The Life and Gests of S. THOMAS CANTILVPE, Bishop of Hereford, and some time
before L. Chancellor of England.

Extracted out of the authentic Records of his Canonization as to the maine
part, Anonymus, Matt. Paris, Capgraue, Harpsfeld, and others.

Collected by R. S* S. I.

AT GANT, Printed by ROBERT WALKER, at the sign of the Annuntiation of our B.
Lady. 1674.

To the Great Duke of Tuscany.
Sr.
YOur self, I conceive, as well as others, both may and will, at first sight,
wonder more then a little at the title of this Dedicatory, and censure it, if
not presumtuous, at least far fetched, by a stranger, by an English man, by
one wholly unknown, neither in a capacity to deserve well at your hands, or
oblige you by any service. All this notwithstanding, I come with confidence to
your feet to make my address, and with so much the greater, as the pre-alledgd
circumstances clear me of all self-endedness in the case. And why should I
not, since I have to do with a Prince who is a cherisher of ingenuity, whose
goodness promises an acceptance not only beyond but even without meritt.
Therefore I come as full of Religious simplicity as void of complements, nor
seek admittance but by my syncerity, which aims at nothing besides gratitude
and an humble acknowledgment. But how come I engaged as to these? If I am not
for my own sake, at least for my friends: if not in my self, at least in my
Country: if not explicitly or personally, at least implicitly but yett really.
With a small trespass on your Highness patience I Will tell you all.

Ever since you were pleased to grace England with your presence, many Princely
expressions of your value for our Nation are reported to have falln from your
mouth, as indexes of your affection, even to a more then tacit preference of
the same before others. I dare not attribute this so much to its meritts as
your goodness; but howeuer it were, it is both honorable to it, and obliging to
us: out of the abundance of the heart the tongue speaks. Nor should we easily
have belieu'd reports had we not seen them under your hand and seal, and in
such terms as import even a kind of passion both for the general, and much
more diverse particulars. Its inbred to Princes to Compassionate the afflicted;
and with what a deep ressentment were you pleased to express your self to my
Lady of G. over the Sufferings of Roman Catholics even so far, as to
profess so particular a kindness for all those of that Kingdom, that, say you,
I could be Content to spill my blood to assist them, and contribute to their
selicity in this world, since their invincihle Constancy in Suffering
persecution usakes them meritt an eternal Crown in the next. These are your
own words and hugely significant. The truth is the Cause of Roman Catholics
there is so clearly good, that no Prince of that belief can doubt of it, but
he must together doubt of his own faith. Every such Prince ownes this truth,
but not every one with such a protestation: the protestation is glorious to you
and encouraging to us. Why may we not then, nay why ought we not Sir, in a due
return of Ciuility take notice of it, by Registring it to the world, that so
it may be at least its own Monument to posterity if we can erect no other.

Sr. this is one part of the Acknowledgment I am to make: the other is yett
more Real; as much as deeds are before words. You were pleased not only to say
much of English Catholics but also to do much for them: and this was verifyd
by that noble supply of charity wherewith you relieved a distressd Religious
Community of that nation ready to sink under the burden of its wants. If I
could deem it fit to give scope to my pen, here is a large field and ample
subject wherein to dilate. But I dare not presume to sound the trumpett,
contrary to Scripture, to your alms deeds; charity loving to speak rather by
hynts and intimations then boasting language on such a theme. And therefore
Modesty bids me for bear to say much, as well as gratitude something, least I
may seem either to flatter, or to beg a new. The Charity indeed was as signal
as unexpected, and as unexpected from such a hand as if it had dropped down from
heaven, as surely it did; a mere piece of providence, and a Master one of that
great Master of the Family to his Religious Servants. Sr. I pretend not here to
make a panegyric of your virtues; that requires a more refined pen: but yet
neither must we shutt our eyes against the Shining Sun though it dazzle them,
but with reverence decline the sight. Yett I must not omit to reflect how well
you placed your Charity: among all the little ones of our Lord who nearer or
dearer to him then his Virginspouses, the noblest part of himself or his
Mystical body, as S. Cyprian styles them, and least able to help themselves.
Noble also even as to the world, and this renders their case more
Compassionate: for what greater object of Commiseration then such nobility in a
deep or necessitous decay; where shame retards, as much as want presses, from
exposing their Condition, when every Common beggar can do it without blushing,
and Consequently not so much to be pitty'd.

And hence, great Prince, arises another part of my Obligation and present
engagement; a Common tie of Spiritual interest linking me and that Community
so into a Common unity, that I cannot but deem its good and bad Concerns my
own, and be deeply Concernd in both. Obedience by my present employment for
some years has entitled me to a relief of their Spiritual necessityes, as
Charity and Compassion did your Highness to their temporal. In this Spiritual
interest I cannot but be sensible of their temporal: and though the former
alone be my Concern, yett I cannot but be Concernd for the latter, as the
formers necessary support, without which it cannot subsist: A spiritual tie as
more partaking and nearer Relating to charity, is, or may be, equally if not
more forcible to engage one then the temporal: and this is a further ground of
my present presumption. The first Address I made as an Englishman, and on the
score of my Nation; this second, as a Religious, and for their sake whom
charity obliges me to wish as well as my self; and I know it will be grateful
to them that I acknowledge the favor.

Having thus far given some account of my Address, I must now apologize for
the Present I make and that in more respects then one. The first is its
slendernes, for which it may seem to resemble the Widows Mite in the Treasury
of so many rich Dedicatoryes as are and have bin made to your Highness. And I
do not mislike the resemblance; both because truly expressing its Worthlesnes,
as also because as that, this not withstanding, found a gracious acceptance, so
do I hope through your Princely goodness will this. That had nothing to Commend
it but the Doners intention; if mine be not as good as heart can make it, I can
only say I wish it so. Sr. I pretend not to present you with a piece of
curious Wit, but a piece of homebred Sanctity: and I hope I mistake not my
measures; the former as from me might suffer perchance its exceptions, as
sauouring a little of vanity: the second is but what becomes my profession,
Religious, and that's beyond exception. And, I hope, I do not disparage Sanctity
by Calling it home bred; the Sanctity of our Island having bin in former times
not only the staple Commodity, as I may say, of the same, but of Christendom;
illustrating the Church of God with as many and noble lights in that Kind as
perchance any of its neighboring Kingdoms. I willingly come under the shadow
of sanctity, as least liable to suffer in the esteem of the good; it being
wellcom to every one that is good: Since even those that are not Saints, yett
love and admyre them and their Sanctity. On this Score I confide it will not be
unacceptable, especially to your Highness, so noted a Patron of the Virtuous as
well as Virtuosi: I confide also neither the Saint nor I shall fare the worse
for being English. A Religious Present beseems a Religious man, nor shall I be
taxd on that behalf; and as I come with a great deal of simplicity, so I beg
to be received with Cordiality, and I cannot fail I know of my Request. If I
aymd at rarityes, they ought to be rare indeed if fit for Princes Cabinetts;
but aiming at Sanctity, the more simple it is, the more Commendable, a little
of it is deemd precious and goes far, nor needs it any ascititious foyles to
set it off. Princes indeed are above rarityes, as cloyd with them; and it
fares with such, as it frequently does with Stomachs cloyd with dayntyes;
they will feed more sauourly on a course dish then on the choysest viands. And to
this purpose I have bin informed from no mean hand (and I Comfort my self not
a little in it) that a slight Religious Present of a picture or Relic of an
English Saint will find a gracious acceptance in your benignity; and what else
is it I here tender then a rough draught of a great Saint?

Not some but many will more then probably wonder at the language, nor spare to
censure me for Dedicating an English Treatise to an Italian Prince: and those
also I must satisfy, not your Highness. To wit, every one knows not your
advance, I may say perfection, in the knowledge of the English tongue, nor has
had the honor and favor, like me, to pervse your letters, in that language,
the natiuenes of the phrase, the property of the expression, besides the
speaking and understanding part, and all to such a degree as few externs are
wont to attain. And what an esteem and affection for our Nation does this
imply? or what greater argument of both, then the long patience in ouercoming
all the difficultyes of such a thorny undertaking for so inconsiderable a
purchase? This affection, this argument, this patience, bidds me confide, you
will Sr. not only have patience with mine, but also that it may contribute
something to your Content. And ought we not, in such a mean Competency as our
Capacity affords, cherish such an affection in you, at least give a testimony
of our endeavor? upon such motives as these, that which might seem a
deterrment is to me an encouragement, to wit, its Carrying an English face and
speech, in a word its being English. It will not relish worse but better, I
hope, to your pallat, especially since your natural appetite and inclination
lies so much that way. Why shall not I hope that at spare hours it may prove a
pastime to divert your self now and then by reading a Chapter of the same,
greater perchance then if it had bin in your native language? at least I fear
no just exception on this behalf.

As to the subject of my Present, I am sure it is good in it self, howeuer I
have menaged it: to wit, a Saint and his life, who was such all his life long,
even from his baptism till his death, never forfeyting, still improuing the
first grace and Sanctity, he received therein. This will appear out of the
Context of the History by Satisfactory prooffs: as also a fair Perspectiue of
such Christian Virtues as make and model a Saint, and which well Copied out by
imitation will make the Practitioner a Saint too. Who though he were a Prelate
yet he was a Prince also, as all Episcopal Prelates are, and may serve for a
pattern even to temporal Princes as well as Ecclesiastic. Episcopacy indeed
Consummated his Sanctity, but I may say he was a Saint before he was a Bishop;
he adorning the Myter as much as the Myter him: and so noble by descent, that
no Prince need think it any disparagement even on that score to propose him to
his actions for a samplar of imitation. Of this great Saint I have drawn a
Picture on paper in black and white representing all the lineaments and
features of his virtues and Sanctity that I have bin able to discover. For the
syncerity, integrity, and truth whereof I can only say this, that all or the
chiefest parts and proportions are taken out of the authentic Records of his
Canonization, which are not to be questioned. This homely black paper Picture,
I presume, great Prince, upon the warrant above mentiond, to present you with
all: because it is black it cannot blush at its own rudenes; and though it be
homely; I doubt not the favor of your acceptance, not for its meritts but your
innate goodness, which rejects nothing that's good, as my intention at least, I
am sure, is.

But even your Princely Goodness set a side, I come not altogether at random
and without claim, nay I know not who can lay a better. Sr. this great Saint
died in your Dominions near Florence, and his Sacred Corpse were enterrd, say
the Records in the Abbey Church of S. Seuerus near old Florence: and how does
this Sacred Depositum entitle him to you and you to him? If he deposed his
natural life with you, who can have better right to his Written life then you?
If your Aultars had, and harbourd his Sacred Relics where can we more
propperly Consecrate the Effigies or Votiue Tablet of his Gests and Virtues? If
he went from you to heaven and eternal happynes, he cannot but retain a
grateful memory of the place which Consigned him over to the same: and even
from his Patronage, not only from your Highnesses, I promise my self good
success in this Dedicatory. This Congruity is not far fetchd, nor forced, but
gives a kind of intrinsique interest or propperty; and I am willing to make use
of it to the honor of the Saint, at which alone I do and ought to aim.

Nor is this glorious Prelate the only of our Island which has sanctifyd your
Tuscany with a holy death, and enriched it with his Relics. Another Saint,
and King also about the year 741. Richard by name, Father of the Saints
Willebald, Wunnebald, and Walburga Virgin, renouncing both Crown and Kingdom
for the love of Christ and a virtuous life, after a long pilgrimage to holy
places Settled in fine at Luca and there concluded the whole journey of his
life with great opinion of Sanctity; where he also was buried in the Church of
S. Frigidianus, his Tomb being afterward illustrated with many miracles, what
ever memory may at this present remain there of him and them. So that, great
Sr., you see our favors from Tuscany are not groundles, we having two such
noble Pledges there of intercession: and who more powerful then they, that is,
then the Saints, when the Concern relates to the glory of God and advance of
Catholic Religion? And give me leave, Sr. to ascribe, and I think not rashly,
these your present pious inclinations toward our Country and distressd
Catholics to this Original source, the Saints seeming to have infused these
noble Sentiments of a feeling ressentment which I mentioned before from your
own pen, and cannot too often reflect upon. These pious inclinations have
already produced great, and good effects, of which we are most sensible, and
for which we shall hold our selves obliged ever to be most thankful.

And now I have said all as to the Apologizing part: what remaynes to be said
further is only this; that your Highness will daigne to accept what is said in
good part, as also what is humbly offered by so undeserving a hand. If it be the
first from an English pen the nouelty will in some sort recommend it, in hopes
it may draw more after it, who will suppley for its deficiencyes; and it is
something to lead the way and break the ice. If others have, preceeded, (and I
wish they may) it willingly for their better meritts beggs admittance, at least
for the Saints if for none of its own. As to him, as humbly as heartily I wish
you his Patronage, and that he may be as fertile to you in heavenly blessings,
as he was heertofore to his country in supernatural miracles; and what miracle
but imports a blessing? And Sr. while you have this Paper-picture before you,
if in the perusal of his virtues you find any thing for your advance or
advantage in the same, I humbly propose it to your imitation, as I do to
others. The world is wittnes of your endowments in this, but they must be more
then very good that cannot be better: nor is it any disparagement to be still
improueing in the science of Saints and Christian perfection, to which each one
in his degree and quality, be he who he will, by that Estote perfecti of our B.
Lord and Savior, is obliged. What is there prizable in this life's intercourse
but piety and the service of God, no body being more then he is in that: and
what imprints this truth more lively in us then the lives and examples of
Saints? we seeing by what was done by them, not only what is to be done, but
what is fesible to and by us. This is the thing I endeauourd to aim at in this
Narratiue, by inserting reflections to that purpose, and chiefly of the 4.
Cardinal virtues. as both propper and common to all states and conditions. And
if your Highness or any Reader may be benefitted thereby to a due discharge of
their incumbent duty in the same, I have my desire, which is no other then
glory to God, honor to the Saint, and advance of souls in virtue and piety.

A Table of the Chapters.
Chap. Page. 1. THe time and Circumstances of his birth. 11 2. Of the Parents
and Descent of S. Thomas. 23 3. Of his Child hood and Domestique Education. 33
4. His first Studyes in Oxford. 48 5. S. Thomas his Study of Philosophy. 56 6.
His Study of the Canon Law at Oxford. 63 7. He is made Chancellor of the
University of Oxford. 72 8. He is made Lord High Chancellor of England. 79 9.
King Henry the 3. dies; his Son Succeeds: S. Thomas with license gives up his
Seal and retyres. 89 10. S. Thomas returns to Oxford; proceeds Doctor of
Divinity; the testimony given of him, etc. 97 11. He is made Bishop of
Hereford. 109 12. His Retyrement and Union with God. 121 13. Of his Love to the
Poor. 136 14. His Charity to all, and detestation of detraction. 149 15. His
Courage in defense of Ecclesiastical Libertyes 162 16. His journey to Rome,
and entertainment there. 173 17. His return homewards and death on the way.
186 18. The Burial of his H. Body, and return of his Bones into England. 200
19. The Translation of them into a more eminent place. 212 20. The multitude of
miracles wrought by the Saint. 230 21. His Canonization, and general Devotion
of all unto him both Prince and people till this unhappy breach. 258 22 His
Humility and Abstinence. 270 23. His Discharge of Duty toward God and his
Neighbor. 286 24. His Purity of body and mind. 301 25. His Justice and
Prudence. 314

THE LIFE And Gests of S. THOMAS CANTILUPE. Sometimes Chancellor of England,
and afterward Bishop of Hereford in the same Kingdom.
PREFACE.

THe lives and memory of diverse Illustrious persons seem to carry no small
resemblance with those great Rivers, Nilus Ganges, Tigris Euphaates.
whose names and greatness are as generally frequent in the mouths of men, as
the particulars of their course and original scarce kuowne to any. Nor need we
wonder it is so, especially in the Saints of God; for Sanctity is always built
upon humility, and with its mantle shrowds it self from the eyes of the world,
never better content then when conceald; and the profounder it is, like the
same Rivers, the less noise it makes; so that none but an observing eye can
discover its course. And if this were true in any, it was, I may say, in our
Glorious Prelate S. THOMAS CANTILVPE, Bishop of Hereford; who, the greatest
part of his days, as he lived to the eyes of men a secular orderly but
ordinary life, nothing extraordinary to outward appearance, so they knew no
more of him then what could not be hid, a great vprightnes, singular innocence,
virtuous Conversation, set of with none of these surprising Commendatoryes,
Raptures, Visions, Miracles, which usually accompany sanctity. True it is, that
the Common Legends have left enough to convince that he was a great Saint, and
wrought many Miracles; Yett if we decend further to particulars, we shall find
that the greatest part of what we know o^ him is the least part of what we are
ignorant, and all comprised in a leaf or two. For though he were renownd both
at home and abroad for his noble Extraction, Learning, Sanctity, yet he was
little known as to most particulars of his heavenly life, and appeard rather
visible to the world in certain summary and compendious lineaments, then in any
exact and distinct expression of each several part or perfection. When a
hidden Sanctity is scarce taken notice of, till it be blazed abroad with a full
noise of Miracles, these so convince the owner to be a Saint, that no body
needs to look after any other prooffs of his gests or virtues to attest it, and
therefore these latter are scarce lookd after or regarded. And if a more
diligent search by public authority had not bin made and left on record in
order to his Canonization, we might still have group'd in the dark as to many
particulars which it tells us: and I reckon it among none of the least
providence, that an authentic Copy theroff came to my hands, while I had
thoughts of prosecuting what a devout Client of this Saint had to his honor
rather scarce well designed then half finishd.

There was not a Saint of our English Nation whose memory was received with a
more universal applause both of Prince and people then that of this glorious
Prelate, though the times when he lived were most unquiet and turbulent, and
the employments wherein he was engaged were of highest dignity, and necessarily
combind with the public interest: which in such a condition of times can have
no more settlement then the waves of the Ocean in a raging storm. In the which
to steer such an eeuen course as to runn upon no rock of offense, argues a
great deal of prudent dexterity in the Pilot: nor indeed was there found an
envy (which yet never spares virtue, especially the highest) which durst fasten
tooth on this B. man. Which may well be numbered among none of the least of his
miracles wherewith it pleased Alm. God to honor him; which were so conspicuous
both as to multitude and quality, that he may with rearson bear the name of
Thaumatourge, or wonder worker of the wersterne Church.

Now he being, as I may say, the Darling Saint of his age, so highly
reuerenc'd by all conditions, why no learned pen should set forth his virtues
and interior perfections, as well as pencill paynt his exterior Lineaments, I
can say no more, but that those active times more employed with swords then
books, had not the Conuenience to perform this duty to so great a merit: Or
that they thought it not so considerable in those days to preserve his memory;
in ink and paper, as in monuments of brass and marble. Which honor was so
fully paid our deserving Saint by pious antiquity, that one of these latter
writers either out of a critical or perhaps more moderate motive, speaking of
his Tomb in the Cathedral Church of Hereford, affirms, Cambd. ^^.
that in former times the place and our B. Saint Thomas was held in so high
Veneration, that it did almost eclipse the glory of the King and Martyr Saint
Ethelbert, in whose honor the said Cathedral had bin built many years before,
and dedicated to him as to a titular Patron and Protector, at the expenses of
Milfrede a man of great Command and power in those parts.

But those zealous and Religious times were not more forward to set vptrophees
of piety, then our unfortunate age has bin to pull down and ruin them.
Impiety and error, inseperable twinns, borne at one birth, and which ever go
hand in hand together, hate nothing more then light, which makes them see what
they most abhor, their own Uglynes, and the beauty of virtue: to avoid both,
their desire is to bury themselves and the world in darkness. They have not
hands long enough to reach heaven, yet do their utmost, with as much folly as
fury, to blot out those names on earth which stand upon record in the book of
life. In fine their malicious attempts have no other effect, but to make us
digg under ruins for treasure; and, as they were wont to gather their gold in
Spain and Barbary, they force us to pick up here and there a grain out of
sand and gravel. Howeuer what concerns the life of our glorious Prelate, S.
Thomas Cantilupe, nothing shall be produced even in the midst of this confusion
and darkness, which is not warantable both by Ecclesiastical and profane
history, and especially by the undoubted record of his Canonization. Where
besides a large list of his Miracles, an exact but short summary of his virtues
is amply deposd by several witnesses: which though it give us not a full
narratiue of the same, yet affords sufficient grounds, as will be showed
hereafter in the 22. Chap. to build an indubitable humane belief of their
truth.

If it be necessary to give an account of my undertaking this task, I shall
only offer for motives; first, my devotion to Gods Saints, and one so
universally beneficial and deserving; in the honoring of whom God is
honored, and in this age especially in which many make it apart of their
sanctity to vnsaint Saints. 2. a desire through respect to my friend, to take
up a design laudably by him begun, and therefore, I hope, not vnlaudable in its
prosecution. But chiefly to vindicate the pious memory of the Saint, and
preserve it in a due veneration among the faithful, which by continual
Miracles preserved it self so long as they faithfully venerated him. His Tomb
then was a monument able to preserve the memory of him; now we must endeavor
to erect another able to preserve the memory of it, the graces received
requiring this gratitude: hoping that as his honor and veneration fell with
the last, (for it lasted as long as did the Catholic Religion in our Island)
so it will rise with the first in its restoration, when ever it shall please
god in his mercy to send that happy hour.

I. CHAPTER. The time and Circumstances of his birth.
THe Church of God since the primitive times of Christianity scarce ever
flourished under a happyer Constellation of Saints then in the thirteenth Age,
when conversation with heaven was not confined to caves and deserts, but found
admittance both in Cittyes and Courts. When Christian humility sat as well
upon the thrones of Kings as in Cells of Ermites; and true poverty of spirit
knew how to vest it self as in sackcloath so in purple. This was the age (and
it was a golden one in this respect) when Virginity was preserved and florishd
not only in the Sanctuaryes and enclosd gardens of Religious Cloisters, but,
like a lilly among thorns, in the very midst of word'y delights and Salomea
Cune gundis, Kinga, and Bzou. Annal. 1234.
greatness, even in the state of wedlock and highest fortune. Then it was when
Princes had no other interest of state but the Glory of God, nor any other
ambition but to dilate his Kingdom, which they endeauourd at the expenses of
their Crowns and lives, and were more employed in fortifying their country with
Religious Conuents then forts and Cittadells. When they held it a greater
strength and honor to their Royal Familyes to espouse their daughters to
Christ Crucifyd, in the greatest rigor of Penance and poverty, then to see
them seated on the highest Thrones of Monarchs. When infine those two great
Patriarchs, S. Dominick and S. Francis, peopled the world with so many quires
of Angels, and brought Evangelical perfection out of unknown retyrements and
solitudes to the Common habitation of men.

Our country of England, though separated by nature from the rest of the world
was not excluded from that universal influence of divine grace wherewith it
please'd God to bless those times. The blood of the glorious Martyr S. Thomas
of Canterbury, as the true seed of the Catholic Church, was not spilt in
vain; and being in this age yet fresh and warm, brought forth special fruit
both in Lay and Clergy. But in all none more eminent then another S. Thomas,
another Chancellor of England, another Prelate, another Champion of
Ecclesiastical libertyes and though not slain by the sword, yet lost his
life in the cause. Thus the mercy of God powered down sweet showers of divine
blessings upon that Kingdom by the mirits of his H. Martyr: yet his justice
laid not down the sword of due revenge for that bloody sacrilege, nor was it
yet satisfied with the personal disasters of that unfortunate King, Henry the
second, who having found as many Absoloms as he had Sonns, ready to tear the
Crown from his gray hayres, and to bury him alive, who had given them life;
after he had seen two of them lead him the way to his grave, followd not long
after, and left the other two his Curse for inheritance, of which they had each
one their share by succession.

The former of whom was Richard the first, third Son of the aforesaid King,
who though otherwise a valiant and great Prince and therefore surnamed Coeur de
Lion; yet for that curse entayld upon him by his father, (and much more if
there were true cause of deserving it) had his Crown torn from his head by a
violent and untimely death. And that it might not fall to a more innocent hand,
left no child, but a brother far worse then himself; who, that his royal
purple might be of a more lasting tincture, gave it the second dye with the
blood of his Nephew Arthur, next heir by birth to the Crown of England, as
Son of Geffrey Earl or Duke of little Britannie in France, which Geffrey was
fourth Son of Henry the second King of England. And though it is not certain
that Arthur, was murderd by his Uncles own hands, as the French do tell us;
yet all agree, that Arthur was put in prison in Rouen by his uncle King John,
and never appeard after: the manner of his death is best known to God alone,
before whose invisible eyes all things lie visible. Howeuer King John fifth Son
of Henry the second and surnamed Sans terre, makes the land his own, and on
this wrong builds all his right, which he ever managed withan equal tenor,
as weakly as wickedly. Till at last called to an account by a stranger for
oppressing his country, left the world like an Outlaw, and a poor child to pay
his forfeyt. Who, though otherwise most innocent, could not altogether plead
not guilty, being he claymd all his right from so great injustice.

In the midst of this dismal and dark cloud our morning starr first appeard:
in the hight of this horrid storm which threatened no less then a total
destruction of the nation, it pleased God to give a pledge of atonement between
heaven and earth, to bless the world with our glorious S. THOMAS CANTILUPE, as
a Rayn-bow after a deluge of blood and misery: whose birth not like another
Benjamin purchasd his life with his Mothers death, but finding his country in
Agony restord life. Neither was he only a Common benefitt and happy presage to
the plublique, but a special blessing and reward of his fathers loyalty; who
when the greatest part and power, of the kingdom, either out of personal
offense, and hatred, of the deceased king would yett pursue him in his image,
or led by interest, the common Idol of the world, thought sit to combine with
the stronger party, and rather adore the preualent might and fortune of an a
inuading forraigner, then to support the weakness both in years, and forces of
their native Prince. Yett William lord Cantilupe, father of our glorious Saint,
lookd upon the present state of things with another eye, and was resolved to
lay down his life and fortune at the feet of justice leaving the event to the
divine balance; whether he stood or fell being secure of victory, which ever
crowns them who sacrifice them selves to truth and loyalty. Wherefore as a
person of eminent ability and honor, he gives strength to the better but
lesser party; and as he ever maintaynd his faith inviolable to the father,
though a Prince of most odious and lawless government, he could never forgett
the respect of sovereignty so he continued the same unto the son with all the
disadvantage of humane interest.

The Barons with their French Protector were not only masters of the field
both in strength and number, but also many months possessed of the head City
of the Kingdom; a thing ever held of highest consequence, as being the ordinary
residence and Court of Kings, and whosoever winns it seems to wear the Crown.
The little king at nine years of age, being sollemnly Crowned at Gloucester, was
in a manner Confind to that City and other two, Bustow and Worcester: though
some other particular places and Castles in several parts of the kingdom
stood firmly to him. And chiefly Lincoln which was our Orleans, where a lady,
not inferior to the french sheepardess in Courage, as she was far above her
in birth and quality, defended the Castle of Lincoln the space of a whole
year against Gilbert de Gant, a prime Commander of the french forces, though
he had possessd himself of the Town, and pressd the Castle with a vigorous
siege. The kings honor, Besides his interest was Conceived to be not a little
Concerned in the relief of so much fidelity, especially of so rare and
unusual example in the weaker sex. The Lord Cantilupe therefore with other
Nobles of the Royal party, accompanied likewise by the legate of the sea
Apostolic, with what power they could make, marchd forth upon this design.
Being arrived within 8. miles of Lincoln, they all Confessd and receiud the
holy Eucharist, with a plenary Indulgence which the Legate granted them, and
sollemnly declard the adverse faction separated from the Communion of the holy
Catholic Church.

Thus armd and encouragd from heaven they fall on with such irresistible
violence, that though the defendants exceeded the assaillants far in number,
besides the advantage of their walls and trenches, the Town was soon ground
with a total defeat of the Enemy. THOMAS Earl of Perch, a person of highest
nobility and Command in the Barons army, allyd to both the Crowns of England
and France, being with many others slain upon the place, besides 14. Earls
and Barons, and 400. knights with their seruan^s, horse and foot, taken
presoners. This victory cut the sinews of the Barons confederacy, and blew
off all foreign storms from our English Coast: the french Prince thinking
fit at last to look back upon a safe retreat, and to quitt another right not
to lose his own. In fine our young king was so settled heerby in his throne,
that from this day no rebellion durst presume upon the minority of his years,
nor attempt his Fortune. And for the space of 34. years as long as William
Lord Cantilupe, S. THOMAS his father lived, no man had the power or Courage to
make head against him.

These happy tidings well-comd S. THOMAS into the world, or rather he brought
them with him: these Laurells of victory crowned the Cradle of our holy Infant;
or rather he was given from heaven as a Crown of his fathers loyalty and as a
pledge of the divine protection over the little king, who though a child was
better read then most men in that maxim of wisdom, that crowns and kingdoms
are disposd and swayd by the hand of God. Prou. 8 19.
And therefore seeing himself at the first stepp into his throne, so strongly
opposd or rather thrust out by the violence of a foreign Adversary, and
faction of his native people, Could think of no other refuge but God. And Henr.
K^ighten de euen^ib. Anglia.
as an Author of creditt writing of those times, recounts, he betook himself
to little Jesus in his Virgin Mothers lapp, and with as innocent as sweet a
confidence, presents his Petition in these words: Rogo te puerum Regem, vt me
Regem puerum de caetero regas and defendas. I beseech thee who art a king and
child, govern and defend me henceforth who am a king and Child. That this
petition was not in vain, is sufficiently manifest by the event and strange
overthrow of such powerful designs, which could be only contrould by the
hand of God. Neither did the divine mercy make a stopp here, but gave a further
assurance of his holy protection by the happy birth of S. THOMAS Cantilupe, who
was not only a presage of better times, but in a particular manner designd for
a maine support and strength both to king and kingdom in the highest seat of
government, and to be a mirror of justice in both Tribunalls of church and
state.

II. CHAPTER. Of the Parents and descent of S. THOMAS.
NObility, hough in the most ciuilizd Nations it has ever had a special
prerogative in the general conceyt of men, yett with this abatement and
restriction, that the wiser sort never lookd upon it otherwise then an
extrinsecall and boriowd light, shining more by the reflection of others
deserts, then any worth in it self. Which well interprets that ancient custom
of the Roman Nobility, who wore the sigure of a Moon upon their shoe, as a
distinctiue mark of their rank and quality. Neither had that golden Grasshopper
any other meaning, which the Gentlemen of Athens wore upon their garments as a
badg of honor, but to admonish them that Nobility though it seemd a specious
and glittering thing, yett was but a mere ayry and idle fancy, if, like the
silly grasshopper, they contented themselfes to sing and chant their Ancestres
renown and greatness, and would not take the pains to lay up store, and make
themselves a stock of true worth and honor by their own industrious and noble
actions. Virtue like the sunn shines with its own light, and needs no supply
from any other: it lives not with the breath of other; fame, nor rakes up
honor out of dead men's ashes.

It may seem therefore a very unnecessary if not preposterous diligence, to be
inquisitiue of the pedigrees of Saints, whose purity and holiness of life has
raisd them above all the hight of flesh and blood, and by a strange adoption
made them brothers and sisters and mothers of God himself. Neuertheless if the
wisdom of God allows of a mutual reference and Communication between the
Parent and the child, so as the shame and honor of the one reflects upon the
other: if the eternal Providence has a special and Mysterious design, even
in that lineall succession of nature, as it appears by the style of holy
scripture, and remarkably in the Genealogy of the Word Incarnate, where the
fingar of God points out all particulars with such exactnes, name by name both
good and bad: Infine if the excellency of virtue does not seldom more appear
by a parallel of former times, either in similitude and imitation of worthy
actions or a generous renouncing and detestation of the contrary; it cannot but
conduce to the better knowledge and esteem of Saints, to be informd of what
stock and condition they are. If noble and of high extraction, like a diamond
bred in a mine of gold, worthy to be observed, that by their own virtue they
surpass the glory of their birth and Ancestres, and not by idolizing and
adoring, but treading upon worldly greatness, they make it an ascent to raise
themselves from earth to heaven. If of a mean and low degree, like an
oriental pearl in a course and rugged shell, the workmanship of divine grace
is the more to be admired that can raise children of Abraham from stones, and
frame such precious rarityes of gross materials: As the happynes and glory of
the Saints themselves is likewise more remarkable, being they owe nothing of
their greatness to earth, but receive all from heaven. In a word it cannot be
denied but that nobility and renown of Ancestres (as an impartial wittnes
well expressd it) is a visible light which Mar^. us in Salust.
makes the actions of posterity more Conspicuous, be they good or bad.

Having upon this occasion digressd thus far, give me leave to add one word
more, and let our nobility know that this busynes of descent, be it never so
noble, is a mere ayry thing unles it be supported and illustrated with virtue
and piety. When it is thus mated it both gives and receives great advantages,
and the one sets off the other extremely. True it is that euery-wher, even
alone, it ought to have its due respect, and none that I know denis it besides
the Quaker: but when any bragg of it they boast of what is not their own, and
show thereby rather their own emptynes then its worth, and themselves to have
more of the man then Christian. For Christian Nobility deriues not its pedigree
from flesh and blood but grace and sanctity, according to the saying of S.
Ambrose, the lineage of a just man is virtue and perfection; for by it souls
are ennobled and dignified, as familyes are by antiquity of blood; nor only
ennobled, but deify'd to a participation of the divine nature. This is true
nobility indeed, and worth standing on, and adds great luster to the other, as
the mixture of a nobler metal does to another of an inferior allay: yett
still we must so commend this, as to leave the other in its due reverence and
esteem.

To come now to our B. S. THOMAS; his father was William Lord CANTILVPE, a
person for his worth and greatness often mentioned in the English History and
Records of Heralds. The father of this Lord was also another william, who
jointly with his Son stood ever firm in the Barons Wars to both the Kings,
whose fauovr in employments of highest trust and honor they well deserved.
Though, as a known Historian of those Matt. Paris
times affirms, their family receiud not so just a measure as their meritt
requird. Yett the father of our Saint bore no less a charge in court then that
of great Master or Lord steward of the kings house. Which, as in other
kingdoms, so in this of England, was ever esteemd of chief favor and dignity,
being the eye and hand of the king, not only at a distance and in absence, but
commanding all in his very presence, and in a manner seated upon the same
throne. Neither was this honor or whatsoever else they receiud from their
soueraigns above the rank of their birth and quality.

The Cantilupes or Cantelowes (vulgarly so called from the original Champ de
Loup, or Campus Lup^) were a noble family of special note and eminency among
those brave Adventurers who-followd the Norman conqueror in his enterprise of
our English Monarchy, and purchasd him that crown with the hazard of their
lives and fortunes. And as they brought with them a fair inheritance of estate
and honor, so still continud their course with successiue increase, as great
rivers the further they go, the more they dilate themselves with the reception
of other streams. The Heirs general of the Strong-bowes and Marshalls,
Earls of Pembroke, of the Fitz Walters Earls of Hereford, of the Breoses or
Breuses Lords of Abergauenny left their estates and greatness by right of
marriage unto the Cantelupes. Such being the Paternall line of S. THOMAS, and
his father a person of so high command and creditt, the king upon an exigence
being to make a voyage into france, could not think of a more powerful and
faithful hand, beyond all exception and envy, to entrust with his crown and
kingdom then William Cantelupe: it was an equal and happy match between this
Lord and the Lady Millescenta countess of Eureux and Gloucester, Mother of our
Saint.

She was daughter of Hugh lord Gournay and the Lady Iuliana sister to Reginald
Earl of Dammartin and Boulogne. The Gournay's were of the prime nobility of
Normandy, nearly allyd to the sovereign Dukes of that country; and as near to
our gloirous and blessed King Edward the Confessor. The counts of Dammartin
were of an inllustrious family in france, matchd with the greatest Princes of
Europe. And this Reginald uncle to the Lady Millescent in right of his wife
lda, grandchild to Stephen king of England became Earl of Boulogne, which
title he tra^sferrd again with his daughter Matilde married unto Philipp Earl
of Clermont, only brother to Lewis the 8. king of france, and uncle to S.
Lewis. This the alliance and desent of that noble Lady: She was first married
to Almerick Montfort Earl of Eureux in Normandy, as also of Gloucester in right
of his mother Mabelle, eldest daughter, and heir to william Earl of
Gloucester, Grandchild to Henry the first king of England. This Almerick being
head of that illustrious family of the Mo^tforts descended from Robert surnamed
the Pious, king of france: and dying without issue, was the last of that race
in Normandy; leaving his noble and virtuous Confort the Lady Millescente to be
blessd with a happyer and more fruitful marriage, especially in this her son,
who alone illustrated that renownd family with more honor, then all the
greatness and titles of their famous Ancestres.

III. CHAPTER Of his Childhood and domestique Education.
TO look into the infancy or Childhood of Saints may seem as little pertinent
to their meritt, as to the glory of God: that part of the life of man being
Commonly held for a mere Prologue or dumb show before a tragedy of miseryes; a
dream or slumber before the soul awake to the light of reason; a state of
Neutrality betwixt man and beast, as incapable of praise as blame, and only
happy in this, that it is insensible of all unhappiness. Yett experience and
reason teaches us that this twylight of life is not so dark, but that we may
read sundry characters, though written in a small letter, by the hand of God:
This mute part of the age of man is not so speechless, but that it fore-tells
us much of what will follow. In fine even childhood it self has not so little
of the man, but that it is capable of deep impressions both of grace and
reason: as the lovely and sweet variety of colors in many flowers receive
their first tincture in the very root; and the value of Pearls depends much
upon the first dropps of dew which falls into the shell when thy are newly
engendered. That the divine Providence has a special eye upon the infancy of
man is an undeniable truth both in humane and divine history: neither does this
only consist in certain prodigyes and dedemonstrations of a power above the
reach of nature, but also, and that most usually, in a particular favor and
protection of the divine hand by connaturall means of Education and other
circumstances, to with draw from evil and lead to virtue.

The whole sequel of our S. THOMAS his life clearly shows how highly he was
priuiledg'd with both these blessings from heaven. A nature he had elevated
above the Common strayn; a mind full of generous heat and vigor, ever tending
to a higher sphere, like a fire without smoke or mixture of grosser elements:
which met with so noble a temperature of body, that though of a prosperous
and lively habitude, he never knew in his whole life what any thing meant which
was not agreeable with the purity of Angels. He, the first fruit of that happy
marriage, was borne at a Manor of his fathers in Lincolnshyre. Hameldone by
name, where he also receiud the Sacrament of Baptism, regenerated thereby to
the precious adoption of the Children of God. In memory whereof Edmund Earl of
Cornwall, son to Richard once king of the Romans, and a great admirer of out
saints perfections, built there an Oratory to the honor of God and his; in the
which Oratory our Lord is said te have wrought frequent Miracles by the
intercession of the same saint. Besides him his Parents were blessd with a
numerous offspring of 3. Sonns and 3. daughters, which like so many young
Olives enuironnd their table to their great loy; and the latter were all
bestowd in an honorable wed-lock.

To cultiuate duly these hopeful endowments both of nature and grace by a
Good education was the care and endeavor of his pious Parents: who as in his
infancy they had provided him of virtuous Nurse (the Process of his
Canonization calls her devout, noble, and holy, insomuch that even together
with his milk he suckd in Sanctity) so in his childhood they were no less
wanting to furnish him with fit Masters for his instruction in these first
rudiments; and this was to be done under their own eyes, that they might be
witnesses of all. Thy knew right well how important the first impressions are
in Children, and consequently how choice they ought to be, since that tincture
is retaynd a long time, and gives ordinarily a relish to their proceedings.
His Parents were so chary in this point, and sollicitous to have the blessing
of heaven second their industry, that we may say they imitated daily the
anciente Illyrians, who, when they gatherd their sweet Flower-de-luces lifted
them up as an offering to heaven from whence they had receiud them: so these
noble Personages looking upon this their first fruit as a gift of God, and
acknowledging it to be more his then theyrs, endeavored with all gratitude to
make him a fit present for the divine hand, and to raise him from earth to
heaven by careful and virtuous breeding.

Their usual habitation was at court by reason of the charge which the father
of our saint bore, and the obligation he had of personal attendance for the
daily service of the king. The reputation of Courts has ever bin as of a place
where virtue is laughed out of countenance, and denyd admittance, as too
Coursly cladd for such fine company. Infamy is no where more in credit, nor
vice so Canonized: it is a School of Egyptian Hieroglyphics where beasts and
Monsters are supposd to signify heroique virtues. What care therefore and
vigilance were these pious and noble Parents to use in preserving this sweet
flower from blasting under so malignant a climate? What caution and prevention
to bannish all folly and vanity from the sight of those innocent eyes? to stopp
his ears from the least whisper of charming plasures? What a perpetual watch
and ward, not to let a word fall, not the least action or gesture appear
before this little one which might leave any noxious impression in his tender
soul? Though to say the truth, and to guie those happy times their due (which
is also to be obserud as a special providence of God toward the advancement
of our Saint in all perfection) the style of that Court was far different from
the usual Course of others, and might well be tearmd a Sanctuary of Piety and
school of virtue.

Such an influence has the example of Princes over the hearts of men, drawing
them whither they list with a kind of magnetique force either to good or evil.
We had then a king who thought it no vnderualuing of Majesty to visitt spittles
and Alms houses, to serve and feed the poor with his own hands, to embrace
and kiss lepres. Instead of reuells and masks; his chief pleasure was in his
Chapel, where he heard every day three Masses with sollemne Music, and
never omitted to be present at the rest, as long as there was a Priest at the
Altar; where he ever vsd this Ceremony, in honor to the king of heaven, to
support the Priests arm whilst he elevated the Sacred Host; then with
reverence kissd his hand. Insomuch as his near kinsman and brother in Law S.
Lewis, then king of France, observing that out of his devotion to the holy
Sacrifice of Mass, he left no Considerable time for Sermons, aduisd him to
allow some part of his pious Exercises to the word of God: to which he answered,
that for his part he had rather see his friend then hear him spoken of. Our
Queen, as long as this king her husband liud, agreed with him as well in piety
as in Conjugal love: and as soon as his death left her free to her liberty,
she retyrd to a Cloister of Consecrated Virgins, where the world might see her
heart had ever bin.

The Consort of our Prince; Son of Henry the 3. now king, and after successor
by the name of Edward the 1. was a daughter of Spain, who was so little read
in the Platonique of our days, that she knew not how to love any thing but
Christ and her husband; whom she followd through all hazards and terrors to
the holy land: where the Prince being treacherously stabbd by a Saracen with a
poisoned knife, when no skill of Surgery could prevail, the invincible love of
this lady undertook the cure, and gave her the courage to suck out the poison
and putrefaction of the wound with her own mouth, to make it good that love is
as strong as death. Cant. 8 6.
The piety of the whole court was answerable to their Souveraign's example:
which appears evidently in that so many of the prime nobility devoted their
lives and fortunes to the service of the holy land, and the greatest ladies
ended their days in holy monasteryes.

Neuertheless though that court then was such a Paradise, the pious and prudent
Parents of our saint knew well that serpents might lurk even there: Vipers
creep into gardens of balsome; poisons and antidotes often grow in the same
bed. They were not strangers to the infirmity of humane nature especially in
youth, which like a distemperd Stomach longs for that which is most hurtful,
and in such variety of objects, as at a full table, seldom or never feeds
without a surfett. They resolud therefore to place this precious treasure, which
god had given them in a safe retreat; as nature or rather the Author of nature
teaches the little Pearls, when they are soft and tender in the shell, to
retire under shady and hollow rocks, being otherwise not only exposd to
violence of waves and weather, but also subject to change color and be truly
sunburned if they float in the open sea. They followed therefore the advice of
the holy Ghost given to all Parents, if they love the safety of their children,
to put them under the shade and protection of wisdom, "Statuet filios suos sub
tegmine "illius"; with a promise not only of security but also of glory:
"Protegetur sub tegmine illius a feruore, et in gloria eius requiescet. "This
holy and Ibid. 27.
prudent resolution of theyrs, was it seems much furtherd by a near kinsma^ and
frind Walter Cantilupe Bishop of worcester, a person of mind and courage equal
to his birth, and of such zeal that to advance the heroical design of
Christian Princes in the holy land, he went himself thither accompanied with
one of the greatest men of that age for piety and valor William Longuespee
Earl of Salisbury, whose happy death in that quarrel was sollemnizd with a
triumph in heaven, as it was revealed at that uery instant to his Mother in
England who then led a Religious life in a Monastery of her own founding.

The said noble Prelate Walter Canti^ilupe being in familiar conversation with
William Lord Cantelupe father of S. THOMAS, and the child being present, the
Bishop askd him what course of life he would choose, what pleased him best? The
child freely answered him, that he would be a Soldier: Well said, sweet heart,
quoth the Bishop, thou shall be a soldier to serve the highest of Kings, and
figh under the colors of his glorious Martyr S. THOMAS. These words proved not
only prophetical by the event but also had such efficacy, that the Parents,
as in obedience to a divine decree, directed the whole education of the child
to piety and learning. And the Child himself, as if he had learned a new
lesson from heaven, thought no more of those glorious fancyes, to which his
own generous nature carried him, and the examples of his illustrious
progenitors incited him; but with the same courage betook himself wholly to
his book, and with the little Solomon preferrd it before thrones and kingdoms.
This resolution was truly to be admird in the child and no less in his parents,
considering not only the vehement inclination of men to live after death in
their image by posterity, but much more the hight of their fortune, with so
rich a stock of antiquity and honor, preserud and amplifyd for so many
descents: whereas if he took a course of retyreme^t from a worldly life and not
compatible with succession, as his education seemd to dispose him, all must dye
with him and lie buried in the same grave.

None of these respects could ever persuade the Parents of our Saint to let him
runn the common race of the world in liberty, in plenty, in wantonness, in
excess of vanity and pleasure, without restraint of any thing that flatters the
sensual appetite, foments self love, and reiects all command of reason. These
generally being esteemd in the deprau'd judgment of men as propper attributes
of greatness, and on the contrary discipline, learning, and piety laughd at as a
debasement of noble spiritts and mere precisianisme. But these pious and
prudent Parents weighed things in another balance; they were fully satisfied
of this truth, that nothing suites better with honor then virtue, and that
nobility cannot live in a more immortal Monument upon earth the^ in the shrine
of sanctity. They knew that the nobler the mind, the more need of cultiuating,
otherwise, like a rich soil, more subject to grow wild and degenerate. They
were not so sollicitous to propagate as to illustrate their family; the
happiness whereof they placed not in long continuance but a good conclusion. And
since familyes are mortal, and have their term of life, as well as each
particular man, they cannot come to a better end then to dye in the bed of
honor with integrity of fame and virtue.

IV. CHAPTER. His first Studyes in Oxford.
OUr little S. THOMAS having now receiud the first tincture and elements of
learning at home, both the authority of his Parents and his own propension ledd
him to a place of higher improuement, the university of Oxford: which was at
that time in the primitive vigor, and esteemd by all as great a school of
virtue as learning, and therefore the common Nursery of our chief nobility of
Engeland: a thing continued even to our days, though with different success,
as but too true experience teaches us. It was hard to say whether Oxford in
that age (though it ever bore the preeminence of antiquity) or Paris had the
greater repute and fame of learning. Yet this noble strife bred nothing of that
malignity to which the emulous nature of man is but too prone: yea rather
maintaynd a friendly Commerce, and, as it were, free trade beweene these two
great Marts of wisdom and sanctity. And as those times were fertile of great
persons in all perfections, neither of these two renownd Academyes did ingross
any advantage to themselves, nor envy the others benefitt; but mutually
imparted to each other what was rare and eminent.

The two glorious lights of the Catholic Church S. Dominick, and S. Francis
his Orders illustrated the world at that time with their primitive sple^dour,
and revived Christianity with new vigor of learning and piety. S. THOMAS of
Aquine S. Bone, S. Bonauenture, and Doctor of Doctors Alexander of Hales
borne in Glocestershyre, master of both these Saints, with many others of the
foresaid holy Institutes, were the Oracles of that age; and particularly
enriched and cultiuated the French and English Universities with their
admirable doctrine. Among the rest that famous and learned Prelate Robert
Kilwarby was highly eminent; who bred and borne in England, was one of the
first of that nation who Consecrated him self to God in the holy habit of S.
Dominick.

But his great abilityes and learning gave him not leave to enjoy the sweet
retyrement of a Religious life. He was first called by the Sea Apostolic to
the Primacy of England; in which charge he gave such testimonies of his
incomparable worth, that, Nicolas the 3. who then sat in S. PETER'S Chair, a
great admirer of learning, and virtue (which he only regarded in all
preferments) to have his nearer assistance in the general government of the
whole Church, thought fit to create him Cardinal and Bishop of Porto near
Rome, which is the second dignity among those Princes of the Church. The holy
Prelat having receiud this new addition of honor was so far from that Common
disease and dropsy of Souls, who the more they have of greatness, the more they
thirst; that the first thing he did was to disburden himself of his
Metropolitan charge of Canterbury, not without resentment and repugnance of the
king and all the nobility of England, who extremely affected and reuerened him
for his great learning and holiness of life. He left behind him a perpetual
Monument of his piety and love to his Order, which is yett ex ant, though
applyd to a different use, Commonly known by the name of Black-Fryars in
London. This place when he was Arch Bishop of Canterbury he purchasd, and built
both Church and Convent for his Religious, whom he transferrd thither from a
less Convenient Residence in the suburbs. The modesty and humble Carriage of
this great Prelat was no less admird in the Court of Rome then his eminent
parts and excelling knowledge. He would not change his poor Religious habitt
for the purple of Princes, and was the first Cardinal that retaynd his habitt
in that dignity; as ever since his example was followd by those who were
promoted to that degree of honor from Religious Orders of Monastique
discipline. He never appeard in public but on foot, and never had other train
but two of his own Religious to accompany him, and two other attendants in the
nature of servants. In fine though he was admird and honored as the Oracle of
those times, and mouth of the Sea Apostolic, as appeard in that famous treaty
and letters written by him in the Popes name to the king of Tartary about the
Conversion of that nation to the Christian faith; yett nothing could ever lift
him the least thought above himself out of the profound humility and poverty
of a Religious man.

It was a special providence of God that this great person was chosen to be
the Spiritual guide and Governor of our holy Saint from his tender years,
which we may esteem a mutual happynes and honor to them both: being the wise
child is the fathers joy, as the fathers worth is the Childrens glory. The
learned and wise Prelat seeing how pure and generous a soul he had to manage,
omitted no care and industry to set him forward to the highest perfection.
Wherein finding his Angelical pupil so ready and pliable, and even to out-runn
his wishes, he conceiud such unspeakable joy and comfort, that all the days of
his life he could never name him with out excessive admiration and praise. He
never met with stone or bramble in that soul to choke or hinder the full
fruit of the heavenly seed; he never found weed in that bed of Lillyes; he
never saw spott in that virgin stole which he had receiud in baprisme: Noe
flashes of leuity, frowardnes, or unconstant giddynes so incident to that age.
All his soul in fine Apoc. 4. 6.
like that crystal sea of the Apocalipse, without wave or wind, not disturbd
with the least blast of disorderd passions; yett still in motion, abhorring
nothing more then that canker and bayne of virtue, sloth and idleness.

He never omitted to be daily present at the holy Sacrifice of Mass with all
reverence and attention, which he took for a common duty of all pious
Christians: and therefore would oblige himself to a greater task, reciting
daily, as young as he was, the Canonical hours or Priests Office, which in
him was a remarkable act of piety, and not only a presage of his future
intentions, but also a token not improbable, that even then as much as lay in
him he devoted himself to a Clergy life: having otherwise no tie at all either
of Benefice or Orders; his years being incapable of the one, and the
discipline of those better times not allowing Ecclesiastical fruits and titles
to any other but such as for ability and age could worthily perform the
functions. In this manner did our B. Saint pass his first course of
litterature, with such success and profitt in the Latin tongue, that it gave
him new appetite and courage to apply himself to the study of higher sciences.
As they who discover the first veins of a rich mine work on with more alacrity
to attain the main treasure. Wherefore though at that time Oxford florish'd
with all advantage of learning both for knowledge and discipline, and could
furnish other nations with choice masters in all sciences: yett considerable
motives drew S. THOMAS out of his native contry into France, and inducd him to
choose Paris for his school of Philosophy.

V. CHAPTER. S. Thomas his Study of Philosophy.
THat Antiquity placed the Temples of their goddess of learning and wisdom in
forts and Castles, seated upon a higher ground, and at a co^petent distance
from the common habitation of their Towns and cittyes, did not only signify,
that wisdom and knowledge is the chief protection and safeguard of men, and a
thing highly eleuate a boue the vulgar reach; but also that the proper seat of
learned Exercises is to be at a convenient distance from the throng and tumult
of the world: this being no less an enemy to speculatiue and studious minds
then smoke and dust to the eye, and a confusd and iarring noise to a delicate
and harmonious ear. This considerd, the most populous City of Europe, and the
greatest court, might seem very impropper for the improuement of S. THOMAS in
his studyes: especially for his particular, having more occasion of distraction
then any other by reason of his near relation and alliance with the greatest
Princes of that Court, namely Reginald Count of Dammartin and Boulogne, great
uncle to our Saint, and Matilde Countess of Clermont daughter of the foresaid
Reginald, married to Philipp only brother to Lewis the 8. and uncle to S Lewis
who raignd at that present time. These circumstances might well have putt a
youthful Spirit upon other thoughts then serious and paynfull studys, and
forcd him even against his will to spend the greatest part of his time in
receiving and paying courtly visitts. But the generous resolution of the Saint,
and the great light which he received from heaven to make a true estimate of
things, gave him strength and vigor to prosecute his course without diuersion.

And such were those happy times, that he found rather help then prejudice in
court, where the king a Saint taught the world this truth, that the disorder of
courts is not the fault of the place but men, and that virtue is ever at hand
where it finds admittance. Neither did the court and Army, the two propper
spheres of this great Prince and Soldier of Christ, only partake of his holy
influences; he was as great a Patron of learning as Arms; and as piety and
discipline is the chief support and advancement of both, his powerful example
and industry, and the concourse of so many great persons renownd for learning
and Sanctity, invited thither by the fame of that happy reign, gave such life
and vigor to the university of Paris, that it never flourishd more then in
those holy times. The famous College of Sorbone, so esteemd even till this day,
that it is a special mark of honor to be a member thereof, was then first
founded, and owes the glory of so prosperous a continuance to that happy
beginning which made them heirs not only of the name and patrimony, butt also
of the eminent learning of their worthy Founder Robert de Sorbona. The persons
also who then either taught or studied in that university are a sufficient
testimony of the flourishing state of these times which bred them whom the
Schools ever since have reuerencd and admird as chief Masters and mirrours of
humane and divine sciences, and observe continually their method and form of
teaching, as the ready and only way to attain solid and perfect knowledge.

That S. THOMAS made the best use of these advantages appears evidently by the
effect, and that public testimony of his singular ability and learning, when
having finishd that course of studyes he proceeded Master of Arts, which honor
in those impartial times was not to be bought with favor, nor upon any other
account then desert. Neither did he satisfy himself with that specious
ornament of his youth, as commonly persons of his rank and quality are wont to
do, and then apply the rest of their life to the designments of ambition and
pleasure. As after his return into England he changd not his mind with the
place, but still continued, like a faithful lover, his constant affection to
wisdom, whose amiable beauty had so possesst his heart, that it wiped away all
other impressions. And that he might enjoy his happynes without disturbance he
retyrd from court and the restles noise of the world to his known repose and
first nursery of his youth, the university of Oxford.

But before he leave Paris and we conclude this Chapter, it will not be
impertinent to our purpose to show what a lilly he was at that time amidst
those thrones of Philosophy, able enough to choke all spirit and sentiments
of piety and devotion, if great care be not taken; that is, how pure and nice a
conscience he keept, how sensible of the least blemmish of imperfection; and
this will appear by an example which stands on record, and happend in this
interim. While he studied his Philosophy at Paris, the window of his closett
was a little at fault, and to set it right without trouble or the help of a
workman, he serud himself of a stick or propp of a vine out of the next
vineyard. The matter, God wott, so very inconsiderable, to an ordinary
conscience would not have created any scruple at all; yett he, though otherwise
not scrupulous, in his tenderness, apprehended the transgression so deeply, that
even then for its expiation he enioynd him self a 7. years penance, and each
of them with great remorse confessd the same. From whence we may gather how
Angelically pure that blessed soul was which checkd so ressentiuely at so
minute a thing, and how far it was from harboring any great offense which
deemd the least to be so heinous. A tender conscience is like a tender eye,
which the least moat disturbs and annoyes, making it water to wash of the
stayne, and express regrett that ever it came there.

VI. CHAPTER His study of the Canon Law at Oxford.
THe resolution which S. THOMAS took after he had ended his Philosophy with
such success and applause, sufficiently declares, that his intention was not to
make use of those studyes as an additionall ornament of his other eminent parts
and quality, that as his birth and fortune raisd him above the vulgar sort, so
he might also excel them in perfection of mind and knowledge. Which could not
but be esteemd a motive worthy of a generous Spirit, in setting so true a
value upon the better part of man, and not suffering the flower and vigor of
his age to vannish and wither away without fruit. In prosecution of such happy
beginnings, to carry all on before him, and perfect him self in each kind and
for all Callings, he resolud for his next task to apply his thoughts to the
Civil law: which, though a hard and knotty knowledge, yett he hopd to draw some
honey out of these flints for his improuement. He took it as the Israelites did
the spoils of the Egyptians, to apply it to the service of the true God: and
hearing that there was a famous Professor at Orleans who read that lecture
with much applause, he betook himself thither and frequented his School with
such esteem of progress, that he far outstript his fellow students being iudgd
not only fit but fittest to supply the chayr in his Masters absence. This
knowledge enabled him much as to the mannagement of secular busynes, which
though it were not the thing he aymd at, yett did good service thereby, and
especially in the discharge of his double Chancelour-ship.

Having possessd himself of this study he undertook another of some affinity
but more sacred, with the former, and that was the Canon Law. This suited more
with his inclination and intentions, besides the special providence of God
which ledd this Saint by the hand from his first infancy, and guided him stepp
by stepp to that hight of greatness to which he had designd him both in
Spiritual and temporal government; for it seems evident that our Saint had
even then devoted himself entyrely to the service of the Church and a Clergy
life; otherwise what pretension could a person of his condition have to apply
himself to that sad and laborious study of Canon Law, as void of pleasure as
profitt, or any other ambitious interest, for his particular, being nature and
fortune had raysd him to such a pitch, that he had little need of skill and
industry to advance him further. The motive then of lodging his thoughts upon
this serious and learned study was to enable himself for that holy function to
which God had called him from his very Childhood. He knew that a Clergy life
ought to be a shining light not only in it self, but to illustrate others as
well by doctrine as example. He was assurd that ignorance in such a state was
blindness in the eye, deaffnes in the ear, a palsy in the limms, and a whole
privation of life and vigor through all the body. That it was to play the
Pilot without Card or Compass: to Command in war without practice of arms or
Discipline; to undertake the cure of others without knowledge eyiher of the
evils or remedies. Neither was the circumstance of time unseasonable to
undertake that Study in the prime and vigor of his Years, when he had
improu'd himself in the perfect knowledge of Philosophy, which quickens the
mind with a new life, teaches men to speak and call things by their true names,
gives them eyes to see what is invisible, and makes the senses own, what they
never knew, upon the word of reason.

Much about this time while he was delibirating to leave Paris, a General
Council indicted at Lions in the same kingdom by Innocent the 4. was to take
its beginning on the ensuing feast of S. John Baptist; it being summond not
only upon the score of the holy land, but also for redress of other
Eccleasticall abuses. The emulous Spirit of our Saint, desirous to benefitt
himself in each degree, repayrd thither together with his younger brother
Hugh; knowing well that such Assemblyes summon, as to a general Muster what is
valiant, so to this what is wise, learned, and in virtue eminent. He knew that
a general Council is like a Constellation where many propitious lights
Combine in one to the illuminating of the Christian world, as the great
interpreters of Gods will; as an Oracle giving to know undoubtedly what we are
to believe and do in the great practices of Christianity, and whither can one
recurr with more advantage and satisfaction then hither in doubts of this
nature? These two lesser lights even then darted forth such conspicuous beams,
that notice being taken of them they were both made Chaplans of the said Pope;
and the rather for that besides their own Meritts, the presence of their
father, sent thiter by the King of England, Contributed not a little to this
dignity. The Council ended, our B. Saint returned full fraught with what he
had heard and seen, and taking Paris in his way hastened over to his Mother
Uniuersity of Oxford, toward the accomplishment of his fore mentiond task of
canonlaw; designing when he had Maisterd it to proceed forth with to his
divinity. But we may say that in this he reckond without his host, and while we
propose, God disposes much otherwise: for about 14. years interuen'd eer he
could beginn the latter and in the interim he was to undergo a double
Chancelourship both of Uniuersity and Realm; of both these we shall treat in
the ensuing Chapters.

Coming to this famous Uniuersity, he met to his great comfort, and as great
benefitt of spirit, with his former Ghostly father Dr. Robert Kilwarby: who as
he had before not only known him from his childhood, but also laid in him the
first foundations, of a spiritual life, so now resumd again to the same
charge, he willingly lent his best endeavors to a further advance. The
spiritual aduises of this good man were to our Saint as so many Oracles, and
as such he receive them; animated thereby to a serious progress in both his
undertakings of learning and virtue. For we are to aduert that it was his
settled maxim to make these two always individual companions, keeping them
in an equal balance, so that both learning adorn piety and piety learning,
each giving other a mutual assistance; in so much that no application to
studyes could divert his mind, or lessen his fervor to devotion and virtue. He
knew what the Apostle said to be most true, "scientia inflat, 1. Cor. 5. 2.
that knowledge is a swelling vapor, and puffs upp to danger of bursting if it
be not keept down by the weight of piety, and bounded with a profound
humility. Want of this wholesome caveat makes many great wits miscarry while
they will be more witty then wise, and learned then virtuous.

As for the effect and success of these his present Studyes, by consent of all
both friends and foes, that is, enemies of God and themselves, (for on the
saints part he never bad any, nor opposition at all, but in the behalf of God
and his right, which he was obligd to maintain) by common consent, I say he
proceeded Doctor of Canon Law; and so became incorporated into that noble and
ancient Uniuersity, as a principal and Conspicuous member with a mutual
honor to them both: from whom he was not to part, till by a special
providence of God not only, with common consent but universal joy both of
King and Uniuersity he was made their head.

VII. CHAPTER. He is made Chancellor of Oxford.
SOme space of time elapsd here in preparing for this Graduation; some also
affirm, that he presided for some time in that study: howeuer that interuening
space gave the learned Academy a sufficient knowledge of his singular worth and
abilityes, letting them know what a treasure they had got among them. In the
mean time the Uniuersity is deprived of its head or Chancellor, and was to be
furnished: nothing seemd wanting in our saint toward a most satisfactory
discharge theroff, either as to moral parts of learning, prudence, or what is
also requisite for the support and countenancing of the same authority,
splendor of birth, and great alliance. Having thus cast their eye upon him, by
the joint vote and concurrence of that illustrious Body, the King is petitiond
for his consent, and all parties concernd most readily yeald to the choice
besides himself, who never was ambitious of any preferrment.

What a Chancelour of an Uniuersity is can hardly be defind, being his power
and office wholly depends upon the national customs and propper institution of
the founders. Buh this is generaly receiud by all, that the Chancellor is
truly head of the Uniuersity, not only in points of doctrine, but also in
moral discipline and comportment both of Masters and Students. For England, as
this office was ever of high esteem and honor, so even in these later times,
it is for the most part borne by persons great either by birth and dignity, or
of eminent power and fouour in court: this being held necessary to support and
protect that learned and united Body from all disturbance and disquiett. Which
that valiant and great Prince King Edward the 3. took so to heart, that though
he seemd wholly employed in Arms and warrfare, yett upon an abuse and affront
offered by the City to the Students of that Uniuisity, he Deuested the Major
and Magistrates of their power they had before, and gave the Chancellor Stow.
anno Regis 29. 1355.
of Oxford the only view of the excise of bread, ale, and wine, and other
Victuals, excluding the Major utterly from that office. This king though he
was deeply engagd in wars abroad with such victorious success and conquests as
none before or after him perhaps had the like; yett was so present in the
government of his kingdom at home (especially what concernd the nobler and most
important part of the Common wealth) that is, the education of youth both
Clergy and Laity in learning and virtue, that it might seem the final mark he
aymd at; and for all his successful prowess abroad, that he took it for the
greatest honor to be a feudatary to the supreme Dominion of wisdom, and in
real effect did profess that infallible and everlasting truth, per "me Reges
regnant, by me Kings rule and reign, from me they receive all Prou. 8. 15.
their power.

In this Chair of authority was S. THOMAS Set, and it was his singular
integrity and upright demeanor which purchasd him this great and general
esteem. The truth is, there is no such purchaser of true worth and ascent to
honor as virtue; and this is confessd both by friend and foe, even the latter
where off deemes it praise worthy though he can not imitate it, but beholds it
as the Owl does the light with disdaigne. Of his demeanor in this office the
Record testifyes thus: In quo officio Cancellariae, and in omni statu suo, quem
ante and post habuit, just and sancte se gessit, and viam veritatis quam prius
inchoaverat non dimisit, sed semper de bono in melius profecit. In which Office
of Chancellor as also in each other which he bore, he demeand himself with
such vprightnes and integrity, that he never swaru'd from the path of truth
which he once trodd, but went on always advancing from good to better. This
advance was made by exalting vettue and learning and depressing vice, and
idleness its nurse; by an impartial administration of justice to all, giving
every one their due, by maintayning Discipline in its vigor without slackning
the raynes to a noxious liberty. And as his authority extended both to Masters
and Scholars, and even to the Citizens themselves so far as to impede any
abuse toward the former, so he carryd an equal hand over all, and fayld not
thereby to please all. How resolute and active he was in this his proceeding is
wittnessd by a scuffle or Riott which happend at that time betwixt the Southern
and Northern Scholars upon some quarrel of emulation: in which the disorder
grew so high that to part them he was feign to hazard his own person and to
throw himself in to the middle of the throng, out of which he came though with
a whole skinn yett not with a whole Coat, his gown being torn and he beaten:
yett he Maisterd the multitude, reduced them to order, and made them do
penance for their insolency.

This of Chancellor was the First public office which S. THOMAS bore; this
that Candlestick of gold which first showed that burning and shining light to
the world; this that Hill, where that well built City by the hand of God
himself first appeard and where there never was heard any other note but of
joy and Comfort. And happy would that University have deemd it self, if it
might still have bin exhilarated with these sweet notes, enlightend with his
knowledge, and refreshd with the streams of his wisdom; of which they drunk
with much gust, and he no churl in Communicating them. But they like the
fountain of paradise were not to be confind to so narrow a current, fit to
water the surface of the whole kingdom; to which they were both sufficient,
and the King at the loud report, which sounded even to the Court, designd them.
He thought that famous Uniuersity to little a sphere for so great abilityes,
and that it was an injury to the whole Realm to confine such a person to any
particular place though never so honorable, and therefore resolved to make the
whole partake of this universal benefitt.

VIII. CHAPTER. He is made Lord high Chancellor of England.
KIng Henry the 3. a pious and gracious Prince, as you have heard before, loved
te employ and prefer the virtuous to great Offices, as knowing that weighty
affairs were never better mannagd, and consequently thrive better, then in the
hands of such. For besides the peculiar blessing and light which they receive
from Almighty God, virtue gives them both industry and application, and remoues
many impediments which lie in the others way toward a due discharge of their
trust. And therefore since our holy saint carried in the opinion of all such a
Commendatory of sanctity of life and integrity of conversation, and withal his
natural abilityes corresponded to his supernatural, completing him in both;
I wonder not at all that the good King cast his eyes upon him, and entrusted
him with the great office of Lord Chancellor. As to the Saint himself, as he
neuet sought the employment, nay resisted what he could, so he came with a
disinteress'd heart, disburdend of all respects but what he ought to God and his
King: but seeing himself in the eyes of the court and kingdom, he thought it
stood him upon to be more circumspect in his actions and behavior; and
therefore the Author of his life says, Eo honor decoratus mores actionesque
arctiori virtutis praescripto deuinxit; raysd to that dignity he endeauourd to
square his actions and proceedings according to a straighter line of
perfection. He had learnd to be so far Master of himself, that no exaltation
could raise him above himself: Psalm. 130.
so that his heart and eyes were the same, nor did he now walk in mirabilibus
super se, in the clouds of wonders above himself. He knew he was made the
vicegerent of divine wisdom as to this pittance of trust, and therefore he
said as it taught him, arrogantiam, and superbiam, and viam prauam and os
belingue detestor, arrogance, and pride, and wicked way, and a double tongued
mouth I do detest: and I wish Prou. 8. 13.
all that bear the place would say the same; and especially the last of a
double tongue, fit only for a double heart, destroying all syncerity and
plain dealing. He ownd and practisd that which follows, Meum est Concilium
and aequitas, mea est prudentia and fortitudo; Mine is Counsel and equity,
prudence is mine, strength is mine: and how he behau'd himself in these
particulars shall be showed in the end of this Narratrue.

To give now a small hynt at the nature of this office, it may be obserud that
the word Cancellarius or Chancellor signifyes not only now but many ages ago,
an employment or trust of highest concern and honor, next the King himself,
most eminent for power and authority; and till Sr. Thomas More's time, when
worse changes and innouations followd, the dignity of Chancellor was conferrd
upon single or not married persons, though Laymen, as not to be incapable of
Ecclesiastical Prelacy, either Archbishops or Bishops, as the ordinary style
of England was. As to the etymology of this word, Cassiodorus, that learned and
grave person, deriues it from Cancelli, that is, the grated enclosure wherein
the Chancellor sat, separated from the common throng, not to be disturbd in
his office, accessible only to men's eyes; and therefore the same Author calls
these bars or Cancells lightsome doors, open Cloisters, gates with windows.
This was a friendly admonition or caveat given by Cassiodorus to a Chancellor
newly exalted to that eminent office: to putt him in mind, that though he was
raysd and separated from the common rank of men, yet he was exposd to the
common view of all, and therefore must proceed accordingly; not please himself
as if he were to dance in a nett, but to assure himself that he was like to
have as many censures and sharp judgments of him, as men had eyes. Others say,
he is so called because the Chancellor is, as it were, the mouth, the eye, and
ear of the Prince or Sovereign, and has the reuie wing of all Memorialls or
Petitions presented to the Prince, and even decrees of the Prince himself;
what he finds not convenient to Law, or prejudicial to the Prince's or public
good, it is his Office to cancel or cross out as void and wholly illegal, and
not to sign it. From this Cancelling or crossing out with such uncontrolled
authority, they will have the name of Cancellarius or Chancellor derived.

As for the Chancellor of England's office, it is a dignity that makes him
esteemd in the kingdom above all, and next to the King himself. In so much
that on the other part of the Kings Seal (wheroff the custody belongs to the
Chancellor) he signs his own Orders: that the Kings Chapel be in his
disposal and care; that vacant Arch. Bishoprics, Bishoprics, Abbeys, and
Baronyes, falling into the Kings hands be receiud and kept by him that is the
Chancellor: who likewise is to be present when soever the King sitts in
Counsel; even when he is not called: that all things of the Clark or Clergy man
who carries the Kings Seal, be signd by the Chancellors hand; that all things
be disposd of by the advice and Counsel of the Chancellor: in fine that by the
grace of God, his desert and meritt concurring, he never ends his days but in
the Sea of an Arch Bishop or Bishop, if he will accept of it. And for this
reason the office of Chancellor is never to be bought, as having so much
connection and Relation to a Clergy state, for danger of incurring Simony. The
manner or ceremony of creating Chancellors in the Reign of Henry the 2.
Grandfather to King Henry the 3., who enstalld S. THOMAS in that dignity, was
to hang the great Seal about the chosen Chancello'rs neck. But afterward both
the ceremonies of enstallment and his court of Chancery was augmented, three
seals, one of gold, two of silver a great one and a lesser; and for the
Lawyers abuses and quirkes in the Common law the Chancello'rs court or Chancery
erected to moderate all as Vmpire, merely out of equity and justice,
independent of sophistical tricks and verbal cauills. This was the office of
the Lord Chancellor of England since the Norman conquest for the most part with
some ceremonial changes, rather accidental then in substance, as the Kings
who raignd thought fit.

In the administration of this office as our Saint showed great wisdom, so did
he also great integrity, and these two completed his justice; so that the
former securd him against mistakes and ignorance, the latter against bribes and
extorsions; neither of which either was or ever could be justly laid to his
charge. Nay he was so scrupulously nice in the latter, that he would not have
so much as the shadow of it to approach him. It is recorded particularly that
certain Religious men who had a suite depending at Law applyd themselves to
him for his favor and furtherance in the dispatch of the same, and thereto
presented him with a jewel of value: which he rejected not without
indignation, asking them whether they thought him to be wonn with gifts. Nor
was his courage inferior either to his wisdom or integrity; upon which
account when reason and equity dictated that such a thing was to be done, he
was undaunted as to the execution, even though the king himself stood in the
way, yett none more obseruant of his Majesty then he. This may be confirmd by
what happend at the council table and was driven on by many great ones who
persuaded the king to conferr an office upon a new converted Jew whereby he was
impowerd over the lives and persons of such subjects as were found to be
coyners of false money. He opposd it with much earnestnes, saying, it was too
unlimited a power over Christians to be committed to a new converted Jew, who
might easily be tempted according to his former ill habitts to abuse it: and
therefore besought his Majesty with tears either to revoke it, or give him
leave to absent himself, for he could not approve it. The king moved with his
tears and candor as well as the force of his reasons bidding him sit still,
changd there upon his determination. I shall say more relating to this in the
last Chapter. Now how satisfactory his mannagement of affairs in this ticklish
charge was both to Prince and people is euidenc'd by this, that the King upon
urgent occasions being called into France, left to him, during his absence, the
trust and charge of the whole kingdom.

IX. CHAPTER. King Henry dies, his Son succeeds, S. Thomas with License gives
up his Seal and retyres.
IN this equal track of justice, declining neither to the right hand nor the
left, did our Saint walk all the respitt of King Henry's life. Full often
during this space of time did he sigh after his former Retyrement, and ceasd
not upon fit occasions to importune the same: but the good King who had found
his assistance and dexterity so serviceable in the dispatch of affairs would
by noe means harken to that request, giving him leave to groan under his
burden: and he in compliance with his will submitted to it, making the best of
the worst and a virtue of necessity. At last, having finishd the course of
nature as well as of a virtuous life, he paid the common tribute of mortality
to death, and Edward his eldest Son, called the first of that name immediately
succeeded in the throne: of whom it will not be amiss to give some short
account, as also how things went in the course of affairs.

This Edward was not only a warr-like but wise Prince, and as he had receiud
both Crown and life from his father, so he restord both again, by cutting off
with his own hand the last and most dangerous Rebellion of all. This was raisd
by Simon Montfort a great soldier, and of a high Spirit, otherwise a pious
and gracious person to most men, by reason of his forward zeal to engage in
what he conceiud did concern the common good: which cost him first expulsion
out of France, and after his being receiud in England, and made Earl of
Lecester, noe less then his life. This great Warrior observing the march and
approach of Prince Edward to give him battle, turned to his Commanders and
thus aduisd them; let us commend our souls to God, for our bodies are theyrs;
as it fell out and he died with the rest. The same great Prince Edward the
first, after he had brought the kingdom of Scotland to the utmost extremity,
but prevented by death could not complete the full conquest, he chargd his Son
Edward the 2. or of Caernaruan (called so from his birth in that castle) not to
enterre his body till he finishd the work begunn by him, of which little
remayn'd to be atchieu'd. But those court Parasites, the young Kings favorites,
hating as death the life of a Soldier, drew him of from that noble design to
court again, to the shame and infamy of the English Nation, and wretched end
of that unfortunate Prince. A sad example of disobedience to the last words of
a dying father, and such a father as England had scarce his like for valor,
conduct, and wisdom.

In the very beginning of whose Reign and first stepp into the throne S.
THOMAS as his place and office requird brought him the great Seal of England,
with most humble acknowledgment of his obligation to his Majesty's father for
honoring him above all desert with that eminent charge, which he resignd into
his Majestyes hands with this humble petition, that with his Majestyes
approbation and leave, he may retire to that known mother of learning and
wisdom Oxford, where he may more enable himself for the service of God and of
his Majesty, and the assistance of his country. To which the King answered first
with thanks, as the manner is, for the great service done to the King and
kingdom; and for his petition, that he assented to it, and for the present
gave him full liberty to dispose of himself as he thought fitting. This was it
which our Saint, much more addicted to the Schools then the court, so
earnestly breathd after, and as cheerfully hastend to them as a stone to its
Center or fire to its element; "trahit sua quemque voluptas.

And here I cannot but pawse a while upon this noble and heroical act of S.
THOMAS; which if we measure by a humane ell and man's natural inclination to
greatness, was perchance one of the noblest of his life. For where in the world
shall one find even virtuous and holy men who make not preferrments a part of
their aim and reward of their studyes, much less who will diuest themselves
willingly of it especially the highest, when they have it in possession. Honor
is called the Nurse of Arts, and suites much with the propension of man, who
naturally loves precedence and preeminency, as the milk he suckd from his
Mother Eve, and few part with^^ but against their wills. It is mo^^ ^hen
probable for diverse reasons, that S. THOMAS might have continued his Office had
he not solicited a release from the same; and such a solicitation upon the
prudentiall motives of a virtuous humility argues a profound sanctity, and
contempt both of himself and worldly things. Had he continued in his charge
the ordinary course of such proceedings would have enstalld him in the Sea of
somegreat Prelacy: of which if he had bin more ambitious then of a private
Retyrement, he would have made it his busynes as he did this. But Saints see
with other eyes then these of nature, they are guided by better lights, which
partake more of truth and less of uanity: they see honor to be nothing else
but a buble and a burden, and on both scores worthy of despisement, since the
former^ as empty as the latter troublesome, (...) say no worse. Honor, says
the Philosoper, is in him that conferrs it, the burden only passes to the
Receiver or honored: what is burdensome ought to be rejected. To discover the
emptynes of honor is a point of wisdom; to contemn that which all do^^ on, a
point of sanctity: true wisdom makes them know it is but a shadow, and that
they ought not to content themselves with shadows but solid substances; nor
play the dog in the fable, who while he more greedily then prudently s'natchd
at the shadow lost the bone. True sanctity tells them that the truest honor is
to contemme all honor besides the honor of God; which while they labor to
advance they honor both him and themselves, not with an empty ayry honor but
permanent and eternal, whose shadow the other is.

Such good solid principles made our Saint do what he did, that is, pray the
Saint, that is, despise and trample upon that Idol of the world for the love of
heaven and a virtuous life. But though the King lisenc'd him at his request
from the Chancellorship, yett he still retaynd him, during life, of his Privy
Council, as I find upon Record in the Process of his Canonization, where his
advise proved many times aduantageous above others, as I shall here after have
occasion to relate: and things were so orderd at present that no let or stopp
was putt to the actual design of prosecuting his studyes.

X. CHAPTER. S. Thomas returns to Oxford, proceeds Doctor of Divinity, the
testimony given of him.
OUr Saint, as we said, being with license and approbation of the King free
from Court and Chancellors office, so much admired and wishd for by the rest of
the world, sung with the Royal Prophet laqueus contritus est Psalm. 123. ^. 7.
and nos liberati sumus, the snare is broken, and we set at liberty;and like
a dove or pigeon with eyes sealed to the lower world soars upwards, as far as
his wings can bear him, to enjoy God and what leads nearest to him, that is,
true knowledge of him, which from the things it treats of, as propperly, as
Commonly, is called Divinity. In which study, having exercisd himself with his
wonted application free from all other distraction and adhesion to terrene
things, he made such progress, that by the votes of all in due time, he
proceeded Doctor, of that highest of sciences, which, as the Angelical S.
THOMAS explicates it out of the Proverbs chap. 9. v. 3. sitts like a Queen in
Court, and all other intellectual Arts serve her as hand mayds. And what
wonder if his flight were so soaring, since he had the wings of a dove, I may
say of an Angel or bird of Paradise, by reason of his purest soul, cleanest
heart, and Angelical conversation; and as the clean of heart see God best, and
he so attractiuely amiable, why should they not make great advance toward him.
As wisdom does not enter into a maleuolous soul, nor dwell in a body subject
to sin, so when it finds one symbolizing with its humor in point of sanctity,
and Capacitated thereto, it Communicates light as plentifully, as the Sunn his
beams to the Crystal.

How Joyfully he was receiud in that Uniuersity, and what wellcomes he had from
all the degrees of the same, as a thing of course is needles here to be
expressd. He Coming now in the quality not of a public person but private
Student to gain more time and set closer to his task, wau'd what he could all
such diuersions: his entertainment was among his books, and his content in his
devotions; and there he never found himself less alone then when most. He knew
what a precious treasure time is, and esteeming it as such, was loath to loose
the least parcel thereof: this he did both for his own benefitt and the
example of others, to make them less wastfull of what the most part are lavish.
To this good mannagement of time and his other devotions he joined works of
mercy, and especially relief to poor scholars, to many whereof he gave a daily
maintinance, enabling them thereby to go through with their studyes; and to
this kind of charity he was much addicted, as we shall further show in the 13.
Chapter.

His thoughts thus divided betwixt his studyes and devotions gave him the
fruits of the formers industry, and the blessings of the latters light. Amidst
these he prepared himself for his great Act or Commencement, at which his
ancient friend and Master in spirit, who had taught him many a good lesson in
that kind, would be present, I mean Robert Kilwarby, who though at the time of
his Presentment he were Doctor of the Chair, yett before the time he was to
stand in the Act, his great knowledge and eminent virtue had receiud a condign
reward of both, from the hands of Pope and Prince, the Sea of Canterburry. This
made the new Prelate not stand upon his points, but as the truly humble, the
more they are exalted the humbler they are, so this preferrment rather furtherd
then retarded him in the respect and honor he intended his friend. Friendship
is never better grounded or supported then with piety; none knowing the laws
of that better then this, or keeping them more inuiolably, as least swayd by
interest. Though the meritts of our Saint were such that they needed no
commendatoryes, yett to observe form and the usual custom, after his examen
he is bid to withdraw: that done the Archbishop who came down purposely to
perform the Ceremonies of his Creation, gave an ample testimony of him, and
that upon oath to the present Auditory, at what time the saint was no less then
54. jeares of age. He commended him first from the 4. Cardinal virtues and his
eminent perfection in each; next from his singular purity both of body and
mind, as pure as to both, as he was the firstday he came into the world. And
if, said he, you demand of me how I come to have such a confident assurance
thereof; I answer in the presence of God, that I have read it all along as
clearly in his life and conscience by hearing his Confessions even ftom his
youth, as any of you in a book legibly writ can read characters laid open to
your eyes: nor do I fear but God, a lover of purity, who has thus long
preserud him without spott, will keep him spottles even till death.

This was a rare Elogium of the virgin integrity of our Saint, well worth our
admiration and veneration, I may also add imitation; it falling especially from
the mouth of one who might be accounted an Oracle as to truth, and as free from
flattery as interest by it. Why then should any one suspect such a
disinteress'd testimony of a sacred personage far above censure, and not
rather censure those that censure him? Every thing is as it is taken: I read
this Elogium of a venerable Prelate, and I think I do prudently in framing
there upon a most high conceyt of the Saints purity: why do I not? he being one
of unquestionable credit: another comes and he censures all both Primate and
Saint, both the testimony of this and the integrity of the other. I hold this
discourse because Doctor Godwin once pretended Bishop of Hereford, and
Recorder of all the English Bishops lives, upon the rehearsal of this very
passage makes this reflection by way of a prudentiall note; "Omnis homo, says
he, mendax; either Confessor or Confessed, or the reporter ly'd I doubt not.
Whence may be seen what gloss this Historian putts upon so grave an
asseueration, and how easily he waves any authority besides his own. What
means the man by omnis homo mendax? does he aim at the Saint or at the
Primate or at himself; for if all be liars, by consequence he too; and how
non-sensically is this thrust in? What need he doubt but such a point of
perfection may be asserted, and neither Confessor nor Confessed, nor Reporter
a Liar? by what Divinity does Doctor Godwin conclude this? It may be a wonder
beyond belief in the Protestant church, that any one keep his baptismall
purity in an integrity of body and mind, but in the Catholic it is not at
all; and I doubt as little of this as he of the other. How should we know the
gestes of Saints, since we have them not by Revelation, but by the Relation of
creditable men? No more Certainly is requird here then suffises to ground a
prudent belief: if every grave historian pretend to this, even Doctor Godwin
himself, how much more a Prelate a Primate? But enough of such stuff; he would
only have showed a piece of his Divinity, and confirmd it with an I DOUBT NOT,
and it suffises to have taken notice of its strength. I doubt not for all his
doubt but the Primates testimony will stand good, since so many great virtues
give force and warrant to his veracity, and upon the same, that our Saint, as
he deserves, will be thought to have preserud his vnblemmish'd integrity in the
candor of its first innocence.

About this time it was while S. THOMAS was attending his Studyes that Gregory
the to. gave a beginning to the 2. Council of Lions, and that, an interruption
to him from the said studyes. The improuement which he found by the former
would not let him slipp the opportunity of redoubling the same by the latter. A
General Council is the School of the age in which it is held; the great mart
of knowledge where one may buy wisdom at an easy rate, and become acquainted
with all the worthyes of all Nations. An obseruant be comes hither as into a
garden of choysest flowers, where it may pick and choose the honey of all good
improuement at pleasure; whether it be in point of virtue, or whether it be in
point of science; here he may find patterns of the former, and no less of the
latter: here he may hear the Orator perorate, the Philosopher discourse, the
Divine dispute, the Interpreter expound, the Antiquary impart his hiddenest
treasures of rites, customs, traditions and the like. In the year 1274. upon
the Summons of the chief Pastor of Gods church Gregory the 10. there met
700. Prelates in the City of Lions, Latin and Greek, gatherd together from
all the parts of the Christian world to Consider upon the State of the Church;
not only to seek a second time relief for the H. Land and its oppressions by
infidells, but also to Ciment up the breaches of the same church, causd by
that unfortunate schism of the Greeks about the Procession of the H. Ghost.
13. times had that perfidious Nation sworn and subscribd in full Council to
an open Reuokement and disclayme of that schism, and as often had it relapsd
to vomitt; nor dit it now any whitt less as to both, submission and revolt.

Further account of this our Saints Journey then meerley of his going I find
none: he went, I suppose, in the quality of a private person, because the
Record which mentions it specifyes no more: and going as such (Saints do not
use to carry any great noise or clutter along with them) he returned when he
thought good as silently as he went. And this must probably have happend after
the time of his Studyes and Graduation; because that past and he commenced, I
find he was immediately called to a chair in the same University where having
read and presided 16. months the fame of the indicted Council called him away
not by any other Summons then those of his own improuement. For pretensions of
advancement were as far from his thoughts as they were from his desires or
heart: yett honors are like shadows following those that fly from them, and so
they did him. For shortly after this his return from the council he was
chosen to shine in the Ecclesiastical Magistracy, as he had before in the
Schools and secular Tribunalls: and how this came to pass must be the subject
of the next Chapter.

XI. CHAPTER. He is made Bishop of Hereford.
WE have hitherto accompanyd our Saint through the private passages of his
life, and beheld him for the most part immured as it were, within the walls of
the Schools attending chiefly to the perfecting himself not others. Not but
that he has appeard, and very illustrious too, in the eyes of the world and
gloryes of the Court, when made Lord Chancellor of England he divided justice
with such an equal and satisfactory balance to the whole kingdom that none
besides himself was glad at the resignment. This was but a forced lending
himself to what he could not with stand; or a voluntary admittance of what was
putt upon him whether he would or not: otherwise if it had bin as much
according to his gust, as that of the rest of the world, he would neither have
so earnestly sought his own release, nor ioyd so much in obtaining it, as he
did.

Those great talents and abilityes which renderd him so recommendable to this,
did the same to Ecclesiastical promotions. It is a prerogratiue which God has
annexd to virtue, that it meets, though not always, with many even temporal
rewards when it looks the least after them; and indeed who deserves them
better, or when they have them can use them with more integrity? His nobility
also and great alliance gave no small furtherance: whence it was, that he
enjoyed at the same time by dispensation many and fatt benifices, all which
according to the Collatours intention he turned not so much to his own interest
as to the maintaining and recovering of their rights, upholding privileges,
conseruing buildings, and relieuing the poor of the respective neighborhood.
He was at the same time Canon and Chanter of York, Archdeacon and Canon of
lichfield, Archdeacon of Stafford, Canon of London and Hereford: all which I
rehearse not as so many Certificates of his Sanctity but as rewards of his
meritts, and pledges of respect and honor from such Chapters, ambitious to
have him a member of the same; and it were to be wishd that such were always
in their hands who would use them to their improuement.

While things were in this course, John de Breton a worthey Prelate grouernd
the Sea of Hereford, one well seen both into the Canon and Common Law of the
Land which latter he illustrated with his writings. This man dying in this
interim left his chair vacant to a successor, and the care of providing a
fit one to the vigi lancy of the Chapter: the carriage of things as to the
Election (as we find recorded in the Process of his Canonization) was after
this tenor. It chanced while the Chapter was deliberating about that point, S.
THOMAS, a canon of the same, though his ordinary Residence were at Londen, was
accidentally called down thither upon the score of other affairs. The day
prefixd for the election before his coming, happend while he was there, and he
as a member theroff, and of great regard both for his virtue learning, and
nobility, was desyrd to preach before the Chapter, and so give a happy entrance
to the work. All proceeded Canonically according to method, but yett the result
of the votes was not so clear and absolute that day as to decide the question;
and tell them positiuely this is the man. The next meeting did it; and all the
Chapter by joint decree, says the Process, did conclude first that the party
to be elected should be a THOMAS, and next that the ambiguity of that name
should be resolved to the individual THOMAS Cantelupe: whence followed an
unanimous acclamation of all, desyring and accepting and voycing him their
Bishop. Hence he was carried to the high Altar, and a TE DEUM solemnly enton'd
by way of thanksgiving with the Uniuersall applause and good liking of all
besides himself. For he like one surprizd at unawares, and expecting nothing
less then what happend, broke forth into tears, bemoand his condition,
deprecated the burden, alleged his own insufficiency, and usd all the
arguments he could divise to reuerse the Election. He did as Saints use to do,
who measuring themselves by the ell of their own mean-conceytednes, and
poyzing the burden which such a charge draws after it, the eyes of their
humility makes them deem themselves weaklings, and the burden like an Aetna
insupportable, well knowing what it is to be accountable for so many souls. He
did like an humble Saint, and they like a wise and and Sage Chapter, who knows
those to be fittest for Prelacy, that are least ambitious of it; and them
ablest to answer for others who are most careful over themselves: for he that
is known to neglect his own soul, how can it be presumd that he will be
vigilant over those of others, since charity beginns at home.

Far was our Saint from those ambitious motives of preferrment which possess
even good souls: and though Tim. C. 3^
the Apostle says, he that desires a Bishopric desires a good work, yett
great Saints find good reasons why to wave, yea suppress such desires,
especially when they find them to arise more from selfseeking then Gods honor
or the good of souls. No body ought Hebr. 5. 4.
to emulate this honor but he that is called by God as Aaron: it is want of
interior light that makes many more forward then considerate in this kind; who
seeing only by the glimmerings of selfloue, (a false light issuing from an
ignis fatuus) think that often gay, which has nothing suchbut what it borrowes
from false reflections. Where as Saints who are of a more refind sight, as seeing
things by true lights, and measuring them accordingly by the Weights of the
Sanctuary, make a far different estimate, and proceed quite contrary. As we
ought not to censure the former unless their Sinister intention and self
endednes condemn them first for Mercenaryes, so we cannot but admire those
others who prefer an humble security before a splendid danger, and dread the
honor by reason of the burden.

As the H. Ghost, the great President of the Church and its affairs, presides
influentially in all its Canonical Elections, so we cannot doubt but that
Fingar digitus pat. dextera.
of the Fathers right hand, did here as it is his office, inspiringly point out
this Sheapard whom he designd to govern that flock, and set up as a light
in the Candlestick of the Church of Hereford to shine to all in learning and
virtue. That this was an assured Decree of heaven, not only as all Canonical
Elections are, but also peculiarly preordaynd by a special providence may be
showed both by the whole steerage of his life, whose actions and behavior seemd
to be squard and molded for such a course, as also by several predictions and
prognosticons which intimated the same. The saying of Walter Cantilupe Bishop
of Worcester and his kinsman, vtterd in our Saints childhood concerning his
future state of life, cited in the 3. Chapter, seems by the event to have bin
Prophetique, and as such was receuid by his Parents, who there upon directed the
whole education of their child to a perpetual advance in knowledge and piety,
the two ornaments and supports of Prelacy. It was no less remarkable what passd
while he studied the Law at Orleans, and for his excellency in that science
supplyd the absence of his Professor. When the night before he was to read, one
of his fellow Students beheld him by way of dream not only in the Chair or
Pulpitt, but also Carrying a Bishops Mytre on his head, the circumference or
border whereof was full of Crosses, as ominating that he was to walk by the way
of the Cross full of hardship and contradiction. We may add to these a third
prediction of his immediate Predecessor, who, two years before his own death
and the others election, foretold he should succeed him in his charge.

The choice being made and ratified to the satisfaction of all, the day and
place of his inauguration was pitchd on. The day was to be the 8. of Sept.
sacred to the Nativity of the Virgin Mother of God, nor could any other have
fallen more suitable to his desires, and the devotion he had for that glorious
Queen: whose Nativity as it brought a deluge of joy and happynes to all
mankind, so he might hope it would betyde no ill presage to him, who was now to
be borne as it were a new man; and most willingly did he come into this new
world under her patronage, under which he was to live and dye, as all they do
who live and dye happily. When he had resolved who was to consecrate him, it
was easy to conclude on the place of Confecration: the former resolve was
easily made according to his own inclination; for connaturally speaking on
whom would he sooner pitch then on him to whom he was most beholding after
God for what he had both in literature and piety: who as he had honored him in
his commencement of Doctor of Divinity, so also Crown and complete all with
the Character of Episcopacy. This was Robert Kilwarby whom we mentiond in the
precedent Chapter, installd now Archbishop of Canterbury and Primate of
England; who though so great, showed an humble readynes to comply with the
desires of his friend in order to a consecration, what soever they were, or
where soever to be performd: sealing up, as it were, with this concluding act
(for shortly after he was called to Rome) all his former endeavors for the
Saints advance in spirit and piety, specifyd in the 4. Chapter: only it is to
be noted in a word that the Consecration was made in Christ church Canterbury
in the year 1275. and of his age about 56.

In testimony of the common content received by this Election, and the happynes
as well as honor accrewing thence to his See of Hereford, it was agreed by all
concernd, both Chapter and succssours, and for an attestation of the general
Sentiment, that thence forward all the Bishops of Hereford should give his coat
of Arms as the coat of their See, to wit, G. 3. leopards heads jeasant, 3.
flouwer de luces Or. So true it is, that honor like a shadow follows those
that fly it, and that no pursuit besides contempt is the ready way to its
purchase.

XII. CHAPTER. His Retyrement and Union with God.
THis new Character made him a new man, nor did he look on himself with the
same eyes as before: not puffd up like many, with the fumes of a swelling
exaltation, but purely on the score of his new Character, beholding himself as
one consignd over thereby to the service of God. They are worse then purblind
who look only on a man as a mere man, and make no distinction at all of states
and callings, being able to penetrate no further then the exterior lineaments,
nor distinguish in their leuelling humor betwixt a man and a Priest, one with
a crosyer and a Sword. Even such themselves, when qualifyd and raysd to
honors, look on themselves as some body, and will not bate an ace of State;
why should not the same be done when raysd to a state of Sanctity? Bishops are
in a state of perfection, and set up as lights in the candlestick of the
church to shine to others, you are, said Christ of them, the light of the Mat.
5. 14.
world, nothing not squaring with perfection is expected from them. This
consideration makes them reflect on their duty, attend to your selves and your
whole flock, and so did it our Act. 20. 28.
B. Saint, giving him subject enough to busy his thoughts on, in order to a due
discharge of his trust. Which the better to perform he recalls all his
thoughts home, and as he had now contracted a new Espousalle, so he wedded all
his endeauours to its interest. A sheapard till he have a flock of his own may
divert himself more freely among his neighbors and spend some hours in
visiting theyrs; but when he himself is once Master of one he attends only to
that, and may say, as did the man in the Gospel on another occasion, uxorem
duxi and I^c. 14. 20.
ideo non possum, etc.

When God calls one to a state he furnishes him with thoughts, desires,
affections suitable thereto; he gives him light to consider it, to ponder its
weightynes, to see for what he must be answerable when "read rationem
villicationis Luc. 16. 2.
tuae" calls upon him; All these employ his mind sufficiently, and make him
retire with in himself, and consequently with draw from less necessary
exterior affairs. He never was in love with the world nor taken with its
fooleryes, and therefore easily retyrd from it as from what he little cared for:
he was long ago like one glutted and surfeyting with its dilights even the
choysest of the court, and saw too clearly its vanities to be deluded by them.
The more he retyrd into himself, the more he loved Retyrement, its sweetness
being not known but by tasting it; and one truth he discouerd thereby, that a
gadding Spirit will never make a Saint, nor wandering thoughts which go all
day on wool-gathering bring home much sanctity. He found all in God and
contented himself with him alone, as well he might; who to a holy Soul is all
in all: and it is in solitude that he speaks to such a heart, where the choyser
sort of virtues dwell, not upon Roads or marketplaces; as Lions and Eagles and
such generous Creatures are not found in common woods and fields but solitary
Wildernesses, where they may rule and enjoy themselves vncontroulld by the
vulgar of inferior Creatures. Here upon a great change was obserud in him and
his conversation; he was, and was esteemd a Saint before, but now more
noys'dly; he had long ago the world in contempt, now in hatred.

What lay not a little heavy on his heart, and was, as I may say, the burden of
his thoughts, was his new charge, or the solicitude of its good discharge. To
comply duly with this was all his care, and to do it well, a great supply he
knew, of virtues was requisite, and those chiefly which attend such a function.
Those he conceived to be in the first place and above others Vigilance, he
being now a Sheapard that was to keep watch and stand Sentinel over his Flock:
a virtue so propper to one thus entrusted, that on it the whole welfare and
safety of the same Flock seems in a manner to depend as to its preservation and
integrity, both for the preventing of mischiefs and giving redress when
incurrd. A vigilant Pastor withstands the incursions of wolves and other
beasts of prey, not only when they appear in their propper shape, but also
disguisd in the dress of sheep; nor is it his duty only to prevent and repel
evil but also to implant good: It happend when men were a sleep that the enemy
man found opportunity to sow tares upon the good wheat and spoil the harvest.
To recommend this virtue the high Priest in the old law carryd an Amythist
enchac'd in his Rational as a symbol of watchfullnes, the nature of that
precious stone disposing much thereto: and nature inculcates the necessity of it
both by the lions sleeping with open eyes, and the crane with a stone in her
talon, not to over sleep themselves, as the foolish virgins did, but be ready
for the least alarm; which lesson is taught us by the spouse and may serve for
a Motto to all, Ego dormio and cormeum Cant. 5. 2.
vigilat. Upon the same score he considerd himself not only as the Master of
a great family, which he was to feed with the bread of the word of God, and
keep in good order as beseemd the House of God; but also (which touchd him
nearer to the heart) a Common farher of so many children, whom, as such, he was
to embrace with the arms of a fatherly charity, and tender their Spiritual
welfare as much as any parent, for each one wheroff he was to be accountable
to him who entrusted them in his hands. This made him putt on the bowels of
Colos. 3. 12.
mercy, benignity, humility, modesty, patience, and bear with the faults and
frailtyes of others, becoming all to all that he might winn all to Christ. This
humble condescendence gave him a powerful ascendant upon the hearts of the good
to incline them much toward virtue and piety, and gaind him so much esteem in
their affections, that his words were, tanquam potestatem Matt. 7.
habentis, as of one that spoke with an awefull authority. Yett he loved them as
his Children and was so beloved by them, and feared accordingly; for that fear
is best and most effectual to good which is grounded on and arises from love;
when it is otherwise it is not so much filial as servile, that is, propper to
servants rather then children.

This Retyrement as it sequesterd his heart and thoughts from the world and its
affairs, so it gave him a fayrer prospect of virtue and its anduantages to
Christian perfection, and the necessity thereof toward the due ordering both of
body and soul. To have all well, there must be a right understanding and
subordination betwixt these two: the soul must be Mistress, and good reason
why? the body handmayd and subseruient. Reason must command, sense obey; this
will not be done but by a true subjection of the inferior man to the
Superior; nor that, but by frequent penance and mortification interior and
exterior, both in macerating the flesh, and subduing our passions and
appetites. To effect this the servants of God make war upon them 1 Cor. 9. 17.
selves by chastizing their bodies, least while they preach to others,
themselves become reprobate, and to this purpose embrace the hardshipps of
fasting, watching, hayr cloth, and the like to further and complete the
conquest of themselves. And this was the practice of our H. Saint as the
Recorders of his life and gests do testify, and had also bin through his
former age, wearing a rough hayr cloth next his body for many years
together, pennancing his innocent flesh with frequent fasts and watchings. But
now he frequented all these in so much greater perfection, as he conceived the
need he had of their present support to be more pressing, though not to
suppress any rebellious mutinyes, yett to obtain greater supplies of grace.
Yea even in the hour of his death and amidst the encumbrances of a long and
tedious iourny he was found shrouded in one of these, as in a coat of male
against the stings of death: as if he intended, according to the Proverb,
"clavum clauo pellere, to drive out one nail with another, or make a cordial
for his sickness of that which seemd as ill as the sickness it self: But Saints
esteem those cordialls, which we do Corrosiues. And his fervor in this kind
was such, that by these and other the like austerityes he incurrd great
infirmityes of body, and was much pesterd with most sharp fitts of the
cholique, and pains of the Stomach, which with other sicknesses gave him a
full exercise of his patience for many years with no small increase of meritt.

But the vigor of his mind Masterd all these, which served only to render his
body or inferior part more pliant and supple in a due subjection, where by his
Soul, perfect Mistress of the family, yealded a rational obsequiousnes to God
its Creator, by dilating it self in prayer, and meditating the divine
perfections with the repose of so much devotion and sweetness, that he seemd to
be there as in his Center. And it is recorded of him peculiarly, that his
exterior Capgraue,
Composure and recollection in the same was such that the very sight of him was
sufficient to stir up both faith and fervor in the beholders: as also that
in celebrating the H. Sacrifice of Mass, his heart and eyes were so dissolved
into tears, as if he had actually beheld the bloody Mystery of the Cross
represented to them, so lively was his faith so ardent his devotion. He carried
a great love to this exercise of prayer, and deservedly, for by it all
spiritual enterprises are atchieu'd, that being the Source from whence we
derive both light to discover, and strength to act, and courage to attaque, and
perseverance to Crown our undertakings. By this a soul conuerseth with God
and he with it; Conversation we know, breeds familiarity, and this friendship
or union of hearts; and when one is arrived to that, "amicorum omnia Communia,
what needs he more by way of supply then the storehouse of God himself. Union
is the result of love, that making the lover and beloved one, and love consists
in a matuall Communication of goods and talents; if we give, we need not doubt
but we shall receive, his very essence being goodness and bounty. All these are
the effects of Prayer, and chiefly this union which who soever has attaynd,
what wants he of perfection? Perfection consist's in charity, which is
consummated in unity; for then every thing is deemd perfect when it attaynes
its end, and unites it self to that which is its vltimate Consummation; the
Consummation of a rational Creature is God, and God is in us and we in him by
charity. Being thus united to God by charity, or as S. Bernard calls it,
married to his Word, Charitas maritat animam Verbo the sequel is, that as two
Spouses are two in one flesh by Corporal Espousalls, so God and a soul become
two in one Spirit by a spiritual: and all the consequences, advantages,
participations of honors, riches, ennoblement, alliance, etc. which are
Communicated by the other, are after a much more divine manner participated by
this. What wonder then if our B. Saint endeauourd so earnestly an union with
God, and took prayer so much to heart as the begetter of this union.

To maintain and highten the same was all his endeavor; and he endeauourd it
by employing to that purpose the 3. powers of his soul memory, understanding
and will in a perpetual presence of him. His memory by recounting his great
and daily benefitts in a thankfullnes of heart; his understanding by meditating
his divine truths, perfections, and attributes; his will by loving him in all,
and conforming his to the divine: and this is the noblest employment of a
rational soul and an imitation of what the Saints do in heaven. The more
straightly he united himself to God the more he did partake of his bountyes, who
scorns to be out-vy'd by any body in this kind; and this participation
increasd the flame of his charity, which dilated it self both toward God and
his Neighbor, loving God for himself and his neighbor in, and for God, and
as himself; and this is the fullnes of the Law and Prophetts. Hence he became
so Zealous both of the honor and House of God, which is his Church, and so
sensible of the concerns of his neighbor both spiritual and temporal, that
he seemd to be borne for their relief, and especially of the poor and needy:
of both which parts of charity we shall treat more amply in the ensuing
Chapters; and first

XIII. CHAPTER. Of his Love to the Poor.
TO think that one so groundedly maximd in perfection and the practice of all
solid virtue as he was, would rather impair then improve by his Exaltation, is
a paradoxe. Qui Apoc. 22. 11.
sanctus est sanctificetur adhuc, who is holy let him advance in holiness, said
S. John, and so says every truly virtuous soul, whose glory is to be always
mounting with the sunn to the topp of his Meridian. All our Saints ambition and
satisfaction was in a happy progress toward perfection, knowing that as to its
pursuit we are, as it were, in a stream where there is no standing still for
the Rower, not to ascend is to descend, and to go backward not to go forward.
Even while he was yett a Churchman or Canon he was very much devoted to alms
deeds and the relief of the poor; how much was this pious practice aduancd
when by the imposition of hands he had received the H. Ghost who is Father of
the Veni Pater patiperum
poor, and made him such: but whether before or after matters not, the virtue
being equally commendable in both states, and we will speak promiscuously of it
in both.

Though good words give but barren comfort to an empty stomach yett still it is
true, that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and then they are
only expressions of a willing mind: and howeuer even a Compassionate answer is
in some sort satisfactory. The poor were sure at least of that from him, if
nothing else, though he seldom stinted his charity there: and as he esteemd
them the Patrimony of Christ so he spoke with all humility and respect to them,
as he would to Christ himself, knowing that to be done to him which was done
to the least of his members. Upon this account the esteem he had of them was
such that he commonly called them his Breethren (a name of greatest love) and
with his good will would have had all his domestiques to have called them so
too, and chidd them that they did not. Whence it is recorded that being set at
table with half a dozen such guests, and finding yet place for more, he sent
one of the waiters to the Palace gate te see whether any of his Breethren were
there or no; if there were, that he should bring a couple of them along with
him. He returning told his Lord there were no Brothers of any Order what
soever; No, said the Bishop, not of this that sitts here by me, poynting to the
beggars: yes, my Lord, replied he, there are at least a dozen such; go then,
said he, and bring 5. of the number along with you, which was forth with done,
and impletae sunt Matt. 22. 10.
Nuptiae discumbentium.

But words be they never so good are still inferior to deeds, these latter
being a better proof of charity as costing more, and aftording more relief.
This was the substantial part of his love to the poor, and he was not sparing
of it: he had, to wit, learnd the great lesson of his Lord and Master beatius
est Act. 20. 35.
magis dare quam accipere, it is a more blessed thing to give then to take; and
he was resolved to practice it in this behalf. The recommendation of his own
meritts and noble descent had furnishd him with a large proportion of Church
Revenues even before the access of his Bishopric, which, besides a competency
of maintenance beseeming his quality, and the discharge of other incumbencyes,
he knew not how to bestow better then on the poor. He knew that the goods of
the Church are the Patrimony of Christ, and where could he spend them better
then on the living members of Christ, either to his own content of mind or
satisfaction of conscience. This is the way to grow rich in heaven, and make
friends of the Mammon of iniquity, Luc. 16. 9.
that, when other means fail, these may receive us into the eternal
tabernacles: nay even procure us temporal Commodityes, since alms deeds laid
up in the bosom of the poor (this is the best way of honoring our Lord by
Prou. 2. 10.
them) fill both the press with wine, and barnes with Corn, and the
almes-giuer with other blessings. He in deed had no great sins of his own to
redeem by them, as having probably never lost his baptismall innocence, but he
aymd at a treasure of meritts due to such works of Corporal mercy, and was to
be laid up in heanen against his reception there, out of the reach of rust or
moth. Hence he took this virtue so to heart that it was very resplendent in his
practice, and the poor resorted to him as to a common parent from whom they
never departed empty handed. He found it no bad medium to work by the body upon
the Soul; and true, that to gain this, charity must be showed to that: an
indisposd body is like an indisposd mind, hard to be wrought upon while
necessitous; fill the hand and you gain the heart, now flexible to any good
impressions. Our corrupt nature is more sensible of hungar then of devotion,
and ressents want of sustenance more then want of virtue or grace. It is as
hard to hammer it to good as a piece of iron to a good shape unless it be first
made supple by the fire of a subuentiue charity, this done you may form it as
you please: Works of Corporal mercy must dispose for the spiritual. Therefore
his custom was to seek admittance to the mind by relieuing the body, and made
it a part of his care to order things so, that while he refreshd this, that
should not also want its food, partly by pious discourses and godly
instructions, partly by causing some good book to be read suitable to the
present exigence.

To this so laudable and holy practice of his former life, he seems to have
superadded this Circumstance after his Episcopal installment, that what he did
before in this kind by others, he would now do by himself, and with his own
hands. This is particularly recorded of him, and deservedly worth noting, as a
great super additionall to the former virtue; for how could he employ his hands
now Consecrated to God more piously then by consecrating them to such an
exercise of charity? What is laudably done by another is more laudably by our
selves: God does Psalm. 144. 16.
it by himself as the Psalmist tells us aperis tu manum tuam and imples omne
animal benedictione thou opens they hand and fills each Creature with
benedictions; the sunn sends not a servant, nor the heavens also, to divide
their influences to this sublunary world: besides that thus not only an act of
charity but also of humility, and no mean one, is exercisd. Its good to give
alms by others, but much better to do it by himself as more meritorious: one
has the meritt both of the alms, and of the manner of giving it, and the
manner in some respect even doubles it: for who thinks not himself more graced
by receiving a gratuity immediately from the Prince's own hand then from his
servant: the more immediate the influence, the more it is prizd. For these
reasons it is accounted a praise worthy practice in parents, when they do it
not themselves, to inure their children, a part of themselves, to be the
Conueyers of their alms, unless other motives impede: it has not only a more
Comfortable acceptance both from God and man, but also it habituates or rather
seasons these new vessels, capable as yett of any tincture, with such a
flauour of charity, that many times it sticks by them their whole life long.
And perchance our B. Saint took his from such a rise of devotion, or document
of his pious Parents, and grew up with him so palpably that of him it might
be-sayd without rashness, ab infantia crevit Job. 31. 18.
mecum miseratio.

How ever certain enough it is that the practice is very Christian, and much to
be recommended, due circumstances being observed: and even while I am reuiewing
these papers a fresh example for its Confirmation comes from the Emperors
Court at Vienna with the acclamation, approbation and also edification of all
that hear it. The little daughter of the present Emperor Leopold (piety being
always hereditary to that Imperial family, which God long preserve) feasted
a competent number of poor children of her own age and sex, nor content with
this, to complete the charity, would serve them with her own hands. To wit,
she and her noble Parents deemd it nothing unworthy either of themselves or
her, to serve God in his meanest members; as being ascertaind of the truth of
these words Matt. 25. what you do to one of these little ones you do to me.
This I alledg to show that parents need not be shye or nice in point of
apprehending it a disparagement, since they see it practisd by one of the most
illustrious of the world: But it suffices to have hynted this.

While he was in the Uniuersityes (and in them he spent the greatest part of
his years) his charity vented it self in a particular manner upon the relief
of poor Students, thereby to enable them to a prosecution of their Studyes.
This was seen chiefly in relieuing the hungry, clothing the naked, and
providing necessaryes for those in distress, who must otherwise have
interrupted their course both to their own and the vndoeing of many. Its most
charity to help them who probably are like to be most beneficial to the
public good, and consequently greatest promoters of charity: who having bin
sustaynd by it have learnd by experience and their own wants what it is to be
charitable to others, non aliena mali miseris succurrere disco. And what fayrer
way toward this enablement then a good foundation of learning upon which the
superstructures of preferrment may be built both in Church and Common-welth by
employments Spiritual and temporal: whence he might say, I by my charityes
have enabled so many, and putt them in a Capacity to do the same to others:
and I think every one will applaude his placing them so well. Upon this score
of love to the poor he was more ready at all times to hear their Confessions
then those of the better sort, who could never want Ghostly Fathers, and those
that would be forward to assist them, while those of a meaner condition were
easily putt by, though not by him who equally beheld Christ in all, and knew
not what acception of persons signified. This was so remarkable in him, that a
person of quality, who measurd all by a worldly ell, objected it as a discredit
to his birth and calling; but received no other answer then this: I must be
accountable to Alm. God the great Judge, as well for the poor as the rich,
ignoble as noble.

To this he added another but in another kind, yett still to the poor; and
with as much or more demonstration of love and devotion as the former. For who
more poor then those who are deeply in distress, and cannot help themselves in
the very least; those whom the H. Ghost calls by the Psalmist Psalm. 40 2.
antonomastically THE POOR and needy, and gives not one but many blessings to
those that are sensible of their necessitous condition. I mean the souls in
Purgatory, who are a great object of charity, and beg compassion with a
"miseremini mei" and they must be hard hearted that are not moved, since it will
be one day theyrowne case. It is recorded of him, that even while Bishop if in
traveling he met with a coarse, he presently lighted from his horse and
together with all his train said on his knees a "de profundis" for the soul
departed. So true it is that he was a lover of the poor both living and dead.

XIV. CHAPTER. His Charity to all, and Detestation of Detraction.
THe former Chapter gave us a scantling of his love and Charity to the Poor;
this, indifferently to all. Virtues as well as causes, the more Uniuersall,
they are also the more perfect, as most resembling those of the Saints in
heaven. Charity is a fire whose actiuity is still dilating it self where it
finds fuel to feed on: it knows no bound but discretion, and many times
scarce that, though it ought always to be orderly; but it uses as little to
keep a mean, as it is of its own nature much Communicatiue. S. THOMAS his
heart was a heaven, and the Sunn of this heaven was charity, as influentiall as
any heaven, and as pure and simple as free from all self ended composition:
like the Sunn it regarded all equally without acception of persons, having
latitude of heart to embrace all, and each one in their propper quality both
noble and ignoble, rich and poor. This Sunn like our Material one rise
equally to the good and bad, just and unjust: to the former for their
improuement; to the latter for their amendment, beneficial to all, affording
both light and heat by word and example: and as he loved all, so was he beloved
generally by all, love as naturally exciting love as benefitts do gratitude.

It might truly be verifyd of him what 1. Cor. 16. 14.
the Apostle so earnestly recommended to the Corinthians, "Omnia vestra in
charitate fiant" that all their deuoyrs should be done in charity, and so were
all his actions, all his words and proceedings: as issuing from a heart all made
of charity they carried its relish and parfume, like the plants of Arabia
faelix, because rooted in that parfum'd soil, they did partake thence of the
same fragrant odours. And to this purpose it was deposd in the Process of his
Canonization that his daily conversation was such, that not the least excess
either in word or gesture, yea though highly prouokd thereto, could be discouerd
or forcd from him contrary to charity. Causes are known by their effects and
trees by their fruits: the fruits of charity and the H. Ghost, Gal. 5. 2^.
whose prime issue it is, are recounted by the Apostle among others to be
patience, benignity, meeknes, a peaceful disposition; and that he was
eminently practisd in all these, we shall make evident by examples. He lookd on
patience as the virtue in which he was to possess his soul, and for that
reason was so deeply rooted in it, that no wind or weather by word or deed
could shake its Constancy, or render him the least impatient: yea all the
retaliation Romans 12. 20.
he vsd to make was to pray for them, heaping thus the hott coules of charity
upon their head and ouercoming evil in good, as most beseeming a Christian. He
had diverse controversyes relating to his Church with Friar John Peccham then
Arch-Bishopp of Canterbury which cost our Saint afterward a journey to Rome;
and what ever passd in fact, he had but hard measure in words, being treated
with contumelious language and in a high degree: yett he did not so much as
repine thereat, nor suffer any of his to recriminate in the least. These 3.
proppertyes of charity, patience, meeknes, and benignity, are so nearly allied
and linkd together, that for breuityes sake we may treat them all under one,
they being as it were twinns of the same Mother, most like as in nature so
infeatures, and consequently what Commends the one Commends the other.

I have already exemplifyd in the 7. Chapter how patiently, while yett
Chancellor of the Uniuersity he carried himself in that bussle betwixt the
Southern and Northern Scholars in an affront as contemptuous as could be
putt upon him; yett he never complaynd of the insolency, much less sought
revenge, contenting himself with the meritt of his patience: and this not out
of any pusillanimity or want of courage, for he, as being of a vigorous
spirit, had enough of that, but merely ouerswayd with motives of virtue he
putt all up, fullfilling what God bid him, mihi vindictam and ego retribuam
Heb. 10 30.
leave revenge to me and I will see it repayd. He had a great suite at law
with the Earl of Gloucester and his Officers, from whom in the open Court he
received many unhandsome and reuiling speeches little beseeming either him or
them: all he said by way of reply was this, and he did it with much meeknes; My
Lord, say what you please of me, you shall never provoke me to say any thing
against you misbeseeming; that is not the thing I come for, but to recover the
rights of my Church. Yea this virtue of a patient meeknes was so remarkable in
him, that if any of his servants, no just cause being given, fretted
impatiently at his commands, his custom was to humble himself first to them
toward a reconcilement, as if he, not they, had bin in fault, giving them
sweet and mollifying words, to show thereby that all was forgott and forgiven,
as not proceeding from passion or spleen. While he lived at Paris, 4. jeares
before he was Bishop, he had a Clark in his Retinue who had this custom that,
taking his after noon napp, whoeuer awakd him out of it, he would, half a
sleep as he yett was, thank him with his fist and that very liberally with many
a blow. It chanced one day, no other being at hand, that his Master,
unacquainted with this ill habit, went himself to be his Caller; nor did he
fare better then others vsd to do: to wit, the man not fully himself fell on
his Master, and among others gave him a shrowed blow on the side. The Saint
nothing moved or offended here with made only this short reply; take heed
Child, what you do, it is a Priest whom you beat. Other examples of this
nature might be alledgd to show the absolute Mastry he had over his passions,
standing Lord paramount to their Controwle when ever there was danger of over
lashing, and what greater sign of an eminent sanctity?

Charity is always as peaceful, so a peacemaker, in as much as it Ciments
up all breaches, and concludes all in unity: and he took this much to heart as
knowing that a beatitude was annexd to it, Blessed are the Peacemakers. Matt.
5. 9.
He not only had no enmity with any one living, but made it his endeavor to
piece up all discordes whereuer he found them, and reconcile parties to a true
understanding of mutual charity. As to himself or his own person it was
impossible to fix a quarrel upon him, he esteeming no loss greater then that
of charity, and would part with any thing rather then infringe it. He knew not
what it was to bear hatred or ill will; and to prevent all grounds of mistake
in this kind which might be occasiond by ill mannagement of affairs, he vsd
always to have able Lawyers and discreet Councillors about him, by whose
prudence and skill he so regulated his exterior judicial actions, that no
place by such a prevention was left for Controuersyes. Nor was he content to
have them about him, but every day as soon as divine Office was ended he called
them to Consult and scannd every cause which was to be decided. This must needs
contribute much to peace, and such an upright prudentiall proceeding to the
maintaining of charity: nor was he content with this care but over and above he
burdened their Consciences, and taxd them with it if he found any false dealing
among them. All the Controuersyes he had with others were not on his own score
but on the behalf of his Church, and consequently not to be deemd his own but
hers: though in other respects he were a lamb, yett in her defense he was a
Lion, and feared no colors or opposition what soever, nor refusd either labor
or danger for the preservation of her immunityes. Upon this account he
undertook a journey to Rome which cost him his life, nor could any temporal
power, how formidable soever, appale him when he found justice his a bettour:
in this a true imitatour of his glorious Patron S. THOMAS of Canterbury; which
his magnanimity since it is to be the subject of the next Chapter, I will say
no more here then only to referr the reader to it.

Now as charity had made him her victime, and as such a perfect holocaust of
love, no wonder if loving it so entyrely he hated as heartily its opposite and
Rival detraction. The horror he bore to that vice was so signal that all the
Writers of his life take notice of it, and in such expressions of auersion that
greater can hardly be invented. And indeed how could these bowels all made of
love do other wise then abhor its destructive, a compound made up of malice
and envy? It is a murderer of its neighbors good name, a Robber of his meritt
and praise, a thief that's always pilfering something, a poisonous breath that
seeks to blast what is not its own, a mere lump of self love repining at
another prosperity: He learnd this lesson of the great S. AUSTIN, who as he
was charitably hospitable so he excluded none from his table besides the
detractour, as the noted distick which he putt up to that purpose does
testify. Our B. Saint as he perfectly detested this vice in him self, so he
could not endure it in any of his domestiques; nor did he omit, when he found
them faulty, to give a severe reprehension. One of his Chaplans having bin
present at a passage betwixt the Archbishop Peccham and him, where in the Saint
seemd to receive hard dealing both as to words and deeds, the Chaplain in time
of table Complaining of it begann to inueigh against the court of Rome for its
negligence in providing able and fit Prelates to govern thyer flocks, with
much more then needed to that purpose. His Lord was presently moved thereat, and
giving him a check wishd him to speak more reuerendly and charitably of all,
and chiefly of his Superiors and betters.

It may be expected that treating of his charity to all, some thing should be
said of it in order to God, whom it regards in the first place. It is this
love chiefly which is the fullfilling of the Law and Prophetts, by which we
love God above all, and our Neighbor as our self in and for God; so that this
latter part of the Law Cannot subsist without the former on which it depends.
As his whole life was, as I may say, one continued or uninterrupted act of
charity toward God, by which he was incessantly not only tending toward him
but also united to him in his divine grace as will appear by the reuiew of
his vertves; so an ample scope of matter Cannot fail him that would dilate
himself on this subject (for what are all moral virtues but so many issues or
shoots of charity their root?) yett at present we will rather suppose this
virtue of virtues then go about to prove it, and leave it to be drawn by the
reader rather from his other perfections then make a formal draught of it;
praising it perchance as much or more by an admiring silence then extenuating
expressions: for what are the Commendatoryes of our words, to the lively
colors of his virtues? Besides we shall have occasion to say something of it
when we treat of his piety and devotion, true gennuine children of this Mother.

XV. CHAPTER. His Courage in defense of Ecclesiastical Libertyes.
THe Church is the Bride of Christ espousd at the expense of his precious
blood, dearer to him then his life, and who ever touches her to wrong her
touches the apple of his eye. For her defense and propagation he settled a
Hierarchy, in which he gave some Apostles, some Doctors, others Pastors; for
the work of the Ministry and edification of this his Mystical body. In this
Hierarchy, Ministry, edification, Bishops as the immediate successors of the
Apostles Carry the first rank both in governing and feeding: in feeding is
regarded the wholsomnes of the fodder and pasturage, in governing, direction
and protection; and both these require that he be a true Sheapard not a
hyreling, and seek the good of his flock, not himself. If the hyreling see a
wolf Coming, says the best of Sheapards, Joan. 10. 12.
he runns away because he is a hyreling; while the good Sheapard exposes his
life for his sheep, shunning neither pains nor danger for their safety and
behoof; and so did our B. Saint, proving himself a good Sheapard indeed. His
love to his espousd Church was as tender as ought to be to his own Spouse, now
a Spiritual part of himself and the Spouse of Christ, and he embracd her as
such, and together with her espousd all her Concerns whatsoever; and this is
no more then is ordinarily done even in Corporal Marriages. It was his deuoir
to prove himself a faithful Menager of the family he was entrusted with all,
and a valiant maintainer of all its possessions, privileges, Libertyes,
immunityes, that in none of them it might suffer prejudice. This he took to
heart exceedingly, as deeming it the prime part of his charge, resolved to
expose and oppose himself as a wall for the House of God: and what we are to
relate will show that he fayld not in his resolution, sealing it even with the
loss of his life; and what greater pledge of his fidelity?

It had bin the deplorable misfortune of our poor Country, that for many
years, successively and by fitts, it had bin inuolu'd in an unnatural
intestine war, which as it causd great Confusion in the civil state, so did
it no little in the Ecclesiastical. In such times of liberty, abuses easily
creep in, an unjust invasion being much sooner committed then redressd; for
when the sword gives Law, its in vain for the Crosyer to plead Conscience, or
preach Restitution, a language little understood in in civil garboyles. The
weakest, they say, go always to the walls, and so does the Church as least
able in such occasions to defend it self, since it cannot nor must not repel
force by force; and so to redeem vexation is compelld to part with her right
especially when the inuaders are powerful. This was the case of the Sea of
Hereford when our Saint enterd upon it: it had bin unjustly outed of diverse
large possessions, and, what made the Recovery harder, the possessours had
quiettly enjoyed them diverse years, even in time of peace, when the laws had
their Course; his two predecessors knowing well the equity of their cause, but
dispayring to prevail against such potent aduerfaryes; One wheroff was the
Kings Sonn-in-law Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, another Lewellin Prince of Wales,
and a third Roger Lord Clifford, besides the Archbishop of Canterbury and
others.

Our H. Saint having maturely considerd all this, though he found the task very
hard, yett relying on the equity of his plea, deemd himself bound, unless he
would betray his trust, to attempt the recovery of these Lands. His courage was
such that in Gods cause he feared no color of greatness, nor multitude of
opposers; and why should he, since he was armd with the armor of the just, a
true armor of prooff? having justice or a good Conscience for his Sap. 5. 20.
breast plate piece, syncer judgment for his helmett, and equity for an
invincible shield. Courage and magnanimity is never better seconded then by
virtue and sanctity, and a good cause; when these make the onsett, be the
opposition what it will, they Carry all before them. Of his own nature he was
so auerse from suites or contrasts, that he would sooner have yealded up his
private right to an adversary then sought to regaine it by Law; in what belongd
to his Church he could not, it being not his own but Gods who requird it at
his hands. But to moderate and facilitate all, the best he could, the first
essay he made was a modest and peaceful claim of his right proposing an
agreement on reasonable terms, and in case it were refusd, a ready offer of a
Reference; if that were rejected too, then he left the matter to a trial at
law, in which he played the Sollicitour so well, and was so diligently
watchful, that he would be present at the decision though he were carried in a
litter. This conscientious proceeding grounded on an equitable right, driven on
by a studious attendance, made him never fail to winn his plea.

Hence such was the opinion which every one conceived of his zeal and courage
in behalf of his Spouse or Church, that, during the time of 7. years which he
sat in its Chair, no body durst presume to offer the least encroachment on
its immunityes, knowing well that to offer such a thing were to awake a
sleeping Lion. But this was not enough, his love and magnanimity aymd at a
recovery of what was unjustly invaded and detaynd: in which behalf though the
endeauours of his immediate predecessors Peter and John, had bin little
successful, being over powerd with might, he also would try his chance, and
began with the greatest first. Wherefore after a legal claim laid to Malbume
Chase and other lands and woods there to adjoining, wrongfully withheld by
Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, nor receiving any satisfactory answer
toward a restitution, he commenced a suite against him, and followd it so
close, that notw ithstanding all his greatness and countenance from the King,
clear justice was ready to give verdict on his behalf. The Court was held
near or upon the place controuerted, and the Earl had armd men together with
his Forresters, in case of being cast, to keep possession by force: and seeing
things brought to this pass besought the King for a suspension of the final
Sentence, which was granted. All this nothing abashd the H. Bishop; who going a
side to geather with his Clergy into the wood, putt himself in his Episcopal
Robes, and them in theyrs with lighted tapers; thus going before them he came
to the place where the Judges together with the Earl made their a bode; where
the Candles being putt out, he solemnly pronouned a sentence of Excommunication
against all and every one who that day hinderd and molested his and the Church
of Herefords right in the said woods and forest. This done, the Earl
perceived who he had to deal withal, and presently, taking horse departed:
nor was he sooner gone then the Judges proceeded to give sentence, and that
given, the Bishopp causd his servants to hunt as in his own libertyes through
the same Chase to Regaine possession; and he himself for the same purpose
walkd over the bounds, unarmed as he was, though it were not done without danger
of his life. For diverse of the Earls men obstinately persisting to maintain
the quarrel, shot at random very near his person without any respect or
reverence had thereto: one of whom more injurious then the rest he threatened
with the divine revenge; and the same person shortly after, says the Record,
was miserably drowned, the Common voice of all going that it was a just
punishment for his contemptuous carriage toward the Saint, and well for him if
only a temporal.

He proceeded much after the same fashon with Lewellin Prince of Wales, and to
excommunication also, for unjustly detayning 3. villages situated near
Montgomery belonging to the said his See. Who lying thus under the Censure came
with the King, as fearing nothing under his shadow, into a Church where the
Saint was going to Say Mass. He espyd the Excommunicated person, and without
further complement warnd him as such out of the Church: the King himself
interpossd for his stay; but all would not do, nor he beginn till the other
had absented himself, nor could he be admitted into Communion before due
satisfaction was performd. He was in like manner forced to use the same rigor
both spiritual and temporal against some Welshmen who had usurped 3. villages
of his Territory and defended them by strong hand, till proceeding to the like
censures he frighted them into a restitution. Roger Lord Clifford a Neighbourer
upon his Diocese had trenchd so far upon the same in time of war as to drive
bootyes of cattle and use extorsions upon some of the diocesans. He was too
noble minded to deny the fact or putt the H. Bishop to the prooff of it, but
now willing to restore, all his endeavor was to make satisfaction in private
by some Composition without undergoing the confusion of a public, and to
obtain this he offered underhand no small sum of money. He knew not with
whom he had to do, nor the principle, it seems, that a public fault must
have a public penance: the offense being notorious, a private atonement
could not be admitted, nor the scandal taken away till he in person in the
Church of Hereford appearing in a penitential weed, barehead and barefoot,
went in procession up to the high Altar it self, the Bishop following with a
rodd in his hand and according to the canons striking him.

XVI. CHAPTER. His journey to Rome and entertainment there.
THe last contest he had and which cost him dearer then the rest, as going more
against the hair, (for he loved not debates with superiors) was with his
Metropolitan John Peccham, Archbishop of Canterbury; a man of great learning
and ability and a worthy Prelate, as grave Authors do testify of him. Nor is
either he or our Saint to be the worse thought off for this their variance,
since good and wise men may be of a different judgment, as to matters of right
or fact, until a just umpyre decide the controversy; till then both the
Plaintiff and Defendant may inculpably by course of law seek their right.

This John Peccham succeeded Robert Kilwarby in the Chair of Canterbury; with
whom he carried this reference, that as the other had bin Prouintiall of the
H. Order of S. Dominick and thence chosen to that See, so this of S. Franciss;
both signally eminent in knowledge and virtue, both great lights of their
respective bodies. This John, his years of Government being expyrd, trauelld
through the Uniuersityes of Italy to his great improuement, and lastly to Rome,
where the forerunning fame having given a large character of his eminent parts
he was in short time made by the Pope then sitting Auditour or chief Judge of
his Palace: in which employment he continued till upon the Promotion of Robert
to his Cardinallship, he succeeded him in his Archbishopric.

No Record that I could meet withal give us any further account of this
controversy, then that it was Ecclesiastical, and relating to the privileges
and immunityes of private Sees, on which the Archbishop was thought to trench.
A Council was held by him at Pedding; in the which he is said to have laid
some injunctions on the particular Sees under his jurisdiction prejudicial to
their libertyes and beyond the verge of his power, as was conceived; nor were
they peculiar to that of Hereford, but jointly common to all that acknowledged
him their Metropolitan. And though they were equally concernd, yett no one
besides our Saint had the courage to undergo borh the labor and expenses and
hazards that were annexd to such an undertaking. They were sure to have a very
powerful adversary, the cause was to be tried in the court of Rome, for that
end a journey thither was necessary, and a good purse to defray its charges;
all which considerd and the doubtfullnes of the success, made the rest of the
Bishops hold off and rather be content to sit still loosers in what they deemd
their right, then to incurr such encumbrances in seeking redress. This was the
state of the question, and in this posture things stood when S. THOMAS weighing
maturely the encroachment on their privileges and its consequences on one
side, and the justice of the cause, of which he was thoroughly satisfyd, on the
other, resolved to lend his best endeauours, and spare neither pains nor cost
for rectifying what was a miss, though it should cost him a journey to Rome.

Those very motives which daunted the other Bishops were to him so many
incentiues; he vnderualu'd all labors, he contemnd all dangers, and for what
end were the Revenues of the Church allowd him, but for his own and the
maintenance of the Church and her prerogatives? All this arose from the Zealous
love he had for his spouse, much dearer to him then Rachel to Jacob; for whose
preservation he neither feared to dye nor refussd to live and serve through
heats and colds night and day another 7. years if so it pleased Alm. God. And
finding that for the good mannagement of his suite a journey to Rome was
necessary, since it could neither be determind else where, nor there well
without a personal attendance, which is the life and vigor of such
dependences, he resolved upon the fame, though now well struck into years, and
often incumberd with great fitts of sickness; both the one and other wheroff
might justly have pleaded his excuse, could his charity have admitted any. As
in this he dischargd his own conscience, so was his resolution accompanyd with
the acclamations of all sorts of people, extolling his courage and zeal now,
as afterward they doubted not to ascribe to it all the miracles which God was
pleased to work by him, stiling him a Martyr like S. THOMAS of Canterbury, as
loosing his life in defense of his Church, as shall be more fully showed in the
next Chapter.

He took his journey from England through Normandy, and making some stay in the
Abbey of Lira in the Diocese of Eureux, this which I am to recount happend
during that interim, nor must be ommitted as being a testimony of his present
sanctity. A child of 3. years old wont to play with other children before the
Abbey gates, falling into a brook which rann thereby, was drowned; the Child's
Parents well known to the Saint gave him to understand the misfortune befallen
them, to whom he said no more then these few words, the child by Gods
assistance will live; and streching forth his hand toward the place, made there
on the sign of the Cross. In the mean while the father of the Child taking it
out of the brook found it stark dead, full of water and sand, no sign either
of life or motion remaining in it: he opend the mouth with a knife and letting
the water out to a great quantity, to omit no endeavor he chafed the body
though hopeles of life before the fire. His endeavor found effect; life
returned and motion appeard, and in a competency of time all came to its
natural pass to the great astonishment of all present. The recovery was held
even then miraculous, but to whom to ascribe the Miracle they knew not, and to
S. THOMAS they durst not, though even then venerable for his Sanctity, yett his
humility could not brook such extraordinaryes. But afterward when the fame and
number of his wonders was divulgd through France it self, the father of the
child before the Lords Commissioners upon the Saints making the sign of the
Cross, and uttering the aforesaid words, deposd, that he verily belieud life
was restord by his meritts and intercession.

He begann his journey in or about the 60. year of his age, and not with
standing his bodily infirmityes arrived there safe and well, Nicolas the 4.
sitting then in the Chair of S. Peter. How welcome both the quality of his
person, and character of degree made him is needles to insist upon, besides the
fame of sanctity as well as knowledge which accompanyd him; nor must we omit
the supperadditionall of being Chaplain to his Holiness conferrd heertofore upon
him in the Council of Lions. Saints carry always with them Letter-Patents of
a grateful Reception, and it is one of the temporal rewards of sanctity,
especially where it is in vogue and has its due respect; which if it be not
regardable in the holy city where will it? The court of Rome is the great
Patronizer and promoter of Sanctity, where it is as in its center; which though
trampled upon else where, here finds redress, where it has as many assertours as
it has persons of eminency, such as have an aim to rise by its Commendatoryes.
Virtue is praise worthy even in an enemy, its own native beams and
intrinsecall worth rendering it so, how much more when it shynes in its propper
hemysphere enuironnd with lights to set it off, not as foyles but like the
Moon among her stars. No body prizes virtue more highly then the virtuous,
its worth being best known to such, and none Commends it more then those that
practice it, its commendation consisting not so much in words as in deeds. It
is ignorance that makes the world contemn it, who if they knew its prizeles
value would sell all to purchase it. This present Pope was a Frenchman by
birth, who besides other great parts where with Nature had endowd him, was so
far favored by grace, as to be eminent in sanctity of life; in attestation
wheroff after death his sepulcher was gracd with many Miracles, the blind,
lame, and dumb finding there a present cure. Now what wonder if one Saint give
another an honorable reception? this is no more then to give virtue its due;
and from whom may that be more justly expected then from Saints?

The legality of Appeals to Rome in Church affairs when a decision cannot be
had in an inferior court, is ratifyd by the custom and practice of all
nations and ages: to her all fly as to a common and disinteressd Mother who
holds the weights of the Sanctuary, and without bias and partiality diuides a
distributive justice according to equity. This is no more then to appeal from
an inferior court to a superior, which the course of justice deemes lawful;
nor indeed in our present controversy which was betwixt a Bishop and his
Primate could any other court give a final verdict. To it therefore our Saint
appeald, and in prosecution of it made his long journey; and as he was always
happy in this that he undertook nothing but upon mature advise and
circumspection, grounded on the sound judgment of wise Counselors so he
seldom or never miscarried in any cause, but all being well digested the very
laying it open proved its decision. Yett a legal course of law was to be
observed, and things by degrees brought to an issue; and his was such as he
desyrd, that is, an enioyment of the rights he was invested in by the decrees
of former Popes, without suffering any infringment therein by his Metropolitan,
who had not power to explicate Papal Constitutions, as our Saint objected to
him in the fore mentiond Council of Redding, and upon his own explication to
lay a claim. Where all proceeds according to rigor of justice, favor
pretends no place, nor did it here further, then to obtain a quick dispatch
and remouall of those delays, which render law-suites both costly and tedious.
This was all the favor that was or could be showed him, and he took it for no
mean one; longing as he did after a speedy return, his heart being at home,
where was also the chiefest of his concerns, while the rest of his body was at
Rome. He did, it is true, by an interior union of mind enjoy God every where
having long habituated himself in the same, but yett his content was in
Recollection: he loved not the Ceremonious visitts of courts nor the loss of
time that is made in them, they being toylsomly fruitles and fruitlesly
toylsome; while he was Lord Chancellor he felt the smart of that, and the
surfeyt causd then, made him less able to digest them all his life after. Yett
to omit them would have bin deemd a solecisme against ciuility, and argued at
the best a stoicall sanctity; therefore who can blame a servant of God if he
endeavor to withdraw himself out of the concourse of such courtshipps: He
that touches pitch shall be defild by it.

XVII. CHAPTER. Of his Return homewards, and death on the Way.
Having thus obtaynd a favorable dispatch and taken leave of that great court,
he putt himself with joy upon the way as to himself, though he left it in a
kind of regrett for his departure, and the privation of the sweet odor of his
sanctity causd thereby: What is admird as present is regretted as absent, nor
do we ordinarily know the worth of things better then by their privation. It
cannot be prudently doubted but that according to his settled practice of
piety, during the space of his abode there, he left many monuments both of his
Wisdom and Sanctity most richly worth recounting had they come to our
knowledge. But since they do not we must rather content our selves with a
patient silence, then discourse upon less groundles conjectures, contenting our
selves that all is registerd in the book of life or Annalls of heaven to be
publishd at the day of judgment. Nor can I doubt but according to the usual
strain of sanctity, which has for its motto, "ama nesciri, love Concealment,
he played the silent Eagle, not the talkatiue parrot, and that the course of his
virtuous actions the more profound they were the more silent like deep rivers
and with less noise did they imperceptibly flow, and therefore no wonder if they
escapd the record.

Having putt himself on his journey as soon as the heats would permit, all
his endeauours now, after Alm. God, were to render it as speedy as he could;
much rejoicing in the success of his negotiation, and longing earnestly to make
the concernd neighboring Churches at home, as well as his own, partake of the
same. Thus do the Wisest many times project according to humane reasons and
motives, while reckning, as I may say, without their host, they propose and God
disposes. Little did he dream that his journey was destined to a better home,
and himself designed not for new labors but a fruition of the past, the
evening being at hand when the Master of the Vineyard was to call his Workman
to receive his hyre, and inuit him into the joys of our Lord; a thing if not
sought for yett always welcome as being the much better home. He was resignd
for life and death putting both in the hands of God; and having learnd to
possess his soul in patience, he was not sollicitous to dye soon or live long,
but to live and dye well; which latter can be done but once, and gives the
vpshott to all.

He was now in the Clymactericall year of his age 63. and his crazy body was
worn out with former labors, and not only what he now did but what he had
done these diverse years was more by the vigor of his spirit then Corporal
strength. This is a thing propper to holy souls who measuring their ability,
as indeed they ought, rather by the former then the latter, make this against
its will keep pace with that, as has bin observed in S. Basil, S. Gregory and
others, and either by Communicating a new force, or rejecting the sleeules
excuses of self love, or by a special blessing of God they do wonders in this
kind. This vigorous resolution had now brought him as far as the state of
Florence, and in it to a place known by the name of Monte Fiascone; but its
stock or viaticum being spent could carry him no further. Here his debility
destitute of vitalls for a reinforcement, causd a distemper, that was hightned
to a fever, this in its accesses, as a certain fore runner of death by its
symptoms, told him that the days and ways of his pilgrimage would shortly be
ended, and so they were, in not very many hours Compass, all its periods
concluding in one point, to wit, Alm. God, in whose sight the death of Saints
is precious. Now we must look on him a while as deaths victime, and learn of
him how to dye well, which is one of the most important arts in the world, for
what auailes it if we gain the whole uniuerse and suffer shipwreck of our own
Souls. This maxim was the study of his whole life, and on it all his
principles were grounded, and so well, that he was not a frayd to look death in
the face; he regarding it no otherwise then as a passage to a better life: and
therefore amidst all its appalements he sat upon its Couch as the Phoenix on her
pile of spices, expecting that the same flames which consumd his body should
renew his soul to a better and immortal life.

Of this his passage I shall say no more then I find upon authentic Record,
the Process of his Canonization: reflecting on two things; first, his
preparation to it, secondly the sequels of it. And as to the former, when he
perceived that the evening of life was in a great decline and its sunn near
upon setting, though his whole life had bin nothing else but a preparation to
death, or disposition to the sleep of Saints, by which they rest in our Lord;
yett the nearer it approachd, the more it awakd him to a discharge of his last
duties. And therefore with heart and eyes fixd on heaven, the first of his
desires, according to the Rytes of H. Church, were the last Sacraments or
Viaticum of that great journey, doing himself as he had taught others to do
in that passage. These are Confession, Communion, and Extreme Unction which as
no good Christian does omit, so no good servant of God, but has them in esteem
and veneration, and the greater, the better insight they have into the Concerns
of their soul and its happy passage. Having thus provided for the substantial
part, all the rest of his minutes were let out at the highest exchange, and
he, unmindful of all worldly things, inuokd the Spirit both of life and light
by a" Veni Creator Spiritus, to be assistant to him in this last conflict
against the Spiritts of Darkness, when both life and light lie at the Stake.
This done he armd himself with the sign of the cross or ensign of
Christianity as formidable to the infernal powers as confortable to a parting
soul; who whilst he consignd himself by it over to Alm. God he added these
devout expressions taught him probably in his child hood, "Per signum Crucis de
inimicis nostris libera nos Deus noster; and again, *Per Crucis hoc signum
fugiat procul omne malignum; and lastly, "Per idem signum saluetur omne
benignum. All these are put down verbatim in the record, and teach us how to
arm our selves in our last Conflict toward a victory over our enemies. This
done he called his retinue about him, and imparting to each, faith the lessons
of his office, the kiss of peace together with wholesome instructions for a
pious life, amidst these embracements he took and gave the last adieu. And now
by this time the stock of life being quite spent the pangs of death came
stronger upon him, and these increasing he betook himself more earnestly to
his refuge of prayer making use of that verse of the Psalmist propper in such a
passage in manus tuas Domine commendo Spiritum meum, Domine Deus veritatis
Commendo Spiritum meum: which words whilst he repeated thrice with his hands
elevated toward heaven, he renderd his sweet Soul most acceptable to heaven,
to be receiud according to its meritts into the eternal tabernacles. This was
the setting of this sweet Sunn, showing much not only of the Christian but of
the Saint, and verifying the old saying, "vt vixit sic morixit, teaching us
that general rule without exception, he that lives well dies well. Which Sunn
though he went down in a strange horizon yett found a welcome in the Ocean of
bliss or a blessed eternity: the true Christian deemes that his Hemisphere
where God places him, we being all Citizens of the world, and like beggars
never out of our way while we are tending to Paradise. Happy they that can make
a happy Conclusion of so important an affayre, which when thus concluded our
work is done; and if not happily alls undone, and that without redress: that is
a moment of greatest moment whereon depends eternity.

Though his festiuity were keept on the 2. of October, yett the day of his
death happend on the 25. of August or the morrow to the Apostle S. Bartholomew.
And since all Authors that I can find unanimously agree as to the place, to
wit that it was near Monte fiascone, one would wonder why Bp. God win in
contradiction here of without alleging any ground for his assertion, should
maintain that he died at Ciuita Vecchi, and in his way to Rome; whereas there
are undeniable prooffs, both of his arrival there and obtaining his
pretentions, return by land, and holy death at the place aforesaid. To say the
least this cannot but argue a spirit of contradiction propper to one of his
coat, and little beseeming the name of a Bishop (nor had he more besides the
revenues:) Only it is a known trick of such (I can call it no better) to
render the clearest truths disputable, and thence doubtful, and so by degrees
eneruate all faith both humane and divine by undermining the authority which is
their basis.

It happend the night after his decease that one of his officers whom he had
left behind him in England, his name was Robert of Gloucester, then his
Secretary, afterward Chancellor of Hereford; being at that time at London and
Lodging in the Bishops own Chamber, had this dream or vision, call it as you
please. He thought himself to be at Lions in France where in the great street
of that City which leads to the Cathedral, he seemd to behold his Lord and
Master going toward that Church, whither himself was also bound. Both being
enterd, his Lord, he thought, went into the Sacristy, where putting of the
upper garment which he wore, he vested himself with white Pontifical Robes
and those most rich, and carrying in his hand the Body of our Lord or most B.
Sacrament in form of a Consecrated Host, he appeard suddenly in the midst of
a most solemn and stately Procession both of Clergy and religious, and those
likewise cladd all in white. The Procession seemd to move toward the Cloister
of the Cathedral, while others of that quire enton'd and prosecuted with
delicate Music, that part of the Capitulum propper to the Office of S. Peter
ad Vincula, Occidit autem Jacobum fratrem Joannis gladio. But before all were
enterd the gate which led into the said Cloister, it on a sudden was shutt,
and Robert who with many others desyrd also to enter were excluded to their no
small defeatment, and left to consider the dream, of which he as the ignorant
of the Saints death could look upon no otherwise then a dream. But when
immediately after certain tidings both of his death and the precise time of it
came to be known, and that it and his dream iumpt so patt together, he could
not but think it more then a fancy, and that Alm God would intimate thereby that
as he died, though not in persecution, yett in prosecution of the rights of his
Church, and in some sort lost his life for the same, the Saint had not only
deserud but receiud the reward of a Martyr.

This Relation I have Coppy'd out of the Process of his Canonization where it
was juridically deposd before the Examinants, and approved, as suiting well
with what I said above of the Common apprehension of all, that God wrought
Miracles by him for his actings and sufferings for his Church. And the same
Relation adds yett further to let us know it was more a vision then dream, or
rather a Vision by way of dream, (as is not unusual in H. Scripture both old
and new) that after this first apparition the B. Saint was seen often to the
same party, not indeed, says it, as one in glory, but yett such, as that his
joyful contentednes spoke him to be in a must happy Condition.

XVIII. CHAPTER. The burial of his H. Bowels there, and Return of his sacred
Bones into Engalnd.
THus much as to his sacred death and other Circumstances which accompanyd or
related thereto; now we must pass to the other part, to wit, the sequeles that
followd thereupon. He died a passinger in this life's pilgrimage, and in a Common
Inn; and indeed what other are all the lodgings in this world? we take them
up, we bespeak supper, we forecast our future journey, we go to bed and rest,
promising our selves, like the man in the Gospel, many days of life, when,
called fools for our pains, we are surprizd with a fever, and all the journey
we make afterward is only to our grave. Our B. Saint was too watchful to be
stolen upon by that ngihtthiefe; they only are so surprizd who are found
vnprepard, that is, keep no watch and ward, and Consequently are unprovided for
the assault: and therefore we pray together with the Church to be deliuerd not
from death, nor from sudden death, but from sudden and unprovided death; for
indeed to one that is provided no death is propperly sudden.

The Records tell us that his sacred Corpse lay exposd in the same place for 6.
days together; and this is but suitable to what is done to persons of his
extraction and quality, according to the respect every where given them. Though
here another reason occurrd which might more then probably autorize the same:
for no sooner was the sweet soul departed like the extinct flame of a stick of
parfume, but such a heavenly fragrancy filld the whole room, that it was most
dilitious to the sent, and recreatiue to all that were present. This, to wit,
was a blessing redounding to the body for the joint concurrence that copartner
afforded it in his virtuous excercises in the service of God and his Church;
and a testimonial of the odor of sanctity of that holy guest which lodgd
therein. Such sensible witnesses of an innocent integrity in his servants does
Alm. God sometimes impart for their glory and our incitement, we being not
easily moved but by our senses either to conceive highly of them, or be eggd on
to imitation, though the odor of virtue and sanctity in it self far surpass
what ever is of sense. In the mean time the same heeroff together with his
death being bruited abroad, as virtue and nobility is ever in esteem with the
noble and virtuous, it made many great Personages resort thither and some
Cardinals among the rest, who acquainted with him during his abode at Rome, or
the opinion that went of him, had bin no strangers either to him or his
perfections. By their Concurrence chiefly an honorable funeral was prepared for
his Enterrment the sunday following, when he was burryed in the Church of S.
Seuerus belonging to an Abbey of that name situate near the old City of
Florence: at what time a funeral Sermon was preachd by one of the Cardinals,
who could not want matter to dilate upon while he commended him for his noble
descent, exquisite learning, and eminent sanctity.

All these particulars are thus far minutely specifyd in the Record; but its
warrant carry's us no farther, nor any other that I could meet with as to the
sequeles of his Enterrment. And consequently we are at a loss both as to that
present and future times how to know whether any or what public Veneration
was there given at any time to his sacred Corpse: or whether graces and Miracles
were wrought there at, as in England at his Sacred Bones; what memory remaind
of him and how long: all this must be left to Doomsday book and its Register,
when all will be publishd to the glory of God and the Saint, and satisfaction
of all. In the interim we may know, that in the Catholic Church not every one
that dies with opinion of sanctity is forthwith honored as a Saint, the
public Declaration of the Church, to prevent abuses and regulate all in an
orderly way, is thereto requisite, and nothing permitted but under this warrant.
He died, it is true, a Saint but his sanctity was not autorizd: he died a
stranger and an alien, and how little notice is taken of such; 5. years elapsd
before any Miracles were noysd abroad even in England it self, and 25. before
his Canonization: what wonder if the memory of him not preserud by any special
graces or signs grew cold, and in that coldness vannishd to oblivion. Though
God were pleased at his mediation for the comfort of the people, incitement of
their devotion, and other reasons best known to himself, to work such wonders
at his Sacred bones; yett he does this when, and where, and how long he thinks
good, and no body must presume to ask, why do you so? All these are the
secretts of his Dispensations, and he says to us as he did to the Apostles "Non
est vestrum, etc. it is not for you Act. 1. 7.
to know times or moments which the Father has putt in his own power.

The news of his death we may imagine brought heavy tidings to his flock at
Hereford; who as it was most happy in his government during life, so sustaynd an
imcomparable loss by his death, the sorrow of the privation answering
proportionably to the joy of the possession. But these are blows which all
must be content to suffer when God inflicts them; nor is there any redress
besides an humble acquiescence in his holy will: when we have paid a little
tribute to nature all the rest is a submissiue resignation; who dare say to him
why do you so? Yet though his people could not have him alive, it would have
bin some comfort to have had him dead, that is, him in his Corpse; to the end
they might have enjoyed him in his Relics, which even then, for the great
opinion they had of his sanctity, were esteemd for such. In the present
circumstances that could not be conveniently done; but care was thus far
taken, that the bones being separated from the fleshy parts they together with
his head and heart were transported into England, and deposited as a most
precious treasure in the Church of Hereford. These were received with much
Devotion by the people who went forth together with the Chapter and Clergy to
meet them, and were enshrynd in the Chapel of our B. Lady in the same
Cathedral that they might repose in her bosom after death to whom living and
dying he was so singularly devoted, and where could his heart rest better then
in her hands, to whose honor he had sacrificed both heart and hands?

Among others whom either devotion or curiosity moved to meet this welcome
pledge, one was Gilbert Lord Clare Earl of Gloucester; betwixt whom and our
Saint, as we insinuated heertofore there was no good understanding upon the
account of some lands which the Earl detaynd, and the Saint claymd as due to
his Church, and recouerd from him by force of law with much both cost and
pains. He now approaching to the sacred pledge it was very remarkable and
lookd on as a Miracle by all the Company, that the dry Bones in his presence
begann to bleed a fresh and in such a quantity, that he and all might see the
Cask in which they were carryd imbrued with the same. The Earl much amazd
heerat was struck with compunction, and acknowledging his fault made a full
restitution of all to the Church, expiating by penance what he had rashly
committed, as the only way to make the best of an ill bargain.

In the retinue of the deceasd Bishop the chief mannager of affairs was
Richard Swinfield his Secretary, first in authority above the rest: he was a
Priest of great parts and virtuous conversation for which he was afterward
promoted to succeed in that vacant See, and in process of time chief
sollicitour and informer in order to the Saints Canonization. To him as such
belongd the charge of conueying the Sacred Depositum; and he tells us in his
deposition before the Commissaryes Apostolical what happend to himself the
night before he with it arrived at Hereford. To the end all things might be the
next morning in a better readynes, he cast his journey so as to lodge with his
Company that night in a village 2. miles distant from the City: where weary
with journeying and going late to bed he ouersleept himself beyond his time
the next morning. His chamber was remote from all Company, and so high that
without a ladder there was no access to the windows: and yett 3. knocks were
given as with the knuckle of a bended fingar on the same, and soloud that they
served for an alarm to awake and tell him it was time to rise. And in that
sense he understood them, and there upon called up his Company; concluding
with-in himself, that this was a favor done him by the Saint toward the
pursuit and furtherance of what they had in hand, to wit the solemn Reception
and placing of the same bones. And what indeed could it be else; since humanely
speaking no body without a ladder could come there, and looking curiously about
he saw there was none: therefore he ascribd it to the meritts of the Saint, and
very thankful for such an extraordinary favor, to his honor he recorded it
to posterity; making thence a conjecture that this piece of service, the
conueyance of his bones, was acceptable to him, since he had bin pleased to give
it such an unusual concurrence.

While S. THOMAS was yett alive no body seemd to carry a greater respect and
Veneration for his sanctity then Edmund Earl of Cornwall, Son to Richard King
of the Romans. He it was that invited the Saint to keep his Whitsontyde with
him at his Castle of Wallingford: where whilst he sung the" Veni Creator
Spriritus the strange Miracle of the birds happend, which we shall relate here
after in the 23. Chapter. Howeuer it was procurd, this great Deuotist made
means to get his Heart, a treasure he esteemd above any jewels; and to
testify this esteem thought he could not honor it sufficiently any other way
then by enclosing it in a most costly shryne together with a parcel of our
Bl. Saviors Blood, and founding a Monastery of Bons-Hommes at Ashridg in
Buckingham shyre to its honor, where it might be daily and duly venerated to
the praise and glory of Alm. God, who had raisd his Servant to such an eminency
of perfection. This devout Earl had such a Confidence in his patronage and
intercession, that he was wont to profess he had not greater in those of our
glorious Apostle S. Austin.

XIX. CHAPTER. The Translation of his H. Bones into a more eminent place.
THe near approach of the most welcome Treasure being known at Hereford
stirrd up the Citizens both Ecclesiastiques and laymen to join, as we said,
in a solemn Procession to fetch it in; so showing by their Veneration to the
dead how much respect they had for him alive, and how deeply they ressented
their incomparable loss. It was done with as much splendor as the shortness of
the time would permit; and so amidst all the festiualls of devotion it was
brought into the Cathedral, a small parcel, God wott, of what they desyrd,
yett even as such most welcome. They wishd him such in his return home as
they sent him abroad, alive and governing as their Pastor: they wishd, if
dead, not only his Bones but whole body; for a treasure the greater it is the
better and more precious: but as it was, content with what necessity imposd,
they lent their concurrence toward a solemn enterring it in the Chapel of
our B. Lady, the place designd for its Reception. Here it was laid in a Coffin
of stone, and a fair Grauestone, such as beseemd his quality, placed for a
Cover to the Orifice, cimented, on all sides as close and handsomely as art
could make it.

Here it lay 5. years amidst the private veneration of devout persons
partaking of no more honor then their Devotion gave it, each one according to
the opinion they had of his Sanctity. For though diverse things more then
ordinary, and such as begott much wonder and Veneration were related on
several passages, as, the fragrant oudour it exhald, the blood it sweat,
morning call, etc. Yett formal Miracles none were wrought nor pretended to;
and the Catholic Church has always vsd a special warynes to prevent
disorders of this nature, that nothing may be publicly ascribd before
attested by legal authority; and we need not doubt but the Saint himself among
so many decrees as he made, had left this enacted. During this interuall of
time the Vacant Chair was provided of a successor; the party elected was
Richard Swinfeld of whom we said something in the precedent Chapter; the same
that accompanyd our Saint to Rome, and by his good services there on his
Churches behalf, as also by the safe Conueyance of his Relics had much
improu'd himself in the opinion and esteem of that Chapter. And the providence
of God, as to this, seems remarkable in the Election, both that none could have
concurrd more to the glory and illustration of our Saint, none knowing him and
his meritts better then he, and consequently could be more zealous in that
behalf; as also because he was both a great Preacher, truly virtuous, and
thoroughly versd in the affairs of that Bishopric, as bredd up under the
Saint. The profound respect and zeal he had for his H. Predecessor took
little content to see his bones so worthy of greater Veneration lie so
obscurely beneath their desert even as he was a Bishopp, not only a Saint.
Where upon he determind a solemn Translation of the same to a more eminent and
conspicuous place of the same Cathedral; where he resolved to erect a stately
Monument of Marble, and have the action solemnizd with the greatest
magnificence he possibly could.

The time pitchd on for this purpose was Mandate thursday in holy week; the
report wheroff blazd abroad invited both court and country to honor it with
their presence, nor needed many motives, the opinion they had of him was
sufficient. It was made in the year 1287. the 6. of April, the Bishopp and
Chapter jointly concurring thereto: and the place to which it was Translated,
says Godwin, was the east wall of the North-Cross-Ile where yett is to be
seen, says he, a tomb of Marble. King Edward the 3. in whose Reign it was
made was then at Calais, which he had not long before taken from the French
King; but purposely came over out of his devotion to the Saint, and to grace
the solemnity with his presence. He and his Nobles, says John Stow, were
entertaind at the charges of Nicolas Cantilupe, Baron, Cosen to S. THOMAS; Nor
did the King miss of a due reward from the said Saint in recompense of his
Religiousnes. For while he was attending to that action he received private
intelligence of a design on foot for the delivery of that Town by a
Genowayse, Emericus of Padua, who lived there and was a private Pensionayre of
the French King, to him: he played lack on both sides being also in see to King
Edward, who suspecting nothing less keept him and his men there for the defense
of the Town. Nor was here an end of the blessing: for the King hastening to its
succor, not only forestalld the others treachery, but with a handful of men
repulsd the numeros enemy, took many prisoners, and putt all in a posture of
safety.

The sacred Depositum, as we hynted before, was putt into a stone Coffin shutt
up under a fair great Grauestone, which was to be removed eer the Coffin
could be taken out, and how to remove it so great and massy as it was, gave no
small difficulty naturally speaking in that narrownes and situation of place.
While their wits were thus contriuing, two of the Bishops Pages who stood by,
putt their hands to it as it were in sport to try their strength, where 4. of
the ablest could have done nothing. And here behold a strange accident: at the
slender impulse of these two alone the massy stone yealded and gave place as
far as was necessary for the present purpose, as if it had bin a thinn board
not what it was. All the Company cried out a Miracle (for they could ascribe it
to nothing else) wrought by the Saint to attest his Sanctity, and show how
grateful the Translation was to him. But here was not an end of their
amazement; yea it was much increasd, when after the Mass of Requiem and
solemnity ended, trial was made again in the same manner to putt the said
stone into its former posture; which now thought they had the advantage of the
ground much more then before, not these two but neither teen more joined with
them, endeavoring with all their might and main, were scarce able to set in
its place.

This was an essay or prelude to the manyfold Miracles which immediately
followd: for such was the wonderworking power of Alm. God to evidence the glory
of his Servant S. THOMAS, that that very day of his Translation 5. Miracles
were wrought at his Tomb, and as many each ensuing day for diverse together.
Nay there was a perpetual continued stream, the source being once opend,
without surcease for many years, of which we shall speak more in the ensuing
Chapter. Great was the Devotion of the people in this solemnity, hightned we
may imagine not a little by these fresh foregoing wonders: and where there is
Devotion God is never sparing of his graces and mercyes; that his Sovereign
Oil ceases not still to runn, so long as there are such fresh potts disposd to
receive it. Why he reserved these extraordinary blessings for this feast let us
not curiously enquire of him in whose hands is the free disposal of times and
moments; but let us take his dispensations when they come humbly and
thankfully, being assurd that he knows better what and when things are to be
done then we can tell him.

In the Translation it self and time of Mass of Requiem said at the new Tomb
for the dead (for as yett the Saint was neither Beatifyd nor Canonizd) a man
who had bin two years blind, and a Woman 8. both of them receiud their Sight
in the presence of all the people who were spectatours, admirers, and
witnesses of the Miracle. To give a particular account of all the rest that
were wrought (though they be all upon Record and attested) would be too
tedious, and especially all that were wrought during the Octaue of the
solemnity (40. in number;) but as Easter day by reason of its glorious
festival claymd to it self a peculiar splendor above the rest, so Alm. God
seems to have keept a noted and particular Cure for it, much redounding to the
honor of our Saint, as wrought upon one both noble of himself and well known
to all the Nobility of the land, and consequently more famed abroad and divulgd
then many others. This was one Milis a famous Warryer, renownd far and near
for his exployt^ in Tilting: with frequent falls and bruises and other
misfortunes such a weakness came upon him, that he became contracted in his
limbs and they all vseles to him. And thus he remaynd 6. whole years, all art
of Physicians laboring in vain, now an object of compassion as much as he had
bin before of Congratulation. This man familiarly known to Bishop Richard was
by name invited to the Translation and particularly on Easter day when
celebrated with greater Solemnity: the good Bishop intimating with all that
diverse great Miracles were then daily wrought at the Saints Tomb, and who knew
but he might have a blessing in store for him. He like one in misery harkend
willingly to any advise that rellishd of redress: he made himself be carryd to
the Tomb on Easter Eeue he prayed there devoutly the whole night, beseeching the
Saint that as he was noble himself he would be propitious to a noble knight
commiserating his present pitiful condition, and vouchsafing him the gracious
favor of a Cure. To render himself better disposd like a good Christian he
frequented the H. Sacraments of Confession and Communion, and at the time when
in the said Church the Mystery of the Resurrection says the Record, was that
morning represented, he found himself so perfectly cured at the said Tomb,
that the same day, exulting in our Lord, whole and sound, he played the
Seruingman at the Bishops table, waiting on him and his other guests.

For a conclusion of this Chapter I must insert a remarkable Cure which was
wrought while the sacred Relics remaynd yett in our Ladies Chapel, six
days before the Translation, that is, the day before Palmsunday, and therefore
may deservedly claim to be here inserted: it is thus recorded in the
forementiond Process. One Edith wife to a Citizen of Hereford in the beginning
of that same lent was seizd with a furious phrenzey, and all humane means
falling short, so she continued till the day before Palmsunday. The recourse to
S. THOMAS not being as then famd by any Miracles, her husband causd her to be
measurd to a Relic of the H. Cross much venerated in that Cathedral, at
whose Altar she was keept night and day bound, and attended by two of her
sex: though at the same time she were aduisd by a Priest of the Church to have
recourse to S. THOMAS and to be measurd to him, giving her great hopes of a
recovery by his intercession. All this was done at his suggestion, and a Candle
was made of the thread that measurd her, and set at her head as she lay bound
hand and foot, her ordinary Station being all this while at the Altar of the
H. Cross. The friday before Palm sunday as she was there hearing Mass, not
only the candles on the Altar but all through the Church were on a sudden
putt out, no body knew how, and a great noise like the murmr of a great river
was heard at the same time: this lasting the space of ten Paters and Aue's,
visibly before them all fire came from heaven and lighted the Candle standing
at her head whose week was made of the thread that measurd her to the Saint. At
the lighting of this she recouerd her senses and became well, the Saint at that
instant appearing to her and bidding her be well: at the same time also the
Cords which bound her of themselves became loose, and she in the presence and
hearing of all, repeating it over and over again said aloud where is this S.
THOMAS that bids me be well. She went to our lady's Chapel, prayed before his
Relics, a "Te Deum" was sung in thanksgiving for the cure, she continued as
well and sensible as ever before; and this was the first miracle which the
Saint wrought in the Church of Hereford.

Upon the Relation of this Miracle it occurrs to me that some peruser of the
same may check perchance (as it is always easy to find fault) at one or two
passages mentiond therein: the which to clear up by way of prevention will
happily not be unacceptable. One may be, her leaving the H. Cross and its
Altar to betake herself to S. THOMAS: in which if there were any fault, it
was was the Priests who aduisd her to it; which could not be great, it being
warranted by the good miraculous effect immediately ensuing. Neither did he
dissuade her from the H. Cross whose efficacious virtue is venerable to all
Christians, but only persuaded her (whether by divine instinct or the impulse
of his devotion matters not much) to make her recourse to God and it by the
mediation of the Saint. His devotion to S. THOMAS moved him to urge this
recourse, which, if upon the opinion had of his Sanctity, he aduisd, where is
the error? Nay it is glorious to the H. Cross, as it is also to honor God in
his Saints, (so far is it from disparagement to see its servants honored and
inuokd: besides that a new Starr may many times and without prejudice to the
Sunn, draw more eyes to it then the Sunn it self, and have its influences more
cried up: both devotions were compatible and good, nor does the latter
derogate from the former.

Another perhaps will be dissatisfyd, yea even a little scandalizd at this
measuring to the Saint, and ask what it means? Truly I do not remember to have
read it elsewhere, nor is it any Ecclesiastical Ceremony of any Church, much
less of the Catholic: it seems to have bin taken up by the devotion of the
people therabouts, and, as an innocent harmles expression of their devotion and
recourse to the Saint, approved by custom; and though frequently used, yett
not so of necessity, but that it was and with equal succes as frequently
omitted, at least not mentiond. This their recourse and application to the
Saint was twofold; and the miraculous effects as to both show its acceptablenes
to him: either by bending a piece of siluercoyne over the patients head who
sought redress to the honor of the Saint, appropriating the party by this
expression to him and his peculiar patronage for redress: or else by measuring
the said client by a thread or some such thing, that is, by taking his length
and breadth with the same intention as in the former, and depositing them at
his Altar or to his honor. The manifold miraculous effects ensuing here upon
vindicate the fact from all suspicion of irreligiosity and superstition: and if
the Saint was pleased to accept it, let not us harbor a prejudice against it.
When we see the Candle whole week was made of this measure miraculously and
before all the rest lighted from heaven, let us take that Miracle for an
approuement of its innocence; all is well when all is meant well: alius quidem
sic, alius autem 1, Co^* 7.
sic; thus much I thought good to premitt for the scandal of the weak.

XX. CHAPTER. The multitude of Miracles wrought by the Saint.
WE may indeed call them a multitude and of the greatest size, for few Saints
perchance in Gods Church have wrought more; and therefore he was not
undeseruedly called in the Preface, the Thaumaturgus of that age. And their
quality is no less remarkable then their quantity, it being such as renders
them unquestionable in their kind, that is, evident and patent like those of
the Gospel, and such as our B. Savior both wrought and alledgd for
testimonialls of his Reception as Messiah, by giving sight to the blind,
healing the lame, raising the dead etc. and these as well as others in great
abundance. For the Readers satisfaction, and the Saint's greater glory I will
summarily putt down here what the several Authors of his life say in this
behalf; that the authority of his Miracles may remain as questionles as they
are numerous. Which Authors when they have consignd his virtues over to us
with this seal of deeds and deliuerd them under such a Consignment, (they
having before signalizd them with words;) it cannot be denyd but all legal
formalityes are obserud, and that they ought to stand in force as a deed signd
sealed and deliuerd, according to the tenor of our Courts of justice: and why
should not Saints in heaven partake theroff as well as Sinners on earth? to
deny it them were a great inconsequence.

These Miracles took their rise or source from his Translation, and continued
their stream some ages together: in treating of them we will not launch forth
into their main of all particulars, for so we should loose our selves without
end, but only cruzing near the Shore pass as swiftly as safely through such
an Ocean. The first I cite in this behalf is Laurentius Surius a grave and
exact Author; who out of one Anonymus or Conceald ancient Writer but
judicious, testifyes that among the Miracles which stand upon record, our B.
Saint is found to have restord from death to life 66. sight to the blind 41.
use of their limbs to the Contracted or sinew-shrunk 52. Palseystruck 21. and
he recounts only what came to his knowledge, not that he professes to know all.
Doctor Nicolas Harpsfield Prebend of Canterbury and a diligent Collectour of
the Gests of our Saints makes such a like Relation; who speaking of our
glorious Saint and his eminent virtues tells us they were recommended to us and
future posterity under the attestation of frequent Miracles, 163 wheroff were
wrought, says he, in the Compass of a few years, and renderd his meritts
famous far and near for the same. John Capgraue expresses himself in this
sort as to the Saint and this point of his Miracles, where he says: The
Miracles which after his death Alm. God was pleased to show to us Sinners in
evidence of his sanctity and to the honor of his own name, (for God is
honored in his Saints) I saw, says he, at his Tomb, registerd in diverse
volumes, and they were in a manner infinite. In one wheroff, says the same, I
counted 425. wrought by S. THOMAS at his Shryne, all miraculous effects, many
wheroff were in the cure of different deseases: and even Bishop God win
himself, a mere pickpocket in this Kind filching away what ever he can, grants
that many Miracles are said to have bin wrought at the plare of his burial, in
regard wheroff it pleased the Pope to make him a Saint. Thus does he mince the
matter which he dares not deny, not yett can Confess without a clear
condemnation of himself and his breethren, who pulld down a Church and faith,
so stord and confirmd with Miracles, to set up a Chapel of their own
building, to verify the old Proverb, where God has a Church the Devil will
have a Chapel.

The last Confirmation which I bring of his miracles and their multitude is be
yond all exception to any vnprejudiced judgment, for I borrow it from the very
authentic Acts and Records juridically proved and approved in the Process of
his Canonization. A copy of these same Acts and Records taken by a friend of
mine of unquestionable syncerity out of the Original which is keept in the
Vatican Library I have at this present lying by me; and whatsoever I have or
shall say concerning his miracles is all or in greatest part borrowd from
thence. There I find upon Record in all 429. and them examind and approved
partly by the Lords Commissioners deputed by his Holiness then living, for that
end; and partly by 4. autoriz'd Notaryes. The Lords were the Bishop of London
and Bishop of Miniat, who sat some times at S. Catharines London, some times at
Hereford, to avoid charges in the Citation of witnesses: they were commissiond
only for 4. months and in that time they could examine noe more then 39.
miracles all which they subscribd. The 4. Notaryes were a kind of standing
Committee for that purpose, whose power stood good without limitt of time or
stint of authority; and all the force of approbation which the rest have is
deriud from them. And thus much in general is sufficient to ascertaine us both
of the creditablenes of what we alledg, and to show how highly he was in favor
with Aim. God: for all these being things above the ordinary Course of nature
they require a special and supernatural concurrence, a thing merely of grace,
and not granted but upon extraordinary exigencyes for the illustration of the
power of God in his Saints and to let the world know how wonderful he is in
them; "Mirabilis Deus in Sanctis Psalm, 67. ^6.
suis.

Miracles when frequent are an evident conviction of true sanctity as being the
Seal, not to be counterfeyted, which God himself setts upon it for its
manifestation and autorizement to the world; which seal whosoever can exhibit
under test, his virtue needs no other touchstone to prove it Current and
genuine. Not that all that does not carry them is spurious, or that all Saints
to be such must work miracles, or that they are of the essence of sanctity, it
being of it self too nobly divine to need any such support besides it self:
and many great Saints, as the H. Baptist, S. Joseph and others, have during
life wrought none at all, and yett were held for such; unless we will say the
whole tenor of their life was a continual miracle. Yett still where found,
they are deservedly esteemd so many pled'ges of Gods favor to the worker, and
infallible attestations of his sanctity; it being against the diuine-goodnes to
permit hyprocrisy to be accompanyd and autorizd by those distinctiue marks
with, which he has signalizd the true faith and Sanctity. But it is not in
point of faith as it is in point of sanctitity, as to this; that true sanctity
may be C^^l vident, claudi ambulant, etc.
found without Miracles, though the true Church or faith Cannot, Christ having
entayld them upon it: insomuch that that Church which cannot show miracles
Cannot be the Church of Christ. But he has not annexd miracles to true
sanctity, nor are they of its essence, and consequently though they grace it
extremely when present, yet it may be as perfect and grateful to God when
absent, because not an intrinsesecall Commendatory but merely extrinsecall and
as to us by way of testimonial, a grace gratis given by Alm. God.

Now to satisfy the Devotion of the Reader, or rather to inflame it the more,
we will descend in particular to relate some few of so many miracles, and give
a little scantling theroff; which as they are particular pledges of Gods
special favor toward his servant, so they cannot but be special incentiues
to us of a peculiar reverence toward the same.

One Juliana living not far from Hereford in her Childbed fell into such a
Contraction of all her limbs, that she became wholly destitute of their use,
and this for the space of 9. years together. All humane remedies proved
unuseful to her cure, and how to obtain divine she knew not: the fame and
name of S. THOMAS was then not blazd abroad, though it happend after his death,
and while his sacred bones lay buried in our Ladies Chapel. Yett the
charitable Saint had a kindness for the poor Creature, and appearing 6.
several times to her, wishd her to go to the Tomb of Bishop THOMAS which was
in our Lady's Chapel at Hereford, and there she should be curd. She neither
knew what Bishop THOMAS nor Lady's Chapel meant, but upon so many warnings
resolved to send her husband to Hereford to learn by enquiry what they might
mean. He went, he informd himself, he returned, yett the disabled wretch lay
languishing a whole year before she could resolve to be carryd thither. The
bruit of the sollemne Translation quickened her devotion a little, and being
carryd in a baskett was placed in our Lady's Chapel at the Saints Relics:
there falling into a slumber he appeard to her again bidding her rise and go
to the new Tomb; she made what shift she could to get to it, nor had she
sooner touchd it and said a few prayers, but by leaning on it she rose, found
her self well, and walkd thrice about it, and the next day home without any
help. The baskett in which she was brought she left behind her at the Tomb; but
it being borrowd of a poor neighbor who demanded her baskett again, Iuliana
the next morning sent for it and restord it to the owner. But what much
hightned the Miracle was this; the baskett was no sooner taken away but the
woman relapsd into her former Contraction: it seems the Saint requird it for a
monument of his charitable redress. What remedy now? she is carryd again to
his Tomb and in the same baskett, remaining so amidst tears and prayers a
whole day and night: the next morning her good Benefactour mindful of his
patient restord her limms once more to a full and perfect use of them, and
least she might incurr a second forfeyture she presumd no more to take away the
baskett.

A public Incendiary was taken in flagrante, and deservedly by the Lord of
the Manor, who had legal power, sentencd to the gallows which was executed,
and he lay there a sad spectacle of justice with all the certain signs of a
dead man in so much that now they thought of nothing more but his buryall. The
lady of the Manor a very virtuous matrone, and her daughter like herself,
having their charity not tied to meritt, much beyond his deserts, had a great
mind to have him thus as he was measurd to S. THOMAS in hopes of a reuiuall;
Confiding surely that the latter part of his life would be more edificatiue
then the former. In fine she did it and not once or twice but thrice with much
devotion seconded with the fervent prayers of all that were present. Her faith
was equal to her hope and charity, and all three so acceptable to the Saint
that upon this devout petition, as a prelude to what would follow, the dead
body moved first one foot, then begann to breath; the eyes which hung ghastly
upon his cheeks fell back of themselves to their propper place, and so did his
tongue to its: in fine there was a perfect recovery from death to life; and he
is said, (and no great wonder it should be so) to have mended his manners very
much, and behau'd himself through all like a good Christian. It is not granted
every one to dye twice.

The palpablest of miracles or raising the dead was so ordinary with our
glorious Saint that 40. such like resuscitations stand upon a juridicall
record. Our Lord and savior has the sole Dominion of life and death, keeping
in his own hands the keys of both without control; yett so, as that he
lends them sometimes to his servants who, what they do, is by his power and
dispensation, as are also all the miracles which they work, not done by their
propper virtue but his Concurrence who communicates it: and thus he wrought
with our Saint, who will say, as did S. Peter to the Jews, Viri Israelitae
quid admiramini, Act. 3. 12.
aut quid nos intuemini, etc. Ye men of Israel why marvel you at this, or why
look you upon us as though by our power or holiness we have made this man to
walk, the God of Abraham, etc. In this kind a little Child scarce 3. years old
playing with another of the same age on the bank of a fishpond, the other to
frighten this, made as if he would thrust her in, and she out of fear fell in
indeed, and was actually drowned before the mischance known or help could be
given. This pond belongd and was near to an Alehouse where store of Company,
was at the same time making merry, and among the rest the Parents of the child:
so close many times and unexpectedly does sorrow follow mirth at the heels,
dashing the wine of comfort with the water of tears, suitable to that of the
wiseman, "Extrema gaudii luctus occupat; and thus many times is all the sport
Prou. 14. 13.
spoyld. The Child is taken out lifeles, and while they are all lamenting over
it, the Father, who had heard much of the miracles wrought by S. THOMAS,
together with all the company recommended the matter with much Devotion to the
Saint, and with his girdle measurd her to him according to custom. Thus they
all perseuerd praying, and on their bare knees, says the Record, till next
morning without any sign of life: in the morning natural heat came into her
body, motion of her limbs followd that, and speech motion, and so by degrees
came perfectly to her self. This miracle was among the first which Alm. God
wrough by his Saint, and it being noysd abroad people came far and near to
behold the Child: it was also the first which was solemnly examind and approved
by the Lords Commissioners. She lived till she came to woman's estate, but could
never be persuaded by her Parents to marry though much urgd thereto; and
therefore was Commonly called by the name of S. THOMAS his Vingin.

A poor man by an unjust oppression of his Landlord was cast into prison and
so laden with irons that the weight of them broke his left arm. In this sad
Condition both of want and torment, all humane means failing him he sought
divine, and had recourse to our Saint; making a vow that if he cured his arm
and restord him to liberty, himself would make a pilgrimage to his Tomb. He
found a propitious Patron; his arm was forth with Curd, and he eerlong
releasd from hold. But alas! a good purpose is sooner made then keept; he that
said VOUETE said also REDDITE, which latter part was wholly neglected by this
ungrateful Client, who now having obtaynd what he desyrd thought no more of
what he promisd, and so it fares with a great many. The Saint sent him a
Remembrancer, and he fell into a grievous fit of sickness, and in it into a
phrensey, in a rauing transport wheroff his arm is broken again and in the
same place. Being fallen a-sleep he seemd to see the most glorious Mother of
God, and hear her saying to S. THOMAS who stood by her, friend, help this
poor Caytiff: help him? replied he; he made a vow to visitt me before this, and
has not bin so good as his word. Ah, said the sweet Mother of mercy, he will
come to you, help him, I pray: Let him then come, replied the Saint on
Whitsunday and he shall be curd in the name of our Lord. Which said they both
disappeard: and the sick man relating the Vision to the bystanders was carryd
by them on that day to the Saints Shryne where he found redress of both his
maladyes by the intercession of the most glorious Virgin and the meritts of the
Saint.

One of Staynes not far from London became so infirm that all present judgd
he could not live one hour to an end. This extremity or infirmity was the
least part of his misery: for he found himself haunted and obsess'd over and
above with multitudes of Devils in most hideous Shapes which not only besett
him, but some taking him by the head others by the feet they haled and pulld
him almost to pieces. The poor sickman half distracted had recourse as well
as he could to Alm. God, beseeching him by the meritts of his devout Servant S.
THOMAS of Hereford to afford some assistance in this dreadful agony. And
behold, while he silently thus recommended himself he saw the man of God forth
with approaching him, and clasping his head betwixt his hands stood in his
defense against these wicked Spiritts the greatest part of that night. About
break of day putt to flight they all vannishd, the Saint still holding the
Sickmans head as before; who suddenly awaking out of his sleep, and his aid
or helper withdrawing at the same instant, he found himself perfectly restord
to health both of body and mind by the powerful mediation of his heavenly
Champion who came so seasonably to his rescue. To whose Tomb therefore by way of
thanksgiving he with his Neighbors undertook barefout a long pilgrimage, and
there in each ones hearing attested the cure.

To let us know how dangerous it is to meddle with edg tools, that is, to
jest profanely with the proceedings of Saints, making a piece of drollery of
what we ought humbly to venerate if we do not understand; a youngman Flemming
by nation and servant to an English Lady of quality, (he was better fedd then
taught) being in a Citizens house in Hereford, among other Raillery, began to
speak scurrilously of our B. Saint, saying, that while he hu'd he was certainly
of a covetous humor, since after his death he receives so many precious gifts
refusing nothing that was offered him. While he presumd to go thus on, one of
his hands suddenly shrunk up with such violence of pain, that acknowledging
his fault he was forced before all present to inuoke the Saint for redress:
which no sooner desyrd then obtaynd so charitable was he toward him, the hand
being presently restord, and all as well as before. But see the inueteratenes
of an ill custom! shaken off, it recurrs again and clings to us like a second
nature. The ungrateful wretch thus curd attributes both the pain and cure to
a natural cause, and neither the latter to his benefactour nor the former to a
punishment of his profane scurrility. While he was uttering these words, so
violent a pain and Contraction seizd the same hand a second time that no
stroke but one from heaven could cause it. Affliction gives understanding, and
so did it him; he acknowledgd the hand of God upon him for his ingratitude, and
now heartily penitent called upon the Saint and desyrd all the standers-by, to
do the same. Their prayers were presently heard, his hand restord, and he
learnd more wit then to relapse the third time. Let us learn hence to detest
atheistical drollery, and serve God and reverence his Saints in whom he is so
admirably admirable.

The next I will relate happend in the person of Bishop Richard the so often
mentiond successor to our Saint: He in the first years of his Episcopacy was
so ill of the stone that both Physicians and others lookd on him as a dyingman,
nor for the space of 5. or 6. weeks did he stir out of his Chamber. His
Chamberlane who deposd this cure, sleeping one night in his Lords Chamber to be
ready on all exigences, seemd in his sleep to hear one say to him, arise, take
the Relic which thou have of S. THOMAS (it was the first joint of his right
thumb, and no body besides himself knew of it) wash it in the wine which in a
silver Cruett stands in the window, give thy Master to drink of it, and he
shall be curd. The Chamberlane either mistrusting the call and its effect, or
fearful that the wine might not be good for his Lord, dissembled the matter
nor took notice of it, chiefly indeed for fear of loosing his precious
Re^^que, which he deemd to precious for him to keep were it once known to
others. The next night he heard the same call with a menace for his former
neglect; yett he out of the precedent motives forbore also the second time: the
night following or 3. he seemd to behold our B. Lady accompanyd with many
Virgins all which were clad in white and enuironnd with great brightness entering
the Chamber in which the Bishop and his Chamberlane reposd, and coming near to
the latters bed, who for some days before had with much devotion besought her
attistance by the meritrs of S. THOMAS for his Masters Recovery; said to him in
French, says the Process, Deynse (that was the Chamberlains name) art thou
asleep? he answered no: rise then, said she, take the wine above mentiond, and
if thou do it not, at they peril be it. This last threat made a deeper
impression; and as soon as it was light he Communicated the matter with the
Bishops Confessor and Physician to know their judgment upon the matter: with
their approbation and in their presence he washd the foresaid Relic, and the
Physician gave 3. spoonfulls of the said wine to the Bishop wishing him to
drink it: he making the sign of the Cross did so, rise immediately, went down
to the Chapel which he could not do for so many weeks, heard Mass, and
remaynd all that ensuing year as free, as if he had never bin molested there
with.

I will conclude this present Narratiue with another deposd juridically before
the Lords Commissioners by the party concernd then living, who in his younger
days had once bin a meniall servant of the Saint, but marrying afterward
lived at London and by trade was a Barber. This man upon the sudden without
any visible occasion lost first one eye then the other, and both with such
excess of pain that it made him seek all humane redress, though in vain, and
try the skill of Surgery, which not withstanding he remaynd 3. years stark
blind, feign to be ledd whither ever he went and he daily did to S. Paul's
Church to hear Mass. Much discomforted with this accident he called to mind his
old Patron and great well wisher S. THOMAS now Canonizd a Saint and working
Miracles. He recommends himself most earnestly to him and our B. Lady;
beseeching her by the devotion he had to her to obtain of Alm. God a cure of
his misery and restorement of sight that he might again to his comfort behold
her Son in the Consecrated Host, while it is elevated for all to adore. For
this end he causd himself to be measurd according to custom to S. THOMAS, and
sent the measure and two Eyes of wax with it to Hambleden in lincoln shyre,
the place where our Saint was borne and Christend. Two days after he found
some glimmerings of light so as to distinguish imperfectly motion and color,
and there upon causd himself to be measurd the second time, and that measure he
sent to Hereford to the Saints Shryne; and there upon found such help that with
in 8. days space he could walk any whither without a leader, and could
discern, as he desyrd, the elevated Host at a Competent distance. The cure he
ascribd to the Saint, as also in this respect, the cause of his blindness; for
that he in his youth when he served S. THOMAS being of a loose life and wanton
behavior, and chid therefore frequently by him for his amendment, the Saint
obtaynd of Alm. God this temporal affliction (it many times gives
vnsterstanding and such blindness light to see our selves) toward an amendment
of his spiritual: and he acknowledgd that he had reahd great benefitt thereby,
and heartily thankd Alm. God and the Saint for the same.

It were as easy for me to cite some hundreds as these few, were it any part
of my design to swell this little Summary into a great volume. It does not
aim at a Rehearsal of his miracles but of his virtues which are the noblest
kind of miracles: for in this corrupt nature of ours so prone to vice, I esteem
every soul eminent in sanctity so many miracles of Gods grace working in it.
And these miracles are more for our purpose, that is, for our imitation, to
which purpose if we do not apply them we swerve from the purpose; the greatest
honor and devotion we can show toward a Saint being to imitate his virtues,
as also the most beneficial to us. Miracles are good witnesses of Sanctity,
ascertaning us how high the Saint stands in the favor of God, and they stir
us up also to a due recourse toward him in our necessityes: but to profitt
otherwise then by their imitation we cannot pretend, since being above the
course of nature they are objects rather to be admird then imitated: set your
self to a generous imitation of their virtues and you may probably work
miracles your self.

XXI. CHAPTER. His Canonization, and general devotion of all unto him both
Prince and people till this unhappy breach.
THe multitude of extraordinary graces and favors which Alm. God imparted to
all sorts of people by the meritts of his glorious Servant an Bishop S. THOMAS
was the reason why the whole Kingdom solicited the then Pope for his
Canonization. Now 25. years or there abouts were elapsd since the Translation
of his Sacred Bones into his new Sepulcher, since which time the current of
miracles never ceasd; and the daily Monuments theroff hanging at the same were
so many Remembrancers minding them as much to glorify him, as he was
beneficial toward them. One good turn requires another; if Saints obtain us
temporal blessings, let us give them the glory theroff: glory is a celebrious
knowledge with praise; nor can this be better had in this world then from the
mouth of the Church whose words in this; matter are Oracles, and her public
declaration in point of Sanctity a Canonization. Hence it was that Prince and
people, Clergy, Religious, Secular, all intere^sd alike in his favors, (yett
above others the Bishopp and Chapter of Hereford) became joint Sollicitours,
that as heaven had ownd his piety by so many prodigyes, the Church would
authentically declare it, autorizing them to honor him as a Saint, who had
exhibited so many undeniable prooffs of Sanctity. The generalitty of the
Bishops of our Nation Concurrd to this, and I find a Transscript in the
Process it self exhibited by the Procuratour of the Chapter of Hereford to
the LL. Commissioners, which Transcript was subscribd by the LL. Bishops, John
Archbishop of York, Antony of Durham, Godfrey of Worcester, John of Landaff,
John of Winchester, Raph of Norwich, Walter of Bath, Aluian of Bangor, John of
Carlisle, Thomas of Excester, and was directed by them to his Holiness,
containing their esteem and sentiment both of his life and virtues, and the
wonders daily wrought at his Shryne.

Upon this and other such Solicitations it was that a public Process of the
Saints life and Miracles was instituted, and Commissaryes Apostolical deputed
thereto the two Bishopps and Arch Deacon specifyd in the precedent Chapter.
Procuratour for the Chapter of Hereford was one Henricus a Schorna, and Bishop
Richard who best knew the Saint living and dying, as one that was bred under
him, Conscious to all his secretts, was the first and chief Deponent. The
Commission took date the 13. of July 1307. and was to continue but 4. months:
which limitation of time and multiplicity both of Witnesses and Miracles was
the reason why they could not insist upon or pass through all: but as many as
were examind by them either in order to his virtues or miracles, all
Depositions passd under oath, the H. Ghospells lying open before them, and they
swearing to speak nothing but truth. Which depositions were duly Registerd by
appointed Notaryes, reuiewd by the Commissioners, and by them Consignd up to
his Holiness and keept to posterity in the Vatican Library: the perusal of an
authentical Copy wheroff, by the favor of a special friend and diligent
Searcher into the gests and Legends of Saints was Communicated to me, and
therefore I can auerr much for the undoubted truth of what I say. The
information being taken as above, and a due return made to the Congregation of
Rites whom such matters concern, all being adjusted according to form, HIS
HOLINESS John the 22. at the instance of our King and Prelates, proceeded to a
Canonization, which was solemnizd both at Rome with usual festiualls, and to
the universal joy of the whole Kingdom, much more in England, and chiefly in
the Church of Hereford. Though the day of its solemnization be not specifyd,
yett we may credibly think it was on the 2. of October, on which day the Church
celebrates his yearly memory, though it be otherwise certainly known, as we
said above, that the day of his deposition or death were on the 25. of August.

The fame of his sanctity attested so many years by a world of miraculous
Cures of all Kinds to all sorts of people, did not bound it self with in our
own Island, but working at Sea as well as at Land, and passing our streights it
filld both France and Italy as well as Scotland and Ireland: and as all
received a new access of joy by this new access of honor, so every one strive
to putt on a new fervor of devotion suitable to his meritts and their
obligation. A new declard Saint is like a new Starr in the Pirmament, he draws
as many hearts as that does eyes, and if the influences of the latter be more
visible the Communications of the former are more benign and obliging. A flame
of devotion which is continually nourishd with the oil and fuel of successiue
blessings need not fear a decrease of heat, and such was the peoples toward
our Saint. One King and two Queens have. bin seen prostrate Pilgrims before his
Tomb, nor was their Majesty ever more gloriously great, then when thus humble
before Gods Servant: there is noe truer greatness then that which accrues from a
profound humility. All the Princes and Nobles of the Land imitated their
example with votaryes in their hands: the greatest Prelates and their Clergy
were the first in this Religious Worship, nor was it then accounted
superstition or idolatry to honor God in his Saints. How happy was the people
of this Kingdom in such a propitious Patron where in their greatest plunges
of necessity, they needed only as it were to ask and have, if the grace were
fit to be imparted, and they disposd to receive it: his Shrine alone being a
Pharmacopaea or Dispensatory of Receypts for the Cure of all maladys even death
it self. And thus it continud many years to the Common Comfort of all, and
doubtless would longer, had we remaynd still in the Union of Gods Church and
Communion of his Saints, members of that mystical body which only partakes of
the divine Influences of itts head Christ JESUS. The breach of which union
broke all our happynes, and us into division from our Mother the Church, from
whom to be divided is an utter disinheriting from the birthright of the
Children of God, since he shall not have God for his father who has not the
Church for his Mother as wittness S. Austin and S. Cyprian. A most unfortunate
breach, which as it vnsainted Saints and demolishd the Shrynes their
Forefathers Devotion had erected to their sacred memory, what wonder if it
obstructed thereby the stream of their favors, it being not fit to give holy
things to dogs, or Cast such pearls to swine to feed on.

Yett to sbew that the Saint is still in heaven and powerful with Alm. God if
we were but worthy to deserve his favors, even in our time not many years
ago a furious plague sweeping all before it in the Town of Hereford and
threatening utter destruction to the inhabitans, that pestilentiall Contagion
received such a check from our Saints Relics carryd in a private Procession,
that it gave a total surcease to the same, and so suddenly, that it was
ascribd to Miracle. Such reserues of his ancient bountyes Alm. God is now and
then pleased to Communicate, to keep our devotion on foot, and give us heerby a
pledge that when he fees time he will restore both our distracted Country to
unity of faith, and the current of his graces to their wonted channel.

The generality of devotion had to this Saint may in part also be showed by the
numberles Number of Donaryes offered at his Tomb: nor can I give my Reader a
more satisfactory account of them then by relating what I find specifyd in the
Register of the Lords Commissioners. As they were exact in all so in this
particular also; and what they found extant they causd to be listed in a
schedule, and to give here a reuiew of it will perchance not be ungrateful:
thus then it specifyes. Inprim: a hundred and 70. votiue Ships in silver; and
in wax 41. Item diverse images of silver, some of the whole body others of
several parts, in all 129. Of the whole body in wax 436. of several parts
very near upon a thousand; and among them figures of horses, other beasts and
birds 77. besides innumerable of eyes, ears, teeth, breasts etc. Item
Childrens coats some of silk, some of linen to the number of 95. Three little
carts of wood which the lame upon their cure left for a monument of the same,
and one of wax. Crutches 108. Great Waxen Tapers 10. Webbs of silk and cloth
of gold 38. They found also many Pendants, Earrings, Braceletts, and other
Ornaments belonging to women many pearls and other jewels which were said to
have bin offered out of devotion. among which there were 450. gold rings, 70.
silver rings, 65. necklaces of gold, 31. of silver, and diverse precious stones.
Nor must we omit other chains though of iron, anchors, pikes, arrows,
swords, fauchons, etc. instruments of hurts received and now monuments of
miraculous cures.

And all these with in the space of little more then the first 20. years after
his Translation, and before his Canonization. What may we conceive of the whole
age or two next ensuing? to what a mass would they probably swell in two
Centinaryes, when by his Canonization, and consequently increase of devotion,
he came to be better known and more religously worshippd, and consequently
more profuse of his graces. Those to whom the forfeyture of all did escheat,
when of Catholic worshipp all became Protestant profanation, those, I say,
could have informd us more exactly if they pleased: for though they love not
Saints nor their Shrynes; yett they can both fingar and devour all the
Donaryes which hang at them of what metal soever they be, without the least
scruple of Conscience or indigestion.

According to the drift of my first design here should my Narratiue make an
end, it being no part of my intention to bulk it further with his Miracles; and
we have touchd upon all the chief passages of his life which have come to our
knowledge. But because diverse particulars relating to his virtues could not be
inserted in the said former passages; and that part of his life, his virtues I
mean, imports us most for our instruction and imitation (for why do we write
or read the lives of Saints but that we many imitate them) therefore I will make
a brief but fuller reuiew of some of the said his virtues, and illustrate and
confirm them with such examples as I find upon Record, with which I am
furnishd by the forementiond Process, it being great pity to deprive them of
light.

XXII. CHAPTER. His Humility and Abstinence.
I Will heginn with his humility as the foundation and preserver of all virtue
and sanctity; the ground work on which all spiritual edification, that is, the
House of Perfection is to be raysd. Nor is it only the foundation but also the
ciment or mortar of this building which gives a combynement and both unity and
union to all the parts by making it one House; and this union is both the order
and beauty of the structure or whole. And in this it squares very propperly;
for as the mortar not only combynes, but lies conceald and is not seen, so
humility though it give luster to other virtues yett it conceales it self,
carrying for its motto, "ama nesciri" love to lie conceald. What charity is in
Theologicalls the same is humility in Moralls: as that perfects the former, so
this the latter; in so much that neither the virtue of penance, nor
mortification, nor obedience, of which S. Leo says, that nothing is hard to
the humble, nor poverty, nor patience, nay nor even charity it self can
subsist without humility, since this alone can ciment up the breaches of that,
according to S. Bernard, Sola humilitas lae^ae charitatis est reparatio. To
build without this foundation is to build to ruin, since no other without this
can sustain the Stress of such a machine as is spiritual perfection: who
builds not on it builds on the superficial sands of self conceypt or some such
like; and Consequently when a storm Luc. 6. 49,
comes, and the winds blow, and the raynes fall, great will be the ruins of
that House, as our Savior said, because it is not built on this Rock or
groundwork.

It is propper to this virtue to empty our selves of our selves, that is, of
self love and self ease, a lazy humor which sowes a pillow, to every elbow,
and is always leaning homewards, that is, not to seek God and his greater
glory, but it self, hating to take pains and use diligence which is called the
mother of good success, a good issue seldom failing the diligent. And humility
is always such, nor indeed can it be otherwise, since the care and
solicitude of the humble man is not bent upon himself, whom he deems
unworthy of any good, but on God, whose beneplacitum is his sole joy, and to be
accounted a good servant his only happynes. Pride on the contrary always
seeks it self, as prizing nothing but it self, it being a mere lump of self
love; and proceeds toward God as did that man toward Jupiter, who, giving him
half of all he had, eat the kernells of his nutts, and gave him the shells. As
humility emtyes us of our selves so does it replenish us with God and his
graces: for when we putt off our selves we putt on Alm. God, and where the
Creature ceases to be, there succeeds the Creator by a sequel morally
necessary in the order of grace; as in that of nature, the air connaturally
succeeds the substraction of another body to hinder a vacuity. For God who is
every where by his immensity has his propper mansion house, says S. Austin, in
the heart of the humble: but then he will have no inmate besides himself, he
will not share Lodgings with any one, no not even with the Land Lord himself.

I make this short Elogium of humility to give the less acquainted Reader a
little knowledge of its worth: it was one of the gloryes of our Saint rendering
him as acceptable to men as grateful to God, and it is expressly noted in his
life, that it got him the love of all. And no wonder; for the humble man
incurrs no body's displeasure, since he trencheth neither on their profitt nor
creditt: he contents himself with what he is, and deeming himself a mere
nothing he rests in that, and consequently is beneath envy: where as the proud
self lover is ungrateful as contemning all and caring for no body but
himself, because he loves no body but himself, while the humble all besides
himself; and to love is the way to be beloved. All his Comportment was seasond
with this ingredient and carryd a strong relish of it in his words, his
actions, and behavior, so that it was a virtue, as it ought, transcendentall
through all. This gave him that Candor of an ingenuous simplicity so propper
to Christian Conversation and the Spirit of God, in Vir simpl^^ and rectus.
Genesis Job. 1.
heritted from these ancient Patriarchs Jacob, Job, and the rest, praysd by God
in the first place for this; a virtue so opposite to all duplicity or double
dealing, and consequently the Mother of integrity and vprightnes as well as all
happynes, making his tongue and his heart go both together. There is great
difference betwixt simplicity and simplenes as the world takes it, which is so
ignorant of this virtue, that it cannot distinguish betwixt in and folly; where
as it does not exclude prudence but craft and duplicity. Prudence is its
indiuduall Companion, and therefore our B. Savior wishd his Apostles to join
the prudence of the Serpent with the Simplicity of the dove: and how eminently
prudent our Saint was shall be showed in the last Chapter. This humble
simplicity made him so obsequious to all just Commands; for what teaches
obedience but tractability, and tractability but humility, the only
disposition to subjection and subordination, as pride on the contrary is its
opponent. We have showed already in the 13 Chapter, what a love and respect he
had for the poor, how he called them his breethren, heard their Confessions
before the Rich, made his table so open and Common to them that it entertaynd
sometimes 30. sometimes 40. 50. yea a 100. together; who, as he was as poor of
spirit as the most, so he loved like byrds of a feather to sort with them: and
all this was a result of his humility which naturally branches into charity,
seeking others more then it self. From this also was sourc'd his singular
contempt both of himself and all that is specious in point of employment or
preferrment: hence he rejoiced so much at his deposing the Office of Lord
Chancellor, as much, to wit, as others at its attaynment; and was the cause
that his promotion to the Bishopric of Hereford cost him so many tears,
desirous rather to lie hidd under a bushel then be set in the Candlestick of
the Church. Hence he was ever ready to pardon any delinquent upon point of due
submission and pardon demanded; and many times though the fault were theyrs, he
would prevent them by way of example seeking friendship when they had broken
it: but to the stubborn and incorrigible he was not easily reconcild. This
virtue taught him also patience, which is soon lost admidst the Crosses of this
world if it be not supported by humility which fitts our shoulders for every
burden, and persuades us we bear no more then our due: whence it was that
without repining he readily received all the personal affronts above mentiond
in the 14. Chapter, without so much as offering at a Retaliation even in word.

To his humility we may join his Mortification and these two suite well
together, and lend a mutual hand to each other. For it is the humble man that
is mortifyd, and the mortifyd humble; humility by self contempt making way for
mortification, and mortification advancing humility. No man that is a self
lover will set upon mortification unless it be to destroy self love, and who
aims at that besides the humble self denyer. The advantages of this virtue in
order to sanctity, as it makes one truly master of himself and all his
passions, appetites, inclinations, etc. are very great: for it is this unruly
and mutinous populace which gives us all our disturbances and conflicts betwixt
the spirit and the flesh, while these servants will needs be masters, and
domineer over and against reason, putting all into a combustion. The Royal
Prophett Psalm, 31. 9.
bids us bind fast their cheeks in bridle and bitt, and this bitt or curb is
mortification, they must either be hamperd thus or there is no ruling them.
They are like fire and water good servants but ill masters; give them an inch
and they will take an ell; but keep them short, close to their task with in their
bounds, and they will do you good service. Our B. Saint in his light and
experience found all this true, and therefore resolved to keep a strict hand and
watchful eye over them and all their motions, ready to suppress any
insurrections in this kind. And by internal mortification, which is much the
nobler, he preserved his mind in such a peaceful calm that one could scarce
discover any commotion to the contrary; in so much that he might seem to live
in a Region above flesh and blood, where neither winds nor tempests have
access. And this is a thing fecible enough to the Servant of God, if he make it
his busynes and take it to heart, grace willingly seconding such endeauours; and
our Saint profited so much in this Kind, that, considering the equal tenor of
his Conversation, one might say he either never had passions, which is
impossible in such a liuelynes of nature, or else kept them in a perfect
subjection to reason and virtue, which is no more then truth.

To this interior Mortification he joined exterior, as much facilitating the
former, and rendering the flesh duly subordinate to the Spirit; a thing
necessary for those who aim at a perfect conquest over them selves; and this
he practisd in a triple kind. First by hayr cloth and other austerityes to
which he accustomd himself many years, and even at his death, not contenting
himself with the incident sufferances of so long a journey, he was found with
a hayr shyrt next his body and that of the rougher size. 2. by watching and
subtraction of sleep even necessary, stinting himself to a very short
pittance, which was much felt by those about him as cutting theyrs too short
also: yett he made this a daily custom, spending the remnant of the night in
prayer and reading of H. Scripture, or other such like pious exercises. 3. by a
wonderful abstemiousnes and sobriety of dyett, the propper food of Sanctity
and refection of virtuous souls, by which they gather more strength and vigor
then by the choysest dayntyes. Experience teaches too truly what an enemy
gluttony and fullfeeding is to devotion; how it indisposes the mind while it
ouercharges the body, and makes it think more on the fleshpotts of Egypt then
the manna of Angels. A refection is necessary for the recruit of our decaying
forces; a repletion, which rather oppresses then refreshes, never: he must
content himself with necessaryes, and even retrench them a little, who will
avoid superfluityes; this was the prayer of the Wiseman and must be Tantum
victui meo tribue necessaria. Prou. 30, 8,
ours.

S. THOMAS knew well all the advantages of a sober abstinence, and therefore his
dyett was so spare, that his familiars did wonder how it could give a competent
sustenance to maintain life, and this usually. And thus much Bishopp Richard
deposd in his Process upon oath, asseuering with all that his abstinence was
such, that one might truly say his whole life was a continual fast. He made
but one meal the day, and that with these short Commons, not for want of an
appetite but to curb and mortify it; for being askd that question by the said
his successor who then sat next him, he confessed ingenuously that his
stomach served him for much more, and taking a good piece of a loaf in his
hand, said, he could eat all that and with gust. To this rigor of quantity he
added another of quality: if he tasted of any curious or costly dish that was
all, then made it be carryd either to the sick or poor: his ordinary fare was
of the homelyer sort, such as would satisfy nature not please the pallat, and
his drink suitable, to wit, small bear. He seldom drunk wine unless in a very
small quantity, or much temperd with water; he never willingly drunk betwixt
meals, and when the quality of the persons was such that it requird such a
ciuility from him, he vsd pretty sleights and artifices to euade it, by seeming
to drink when he scarce touchd the Cupp. In his younger days and better health
he was wont to fast good Friday and all the Eues of our B. Lady with bread and
water, but afterward when his stock of strenght would not bear that rigor,
by the prescript of his Physician he was for*bid that, and appointed to take a
little broth. In Confirmation of this his temperance a pretty passage is
related by the aforesaid Bishop Richard who then was present: A Kinsman of our
Saint and his Companion for 20. years and vppwards, William of Albenack
sitting once at table with him, when all had done and it was taking away S.
THOMAS espied him still eating some bread; with which a little surprizd, he
said merrily to him; Old man, what art thou doing? I am eating, quoth he; and
why now? replied the Saint. Because, said the other, I find an appetite. What,
said S. THOMAS, and are you wont to eat as long as you find an appetite? yes, I
profess, said William, and all do so that I know. All do so? said the Saint in
a chiding tone, Marry God forbid: I can assure you in very truth that for 30.
years till this day I have not rise from table with a less appetite then when
I sat down. But this latter part he wisperd in his ear forbidding him to
speak of it while he lived: and another story much to the same purpose stands
upon authentic record, and both are a great testimonial of his abstemiousnes
and sobriety.

XXIII. CHAPTER. His discharge of duty toward God and his Neighbor.
HIs humility and abstemiousnes fitted and disposd him rightly toward this
discharge; the former by withdrawing him from self-loue, the latter from
wordly, and these are the great obstructers of the love of God, and cause of
our slacknes in his service, it being certainly certain that no body can serve
two Masters. This Religious discharge is the work of our whole life, and
consequently of greatest concern, implying both parts of Christian duty, to
decline from evil and do good, and do good not how ever but after a good
manner and as beseems such a Majesty: for God loves not slubberd services, but
will have them done as well with the heart as hand and tongue, or else they will
find a cold acceptance. By a due compliance in this Kind we show our love to
him, and this compliance in our Spiritual functions is called Devotion which is
esteemd greater or less as our performance is more feruorous or remiss.
Devotion is an effect of love, and an issue of divine grace, which, if not
sourc'd from these two is not esteemd genuine and current, but to want of its
grains of weight; and this may be counterfeyted as well as other virtues.

The subject of his devotion, or his spiritual exercises relating immediately
to Alm. God were chiefly Prayer, the H. Sacrifice of Mass, his Canonical
Hours or divine Office; and in the discharge of these, he was not only, says
the Record, devout but most devout, performing them with a most profound
attention and Reverence. Prayer is called an Incense, and this inconse he was, I
may say, continually offering according to the advice of S. Paul, sine These.
5. 17.
intermissione orate, be always praying, not only as each good work in the
opinion of S. Basil, is a good prayer, but also by a more near, interior and
familiar Conversation with Alm* God by the powers of our soul, employing them
not only in a Consideration of his attributes but an union of will. And what
could a pious heart nursd up in its baptismall grace, and consequently the
throne and Altar of the H. Ghost, Sacrifice to so divine a guest besides
prayers and praises? the former to beg new blessings, the latter in thanks
giving, for them received. To attend the more freely to this, was the chief
reason why he cut his sleep so short and rise by night that he might watch and
pray, and offer early a morning oblation to God and his Saints in an odor of
sweetness, killing, as the Royal Prophet did, in the feruor of his prayer all
Psalm. 100. 8.
the sinners of the earth. He knew that in a spiritual life no great matter
could be atchieu'd or advance made without this; and therefore he made it his
daily bread, and was much more frequently feeding his soul with it then his
body with Corporal, deeming it the life which was to animate all his actions.
We treated in the 12. Chapter of his Retyrement and union with God, and this
union was chiefly effected by Prayer, and intimates a frequent and constant
practice of the same even to an intimate familiarity, whose result it is.

Even before he was Bishop he was particularly noted for his singular Reverence
and Devotion in reciting Divine office, which argues a true feeling of Spirit
and the presence of Alm. God: in which his exterior Composure of body and
attention of mind was such, that it was of great edification to the beholders.
Thus he begunn, thus he perseuerd until the end fullfilling exactly what our
H. Mother the Church requires of us for a due discharge of that great function,
and it were to be wishd all those to whom this obligation is incumbent, were
imitatours of the same. He was most exact in the administration of the
Sacraments, and performance of Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, so mixing piety with
a Majestic gravity, that both the one and other begott a Reuerentiall esteem
toward those Sacred Rytes in them that were present. But above all he was most
singularly devoted to the H. Sacrifice of Mass; here his devotion seemd to
triumph and he at the Altar to be in his Center, so full was his heart fraught
with pious affections, with such a spirit of humility and Contrition did he
approach it, such an ample testimony heeroff did he give by his abundance of
tears, that one would have thought he had rather, says the Record, actually
be held the bloody Sacrifice it self, and his Lord and Savior therein
immolated, then an unbloody and Mystical representation of the same; an
argument both of his lively faith and ardent charity. To indulge the more to
these pious affections he gave here ample scope to his devotion much beyond the
ordinary stint of half an hour, letting his soul feed at leisure on these
sweet Mysteryes; and Alm. God did so concur, that he was frequently alienated
from his senses and as it were in a rapture, so that it was necessary for the
seruer (who deposd this upon oath) to cough and make a noise to bring him to
himself and make an end of his Mass: and this, says the same, happend
frequently while he lived at Rouen, from the feast of S. Peter ad Vincula till
the feast of S. Michael next ensuing.

To show how acceptable this his piety in the H. Sacrifice and other spiritual
deuoyrs was to Alm. God, it pleased his divine Majesty to grace him particularly
at the same with a favor which all that were present attributed to Miracle,
and as such it was approved by the Lords Commissioners and those that beheld
it. On the feast of Pentecost or Whitsunday he was invited by Edmund Earl of
Cornwall, a great admirer of his Sanctity, to Celebrate the feast and say Mass
at his Castle of Wallingford, and it happend in the second or third year of
his Pontificate. While he was preparing and disposing himself thereto by
singing the Hymn "Veni Creator Spiritus; upon the entonement of the first
verse, a flock of byrds in the sight and hearing of all, with Musical notes
and beating their wings against the Chapel windows seemd to applaud the
Saint while he sung, and he having ended they retyrd while the Quire prosecuted
what he had enton'd till the end of the strophe. But he entoning the first
verse of the second they returned again, and while he sung, both with voice and
wing they accompanyd him and applauded as before; and so strophe after strophe
till the hymn was ended. This seemd a great Nouelty to the said Earl and all
that beheld it which were many; and to satisfy themselves the better, they went
out of the Chapel abroad, and had a full sight of them judging them to be
about 40. and beheld them Coming and going as before, nor could interprett such
an unusual thing never observed before nor after, otherwise, then as orderd by
God to wittnes the sanctity of our Saint and the acceptablenes of the great
work he was about. Then it was that the Earl in the hearing of all, Bishop
Richard then Chancellor of Hereford being present, made that expression cited
in the end of the 18. Chapter of his singular Confidence in the prayers and
patronage of S. THOMAS, no less then in those of our great Apostle S. Austin.

The lively faith and high esteem he had of the dignity of this divine
Sacrifice, as it made him recollect all his powers and attention for its better
performance, so it made him wave all humane respects when he was about it, not
admitting any interruption whatsoever, not even from the King himself, though
otherwise most obseruant and submissiue to his Commands. It happend once that
while he was ready to vest, a Messinger came in all have from the King to call
him to Council without delay upon matters of great importance, (and it was his
office to attend he being of the Privy Council:) What must he do? after a
short pause he calls the Messinger, who was a Priest, wishing him to tell his
Majesty, if he pleased, in these terms; That he was now engagd in the service
of one greater then himself, who requird his present attendance; but when I
have, said he, dischargd my duty to him I will not fail to wayt on his
Majesty. After all done and his devotions ended he repayrd immediately to Court
then keept at the Palace at Westminster; and receiving a gentle rebuke for his
delay, the matter was proposd and discus'd: in the handling wheroff he deliuerd
his advise so pertinently, and suggested beyond the rest such expedients so
patt and fecible, that all without reply embracd them as sent from heaven. And
the King ouerioyd here with, is said to have spoken to him in these words: Many
blessings, my Lord, light upon you, and ever praysd and magnifyd be that
highest master whom you serve, and long may you serve both him and us. So true
it is that if we seek in the first place the Kingdom of heaven and its
justice, not failing of our duty in that, all these secondaryes will be cast
into the bargain.

I will conclude the love he showed to God by the religious performance of these
his Spiritual obligations, with the devotion he carried to his Saints, and
chiefly to the Queen of Saints the Virgin Mother. The Proverb says, love me
and love my friend; and God says, love me and love my Saints, my dearest
friends; and deservedly: for how can they be said to love him who love not
those that are one with him? In his love to our B. Lady I will comprize all the
rest, and although this were notedly great, that is, so great, that he was
publicly noted for it, yett we have not much left upon Record whereby to
illustrate and amplify it. This not withstanding, if we may measure the Lion by
his Clawe, and guess at Hercules by his foot, we have sufficient hynts or
grounds both to inform and inflame us to his imitation in this particular. I
have showed above out of authentic Records, that in his younger days he was
wont to fast the Vigills of her feasts with bread and water, which custom he
continued till want of health disabled him thereto: and what greater expression
of a tender devotion could he exhibit? The expression is as extraordinary as
is the fast, and the fast speaks as much devotion as a fast can do, and ranks
it with the tenderest. He choose her Nativity, as I noted above, for his
Episcopal Consecration, receiving that sacred Character under her patronage;
and diverse apparitions of her with him after death in a joint Concurrence of
both to the cure of many, show how dear he was to her during life. And I find
that abroad he carried the Common esteem of one singularly devoted to her, and
was poynted at as her particular client; and this persuasion wrought so far
with some, that they vsd it for motive of mediation to obtain what they
desyrd, beseeching him for the love and devotion he bore her to grant their
request. And to this purpose it is recounted of one who before had bin of his
household, and falling into a great fit of sickness for ten weeks space, 3.
wheroff he passd sleeples, turning himself to the Saint, he earnestly besought
him for the love he bore to the Mother of God, that he would obtain for him
the benifitt of sleeping. This said, he fell into a slumber, and in it thought
he saw two men bring into his Chamber a very fine bed, in which being laid by
them he sleept soundly and quiettly till the morning; when being awakd and
missing the bed, though he was more then a little concernd that it should be
carryd away, yett never the less he found himself quite Cured of his
infirmity, and upon the score of the Saints devotion to our B. Lady.

As for his love toward his Neighbor, I had rather wave then mention it, as
not able to treat of it in that due manner I ought and it deserves: not but
that it was mainly great in it self, but time and records have bin so
injurious as not to convey the particulars to our knowledge; and in these things
we must not go by guess but certain relation. Who can rationally doubt but
that he who was a flaming furnace of love toward God, was enkindled with the
same toward his Neighbor for love of God? Or he that played the good Sheapard
for 7. years to geather in feeding his flock, had not a tender love for the
same flock, without which he had proved himself rather a Mercenary hyreling
then good Sheapard? Or if he were so zealously courageous for the maintenance
and Recovery of his Church Lands and Libertyes, would he not be much more
sollicitous for her childrens souls and salvation? If he took her dead
Concerns so much to heart, how much more would he her living; if he were so
charitably charitable after death in the cure of their bodies, how much more
while he hu'd in curing their souls? We know that he was assiduous in
preaching and teaching, in reconciling enmityes, in hindering debates, in
administering justice, in promoting piety, in depressing vice, in redressing
abuses, in administering the Sacraments, etc. but what is all this to his
boundles zeal, which not contenting it self with obligatoryes would branch
into supererogatoryes: and none of these latter are come to our knowledge
besides what is already specifyd. I cannot satisfy my self as to what I would
and ought to say on this point, and therefore I pass to the next.

XXIV. CHAPTER. Of his Purity of body and mind.
AMong all the virtues which like so many Stars embellishd our Saint, 3. seem
Conspicuously eminent above the rest, and as I may say, of the first magnitude.
One was his zeal and courage in the vindication and maintenance of his
Churches Libertyes; and of this we have treated in the 15. Chapter. The second
his parsimony and sobriety of dyett to such a degree of Sparenes, and
mortification of his appetite, that he might be said, as we mentiond a little
before, to have observed for many years of his life a strict Ecclesiastical
fast; and of this in the 22. The third was a wonderful innocence of life, by
which he is thought to have preserved the baptismall garment of his soul pure
and unspotted all his life long, at least from any mortal stayne; a priuiledg
granted not to many, and this I call his Purity of body and mind, and shall be
the subjectt of this Chapter.

This purity is that cleanes of heart to which our B. Savior affixd a
beatitude, and in its beams our B. Saint saw God so present in all his
actions, that he was ashamd as well as reuerentially afraid to offend him:
whence it made him sollicitous to walk like a child of light; and the Apostle
tells us that their Ephesians. 5. 9.
journey and progress is in all goodness, and justice, and truth. Whence it was
that the Royal Prophett desyrd so Psalm. 50. 62.
much to have a clean heart created in him; for such as is the heart such is the
whole man, and God who so earnestly Couetts our heart will either have a pure
one or none. This is the eye of man which if it be simple the whole body will
be lightsome, if troubled and obscure, darksome: and if the light that is in us,
says our Savior, be darkness, Matt. 6. 23.
how great and lamentable must that needs be. This is the reason why the
Wiseman aduises us to guard our heart with all diligence, because it is the
Original house of life as well Spiritual as Corporal, the chief seat of
life and the H. Ghost, whose throne it is. What is engenderd here must be like
that of pearls by the pure dew of heaven without speck or blemmish, one dropp
of salt water causes a miscarriage: and as the Spouse feeds and lies not but
among lillyes, so if we couett his Company at bed and board, this must be his
entertainment: even a discomposd cast of an eye will make him quitt the
Company; for Divine Wisdom will Sap. 1. 4.
not enter into a maleuolous soul, nor dwell in a body subject to Sin.

To this due preservation of the heart and maintenance of purity, there must be
a joint Concurrence of both the parts of man, body and soul, nor will the one
be able to effect it whithout the other, it being a result of both. One flaw
spoils the worth of a jewel, one distorted limb or wenn a beautiful body;
perfection Consists in an integrity of the parts and whole: and this was the
care and solicitude of our Saint to combyne both his in this respect into a
Common interest; nor did he endeavor it by fitts and spurts, but was the
constant practice of his life, and who ever aims at it, his solid resolution
must be like that of the Ermin, Malo mori quam faedari rather dye then suffer a
blemmish. To effect this was the grand work of our B. Saint, as it is of all
those who intend to serve God in syncerity and purity: and to Compass it the
better he keept a strict eye upon both and their proceedings, by a due inquiry
into them, and set for that end watch and ward upon all the auenues which lead
thereto, securing himself thus against all surprises, by a due intelligence of
all that pasd, admitting the good rejecting the bad. By this diligence he
enjoyed a perfect peace both at home and abroad, nor in his interior did he
find either mutiny or insurrection; and whoeuer will imitate this his
mannagement of such affairs shall experience the same. By this wary
watchfullnes, and the assistance of a good Spiritual Directour in his
beginnings or younger days, he preserved himself so vnderild both in body and
soul, the grace of Alm. God Cooperating, that he deserved from the same his
Directour in his now declining age that public Elogium of his integrity which
I mentiond in the 10. Chapter: which by advancing from virtue to virtue he was
still Consummating even till death.

This was one reason why he treated his crazy body so severely both by
abstinence and other chastisements; knowing right well that to have it a
dutiful servant it must be keept under and at task, least through idleness
getting head it become unruly and play the wanton, debauching the soul to its
licentiousnes, to which our corrupt nature too much inclines it. This flesh of
ours is the worst naturd creature upon earth, a mere devil to our, and its
own undoing; it cares for no body but it self, and that's the propperty of
self love, never regarding what woe it work the soul so it can Compass its
desires and please its appetites: it is little concernd either for heaven or
hell, creditt or discreditt, friend or foe; and what do we in pampering such a
one, but make much of a churlish curr which will one day do his best to pull
out our throat, that is, undo us: the way to cast out this Devil is that
which our Savior prescribes, "in jejunio and oratione" Matt. 17. 20.
in fasting and prayer. He added to this by way of prevention a shunning of
conversation with women (occasion they say makes a thief, and he that touches
pitch shall be defiled by it) even his own Sisters, as much as could stand
with Common ciuility; not permitting them to lodge above one night in his
palace, and then his custom was to leave it himself, and divert to some of
his maunour houses. He had a horror of all speeches glauncing at leuity, nor
durst any in his presence scatter such smutty jeasts, much less utter broad
ribaldry without the penalty of a sound check: a language much unbeseeming
Christian Conversation, as made up only of the dreggs of wit, fit only
indeed for the mouth of a bargman, though not a little in vogue among many
world lings. The love of this virtue made him conceive a perfect hatred and
horror of the contrary vice, and as both the impious and his impiety is
abominable to God, so had he not only a loathing of the latter, but also an
auersion from the former and those he knew to be given to the same, nor could
he affect them further then Christian charity commanded, though otherwise his
nearest allies. This he made evident by his Carriage toward a nephew of his
one for whom he had a great kindness so long as he did well, maintaining him in
the Uniuersity, making him his Confident, and would certainly have done very
much for him. But understanding that he was become loose of behavior and not
so chaste in his ways, he totally withdrew his affection, and though much
pressd to take him along in his journey to Rome, no persuasion could prevail;
on which subject he expressd himself to this effect. These young men, said he,
are not now adays so bashful and modest as heertofore: for when I was such a
one, if a handsome woman had lookd me in the face, I should presently have bin
putt to the blush, turned my eyes from her, (they are words of the Record) or
pulld my hatt over them, that either I should not have seen her or she me;
but now things go far otherwise: nor could he ever be induced to receive him
into favor or familiarity. This virtue of Angelical purity was so conspicuous
in him that the Prayer vsd in the office of his feast petitions by it graces
from God, and that by its meritts we may deserve to be associated to the quires
of Angels; and the first lesson of the same Office calls him Angelicus homo,
an Angelical man.

And the love and esteem he had for this virtue was not only verbal or from
the teeth outward, but he made good in deed what he professd in word: and Alm.
God was pleased to permit Certamen forte dedit ei ut vinceret. Sap. ^0. 12.
some trialls in this kind, and to give him a strong Combatt for the greater
glory of his victory. While he lived at Paris, he like another chaste Joseph was
assaulted in the same as dangerously as impudently; and he like him forced to
fly and leave his cloak behind him, nor can that flight by deemd disgraceful
when by it we get the victory. He got it, and in this was more happy then
Joseph that he wonn not only the Combatt but also the Tempter into the
bargain, reclayming her to a chaste life from her impudent lubricity, and so
deserved a double reward. Such a chaste body was fit to be the consort of so
pure a soul to make up an Angelical Compound: and its but meet that such a
jewel of purity should be keept in a suitable Cabinett that both parts might
bear proportion and mutually correspond. A Christian ought to train up his
body to immortality, and labor to leave it such in life and death as he
desires to find it in the Resurrection; such that it may be acknowledgd and
ownd for a Member of Chtist as indeed it is, and what a shame then is it, as
the Apostle argues, to make it the member of a harlott. Our B. Saint understood
this right well both as to proportion, decency, and other advantages which
thence accru'd, and therefore he made it always his busynes to procure and
maintain a good Correspondence betwixt both.

Now he that was so industrious in the Cultiuating and preservation of his body
what would he be for his soul and Conscience? the other's but the servant,
this the Mistress; that but the Shell, this the Pearl; and he knew very well
how to give every one its due. All he was to do in this kind was to keep it to
Christian duty according to his state, to cultiuate it in piety and the service
of God sowing in it the seeds of all virtues; and how he did this even in his
youth, and in what a nice and delicate temper he keept it, maybe known by what
we related in the end of the 5. Chapter of the vinepropp taken out of another
vineyard, and the 7. years penance he did for the same.

Whence we may gather how Angelically pure that delicate soul was which checkd
so feelingly at so small a matter, and how far it was from harboring any
great offense which deemd the least to be so great. Nor yett was it one of
those which flea a gnatt and swallow a Camel according to the expression of
our B. Savior, or stumbles at a straw and leaps over a block; but pure
illuminated souls in their quick-sightednes can espy a blemmish where a dimm
eye of a grosser Complexion makes no discovery at all. This was the
Constitution of his mind and tenor of proceeding when he was now in the flower
of his youth, and nature pronest to lubricity, where nothing but the special
grace of God in an eminent sanctity could work such effects so opposite to
nature and above it. And as he went always advancing to Sanctity even till
death, so did he also in purity, sanctity, as S. Anselme defines out of S.
Denis, being a most perfect and unspotted purity free and entyre from all
blemmish, and to what a pitch of eminency must he needs arrive! I shall
conclude all in this, that he lived and died a pure Virgin both in body and
mind.

XXV. and last CHAPTER. Of his Justice and Prudence.
BOth these are Cardinal Virtues, and when I have showed with what a rich stock
our Saint traded in them, I shall have made him Conspicuous in in all four. As
for his temperance and fortitude I have already given a character of them; the
former while I treated of his abstinence, the latter of his courage and
magnanimity in defense of his Church. As to what we treat of at present, he had
great practice of the former, to wit Justice, in both his Chancellorships, and
dischargd his trust with such integrity that all parties concernd were
abundantly satisfyd. And he took the true way to do it; for he sought it, not
himself; and made its advance his end, not his own, nor the enrichment of his
estate: while others peruersly inuert true order by taking the quite contrary
course. The ordering of this depends much upon the well or ill ordering of
their own Conscience, which must be the beam of the balance, and to be
right, stand always perpendicular, inclining neither to one side or other but
as the scales sway it, in the one wheroff must be justice, in the other the
thing controuerted; to the end an eeuen and impartial hand may be keept. It
were much to be wishd that all distributers of justice did this; more indeed to
be wishd then hopd for, while so many make a trade of selling what they ought
to give, and gratis; their honesty becoming venall to avarice, and them selves
imitatours of Judas, who as he sold his Master so they their Mistress, for what
are all in office but her Servants and Ministers; that which Captiuated the
other Captiuates them, peruerts their sense, and misleads them from the paths
of equity. This proceeds from being not so well principled in point of
Conscience and justice, which go always hand in hand together, and are
attended by vprightnes and syncerity: and thus our B. Saint walkd in them with
the Common approbation of all, guided not by the dictamens of this world but
Divine Wisdom, by whose Prou. 8. 15,
direction all both Lawgiuers and Administers of justice decree and execute
just things.

Thus he purchasd that vogue of integrity which every where accompanied his
proceedings, growing up with him even from his youth, and so habitually rooted
and relucent in all his carriage, that it is noted as the prime Motive why he
was chosen first to the Chancelorship of the University and then of the whole
Kingdom. And Certainly such an integrity of justice is an excellent
Cemmendatory to preferment, as giving great advantages to a full discharge of
trust, and strange it is that men do not take this way to Compass it when they
seek so greedily after it. If natural abilityes be so much regarded, how much
more in all reason ought supernatural? if wit, how much more virtue? Wit
without virtue and grace degenerates for the most part into Craft, and turns
public justice into private ends and selfseeking. Even those that are not
virtuous are great admirers of it in others, as being praise worthy in a very
enemy: and since no body but loves to have their things well done, and nothing
Contributes more then it to their welldoing; as they willingly Covet the former
so they are forward in preferring the latter. Besides that Honors and Offices
are Commonly at the disposal of the honorable, or persons of honor and
integrity; and who stand more clear in their eye, or are deemed better
deserving, or lastly by whom are they like to have more creditt and
satisfaction then by the uprightly just and virtuous? This virtue is
particularly specifyd in the ancient Lessons of his Office, where he is said to
have bin in justis operibus semper devotus always much devoted to the
practice of justice: and elsewhere in the same, Iura Ecclesiae suae viriliter
defendebat indutus justitia ut Lorica he courageously defended the Rights of
his Church armd with justice as with a breast plate. And this repute purchasd
him such a name that it set him as it were out of the reach of temptation; and
he in reality so abhorrd any thing in its administration which lookd like a
bribe, that he was a frayd even of its shadow. It is particularly recounted
that certain Religious men, who had a suite depending at Law, applyd
themselves to him for his favor and furtherance in the dispatch of the same,
and thereto presented him with a jewel of value; which he rejected not without
indignation, asking them whether they thought him to be wonn with gifts. Their
intention questionles was good, and aymd at no more then a reedeming of the
delays of the Law, not a buying of it, which they knew could not be sold: but
a Judge must avoid even suspicions in this kind, choosing rather to sit without
a lawful gain then have it with hazard of dishonesty; better is a good name,
says the Wiseman, then great Prou. 22. 1.
riches. One in that office who carries himself so religiously, where so many
eyes are upon him, as not to be taxd by any, it is a great evidence that he
discharges his trust uprightly. In the University he had the same Character,
and that was a stepp to the other promotion where he gave as ample satisfaction
by a just performance of his office in promoting learning, advancing virtue,
exacting Discipline, redressing abuses, punishing offenders, maintaining
priu^ledges, complying in fine with all points of duty, so that he also might
carry for his discharg or motto, been Marc. 7. 37.
omnia fecit he did all well. It was chiefly for the esteem they had of his
justice and piety that he was made Chancellor of the University, and for these
particularly was he praysd publicly in the same by Robert Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, affirming that in all his judicial Acts relating to the Students
he was neither swayd with favor of fear, but regulated himself merely by
justice and the meritts of the cause.

In administering justice, what he did by himself, the dictates of a good
Conscience inusolably keept, would not let him swerve from a virtuous reason;
and in what he was forcd to entrust others with all, he burdend their
Consciences (the only tie to him that ownes one) to a faithful discharge, as
they would answer it at Gods tribunal. When complaynts were made against his
Bailiffs or other Officers, he took the matter to his own scanning, and if he
found them faulty he was not content with punishing them, but reuok*d and
annulld what they had unjustly done, causing satisfaction to be made to the
injurd parties. When ever he apprehended a concern of justice in any cause he
was so resolute for its vindication and maintenance, that he wan'd all other
considerations: whence it was that in his Law-suites for the Recovery of his
Church Lands, mentiond above in the 15. Chapter, though the power of his
adversaries were formidable enough, and the issue on that respect doubtful,
yett he could never be brought to harken to any underhand composition, though
more perchance for his private interest. The Earl of Gloucester when he
preceiu'd himself cast in Law offered round sums of money to let the suite
fall: Peter Corbett did the same on a like occasion; and Roger Lord Clifford,
as knowing himself more liable to the Law (for he in time of war had taken
the then Bishop of Hereford prisoner merely to extort a ransom from him)
labourd to redeem his public penance with a 100. sterling (a great sum in
those days,) but the Saint was inflexible to all such motions, resolved to
leave all to the Course of Justice. In the public interest he as Counselor
had in affairs, he observed that the Jews, permitted then to live
promiscously, were very pernicious to the State, not only for counterfeyting
false Coin, but also by reason of their vsurarious extorsions by which they
eat-out the estates of their debtors to their utter undoing. Where upon he
preuaild with the King that some fit men might be appointed to preach to them,
and if they would still remain obstinate, that then they should quitt the
Realm. They understood what was doing and 500. of them, says the Record, came
in a body to him, offering large sums of money if he would desist: but they
missd much of their mark, nor found him like some others capable of a bribe;
his answer was, they were enemies to God and Rebels to faith, nor could ever
gain his good will but by becoming good Christians.

I will conclude this Corallary of our Saints virtues and Narratiue of his life
with that which consummated all into perfection, his prudence: this deservedly
accompany's justice and is its associate, since this orders what that executes.
Prudence is styled by the Wiseman the Science of Saints, a Science without
which the greatest learning is ignorance and Wisdom folly; and it Consists,
says the Prince of Divines, in a due Election of Mediums and ordering them to
our final End, the Compassing wheroff is our final beatitude, and
consequently Consummate Wisdom. This is its great Act or Master piece, and
from hence imparts its influence into the Common concerns and mannagement of
all our proceedings, giving them weight, and squaring them according to
Christian virtue. This part of Divine Wisdom grew up with our Saint from his
childhood; and that it might not degenerate into Craft (a hand-mayd Issue that
will needs like Ismael stand in Competition with the Legitimate Isaac) he joined
simplicity with it to exclude all duplicity or double dealing, the only art by
which craft thriues; knowing right well the truth of that Common saying,
Prudens simplicitas densa felicitas Prudent simplicity fertile felicity, and
what a rich Cropp is to be reapd thence! It is recorded of him that he was of
an eminent prudence and had a deep insight into all sorts of affairs as well
temporal as Spiritual: and why not? the light of grace does neither dazell
nor ouercast but rather clear up the sight of our judgment, and when
supernatural light is added to Natural it must needs perfect and improve,
since an inferior can never suffer an allay by mixing with a superior, as
brass or silver with gold. Whence I conclude that the greatest Saints are
fittest to make the gratest Statesmen, not only because they are freeest from
Corruption, and least swayd with passion and interest (two great blinders of
judgment) but also for the singular advantage their natural abilityes receive
from the light and assistance of divine grace. Whence it is obseruable in our
Historyes that in Catholic times Learned Bishops and virtuous Prelates were
employed ordinarily both at home and abroad in the mannagement of weightyest
affairs: and who, I pray, more knowing then they, or ought to be of greater
integrity?

As a general opinion acquird by his just and upright Carriage preferrd him to
the Chancellorship of the University, so his prudent demeanment in the same,
made King Harry the 3. prefer him to that of the Kingdom. And though upon
that good Kings death at his own earnest request he were licensed by his Son
Edward to relinquish it, yett he keept him still of his Privy Council; and how
much he esteemd his advise is seen by what we recounted in the 23. Chapter. He
that could wade through the deep affairs of two Chancellorships and a
Bishopric, and keep still above the waters of any dislike or dissatisfaction,
where so many sink, must needs have bin supported with a great prudence. The
means he vsd for this support was to have knowing and conscientious men about
him, who understood both what in prudence was to be done and would execute it
honestly: and when, all Circumstances duly weighd, he found that according to
the Dictates of prudence and Conscience this was to be effected or that
omitted, he stuck so close to his principles that neither fear nor respect
could move him in the least; and this we confirmed with an example in the 8.
Chapter. We must also Consider the times in which he bore the aforesaid
Offices most vnquiett and turbulent, and to keep sure footing on such slippery
ground argues a great prudence and wisdom: it argues that he could Master both
the times and himself, not they him.

And now having given as good a Character of this virtue in our Saint as my
breuity and informations will allow, it is time to make an end: and though I
have said little in regard of what might be said, yett I think I say much to
its and his Commendation, when I show that by it he orderd both his Spiritual
and temporal Concerns so, as to prove himself a great Saint in the former,
and a great Statesman in the latter. In his declining age, especially after he
was made Bishop, he withdrew himself as much as he could from all worldly
employments, the more to apply himself to heavenly, and that was the greatest
point of prudence which ever he exercisd, teaching him that the Kingdom of
heaven was to be sought in the first place and above all. For what will it
avail one to gain the whole world if he loose heaven and his own soul, or
with what exchange will he be able to redeem that loss? What matters it if one
enjoy all the pleasures of the world, all the treasures of the world, and all
its highest preferrments if he have not heaven at the end of them? that is to
say, what matters it to enjoy here a seeming momentary happynes, and be most
unhappy hereafter for all eternity? To be truly prudent is to be prudent to
eternity, and so was our Saint, and who ever is not thus prudent proves
himself a very fool.

True prudence guides to true happynes; as there is no true happynes but
eternal, so neither true prudence but which leads to this eternity. This is
true prudence indeed, its great Act and Master piece; at which all our
practical prudence in this great mannagement must level as at its final
scope, and the purchase of all our endeauours in this life's Commerce. As
nothing less then eternity will do our work, that is, make us eternally happy,
so must we acquiesce in no other, none but that being truly satiatiue, and all
the rest an empty shadow. The prudence of the flesh, says the Apostle, is
death, Romans 8. 6.
and operates it: the wisdom of this world, says the same, is folly with God;
that Cannot be a guide of our 1. Cor. 3. 19.
proceedings. Ours must be refined above the world and death, the issue of
divine Wisdom, and therefore is called by it the Science of Saints, Scientia
Prou. 10.
Sanctorum prudentia. This Science our B. Saint studied all his life long, and
learnd more true knowledge out of it, then he did out of all the Philosophy of
Aristotle, or Idaeas of Plato. He learnd to be virtuous, to keep a good
Conscience, his duty toward God, his Neighbor, and himself, to subdue sense
to reason, and the whole man to the Obedience of the Divine Law. He learnd to
prefer a solid happynes before a seeming one, eternity before time, the soul
before the body, and God and his Service above all. Christ our B. Savior Matt.
10. 16.
sends us to the Serpent to learn this prudence; and it teaches us a twofold:
to expose the whole body to save the head, the seat of life; and so must we
all our external goods, body and all, for the preservation of our faith and
safety of our Souls. The Serpent, say Naturalists, stopps one ear with its
tail the other it clapps close to the ground, so to become deaf to charms
and enchantments; and prudence bidds us imitate this amidst the enchantments of
Sinnfull pleasures, (according to that of the 57. Psalm) to which our Corrupt
nature inclines. Common errors lead the way, Custom like a torrent carry's us
head long, and engulfs us in a sea of Spiritual Miseryes. To these two we may
add a third; and it is, that the Serpent by forcing her passage through a
narrow Cranny stripps her self of her old coat and together of her old age
and so becomes young. We by endeavoring, as our Savior aduises, to Luc. 13.
24.
enter by the narrow gate may effect the same, and, stripping our selves of
inueterate habitts, putt on a newnes of life. Let us learn at least to avoid
gross mistakes against prudence, if we cannot all. Even Common prudence bidds
us secure the main Concern when we cannot all particulars, it being accounted
no indiscretion to hazard something to save the whole. What is our main Concern
but our Soul? if we loose that we loose all: to venture a limb to save our
life is a dictate of nature; and to exspose both body and estate to save our
Soul is a Certain Maxim of grace. If we must quitt either a lease for life,
or an inhereritance, it would be deemd madness to part with the latter to secure
the former, this being as much in its Kind as to exchange pearls for peebles
and gold for Clinquant; and is the same when ever Soul and body, time and
eternity, heaven and this world come into Competency. To make here a right
Election is the part of prudence; and our glorious S. THOMAS both did it and
teaches us to do it, and of all the virtuous lessons of his whole life none
then this is more important, none more prudent. God in his grace and light give
us strength to make the same resolves, and execute them with an equal
fidelity. Amen.

FINIS.
APPROBATIO.
LIbellum, cui titulus, The Life and Gests of Saint Thomas Cantilupe, Bishop of
Hereford, Anglice conscriptum, a Theologo mihi noto lectum praelo dignum
censeo. Actum Gandavi, 27. Augusti, Anno 1674.

H. HESIUS. Libr. Censor.

ERRATA.
Fol. Lin. 17 12 glorions glorious 19 20 their they 23 11 hough though 31 29
inlustrious illustrious 33 5 chidhood childhood 45 9 figh fight 57 15
particulari particular 69 4 thiter thither 73 18 buh but 106 19 be he 117 20
reccuid received 135 11 aftording affording 160 3 oue one 175 4 fitting sitting
186 20 the he 256 18 reahd reapd 270 7 many may 310 13 by be


