The Rule of Rejoicing; OR A DIRECTION FOR Mirth.

IN A SERMON Preached upon Trinity-Sunday, being the 18th of June, in the Year
of our Lord 1671.

By JOHN STRAIGHT, Master of Arts, sometime a Member of Queens-Colledge in
Cambridge, now Vicar of Stourepaine in the County of Dorset, and Chaplain to
the Right Reverend Father in God, Dr. John Davenant, late Lord Bishop of Sarum.

Temporalibus gaudent, qui bona aeterna non norunt desiderare, Aug. in Psalm.
52. We will rejoice in thy Salvation, and triumph in the Name of the Lord our
God, Psalm. 20. 5. LONDON, Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in
Little Britain, 1671.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
To his Loving Parishioners and good Neighbors, the Inhabitants of Stourepaine
in the County of Dorset, JOHN STRAIGHT, their Aged Vicar, dedicateth this Rule
of Rejoicing.
My good Neighbors,
THere are too many plucked away with the Errors of these Seditious and
Schismatical Times: How much it has been my care to keep you upright, and
preserve you from Schism, Faction and Separation, you cannot choose but witness
for me. I am now grown old, and ready to go the way of all Flesh; and seeing I
have received some part of my temporal Maintenance from you, I thought it meet
for me, before I go hence, and be no more seen, to bestow some spiritual Gift
upon you, by which I might, by Gods Blessing upon it, so season your Romans 1. 11.
outward Enjoyments, as you might be furthered in your passage to that
Country, which I trust you seek after. Give me leave to make use Heb. 11. 14.
of a part of S. Peter's Expression to the Cripple at the Temple Gate (Such as I
have, give I unto Acts 3. 6.
you) a few Printed Leaves of Paper, which are indeed the best Monuments and
sutablest Remembrances that a Minister can leave behind him to his People; by
which, he being dead, may (with Abel) yet speak unto you. If S. Paul was Phil.
3. 1.
not ashamed to write the same things again, sure it is no presumption then in
me to present that now to your views, which not long since I committed to your
ears. It seemed welcome to you then; I hope you will kindly accept of it now;
and not only entertain it as a testimony of my Love, and dear Affection to you,
but that which is far better, viz. That you will make that good use of it, for
which it was intended; which was, the rectifying of your Joy here while I am
with you, and the continuance of your Comfort hereafter, when I am dead, and
taken from you. If God shall move your hearts (as I trust he has begun to do,
and will more) to the entertainment of that which is the principal Subject of
this Sermon, it will make you shun the Atheistical profaneness of these
Godless times, and bring that upon you, which is only able to make you happy;
even that which will make your hearts stable and unblameable in Joyfulness;
which is the hearty Prayer of him that is

Your very Loving Vicar, and continual Suppliant to the Throne of Grace for you
all. JOHN STRAIGHT.

To all READERS whatsoever.
THe Merchant that has once put to Sea, though he meet with some miscasualties
in his Voyage, is yet commonly apt to make another Adventure. It has been my
hap, by the persuasion of some prevalent Friends, to make two adventures
already before this; My Ship is once again launched, and let loose to the
swelling waves of malicious Censure. The boisterous blasts of such vain winds
dismay me not, nor do the multitude of pilfering Pirates, who by their prating,
endeavor to rob men of their good Names, put a stop to my course, 2 Cor. 11.
26.
or cause me to strike sail. The blessed Apostle tells me, that he was thrice
shipwrackt, that he was in perils often, and among the rest, especially amongst
false Brethren. How can I then look to be free from such perils? No, no, so
long as there are so many of but little Judgment, and less Honesty, I neither
can, nor do expect to escape their stripes. But as for such, I shall take up
the same Apostles resolution, and say 1 Cor. 4. 3.
with him, that I pass very little to be judged of them. There are too many so
proud, and self-conceited, that they think nothing well done, but what they do
themselves; such Readers commonly usurp the office of rash Judges, and so,
instead of Lectores, they become Lictores. To such, I shall apply my blessed
Saviors words, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; if well, why
then do you smite me with your John 18. 23 1 Cor. 4. 3.
detracting Tongues? If my God approve me, I pass not for man's censure. As for
that Thredbare dry derision, of being a Fool in Print, I can as cheerfully bear
it, as David sometime did the Taunts of Michol, 2 Samuel 6. 20, 21, 22.
and be as well pleased to be esteemed a Fool for the communication of good
things, as S. Paul was contented to be accounted a Fool for Christ's sake. I
shall now dismiss the captious and cavilling Reader with 1 Cor. 4. 10.
Martial's Distich:

Cum tua non edas, carpis mea Carmina Leli?

Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua. Martial.


And so turning to the truly Religious and well affected Readers, who read to
profit, and not to pick Holes; To you, dear Christians, I willingly present
this Sermon, with Jacobs Blessing and Prayer for his Sons; God Almighty send
thee mercy in the sight of the man, etc. You have here (good Friends) Genesis 43.
14.
a Rule of Rejoicing, a Direction for your Mirth; accept it from me, and apply
it to your selves; do as Elisha did to the Child he raised from death to life;
he stretched himself over the Child, he put his mouth 2 Kin. 4. 33, 34.
on the Child's mouth, his eyes on his eyes, his hands on his hands, and
therewithal he joined prayers, and the Child revived; so do you also, compare
your selves with this pattern, measure out your joy with this Rule; where you
find a conformity, give thanks to God for it; and where not, pray to God to
quicken you, that you may grow in an holy similitude and conformity to this
Rule. And if these little fruits of my Ministry may serve any way to guide you
in your journey toward Heaven, it shall be no small comfort to me, that I have
not run nor labored in vain. Gal. 2. 2.
And seeing all good things come from above, I therefore commend you to the
Father of Lights, who is able to make you rejoice in him, with joy unspeakable
and glorious; and rest, 1 Pet. 1. 8.


Yours to serve you in what I may. JOHN STRAIGHT.

The Rule of REJOICING, OR, A Direction for MIRTH. IN A SERMON Preached in the
Parish Church of Stoure-paine in the County of Dorset, on the 18th of June,
1671.
Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say, Rejoice.
THat which Seneca sometime said of Learning, I may, and that not unfitly,
affirm of Joy: Vita sine Literis mors est, vivumque hominis Sepulchrum; so he:
Vita sine gaudio mors est, vivumque hominis Sepulchrum; so I. A Life without
Learning (He) without Joy (I) is a mere Death, and but the living Sepulcher of
man. A short Life, if joyous, is far better than a long Age, if mixed, and
continually clogged with anxious Molestations: Much rather should I choose to
live a few days here in merry gladness, than desire to accomplish the
prolonged years of Methuselah in sullen sadness. Heaviness of heart is the
Curse of God. It Is Deuteronomy. 28. 65. Pro. 15. 13. and 17. 22. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
a great enemy to our health, which God has bound us to take care of: It dries
the Bones; and briefly, it gives great advantage to Satan, who like a roaring
Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour. It Is an old Saying, that
Melancholia est Vehiculum Daemonus; and Experience proves, that we are never so
weak, never so apt to receive the Temptations of Satan, never so unable to
resist them, as when we are oppressed with Melancholy and Sadness of heart: For
this cause S. Paul charge the Corinthians to comfort the incestuous person,
lest Satan 2 Cor. 2, 7, 11.
(says he) circumvent us; for we are not ignorant of his Devices. Look upon
David, a man after Gods own heart, as the Scripture styles him; and yet see to
what an 2 Samuel 18. 33.
inconvenience sadness, and plodding too much on the loss of his Son Absalom
brought him; see how unlike himself it made him. And so Job, concerning whom
the Job 1. 1.
Lord gives also a large Testimony; an upright and just man, one that feared
God, and eschewed evil: Yet observe how far he forgets himself, by yielding too
much to sadness and heaviness of heart: he is angry with the Light, Job 3. 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.
quarrels with the Night, has a Saying to the Stars, to his Mother, to the
Midwife; there is no dealing with him in his Fit.

Instances of this kind, there be more than enough; but they are unpleasant.
Without Joy, there is no contentment in any thing. Who would wish for Life it
self, but to take some joy and comfort in it? Joy is all in all. Well therefore
does our Apostle apply himself to press this Duty upon the Philippians in the
words of our Text; Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say, rejoice.

In which words observe these four Particulars.

1. A Duty enjoined, viz. Rejoicing; Rejoice.

2. The Limitation of this Duty; our Rejoicing must not be carnal, but
spiritual, non in Saeculo, sed in Domino; it must not be in the World, but in
the Lord; Rejoice in the Lord.

3. The Extent of this Duty of Rejoicing: It must not be at one time, and not
at another; it must not be only now at Trinity-Tide, your usual time of
Merriment, and enjoyment of your Friends and Acquaintance, and no more till
that time comes again in a Revolution; but it must be all the year long, even
as long as we live [alway] Rejoice in the Lord always.

4. And Lastly, The Ingemination of this Duty of Rejoicing; Again I say,
Rejoice: As if S. Paul should have said, I exhort you not unto this duty of
Rejoicing suddenly nor rashly, out of a merry pin (as we commonly say) but out
of a serious and sober deliberation; and therefore I say again, Rejoice.
Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say, Rejoice. Of these in their Order.

And first, of the first; The Duty enjoined by the Apostle to every good
Christian, Rejoicing. Rejoice.

It is then the Duty of all Gods Children to be joyful. It is the Duty of all
Gods Children to be cheerful.

O come, let us rejoice unto the Lord, says the Psalmist. Let Psalm. 95. 1.
Psalm. 100. 2. Psalm. 100. 4. Psalm. 47. 1.
us serve the Lord with gladness, and come before him with joyfulness. Let us
enter into his Gates with praise, and into his Courts with rejoicing. All
people clap your hands, sing aloud unto God with a joyful voice, says David.
This Disposition, we see, was in the blessed Virgin Mary, Luke 1. 47.
when she said, that her Spirit rejoiced in God her Savior. There is no man
but would have his business done with Cheerfulness; and therefore Solomon
says, that a sluggish Pro. 10. 26.
or dull Agent, is as Vinegar to the Teeth, or as Smoke to the Eyes. It is a
matter of vexation and trouble, to see any thing performed with lumpish
heaviness. God himself is all Spirit, and he will be served with our Spirits;
he can endure none but cheerful Servitors. In the time of the Ceremonies, when
God had appointed, that the firstborn of a man's Beasts should be set apart to
him, it was with this exception; If it were the first Foal of an Exodus 13. 12,
13.
Ass, it should be redeemed with a Lamb; if it were not redeemed, the Neck of
it was to be broken; God would not have that to be sacrificed unto him. Some,
not unaptly, make this to be meant by it, that God so appointed, as an evidence
of his detestation of dullness and want of Life and Cheerfulness in good things,
an Ass being one of the dullest Creatures (for which cause, I conceive, Sloth
is wont to be pictured riding upon an Ass) God would not be honored by the
Sacrifice of such a Beast. It is the Badge of Christ's People, that they come
willingly at the time of assembling. And I rejoiced, says David, when they
said unto me, we will go unto the House Psalm. 110. 3. Psalm. 122. 1.
of the Lord. Those Services that are offered unto God without cheerfulness,
they never find acceptance.

And truly great reason have Gods Children to rejoice, and to serve him with
alacrity: For,

First, Their Sins are forgiven them, and that is a just cause of joy. Son, be
of good cheer (says our Savior Christ) thy Sins are forgiven thee. Matthew. 9.
2.


Secondly, God is reconciled unto them in Christ, and delights in them, and
that is another just cause of joy. Let him that glories (says the Lord) glory
in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord which Jer. 9.
24.
exercise loving kindness. This is that loving kindness and mercy, which being
shed abroad in the heart by the holy Ghost, is better than life, as the
Psalmist speaks; The Soul is satisfied with it as with Marrow and Fatness.
Psalm. 63. 3. Psalm. 63. 5. Romans 14. 17. Romans 8. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 8. Luke 2. 10.
John 16. 24.
St. Paul calls this Joy in the Holy Ghost: The Holy Ghost works it in the
heart, and that witness of the Spirit is the Ground of it. St. Peter, for the
dignity of it, commends it to be both unspeakable and glorious. The Angels to
the Shepherds called it great joy. Our blessed Savior styles it a full joy.
And the Psalmist terms it the joy of Gods people, as being their Peculiar: The
Stranger Ps. 106. 5.
from the Commonwealth of Israel meddles not with this Joy.

Use 1. Instruct.
The Religious Life then is the merry Life. Those that do unseignedly fear God,
and have set their hearts to please him, are the only men of the world, that
have just cause to be cheerful, that have just cause to be comfortable, that
have just cause to be joyful. Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord,
says the Prophet David: Psalm. 105. 3. Psalm. 32. 11.
And shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart.

Use 2. Reproof.
Let this then be a check to our common Lumpishness, and a reproof to our usual
uncheerfulness: Let it serve to correct that deadness of Spirit which does
generally discover it self in our performances of Religious Duties. Men many
times look, when they are hearing, or otherwise attending upon the other
Services of Gods House, as if they had no heart to them; as if (were it not for
shame) they would say with those Jews that the Prophet Malachy speaks of, in
plain terms, Behold it is a weariness. The Mal. 1. 13.
thoughts of many are even tired and spent, before an hour be half out; witness
that common deadness, and filthy drowsiness, to which many do give themselves
over, even in the midst of the Congregation. Oh, look to your Affections,
Beloved! God looks for cheerfulness in his Service. He would have nothing taken
of any toward the erecting of the Tabernacle, unless it were of him that had a
willing heart. Strive therefore, Oh strive, I say, Exodus 35. 5.
against your wonted sluggishness, and when you feel a kind of heaviness to
creep upon you, do you check your selves for it; rouse up your selves, and
blame your selves, who in other things can be so jocund and fresh, and yet be
so heavy, like men struck on the head, when matters appertaining to the Service
of God are in hand, Remember the Duty enjoined here by the Apostle; Rejoice.

Rejoice; yes: but what is this joy you persuade us Tho. Aq.
unto? The Angelical Doctor tells you, that it is Passio mentis excitata ex
opinione praesentis boni, vel expectatione futuri; Joy (says he) is a passion
of the Mind stirred up from an opinion of some present, or at least from an
expectation of some future good. Now (Beloved) seeing Gods Children have not
only an opinion of some present, but a most certain expectation of some future
good too, therefore they of all men have most cause to rejoice, and serve their
God with gladness. But to give you yet a more Divine Description of true Joy:
True joy indeed is a spiritual motion wrought in the minds and hearts of the
Faithful by the Holy Ghost, proceeding from their Reconciliation to God by
Faith in Christ. Hence is that of Caesarius, Verum gaudium non possidetur, nisi
pax and justitia teneatur; prima enim est and quasi radix Caesar. 2. Admon.
Justitia, secunda Pax, tertia Gaudium; de Justitia nascitur Pax, de Pace
Gaudium generatur: That is, True Joy is not there to be found, where Peace and
Righteousness is forsaken; for Righteousness which proceeds from our
reconciliation to God by Faith in Christ, is first, and as it were, the root of
all; Peace of Conscience second, issuing from the former; and lastly, true joy
springing from both; from Righteousness comes Peace, and from Peace proceeds
true Joy.

This is the joy S. Paul enjoynes the Philippians to observe in our Text, and
this is that joy which I commend to you to embrace. Would you be joyful? would
you be cheerful? Would you be merry indeed? Oh then labor for Righteousness,
whence Peace of Conscience will undoubtedly proceed, and thence unspeakable Joy
will necessarily follow. Gaudete in veritate, non in iniquitate; Beda.
gaudete in spe aeternitatis, non in flore vanitatis, as Venerable Beda has
it; that is, Rejoice in Verity, not in Iniquity; rejoice in the hope of
Eternity, not in the fading flower of Vanity: And thus I am fallen upon my
second Particular, which is the Limitation of this Duty enjoined, expressed in
these words, (...), in the Lord. Rejoice in the Lord.

The Second Part, Limitation.
This (Beloved) is the qualifying, the seasoning, and the bounding of our
Mirth; It must be in the Lord: Why? Vllumne gaudium nisi in Dorino? says Aug.
Yes, there is, as the same Father has it, Gaudium Vanitatis, as well as
Gaudium Veritatis; that is, there is a joy of Vanity, as well as a joy of
Verity. There is a twofold joy, there is a hellish joy, and there is a holy
joy; the one is inhibited, the other imposed. The vain joy of the world, or
rather, the worlds joy in vanity, is interdicted; the holy joy, the joy of
verity, the rejoicing in the Lord, that is it which is here enjoined in our
Apostles Edict, Rejoice in the Lord.

Obs. Rejoicing in the Lord is the only true rejoicing.
Illud est verum acsummum gaudium (says S. Bernard) Bern. in Sermon.
quod non de Creatura, sed de Creatore concipitur; quod cum acceperis, nemo
tollet a^te; cui aliunde comparata, omnis jucunditas moeror est, omnis suavitas
dolor est, omne dulce amarum est, omne decorum foedum est, omne postremo quod
delectari potest, molestum est. That is true and excellent joy indeed (says
that Father) which is conceived in the Creator, and not in the Creature; which
when thou have received, no man can take from thee; to which, if all other
rejoicing and pleasure be compared, they be but painfulness, all other
sweetness but sadness, all other delightsomness but dullness, all other
comeliness but filthiness; and in a word, all other mirth but madness.

The comfort which the Soul feels in Gods favor, in the pardon of sin, is that
which indeed deserves to be termed Joy and Rejoicing.

when we are judged (says the Apostle) we are chastened of the Lord, because
we should not be condemned with the world.

Secondly, Rejoicing in the Lord is the only true Rejoicing, because it is
lasting; it abides by us when all other joys forsake us: Christ commends it to
his Disciples, by the name of a Joy which no man could take from Joh. 16. 22.
them. It may indeed, I confess, sometime be interrupted and overclouded with
sad Passions, but it can never be clean extinguished. God does sometime so hide
away his face from his dearest ones, for their humiliation, that they are
troubled, and that not a little; but it is an absolute and never-failing truth,
that he will turn again and quicken them, that his people may rejoice in him.
As for Psalm. 71. 20.
the joy that is in outward things, as in the wealth, honor, pleasure and
glory of this Life, it is but vanishing, like the noise of Thorns under a Pot,
as the wise man tells Ecc. 7. 8.
us, which crackle and blaze exceedingly for a while, but are quickly out. It
is a short rejoicing, even a joy but for a moment, as Zophar tells us; The
rejoicing of the Job 20. 5.
wicked is short (says he) and the joy of Hypocrites is but a moment. As the
things themselves are transitory and uncertain, so must that joy that is taken
in them be; Vanity it self is not more light. And then, for the most part,
these shallow, and soon drying Streams of outward joy, they do empty themselves
into a Sea of Heaviness: They are as a short Winters day, the fairness whereof,
in regard of some breakings out of the Sun, is at last swallowed up into a
gloomy and tempestuous night. But that Light which is sown for the righteous
(as the Psalmist Psalm. 97. 11.
speaks) and that Joy which is prepared for the upright in heart, though it
be sometime darkened, yet it never goes out: It does always scatter and
disperse, like the Sun in his strength, all Clouds of Affrightment, and all
Mists of Coffeehouse whatsoever. This relieves the Soul, whenas other joys
do deceive a man, like a Brook, as holy Job speaks, which, when we want water,
is dry, and when we have no need, overflows. This Joy therefore, Job 6. 15.
is the only true Joy: This rejoicing in the Lord, is the only true rejoicing.

that his Substance is great, Job 31. 25.
and that his hand has gotten much, as Job speaks: Another is glad with Haman,
for his great Promotion: A Table Esth. 5. 11.
richly decked, an overflowing Cup, and a faring deliciously every day, there
is the Epicures joy: They most dote upon that mad Mirth which Solomon speaks
of; Eccl. 2. 2.
and if they may live in pleasures and wantonness, making to morrow as to day,
and have their Houses peaceable, and without fear, without any Rod of God upon
them, then they are glad; and many Fools are apt to think them happy who live
thus: O, say they, they live a brave life, as men enjoying their imagined
felicity. But alas! how much are men deceived herein? what are all those joys
in comparison of this we are now treating of? Indeed if it be rightly
considered, what true comfort can a man take in any thing, so long as he
knows not how the case stands between God and his own Soul? What true
comfort, I say, can any man have, so long as he knows not what shall become of
him at the day of the great account and reckoning for his sins? Howsoever the
Devil teaches men to forget the consideration hereof, that so he may lead them
on like an Ox to the slaughter, or as a Fool that goes to the Stocks for
correction, not knowing that they are in danger: Yet if ever at any time the
Conscience be a little awakened to think on this, the very remembrance of it is
like the beholding of the hand upon the Wall to Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 6.
which when he saw it, put him quite out of his humor of Jollity; it was not
the presence of his Princes, nor the company of his Wives and Concubines, nor
the beholding of the Golden Vessels which he had taken out of the Temple of the
Lord, nor the pleasing taste of the Wine which was before him, none of these
could keep his countenance from changing, nor his thoughts from troubling him.
Nothing indeed can overcome the terror and amazement which is wont to astonish
the Soul guilty of sin in its own apprehension, and sensible of the terror of
the Lord, and yet ignorant withal, and without all manner of assurance to be
pardoned. Think, Oh think seriously with thy self in what a case thy Soul will
be, when as thou art breathing out thy last Breath, and art even ready to be
driven out of the world by a violent and tormenting sickness; when thou shall
see the sins of thy Life mustering together before thee, and the just wrath of
God ready to seize upon thee, and Hell in thy own conceit even wide gaping to
receive thee, and yet have no feeling of this joy issuing out of the knowledge
of Gods being graciously reconciled to thee in his Son. Oh then (Dear
Christians) let us labor for this joy above all; let us never give any rest to
our thoughts, till we be brought to hear of this gladness in the Lord: A Dram
of this is better than all the mirth in the world beside, and shall be a secret
comfort of thy Soul, when all that the Earth affords, cannot yield thee so much
as a drop of true refreshing.

Wicked joys are like those Locusts, upon whose heads were not Crowns, but as
if it were Crowns (not of Rev. 9. 7.
Gold, but) like Gold: their Faces were (not, but) as it were Faces of men;
their Hairs (not indeed, but) as it were the Hairs of Women; their Brestplates,
as it were Brestplates of Iron: All these were shadowy and similitudinary; but
there were stings in their Tails, as you may see at the 10th. verse, not as it
were, but true stings indeed. Gaudent falsis bonis, pereunt veris tormentis;
Men call for mirth and jollity here, as the Philistims did for Sampson, to make
them sport, and it pulls down the Jud. 16. 25.
House upon their heads. It is better (says S. Gregory) in the words of
Solomon, to enter into the house of mourning, than the habitation of such
rejoicing. How foolish is it for a little tickling of the Palate, to hazard
eternal comfort? to adventure our drowning in eternal perdition? Let us
therefore (beloved Brethren) think of the joy of this world as it deserves,
viz. with contempt; for alas, how little can it do for us? and that little,
with what deceit? What is thy heart the better? or what the merrier for all
these false joys wherewith at any time it has befriended thee? When did it
offer Honey, but it Jud. 4. 21.
brought a Sting withal? When did it tender thee Milk and Slumber, without a
Nail and a Hammer? Just like Joabs Kiss, it is still attended with a secret
Stab. It is no good purchase, to procure an endless woe, for a little 2 Samuel 20.
9.
sliding shadow of contentment. Believe them that have bought their experience
dear. It is better to avoid this joy, ante gustum, quam post fastidium, before
we have tasted it, than after we have surfeited on it. The more hold we take of
this, the more we lose our hold upon God. Turn ye therefore, my beloved
Brethren, from this vain, false, and short joy that seeks you, and seek that
joy of verity, that joy in the Lord, which shall for ever content, and never
cloy you.





First, You must have a diligent care to prevent Excess. Whether we eat or
drink, or whatsoever we do else, 1 Cor. 10. 31. Romans 13. 13. Luke 21. 34
all must be done to the Glory of God. Gluttony and Drunkenness are the works
of Darkness, contrary to honest walking; you must take heed therefore lest at
at any time your hearts be oppressed with them.

Secondly, You may rejoice in the enjoyment of these outward things, always
provided that God be not banished out of your thoughts: We may be merry, but
God must be by: we may please our selves, so long as we displease not him. All
our joy is not reserved for the next life, some is afforded us on earth; Gods
greater Light does not extinguish the less. Friends, Children, Wine, Oil,
Health, Liberty, Competency, are not given us for discontent; we may not make
them indeed Gods Rivals, but we may rejoice in them as Gods Blessings. In
themselves, they are nothing; in him, they are worth our joy. They wrong
Christians, that forbid them mirth: The Gospel is not such dull Metal, but the
Tidings of joy to all Believers. When the Lord has Luke 2. 10.
made us happy, he gives us no thanks to make our selves miserable. If we find
God reconciled, Christ our Advocate, the Holy Spirit our Comforter, if we have
peace in our Conscience, and in Heaven an Inheritance, we should be both angry
and ashamed at our selves, to ask on earth that Question, Why art thou sad, or
cast down, Oh my Soul! If we be in Christ, our very bread Psalm. 42. 11.
is a Symbol of the Bread of Life; and our Wine and Beer, a Token of that Cup
we shall drink in Heaven. What should discomfort us, if the Lord be with us?
Only let us be sure, that our Delights exclude not the Presence of God. Rejoice
we may; nay, rejoice we must; it is our duty enjoined by the Apostle; but look
we to the Limitation, that the Lord be in it. Rejoice in the Lord.

The Third Part, The Extent.
I have done with two parts of my Text, The Duty, and the Limitation of it. I
shall now proceed to the Third, which is the Extent of the Duty, in the word
(...), always; (...); Rejoice in the Lord always.

This seems at first view a strange Paradox, an intricate Riddle, nay indeed a
mere contradiction: For how can we weep, lament and sorrow too, as our blessed
Savior Joh. 16. 20.
himself has said we shall; and yet rejoice also, and that always too, as the
Apostle here says we should? Rejoice in the Lord always: How is it possible
that weeping and rejoicing should comply and agree together in one and the same
Subject, at one and the same time? Do not Contraries expel each other? Yes
(Beloved) they do indeed; but these are not contraries: Christian Rejoicing and
Christian Mourning do well agree together in one and the same Subject, at one
and the same time too. Take a Similitude from a Traveller, to illustrate this
unto you. A Traveller may rejoice to see the Sun shine, and yet he may be
sorrowful too at the very same time, to behold some Clouds arising to eclipse
his Light from him. So it is (Beloved) with Gods Children, they may rejoice to
see the Sun of Gods Favor shining comfortably upon them, and yet at the same
time, they may weep too, to behold some of their cloudy sins arising to obscure
it. Nullus enim justus and sanctus caret peccato, Aug.
nec tamen ex hoc desinit esse justus vel sanctus, cum affectu teneat
Sanctitatem. There is no man so righteous or holy as to be without sin, and yet
he cease not to be righteous or holy, so long as he affects Holiness: so S.
Aug. The burning Bush in which God appeared to Moses, that Exodus 3. 2.
was not burnt up because God was in it, shows us how Gods Church and Chosen,
may both weep continually, and yet rejoice continually too. Weep they must
continually, because they are always compassed about with the fiery flames of
Affliction: Again, rejoice they must continually, because they are not
consumed, but comforted by God in the midst of all calamities.

We have seen, says S. Gregory, Clouds dissolving themselves Greg.
into drops upon the Earth, and yet the Sunbeams resplendently reflecting
refreshment on the same, at the same instant of time. So it is with Gods
Children here on Earth; the doleful Clouds of sin, and affliction for sin, do
often distil-Chrystal showers from their eyes, and yet the Sun of Righteousness
shines at the same instant most comfortably in their hearts, and causes them
to rejoice; witness holy David, who tells us, that in the multitude of the
Psalm. 94. 19.
sorrows of his heart, Gods Comforts still refreshed his Soul.

We will now descend to the demonstration of this unto you in some few
Particulars. Six Causes I have formerly observed (in my Sermon on the 16th. of
John, at the 20th. verse, Printed in the Year 1643.) to move the Righteous to
weep continually; but, lo, now I bring you twice so many more Causes out of
Gods Storehouse, to make them rejoice even in the same things always.

David every night to water his Couch with his Tears. This made Mary Magdalen
Psalm. 6. 6. Luke 7. 38.
weep as if she poured forth water, not by drops, but by floods: This made
Peter weep bitterly; yea, and this made S. Paul cry out heavily, Miser ego
homo, quis me Matthew. 26. 75. Romans 7. 24.
eripiet? etc. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death?

Yes, blessed Saint, thou have a Deliverer, Jesus Christ our Lord, he is the
Propitiation for thy sins, and not for thine only, but for all the sins of all
the Elect. Rejoice 1 John 2. 2.
therefore in this Oh ye Righteous; first, Because there is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus. And then, secondly, Because you walk not after
the Flesh, but Romans 8. 1.
after the Spirit. Your sins are remitted, and therefore you have cause to be
cheerful. If there be sorrow in the contrition of sin, much more then is there
joy in the remission of sin. One dram of this joy out-values all the loads of
the other sorrow. Like men over-burdened, we feel most comfortable ease, when
the Cross of Christ takes all this weight from our shoulders. When sin is
remitted, nothing can much afflict. The greatest sorrow to the heart penitent,
proves the greatest joy to the heart pardoned. It is not possible, for joy and
comfort to be there absent, where Gods kindness is present. Can that heart be
void of Consolation, which is inhabited by the God of Consolation? May he who
has the Fountain and Ocean of Gladness within him, remain a dry Pit, and be
utterly empty and void of gladness? No, no, they who have been pressed with the
burden of sin, will be much refreshed with deliverance from it. They who have
been terrified with the guiltiness of sin, and the horrible sight of Damnation,
cannot choose but be joyful at the pardon thereof, when their Souls are lifted
up with the hope of Salvation: As Oil will overtop all other Liquors, and
cannot be kept under, so will this joy overtop all other Sorrows, and cannot be
suppressed.

David's Eyes gushed Psalm. 119. 136. 2 Pet. 2. 8.
out with Rivers of Tears, because men kept not Gods Laws. And righteous Lot
mourns for the ungodly conversation of the wicked Sodomites: For he being
righteous (says S. Peter) and dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing,
vexed his righteous Soul from day to day, with their unlawful deeds. Yet they
are to rejoice in this also: First, Because God keeps them from committing
such sins as others do commit; because they are preserved from ^^^ing with
others into the same excess of riot: And then, Secondly, Because God will wound
the hairy scalp of such 1 Pet. 4. 4. Psalm. 58. 10.
as go on still in their wickedness. And the Righteous shall rejoice (says the
Psalmist) when he sees the vengeance.

Thirdly, The Third Cause of their weeping is for the Judgments of God upon the
Land. The Prophet Jeremiah Jer. 9. 1.
weeps most abundantly for this; Oh that mine head (says he) were full of
water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for
the slain of the Daughter of my people! The Captivity of Babylon Psalm. 137. 4.
marred the Mirth of Jerusalem: How shall we sing the Lords Song (in such
distress) in a strange Land? Certainly, when God troubles the state of our
Peace, he would trouble the eyes of our heads; when the Thunder shakes the Air,
the Clouds weep to still it. Nothing is more without comfort than Darkness, nor
is there any thing more without joy than Calamity: How then shall we rejoice in
this, when the Judgments of God are abroad in the Earth? Yes, thus Beloved.
First, Because God has hitherto preserved us from the Judgments upon the Land;
as namely, from Plague, Pestilence, Fire, and Famine, from Battle, Murder, and
sudden death; insomuch as we may say with the Prophet David, A thousand have
fallen at our left hand, and ten thousand at Psalm. 91. 7.
our right hand, but it has not come near us. Unto Gods Children there is
always comfort in calamity; unto the righteous there arises Light in
Darkness: They need not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the Arrow
that Psalm. 112. 4. Psalm. 91. ^5.
flies by day. And then secondly, They may rejoice again in this, that if so
be it should please God to take them away by any sweeping Judgment, yet their
Souls cannot be touched; they are sure to be saved, and to be carried into
Abraham's Bosom. It is enough to make Luke 16. 22
them rejoice in any Judgment whatsoever happens, to know that it shall work
together for the best for them. Romans 8. 28.


Fourthly, The Fourth cause of Gods Childrens weeping, is for the afflictions
of poor Joseph, for them that are tossed from Post to Pillar; for them that are
driven from house and home; in a word, for them that are for Christ's sake
brought to great extremity. Mine eye casts out Rivers of water (says the
Prophet Jeremy) for the Lam. 3. 48, 49.
destruction of the Daughter of my people; yea, mine eye droppeth without stay,
and cease not. But how shall we rejoice in this? Yes, thus; First, Because
the light afflictions of this present life do cause an eternal weight of Glory;
yea, a far more excellent, and eternal weight of Glory, as the blessed Apostle
assures us. And then, Secondly, because Sanguis Martyrum est Semen Ecclesiae,
because the blood of Martyrs is the seed of the Church. What is a few drops of
Blood here, to the Kingdom of Heaven hereafter? My Brethren (says S. James)
count Jam. 1. 2.
it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse Temptations. What S. James? joy in
trouble? joy in affliction? Will the world believe you S. James? Yes, the world
of Elect will; they have proved it, they have learned this benefit by good
experience, they have found their sorrows have been turned into joy; heaviness
might endure for a night, but joy has come in the morning. We are not
destitute of comfort even here in the midst of fiery trials, blessed be God for
it; but this is nothing to that which is to be revealed: The glory to come does
every way surmount the present afflictions of Gods Children: and therefore in
this they have cause to rejoice also.

Fifthly, The Fifth cause of Gods Childrens weeping, is for the loss of dear
Friends; thus David, we read, mourned for Jonathan; Woe is me for thee my
Brother Jonathan. Thus 2 Samuel 1. 26 Jo. 11, 33, and 35.
Mary, yea, and Christ himself, do weep for Lazarus. And how shall we do to
rejoice in this? Yes, thus we may, yea, and thus we must rejoice in this:
First, Because they rest from their Labors: And secondly, Because they are
delivered Rev. 14. 13.
from the Evils to come. They are happy whose glass is well run out: Foelices
nimium quibus est Fortuna peracta; as the Poet most divinely. They rest from
those Labors which tire us that live; and the works which we are to follow,
follow them. And are not these sufficient Causes of rejoicing in that
Particular?

Sixthly, and lastly, Gods Children are to weep, because they are but as
Pilgrims and Strangers here on earth; For 2 Cor. 5. 2.
therefore we sigh (says the Apostle) desiring to be clothed with our house
which is from heaven. Yet they are to rejoice in this too: First, Because they
have most Royal Mansions Joh. 14. 2, 3.
prepared for them in heaven: And secondly, Because they are sure to be
possessed of them in the end. Thus you see, Gods Children, though they be as
sorrowing continually, 2 Cor. 6. 10.
yet are they also always rejoicing. Rejoice in the Lord always.

Do thou feel now in thy self the Evidences and Pledges Applic.
of the favor of God in Christ Jesus? Oh it is good for thee to rejoice in
them! The Gospel is glad tidings of joy, yea, Luke 2. 10.
of great joy to all Believers. Do thou find thy self sad, sullen and
discontented? Oh check and chide thy self for thy unchearfulness: Take the
Prophet David for thy Pattern, Psalm. 42. 5, and 11. Ps. 43. 5.
who no less than three times in two short Psalms together, rebukes himself for
this very thing. Why art thou cast down, Oh my Soul? and why art thou
disquieted within me? Neglect not those divine Consolations that have been
propounded to thee. Stir up and provoke thy self to this holy Duty in the
extent of it; Rejoice in the Lord always. That which Eliphaz Job 15. 11, 12.
sometime said to Job, when he would not be comforted by God, nor by his
Counsel, let me apply to the disconsolate, dejected and drooping Soul: Are the
Consolations of God small with thee? Is this thing strange unto thee? Why does
thine heart take thee away? and what do thine eyes mean? Seem the Consolations
of God small unto thee? Thou have heard twice so many Causes of rejoicing, as
there is of sorrowing, in the same Particulars; why then take thou no more
joy in God? why then take thou no more comfort in Christ? why do thou not
rejoice in the Lord always? Certainly, beloved, the true reason why we rejoice
not enough, is, because we are not enough Christians.

Well, would you now for the future practice this Apostolical precept of
rejoicing in the Lord always? then observe, I pray, these four Means following.
First, Get you a true justifying Faith; get you a good assurance of Salvation:
this is a sure way to keep the heart cheerful. The Light of Gods countenance
favorably shining upon us through Christ, adds more comfort, than when our
Corn, and Wine, and Oil is increased. The joy that grows from this ground,
Psalm. 4. 6, 7. 1 Pet. 1. 8.
is unspeakable and glorious. This is able to make a man rejoice, when he has
never so many means to make him heavy; for being justified by Faith, we have
peace with God Romans 5. 1, 3.
through Jesus Christ our Lord: neither that only, but we also rejoice in
tribulation. This it was that made Paul and Silas rejoice and sing in Prison.
True Faith gives a man many Act. 16. 25.
sound grounds of comfort; it gives a man many Reasons of solid rejoicing: Son,
be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven Matthew. 9. 2.
thee, says Christ to the sick of the Palsy: Thy sins which were the cause of
thy Sickness, they are forgiven, therefore be of good cheer.

Secondly, He that has true Faith, knows that he shall never lose the favor
of God, after he has once obtained it, how many signs soever of Gods anger
may be upon him; and is not this a notable ground of rejoicing, when a man is
by Faith persuaded, that neither Life, nor Death, nor Romans 8. 38, 39.
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate him from
the Love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Thirdly, He that has true Faith, knows God will have a tender respect to his
weakness in whatsoever affliction he shall lay upon him, that it shall not
exceed his Romans 8. 26.
strength; God will be the strength of his Spirit; God will support and enable
him to bear it, that he faint not under it. God is faithful, says the Apostle,
and will not suffer you to be 1 Cor. 10. 13
tempted above that you are able; but will even give the issue with the
temptation, that ye may be able to bear it.

Fourthly, He that has true Faith, is assured that whatsoever affliction God
lays upon him, it shall in the end tend to his good, and to the furtherance
of his Salvation. Also we know that all things work together for the best unto
them Romans 8. 28.
that love God, even to them that are called according to his purpose. So S.
Paul.

Fifthly, He that has true faith, knows the end will pay for all, and that
after a while all tears shall be wiped from his eyes, and he shall enjoy
unspeakable comfort. I should Psalm. 27. 13.
have fainted, says David, except I had believed to see the goodness of the
Lord in the Land of the living. And this of the first Means of continual
rejoicing: If you would rejoice in the Lord always, you must then get you a true
justifying Faith, a good assurance of your salvation.

Secondly, A second Means to rejoice always, is to take care to keep a good
Conscience. That man that in all things is careful to please God, and to keep
his Conscience pure, that he fall not into any known and grievous sin, shall
ever have a quiet and cheerful heart; he may rejoice always: Our rejoicing is
this, says S. Paul, even the testimony of our 2 Cor. 1. 12.
Conscience, that in simplicity and godly pureness, we have had our
conversation in the world. This will make a man cheerful at all times, not in
prosperity only, but even in adversity also; and therefore Solomon calls it a
continual Feast. And Pro. 15. 15.
in this respect the Apostle calls Righteousness (a Brestplate) that will
defend the heart even in the evil day. Would you Ephesians. 6. 14.
therefore have a cheerful heart? would you be comfortable, and rejoice always;
even in affliction, in the time of your sickness, and at the hour of your
death? have a care then of a good Conscience; take heed of known sins. That man
only that in all things is careful to please God, and to keep his Conscience
pure, that he fall not into any known and grievous sin, shall have a quiet and
cheerful heart; he only may rejoice always.

Thirdly, The third Means to make us rejoice always, is to make the Lord our
Treasure, and not any earthly thing. If a man do not overvalue these earthly
Comforts, as namely, Husbands, Wives, Friends, Children, Health, Wealth,
Liberty, Peace, etc. nor account them his chief treasure, but esteem them as
they are indeed, even transitory Comforts; and account the Lord, and his Favor
and Grace his chief Treasure: If a man set not his heart on these things, but
love them only in the Lord, then shall he not be oppressed with immoderate
sorrow for them, when God shall take them away: Such a man may rejoice still;
whereas he that makes these worldly things his chief Treasure, and sets his
heart upon them, he cannot rejoice always; he must needs be oppressed with
sorrow, when he shall be deprived of them. You may see it in the example of
Ahab, who, when he could not get Naboths Vineyard, his spirit was exceeding
sad, he could not eat his Bread: And why was he so vexed? Because 1 Kings 21.
5, 6.
his Pleasure was his Treasure, he loved Naboths Vineyard too well; it was even
a death to him to be kept from it. To such then as have no felicity but in
these earthly things, as namely, in their Wealth, in their Belly-chear, in
their merry Company, in their Pastimes and Sports, in their brave Apparel, in
their Credit and Favor with men, and the like: To such as love these things
more than God, to all such as affect them and care for them more than they do
for God and his Grace, I may say as our blessed Savior said in another Luke
21. 6.
case, Are these the things that you look upon? Have you no better Comforts
than these? Alas, how woeful will your case be when you must part with these
things? Consider of that which Job says, What hope has the Hypocrite Job 27.
8, 9, 10.
when he has heaped up riches, if God take away his Soul? Can he hope that God
will hear his cry when trouble comes upon him? will he set his delight on the
Almighty, and call upon God at all times? Take off your affections from these
terrestrial and transitory things here below, and set them on things above:
Follow the advice of your blessed Savior in S. Matthews Gospel; Lay not up
treasure for your selves upon earth, but Mat. 6, 19. 20, 21.
lay up treasures for your selves in Heaven: and mark the reason which Christ
there renders; for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. If
you make earthly things your treasure, you can neither truly rejoice, nor always
rejoice; you will either immoderately joy in them when you have them, or else
immoderately grieve for them, when you shall come to want them. To take your
thoughts therefore off from these things, and to set them right where they
should be, set them on Gods Grace and Favor, that is a special means to make
you rejoice always. And to this end, that you may the better be enabled to make
God and his Grace your Treasure, and not any earthly thing, Consider,

First, That these things are not your proper goods, but cast more plentifully
on Reprobates than on Gods Children; and therefore our Savior calls external
goods another man's goods, because we are but Stewards of them, and must Luke
16. 12.
leave them; but Gods Favor and Grace are our peculiar portion; spiritual
goods are our own, they shall never be taken away. The Fear of the Lord is
clean, and endures for ever, says the Psalmist. Psalm. 19. 9.


Secondly, Consider also, that these earthly things are vain, and can yield us
no hope, no comfort, nor no joy when we shall stand in need: Riches avail not
in the day of wrath, says Solomon; but the sense of Gods Favor and Grace
does; for Prove. 11. 4.
that will yield us comfort and unspeakable joy, even in the greatest
affliction. If therefore you would rejoice always, take heed that you overvalue
not these earthly Comforts, but make God, his Grace and favor your chiefest
Treasure.

Fourthly and lastly, The fourth and last Means which I shall prescribe you to
make you rejoice always, is to be rightly persuaded of our Liberty in the use of
the outward comforts of this life; as namely, good diet, good company, etc. Let
no man say, that this means might well be spared, seeing most men are apt to
stumble at it. No, for though this age be (I confess) a secure age, and too
much set upon Jollity and carnal Mirth, yet must I prescribe this Means to such
as know themselves to be reconciled to God in Jesus Christ. Many good souls
there are that are apt to give great advantage to Satan, in the anguish of
their Conscience, by persuading themselves, they should much offend God, if
they should give liberty to themselves to enjoy the Creatures of God for their
delight; if they should keep company, or be merry at any time. Such as these
are, have need of this Instruction; to such as these are, I speak, and say,
that a liberal use of the outward Comforts of this life, is a good and lawful
Means to make them cheerful; provided always that they exceed not the bounds
of Sobriety. They that use these things without sobriety, and affect them too
much, they shall never receive good by them. It is made the note of a man that
shall never go to heaven, to lift up his mind unto vanity. It is easy for a
man to surfeit, and take too much Psalm. 24. 4.
of these things. If thou have found Honey, says Solomon, eat that that is
sufficient for thee, lest thou be over-full, and vomit Prove. 25. 16
it. Of the comfort and refreshing that many take in these things, that may be
said, which Solomon likewise says, that the end of that mirth is heaviness.
Yet certainly Prove. 14. 13
there is great force in these things being rightly used, to keep the heart
from being overcome with sadness, and to make it cheerful. Thus you have had
the Duty of Rejoicing, the Limitation of it (in the Lord) and the Extent of it
also, in the word (always) discussed unto you: I come now in the last place to
the fourth and last Particular observed in my Text, which is the Ingemination
of this Duty of Rejoicing, in these words, And again I say, Rejoice.

The Fourth Part.
What need, may some men say, is there of this Ingemination? What will the
Apostle himself tautologize? Why should so short a Precept have so sudden an
Iteration? Solomon (Beloved) in the last of his Ecclesiastes, makes my Answer
for me, where he says, That the words of the wise are Eccl. 12. 11
as Goads and Nails fastened by the Masters of the Assemblies. As Goads to prick
us forward to our Duty, and as Nails to keep us within our compass. The Goad,
you know, serves to quicken the dull Ox, to make him mend his pace: So
likewise does our Apostles Ingemination here in our Text, serve to quicken us,
to rouse us from our drowsy dullness, to a willing cheerfulness in serving God
all the tenor of our lives. Let us therefore serve the Lord with gladness, non
in amaritudine murmurationis, sed in ^ucunditate dilectionis, as S. Augustine
sweetly on the place: Else Gods plagues shall be evident signs, that he is
offended with us, whose Curses shall come upon us, pursue us, and overtake us,
till we be destroyed, and that, because we served not the Lord with gladness,
as Moses tells Gods People in Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 28. 45, 46, 47.


Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, Rejoice.

S. Paul by doubling of this Duty of Rejoicing, strives to strike the Nail to
the head, as we commonly say in our English Proverb: He endeavors to press
the Duty home to the Conscience: A good pattern for us that are Ministers, to
follow and imitate.

Every faithful Minister ought after S. Paul's example, to endeavor to bring
Gods Word home to the Consciences of his Hearers. We must not handle the Word
of God deceitfully; but in declaration of the Truth approve our selves 2 Cor.
4. 2.
to every man's Conscience in the sight of God. There is (Beloved) as much need
(though many perhaps may think it superfluous) of Application and of pressing
Duties home to the Consciences of our Hearers, as there was here of S. Paul's
Ingemination. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, says our Savior Mat. 23. 37
Christ, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee! Why what? Would not one Jerusalem have served the turn here? No, no,
Beloved, our Savior himself presses Jerusalem most pathetically; he comes as
near the quick as he could, to teach us this very duty of bringing the Word of
God as close as we can to the Consciences of our Hearers.

And this we are to do for these three Reasons following: Propter caecitatem
Intellectus, because of the blindness of our understandings. Secondly, Propter
labilitatem Memoriae; because of the slipperiness of our Memories. And thirdly,
propter perversitatem Voluntatum; because of the perversity of our Wills and
Affections.

propter caecitatem Intellectus, because of the blindness of our
Understandings: For although we are Eagle-ey'd in things belonging to the
world, yet are we all by nature, I exclude none, as blind as Beetles, even as
blind as Bartimaeus, in things pertaining Mar. 10. 46
to our everlasting salvation. The Natural man perceives not the things that
are of God, neither indeed can he, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
because they are spiritually discerned. We have therefore need of
Ingemination, we have need of Application, we have need of Line upon Line, and
Precept upon Precept.

propter labilitatem Memoriae, in regard of the slipperiness of our Memories;
we are very forgetful, no sooner is a good admonition in at one ear, but
instantly it is out at another, unless it be brought home unto the Conscience,
that, that being awakened, may make us revolve it in our minds.

propter perversitatem Voluntatum, because of the perverseness of our wills and
affections, which are naturally averse from God and Goodness. Vulnerata,
sauciata, vexata, immo perdita Aug.
est, vera confessione, non falsa defensione opus habet, says S. Aug.
Preaching, of all Professions, has the least hope to prevail, because it deals
with the perverse will of man, which has naturally no disposition to goodness:
but rather indeed an opposition against it; an averseness from good, and a
perverseness in evil. And yet to work this will to goodness, is our Office; and
the best way to do this, is to ingeminate, to reiterate, and double our
Exhortations to Christian Duties unto you; for put case you should remember
some good instructions from Gods word, yet if the will be not subjugated again
and again, by Ingemination, and by pressing Application of them to it self, it
will questionless break out with the Jews into a Nolumus obedire, We will not
have this man to rule over us, we will not obey. Come let Luke 19. 14* Psalm. 2.
3.
us break his bonds in sunder, and cast away his Cords from us.

A Word now of Application, and so an end: Has God Applic.
indeed set his Ministers like Trumpets and Drums to call you to your Arms, to
stir you up to Christian Duties? O then Heb. 13. 22.
dear Christians, do you suffer the words of Exhortation. Let it not be tedious
nor irksom to you to be called upon again and again to the practice of any
Christian Duty. The best in Gods Team stand in need of a pricking forward;
there are none living but have need of a Memento. It is our 2 Timothy 1. 6.
Office to give you the Alarm; be it your care to maintain the Battle. Take
heed of kicking and flinging when you are spurred; be not like an overcharged
Cannon, which either bursts, or mischievously recoils against the Gunner, when
he puts the Match unto it: No, no, be contented to hear of your Duty, and be
careful to put it in practice too: Remember to whom the Euge bone Serve belongs
at the great day; not to the idle and sluggish person, but to the faithful,
diligent Matthew. 25. 21.
and cheerful Servant.

And now to draw to a Conclusion, and to wind up all in a word; Call to mind
dear Christians, the Duty enjoined you here by the Apostle; look to its
Limitation; consider its Extension; and so ruminate upon its Ingemination, that
you take up the Prophet Habakkuks Resolution, I will rejoice in Hab. 3. 18.
the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. And thus I leave you with
this Rule of Rejoicing; which if you well observe here, will bring you to the
fullness of joy hereafter, even to his presence at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore: To which fulnels of joy, and never fading pleasures, he
in his good time bring us, who has so dearly bought us, even Jesus Christ the
righteous; to whom with thee Oh Father, and thy blessed Spirit, be ascribed, as
is most due, all Honor and Glory, Power and Dominion, Might and Majesty, now
and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

