STRANGE NEVVES FROM Bartholomew-Fair, OR, THE Wandring-Whore DISCOVERED, Her
Cabinet unlockt, her Secrets laid open, unvailed, and spread abroad in Whore
and Bacon-lane, Duck-stret, and the Garrison of Pye-Corner.

With the exact manner of conveighing St. Jameses Bawbyes to St.
Bartholmews-Fair, for the use of all the Noble Hectors* Trappans, Pimps, Dicks
merry Cullys and mad-conceited Lads of Great-Bedlam.

Also the mad-slights, merry-conceits tricks, whimsies and quillets used by the
Wandring-Whore, her Bawds, Mobs, Panders, Pads and Trulls for the drawing in of
young Hectors, with the manner of her Traffic by Morter-pieces, and new
invented Engines never discovered before.

By PETER ARETINE.

LONDON, Printed for Theodorus Mi(...), 166^.

A CONFERENCE BETWIXT The Wandring-whore, Bonny Besse of Whore and Bacon Lane,
merry Moll of Duck street, and pretty Peg of Py-corner.
Bonny Bette. WHat News now Merry Moll? Is trading quick or dead?


Moll. As dead as a door Nail, but whether away so fast Bette?


Bettee. To seek for employment that I may be able to hold out a Winters siege.


Moll. What is thy design, or how do you intend to go on with the work.


Bette. I am just now going to see the dancing on the ropes; for except I can
draw out a Dick or two from thence, to view my rare agility of Body on the
ground, with bending backward and forward, heaving, thrusting and other
Recreation, I shall have little profit this Fair; yet I know our tumbling
exceeds their recreation as far as Gold does the evacuation of a young
Gentlewomans back Salliport; but how trad'st thou Pegg?


Peg. Marry, I meet with merry Hectors, and trade with none but such as come on
nobly* fall on neatly* and retreat gallantly; they give me Py-cornor Law and
Py-corner pay, and I am contented to the life.


Moll. Well then, thou have the quintissence of happiness, we enjoy no pleasure
like thine, no nor profit neither; for though we get by our Canns, we lose by
Informers and such like varlets that steal away our profit, so that I am
destitute of any thing but the P -- and the praise, a common benefit to all the
Female sex; but I want the half-Crowns, through neglect of a Chuck-Office.


Bette. Would I had thought of that before, I might then have borrowed
Jack-a-Newberrys six Wind-mills, they being hung out at my door would have
brought custom enough, but now I must lose a Hog for a half-penny-worth of Tar,
for custom is so dull, there is nothing to be got but by impudence, which I am
well furnished with, but dare not be too public, lest like our dear sister Tory
Rory, I be forced to beat out my living at the Hemp-block, or be transported as
some of my brethren were yesterday. Yet hang sorrow, fear no colors, for they
that want impudence, may be supplied here with Kettles, Pans, Ladles, Skillets
or Skimers, to rub their Faces on, whereby they may be as well brass'd as any
Morterpiece that was in St. Jameses Fair; therefore let us venture a hazard, all
are not taken that use our profession; but stay who comes here, the
Wandring-whore?

I think it is she, if not, my eyes grow dull,
it is she faith, see how she spreads her sails,
View but the Motto on her standard Moll,
two rampant WH -- are turning up their Tails.

Wand. Wh -- The very same in sooth, for I have wandered too and fro through
the Fair, picked up many a Dick and gulled many a Cully of his Nab, tipped his
bung, and sent his Callee to Egypt, but this is nothing to the high Trade I
drive at home, when they come there, I spread my Colors, and receive the
Spanish Rogue into my French quarters, where he turned the Pig so long till one
of his best members was lost in the dripping-pan, yet the Jack-weights are
secure and hang fast still, but this whelp of Scoggin complains of a loss I
never was, or at least will be sensible of, which was by a pinch in the Pocket,
but that I own not his which I my self have in possession. For when the Cole is
gone, the simple Elf
Is not the owner of it, but my self.



Bette. But Sister, how drive you this Trade, to insert another account so
neatly in the Almanac of your Pocket?


Wand.-Wh -- By two long fingers made for that purpose, to dive into the
Pockets of such Gulls, who after the receipt of two or three Cups, forget the
strength of their own Estates.


Moll. That Is a pure strain, But how do you begin, or what means use you forr
the enticing young Hectors into your Garrison?


Wand.-VV -- To entice young punys. I lie as open as Noonday, sit down at the
door, set one foot to the right, the other to the left, as far distant as I can
spread my imperfect Limbs, and cry Lads: here is a can of the best liquor in the
fair, claping my hand on my marketplace, and saying, here is your Ware boys,
which invitation with a wink, a smile and a chuck under the Chin, brings in the
bonny Lads as easily as a hungry foul eats dry bread.


Peg. And I for my part cry, here boys, here is the best Pigs head in the Fair,
a rare quarter of Lamb, pure Mutton, and the best buttock bief in England; but
how comes in your profit when they are in your Garrison?


Wandring-W -- I spread my shrouds, vnvail my Cabinet* disclose my secrets, and
open the pure Linen Curtains that hang before my chief Fortress, drink a Cann
or two, smoke, sing old Rose, dance, and when the Gull is elivated, I Hull him
asleep as Delilah did Sampson, and then turn Philistine, tip his Bung, and
deprive him of the strength of his Estate, so he rises when he awakes as poor
as Job, thinking he has been in Heaven when indeed newly crept out of the
Devils Vestry. marching off like a senseless piece of iniquity, not thinking
of his loss till he comes into the Fair, to lay out his money in Bawbles for
his sweet-beart, it may be in Gloves, Ribbons, Rings, Beads, Bracelets or other
such like Fancies, yet coming to pay, diving in his Pocket for Coal, he finds
all as clear as a room new swept; thus by my free entertainment, I free him
from the sin of covetousness.


Mol. And I in good sooth am as Common and free to my Customers, as a Cream-pot
to a Dary maid, and that brings them in as fast as water runs through a scieve.
They come in with their fowl Pipes, and I like an able Doctress cleanse them
with a P -- I clear the stem and also burn the bowl
Till it is as white as Pot-hooks or Char-coale.



Peg. I but tell me, what do thou do with a company of Varlets called
Permoters, for I am more plagued with them then any other vermin whatever?


Mol. Marry Peg, in our Duck quarters, if they once appear, we know the Knaves
so well, that we put them in an upper room, then borrow a quart pot, and fill
that frothing full to blind them, whilest-we pinch the Cans of our Gulls to
secure our own profit. For though by them our getting is but small
The noble Hectors sure to pay for all.



Mol. Come you are an old wandering Who -- know all Postures, and turn up your
tail to all sorts of Culls, what do you for a contented Coxcomb to keep the
door, whilst you do exercise with your Hectors, by the Turks entering the
Castle of Comfort?


Wand.-Wh -- I tell the Moll, though my husband be a mere Mopus to a man of
mettle, yet my Gusmond is a man able to defend me, and a pure Rogue that I dare
trust with the Cabinet of Venus, with the Key to unlock it, and indeed with all
my secreets; He Will Pimp purely for half a Crown a day besides his Vails, I and
Trapan young Gallants too, whereby my Trade daily increases, Customers come in
nimbly, and go out as merrily as thieves to Tiburn. So to the world my Hector
young appears,
when he comes out with naught but hanging Ears.



Bess. I Will tell thee Peg I thrive as well as any of them all, for a young Bump
coming late to Bacon-Lane, full of Coal, my pretty Mob Nell with the wink of
an eye drew him in to my Garrison, we two so smoakt him, after a collation of
bread and Bacon, that by drinking, sporting-and-kissing the fool lost his
purse, but how he knew not; for the reckoning being suddenly brought in, his
Quids were vanished, his pocket saying No point Larshon, the pennyless puppy,
supposing his Bung had bin tipped in the Fair before he came in, was forced to
leave his Callee for the reckoning; this Tuskin being a zealot was loath to
tumult lest he should be discovered: therefore he durst not outface us, whose
impudence might well have startled a more able Hectors. Yet when the Bump was
marched off; we sustained by his loss 5 pound advantage toward our house-rent,
a few such Jobs at Lady-fair will find Puppy-dogwater for the refreshing our
beautys till next Fair: besides silk-Gowns smock-petty-Coats and White-Aprons.

Thus did this Gull for fear our secreets smoother
Lest he should counted be a sinful Brother.
We gave him leave to drink, to sport and play,
Whilst we his Purse and Coal conveyed away.

Peg. Sister Bette let us away, break off our discourse and betake our selves to
our heels, for here comes two pitiful fellows called Beadles, therefore our
best way is to secure our own quarters.


Bettee. Come be of good cheer, but'let's not make more have then good speed,
go fare and softly, least jealousy cause suspicion, and they seize on us
before our time, for these Bloodhounds will soon fcent enough by our discourse
to put a stop to our further trading. For if our secrets should discovered be
We know the worst, a whipping sets us free.



FINIS.

