THE EARL OF STRAFFORDS LETTER TO HIS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, DATED FROM THE
TOWER, 4. May, 1641.



Anno Domini 1641.

The Earl of STRAFFORDS Letter, to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, dated
from the Tower, the 4. May, 1641.
May it please your sacred Majesty,
IT has been my greatest grief in all these troubles, to be taken as a person
which should endeavor to represent and set things amiss between your
Majesty and your people; and to give Counsels tending to the disquiet of the
three Kingdoms.

Most true it is, that this mine own private condition considered, it had been
a great madness, since through your gracious favor I was so provided, as not
to expect in any kind to mend my fortune, or please my mind more, then by
resting where your bounteous hands had placed me.

Nay, it is most mightily mistaken, for unto your Majesty it is well known, my
poor, and humble advises concluded still in this, That your Majesty and your
people could never be happy, till there were a right understanding betwixt you
and them: no other means to effect, and settle this happiness, but by the
Council, and assent of the Parliament; or to prevent the growing evils upon
this State but by entirely putting your self in the last resort, upon the
loyalty, and good affections of your English Subjects.

Yet such is my misfortune, this truth finds little credit, the contrary
seems generally to be believed, and my self reputed, as some thing of
separation between you, and your people; under a heavier censure then which I
am persuaded no Gentleman can suffer.

Now, I understand the minds of men are more incensed against me,
notwithstanding your Majesty has declared, that in your Princely opinion, I
am not guilty of treason, nor are you satisfied in your conscience to pass the
Bill.

This brings me into a very great straight, there is before me the ruin of
my Children, and Family, hitherto untouched, in all the branches of it with any
foul crimes. Here is before me the many ills, which may befall your sacred
Person, and the whole Kingdom, should your self, and Parliament part less
satisfied one with the other, then is necessary for the preservation both of
King and people. Here are before me the things most valued, most feared, by
mortal man, Life, or Death.

To say Sir, that there has not been a strife in me, were to make me less
man, than God knows, mine infirmities give me. And to call a destruction upon
my self, and young Children, where the intentions of my heart (at least have
been innocent of this great offense) may be believed, will find no easy
content from flesh and blood.

But with much sadness, I am come to a resolution, of that which I take to be
best becoming me, to look upon that which is most principal in it self, which
doubtless is the prosperity of your sacred person, and the common wealth,
infinitely before any private man's interest.

And therefore in few words, as I put my self wholly upon the honor, and
justice of my Peers so clearly, as to beseech your Majesty might please to have
spared that declaration of yours on Saturday last, and entirely to have left me
to their Lordships; so now, to set your Majesty's conscience at liberty, I do
most humbly beseech your Majesty, in prevention of mistakes which may happen,
by your refusal, to pass this B^ll; And by this means remove (praised be God)
I cannot say, this accursed (but I confess) this unfortunate thing forth of
the way, toward that blessed agreement, which God I trust, shall ever
establish between you and your subjects.

Sir, my consent shall more acquit you herein to God, than all the world can do
besides. To a willing man there is no injury done. And as by Gods grace, I
forgive all the world with a calmnesse and meekness of infinite Contentment to
my dislodging soul; So Sir, to you can I give the life of this world, with all
the cheerfulness imaginable; in the just acknowledgement of your exceeding
favors. And only beg that in your goodness, you would vouchsafe to cast your
gracious regard upon my poor Son, and his three Sisters, less, or more, and no
otherwise, than as their (in present) unfortunate Father, may hereafter appear
more or less guilty of this death.

God long preserve your Majesty. Your Majesty's most faithful, and humble
Subject, and Servant, STRAFFORD.

Tower, 4 May, 1641.

