TWO LETTERS Sent from the Earl of Strafford, one to his Lady in Ireland a
little before his death: And another to a certain great LADY.

depiction of Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford

Printed in the year 1641.

A LETTER SENT FROM THE EARL OF STRAFFORD TO HIS LADY into IRELAND a little
before his death, May the 11. 1641.
YOu shall receive my dear wife, my last words, in these my last times; my love
I send that you may keep it when I am dead, and my counsel that you may
remember it when I am no more: I would not with my will present you sorrows
(dear wife) let them go to the grave with me and be buried in the dust, and
seeing it is not the will of God, that I shall see you any more, bear my
distraction patiently, and with an heart like your self.

First, I send you all the thanks which my heart can conceive or my words
express, for your many travells and cares for me, which though they have not
taken effect as you wished, yet my debt to you is no less; but pay it I never
shall in this world.

Secondly, I beseech you for the love you bare me living, that you do not hide
your self many days, but by your travel seek to help the miserable fortune
and the right of your poor children, your mourning cannot avail any thing
that am but dust.

Thirdly, you shall understand that my lands were conveied (bona fide) unto my
son, the writings were drawn at Midsummer was twelve month, as diverse can
witness: to what friend to direct you I know not, for all mine have left me in
the true time of trial; most sorry am I that being thus surprised by death I
can leave you no better estate; God has prevented all my determinations, that
great God that works all in all; and if you can live free from want, care
forno more, for the rest is but vanity. Love God and begin betimes in him, so
shall you find true everlasting comfort, when you have traveled and wearied
your self with all sorts of worldly cogitations, you shall sit down with
sorrow in the end: Teach your son also to fear and serve God whilst he is
young, that the fear of God may grow upon him; then will God be an husband to
you, and a father to him, and a husband and a father that never can be taken
away from you.

Balo owes me 10000 pound, and Arian 100. pound, in Iernsey I have also much
owing me.

Dear wife, I beseech you for my souls sake, pay all poor men when I am
dead: no doubt you shall be much sought unto, for the world thinks I was very
rich. Have a care to fair pretense of men, for no greater misery can befall
you in this life, then to be a prey unto the world, and after to be despised. I
speak, God knows, not to dissuade you from marying again, for that will be
the best for you, both in respect of God, and of the world. As for me, I am no
more yours, nor you mine; death has cut us asunder, and God has divided me
from the world and you from me. Remember my child for his fathers sake, who
loved you in his happiest estate. I sued for my life, but God knows it was for
you and yours that I desired it, for know it, my dear wife, your child is the
son of a true man, who in his own respect despises death.

I cannot write much, God knows how hardly I steal time, when all are
asleep: And it is also time to separate my thoughts from the world. Beg my
dead body, which living, was denied; and either lay it in Aleaune or Antley by
my Father and mother. I can say no more, time and death calls me away. The
everlasting God powerful, infinite, inscrutable, God almighty, who is
goodness it self, the true light and life, keep you and yours, and have
mercy upon me.

My dear wife farewell. Lord bless my boy. Pray for me: and let my true God
hold you both in his arms.
FINIS.
A Letter sent unto a certain great Lady, and lately discovered by strange
accident, May, 1641.
Madame:
ALthough there be some discovery made known, yet what is intended is made
secure; wherefore you must procure two thousand pound speedily; for no danger
lets difficulty to compass it, if you keep secret: Remember your oath, for we
shall slay the Beast with many heads, and destroy the Devils brood before they
dream or mistrust. Burn the Letter you have received, your reward shall be in
Heaven.

FINIS.

