STRAFFORIADOS. THE LIEUTENANT'S LEGEND: As it was first compared, and now
published, according to the Original Copy.

Writ by his own hand in the Tower.

SIDON. Extincta est rabies parientis sanguine. --
CLAUD. -- Fundatae in sanguine Gentes
Non sine test ruunt. --
Printed in the Year, 1652.

TO THE READER.
SOme Rithms (for they merit not the style of Verse, much less the authority
of so able and active a Pen) have been lately published, and unjustly fathered
upon Earl STRAFFORD. And whence came these, but from those brothell Broakers
of false ware, who for base gain will frontlesly engage their penurious pen in
any ementitious work? Believe it from the mouth of him that dare avouch it,
and who in Subjects of this kind, was to the knowledge of his Honor, while he
lived, best interessed; that none of this sort have at any time under his Name
been heretofore divulged: which are not to be accounted fabulous, and worthily
rejected; being so far different from his expressive Character, as they bear
not the least Semblance of so exquisite a Limner.

As for his Ultimum Vale, it has been no less simply then sordidly
acknowledged, as well by him who ementitiously writ it, as by him who did
surreptitiously print it, that his Honor had no hand in it; for, advantage of
the time, with hope of profit, was the only bait that lured them to it.
Lastly, for those late-dispersed Copies of his Letters, you may gather what
probability they bear of being his, by their distinct Characters.

This here presented, as it was penned by him, and transcribed by one near and
dear unto him, was his last Piece recommended to Posterity: and for a Legacy
left by HIM, then whom none ever was more ably endowed, more generally hated,
in dis-esteem of the State more unhappily suffered, nor in the period of his
suffering by discreet eyes more compassionately bemoned.

The LIEUTENANT's Legend.
Dat poenas laudata fides; gravis exitus altis
Imminet Herois; tuta myrica manes.

EYe me, ye mounting Cedars! once was I,
As you are, Great; rich in the Estimate
Of Prince and People; no malignant eye
Reflected on me; so secure my state,
It felt no Rivals; then I feared no Grate
Nor a Plebeian Storm; then my renown
Took breath from Such as now would cry it down.
Honors came thick upon me, as if these
Meant with their weight to crush me; Every day
Raised me one Story higher; Land and Seas
Were then propitious; fresh as fragrant May,
Sprung my enlivened Strength; where a decay
In Health, Wealth, Freedom, Popular esteem,
Prove my late Scene of State a golden Dream.
I had (unhappy is the accent had)
A competence of State before I came
To this Surprising grandeur; being clad
In native properties, till the wing of Fame
Imp'd with a Country Zeal enlarged my aim
To high designs, producing such Success,
" My Seeming blessed estate eclyps'd my bless.
That vocal Forest or Plebeian vote
Adjudge me worthy of the worthlest death;
Yet this Mechanic rabble know me not
But by report, though their empoisned breath
Steames rank upon me, wishing but to sheath
Their weapons in my bowels; thus am I
Become their Foe, and yet they know not why.
Go I by Water or a private Coach,
I Am hooted at, blind fury finds no end;
The Style of Traitor welcoms my approach,
Whereto mine Ears a forced attention lend;
Yet, amongst these Fiends I have one constant Friend,
An un-amated loyal heart within me,
Which in these gusts shall peace of Conscience win me.
The Princes Declaration it was such
As it Secured me from the doom of Death;
But on the incensed State it wrought not much,
Such were my Acts, I Am held unfit to breath,
Such was the Spleen pursude me underneath:
Tradesmen and Women still for justice cry,
" We cannot live, if Strafford do not dye.
The Judges their authentic Sentence pass,
And in two Charges vote me of High treason;
Which vote, as is conceived, molded was
From their approaching fears which blinded reason
And caused those Elders to comply with season.
For the Safest way to shun those ship-wrackt Shelves,
Was, as they held, t'ingratiate themselves.
Thus do I live a dying life, immured
With cares more numerous then my Warders be;
Endangered most, when seeming most secured,
While Damocles keen Sword Hangs over me,
On public Stage to act my tragedy:
Avaunt base Servile fear; Let Law proceed;
Though headless, yet I cannot lose my head.
I know that my Redeemer lives; in him
My life and love are Sealed; admit it then
A minute Spill what many years did Spin,
I shall resume these lineaments again,
Restored, refined, and purifide from Stain.
Crazy's my Cottage; no content at all
To Sojourne in a Lodging like to fall.
Now if those Prudent Houses hold't not fit
That I unto my WENTVVORTH WOOD-HOUSE go,
To exercise my days in Holy Writ,
Or like a Recluse in a Cell of woe,
To pray for those I owe Devotion to;
Let the Sentence of sad Death come when it pleases,
The Axe's edge gives cure to all diseases.
Erect your Scaffolds like Pyramides,
Let my Corrivals my Appellants be;
Let Ship-wrackt Judges that have Writs
Become Spectators of my miscrie,
Teare-poudred Sables cloathe my Family:
All this is nothing! a more glorious place
Arms me to look Death-terrors in the face.
And yet excuse me that I thus conceave,
If these long Charges by me answered
Bring my weak body to untimely grave,
To after-ages 'twill be registered,
Nay, by just privilege authorized
That STRAFFORD Such a day and year did dye
For no High treason, but to Satisfy.
The LIEUTENANT's Lachrymae: OR, His Last Goodnight.
No Glass may more to life present Man's face,
Then THIS, the frailty of a Great man's place.

-- Whence I gather, More useful to the Body's no Physician,
Then for a man to ponder his condition,


DRaw near, give ear, and hear a Peer, whose misery was such,
As Envies state, a great man's Fate, relentlesly did touch.
Once was I near the Prince's ear, and dear unto the State,
But now my bliss reduced is to this sad Tragic Fate.
There was a day when I bore sway in public Parliament;
Then who but I? which raised me high, to be York's President;
Where Prince's love did so improve the Instructions of that Court,
As it became a Chancery in confluence and resort.
But Country-aire was my least care, I must transplanted be,
And take my place t'inlarge my grace, of Ireland's Deputy;
Where, as it is sed, no Venom bred, so 'twas my glorious strife
To censure such who throve too much with venom in their life.
None were so high but would comply with me and my commands,
For else were they forced to obey, and perish in my hands.
None durst devour the Widow, Poor, nor seize on other's right,
But I brought in to scourge his sin, and crush him with my might.
But what is all this? I did amiss, for so the Commons say;
All this did tend to mine own end, and profit every way.
My Port advanced, my State inhanc'd, and my Revenues too,
The Common Laws I did dispose, and wrest them God knows how.
Laws life did rest within my breast, my will was still my Law,
No State could be, if it neighbored me, secured from a flaw;
I could dispense with Acts of Bench, and dis-annull their Course,
None ever lived, less liked, less loved, in men's opinion worse.
FIRST These pretensive Crimes in the Articles of his Trial; were with much
vehemence pressed: All which, were by his HONOR, to the great Satisfaction of
his Audience, with a serious ingenuity cleared.
I did fleece our Merchandise, and grievous imposts raise,
For private gain, I truckt with Spain; and with injurious lays
Impaired men's state to increase their hate, no pity did I render;
Thus with all ill I Am twitted still, my good deeds none remember.
I should report in public Court with an imperious aw
That the finger of the King should bring command ore the Loins of Law;
Whereas a Knight to do me right that testat did evince:
For I did say, Laws loins might sway the finger of the Prince.
The Scottish Charge in trifles large h'as taxt me in like sort,
If the Island here invaded were, the State might thank me for it;
For I an Army had prepared their Kingdom to subdue,
And to bring in that Man of Sin with his Papistick crew.
When all men knew I was a foe to Superstition still,
And in the North brought Romists forth and wrought them to my will;
When they did pay so much as they would gladly been content
The Penal Statutes to obey, to quit their annual rent.
Their City Garaway did say, that of mine own accord
When He came in I moved the King to take away his Sword;
Which ever since did so incense that The City-councell.
awful Bench as these
Jointly deny, unless I dye, to pay their Subsidies.
In a Cleanthes.
borrowed name to my defame some say I wrote Love Letters,
To wind youth in licentious Sin made fast with golden fetters;
Which purchase got, I feared not strange lofty Acts to make,
At the Sons desire against his Sire for his Clorinda's sake.
There is no crime at any time wherewith I Am not impeached,
My hands in blood, no action good, my thoughts at treason reached.
What joy then here when all men bear such malice to my name?
Should Justice rest, with joint protest, they would display my shame.
They say I stay and stop the way of Issues that are made,
And that Iv'e sought by poisons brought to leave my Spirits dacaid;
Or that I make means to escape in counterfeat disguise,
When never I, by the Death I dye, dreamed such an enterprise.
From the Tower I Am sent to the Parliament with Garrisons surrounded,
Yet I pursude by the multitude might be surpised and wounded;
Peece-meale these swear they would me tear, should Train-band me surrender,
Were I as clear as ever were they would vote me an offender.
Now at the Bar as Felons are, must I hold up my hand,
And those my strong Accusers be who stood at my command.
" A breaker o'th last Parliament, an Instrument of war,
" Subverter of the Common-Laws, a close Adulterer.
A Cruel Tyrant, and what is worse, if worser can be found,
No Snake may be compared to me in such a Meaning Ireland; which (as is
reported) by the pious Tears, and Prayers of Saint Patrick, became freed of
all venomous Creatures. Vid. Annal Arden. Insul.
Snakelesse ground;
See, See our humane frailty! what fading honor's worth,
When the Evning may ore-cloud that day the clearest Morn brought forth?
The House of Commons voted my High Treason long ago,
And they do grutch, their hate is such, the High-House does not so;
And some do guess they do not this for any love to me,
The reason why, if I should dye secure they could not be.
But now both Houses are agreed that I should lose my head,
Tower Hill must be a Stage for me, where Stories may be read,
That never Man from greatness came to such calamity,
Nor in high place bore more disgrace then Irelands Deputy.
Farewell, farewell; now to my Cell, from thence unto the Stage,
Where the Hatchet must prove honor dust, and pay my Service Wage;
Relent hard heart what ere thou art, when thou shall see my fall,
What happened me may fall to thee, do Justice then to all.
Farewell Dear Spouse, my ancient House, my tender Children too,
Though Law on me inflicted be, it takes no hold of you.
My blood though spilt, yee'r free from guilt, the Prince will do ye right,
Whose Crown Heavens bless with all success: And so vain World goodnight.
A FATHERS FAREWELL.
O Ye my constant cares, but unconstant comforts; Let me turn to you, before I
turn to earth! O, to what end did I take care to waste my self, for that
which others without care intend to waste? Why should I become so foolishly
frugall, as to make my Heir sick of a Father; riot in his Funeral; and in his
death to act to life the part of a Prodigal? O how many children had fared
well in the world, had their Parents set their hearts less on the world! A
Worldlings common Objection.
Oh, but who provides not for his Family, is worse then an Infidel! Much more
for his Posterity, being the dearest of his Family, the nearest of his Meniey.
O my Indulgence! What a discomfort have thou occasioned to me in the One, what
a disorder in the Other! I was lessoned by a Good Father, August. Med. cap. 1.
to make nothing a greater stranger to me in the way of my Pilgrimage, then
toward my Familiars impiety; toward my Servants severity; toward my
Neighbors extremity. Which Lesson, though I have not learned as well as I
should, yet have I labored to observe it as well as I could. Mean time, while
I looked upon mine own, I found my too tender Nature of such a temper, as it
needed no such direction. Before I was a Father, I mused much how so wise a
Sage as Agesilaus, could so strangely play the Child, as to ride on
Hobbyhorse with his Children. But remembering his Answer, I could not choose
but approve an indiscreet act, proceeding from so affectionate a Nature: Do
not condemn me of Folly, till you have Children of your own.

O Nature, how swift art thou in thy descending! how slow in thy ascending!

Henry the Second, then whom none more happy in his Youth; more unfortunate in
his Age; having observed the mutability of his condition, how he could not be
more numerous in years, then he was surpised with aged cares; being esteemed
least by those who should reverence him most, devised this Henricus aetate
confectus; quo tempore a Liberis gravissimis affectus fuerit odiis; Emblema
sibi contraxit ab Aquila, quatuor pullis adumbrato; quorum duo oculos Aquilae
eruentes; alii duo ungui bus erant vellicantes.
Emblem, to represent his Parentall affliction: An Eagle personating Himself,
with four young ones, presenting his four Sons; two whereof were ever
billing and pecking at his eyes: the other two scratching his face. These were
unkind Chickens; unnatural Eaglets; yet many such Branchers may we find ayring
near most of our Nests. But heavy judgments are reserved for such
Unnaturalists. The Ravens shall pick out their eyes; and the terrors of
unprepared ends shall surprise them. These who are sick of a Father, shall find
sickly comforts in the death of a Father. The Inheritance which their
Nimrod-desires hunted after with such greediness, shall but serve for fuel to
increase their unhappiness. As their wishes murdered him living, so shall his
ill-requited memory present to their profuse hours, and misspent Estates,
Myriads of miseries at their dying.

But admit (which were rare to find) that these longing Heirs should be
followers of their Fathers steps, in a thriving providence: yet must they
expect from their children in offices of Obedience a just Acquittance.

Such Parents seldom God blesses with obedient Children; who neglected the
duty they ought to their Parents when they were Children. Illud expectandum est
a nobis, quod praestitimus nostris. Paterculus.
So as, whether these undutifull ones be Frugall or Prodigal, Misery, through
a loathed satiety; or Poverty, through their profuse society, have ever
accompanied their Evening. Yea, I have known some of these, who either touched
with remorse of Conscience, or driven to want through their own licentiousness,
could have wished to have dug up their contemned Fathers with their nails,
so they might have enjoyed them: For all the dis-esteem which their neglectfull
youth, while they were living expressed unto them: or poisonous disgraces their
unmanag'd course aspersed on them: Yet was it no Filial Zeal, but an
Experimental want that wrought upon them this course.

O the deceiving hopes of a disconsolate Father! What restless cares, anxious
hopes, and solicitous fears hourly awake him, sleeping; and daily encounter
him, waking! He neglects no time to increase his store; no ways unsought to
improve his estate. He eats the bread of carfulness, and apportions himself
the very least of all his Family, to raise an higher foundation to his
posterity. O sandy groundwork! What an imprudent house-holder is He, who
shares in his own, with the least and lowest of his Meniey? to beget
affliction to himself; dis-affection in others! Where Large Inventories
commonly make forgetful Executors; loose Successors! Poor indisposed
providence! Be these the fruits of broken sleeps; and needy repasts? Is it
wisdom to lay up his treasure in the hopes of those, who mourn for nothing
more then to be their own Treasurers; by disseising a too industrious Father
of his care and coin together? O what a joyful sound does the Passing Bell
afford to a thirsty Prodigal! who, long before the crawling worm has either
untwisted his Shroud: or those funeral flowers which stuck his Corpse, lost
their color; has buried the memory of his indulgent Father in those
healthlesse Healths of lasting Oblivion. In what account are we to hold those
hours, that are incountred with such confluence of griefs? Peruse Annals of
Time, and in what did Old Priam exceed young Tro^lus, but in years, tears,
calamitous Children, and numerous cares?
Let the foolish Father, whose penurious life has been wholly bestowed on
Sparing, to give more length of line to his Successors Spending; cast up his
Accounts, and examine what profit or parentall comfort his nightly cares and
watchful endeavors have returned him. Methinks I see him turn over leaf
after leaf, and account day after day: yet he finds nothing worthy his care,
nor what may answer his toil.

Yet take this notice, as an Addition to his folly. Though He found nothing all
his time, that might promise him least assurance in them of performing his
Bequest; yet such is his groundless confidence; as He recommends to their
care, what he forgot to do in his life. Sundry pious works, which either his
affection, so closely cemented to the World, would not suffer him to perform:
Or the foolish hope He had in his Heir, made him transfer that Work to his
trust. But the careless Unthrift makes his late Fathers Charge, the least of
his Care: He finds in himself such liberty of conscience, as He can dispense
with the Execution of such Bequests; He finds all that his Father left him,
little enough for his own Share; as He hopes within short time the World will
show it. Memorialls of dead Fathers are to be buried with them. Thus discharge
such as these their trust to purpose. Legacies and Pious Offices must become
their own Trustees. Their Testator is committed to Earth: whose memory
accompanies his Obsequies; Both subject to one Fate: And deposited in one Urne.
And those who survive Him, hold him rightly served. What mad Man is He, that
will entrust Him, at his Death; who never answered his trust in his life?
Expectance begets obedience: Enjoyment shutts up affection in an Act of
Oblivion.
If hopes make not a Child Obedient: Possession of what He hoped for, will
hardly do it. O see, to what shadows this Worldlings substance is reduced!
Before He return well to Earth, all his early and late providence is resolved
to Air. He has bid the World a long farewell; which makes his jolly
Spend-thrift farewell and deliciously in it. Those Consorts which his Father
hated, must be his only Copesmates. In their Careere, they sing a merry
Requiem for his Soul, whose Rest is the least of their Care. His interment
gives intertainment to those, who will never leave his debaucht Heir, till his
Estate has left him. He has made choice of them, and for a World he would not
change them; whose only Office it is, to contrive the way how he may gallantly
spend: as it is His, to find a purse how to defray the charge of their
Projects.

Thus must an aged providence be thawed and to nothing dissolved by a Youthful
expense. Were the length of his days proportioned to his expense, his
exhausted State, before he saw half of his days, would be contracted to a
Scrip: or his Prospect, through his numerous engagements, confined to a Grate.
But Death is many times so kind, as to impose a period to his miseries: and to
end him, before they wholly make an end of him. But be his days long or short,
his memory cannot choose but rot, being a branch shred and cut off from the
root. It is a promise, and He is faithful in his performance that makes it:
Length of days shall be unto him, who Honors his Parents: which implies an
Abridgment to his, who dishonours them. The wicked and deceitful man shall not
live to see half his Days. And show me a more deceitful Liver, then He who
deceives the trust of a Father! If Obedience be better then Sacrifice; no
doubt, but Disobedience is the Sacrifice of Fools. It seems he desires to
have his days short, who by his Rebellious course, labors to shorten his
Fathers days. The foundation of his hopes cannot stand. But future judgments
are strangers to his thoughts. So he may enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a
season; Eternity is quite razed out of the Calendar of his memory.

He holds the Pelican a good natural Mother in feeding her young-ones to her
own ruin: but he holds that Child a mere Natural, that would requite that
parentall favor to his own danger. Whence it is, that He accounts no Bird
more foolish then the Storke, in carrying his aged Parents upon his Wings: and
providing for them, whose unweldy condition cannot purvey for themselves. I
have often observed it, nor could I well credit what my eyes had seen: how
Nature could possibly become such a Changeling, as to wish no being, to those
from whom they had their being. Many Children have found their Parents to be
their best Stewards: yet rather then be troubled with such Dispensers, they
could wish that care supplied by Hyrelings.

There was an ancient Decree, that He who neglected his Parents in their age,
should reap no benefit by their Death. Var de Antiq. Romans Viget. Macrob. Valor.
Max. Rhodolph. Agric. de Leg. Not.
Now, how many Children should we find disinherited, were this Law to all
intents and purposes executed? That Law, no doubt, was well intended, if it
were but ordained only to preserve in their Progeny, pretenses of Duty. It is
hope of preferment, that begets in most Children this Shady Semblance of
Obedience. Take away this Hope, and you shall find an icy Zeal. Broad-spred
Sycamours, all for Shadow; none for Fruit. Were it not then just, for Parents
to adopt Strangers their Heirs; seeing those who should be their Lineall
Heirs, make themselves such Strangers to their cares? But the heart of a
Father is of a more waxen and indulgent temper: so blind has affection made
him, as He generally values those most, whose actions deserve least. These he
tenderly huggs, who would follow his Hearse with dry eyes: and who in the
height of his extremes, will rather Prey on him, then Pray for him. So apt is
Nature to deprave judgment: and to play the Impostor with her Multiplying
Glass; presenting more comforts in the worst, then can possibly appear in the
best. When affection has forfeited her discretion, and lost the eyes of her
judgment by mistakes; Virtues seem Vices: and Vices Virtues. It were wisdom
then for Nature to suspend her eyes: and to fix them with an impartial
reflexe both on merit and immerit. This will beget that emulation in goodness,
which Children before knew not, at least pursude not; because they were by
their Parents undistinguished or unrewarded. But little need we to press this
Argument: Experience tells you whom I should admonish; that a Father is more
ready to give, then a Child to requite. Be it your care to retain, in this my
last Farewell, these final Directions; which may prove as useful to you, as
any Portion I can bequeath you.

Your youth informed me, that your Dispositions were different; which caused me
to bestow you several ways. For Philosophy had told me, and Experience taught
me, that Nature could not be forced. Yet have I highly taxed my Indulgence for
giving such way to the freedom of youth. Some of you pretended for Arms;
others for Arts. You, who were for Arms had got such a Surfeit of the School,
as your Plea was incapacity to your Book; by reason of your want of memory, or
impregnancy, or some other innate defect. So as, your desire was to inlist your
selves, after the garb of these stirring times, amongst Soldiers of Fortune;
to engage your persons for the Camp: but (as I conceited it) only to
dis-ingage your selves of the Whip. And I assented to it: and some progression
have you made in it, without much loss or increment of Honor.

March along then with this advice; In the first place, be no less Cautious
then Conscientious of the Grounds for which you fight. Be He never so valiant,
if the Cause be naught for which he ingageth; it is Rashness and no Valor;
For win He or lose He, the issue redounds ever to his Dishonor. Sub quocunque
Regimine critis constituti, non reluctantes, sed integre subditi. Albanus.
Arnobius. Evander. Euthymius.
Allegiance is a just ground; in what Orb soever, the State be Spheared:
though in these days unfortunately managed. But Actions are not to derive
their equity from event or success: Nor to receive their Censure from the
loss of a Field. Fortune is not always Virtues Shadow. If this last design
of theirs bearing such a face of Loyalty, redeem their fame, it is an
unexspected recovery.
England cannot be more in Gods eye, then Iudaea: and yet Infidels are become
Lords of that Seat, where our Heavenly Lord and his Apostles trod.

Let me advise you; be no Scotch pretenders; in making Religion your color,
when Plunder is your aim. Though their booties enrich them, and their Newtrall
Factions seemingly secure them, They must come off with loss, before the maine
Battle determine the Quarrel.


Make not such use of your strength, as injuriously to entrench upon an others
State. Do no man wrong; When the Sword is in your hand, let Grace be in your
heart. Let that daring insolence, so familiar with a Soldier, be to you an
uncivil Stranger. Walk in the ways of Innocence: and end these days of your
warfare in it. Prefer a glorious Death, before a vicious life. Better is it
to dye with an Abel, then to live a Cain.

Be it your prime care every Morn to make your peace with God; Suffer not your
inward Enemy to have any advantage of you: Whatsoever your Outward have. Though
the Bullet make no distinction betwixt a Prince and a Common Soldier: Those
Christian Memorialls recommended to you in your youth, should better prepare
you then to fall like Beasts, without remembering your future condition.

The Mariner and Soldier ought of all others to be ever provided of this
Spiritual Armor. Three inches only distanceth the One from Death: and a
Papersconce the Other. Of all Others, every hour may be your last: Be it then
your constant Task, in the Service of your Camp, to make Heaven your Care.
March after this manner, and the Lord of Hoasts will go along with you: and
improve these actions of valor to your Fame, His Honor.

Now for you, who are for Arts. As it has been my care to season you in all
Sciences, Humane and Divine: be it your care not to invert them, but rank them
according to their Degrees. Employ your Humane as Handmaids; your Divine as
their Mistresses. Now, Religion must be the foundation; which being strengthened
and cherished by that sweetly-distilling influence of Devotion, is not to
consist only in Speculative knowledge, but Proficiency of Action.

For Religion, being the Mystery of our Salvation, is a practical Syllogism,
whose premises go for nothing, if there be not the active conclusion of
well-doing. The promise is not made to Him that knows this, but to Him that
does this. Do this and thou shall live.

In the expense of your hours, be careful how you bestow your selves in them:
Account these so precious, as the whole world cannot reduce nor recall one
Minute of them. Have not your eye on the Glass how it runs: no^ on the Clock
what it strikes. Contemplation should be more fixed, then to be so easily
distracted. He, who in his Study gives more ear to the hour, then those lines
he reads; must give me leave to hold him such a proficient, as He is rather to
be accounted a Truant then a Student. Make every Evening, an Accomptant of the
forespent day. Your age is not to be reckoned by years but hours: Many are
young in hours, who are old in years. Bestow your time in Learning to your
profit: but intertaine such humility in your improvement, as with modesty to
acknowledge it. The Zone where you live admits no Solstice: your Academick
Studies hold correspondence with no Station. You must either be Proficients or
Deficients. In one word, make God the Beginning and Ending of all your Labors:
and then with a cheerful Evening will He crown all your Endeavors.

Now to you, my Daughters, whose choicest Consorts should be Modesty, Humility
and pious Industry; though your Mother were taken from you, before She could
well inform you: or your selves capable of what She might recommend unto you;
yet are you supplied in her want, by One; who, though a Stepmother, (a Name
employing an harsh Nature) yet be her Steps so imitable, that if you walk in
them, they may sufficiently enable you by Her example. Do not then Step over
Her with an awlesse reverence: But observe her Directions as useful Lessons,
for the knowledge of your Selves: and performance of those Officers, wherein
you stand obliged to God and the World. I shall be sparing in speaking much to
you, being so confident of Her care with whom you are: and to whose Education
and Tuition next under God, I commend you; as She will never desert you,
unless you desert your selves.

Now the blessing of God, and a poor languishing, but truly-loving Father be
among you: and direct you in all your ways and works, to His honor who made
you.

PROVE. 4. 1. Hear ye Children, the instructions of a Father, and attend to
know understanding.


DEATHS DREAM.
LAst night, me thought, I saw a Great-man dye,
And none was in the Room but He and I.
His vital parts had made their Long retreat,
Eyes Dim, Voice Hoarse, his Pulse no strength to beat.
Yet like two antient-friends long time acquainted,
His Soul, me thought, would hardly be contented
To leave the Body: or the Flesh her Guest,
Her living Soul, without a sharp contest.
But fruitless was this Conflict; They must yield
To Him who still came Conqueror from the field:
And being ready to surprise his Fort,
It moved me to advise Him in this sort.
Let no weak hopes of longer life deceave you,
" You see how your Physicians mean to leave you;
" Whose choice Receipts, Apothecarry Bills,
" At such excessive Charge their Patients kills;
" Are left to your Executor to pay:
" And for their wage, not for your health they stay,
" For that 's past Cure: -- Prepare then for remove
" From this poor Vale of Tears to joys above:
" Here is a fading, there a real bliss,
" Fix then your heart, Sir, where your treasure is.
Wherewith he sighed: and shed a trickling tear
As if the Treasure of his Heart lodged here.
Till my persuasions did at last so win him,
I found, me thought, a lively faith within him.
For pearled tears did his Repentance show,
And Eyes the Place where He was mounting to.
Which I observing; " Sir, while you have sense,
" Thus I Discoursed) discharge your Conscience,
" And set your House in Order. " FRIEND, that care
" (So He replied) is left unto my Heir:
" Portions, Doles, Legacies I shall not need
" To write; His love can my intentions read.
" These Cares are recommeded to His trust,
" And He Will discharge them, for I hold him just.
" My Soul has sude divorce 'twixt The World and me,
" From which my thoughts shall henceforth strangers be.
" One Only man there is whom I could wish
" Might never share in any State of His:
" For His hydroptick drought like thirsty ground,
" Gapes still for more, the more it does abound:
" But that I may in charity depart,
" I wish his true Conversion with my heart.
Having my Spiritual Physic thus applide,
With much Composedness me thought He did.
Now HE, whom He deputed for his Heir
Appeared so well disposed, so debonaire;
As none (if Dreams may represent a truth)
Retained more seeds of virtue in his youth.
But as choice Plants often perish in their prime
While Grafts of flower growth live longer time;
So He; when those pure beamelings should appear
And spread their beauty in their proper Sphere;
Heart-slaine with filial-love, as Chemists gather,
Within few days Death sent him to his Father:
Leaving a lovely Lady here behind,
Who lived to wear His Picture in her mind.
-- Good God, what strong impressions Dreams receive!
Scarce were these two, me thought, cold in their Grave,
Or those Seere Funeral Flowers their Color lost,
Till He stepped in, whom the Father feared most;
Claiming a title in this vast Estate
With other Three concerned in this debate.
Which to compose, They were advised to show
Their just pretenses, which all yielded to.
The place that they proposed for this Assay
Was near the Porch where those two Coarses lay;
Those two indeared Ones: for never were
Sire to his Son, nor Son to Sire more dear.
Thrice did they meet, but nothing could be done;
One would have all: and others might have none.
" Earth-glude affections will admit no stay
" Until their Owner be reduced to clay.
This made me muse how men indu'd with reason
Could in a Place of Death, and such a season
Converse with Earth so freely, as to plead
For their Estates that were so lately dead!
In this amaze, Those Corpse, me thought, appeared
To their half Bodies, from a Statue reared:
Where the Elder pale with anger seemed to show An ashy hue presents Death: A
furrowed brow an apprehensive passion.

Both Death and Passion in his furrowed brow.
While the Younger more composed, seemed with a tear
To whisper these words in his Fathers ear.
Sir, do you hear how these Corrivalls fight
T'invest themselves in our peculiar Right:
What projects they contrive their ends to win,
While we are forgot as if we had not bin?
The Incensed Father having sadly eyde
Those violent Contests; at last replyde
With a deep-scalding sigh, and ghastly groan
Breathed frow a steming Urne: " Was ever moan
" Clothed with less solemn rites: or funeral Bears
" Ranked with less mourning roabs and fewer tears?
" Forgot as soon as Eathed! unhappy State
" To make those men our Heirs whom we did hate!
After which hideous voice, their Grave stones shook,
Whereat the Umpires fled, and I awak't.
'Twas nothing but a Dream; and Dreams men say,
Expound themselves the clean contrary way.
But Dreams have Moralls too: and such had these;
Expound them then, Good Readers, as you please.
Deaths Doom.
" Tot varias facies variis spectare dicbus
" Miror, and offigies fingere credo dies.
GIlt Gull, who lin'st thy silken sins with Plush,
And car'st not for thine inward man a rush,
Some two or three years hence, or such a thing
Pye-colour'd Jay, thou in a Jayle may sing.
MAdam, who made you with your breasts displayed,
Apishly trimmed, fantastickly arrayed?
Your Purles, Purfles, Powders must decline,
Naught left you but a Shade, a Shroude, a Shrine.
CHurchman, who taught you such a formal dress,
And to forget your mainest business?
Sir, when you dye; you must before him appear,
Will ask you what you were, not what you wear.
LAwyer, who learned you to abuse the State,
And make Laws Spider-webs by your deceit?
For all your quaint Demurres, you find no Plee
Against the Injunction of mortality.
Soldier, who gave you Discipline to fight,
To right your self by taking others right?
This is not right; " He is not virtues friend,
That wrongs another for his private end.
VIntner, who schooled you to corrupt your wine,
To make men's froms sprout like a Porcupine?
When this rich Vintage's past, for all your plenty,
Your Bush shall be pulled down, your Hogshead empty.
AUthor, who dipped your pen in Hypocrene,
To gull the world with a worldly Theme,
Leave earth where you do live, and strive to love
That Sphere, where Angels may your Muse approve,
ACtor, return, what are you? whence you came!
To live, lust, loiter, pander and profane?
This is a strange vocation; ever have
Thoughts in thy Tyring-House upon thy Grave.
But if these Motives will not serve your turn,
Here Is Mirrors for you, Scithe, Houre-glasse, and Urne;
Dish up your Viands then, scrape up your Crummes,
For lo you where the Sergeant Majo comes!
Gull, Dame, Church, Lawyer, Soldier, Author, Actor,
Are Merchandise to Fate, where Death's the Factor.
Morphuus, Urna, Rogus, Fax Clepsydra, Virga, Coronis,
Singula sunt Fati nuntia certa tui.
HYMEN'S Golden Censer.
A Spiritual Spousall.
HYmen unveyle thy sacred Censers; let
This amorous Pair in th'pale of fancy met,
When thou have closed their Ceremonial rite,
With Cordial joys and wreaths be-day the night.
May Nuptial twists give mutual recompense,
And crown their Loves with blushing innocence.
Lovely Leander, when He won the Tower
Where Hero lodged, He could not rest secure.
Fears caused Him forfeit freedom; while your Love
Signed here below, and registered above
Admits no interposing Cloud to shade
Those Choice Contents for which you both were made.
Pure tender tinder of affections flame
Crown their joint votes with fancy, fortune, fame,
And all that is good; that their straight levelled line
May be a Mirror to this Crooked time;
Where vice enfranchised strutts without control,
And virtue droops as though she had no Soul.
While these Pure Souls march in that Regiment
Where their Restraint is the Orb of their Content.
If It seem a Paradoxe, observe that tie
Which leaves love in a linked liberty.
" Blessed Spousall tie! which though it Captives make,
" Those Bonds seem easy for the Keepers sake.
LEDA's various Censure.
LEda grows violent when She does hear
Any disgust that She has shown;
And welcomes her reprover with a Tear,
For other Refuge has she none.
Straight will she dye, yet knows not why;
O what a Salve is this, said I,
When Crimes beg Cures from a revenging eye!
Yet some there be hold Leda's temper sweet,
Though native passions take their Course;
And when those Crystal Founts with Silence meet,
They are not to be valued worse.
For those rins'd eye's clearly discryes
She fears those foes that virtue flies,
S^ as her tears become Sins Sacrifice.
That very night She in my bosom lay,
Eyes shed a tear, Heart bred a Sigh;
I ask't her what she ayl'd? She would not say,
Only she wished that Death were ny;
Wiping her eye, (poor fool,) said I,
What wants thou while thy Cinna's by?
She with a smile replide, I will not dye.
Thus fancy by a soft remorce grew mild,
Enlivened with a Sacred heat:
And to her foe became so reconciled,
As Fancy took up Furies Seat.
May Hymen bring like Marriage ring
To Subjects Spousall and their King.
Still may my Leda touch upon this String.
What is Complexion but a deep-lay'd die
Upon a Clot of breathing Clay?
What is my lovely Leda, or what I
But a quick Shade, a Flower in May?
Yet if our mind be so combined
As Heaven's pure eye no Soil can find;
Leda's in me, and I in her inshrin'd.
-- Blessed Ordinance that votes us so confined.
LIFE'S HARVEST.
Green Fruit.
LIght-vading joys, a fading life
Do ever keep me Company;
Where though a Turtle be my wife,
And hopes in her posterity,
They are in their Minority.
So as who justly these compares
May find green hopes, but Riper cares.
A precious Medall.
Look on him, who was taken and tide,
Was tossed and pushed to every side,
First Deifide and then defide,
Arraigned for thee and Crucifide.
A thought of these will humble pride,
And render thee so mortifide,
As no Earths loss shall thee devide
From Him who for thee lived and did.
FINIS.

