A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, Jan. 30. 1674/5. At the
Anniversary Commemoration of the MARTYRDOM of King Charles I.

By George Stradling, D. D. Dean of Chichester, and one of His Majesty's
Chaplains in Ordinary.

Printed by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard,
and the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1675.

St. Joh. 19. 15. the latter part of the Verse. -- Pilate says unto them,
Shall I Crucify your King? The chief Priests answered, We have no King but
Caesar.


IT is a great and common fault of mankind to be overcurious in finding out
the reasons of Gods Providence, every one presuming to sound that bottomless
Deep with his own scant line and plummet. Sin and punishment are so nearly
related, that when the Lord has marked any one with some signal Judgment, we
presently raise hue and cry against him and are ready to fall upon him as one
singled out for destruction, thinking that warrant enough to condemn whom God
has smitten, and to make him the executioner of our rash and unadvised
sentences. Who did sin; this man, or his Parents, that he was born blind? Joh.
9. 2.
was once the question of Christ's Disciples; and the best of us are apt enough
to make too particular applications to persons, to measure the heinousness of
their offenses by the greatness of their visible sufferings. Thus the
Barbarians seeing a Viper fastened to St. Paul's hand, Act. 28. 4.
immediately vote him no less than a murderer; the uncharitable error too of
some, in the case of those Galileans whose blood Pilate had mingled with their
Sacrifices. St. Luke 13. 1. Luke 13. 1.


If such conclusions as these should pass for good, we should inevitably
condemn the generation of Gods Children, who commonly have a double portion of
temporal afflictions; Every judgment on the holiest person should then be
construed a Reprobation; He that escapes the lash here, should then be the Son,
and he that smarts under it, the Bastard; and by this argument we should
conclude, that God loves the Tents of Robbers more than the place where his
honor dwells, as often as he spares their Dens and fires his own Temple.

I need not tell you how severe some of late have been in their reflections not
only on private but public persons, even to the branding of Gods own
Vicegerents and particularly our late Sovereign, whose greatest Crime 'twas to
have been Unhappy. Their words as well as actions have sufficiently expressed
their Charity to Him on this account, nothing having been more familiar with
them than to make his sufferings an argument of Gods rejecting Him, and a Plea
for all those affronts they should offer to his Person or Dignity. The Mean
Tekel was legible to every Passer by; Each one, though never so unlearned,
could decipher the bloody characters, and pronounce the fatal sentence; God
has forsaken him, persecute and take him, for there is none to deliver him,
Psalm. 71. 9.
was the language of our modern Sons of Belial against this our David; not
considering that Princes have their failings as well as other men, That no
condition whatsoever is exempt from a Divine Judgment, No Laurel of proof
against God's Thunderbolts, nor any Crown a sufficient fence against an
Almighty stroke; That God is pleased sometimes to exercise his Sovereign power
and Empire over the Great ones of the Earth, to teach their Scepters to bow to
his; v. Psalm. 106. 32.
That the Best of Kings may be the unhappiest here, and be punished sometimes
not so much for their own as for their subjects faults; or, if for their own,
only to brighten their graces, and to give them an advantage of purchasing to
themselves more glorious Crowns in Heaven than they wear here on Earth.

There is enough in this Chapter to secure this truth, where we may behold The
King of Kings, in whom there was no Guile, no sin but what of ours He took upon
Him, suffering the contradiction of sinners, made the very scorn of men and the
outcast of the People: And after such an example it can be no strange thing to
see his Deputy so ill treated, who as innocent as he was, was not impeccable,
and yet so innocent and virtuous too, that all the Records of History can
scarce furnish us with so excellent a Prince nor perhaps with so unfortunate,
as if God had raised him up like another St. Paul to show how great things he
should suffer as well as do for Him; Act. 9. 16.
One whose Afflictions were great as Himself, and only less than his Saviors,
but withal so like that it is hard to distinguish them; Each of them undergoing
the Pageantry of a Judicial trial, delivered up out of envy to the rage and
malice of an incensed Rout and the Power of a corrupt Judge. And yet as corrupt
as our Saviors was, he was still a Judge, as Lawful a one as the Roman Power
could make him; whereas Ours here had neither the Authority of a Pilate, nor
yet the Innocence or Compassion. 'Twas Pilate's sad fate to contest with an
enraged multitude, whom 'twas unsafe to displease, and as dangerous to humor.
On the one hand, violently to oppose them, was to resist a torrent, to draw
upon himself the hatred of a whole Nation, and perhaps Caesar's too; and on the
other, to gratify them, was to make himself his own Enemy by casting the
Innocent; so that Pilate could neither well absolve Christ, nor yet Condemn
him. In this sad straight see how uneasy he is under the apprehension of his
own guilt and the Peoples fury, the former the much heavier load of the two,
which he uses all possible arts to shift off.

1. By endeavoring to clear our Saviors Innocence, the Judge himself becoming
his Advocate and Jury too, passing his Verdict of not guilty, I find in Him no
fault at all. Joh. 18. 38.


2. By exposing Him all in blood as a spectacle of misery to excite their pity
and Compassion, Behold your King. c. 19. 14.


3. By seeking to divert their rage on one who did really deserve it, as being
both a Traitor and a Murderer; c. 18. 40.
and when all this would not do,

4. He produces his last and strongest argument to deterr them from so horrid
and impious an attempt, namely, That He whose blood they so much thirsted for,
was not only an innocent Man, but a King; and, which was more, Their King; The
offering violence to such a person, being in his apprehension so unparalled a
crime, that no precedent could warrant it; so that Pilate himself is startled
at the very thought of it, and in a just indignation of being made the
instrument of so foul a Treason breaks forth into this Pathetical question in
the Text, Shall I Crucify your King? Which whether he did really take him for,
or only spoke it by way of jeer and derision, yet from the very supposition we
may argue, How sacred the Person of a King was held to be in the judgment of a
Heathen and him none of the best, and of the worst of Jews too by the answer
they make him, owning his reason for good upon supposition, That Christ had
been their King, We have no King but Caesar: As if they should have said, True
indeed, were this man a King, much more, Our King, we could have no tolerable
Plea or Excuse for those our proceedings against him; But here is Error
Personae, Thou mistakest the Person, Caesar, not this man, is Our King, and
therefore take heed what thou do, lest thou make Caesar thine Enemy by
setting up a Competitor against him.

The Division.
From the words thus explained we may clearly infer this general Conclusion,
That Every Natural and Lawful Prince ought to be sacred, supreme, and
consequently Inviolable, and that 1. By the Confession of Heathens and of Jews;
and that this was their Judgment, I shall endeavor in the first place to make
out distinctly unto you. 2. And in the second, I shall show you, how vile these
Jews were, how false to their God and to themselves too, in owning Caesar for
their King, and disowning Christ. 3. To complete my discourse, I shall give you
the sense of Christ, his Apostles and primitive Doctors as to matter of
subjection to Sovereign Princes; and so close up all with some application to
our present Occasion.


I begin with the first thing in the proposed order; namely, the judgment of
Heathens as to the sacredness of the persons of Kings, implied in this
Question, Shall I Crucify your King?

The first Part.
1. Of the judgment of Heathens.
A strange thing this, to a Pilate, as indeed to all Heathens, with whom
Monarchy was a sacred thing, as having a Divine, at least, a Natural Original.
That they derived it from Jupiter is clear from their (...), and those high
Titles they gave Kings of (...) and (...), so frequent among them. That 'twas
founded in Nature, Seneca tells us: Nature, says he, did first invent a King.
His instance is in Bees, and he observes it also in other Creatures. Natura
commenta est Regem; quod and ex aliis animalibus licet cognoscere and ex
apibus, lib. 1. de Clementia, c. 19.
And indeed what was the first man, in the design of his Creation, but an
Universal Monarch? Polyarchy came in with Sin and the Curse, and Commonwealths
are but Puny States to Monarchy. This is plainly confessed by Tully who reckons
it inter Notiora, Omnes Antiquae Gentes Regibus quondam paruerunt. Cicero lib.
3. de legibus, initio.
among the most certain known truths, That all Nations of old were subject to
Kings. Justin. lib. 1. c. 1.
Justin says the very same thing, and Tacitus particularly affirms this to
have been the ancient Roman Covernment, in the very first words of his Annals.
Tacit. Annal. 1.


But besides the unanimous consent and inclination of all Nations to this form
of Government, It Is having been exercised by Fathers of Families in the first
Ages of the World for at least three thousand years, strongly confirms it. That
Noah had this power we may collect from Genesis 9. 25. Genesis 9. 25.
And Abraham is therefore styled A mighty Prince, c. 23. 6. 23. 6.
though his Principality exten^ed not beyond the limits of his own Family, as
being therein Absolute and Uncontrollable. We do not read any where that Adam
in his many hundred years Monarchy ever asked his Subjects Consent; His Dominion
was as absolute over his Own as over the other Creatures, his Will a Law, and
all his Dictates, Oracles. Such a successive unlimited Monarchy as God did at
first Constitute; so was He pleased still to continue in the Firstborn. Cain
had it upon this account and that by Gods own appointment, Genesis 4. 7. Genesis 4. 7.
From whence it succeeded in Jacob's Family, Genesis 49. 3. 49. 3.
Reuben thou art my firstborn -- The Excellency of Dignity and the Excellency
of Power (of Honor and Authority) that is. The Supremacy of both. This lasted
all along in the Patriarchs line; He that begat, commanded; He that gave life
might take it away; All power then remained in the Fathers hand, as all Law did
in his breast. Jus vitae and necis, derived from Nature, belonged to him by the
right of nature; and to have resisted a Fathers command then, had been a crime
of the deepest dye. and when the Roman Manlius slew his Victorious Son with his
own hand, he acted by the Authority of a Father as well as of a Magistrate.
Which paternal power continued among the Romans till Justinian took it away, so
that before his time 'twas still in force, though Christianity forbad the use
of it. A second thing consequent to the former, was high honor and Reverence,
which natural reason as well as God's Law taught men to pay unto Parents;
Honor thy Father, being a Law written in the heart of man as well as engraven
in stone, and which we therefore find given by Heathens to their natural
Parents in as high a degree as ever it was by Jews or Christians.

Now these two things, Supremacy and Honor, invested in natural Parents and
owned as their due, were by the free and voluntary act of the People afterward
transferred on the Political, when many Families became united into one
Kingdom, and the very Title past along with the Power. Hence are Princes styled
Patres Patriae, and, as such, retained the same Prerogative, and the same at
least if not a greater Reverence. For they were absolute, their Empire knew no
bounds in the early ages of the World, known by the name of (...), wherein,
Arbitria Principum pro legibus erant; Justin. lib. 1. c. 1.
Their rule wholly Despotical, yet (...), just and legal, though absolute and
unaccountable. Aristot. lib. 3. pol. cap. 10.
Such a Government the Eastern People lived long under and enjoyed a great
measure of happiness by it; and therefore to speak in Tacitus language, Addicte
admodum regnabantur, they were most devoutly obedient, no more questioning
their Princes wisdom than their Gods. Heathens knew no such thing as a Prior
primo, their Reason could not conceive how any one could be sup^eam and yet
have another above him, nor find a Circle in Covernment less absurd than one in
Logic, as that which in their judgment would infallibly beget an infinite
progress. This was the Poets notion of a King, Martial. lib. 2. Epig. 17.
Qui Rex est, Regem, Maxim, non habeat. Otherwise he should be a King and no
King. And therefore it is very observable, that in all forms of Government there
was still Supremacy, a potestas Regia, absolute and above Laws, even in the
Roman Commonwealth after the expulsion of their Kings, inherent in the Person
of the Supreme Magistrate pro tempore, such as were the Dictator and the
Tribunes of the People, without which it had been impossible for them to
preserve peace and order among men. This rendered them (...), safe and
unquestionable. It Is true indeed that there were different sorts of Kings among
Heathens according to the different Qualifications of Regal power in several
Kingdoms. Some, though restrained by Laws, were yet truly Monarchs, not
responsible, as supreme, though not absolute. Others had the Name and Title of
Kings, being in effect but more specious and glorious Subjects, as was Theseus
to the People, and the Spartan Kings to the Ephori. Cornelius Nepos styles
these latter, Cornel. Nepos in Agesilao.
Nomine magis quam Imperio Reges, Titular Kings, who, exceeding the bounds of
their Commission, were some of them sentenced and Executed too by the
Lacedaemonians. But the Question here is of Kings not restrained and fettered by
conditional compacts and agreements, but such, as for the most part, were left
free and unbound. To cite them to any Tribunal, was a thing no Heathen Subjects
ever did, or indeed thought fit to do. Lib. 3. (...) Joseph. Jud. Antiq. lib.
15. c. 4.
Herodotus tells us, that Cambyses consulting his Senate, whether he might
lawfully Marry his Sister, was answered, That they found no such Law as gave a
Brother power to take his Sister to Wife: But that indeed they met with one
which gave their Emperor free liberty to do what he pleased. When Herod was
cited to appear before M. Anthony to answer for the murder of Aristobulus,
Anthony said openly, That 'twas not fit a King should be questioned for what he
did as King. I remember that Tully being to defend King Deiotarus before
Caesar, begins his Oration from the strangeness and novelty of the thing,
telling him, that 'twas so unusual a thing for a King to be accused, that
before that time 'twas never heard of. Ita est inusitatum Regem capitis reum
esse, ut ante hoc tempus non sit auditum. Cic. Orat. pro Deiotaro.
So sacred were the Persons, so unquestionable the Authority of Sovereign
Princes over their subjects, that whereas 'twas held Parricide to affront
natural Parents, to abuse These was in Heathens account no less than
sacrilege. No defects in Government could render them obnoxious to Justice,
nor any crimes, though never so enormous, dethrone them. They were Tuti Imperii
Majestate, Their Majesty was their Protection, and their Character, their
sanctuary; They were above the reach of those Laws which Themselves made;
(Above the Censure and Penalties of them, not their Guidance and Direction;)
and since they could dispense with others for the breach of them, then much
more surely with Themselves who were the Authors of them. Nemo unquam Principi
leges scripsit; Plin. Panegyr.
And, A Te exigetur Ratio, nos excusabit Obsequium, says Pliny. Tibi summum
rerum judicium Dii cedere, nobis obsequii gloria relicta est, M. Terent. apud
Tacit. Annal. lib. 6.
No Law could punish nor any call Kings to account but the Gods, who as they
gave them the highest Empire here, so did they leave their subjects nothing but
the glory of obeying them. This was Pliny's and Tacitus his Divinity, and much
sounder no doubt than what some Christians have of late taught us, who will
needs Principes in ordinem redigere as Buchanan phrases it (like a Pedant, as
he was) Reduce Princes to good order, by placing Tutors and Guardians over them
to correct them for those imaginary faults which their own fancy mostly creates
and then heightens into Crimes. De jure Regni apud Scotos. Edit. Edinburgi 8.
1581. p. 6.


By what has been said it appears, That as Kingly Government was first founded
in jure paterno; so that Kings themselves were as absolute and uncontrollable
in their Dominions as Fathers were in their Families for some thousands of
years; A thing ever acknowledged by Heathens, and never disputed them but by
Christians. Bell. Jagurth.
Impune quidvis facere, Id est Regem esse, was Salust's definition of a
Sovereign Prince, and all Heathens admitted it; who were so far from thinking
it fit to punish him in his person, that 'twas Treasonable with them to attempt
it in Effigy. I need not tell you how much the Roman Laws provide for the
security of their Emperors, and to this purpose I might cite many of them. But
I forbear, and shall only add a little touching that reverence and honor
Heathens gave their Kings; for the most part indeed too much, being
superstitious in this point even to excess. For I find it held unlawful, by the
Eastern People especially, for private men to gaze too much on their Prince,
and unsafe to venture into his presence unsent for. And therefore we see Esther
durst not appear before Ahasuerus till he held out his Golden Scepter to her.
Esther 5. 2.
What esteem Heathen subjects had for their King; we learn from Artabanus a
Persian speaking thus for himself and the rest of his Country men; Apud
Xenophont.
(...). We own it as the chiefest of those many good Laws among us to honor
and adore our Prince as the lively pourtraicture of the great Preserver of all
things. An Expression not much differing from that of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 17.
Fear God, Honor the King. I might here present you with those lofty Titles of
Eternity and Divinity so frequently by the Romans bestowed upon their Emperors
and the like, more proper for Gods than Men; I might tell you how to abuse
their very statues was Sacrilege; How they swear by the lives of their Princes
(as Joseph did by Pharaoh's, Genesis 42. 16.) Genesis 42. 16.
per Genium Imperatoris, in Tertullian. Apologet. c. 32.
Such Reverence did Heathens pay unto them as to so many Earthly Gods, from
whom they saw they derived the inestimable benefits of Peace, plenty and
Protection; The main ground of all the Heathenish Idolatry.

No marvel then if Pilate (who being a Judge it is presumed could not be
ignorant of these things as having been bred and trained up under the Roman
discipline, and so well acquainted with its Laws and Customs) comparing the
affronts and indignities these Jews were now offering to one whom he supposed
their King, with that high respect and honor he knew all other Nations, and
especially the Roman, expressed toward theirs, is here so much scandalized at
the manner of their Proceedings. 'Twas a new thing to him to see a King brought
before him by his own subjects to receive his sentence. Joh. 18. 31.
Take ye him and judge him according to your Law, says he, not Ours; We have no
such Law whereby to judge, much less to put a Prince to death. This he charges
them home with, and they to prevent the suspicion of so soul a crime, deny
Christ to be their King, but by owning Caesar to be so, profess as much Loyalty
and Obedience to him as Pilate himself could pretend to, which brings in the
second point of the first part of the Text, namely the Judgment of the Jews as
to the sacredness of Kings persons and their Exemption from Force or Judicial
Trial.

2. Of the judgment of Jews.
2. That Kings derived their Authority from God and not from the People; and
therefore could be responsible to none but God for what they did, is a Truth
clearly delivered by the Prophets; He removes and sets up Kings, says
Daniel, c. 2. 21. Dan. 2. 21.
He places them on their Thrones, says Job, c. 36. 7. Job 36. 7.
By Him they reign and by Him they decree Justice, Prove. 8. 15. Prove. 8. 15.
Psalm. 89. 20. 2 Chronicles. 9. 8. Prove. 21. 1. Psalm. 21. 3. 82. 6.
Their Diadem, their Anointing their Scepter, their Throne, all are said to be
from God. As their Hearts are in his hand; so the same hand sets their Crowns
fast upon their Heads. Dixi, Dii estis, is Gods language to Them, not the
Peoples, For then the Dixi should have been changed into a Diximus; nor should
the style be, By me Kings reign, but by Us, according to the modern Divinity.
Consider we a little how the first Jewish Kings were elected, and we shall find
that the People had little or nothing to do in their choice. They indeed
desired a King but God gave him as He had long before designed him. Act. 13. 21.
Nor do we find that the Jewish Kings ever stood much upon their Confirmation
by the People, but as those that knew their way to the Throne ascended its
steps without the Peoples aid. It Is true indeed, The People are said to have
made Saul a King in Gilgal; 1 Samuel 11. 15.
But their making him there, was no more than their approving him. They did
only add to the Pomp and Ceremony, not to the essence of the Constitution. For
Saul was both named and confirmed King and had executed his Office before this
solemnity, as appears from 1 Samuel chapters 10. and 11. 1 Samuel cap. 10, 11.
The People could pretend no interest here, God having left them nothing to do
but to admit and accept him. The same is as true of David too; Psa. 78. 71, 72.
God chose him and took him away from the Sheep-folds, that he might feed Jacob
his people and Israel his Inheritance; Nay God himself owns the Institution,
Psalm. 89. 20. 89. 20.
I have exalted one chosen out of the People; The Exaltation was Gods, and the
choice not Of but Out of the People. And as He did exalt; so did He anoint him
with his own holy Oil, an Emblem of his Sovereignty. A character not only
proper to Him, but to all his Successors, ^ Sam. 10. 27.
(Royal Birth being equal to Royal Unction) to whom in token of subjection, the
People paid homage and gave gifts, admitted their Images on their Coins, and
began their Era from their Reign; All marks of that sovereign Authority Kings
had over them, and which was never disputed. For whatever the rebellious
practices of some were (As there will be Rebels while there be Kings, and never
greater store of such than among the Jews, whom the Prophets frequently style A
Rebellious Nation) yet the opinion of the best and soberest part of them was
ever Orthodox as to matter of subjection to their Natural Princes, whatever
they thought of Foreign ones, whom they looked upon as Usurpers.

This then being granted (as needs it must) That their Kings were supreme, as
holding their Scepters only from God; It will necessarily follow that they were
accountable to none but Him. And this is further demonstrable from the Jus
Regni mentioned 1 Samuel 8. 1 Samuel 8.
where all the Acts of a Tyrannical King are at large described, but such as
the People could not choose but submit to. 'Twas not a Law given for a Prince
to Command, but for the People to obey by. It did by no means excuse him from
sinning, but it did sufficiently disable them from punishing him. And therefore
it is said, when the solemnity of this Inauguration was over, v. 10.
That Samuel told all the words of the Lord unto the People that asked of him a
King. He spoke not to the King, but addressed himself to the People and declared
their Duty (For his duty was well known, it having been taught him by Moses
many Ages before, Deuteronomy. 17.) Deuteronomy. 17.
And the close of all is this, since there is no help in man, they must only
cry unto the Lord, 1 Samuel 8. 18. 1 Samuel 8. 18.
From whence it appears, that although what a King should do were never so
wicked, yet that he might do it with safety and impunity. Which is the express
doctrine of the Old Testament. Job. 34. 18. Job 34. 18.
Is it fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked? Or to Princes, Ye are Ungodly?
'Twas not so it seems in Job's days, nor in Solomon's neither; Eccles. 8. 2, 3.
I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath
of God; For he does whatsoever pleases him: and v. 4. v. 4.
Where the word of a King is, there is Power, and who may say unto him, What
do thou? No man without danger to his life and soul too, Prove. 20. 2.
whosoever provokes him to anger, sins against his own soul. He pulls down the
Kings, and Gods anger upon his head. Kings indeed have long hands, but the
Almighty's are much longer and heavier, who will be sure to punish the breach
of that Oath the subject makes to his Prince, and those affronts that are put
upon his Vicegerent; He, who says expressly to Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. 7.
They have not rejected Thee but Me, will interpret such injuries as done unto
himself. How dangerous a thing it was for the Jews to disobey an inferior
Authority, we learn from Deuteronomy. 17. 12. Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
The man that will do presumptuously and will not hearken to the Priest, that
stands to minister there before the Lord thy God, or unto the Judge, even
that man shall dye; where we see that to disobey the sentence given by the
Judge and interpreted by the Priest, was present death by the Law of Moses:
much more, to resist the commands of the Sovereign Prince, and that by the
Testimony and consent of the People themselves, Joshuah 1. 18. Jos. 1. 18.
Whosoever he be that does Rebel against thy Commandment and will not hearken
to thy words in all that thou command him, shall be put to death. Here is no
exception of Persons, the Law being general and comprehensive. I might enforce
this argument by all those Titles wherewith Kings are dignified in the Old
Testament, 2 Samuel 21. 17. Lament. 4. 20. 2 Samuel 14. 19. 1 Samuel 15. 20.
Of the lights of Israel, The breath of their Nostrils, The Angels of God, and
The Heads of the People; All which speak them supreme and inviolable. I might
also tell you what care God took, to secure them from any violent attempts by
restraining men's hearts as well as tongues, by forbidding them not only
publicly to revile, Exodus 22. ^. Eccles. 10. 20.
but so much as to curse them in thought, lest a bird of the air (An Angel of
God) might tell the matter; much less might the hand be lifted up against them,
For who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed and be guiltless?
says David, 1 Samuel 26. 9. 1 Samuel 26. 9.
If any might have done it, then He to be sure, as next heir to the Crown,
declared so by God himself, and already Anointed to it, and who might now have
made way for himself to it by dispatching Saul who was then in his hand; and
Necessity and Providence (our late great Pleas and Pretenses) might seem to
have led him to it: But so far was David from doing him any hurt himself, that
he would not suffer those whose fingers itcht to be doing, and who came with a
dixit Dominus in their mouths, to injure him in the least; would not give way
to his own Passion or his Soldiers solicitation. The only use he makes of it
is the trial of his Patience and the means of his Peace. David might as easily
have cut off Readiness head as his garment; but his Coat only shall be the worse
for it, not his Person. Like Aaron's precious Ointment he descends only to the
skirts of his Clothing; nor should his garment have been maimed for a revenge,
but only for a monument of his Innocence. And yet as not well secured of that,
the least rent of that garment tears his heart worse, 2 Samuel 25. 5. 2 Samuel 25.
5.
Now what was it that so becalmed and smoothed his own and his Followers
Passion but the Holy Oil that was on Readiness head? Timuit Oleum, says Optatus;
Saul was the Lords Anointed, That was charm enough to tie up David's hand.

Nor do we find that the Jewish Nation did ever pretend to bring any of their
most extravagant Kings into order either by way of force or Justice, but left
them to stand or fall to their own Master, whenever they did such things as
were punishable by the Law of Moses. Exodus 22. 20.
By which Law though every Idolater was to dye without mercy, yet where do we
find that Manasses (An Idolater and a cruel Tyrant to boot) was ever punished
for it by the People? Or where do we learn that Elias (A man of a fiery spirit,
and zealous for his God) did call down fire from Heaven to consume a wicked
Ahab as he did his Captains of fifties and their Bands? When David had
committed Adultery (which was mortal too by the Law of Moses, Levit. 20. 10.)
Levit. 20. 10.
Nathan brings no Authority from the People to punish, he only threatens him
from God, cites him to his Tribunal, and David himself well knew he was to
stand at no other bar, Psalm. 51. 4.
his Tibi soli peccavi, secures him from man's; and St. Ambrose's Comment on
these words puts it out of Question, Rex erat; He was a King, and that was his
Protection. Rex utique erat, nullis Ipse legibus tenebatur, quia liberi sunt
Reges a vinculis delictorum. St. Ambr. Apolog. David. c. 10.


But though the People had no Authority over their Prince, had not the High
Priest? Jesuits indeed say so, but without any ground at all. For they cannot
show us any one single act of Jurisdiction exercised by the High Priest over
the King, whereas we can of the Kings over him; 1 King. 2. 26, 27.
of a Solomon on an Abiathar. 2 Chronicles. 26.
That which they urge here of Azariah's thrusting out Uzziah out of the Temple,
is nothing to the purpose. That was no act of violence against him for burning
Incense to the Lord, and so seizing on the Priests Office, as is pretended,
much less any depriving him of his Regal Authority (which he enjoyed while he
lived.) Jud. Antiq. lib. 9. c. 11. See 2 Chronicles. 26. 20.
But, as Josephus informs us, an Advice or Admonition to him to depart hastily
out of the Temple, God having smitten him with Leprosy, and all Lepers being
to dwell without the Camp, according to the Levitical Law, Levit. 13. 46.
Levit. 13. 46. 2 King. 11.
Nor is that other instance of Jehoiada's slaying Athalia, any whit more
pertinent. For Jehoiada, (who had for some years secured Joas in the Temple
from the fury of that Usurpress) being Uncle and Protector to Joas in his
minority, did, with the consent of the chief of the Realm, only declare him
King, who was so before, as by Right of succession, so by Gods own special
appointment, 2 Chronicles. 23. 3. 2 Chronicles. 23. 3.
Nor did he cause Athalia to be slain, till Joas had been seated on his Royal
Throne, v. 11. v. 11.
so that 'twas not so much His as Joas's Act, in whose name and by whose
Authority He caused it to be done. Here then was no act of the High Priests
Jurisdiction over the King; nor can it be made appear that ever the Sanhedrim
(The Highest Court of Judicature among the Jews, and who had Authority to
punish False Prophets with death) Deuteronomy. 13. 5.
did ever pretend a power of punishing Princes so. After the Babylonish
Captivity indeed nothing was done without their Authority. Joseph. Ant. Jud.
lib. 14. c. 17.
Then we read that Herod was cited to appear before them to answer for some
misdemeanors he had committed, He being but a private Person, his Father
Antipater alive, and Hyrcanus then reigning. To. 1. Annal. ad An. Christi 31.
number. 10. Exercitat. lib. 13. c. 5.
So false is it what Baronius confidently affirms, That all Kings were
obnoxious to the Judgment of the Sanhedrim, as Casaubon shows. Only this must
be confessed, That Kingly power, toward the end of the Jewish Monarchy, was much
restrained by the Senare; so that what Aristotle says of the Kingdom of
Lacedaemonia, is applicable to that of Judaea in those times, Ar. Pol. lib. 3.
c. 10.
(...), That Kings could not do all then as once they could when their Power
was Absolute, and when by the judgment of the best Jewish Doctors, it was
utterly unlawful to call them to an Account; witness that saying of theirs,
cited out of their Talmud, Rex nec judicat nec judicatur; which as it was false
as to the former part of it (as it is evident from 1 Samuel 8. 5. 1 Samuel 8 5.
where the People desire a King that might judge them like all the Nations, and
what kind of Kings those were I have already shown you) so was it most true as
to the latter branch of it, That He was not to be judged of any. A piece of
Divinity so generally owned and approved by the Jews, that it became a
Proverbial saying with them, Nulla creatura judicat Regem, sed Deus Benedictus.

That this was the doctrine of Moses and the Prophets, made good by the example
of Holy men, and avowed by the ablest and soundest Jewish Doctors, These Chief
Priests here could not be ignorant of, as men who had been trained up in the
Schools of the Prophets and in all likelihood well verst in their own Histories
and Practices. And therefore to avoid the force of Pilates argument, they own
his Reason but deny his supposition, That Christ was their King, We have no
King but Caesar. My second general Part.

The second Part.
'Twas impossible in so few words to express more flattery, shall I say,
Blasphemy or Folly. Here is hypocrisy in the height, in owning Caesar for
their King. He was so indeed, but sore against their wills; See Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
one whom Conquest had forced upon them, and whom they mortally hated as an
Usurper, an Enemy to their Religion and Customs. Nor was it possible for them
to love him, while they held it no better than a sinful Vassalage to stoop to a
Heathen Scepter; A fancy Judas Gaulonites and Saducus had put into their heads.
Thus they how their knee to Caesar as they did to Christ, with a Hail King of
the Jews; proclaiming him with their mouths but not with their hearts, Aut
Caesar aut nullus, Caesar must be their King.

And why not Christ? was it not because there was no King in Zion? did not
these men look for a Messiah? And was not this the proper time to expect him,
when according to Jacobs Prophecy, Genesis 49. 10.
the Scepter was departed from Juda? Had not malice and envy blinded their
eyes, they might easily have known him by all those marks their Prophets gave
them of the Messiah, and which were so visible on him. Nor was it long before
that themselves would have made him their King, that they followed him in
Triumph into Jerusalem with Hosanna's to this Son of David as loud as now their
Crucifiges; Joh. 6. 15.
and is the note so soon changed? How much better Pilate, a Heathen, than they
who both owned him here for their King, and a little after proclaimed him such
by a public Inscription on his Cross? Yet Nolumus hunc, is their language, and
by rejecting Christ what did they but renounce all hope of a deliverer? This
was their extreme Folly and they soon smarted for it, when Christ's light yoke
was turned into an iron one that galled their necks to purpose; when the
seditious practices of the furious Zealots lured the Roman Eagles to their
Carcasses, according to the literal meaning of our Lords prediction, Matthew. 24.
28. Matthew. 24. 28.
Thus for their refusing Christ and choosing Caesar for their Lord, 'twas just
with God to plague them by that Caesar; That they who rejected the mild Empire
of a Lamb, should have a devouring Stork set over them, and the Venient Romani,
once their Fear, should at last prove their judgment. Joh. 11. 48.


But besides this, there is a great absurdity in their answer here to Pilate,
an opposition employed between Christ and Caesar. They say Christ is not their
King because Caesar is. The Anabaptist and the Jew are here so cross, that it is
strange one Amsterdam should hold them both. The one says, Christ is our King,
and therefore not Caesar; The other, Caesar is our King, and therefore not
Christ; as if these two, Christ and Caesar were incompatible. 'Twas this
mistake that raised all the Plots against our Savior; This, that awakened
Herod's jealousy, and provoked his rage, when he heard of a King of the Jews.
But his fears were as needless, as they were pernicious; since He, who gave all
Earthly Monarchs their Crowns, did not come with any design to pluck them off
their heads. The not well understanding a due subordination between Christ's and
Caesar's Kingdom, is that which has spilt so much blood in the World. There may
be danger in contrariety, but in diversity there is none. 'Twas a blasphemous
inconsequence then in these Chief Priests, Caesar is our King, therefore not
Christ; whereas they should rather have argued thus, Yea, rather Caesar,
because Christ, it being not necessary that Religion and Policy should clash,
nor at all impossible to Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar 's, and
yet not deny God the things that are God's.

We have had, and still have such loud cries as these among us too; Of some,
who will have no King but Him that wears the Triple Crown, all the rest must
hold theirs precariously from Him. Of others, who are for a King Jesus, owning
Him indeed for their King, but in as bad a sense as these here disclaimed him.
The difference between these two is not very great. The One would have blown up
their King, and the Other did actually cut off his head. Their Impiety was much
alike, but not their Modesty: The former being content to contrive his
destruction in a Cave, while the other had the impudence to murder him on a
Scaffold. A third sort of People we have seen too; who were for a Monarch with
these Jews, but one of their own setting up: For any thing rather than the True
One; For a Traitor and a Murderer; a Barabbas instead of a Christus Domini, a
Bramble for a Cedar. The Chief Priests of those times were mainly for such a
one (If they were Priests at all, for it is questionable whether many of them
were; nay, it is certain that some of them were not, and that All of them were
at best but Jeroboam's Priests, of the meanest of the People). We know whom
these men would once have had for their King, Jeroboam was to be the Man, One
for all Religions but the right one; As good a Priest himself as they that
would have set him up, who carried a Sword in one hand, and a Censer in the
other; One that set up his Calves in opposition to the God of Israel, when he
saw he was not for his turn; A Phocas who by the murder of his Lord aspired to
the Diadem, and he mist it narrowly, the Power he had already got into his
hands, but God would not suffer him to enjoy the Title, and not long after
stripped him and his ridiculous Successor of all their Theatrical Pomp, making
them give way to the True Caesar. And blessed be God that we can truly say what
these Jews here spoke falsely, We have Caesar for our King. Let us then give him
those things that belong unto Him, that which our Religion commands us to pay
Him. And what that is, is to be our third and last Enquiry.

The Third Part. The Doctrine and Practice of Christ, his Apostles and
Primitive Fathers.

That all Magistracy is from God, we learn from Romans 13. 1. The Powers that be,
are ordained of God; and that all degrees and orders of men are from Him, is as
evident. For God never designed such a Parity as some men dream of. A thing, as
contrary to Nature, so to all Reason and Religion. What is commonly said, That
all men are born Equal, that Innocence knew no Superior but God, and that
subjection came in with sin; is speciously, but very falsely alleged. That
Slavery came in with sin, I grant, not Civil subjection. As there was at first
a plain distinction and inequality between Father and Son; so the different
gifts of men imply it; some being born with such Heroic Spirits, as if
designed by God to govern others, whose stronger abilities of body than of
mind, seem to have fitted them only for subjection. This the Philosopher seems
to make the ground of all Civil Government, Polit. 1. And indeed without such
an Inequality there could be None. For every man standing in a Ring or Circle,
where the roundness takes away all distinction, none can be before or after
another; Every single person shall then be a Monarch and a Subject, as 'twas in
that Cyclopedian Anarchy described by Euripides, which the Levelling Doctrine
does inevitably introduce, as against all reason, so against the very interest
of the Designers themselves. Against Reason, as a thing utterly impracticable;
To reduce all men to the same pitch of Government being as unreasonable a
Tyranny as was that of Procrustes, who would fit all Bodies to one bed. Against
the interest of the Designers too, who would have all equal indeed besides
themselves; and I may add, Against Religion; For Christ allows no such thing,
and those Higher Powers mentioned by St. Paul clearly imply a distinction. And
who those Higher Powers were, the (...), in the same Verse declare, The Powers
then in being, which can be understood of none but the Roman Emperors. These
were then the Highest Powers on Earth; To these St. Peter commands subjection
as to the Supreme, 1 Pet. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 13.
These, as our Lord tells us, did (...) and (...), Matthew. 20. 25. 2 Cor. 1. 24.
that is, as the words import, exercise such an absolute and supreme authority
over men, as Masters have over their Servants, and Lords over their Vassals.
And so far was Christ from disputing them this their just Authority, Matthew. 17.
27.
that He not only paid them Tribute in token of his own subjection (though not
without the expense of a Miracle) but expressly commands all his to do so; 22.
21.
Render unto Caesar, the word there is (...), Restore to Him his due, as if it
were not so much a Gift as a Debt. Thus did our Lord, and thus did his Apostles
teach us; Nor do we find that any of the Primitive Fathers taught otherwise
than to own Kings as supreme, and depending only upon God. It Is a known saying
that of Tertullian, Ad Scapulam.
Colimus Imperatorem ut hominem a Deo secundum and solo Deo minorem; and that
of Optatus to the like purpose; Adversus Parmen. lib. 3.
Supra Imperatorem non est nisi Deus qui fecit Imperatorem. I should be
infinite, if I should cite Fathers to this purpose, and I think it needless, it
being impossible for any to produced one single passage out of the Ancient
Fathers to the contrary.

That which some object out of 1 Pet. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 2. 13.
That Kings are but (...), an Ordinance of Man; signifies no more than this,
That Kingly Government, as all other, is exercised by men, and designed for the
good of humane society; not that it is not of a Divine Institution: For the
very word (...) there recalls us to God as to its Author, and in the very same
Verse we find it raised to a divine workmanship, Submit your selves to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake. Who as he is called the Ordinance of man
by St. Peter; so is he expressly styled the Ordinance of God, by St. Paul, Romans
13. 2.

But then secondly, May not the Priest now under the Gospel claim a Superiority
over Princes? St. Peter says nothing to countenance that claim, (he strongly
implies the contrary in the word (...)) 1 Pet. 2. 13.
but his pretended Successor will by all means have it so, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
He who exalts himself above all that is called God, to whose Mitre all
Crowns must vail, and that by virtue of a Dabo tibi Claves, which Keys he can
easily turn into a Sword as often as he finds occasion to employ it against
Sovereign Princes, and then any pretense shall warrant the use of it. Moses,
says Aquinas, Comment. in 1 Pet. 2. 9. Exodus 19. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
styles the Jews a Priestly Kingdom, Exodus 19. 6. And St. Peter us Christians a
Kingly Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 9. and from thence he strongly concludes, that as
Judaism did stand through the Kings superiority over Priests: (which is more by
the bye than what Bellarmine and his Associates will grant him) so Christianity
through the Priests superiority over Kings. An argument much like that once
made use of to prove the Pope to be above the Emperor, because it is said, Genesis
1. 16.
That God made a Greater light to rule the day, and a lesser to rule the night.
But to this I shall oppose St. Paul's practice^ and precept. His practice we
have clear, Acts 25. 11. Acts 25. 10, 11.
where he appeals to Caesar as to the highest Judge on Earth, where he says he
ought to be judged; and that, as it is very observable, in a matter of spiritual
concern, as it will plainly appear, by comparing v. 19. here with the sixth
Verse of Chap. 23. v. 19. Chap. 23. 6.
where he tells us that Of the hope and Resurrection of the dead he was called
in question. This was his practice; and he did no more than what he commands
all men to do, to be subject to the Higher Power, that is, to that very Roman
Emperor to whom he appeals, and his (...), Every Soul includes all, whether
Apostle, Evangelist or Prophet, in the Judgment of far better and more
Authentic Interpreters than any of the Romanists, Hom. 23. in Romans
St. Chrysostom, In locum. Si omnis Anima, etiam vestra. Quis vos excepit ab
Universitate? Qui tentat excipere, conatur decipere. Bernard. ad Henr. Senones
f. 1. Ep. 42. Greg. M. lib. 2. Epist. ad Mauritium 72. Et ad Theodoric. Reg.
Fancorum lib. 9. Epist. 53.
Theodoret, Theophylact, Oecumenius and even St. Bernard too. To which I shall
add the practice of Gregory the Great, himself a Pope, but much more mannerly
than his successors, whose humble Addresses to Mauritius the Emperor, whom he
styles his Lord, as also to Theodoric King of the Franks whom he beseeches to
call a Synod, plainly show, how little he then dreamt of standing in
competition with his Prince. A submission his Successors can no more relish
now than his disclaiming the Universal Monarchy. And we know what a quarrel
there was like to have been in this latter age between Paul 5. and the
Republic of Venice, partly upon this account, that They would not suffer some
Non possunt Clerici a Judice saeculari judicari, etiamsi leges civiles non
servent. Bell. de Clericis, lib. 1. c. 38. Rebellio Clerici adversus Principem,
non est crimen laesae Majestatis, quia Principi non est subditus. Em. Sa Aphor.
Tit. Clericus.
Religious Persons to have leave to violate all the Laws of God and of that
State.

And here it is strange to see how lovingly Jesuits and Sectaries agree
together to dethrone and murder the Lords Anointed: How like Sampson's Foxes
they carry fire in their tails while their heads seem to point diverse ways.
Nemo tam prope tam proculque -- Their Principles and practices much alike. That
the Prince was made for the People; In Rebuspublicis Temporalibus si Rex
degeneret in Tyrannum, licet caput sit regni, tamen a populo potest deponi and
eligi alius. Bell. de Council. lib. 2. c. 19. and Recogn. lib. de laicis sect.
Addo experientiam; Laudat Navarrum qui non dubitat affirmare, Nunquam Populum
ita potestatem suam in Regem transfer, quin illam sibi in habitu retineat, ut
in certis quibusdam casibus etiam actu recipere possit.
That the People can never so far transferr their power over to a King but that
they retain the habit of it still within themselves, and may in some cases
actually reassume it; Potestas immediate est tanquam in subjecto in tota
multitudine, and si causa legitima adsit, potest multitudo mutare regnum in
Aristocratiam, aut Democratiam, and e contra, ut Romae factum legimus. Bell. de
Laicis lib. 3. c. 6.
That when Kings transgress Laws they become obnoxious to the Penalties of
them, and may be Verum principem, qui Tyrannus est ratione administrationis,
non posse a privatis interimi quamdiu manet Princeps -- primum a Republ. vel
Comitiis Regni, vel alio habente authoritatem, esse deponendum, ut in ipsius
Personam liceat quicquam attentare. Lessius. lib. 2. de Justit. and Jure c. 9.
dubio 4.
deposed and killed by the People; That we are to distinguish between their
Persons and their Authority, and may with a safe Conscience oppose the former,
though not the latter; And, to sum up all in one, That Dominatio Temporalis
and superioritas in subditos per sententiam Papae potest omnino adimi
Haereticis. Greg. de Valent. To. 3. disp. in Thomam. Dis. 1. qu. 12. p. 2.
Dominion is founded in Grace, Bad Kings have no right to their Crown^* nor bad
men to any of Gods Creatures. All these doctrines are delivered by the Jesuits
either expressly or at least implicitly; and since they first give the
premises, whereof such rebellious conclusions are the clear and natural issues,
it is easy to see to whom our late Pamphleteers are beholding for their
Destructive Principles, and that they have whet those Swords, wherewith they
have cut off the head of their Prince, at the forges of these Philistines.

But we have not so learned Christ. He never taught us to distinguish between
the Person and Authority of a Prince, no more than St. Paul did when he bad us
be subject to the Higher Powers. A nicety coined by Rebellious heads, but which
never came into that of this Holy Apostle, who only conformed himself to the
Roman style, with whom 'twas ordinary to call Persons Potestates in the
Abstract. An Fidenatum Gabiorumve esse Potestas. Juv. Sat. 10. v. Ephesians. 3. 10.
And therefore v. 3. The same Persons are styled Rulers (...), as v. 6. (...)
Ministers in the Masculine, who v. 1. were entitled (...) Powers; to let us
know, That every affront to their Persons is sin because of their Authority.

But then secondly, That Dominion is founded in Grace, so that Subjects may be
free to cast off the Royal yoke, in case a Prince will not, or they at least
persuade themselves, He does not, submit his neck to Christ's, is the very Root
of all Rebellion; A maxim, which not only turns Kings out of their Thrones,
but all Men out of their Possessions, who have not the mark of their Election
visible on their foreheads. A Doctrine, which has shed more blood than now runs
in the veins of living Christians, and is that which in effect did Murder our
late Sovereign. That Religion, Grace or Virtue gives Princes a Right to Govern,
is as false as it is pernicious. Their Right to Govern is annexed to their
Sovereignty, nor are their Persons Sacred in relation to their Divine or ^ral
endowments, but in regard of Empire. For Cyrus was Christus Domini as well as
Josias, and Saul as well as David. Esa. 45. 1, 5.
If Religion made Kings, then should there of old have been no true Kings but
those of Juda, nor any now but those of Christendom. St. Augustine speaking of
Saul, says, Non habebat innocentiam and tamen habebat sanctitatem. August.
contra Lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 48.
He had not Innocence but he had Holiness, not of Life, but of Unction. This
made David so revere him when alive, and so severely punish him, when dead, by
causing the Amalekite to be slain for but falsely reporting himself his
Executioner. The errors or misdemeanors of Kings can no more disanul their
Authority, than man's Unbelief can make void the faith of God. Romans 3. 3.
It Is not every sailing of the husband that can yield his Wife a just cause for
a separation, she must Take him for better or for worse. The King is the Head
of his Subjects, as the Husband is the Head of his Wife; 1 Samuel 15. 17. 1 Cor.
11. 3.
He solemnly weds himself to his people at his Coronation, and his Oath there
makes the match; But what if he break his Oath, shall his Perjury to God make
him lose his just Authority over men? or release his Subjects of their duty?
This is the Sectarian and Jesuitical doctrine; Buchanan and Emanuel Sa both
assure us, Buchan. de jur. regni p. 53. in 8. Edenburg. 1581. Eman. Sa Aphor.
Tit. Tyrannus.
That in such a case it is lawful for any man to take away the Life of a Tyrant,
that is, such a one as they fancy to be so. A piece of Divinity borrowed from
Tully who had said the same thing many Ages before, but warranted by no
Scripture or practice of any Primitive Christians. These all owned and
submitted themselves to Tyrannical Princes. What was the Roman Emperor in St.
Paul's time but such, and does He in the least question his Authority? Does he
not call Him The Ordinance of God? Does he not preach subjection to Him and
that not for fear but for Conscience? Did his Tyranny or wickedness wash off
that holy oil wherewith God had anointed him above his fellows? And what his
Infidelity and Cruelty to boot, could not do then, shall Heresy be able to do
now? Could such faults dethrone Princes, not many of them perhaps would
heretofore have sat fast on their Thrones. Constantius, Valens, Valentinianus,
Arrians all, yet were never thought less Emperors for all that. Julian more,
an Apostate, yet dyed a Prince. But, Vires deerant, Their Subjects then wanted
power to call them to an account. Tertullian has furnished me with an answer;
Apologet. c. 37.
That Christians then filled all places, Towns, Camp and even the Court it
self. Besides, The Theban Legion, who chose rather to be Martyrs than Rebels,
are a pregnant instance to the contrary. Men that durst look any thing in the
face but Majesty, That could stand before any Enemy but not before their
Sovereign except to wait his Commands. Here only their courage failed them;
They could suffer their own blood to be shed, but knew not our late art of
Phlebotomy, of letting out their Princes heart blood. That Arch-Rebel among us,
Job. Goodwin. Anti-Caval.
who with his brother Mariana the Jesuit has written a Book in defense of
Regicide, not knowing what to say to so plain an Instance, betakes himself to
this pretty Fanatical shift: That that honest liberty of King-killing was hid
from some Primitive Christians for some special ends, which God has since
revealed to this latter age; That such an extraordinary patience and passive
courage were necessary in those days, which are inconvenient in ours, wherein
more plentiful light has made us see it expedient rather to be Assassines than
Martyrs. It Is now the wicked's turn to suffer, and Antichrist cannot be
destroyed except those Kings be, which yet the Scripture expressly tells us are
the very Persons that shall pull him down, Rev. 17. 16. Revel. 17. 16.
Thus are we, in a business of such high moment, to be guided by obscure
fanatical conjectures rather than by those plain precepts of Loyalty and
subjection the Scripture gives us, and the man of Sin cannot down without our
sin too. This is the excellent and safe doctrine of Sectaries; This, their
Christian liberty, to shake off that yoke to Princes which Christ has bound so
fast to their necks, and is now become so great a part of his own. He who has
commanded servants to obey even froward Masters, and Children harsh and
unnatural Parents, 1 Pet. 2. 18.
has enjoined subjects as strict an obedience to Tyrannical Princes. What Law
is there for the servant to call his Master to an account, or the Child his
Father? Or where have we any precept or example in Scripture for questioning
Sovereign Princes? Will these Saints challenge to themselves a greater
Authority than Christ ever took upon him? Where do we find that he exercised
any Jurisdiction on the Powers then in being? He who refused to be made a Judge
between private parties? Luke 12. 14.
Will these New Saints pretend to judge the World now, because Gods Saints
shall judge it hereafter? 1 Cor. 6. 2.
Christ indeed tells his Apostles that Mat. 10. 18.
They should be brought before Kings and Governors, but no where that Kings
and Governors should be brought before Them to receive their doom; much less,
before the People, or their Representatives either, since They can give These
no greater a power than themselves had, nor such a power to be sure as they
have once past away. That distinction of Singulis Major and Universis Minor,
coined in the Consistory and Classis, we find no where in Scripture. There we
hear of a King as Supreme, and of inferior Governors sent and empowered by
Him, but nothing of their being above Him that sent them, put them all
together. There we hear that the Highest Power is the Minister of God, not of
the People; Romans 13. 4.
and his Minister to execute wrath on others, not to be liable to the terrible
effects of another wrath. There we are told, that God has put the Sword into
his, not any others hand, That all besides Him do Take, usurp it, and shall
therefore Perish with it, Matthew. 26. 52. Matthew. 26. 52.
Much more they who employ it to His destruction, who has the only right to use
it. We are commanded there to Pray for Kings, not to murder them; 1 Timothy 2. 2.
To lift up our hands to God For, not against them; To submit to the Worst, not
to trample on the Best of them; To bind Kings in Chains, and then Behead them,
is an honor peculiar to the Saints of this Age, not Christ's. Calling a King
to an account was the Brat of Pope Hildebrand's brain. V. Platin. in vita Greg.
7.
Jesuits and Sectaries have broacht and practiced it. Our Calendar presents us
with a Fifth of November, as well as a Thirtieth of January. No Gospel for
this, but the Evangelium Armatum: It suits well with the Turkish Alchoran and
the practice of Janissaries, to make and unmake their Emperor in a day. Christ
bids his Followers cut off their right hand when it offends them, not their
Sovereign's head, when they but fancy Him offensive. A Doctrine good Christians
have ever abhorred, The worst of Jews we see were ashamed of; nay, the worst of
Heathens too utterly disclaimed; And yet Christians, and they who would be
thought the Best, nay, the only true Christians, have allowed, practiced and
maintained.

Applic.
But Christians of another make and temper than heretofore, till new lights
were hung up; Christians who tell us, That a King may be arraigned, sentenced
and put to death by his People when he fails of his duty, and themselves to be
Judges of his failings. A Doctrine, which if in it self true (as it is most
false) would prove here of no other use, but to condemn the Authors and
Abettors of it, since 'twas most wrongly applied by them to One, in whom there
were no such Usurpation, Tyranny, Wickedness, or Weakness, as was pretended. For

1. Here was as Lawful a King as God and Nature, Law and the Subjects Oaths,
could render Him. Here was (...), a King Born, whom neither Addresses nor
Election had made such. A King by Succession (the best Title now that any can
have to a Crown) No Mushrome one, sprung up in a night, but the Son of Nobles,
the blood of so many Royal Veins running in his; one owned for such even by
those that crucified Him, in their Inscription of, Regum Ultimus.

2. A good, pious Christian and Protestant King. Too good for so ungrateful a
People. A People whom He had even loaded and tired out with his gracious
Concessions; that clothed them as Saul did Jerusalem, in Scarlet with other
delights, 2 Samuel 1. 24.
brought Peace and Plenty, Wealth and Propriety, Honor and Security, to the
Nation, every man safely and quietly sitting under his own Vine and Fig Tree. A
nursing Father also to the Church, under whose happy shelter and Protection it
flourished to the admiration and envy of all round about us; A Church, which
(as Augustus is said to have done to Rome) He changed from Brick to Marble,
reforming its manners as much by His own Royal Example, as He did its Structure
by His Bounty and Munificence. Well might He say with His Savior, John 10. 32.
Many good works have I shown you, for which of those works do ye stone me? Had
He made His Will the Rule of His Government, and that Will revealed it self in
twenty years of injustice; Had He worn a Table Book in His Pocket with the
Names of the Nobility marked in it for slaughter; Had He without any Trial at
Law made His Pleasure pass for Sentence, and lop't off Senators heads as fast
as Tarquin did Poppy's; Had He in His Oppressions of the People made them feel
Times such as Tacitus describes, where no man durst be virtuous, lest he should
be thought to upbraid his Prince, and where not only men's Words, but their
Looks and Sighs were proscribed. In a word, Had He with Caligula, wished His
Kingdom one head, that He might strike it off at a blow; The Rebellious
Principles of his Adversaries might have given them some colorable pretense to
cut off His, and He might then seem to have deserved that Title, which their
Charity after His death bestowed upon Him, of Tyrannorum Maximus. But there was
nothing of all this in the case; Here was an Innocent, Just, Virtuous and
Religious King, in whom it is hard to say, which was most eminent, His Piety to
God, or His Love to His subjects; to whom He lived a Father, and for whom He
dyed a Martyr.

3. A Wise and Able King, whose endowments of mind were answerable to His
Virtues, rendering Him worthy of that Scepter He was born to. In uno hoc Caesare
multi Marii. Those several perfections scattered in others, all concentred in
this Excellent Prince. That Kings have larger hearts and abilities than
ordinary men, we learn from 1 Samuel 10. 9. Sam. 10. 9.
That this King had, His most implacable Enemies have, to their own shame,
often acknowledged.

These were His Qualities, these His Crimes, for which He deserved Death from
those, who had no other reason to implead their Sovereign, than a certain Roman
had to sue his fellow Citizen at Law, because he would not take that Dagger
deep enough into his own bowels wherewith he strove to stab him.

And now, Behold the man. Such a Person this day dying not like one of the
Princes, but the vilest of Malefactors, murdered with all the Formalities of
Justice and Devotion, by such as had no power at all over the life of the
meanest of their fellow subjects; A virtuous, Religious Prince, Professing the
same Protestant Religion and expressing the power of it, in his life and at his
death, beyond the most conscientious of private men. The Common Shepherd led
like a Sheep to the slaughter, after so many Declarations published and
Professions made for his Safety and Honor, in cold blood, most barbarously
Butchered on a Scaffold, by the hand of the Hangman, before that part of His
Palace where He had so often appeared in State: What name shall we find for
such a wickedness? A crime black as that Hell it came from, and which nothing
can equal but the defense of it. A crime so infamous to the whole Nation, so
scandalous to the Protestant Religion, of such dangerous consequence to all
Sovereign Princes, and of such pernicious lasting effects to the Church and
State we live in, that it is to be feared its Malignity may reach Posterity, and
'twere happy for us if the Example might dye with it is Authors. These indeed,
some of them, have received the just recompense of their reward, and their
Punishment has been signal as their Villainy. God has at last burnt those rods
wherewith he scourged this his servant, and their Calamity did arise so
suddenly, that Themselves scarce foresaw it. These Malignant Comets, having
blazed a little while, quickly expired in a stench. Their Rise was sudden, and
their Fall too. Children remember the beginning of their glory, and old men
have lived to see an end of it. They are now the Hatred of all men, and shall
no doubt hereafter be the hissing of all Nations. These Sons of Zeruiah too
strong for their Prince, have not been found so for the Almighty. For what has
been the effect of all their Policy but destruction to these Achitophels and
glory to our David? That stone which these Babel Builders refused, is now
become the head of the Corner. God has set his Posterity Upon his Holy hill of
Sion, and may it like that Sion never be removed, but stand fast for evermore.
May the Scepter never depart from this Jacob, nor Seed from his Loins, until
Shilo come again.

To conclude; Let us pay Him, who this day exchanged a Temporal for an Eternal
Crown, that Reverence and Respect which is due to the memory of so glorious a
Martyr. And the best way to do it will be to honor Him in Him, who is his
second Self, the undoubted Heir of his Crown and Virtues, his (...), the lively
Image and Superscription of this Great Caesar. And while we Render unto that
Caesar's Son the honor due to Him, we shall at the same time Render unto God
the things that be Gods, that honor and obedience we owe Him, who has twisted
the King's honor with his own, for, Fear God and honor the King, are
inseparable; and They who so honor God in his Vicegerent, Himself will also
honor, and make them Kings too hereafter, Which God, etc. Amen.

ERRATUM.
Page 4. line 34. for those read these.


