A Consultation ABOUT RELIGION: OR, What RELIGION is best to be Chosen.

WITH AN APPENDIX UPON THIS QUESTION: Whether every one may be Saved in his own
Religion.

Translated out of Latin, in which it was Written by an Eminent Professor of
Divinity.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, MDCXCIII.

THE PREFACE.
THE following Treatise was written in Latin, by an Eminent Professor of
Divinity at the time when the Divisions of those who were fallen off from the
Catholic Communion, seemed to separate them from one another, at as great a
Distance as they were from her who had been their common Parent. It was
immediately Translated into several Languages; as French, Dutch and English,
and met with a very considerable Success, in these four great Districts of the
Anti-Catholic Party, viz. Germany, Holland, France and England.

The Edition that was in our Language, being by length of time spent and gone,
and those few which may be left, appearing somewhat out of Fashion, and so less
agreeable to this present Age, it has been thought worth the pains to
Translate it a new, and to Publish it as it is here; supposing it may be no
less proper and useful now, when the Divisions of the foresaid four great
Parties, are much more Dilated and Multiplied then they were then; and the
Minds of Men far more unsettled, and busy in seeking where to fix, as to that
Great Concern of Mankind, the true Religion.

Indeed since the greatest part of Mankind are Born and Bred up in Darkness,
and in the Shadow of Death, it should seem that the Divine Goodness could not
have found out or bestowed a more seasonable or more necessary Blessing upon
them, then in providing a means whereby they might be drawn out of such a
miserable state, by enlightening their minds with the Knowledge of this true
Religion.

But, it has pleased the same Divine Goodness, to temper so great a Mercy with
an inscrutable mixture of Justice, in permitting, that this true Religion
should not be so Visible and Evident to all Enquirers, but that there is still
great Danger of Mistaking and Miscarrying in the Search.

This cannot but Cause great unquietness to all serious Enquirers within
themselves, and no less Trouble and Contest among the several Pretenders to it
in the World; and hereby, that which was designed by Almighty God, to be the
greatst Consolation of Men's Minds in this Life, and the only Ground of Hope for
the Life to come, is become the occasion of the greaest Disturbances in the
one, and of endless Miseries in the other.

Nevertheless (to the Glory of God's Grace be it spoken, and to the Honor of
the True Religion) these difficulties and obscurities are not so many nor so
great, but that they may be pierced and broken through by the truly Humble,
Serious and Sincere Enquirer.

They are indeed impenetrable, and an occasion of stumbling to the Passionate,
and to the Prejudiced, to the Proud and Self-Conceited. But this is not the
fault of Religion, nor of the means provided, but of such Persons; and it is no
more then what happens every day in things, of which there is no dispute; and
where the Truth and the Right are Discernable and Unquestionable at first
Sight. For if the Mind of Man be taken up beforehand with any of these
Preventions, no Light or Evidence of any Truth, though never so certain, can
make way for its Reception, as we see in the great and known Sins which
habitually reign in some Men, in spite of all Conviction, and in the frequent
Preferences of Temporals before Eternals, even amongst those who are more
Docile and Obedient.

Such then being the Weakness and Corruption of Man's Heart, that the least
adhesion to any one Object, renders it loose and indifferent to all others the
while; it should seem, that those, whose Office and Profession it is, to reduce
such as are in Error, to the Knowledge and Love of Truth, should not labor s^
much, or so soon to Convince their Understandings, as to Dispose their Wills,
or at least to endeavor the Preparation of the one, Proportionably to the
Cultivation of the other. Since to do otherwise, is but to sow good Seed in
Thorny or Stony Ground, contrary to the Rules and Practice of Natural and
Spiritual Husbandry.

But, what means will you say, can be proposed Sufficient and Efficacious
enough to work such Dispositions in Men so perversely affected?

Why truly, since it is not Naturally in the Power of one Man to gain admission
into the Will of another, but by the way of the Understanding; as also there is
no means of attacking the Understanding, but by the imagination, and by the
Senses: It must be acknowledged, that it is easier to discover then to remove
these grand Impediments of finding out or embracing the Truth. For all the ways
and passages whereby the Truth should enter, are stopped and filled up with
Notions and Fancies, which though vain and weak in themselves, yet by their
near approach and fair appearance, keep Truth and right Reason at such a
distance, that all their Efforts fall short, and do no Execution.

However, some preliminary Labor and Industry methinks might be used to remove
such Rubbish, and to clear the Passages from those Obstructions which forestal
the Truth. And in the first place, it will not be hard to Convince even such
Persons, that all such Passions and Prejudices are at least in themselves mean
and unworthy: For the contrary Virtues are acknowledged and approved by all,
even by those who have the least share of them. Secondly, it is not hard to
Convince the same Persons, that they and all Men are Naturally very prone and
subject to such Passions; and that therefore they ought to be jealous, and even
inquisitive, whether they be not actually prevented by them. Thirdly, They are
thus far agreed already with the Truth, that such Passions are its Enemies; and
that there is no holding Intelligence with it and them at the same time; that
they are the Causes and Promoters of all Error, as they are also Fed and
Cherished themselves by Error. And Lastly, that whosoever fails or falls short
of attaining to the Knowledge of the Truth, by the Fault of these Passions,
they will be so far from excusing, that they will be the aggravation of his Sin
and Misery.

In the next place, it may not be fruitless, to represent that the Virtues and
Dispositions contrary to these Passions are so indispensable that never any one
attained to the Truth without them. It is the first Lesson in the School of
Christ, to seek and receive the Kingdom of Heaven, as a little Child that is
with a Meek, Docile, Humble, Willing Mind. To seek it in the first place, as
the only thing necessary, and to be willing to part with all things for it. The
Truth can no more fail to enter into a Soul thus disposed, then the Sun to
reflect it self in a well Polished and Spotless Glass.

And such Dispositions as these are in themselves, and even to Natural common
Sense do appear so equitable, that they are required in Disciples of all Arts
and Sciences, how much more then are they to be demanded in all Persuits of
Divine and Supernatural Knowledge.

The Teachers and Professors of which seem to have a Right to exact them of
all, who pretend to be their Disciples; and they may and ought to protest
beforehand against all Passionate, Prejudiced, Self-interessed,
Self-conceited, Arrogant, Presumptuous, Unserious and Insincere Discoursers.

To such, Books Written by Angels and Sermons Preached by God himself, would
prove unfruitful; as was the Case of the Scribes and Pharisees, even for these
very Reasons; whilst of the Poor and Simple, of the Meek and Lowly, a few words
of an unlearned Fisherman could Convert Thousands.

To Conclude, if these Dispositions are so necessary in all other Inquests,
they are much more so in the perusers of the following Treatise. Which being a
Consult, does in a most particular manner, require an Impartial, Unbiast and
Unprejudiced Reader; for as much as he is invited hither, not so much as a
Party, as a Judge, in whom a contrary Disposition is intolerable. Let him
therefore consider, that he is to sit and hold the Balance in the Scales of
which are to be put and weighed the opposite Practices of Two contrary Parties,
great and zealous Pretenders to, and Assertors of the True, that is (as each
thinks) of their own Respective Religion.

Nothing will be offered to his Animadversion, but unquestionable Matters of
Fact, of which the common Sense of Mankind may be judge, all begun and
transacted within these Hundred and Fifty Years: The Effects and Consequences
of which do infinitely Touch and Concern him. And therefore, though he be
advised to hold indifference in the Examen, yet let him have a care he do not
so in the Decision; for it is of terrible importance to him, either not to
determine at all, or to determine wrong. For when all is done, he must
unavoidably in the end become a Party, who, here in the beginning is made a
Judge, and the Sentence which he shall, or shall not Pronounce (it matters not
which) if it be not the right, will fall heavy only upon himself.

Let him therefore Read and attend with Fear; and to all the Preparations
recommended before in this Preface, let him add this one more of Earnest and
Fervent Prayer, that God the Enlightner of all Minds, and the Mover of all
Hearts, will please to Visit his with the Twofold Grace of Faith and Charity,
that he may see and chose, and for ever Embrace and Adhere to the only means
for Everlasting Life, The True Religion, Amen.

ERRATA.
Page 15. l. 1. read, Contrition or Sorrow for sins past is necessary. p. 18. l.
30. r. No Liberty. p. 32. l. 4. r. Paralytics. ibid. l. 7. Dele, such. p. 37.
l. 2. r. Bolsecus. p. 51. l. 2. Dele, only. p. 57. l. 30. r. regimen. p. 63. l.
22. r. his head. p. 65. l. 14. r. Faith. ibid. l. 15. r. Evinced. ibid. l. 21.
r. Gods Comandments. p. 67. l. 7. Dele that. p. 70. l. 5. r. profession. p. 72.
l. 26. r. them. p. 73. l. 21. r. Ordination of Degree Descending. p. 79. l.
ult. r. Heresy. p. 82. l. 9. r. Advantageous to their own Authority. p. 88. l.
9. r. The Prophets. ibid. Their Mission. p. 92. l. 25. r. Raisers. ibid. l. 26.
r. tho they. p. 104. l. 30. r. in two. p. 105. l. 12. r. free. p. 107. l. 10.
r. The Son. p. 110. l. 21. r. They varied as long as they lived. p. 114. l. 23.
r. Faith in Christ. p. 119. l. 6. r. or. p. 123. l. 16. r. probation. p. 124.
l. 12. r. Add. ibid. Dele and. ibid. l. 14. r. Contrivances. They p. 132. l.
3. r. required. p. 134. l. ult. r. Occultly. p. 137. in the Margin r. Foxio, p.
138. l. 4. r. Salvation. ibid. l. 8. r. Christ has. p. 139. l. 9. r. this. p.
141. l. r. Basilides, and Carpocrates. p. 143. l. ult. r. de Iconomachis. p.
155. l. 26. r. preside. p. 156. l. 6. Dele (..) after Scriptures. p. 164. l.
22. r. Dominic. p. 170. l. 19. r. infinite. p. 173. l. 18. r. Day and Night. p.
189. l. 6. r. Sacrifice. p. 190. l. 6. for Know, r. Honor. p. 198. l. penult.
r. Vain. p. 199. l. 15. r. is. p. 208. l. 27. r. themselves.

What Faith and Religion, is best to be embraced.
NEver was there greater Variety of Religions, than in these our days, and
never more dispute about the True one. Many waver up and down therein, all
their Lives long, and never come to fix upon any; but shift their Religion, as
Men do their Lodgings, to try where their Minds may be most at ease. Others,
without any deliberation, blindly venture upon the first that comes in their
way; and if you ask them, why this, rather than any of the rest, all they can
say for themselves, is, they take this for the best; or perhaps (which yet
every one pretends in behalf of his own) because it is most conformable to the
Pure Word of God.

And yet such a choice as this, requires the greatest search and deliberation
imaginable, as upon which our eternal Salvation depends. Surely Eternal
Salvation and Damnation are Matters of no small Moment, in comparison with
which all other things (good or bad) are as nothing. Now these depend upon the
Goodness of your Religion. If your Religion be good, 'twill be easy (by the
Grace of God) to obtain Salvation; but if bad, it is impossible to be saved.
For, by a bad or false Religion, you cannot please God, Heb 11. and
consequently you can never obtain pardon of your Sins, nor true Justice, nor by
any Means be made partaker of Christ's Redemption. And so you still remain in
Death, and the Wrath of God abides on you. For all Mankind, without such
Redemption and New Life in Christ, do remain in the Death of Sin, and are the
Children of Wrath; but whosoever has not the true Religion, has no share in
such Redemption, and therefore must necessarily abide in Death, be a Child of
Wrath, and become Fuel for Hellfire.

Now this true Religion is but one, and cannot be many fold. For there is but
one Truth, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and one Lord of all, Ephesians. 4. From
whence it follows; First, That all Religions, all Beliefs, and Confessions of
Faith, besides one, are false, noxious, pestiferous, and introduced by the
Devil (the first Author of them) who is the Father of Lies. And Secondly, That
none who does not profess this Religion, can ever obtain Salvation, and all
that are without it (though they live otherwise never so laudably) will perish
everlastingly. For that which the Apostle says of Charity (If I could speak
with the Tongue of Men and Angels, if I should know all Mysteries, and should
distribute all my goods to the Poor, and deliver my Body to be burnt, but want
Charity, it would nothing profit me) may with greater Reason be said of the
true Faith and Religion, which is the Foundation of Charity, and all other
Christian Virtues. Thirdly, It follows, that it is a gross and stupid Error of
some of the Vulgar, who esteem it sufficient to Salvation, if you only believe
in Christ, and that he dyed for your Sins; although as to many other Points of
Faith (pertaining to the Sacraments and Sacrifice of the Church, etc.) you
believe nothing. For after this rate, almost all sort of Heretics should be
saved. For all of them believe in Christ (otherwise they were not Heretics,
but Apostates) and believe (some few excepted) that he dyed for our Sins. Then
also the Montanists and Novatians, Donatists, Sabellians, Arrians, Macedonians,
Eutychians, Monotholites, and the like Pests of the Church shall be saved. Why
then has the Church, in all Ages, so vehemently opposed her self against
Heresies? Why does St. Paul the Apostle command us to avoid the Man that is an
Heretic, after the 1st or 2d Admonition? Tit 2. Why does he bid us beware of
their Speech, which eats as a Canker? 2 Timothy 2. In vain all these things are
said and done, if Heretics may be saved. I am sure this Fancy is against the
Consent of all Ages. Let us suppose (says St. Augustine) a Man to be chaste,
Lib. 4. contr. Donat. c. 8.
continent, not covetous, nor idolatrous; but bountiful and compassionate to
the Poor; an Enemy to none, not contentious, patient, quiet, envying none,
sober, frugal, but yet a Heretic; such a one, without all doubt (merely
because he is an Heretic) shall never enjoy the Kingdom of God. For (as St.
James witnesses) he that has offended in one Commandment, is made guilty of
all, James 2. and Ioseth all Justice, though he keeps the rest; because he
contemns the Lawmakers himself, who made the whole Law: So he that obstinately
denies one Point of Faith, although he believe the rest, is guilty of
dis-believing all, and loses his whole Faith and Religion, because he despises
the Author of it. For it is one and the same first and supreme Verity, which
has revealed all Points of Faith, and proposed them to our Belief by the
Church, his Spouse, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. He therefore that
shall obstinately reject one Article of Faith, and will not acquiesce in the
Testimony of the Church, is thereby judged to dis-esteem the Authority of God,
(the supreme Verity) of whom the Church is the Publisher, Interpreter, and
Organ.

Neither matters it, that there are some principal Points of Faith, which he
thinks he believes; because he does not believe them with Divine Faith, which
relies only upon Divine Authority, that is infallible; otherwise he would
believe the rest proposed to him, in the same manner; but he believes them with
a kind of Humane Faith; that is to say, because by his private Judgment he is
induced to believe them, taking upon himself the Authority of judging and
discerning what things are to be believed, and what denied and rejected.
Therefore the chief reason or motive of his Belief is private Judgment; and for
that Cause all his Faith is humane and unprofitable.

It is therefore most certain, that as true Justice extends it felf to the
performance of all the Commandments, so the true Faith (which is requisite to
Salvation) extends it self to a belief of all those things which God has
revealed; so that we must believe them all, either expressly, or be ready to
believe them, if they be propounded to us the right way.

Hereby is manifest, what great Care is to be taken, that we choose and profess
the true Faith and Religion; since it is the Foundation of our Salvation, and
that without it, we shall certainly be damned. Whereupon I have undertaken to
propound some Considerations (obvious and manifest to all rational People)
whereby they may take a right course in their Choice of the true Religion.

The first Consideration drawn from the tending to Perfection, which Christian
Religion excites us to.
THat Religion is to be preferred, which conduces most to Purity and Holiness
of Life, which draws our Minds from all affection to earthly Things, and raises
them to the love of heavenly. For this is the chief end of Religion, to
alienate the Minds of Men from Things temporal here below, and to elevate them
toward the thinking, loving, and pursuing of such as are celestial and
eternal. Only the Catholic Religion teaches perfection of Life.
Now such is only the Catholic Religion. For this persuades to abstain from
the Pleasures of the Flesh, and Snares of this Life. This alone teaches to
contemn Riches and Honors, and to renounce them (when possessed) for Christ's
sake. This exhorts to Fastings, Hair-cloth, and other Afflictions of the Body,
whereby the Flesh is brought under Subjection, and subdued to the Spirit.

Hence are there such great numbers of Men and Women in the Catholic Church,
who contemning Riches, Honors and Pleasures (which they either enjoyed, or
might have enjoyed) have bid adieu to the World; and mortifying their Flesh,
have wholly devoted themselves to the Service of God, and Contemplation of
Divine Things. Amongst these are many Noble Men, and their Sons and Daughters;
many of the rich Gentry, and their Children, many great Wits, many famous for
their Eloquence, and knowledge in all kind of Literature; which is an evident
sign of the Divine Spirit, and true Religion. For that Religion cannot choose
but be Heavenly, which withdraws Man's Nature (fixed on Earthly Things) and
raises it up to Heavenly; which expels the Love of that which is Temporal, and
instills an affection to that which is Everlasting; and in a word, which can
work such wonderful Changes in Men. The Tree is known by its Fruits.

Other Religions, especially the Lutheran, Calvinist, and Fanatic (For of
these only I intend to treat in this Discourse) do no such thing. For they are
so far from teaching Mortification of the Flesh, Other Religions take away the
study of Perfection and of all good Works.
Contempt of Earthly Things, and cutting off carnal Pleasures, that they call
Fasting the Tradition of Men, whereby God is worshipped in vain; abstinence
from Flesh with them, is Superstition; Monastic Vows, they say, are impious,
vain, and not at all to be observed; that Chastity is impossible; that all Men
are bound to marry, and lie with a Woman, which Luther affirms to be as
necessary, as Meat, Drink, L. de Vit. conjug.
and Sleep, By which Doctrine it is come to pass, that none of those who are of
these New Religions, do either mortify their Flesh by Fasting, or abide
continent, or abstain from Conjugal and Carnal Pleasures, or abandon their
Riches, and embrace Poverty, for the Love of Christ; but all of them are for a
sensual, easy, and Worldly Life, agreeable to the Inclination of the Flesh,
and corrupt Nature. None of them have so much as a Notion of what it is to lead
an Angelical Life upon Earth, as many of the Saints have done, and many still
do in the Catholic Church.

None of them can bring themselves to cast off the Cares and Solicitudes of
this Life, and break the Bonds of the World, that, with more Freedom, they may
follow Christ, and imitate his most holy Life, in this Mortal Flesh. For,
whatsoever is above the common and vulgar way of living, these New Religions
dis-allow. Who then does not see, that none of them is the Religion of Christ?
For, although Christ does not oblige us by Precept to Poverty, Chastity, single
Life, etc. yet he exhorts and counsels us to practice them, promising great
Rewards to those that shall embrace them, and has shown us how to do it by his
own Example. And by this Counsel and Invitation of Christ, innumerable Persons
of all Degrees, Age; Sex, Nation, and Condition, have attained to the highest
pitch of Sanctity attainable in this Life, and thereby became admirable to the
whole World.

But these New Religions plainly reject such pursuits of Perfection, as things
impossible or superstitious. Nor do they discourage this eminent Sanctity
alone; but likewise all practice, even of good Works. For they teach, Luth.
art. 31. and 36. and lib. de liber. Christiana. Call. lib. 3 Instit. c. 12.
Sect. 4. etc. 14. Sect. 9. Luth. in Assert. art. 1 Call. lib. 3. Instit. c. 11.
Sect. 13, and 14. c. 19. Sect. 2, 4, 7.
That a Man sins in all his Works, although God does not impute this as Sin to
Believers. Again, That Man, by all his good Works, merits nothing of God, nor
is he made more gracious to him, nor become more just, nor shall obtain a
greater Reward, whether he does many or few good Works, or none at all; but for
his Faith alone, God esteems and crowns him.

If this Doctrine be true, who would trouble himself about good Works, or give
himself to Prayer, to Almsgiving, to Fasting, to help his Neighbor in
necessity? For if there be sin in all these Works, no Merit, nor Reward, or any
thing of Advantage thereby, what should move me to do them? Who will bestow his
Labor and Wealth in vain, and forsake the Temporal Commodities of this Life,
to no purpose? These new Religions therefore cut off all good Works, leaving
only Faith to Men, as all in all, to attain Salvation. Truly, it seems not
credible, that our Lord (by so much Labor and Pains, by so many Heavenly
Admonitions, by his Sacred Blood, Cross, and Death) would be the Founder of
such a barren Religion.

Mean while, by thus attributing the merit of Eternal Life to our good Works,
An Objection refuted.
we do not obscure the merits of Christ, as our Adversaries object; but rather
illustrate and exalt them. For the Church has decreed (as an Article of Faith)
that Christ's Merits are so efficacious and universal, Trid. Sess. 6. c. 16.
that he has not only by them merited for us Everlasting Life; but even that
strength and power, by which we also merit. The efficiency of Christ's Merits.
As he does not diminish God's Omnipotency, but magnifies and extols it, who
says, that it not only operates and produces all things, but confers also upon
Creatures the power of operating and producing the like. For there is nothing
more declares the excellency and perfection of the Cause, than that it is not
only able to operate it self, but can give strength and ability to others to
operate. Therefore, when we say, that Christ not only merited for us Eternal
Life, but also confers a power to merit it, we far more extol the efficacy of
Christ's Merits, than they who teach, he only merited all, and gave no power to
us, to cooperate with his Merits. They therefore rather are injurious to
Christ, who take from him this virtue, and efficacy of his Merits. As some
Philosophers, who teach, that no Creatures have power to operate, in-grafted in
them, but only the uncreated Power of God does all things, do derogate from
God's Omnipotency, as if it were not able to confer on them a power to operate
and cooperate with God. He indeed would be injurious to Christ, that should
ascribe to Man any virtue of meriting, not received from the Merits of Christ;
as it would be an injury to God, to allege, that Creatures have power to
operate, not derived from God's Omnipotency. In a word, as the Operations of
Creatures are referred to God, as the Author of them all; because he gives them
force and power, and concurs together with them, as the universal efficient
Cause; so all the merits of the Just, are referred to Christ, as the Author of
them all, because he gives them all the virtue and strength which they have,
and concurs together with them, as the universal meritorious Cause. I omit many
other things, which might be said of this Matter.

The Second Consideration, in that it excludes all Licentiousness to Sin.
THat Religion also is to be preferred as most acceptable to God, which admits
of no License to Sin; but has many ways proper to it self to hinder it. For, as
the Religion, which is of God, ought to animate, and allure Men's Minds to the
study of good Works; so likewise it should deterr them from sinning, by
teaching them the fear of God, and (as much as possibly it can) by preventing
all Sin.

Now it plainly appears, that such is the Catholic Religion, which has many
particular ways to cut off all License to Sin.

First, By the Sacrament of Penance. For many are extremely afraid to sin,
when they perceive themselves obliged to reveal in Confession all their
peculiar Crimes, and undergo a Penance for them; and if they have wronged their
Neighbor by Word or Deed, they are bound to make Restitution, and
Satisfaction. Then again, in this Sacrament, there is required a hearty sorrow
for our Sins, and purpose of amendment of Life; thereby also is conferred Grace
and Assistance from God to perform the same.

Secondly, By the Doctrine of Satisfaction and Purgatory. For it teaches, that
after the Guilt and eternal Punishment of Sin is remitted, there remains
oftentimes the Obligation of a grievous temporal Punishment; which if it be not
expiated (in this life) by good Works, that is, by Prayer, Alms, Fasting, and
the like, we must suffer (after this Life) the most bitter Torments of
Purgatory. For God permits no Sin to escape unpunished.

Thirdly, By teaching that we incurr Eternal Damnation by one mortal Sin,
unless it be blotted out by true Repentance in this Life; and that Faith avails
nothing to the pardon of our Sins, without true Repentance.

Fourthly, By imprinting on Man's Mind the Fear of God several ways; as by
putting us in Mind of the variety of God's Judgments. who will never have us
secure of our Salvation, but always watch and pray, always remain sober, and
bent to good Works, lest some time, perchance, we fall into Temptation, or be
supplanted by the deceit of the Devil, or trip by Inconsideration; or being
unprepared, be surprised by sudden Death. Hence we see in good Catholics (who
earnestly endeavor to live according to their Religion) a wonderful Solicitude
and Care to avoid Sin; and if (through Humane Frailty) they offend, presently
they expiate and amend them.

Now, no other Religions do these things; but do rather rid Men of all the fear
of God, and open a great Gate to all Licentiousness.

First, In taking away the Sacrament of Confession, They take away the Fear of
God, and give a free scope to Sin.
by which (as is aforesaid) Men are wonderfully restrained from Sin. For they
call it Man's Invention, the Murder of Consciences, and mere Superstition.
It Is strange, that any Superstition, or humane Invention, should have so great
a Power, to make People reform their Lives, and gain Peace of Conscience. This
Virtue, even the Lutherans themselves acknowledged, being taught by Experience.
For Sotus reports (who was present) when the Emperor was in Germany, Ju. 4. d.
18. q. 1. a. 1.
an Ambassador was sent him from the famous City of Norimburgh, by whom the
Senate humbly petitioned, that his Imperial Majesty would be pleased to command
the use again of Auricular Confession; for they said, that they found by
Experience, that their Republic (after the taking away of Confession) abounded
with secret Crimes against Justice and other Virtues,

This Address (says Sotus) made the Emperor laugh: For if, by Divine Authority,
People are not obliged to confess their secret Sins, and that a Priest has no
Power to absolve them (according to their Doctrine) how could they imagine (by
any Humane Ordinance, without benefit of Pardon) they could be compelled to it?

Secondly, Because they do not only abolish Confession, but also the Virtue of
Repentance; since they deny that Contrition is necessary, nor Sorrow for Sins
past; it being one of Luther's Articles, Art. 6.
That Contrition makes a Man a greater Sinner. And Calvin quoting the Saying of
St. Hierome, Lib. 4. c. 19. Sect. 17.
That Penance is the Second Plank after Shipwreck, affirms it to be
notoriously impious, and not to be excused.

Thirdly, Because they deny the necessity of Satisfaction; Call. l. 3. c. 1.
Sect. 38. Luth. in assert. art. 5. and 6.
saying, it is injurious to Christ's Satisfaction, as if ours were available,
and Christ's insufficient.

Fourthly, Luth. Epist. ad Walden. de Euch. Call. 3. l. c. 5. Sect. 6.
Because they deny Purgatory, and all Temporal Chastisements of Souls, after
this Life.

Fifthly, because they deny that there is any Obligation of a Temporal
Punishment, Luth sup. and in assert. art. 5. Call. sup. and l. 3. c. Sect. 30.
when the Fault is pardoned; for that the Punishment is always remitted with
the Sin.

Sixthly, Because they teach, Luth. in assert. art. 1. Call. l. 3. c. 11. Sect.
13. and 14. etc. 19. Sect. 2.4, 17.
that Faith alone suffices to the remission of all Guilt and Pain, and nothing
more is required.

Seventhly, Because they teach, that no Sin is imputed to him that has a
special Faith. For this Reason, Luther said, that the Decalogue (or Ten
Commandments) no more belong to us, Luth de liber Christ. Call. l. 3. c. 4.
Sect. 28. and l. 2. c. 8. Sect. 58.
than the Ceremonies of the Old Law; and all Obligation to keep them, is
totally abrogated by the Coming of Christ; that is to say, the violation of
them is no more imputed to Believers, than the violation of the Ceremonial Law.
That all these things are taught by them, is manifest, by the Quotations in the
Margent, and well known by all those that are any thing acquainted with the
Doctrine of these Sects.

These things being so, it is most clear and manifest, that by such means the
Fear of God is utterly banished from the Hearts of Men, and the Reins let loose
to all manner of Sins: Nay, that there is as great Licentiousness caused by
these Religions, as by Atheism, or rather greater. For, if no Sin is imputed to
him (as to the Fault or Punishment) who has but this special Faith, why may he
not venture to commit the most horrible Crimes? For what should he fear? Hell
or Purgatory? But his Faith tells him, that although Sin in its self is
grievous and odious, yet it shall not be imputed to him. Should he fear the
Wrath of God, and Subtraction of his Grace? But God does not impute Sin to him,
and cannot be angry with him, by reason of Christ's Satisfaction. Should he be
afraid of temporal Satisfaction and Confession? But these are taken away, as
superstitious. What then should he stand in fear of, more than an Atheist? Or,
how is not the Door as open to him, for committing all manner of Wickedness, as
to the Atheist? What the Atheist does, the Scripture witnesses, saying, The
Fool has said in his Heart, there is no God; they are corrupted, and have done
abominable Works; there is none that does Good, no not one, Psalm. 13. The
Atheist does this, by casting off all fear of the Divine Vengeance, which keeps
Mortals in awe, and curbs them from Sin: But these Religions do no less expel
the fear of God's Chastisement and Revenge, whilst they teach that no Sin (as
to guilt or punishment) is imputed to him that only believes, and that he shall
never be punished for it.

Nay, I add farther, That this salutary Fear of God, is more extirpated by
these Religions, than by Atheism: For few Atheists hold, for certain, that
there is no Deity; but many of them doubt, and fear the contrary; and therefore
they are not without some fear of Vengeance to fall upon them, which makes them
abstain from many Sins. But these Religions hold for certian and undoubtedly,
that Sins are not imputed to Believers, and therefore they quite cast off all
fear and apprehension of punishment. For this Reason, they far more slacken the
reins of licentiousness to perpetrate all kind of Wickedness than Atheists do.

And this not by one way only, but by several.

First, In Teaching, that Sins are not imputed to Believers, Four several ways
they expel the fear of God.
although they be never so many and great, as aforesaid.

Secondly, By Teaching, That all who have true Faith are predestined, and
that they ought to believe so with all certainty. For, if all Believers of
these Sects are predestined, Call. l. 3. c. 2. 6.7.11.12.15.16, 38.
and are bound firmly to believe themselves so, Why should they be solicitous
to do well, and fly the Works of the Flesh, which the Apostle relates, Gal.
5.19. For they cannot fear to lose their Salvation, and be cast into Hell;
because God's Predestination is effectual and immutable; and the Predestinate
cannot possibly perish: Nor need they fear the pains of Purgatory, which they
believe not; nor the Scourges of this Life, when God lays no imputation of Sin
to their charge.

Thirdly, ^u^h. in Assert. art. 36.
By taking away Free Will, and Teaching, that all things are done by an
ineevitable necessity; that Man is unable to make his ways good or bad: For if
there is Liberty, there is properly no Sin; as a Lion by devouring a Man,
though he does a mischief, yet he sins not; because he does it not freely, but
by the impulse of Nature; nor is is it in his Power to moderate this impulse.
No Man will deserve punishment, because what he does is of necessity; therefore
there will be no Hell, nor punishment after this Life: For it would be a great
and intolerable Cruelty, that Men should be condemned to Eternal Torments, for
doing that which they cannot possibly avoid: Why then do they fear to follow
the Lusts and Desires of their Heart, and commit what Sins soever they list?

Fourthly, When they teach, That all the Works of Men (as well good as bad) are
predestined of God from Eternity; Luth. sup. Call. l. 1. c. 17. 5. c. 13. 1.
and, that they may be done in time, God inclines, incites, forces, and decrees
Man's Will to act them all. For, if God equally operates good and bad in us,
there is no reason why we should fly Evil, or fear any punishment: For, God is
not a Revenger of that, of which he himself is the Author; nor can he justly
punish us for those Crimes which he will have done, and which he forces us to
do; for this were more than Tyrannical Cruelty, which is far from God.

Hereby it is clearer than the Noon Day, that these Religions (four ways) shake
off all fear of God from Men's Hearts, and give as great License to all manner
of Wickedness, as ever any Atheist: And it is so much the more pernicious,
because not so openly impious, but having a show and pretense of Religion, and
Honor of God; namely, under the specious and plausible Titles of a Special
Faith, Satisfaction of Christ, Liberty of the Gospel, and Providence of Divine
Predestination. Under color of these fair Words, so much Poison is swallowed,
as totally corrupts the Minds and Manners of Men. Who therefore, that has but a
spark of right Reason and Understanding can believe these Religions are of God?

The Third Consideration from the Sanctity of the Professors.
THat Religion is to be preferred, wherein most are famous for Holiness of
Life: For it cannot possibly be, that a bad Religion should bring us to Piety,
or that true Sanctity can consist with a Wicked Religion. But the Catholic
Religion has had many in all Ages, that have led most Holy Lives, by the
General Confession of all Christians. Among whom (to single out some of each
Age, and omitting innumerable others) I reckon the Great St. Anthony, St.
Hilarion, St. Gregory Thaumaturge, St. Nicholas Bishop of Mire, St. Athanasius,
St. Gregory Nazianzen, St. Basil, St. Symeon Sty lite, St. Cyprian, St. Hilary,
St. Martin, St. Ambrose, St. Hierome, St. Augustine, St. Benedict, St. Gregory
the Great, St. Vaust, St. Amand, St. Wineck, St. Bertin, St. Willebrord, St.
Romuald, St. Norbert, St. Dominick, St. Boniface, St. Bruno, St. Bernard, St.
Francis, St. Bonaventure, St. Thomas of Aquin, St. Francis of Paul, and many in
our own Age. That all these were of the Roman Catholic Religion is not to be
doubted, since they adhered to the Roman Church, made profession of her Faith,
and strongly maintained it; and because likewise a great many of them were
Monks, and obliged, by their Vows, to lead a Monastic Life; yea, all the Rules
of Monastic profession sprung from them. That these were most Holy Men, is
verifyed by the general Confession of all Christians, throughout so many Ages,
wherein each of them lived; nor was there ever any question made of it; the
same being confessed by Heretics, especially of St. Bernard, St. Dominick, and
St. Francis. It would therefore be a great absurdity and impudence to deny the
Truth of that (or in the least question it) which is acknowledged by the
general consent of all the World.

If these Men therefore were Saints, and Catholics, (as all the World
believes,) the Roman Catholic Religion (which they held and professed) must
necessarily be the true Religion, and proceed from the Spirit of God.

First, Because it is impossible, that a false Religion can bring us to true
Sanctity; for Religion is the Foundation of Sanctity: That Celestial Edifice
cannot be built upon a vain thing, upon a pernicious and sacrilegious Lie, as
every Lie in Religion is. It cannot be, that a false Religion should withdraw
the Mind from Earthly Things, and raise it to Heavenly; that it should inflame
the Heart with Divine Love, and urge it to have a care of our Neighbor's
Salvation, with so much pains and Labor. Now the Holy Catholic Religion
(which these Men professed and practiced) perfected all these things in them,
and therefore it cannot possibly be false.

Secondly, Without the true Religion it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.
But, by the consent of all, these Men pleased God, and were his great Friends:
Therefore their Religion was true: For how, by a false Religion, could they
please God, who is the Truth?

Thirdly, If their Religion was not true, and from God, then 'twas from the
Devil: For he is a Liar from the beginning, and the Father of Lies, Jo. 8.44.
He has always contrived (by his Lies and Deceits) to deprave and corrupt the
true Religion, to the end to destroy Men's Souls. If it were from the Devil,
how could it bring them to so great Sanctity and Piety, and make them the
Devil's Adversaries, and Friends of God? For what Society has Justice with
Iniquity? What Communion has Light with Darkness? And what Agreement has
Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6.14, etc.

Fourthly, It Is altogether incredible, that God should permit so many innocent
Men, so great Despisers of themselves, and all Earthly things, so studious of
the Divine Glory, and such ardent Lovers of God, to be deceived for so many
Ages, in a matter of so great Concern, as the business of Religion, which is
the Foundation of all Piety. Who can so wickedly censure the Goodness of God?
They omitted nothing on their side, whereby to please God, to advance his
Honor and Glory, they undertook the greatest Labors and Difficulties for his
sake, and did wholly consecrate and devote themselves to his service. How can
it possibly be, that this infinite Goodness, this true Light which enlightneth
every Man that comes into the World, Jo. 1.9. should not show his true Light,
and Truth to such eminent and beloved Servants, but leave them in Darkness and
Mortal Errors? That would then be false, which our Lord (with double and
repeated Promises) so often said, Ask, and it shall be given you; seck, and you
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; for every one that asks,
receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him that knocks, it shall be
opened, Matthew. 7.7. Luke 11.

For S. Bernard, S. Benedict, S. Francis, S. Dominick, and other Lights and
Miracles of the World, all their Lifetime, earnestly craved, sought, and
knocked to obtain of our Lord what was necessary to Salvation, and to know his
Divine Will in all things, that they might do it; and yet were never the
nearer, and got nothing. That Speech of our Blessed Savior will likewise prove
false, If you being evil know how to give good Gifts unto your Children, how
much more shall your Heavenly Father give the good Spirit to them that ask him?
Joh. 11.13. For the good Spirit cannot be had without a good Religion. I omit
other things which to this purpose might be alleged.

But if it be Blasphemy to say, that God's Promises are false, we must needs
confess, that these Men received of our Lord the true Faith and Religion.
Wherefore, since it is manifestly apparent, that they were of the Roman
Catholic Religion, and steadfastly adhered to the Church of Rome, and detested
any other Faith and Religion contrary to it; it is not to be doubted, but that
the Roman Catholic Religion is the true Religion, and inspired of God, and all
other false, and invented by the Devil.

To conclude, if their Religion were false, and that of any of our Adversaries
true, we must necessarily grant, that all those men aforesaid whom the World
ever esteemed Saints) were not only no Saints, nor the Friends of God, but also
impious, and Enemies of God, and for that cause damned to eternal Torments.
For, without the true Religion it is impossible to please God, Heb 11. Neither
can it be said, that they were excusable for their Ignorance: Because Ignorance
excuses not, but only in some less principal things, and which are less
necessary, being so only by reason of some positive Precept; and not in
Fundamentals and first Principles. Otherwise, every one might be saved without
any knowledge of God or Christ, which is contrary to Scripture. But if these
erred (as our Adversaries would have it) they erred in the chiefest Points:
1st, because they did not acknowledge a special Faith, by which alone we are
justified, and made partakers of Christ's Redemption and Justice, and Sins not
imputed to us, as the Authors of these new Religions teach. Therefore they
remained in their Sins; were destitute of Christ's Justice, and consequently
the Children of Hell. 2dly, Because, by their own Judgment and Confession, they
were not of the Church of Christ (out of which, by the consent of all, there is
no Salvation) but adhered to the Whore of Babylon (for so they call the Church
of Rome) and were the Ministers, and chief Instruments of Antichrist.

3dly, Because they were Idolaters, worshipping the Creature (namely, Bread and
Wine in the Eucharist) instead of Christ, honoring Saints, and their Images,
etc. There is no Ignorance which can excuse these things. Therefore all these
Men were wicked and condemned to Hell Torments. But how improbable and
incredible is all this, and even against the Common Sense of all Christians,
that have hitherto been? Mean while in all other Religions, it is sufficiently
manifest, that none have ever appeared of such eminent Sanctity, in their Life
and Conversation, as to breed Admiration in the World. For none could ever be
named. Their first Authors were earthly minded, and addicted to Worldly
Pleasures, nothing exceeding in their Lives above the Vulgar; nay, rather
guilty of the greatest Crimes. But of this, more shall be said hereafter.

Nor does it signify any thing, to say, that also amongst Catholics there are
many, An Objection refuted.
which are so far from leading holy Lives, that they defile their Souls and
Bodies with fundry Vices. For they do not this by the grant and leave of their
Religion, which prohibits them, and uses all means possible (by threats,
punishments and promises) to prevent and deter them. Therefore their evil Life
is (in no wise) to be attributed to their Religion, nor can it argue the same
to be imperfect. For, since there are three things to divert Man from Evil, and
excite him to Good; that is, the fear of Punishment, hope of Reward, and the
beauty of good Works; these three things the Catholic Religion most
excellently propounds, and inculcates every where to her Professors.
Therefore it omits nothing to make them sly Sin, and encourage them to Virtue
and Holiness: And if any don't aspire to it, we must not impute it to their
Religion, but their Free Will, which frustrates and contradicts all these
motives and encouragements. But indeed, if Catholic Religion should take away
the fear of Punishment, and hope of Reward, and declare all good Works to be
polluted with the stain of Sin; then the pravity of Men's Lives, and neglect of
good Works, might worthily be ascribed to it. For, as he that takes away the
buttresses, and props of a house (which keeps it from falling) is the cause of
the house's Ruin; so he that subtracts the fear of God, or future Punishment
(whereby Men are restrained and kept back from falling into the gulf of Sin)
is the cause of their ruin. Likewise, he that takes away all that, which is
wont to animate to the study and practice of good Works, is the occasion of
such neglect and contempt of good Works.

Hereby is manifest, that the neglect of good Works, and the evil Life (which
are discerned in some Catholics) are not to be referred to their Religion, but
only to the liberty of their Will: But in Lutherans, Presbyterians, and other
Professors of new Religions, it is to be imputed properly to their Religion,
which takes away all those things that are a hindrance to Evil, and
encouragement to Good, as plainly appears by their Principles in their Books
before mentioned; not excluding also in them that Free Will, by which they
become guilty in choosing and adhering to such a false Religion.

The Fourth Consideration from the Miracles of its Professors.
THat Religion, wherein most Miracles have been done in all Ages, is to be
preferred before others which are without Miracles. For Miracles are a kind of
Seals, and certain divine Evidences, whereby Religion is authorized and
approved. For since many things in Religion are above Nature, exceeding humane
Capacity, and cannot be proved by natural reason, there is need of certain
supernatural Arguments to convince Men. These are Miracles. But the Catholic
Religion only is famous for Miracles; therefore the only true Religion, and to
be esteemed above all others, as that only which has God for its Witness. Now,
that many Miracles have been done, in Confirmation of the Catholic Religion
throughout all Ages (since Christ's and his Apostles time) is evident to all
Christians, by diverse Histories, the Annals of Kingdoms, and the Lives and Acts
of Saints.

But our Adversaries say, these Miracles are not true, Calv. p. fac. in Instit.
but partly feigned, and partly diabolical; The which is void of all
probability. For, it is against the Judgment of the whole World, and of so many
Ages. For all Nations (so many hundreds of years) have (without any scruple)
accounted them true Miracles. For whoever doubted the Miracles of St, Gregory
Thaumaturge, St. Anthony the Great, and St. Hilarion, St. Martin, St. Nicholas,
St. Benedict, St. Malachy, St. Bernard, St. Dominick, St. Francis of Paul, St.
Francis Xaverius, to omit innumerable others?

Besides, that their Miracles were not counterfeited, Their Miracles were no
Lies.
may easily be proved many ways. 1st, Because they were written by most grave
and authentic Authors. For the Miracles of St. Gregory (who was therefore
called Thaumaturgus, that is, the Worker of Miracles.) were written by St.
Gregory Nyssen, in the Life of him, and by St. Basil, in his Book of the Holy
Ghost, chap. 29. The Miracles of St. Anthony, by St. Athanasius, and St.
Hierome; of St. Martin, by Severus Sulpitius; of St. Nicholas, by diverse Greek
Authors; of St. Benedict, by St. Gregory the Great, and others; of St. Malachy,
by St. Bernard; of St. Bernard, by several eminent Authors in his own time; of
St. Francis, by St. Bonaventure; of St. Dominick, by those who being
Eyewitnesses of them, were reconciled to the Catholic Faith; of St. Francis
of Paul, by the Bull of his Canonization; and the Miracles of St. Francis
Xaverius (after a strict scrutiny, and sworn Witnesses) were approved of, by
public Testimony of the Viceroy of India. Who can believe, that these Men
(famous for Sanctity, Learning, and Authority) would (to the damnation of their
Souls, and eternal infamy of their good Name) forge these Miracles, and impose
them upon the World? For a Lie (in things pertaining to Religion) is a most
grievous, mortal Sin, Then again, if they were false and feigned. the vanity of
them might easily have been discovered, by the Men of that Age wherein they
were written. But no body ever rejected them, except Heathens, Jews, or
Heretics. Add hereunto, that many of these Miracles were confirmed by the
public Testimony of Bishops, or Magistrates, through a previous knowledge of
them. Lastly, to say that they were false and counterfeited, is to take away
all belief of History, and overthrow all knowledge of former times. For all the
Acts of Antiquity may be said to be false and feigned, since they cannot be
proved, but by the Authority of the Writers.

In like manner, that their Miracles were not wrought by help of the Devil, nor
by the Devil, is manifest diverse ways.

1st, Because they were done by most holy Men, and such as were entirely
devoted to God's Service. Who can believe that St. Francis, St. Dominick, St.
Bernard, St, Benedict, St. Martin, etc. had any Commerce with the Devil? Again,
because their Works were far above the Devils Power. For the Devil cannot open
the Eyes of the blind, nor cure the lame, nor raise the dead, nor give
immediate cure to Paralitticks or restore dead and withered Limbs, etc. All
these things are above the power of Nature. And hence never any Magicians could
do such such things by the Devil's aid. But our Saints have done many such
Miracles, and almost innumerable, and that in a trice, by the touch only, or by
the sign of the Cross, by a short prayer, and oftentimes, only by a word of
Command. 3dly, Because those which are done by the Art of the Devil, either
continue but a little while (being delusions and deceptions of the Sight, as
appears by that which Conjurers do) or if they last long, they are done by
natural Causes, and exceed not the power of them. Moreover, they are (for the
most part) unprofitable to Men, vain and hurtful; as to make Fire to descend
from Heaven, to make a Statue or Idol speak, etc. which shall be done by
Antichrist, and his false Prophets, in the last days, as it is written in the
Revelations. Chap. 13. nor do they tend to amendment of Life. But the Miracles
of the Saints have a permanent and solid effect, and are profitable to Mankind,
exciting us to the fear of God, and amendment of our Lives. 4thly, New Miracles
are never allowed of in the Church, but by great Examination beforehand: for
Witnesses are examined, and commonly under Oath; the Fact it self is also
looked into, whether 'twas not done by Virtue of Nature, or Help of the Devil;
all Circumstances are likewise considered, as by what means, order, and
occasion, in what place and time, to what end, and for whom, and before whom
the Miracle was wrought: And oftentimes there are not wanting Persons that are
emulous, who are willing to undervalue and slight the matter overmuch, or
endeavor what they can to render it suspicious, and therefore they let nothing
escape untried or unexamin'd: So that it is impossible the Fraud should lie hid
long, if there were any; and it concerns the Divine Providence not to permit
Men to be so miserably deluded, especially after so great care and diligence
used by them to find out the Truth. 5thly, If the Miracles of the Church were
from the Devil, (to retain Men in a flase Religion,) Why does he not do the
same in other false Religions; namely, amongst the Turks, Arrians, Anabaptists,
Libertines, etc. Why does he forbear to work Miracles amongst all these, and do
them only in the Catholic Church? Is it because he loves it better than all
the rest? But he should not neglect them, by whom he may enlarge his Dominions.
He is delighted with variety of false Worships, and accommodates himself to the
Genius, Dispositions, and Affections of all. Therefore, since only the
Catholic Religion has Miracles, and no false Religion has or can have them,
it is a clear sign, that the Miracles of the Catholic Church are not from the
Devil. Lastly, What reason is there, that they should be counted Fictions, or
performed by the Devil? Is it because they cannot be done? But God is
Omnipotent, and did many the like by his Apostles, as appears in Scripture. Or,
is it because they are repugnant to Scripture? But our Lord has plainly
promised this Grace of Miracles, saying, Verily, verily, I say unto you, he
that believes in me, the Works that I do, shall he do also, and greater Works
than these shall he do, because I go to my Father; and whatsoever you shall ask
the Father in my Name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the
Son, Joh. 14.12. etc. By which Words he insinuates, that the Gift of Miracles
shall always remain in the Church, not only amongst the Apostles, but many
Apostolical Men, and People of eminent Sanctity in due time and place. This
Promise therefore of our Lord we see fulfilled, when Holy Men do Miracles. Or
is it for lack of Witnesses? Besides the Writers, (most worthy of belief,) we
have the credit and consent of the People, the Testimony of Bishops and
Magistrates, after a strict enquiry and examination of the matter, by Sworn
Witnesses. There are not any ancient Matters of Fact (except those recorded in
the Holy Scriptures) which have so many and so considerable Witnesses. Add
hereunto, that in every Age, yea, almost every year there are many great
Miracles done in several places, by the Saints reigning with Christ in Heaven,
especially by the most blessed Virgin Mary; which in the places where they are
wrought, are manifest to all, and may he seen by every one with their Eyes, and
felt with their Hands; which also (after a strict examination by sworn
Witnesses, and public Testimonies) are confirmed.

But say our Adversaries, the true Miracles were to confirm the Gospel, yours
overthrow it, Calv. prefac. in Instit.
by setting up Idolatry, that is, the Worship of Relics and Images, Invocation
of Saints, the Mass, etc. therefore they are from the Devil. But this is plain
Sophism, and is called a begging of the Question; for they take for granted as
a truth, that which is to be proved, and whereof the Controversy is, For they
suppose (as a certain and undoubted truth) that the Catholic Religion is
false; and thence they conclude, that her Miracles are false, and delusions of
the Devil; like the Scribes and Pharisees, who first supposed Christ's Doctrine
to be false, and against the Law of Moses, and then conclude that his Miracles
were false, and that he cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils
Matthew. 4.12. So the Heathens calumniated the Miracles of Martyrs, saying they
did them by Art-Magick: And so did the Arians, Eunomians and Vigilantians
vilify the Miracles of Catholics, as Victor, St. Ambrose, and St. Hierome
writes. But we on the contrary, Vict. Vticen. l 2. de persecut. Ambr. ser. de
S. Gervas. and Protas. Hier. contr. Vigil.
by the truth of Miracles (which are perspicuous and obvious to all, seen with
their Eyes and felt with their Hands) conclude the verity of the Catholic
Religion, about which is the Controversy; for we read no where that Miracles
are wrought in confirmation of false Doctrine, as the Saints have done many in
confirmation of the truth of the Roman Catholic Faith. Did ever any Heretic
raise the Dead, give sight to the Blind, cure the Lame and sick of the Palsy,
and cast Devils out of Men's Bodies? Neither Luther, nor Calvin, nor their
followers did ever any such thing. Luther indeed, attempted once to cast a
Devil out of one of his Disciples, but with great peril of his own life, as
Fredericus Staphylas (who was present and an Eyewitness) writes. Calvin also
tried to raise a man to life, who by his persuasion counterfeited himself dead,
but with that success that of a live man he made a dead one; for by the just
Judgment of God, he who had feigned himself dead, was deprived of his life,
while Calvin was endeavoring to restore him to life. In vit. Call. c. 13
This story Hierome Boscus relates at large, with the circumstances thereof.
Wherefore since they are not successful by true or false Miracles, they strive
to take away the foundation of Miracles from the Catholic Church, which is the
chiefest and most convincing; but with no reason, or probability, as I have
shown.

As therefore, they who consider the Miracles of our Lord, or of his Apostles,
and ponder them seriously, setting aside all Envy, Hatred, Worldly Interest, or
other depraved affections, cannot doubt but their Doctrine was from God, who
ratified and confirmed it with so many prodigious Signs and Miracles: So, in
like manner, they who laying aside all malice, prejudice, passion, and temporal
profit or advantage, maturely weigh and reflect on the Miracles, which are
every Age wrought in the Roman Catholic Church, by the Saints thereof living
or dead, cannot choose but believe their Doctrine and Religion is of God, and
the Church (to which they adhere) to be the true Church of God.

The Fifth Consideration from the Conversion of Nations.
THat Religion is to be esteemed the true Religion of Christ, and therefore to
be embraced, to which there has been a Conversion of Nations. For our Lord
has, in diverse places of holy Scripture, Psalm. 1.12.21. Osea 1. Matthew. Mark,
Luke, ult. promised this Conversion of the Gentiles to the true Faith and
Worship of God. But the Religion to which the Gentiles in all Ages have been
converted, is the Roman Catholic Religion, and therefore not to be doubted,
but that it is the true Religion of Christ.

That this Religion to which the Gentiles have been always and even lately
converted, is the Roman Catholic Religion, it is manifest by the things which
have been done in this and former Ages. In this Age innumerable have been, and
daily are converted in the East Indies, in Japan, in the great Kingdom of
China, and many Islands of the Indian Sea. Likewise in America where are many
and spacious Kingdoms. All these came over to the Catholic Religion, and were
joined to the Church of Rome, and that by Religious Mon, sent, for this end and
purpose, by the Authority of his Holiness the Pope.

And to look back to the foregoing Ages. In the Fourteenth Age, one Vincentius
Ferrerius, a Dominican, converted to the Catholic Faith Five and Twenty
Thousand, partly Jews and partly Sarazens; as St. Antoninus, a Writer of the
same Age, witnesses, 3 p. Hist. tit. 23. c. 8. s. 4.

In the Thirteenth Age, many in Tartary were converted to the Catholic
Religion, by two Dominicans, sent by the Pope, at the instance of their
Emperor. which they call the Great Cham; as Paulus Venetus writes, who was an
Agent to that Emperor.

In the Twelfth Age were converted the People of Norway, by Adrian the Fourth,
before he was Pope, as Platin writes in his Life.

In the Eleventh Age, the greatest part of Hungary was converted, and Bishops
sent them by the Pope, at the request of their King, St. Stephen, soon after
his Conversion, as the Centuriators tell us, Cent. 11. c. 2.

In the Tenth Age, many Kingdoms were converted by means of Henry the First,
Emperor, and two Arch Prelates, as the Centuriators note, Cent. 10. c. 2.

In the Ninth Age, the Vandals, Bulgarians, Sclavonians, Polonians, Danes, and
Moravians were converted, and united to the Roman Church: So the Cent. 9. c. 2.

In the Eighth age, most part of Germany was converted by S. Boniface, sent to
that end, by Pope Gregory the Second, Cent. 8. c. 8.

In the Seventh age, the Franks were converted by S. Kilian, who received his
Commission from the Bishop of Rome, Cent. 7. c. 2.

In the Sixth age, the English were converted to the Catholic Faith, by Monks
sent into England by the authority of S. Gregory the Great.

In Fine, Who converted Brabant, Flanders, Holland, Freesland, Westphaly,
France, and other bordering Nations? Were they not Sons of the Roman Church;
namely, S. Servatius, S. Eligius, S. Rumoldus, S. Amand, S. Vaust, S. Livinus,
S. Remigius, S. Willebrord, S. Swithbert, S. Wulfranus, and others, who were
all devoted to the Church of Rome:

By which it appears, that all Nations, that have been converted to Christ,
from Paganism, or Judaism, for above a Thousand Years, were converted to the
Roman Catholic Faith, and adhered to the Church of Rome; as appears not only
by what has been already said; but is more clearly manifest by the Priests,
Altars, Sacrifice of the Mass, Veneration of Holy Relics and Images,
Pilgrimages, Invocation of Saints, Monasteries, Monks, Obedience to the Sea of
Rome, and other things proper to the Catholic Religion, which has ever
flourished among these nations, ever since their Conversion, till of late they
were abolished by these New Religions. Who that considers these things, can
doubt, but the Roman Catholic Religion is the true Religion of Christ? In it
we see this Divine Promise of the Conversion of Nations fulfilled. Hereunto so
many Peoples, so many remote Nations, so many potent Kingdoms have fled and
forsaking their Idols, impurity of Life, multiplicity of Wives, barbarity of
Manners, and former licentiousness, humbly stoop to the yoke of Christ, have
embraced the fear of God, conformed to an honest Life, and were inflamed with
contempt of the World, and love of Heaven. How can it be, that this Religion
should be false and impious, which makes so great a change in the Minds of
barbarous People?

To conclude, how can it be, that the Divine Providence (for so many Ages)
should permit all these Nations to be deceived, (when they willingly forsook
their Idolatry, embraced the Truth, and united themselves to the Church of
Christ) and be plunged into other pernicious Errors, and a new Idolatry; and
that by those, who in the Church were esteemed by every one the most Lawful
Ministers thereof, as being famous for Holiness of Life, Wisdom, and Miracles?
God forbid we should so judge of the Divine Goodness and Providence, which has
so much care for the Salvation of Men.

But now, on the other side, there has never been any Conversion of Nations
made by the Lutherans, Calvinists, and Fanatics, never any accession of Pagan
Kingdoms to their Religion, but only a Revolt of those, who, bearing the Name
of Christians, but weary of their former Religion and Discipline, have followed
their Novelties and Liberty of the Flesh; which is a clear Argument of Heresy:
For Heresy is nothing else but a corruption of the Catholic Doctrine, and
revolt of Christians from the Primitive Religion, retaining still the Christian
Name; and it is the study of Heretical Doctors, not to convert Heathens, but to
pervert Christians: Therefore Tertullian hits them home, Lib de Praescrip. What
shall I say touching the Ministration of the Word, since it is their business
not to convert Infidels, but to seduce Catholics: They take greater Glory to
ruin those that stand, than pains to lift up them that are down: For this Work
of theirs is not of their own building, but a demolishing of the Truth. They
undermine our Church to raise their own; so that they can easier destroy the
House that stands, than raise a new Building out of ruins.

The Sixth Consideration from the Name of Catholic, and the thing signified by
this Name.
THat Religion is to be judged the true Christian Religion, which has always
been accounted and called Catholic, according to the Apostles Creed, I believe
in the Holy Catholic Church. But the Roman Church is only called Catholic,
and the Professors thereof Catholics: Therefore the Roman Catholic Religion,
only, is the true Religion of Christ.

That it, alone, has been always, and still is called Catholic, it is evident.

First, By the general use of the Name over all the World. Hence it is, that
even Heretics, many times, call it the Catholic Religion; and the Professors
thereof, Catholics; nor did ever any Sect merit this Name: For the
Marcionists, Montanists, Vid. Pacia. Epist. denom. Cath. and St. August. c. 4.
contr. Epist. sund.
Manicheans, Donatists, Pelagians, Vigilantians, Waldenses, Lutherans,
Calvinists, Anabaptists, etc. were never called Catholics, nor their Doctrine
the Catholic Religion; only the Church of Rome, and that part of Christianity
which adheres to it, is called the Catholic Church; and the Religion, Belief,
and Doctrine of this Church, the Catholic Religion, the Catholic Faith, and
Catholic Doctrine; and her Followers, Catholics.

Secondly, Because the word Catholic signifies the same as Universal, The
Catholic Religion is spread over all the World.
or General, spreading over all the World. But such is the Roman Religion,
because, being spread over all the known inhabited parts of the World, it
extends it self to all Nations and Kingdoms: For there is no Kingdom nor Nation
known to us, which has not still this Religion, or formerly had it, or does not
now begin to profess it; yea, at this very time, there is well near, amongst
all Nations, a public profession of our Religion; namely, in Japan, China, the
Indies, Persia, Tartary, Turkey, Africa, Brazil, Peru, Mexico, etc. For in all
these places there are Catholics to be found, Churches, Altars, Images of
Christ, and his Saints, celebration of Mass, administration of our Sacraments,
observation of our Feasts and Fasts; and in Fine, there is publicly held the
Roman Catholic Religion. Who can doubt that this is the true religion, and the
true way of Salvation, which our Lord would have proposed and preached to all
Kingdoms, which he has made to grow and increase, at convenient times, in all
Kingdoms, and which every where in a manner he now preserves; causing
Catholics to be dispersed through the whole World, that Infidels by them might
come to the knowledge of the true Religion?

Moreover, it is Catholic in point of Time as well as Place; The Catholic
Religion extends it self to all Ages.
for it has been derived through all Ages, from Christ's and his Apostle's time:
For there is no Age, since that time, can be assigned, wherein this Religion
was not held. In all Ages Mass was celebrated for the living and dead, Festival
and Fasting days were kept, Monastic Vows were frequented, the Saints
invocated, and their Relics honored, with other things proper to our
Religion, in use and practice, as it is manifest by all Ecclesiastic Writers.

On the contrary, if we consider all kind of Sects, No Sect is called the
Catholic Religion.
none of them were ever called the Catholic Religion, or the Professors of
them, Catholics, as aforesaid; but they took the Name of their Religion from
the first Broachers of it; as Simonians, from Simon Magus; Valentinians, from
Valentine; Pelagians, from Pelagius; Lutherans, from Martin Luther; Calvinists,
from Calvin, etc. and none of their Religions are spread over all the World.
Nor dilated over all the World.
At first, when the Catholic Religion began to appear and show it self, it was
not long before it was diffused over all the World, and did increase and
fructify almost in every Kingdom, notwithstanding the Persecutions thereof, as
S. Paul tells us, Romans 10. Colos. 1. But the religion of Luther, Calvin, and
Fanatics, now for the time that it has been in the World, which is about 150
years, has made no such progress; but being confined only to some few
Countries, does daily lose ground, either by crumbling into other Sects, or
else by returning into Catholic religion again: As also, not one of them is of
any ancient standing; but all of them of new invention, but in the last
Century. Therefore, neither in respect of time, nor in respect of place, can
these religions be called Catholic. I add farther, that the Roman Catholic
religion is one and the same every where; but these new religions are diverse,
differing one from another, even in Fundamental Points of Doctrine, while one
accuses and condemns the other of Heresy. How then can they be counted
Catholics?

For we must take notice, that this Name Christian, given at first to all
Believers, and to the whole Church, was specially used to distinguish them from
from the Jews and Heathens, who believed not at all in Christ; as the same now
severeth and makes known all Christian People from Turks and others, that
either deny Christ, or know him not. But when Heretics began to rise from
among the Christians, who professed Christ's Name, and owned some Articles of
Faith, as true Believers do, while they denied others, and brought in new
Doctrines of their own, the name of Christian was too common to distinguish,
and sever these Heretics from the true faithful People; and thereupon the
Apostles, by the Holy Ghost, imposed this name Catholic upon such Believers,
as in all points were obedient to the Church's Doctrine. When Heresies were
risen (says S. Pacianus) and endeavored by diverse Names to tear the Dove of
God (meaning the Church) and rent her in pieces, Epist. ad Sympho.
the Apostolical People acquired their Surname, whereby the uncorrupted might
be distinguished, etc. and so those that before were called Christians, are now
sirnam'd also Catholics. Christian is my Name (says he) Catholic my Surname.
Hence this word Catholic is the proper note, whereby the Holy Apostles (in
their Creed) taught us to discern the true Church, from any false Heretical
Congregation what soever.. The very Name of Catholic, says S. August. keeps me
in the Bosom of the Church. And again, We must hold the Communion of that
Church, which is named Catholic, not only by her own, Cont. Epist. fundam. c.
4. De vera Relig. c. 7.
but also by her Enemies. For whether they will or no, the Heretics and
Schismatics themselves, when they speak not with their own Companions, but
with Strangers, call no other Church Catholic but this; for they could not be
understood, unless they did distinguish it by this name, whereby, it is known
and called, over all the World.

The Seventh Consideration from Succession.
THat Religion is to be judged the true Religion, whose Pastors are all
descended from the Apostles, and are the Apostle's Successors, or who derive
their Authority and Ordination from them. For by this reason it is evident,
that that Religion, and that Church which holds that Religion, is Apostolical;
but such is the Catholic religion; therefore that is the true religion.

Now that all Ministers of the Catholic religion descend from the Apostles
(whether you regard the Power of Order or Jurisdiction) is manifest; for all
her inferior Ministers (especially Subdeacons, Deacons, and Priests) are
ordained by Bishops; the Bishops receive their Order from other Bishops; and
these again from others, and so upwards to the Apostles, who received this
Power immediately from Christ, as Christ from his Father, As my Father sent me,
says he, I send you; and so must you send others; and so I am with you and them
to the end of the World.

As therefore, all Men, according to the Life of Nature, (by a long tract of
Generations,) descend from Adam; so all the Ministers of the Catholic Church,
according to Supernatural Power (by a long race of Ordination and
Consecration) descend from Christ our Lord, who is the Second Adam. There is no
Minister, therefore, in the Church of God, but can derive his Power of
Consecration to offer Sacrifice, absolve from Sins, and to administer other
Sacraments (whereby Christians are sanctified) from Christ, the Chief Fountain
and Author. Whence it follows, that all his Works (which he does by this Power)
are attributed to Christ, as the Supreme Author, who instituted this Power, and
invisibly presides and assists therein; Man being only his Instrument, whereby
he does all this; as St. Augustine and other Fathers excellently observe and
teach.

In like manner all power of Jurisdiction of Ministers to rule and govern
Christians, to preach the Word of God to them, Tract. 5. in Joan. Chrysos. hom
80. ad pop. Ambros. l. 4. de Sacram. c. 4, 5.
and officiate in their Pastoral Duty, descends from Christ, and may clearly be
reduced to him; for the Curates or Parish Priests have their Jurisdiction from
the Bishops, and Bishops from the Chief Bishop, the Pope; the Pope, seeing he
is Blessed Peter's Successor in the same Chair and Authority of governing the
Universal, or Catholic Church, must needs be invested with the same
Jurisdiction which was immediately conferred upon St. Peter, and in him to all
his Lawful Successors: And also only those who have not an ordinary, but a
delegated Authority in the Church, must have it from Parochial Pastors, or
Bishops, or the Pope: So that there is no Minister in the Catholic Church, no
Preacher of God's Word, or Catechizer, who cannot show plainly his Mission, and
demonstrate the same to be derived from Christ: And indeed, if they could not
do so, they were in no wise to be heard, but suspected, and esteemed as Wolves
in Sheeps-cloathing, since they enter not into the Sheepfold by the door, but
creep in privately another way, Joh. 10.

This Argument alwas the Ancient Fathers chiefly made use of, Irenae. l. 3. c.
1. Tertul. de prescrip.
to convince all Heretics; for by it, the Continuation of our Religion (from
several Ages up to the time of the Apostles) is clearly showed. The Succession
of Priests, from the Sea of St. Peter the Apostle (to whom our Lord commended
the care of feeding his Sheep) to this present Bishop, August. Epist. 165.
Optatus l. 2. cont. Parm. Hier. cont. Lucif.
keeps me in the Church, says St. Augustine; and the like says St. Hierome in
his Dialogues.

But now none of the Ministers of the New Religions can show this. And indeed
the power of Order (whereby the Sacraments are administered, and the People
sanctified) they cannot derive from Christ and his Apostles, because they have
taken it quite away: Nor is there any amongst them that have received the
Episcopal or Sacerdotal Order, unless it be some Apostares from the Catholic
Religion, whose Orders then are of no more use and service; and yet the Church
of Christ has had always these degrees, and been governed by them. Likewise
they never had any power of Jurisdiction to preach the word of God, as true
Pastors, or to administer Baptism, and rule the People in Spirituals, and
Divine Worship. For I ask, of whom had Luther and Calvin this power? Of whom
was either of them sent to preach their New Gospel and Reform the People? For
they were not sent by the Ordinary Pastors of the Church, as it is sufficiently
manifest. They came therefore of their own accord, without any Authority or
Commission; which is a certain sign they ought not to be believed, but
rejected. For how shall they Preach except they be sent? Romans 10.15. He that
enters not by the door into the Sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way,
the same is a Thief and a Robber; but he that enters in by the door is the
Shepherd of the Sheep, Joh. 10.1. They enter not in by the door who usurp the
Pastoral Office, without Ordinary or Lawful Authority.

Whether Sectaries are sent by Christ.
But perhaps they will say, that they were sent by Christ, and received
Authority from to reform the Church: But it is not enough to say so; for all
Arch-Hereticks, or Sect-Masters, affirm this of themselves; therefore they
ought to produce their Letters Patent, that Christ sent them, whereby to
convince us, and confirm our Belief; as the Apostles confirmed their Mission
with great Miracles; otherwise we ought not to accept their Reformation; but
are bound rather to reject them, as Imposters.

Again, how did Christ send them, when they teach such different and
contradictory Doctrine amongst themselves? For if Christ sent Luther, Calvin
could not be sent by him, who overthrows Luther's Doctrine in many points, and
damns it as Heritical. On the contrary, if Christ sent Calvin, Luther then
could not be sent by him; for God is not contrary to himself, nor does the
Spirit of the Prophets contradict each other. I omit other things which might
be said to this purpose.

The Eighth Consideration from the consent of the Ancient Fathers, and Doctors,
and their decision of Controversies, without which there is no certainty.
THat Religion is to be imputed to Christ, and to be preferred before all
others, wherein there is an unanimous consent of the chief Doctors and Fathers,
of every Age and Country, since Christ, about points of Faith, which is an
easy end to all Controversies; and from which if you recede, there is nothing
to be relied on, for a certainty: But such is the Roman Catholic Religion,
therefore it is the only true Religion of Christ.

And, First, Touching the consent of Fathers, about the Tenets of our Religion,
it appears by their Writings: For as many ancient Doctors as have written in
Greece, in Asia, in Egypt, in Africa, in Spain, in Italy, in France, in
Germany, in England, of the Mysteries of our Religion, are all consenting to
Free Will, merit of Good Works, the Sacrifice of the Mass for the Living and
Dead, Monastic Vows, Fastings, Feasts, Invocation of Saints, etc. which are
disowned by these New Religions; neither can the Lutherans and Calvinists deny
it; but say, these were the Spots and Blemishes of the ancient Fathers, then
inclining to Superstition and the Traditions of Men; Call. l. 2. c. 2.5.14. and
16. l. 3. c. 4, 5.
whence they fly to the Scriptures, according to their own sense and
interpretation. But how improbable is this, that all the ancient Fathers,
writing of these matters in diverse places, with so general a consent, should
err? For the consent of many, especially before they communiceate one with
another, in the same opinion, is a great sign of Truth, attracting their Minds
to an unanimous consent thereof, by divine illumination. For, it is the property
of Truth (being but One) to join and unite in consent; but of Falsity, being
manifold, to disperse into sundry Opinions and Errors.

Hence it is, that Heretics, in several Countries, writing of the same
subject, scarce ever agree; but are divided into many Opinions, having once
forsaken the Truth.

Again, there is no Tenet of the Catholic Religion can be showed, which has
been introduced anew, by any in the Church; which is a manifest sign, that it
has always been in the Church, and descended from the Apostles: For if it were
brought in anew, after the Apostles, against Apostolical Doctrine, it could be
showed in what Generation or Age it was done, where, and by what Author, and
who opposed the same: For no new Opinion is ever raised, without great stir and
contradiction. Therefore we can show the rise of all Heresies, where, when, and
by what Authors they first began, who opposed them, what strifes they made, and
finally what Pope and Council condemned them. But if this can be demonstrated
of particular Heresies, how much more of the chiefest points of Religion, if
any innovation were made in them?

It is clear therefore, that our Catholic Religion, not only by the Succession
of Ministers, but also by Consanguinity of Doctrine, as Tertullian expresses
it, Lib. de Prescrip. is continued, and accords with the Ancient and
Apostolical Religion.

That the Opinions of these New Religions disagree with those of the ancient
Fathers, Heretics themselves abundantly confess; since, in the Chapters
aforesaid, they blame them of Superstition, and averr they cannot be excused of
Error, as we shall see more at large hereafter.

The Controversies of the Cath Church are easily appeased.
Secondly, The Controversies that sometimes arise in the Church, are easily
decided, by the continual practice of the Church: For the Catholic Church has
an Infallible Judge of Controversies, the Pope, with a General Council, by
which Judge all Controversies have hitherto been easily concluded; all Heresies
sprung up in diverse Ages have been condemned, and Catholic People kept in one
Faith, one Religion, and one Doctrine, through the whole World. In this manner
was the Arrian Heresy condemned by the Synod of Nice, under Pope Silvester;
the Macedonian Heresy, by the Council of Constantinople, under Pope Damasus;
the Nestorian Heresy, by the Council of Ephesus, under Pope Celestine; the
Eutychian Heresy, by the Council of Calcedon, under Leo the First; the
Iconomachists, by the Second Council of Nice, under Adaian the First; and to
omit others, the Berengarian Heresy concerning the Eucharist, by the Synod of
Rome and Vercelles, under Leo the Ninth, by the Synod also of Tours, under
Victor the Second; by the Synod of Rome, under Nicholas the Second; and by
another Roman Synod, under Pope Gregory the Seventh.

For all Reason requires, that the Cause of Religion (being common to the
whole Church) should not be judged by private Persons that have obtained no
Dignity nor Degree in the Church: but by the Supreme Pastor of the Catholic
Church, together with other particular Prelates, to whom the Regiment of the
Church is committed, and who are the Representatives of the whole Catholic
Church. As the Controversies about Laws and Privileges of a Kingdom, are
decided by none but the King, and Chief Men who represent the whole Kingdom:
For to those who are made Superiors in any Community, Spiritual or Temporal, it
belongs to allay Differences and decide Controversies, about matters properly
pertaining to their Government, thereby to take away all contradiction for the
suture.

And indeed, unless the Church had this power, it would have been very
imperfect, lamely instituted, and more miserable than any Temporal Kingdom, or
Commonwealth: For there would never have been an end of Disputes and
Contentions touching the chief points of Faith, no end of Dissentions and
Contradictions; and it must necessarily, in a short time, have been divided
into a Thousand Sects, as we see it happens by the Conventicles of Heretics.

Hence it is, that in the Catholic Church, all points of Faith are certain and
defined, and no variation made of them, and all Catholics unanimously consent
acquiesce, and are satisfied in the belief of them.

Hereby it follows, Thirdly, If you depart from the Catholic Religion, you
have no certainty to depend on, for the true way of Salvation: For what
Religion will you make choice of, in so great a variety? The Lutheran? But why
not the Presbyterian, or any other Fanatic? Why do you profess Luther's
Religion before the rest? For the Presbyterians and Fanatics have Scripture
for their Religion as well as the Lutherans.

Again, if you will embrace the Religion of Luther, which sort would you have,
the mild or rigid? That pure Religion which Luther (the German Prophet)
recommended, or that which Philip Melancton renewed? But this also is of diverse
sorts; for the Augustane Confession was often changed. If you are for Calvin's
Religion, why not Luther's, since he is the Parent of all, and the first that
brought into the World this new Light of the Gospel?

Again, if you are for Calvin's Religion, whether that of Puritans or
Protestants? For they are very different, as the English well know. I omit many
differences wherein these Sects are divided. There is no solid Reason can be
given, why you should profess one, for the certainly of it, rather than the
other; since they all stiffly allege the Word of God to be of their side, that
they have the Spirit of god, and that the sense of Scripture is clearly for
their Doctrine, and that all the rest are false, and manifestly against
Scripture; nor can they otherwise prove it, but by saying, that it is clear to
every one that has the Spirit. Therefore they all urge the same reason for
their Doctrine, and rely on the same foundation. You must therefore be of all
their Religions, or of none.

But the Catholic Religion proves her Tenets far otherwise; namely, from
Sacred Scripture, according to the exposition of the Holy Fathers and Doctors
of all Ages; from the Sanctity, Miracles, and Prophetic Spirit of those that
profess this Religion; from the perpetuity and uniformity of Doctrine through
all Ages: from the purity of Life, which this Doctrine induces; from the
Conversion of Nations to this Doctrine; and from all the other Considerations
set down in the foregoing Chapters.

The Ninth Consideration, proceeding from diverse Reasons, why these New
Religions are to be suspected and avoided.
ALL other Religions, besides the Catholic, expressly and particularly, that of
Luther, Calvin, and the Fanatic (which I chiefly speak of here) ought worthily
to be suspected, and abandoned, as Heretical Sects, for many Reasons, which I
shall here briefly commemorate, and referr to your serious Consideration.

The First Reason, from the Novelty of it.
ALL Novelty, or all New Cutts and Fashions (as St. Gregory Nazianzen calls it)
in any Government (and chiefly in the Affair of religion) are to be shunned and
avoided. The Christian religion is an ancient solid, and immutable thing,
intended to last to the end of the World: For it is the Form, Strength, and as
it were the Soul of Christ's Church; for as by the Soul the Flesh is animated
into a Living Man; so by religion, an Assembly of Men (who otherwise, of
themselves are but carnal) is formed into the Church of Christ, which is a
Spiritual Kingdom, As therefore the Church and Kingdom of Christ is ancient,
and never to be rooted out, as against which the Gates of Hell (that is to say,
no Herefies, or other wicked attempts) shall ever prevail, Mat. ult. and with
which Christ has promised to remain to the end of the World. De August de utit.
caeden. c. 17.
Such also must the Religion be by which this Church and Kingdom of Christ do
subsist. Therefore Novelty is repugnant to the true Religion.

But that these are New Religions, is manifest.

First, Because we can show the first Authors of them, the place, time, and
manner how they began, who resisted them, what great Commotions, Troubles, and
Mobbs were raised by reason of them; and finally, by whom they were condemned.
Now, what clearer signs can there be of Novelty? In the same manner, all
Heresies, introduced against Apostolic Doctrine, are convinced of Novelty;
because we can show how they crept into the Church, at what time they began, in
what place, by what Author, who opposed and condemned them.

Secondly, Before the year of our Lord 1517. Luther's religion was not in the
World, nor Calvin's, nor the other Fanatics, which are but two branches of the
Lutheran Religion: For it appears by Historians of that time, wherein Luther
first showed Head, that there was no religion in the World, but the Catholic
Religion, (and a very few Heretics, called Hussites) except the Judaick,
Mohammedan, and Pagan Religion.

Thirdly, If you should say, that some of them were existent in the World;
namely, the Lutheran Religion, etc. but lay hid; I ask, in what place it was,
in what Kingdom, in what Town, who were the Defenders or Maintainers of it?
Lastly, How do you know it was in Being before, since it could not be manifest
but by Writers, who report no such thing, but the contrary. Besides, when there
were in every place, Inquisitors of Heresies, how could this Religion lie hid
so many hundred years, and not be discovered; and never any one of the
Followers of it fall into their Hands and be corrected? Never any Heretical
Sect could so hide it self, but be often taken, and publicly called in
question and examination. Again, if this religion was in the World before
Luther, why did not the Professors of it (who have hitherto lay hid) come
forth, and acknowledge him as a Doctor of their Faith, and a Champion of their
religion? Why did they not appear in public, and join with him, as their
Partner and Patron, who had set at liberty their religion, before suppressed
and persecuted? But no such ever appeared, that had been of this religion,
before him; but all of them were of the Catholic Religion, before they turned
to Luther, as Luther himself (before he revolted) was a Roman Catholic and a
Friar; L. de Missa augular and l. 2 contr. Swingl.
and said Mass seriously and devoutly fifteen years together, as himself
confesses.

Whereby it is clearer than the Sun at noon day, that Luther's Religion is
altogether new, and was unknown to the World before his time: Not any
Congregation of Men, and perhaps no single person was ever in Being before him,
that professed the same Religion; that is, all the same points of Faith, his
whole Body of Doctrine. For although he might hold some Opinions of ancient
Heretics, yet the Relagion of Luther and the ancient Heretics is not
therefore the same, but in part. For Religion is a Complex, or comprehension of
all those things which pertain to Faiths. But no body (before him) ever taught
all the same Tenets.

This is also convinced by another reason; for it is manifest, the ancient
Doctors and Fathers flourishing in former Ages, were not of Lutheran's Religion;
for They all confess Free Will, the necessity of Good Works, Merits of life
eternal, and possibility of keeping Gommandments: They approve of the
Invocation of Saints, the Veneration of holy Relics and Images, the Sacrifice
of the Mass for the living and dead, the Ordination of Ministers, the
Evangelical Counsils of Monaftick Vows, the custom of Fasting in Lent, etc. all
which Luther's Religion denies, and denounces as superstitious, injurious to
God, and wicked. That the ancient Fathers confess and approve all these things,
is clear by their Writings; nor can Lutherans and Calvinists deny the fame, but
say, they were the Spots of the ancient Fathers: beautiful spots indeed;
Superstition, Idolatry, Impiety. But if the Doctors of former Ages were not of
this Religion, but always decry'd and condemned the same, it is evident that it
is not Ancient, but New. Now, in the Church, there is no Religion taken for the
true Religion of Christ, besides that which the ancient Fathers and Doctors of
the Church have held.

Hence it plainly follows, that the Lutheran Religion is not the Religion of
Christ; for Christ's Religion is not new, but old: But Luther's Religion is
new, and not old, as it is showed. The Religion of Christ has been always in the
World, from the time of the Apostles; but the Religion of Luther has not been
always, but began in the year of our Lord, 1517, as aforesaid. Again, if
Luther's Religion is the true Religion of Christ, the Congregation of People,
holding this Religion, is the true Church of Christ; therefore the Church of
Christ was not before Luther, (as has been declared) because the Lutheran
Religion (which constituted this Church) was not before Luther. If you say, it
was in the Apostles time, and some Ages heretofore, it is to be proved, there
were some then living that held all Luther's Tenets: We can for certain, and
with ease prove the contrary: For it is aparent, the Sacrifice of the Mass for
the living and the dead, Ordnation of Ministers, Monastical Vows, and the like
(which are repugnant to Luthers Religion) were in the Church of God in the
Apostles time, and the Ages nearest to it. Moreover, suposing, but not
granting, that that it had been in the Apostles time, and some time after, yet
at least in the Third and Fourth Age it began to vanish and be quite lost,
which also the Lutheran Doctors confess in the Book of Centuries published by
them. Therefore, Cent. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. cap. 4.
for 1300. years, the Church of Christ fell away and perished: For at least, so
long it is manifest, the Lutheran Religion was not, but what flourished was
point blank contrary to it. The true Religion, then, for so so many Ages was
extinct, the Gospel obscured, the Church of Christ overthrown, till Luther (the
German Prophet) rose, and dispelled this mortal darkness, brought into the
World the light of the Gospel, and repaired the ruins of the Church. The
Lutherans in several Towns of Germany, declare this in writing upon the
Frontispiece of their Houses (in Capital Letters) in these or the like words,
in such a year, the true light of Christ's Gospel shined first in this City, by
abolishing Superstition, etc. Now if the Church of Christ had perished for so
many Ages, how is it true that it was built upon a Rock, Matthew. 16. and not
rather upon Sand? How is it true, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it? How is the House of God the Ground and Pillar of Faith? 2 Timothy 3.
How is the Kingdom of Christ (which is th Church) stable, firm, eternal, and
never to be dissolved? Dan. 2.

If you say, the Church and Lutheran Religion has continued in all Ages from
the time of Christ and his Apostles, but lay hid, it is more than can be
proved, and without any probability, as has been demonstrated. But les us
grant it to be hid; therefore it was not the Church of Christ: For the Church
of Christ is like a City placed upon a Hill, which cannot be hid, Matthew. 5. She
is the Mountain of our Lord's House, established in the top of the Mountains,
and exalted above the Hills, conspicuous to all, and all Nations shall flow
unto it, Isa. 2. She is extended from Sea to Sea, and from the River unto the
ends of the Earth, Psalm. 71. She is that great Mountain which filled the whole
Earth, Dan. 2. For the Church of Christ ought to be manifest, that by her
Worship, Splendour, Manners, and outward Form, the Nations might be attracted to
her, and that those who desire to be made Christians might know whom to go to,
advise with, and receive instructions from. In like manner her Doctrine and
Belief ought to be manifest, or else 'twould be unprofitable to the World, and
could not convert Nations. Therefore in the time of Persecutions, it was never
so obscure, but every where known, as Ecclesiastical Writers tell us. And from
hence came such a multitude of Martyrs. Again, if it lay dormant so many Ages,
it was altogether unworthy of the Christian name: For how could this be called
the true Church of Christ, which durst not confess the sincere Doctrine of
Christ? But was of such a cowardly nature, and so afraid of death, as to hide
it self in the dark, and not dare for so many Ages, to appear in the light.
Nay, did not only hide her self so many Ages, and suppress the sincere
Profession of Faith, but also confess a false Faith (namely, the Papistical)
adore Idols, and defile her self with a thousand Superstitions, and
Sacriledges? For before Luther, all Christians (in outward show at least)
behaved themselves like Catholics, or else they would have been presently
taken by the Inquisitors, and Bishops, and punished as Heriticks: So that the
Church of Christ would have been more miserable and deformed than the ruins of
the Synagogue (or the Jewish Sect) which always held their Meetings in some
places or other, and made a profession of their Religion, nor was ever
compelled (at least in general) to the Worship of Idols. It would also have
been more wretched, and in a worse condition than all Heretical Sects. For,
there has been no Sect of any name, which has not had their Churches, Preaching
Houses, or Conventicles, and some form and prtfession of their religion,
whereby it was known.

From these things it is clear, nothing can be more absurd, than to say, that
the Church of Christ (for so many Ages) absconded. I conclude therefore with
this Dilemma; either the Lutheran and Presbyterian religion were before their
Authors, or not: If not, then they are plainly Novelties, and therefore not the
Religian of Christ, which is ancient; but if they were existent, then they were
occult, and therefore could not be the Religion of Christ, which has been
always visible, manifest, and public. What has been said and proved in this
Discourse against the religion of Luther and Calvin, may be also said of all
other Protestants, whether Anabaptists, Independents, Quakers, and the like
Heresies; for there is the same Novelty in them all, and therefore the same
reasons may be urged against them; but for clearness sake, and not to cloy the
Reader with repetition of Names, I have only made use of One or Two.

I conclude therefore in the Words of St. Hierome, Dialog. contr. Lucif. in
fiae.
who writes thus, I Will tell you briefly and plainly my Opinion, We must live
and die in that Church, which being founded by the Apostles, remains to this
day. If in any place you hear some who are called Christians to derive a Name
from some other Person, (besides Jesus Christ) as Marcionists, Valentinians,
Montanists, (Lutherans, Calvinists) etc. know they are not of the Church of
Christ, but the Synagogue of Antichrist; For by this very token that they have
been brought in under such a Name in after Ages, they are known and convicted
to be some of those, whom the Apostle foretold: Nor let them flatter themselves
by quoting Scripture for their Tenets, since the Devil quoted Scripture also,
which consists not in the reading, but understanding of it. As Novelty
therefore is a sign of Heresy foretold by the Apostle; so such a Sectary Name
a sign of Novelty; and as for bringing of Scripture, it is common to the Devil,
as well as Heretics.

The Second Reason, from a defect of Succession.
ANother reason why these Religions are not to be approved, is, They want
Succession.
because they want a Succession of Ministers, derived by a continued Order from
the Apostles; which Succession is necessary, that our Religion or Church should
be judged Apostolical: For, without this Succession, it cannot be continued
with the Religion of the Apostles.

Hence it is, the Fathers teach every where, that those who would be accounted
the true Church of Christ, ought to show the Succession of their Bishops, by a
continual Series, or order of them from the Apostles: But if they cannot do
this, it is a clear sign, that they are not of the true Church of Christ. So
Optatus Milevitanus (to convince the Donatists that they were not of the true
Church) says, Show the Original of your Chair, if you claim to your selves the
true Church. And Tertullian, Let Heretics show the Original of their Churches;
Tertul. prescrip. advers. Heret.
let let ehem declare to us the Order of their Bishops, by such a continued
Succession, that their first Bishop have either an Apostle or Apostolical Man
for his Predecessor. The same Argument other Fathers mke use of, as Irenaeus,
Epiphanius, St. Hierome, and St. Augustine. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Epiph. Her. 1.27.
infir. cont. Lucif. August. c. 4. cont. Epist fundam.


But it is manifest, that neither the Lutherans, Calvinists, or Fanatticks,
have the least appearance of any such Succession; for to whom, I pray,
succeeded Luther, who was for the most part the Author and Parent of those
Religions? Whose Chair and Authority did he seize upon? Who was Chief of the
Lutheran religion before him? Who of the Presbyterian religion before Calvin
and Swinglius? But if none can be nominated, it is clear they want that
Succession, which the Fathers require to make their Church Apostolical.

Again, They do not only want Succession of Chair and Authority; but also a
degree Ordination of descending from the Apostles: For a double Power in the
Ministers of the Church has been always requisite, and both of them to be
derived by a continued Order from the Apostles, as aforesaid, in the Seventh
Consideration; to wit, the power of Order, whereby Sacrifice is offered, and
the Sacraments administered, to sanctify the Faithful; and the power of
Jurisdiction, whereby a Right and Authority is granted to govern and feed the
Church with the Word of God, etc. But neither of these can they derive from the
Apostles; not the power of Jurisdiction, as it has been showed; nor likewise
the power of Order; for who ordained Luther or Calvin Bishops of their Church?
If they say, that Ordination is not necessary, they contradict all Antiquity,
and the continual practice of the Church; for there was never any made a Bishop
in the Church to perform all Episcopal Functions, unless by another Bishop, to
whom two other Bishops were to be assisting, according to the Institution of
the Apostles, as is expressly commanded, Can. 1. Apost. and Can. 4. Synod of
Nice: And St. Paul insinuates the same, writing to the Bishop St. Timothy,
saying, Neglect not the Grace that is in thee, which is given thee by Prophecy,
with the imposition of the Hands of Priesthood, 1 Timothy 4. That is, the Assembly
of Bishops, who laid their Hands upon him that was to be ordained, as the
Fathers expound it.

Hereby it is clearly manifest, that the Lutherans and Calvinists have neither
of the said powers of Order and Jurisdiction from the Apostles, and that they
are not descended from the Apostles, according to either, nor can trace back
either of these two from themselves up to the Apostles; and consequently that
they have neither true Religion nor the Church of Christ among them: for this
ought to descend, and be as it were continued from the Apostles, by the means
of these two Powers, as has been declared: For all Spiritual Power ought to be
derived from Christ, by the Apostles and their Successors, (through a certain
continued Succession and Communication,) upon other Ministers, as our corporal
Life (by a chain of Causes) is derived from the First Man, Adam, and so must be
to the last Man that shall be born: For as in the Old Testament, none were to
be Priests, unless they descended from Aaron, of the Tribe of Levi; so in the
New Testament, none are Priests or Bishops, unless they derive their degree of
Order and Jurisdiction from Christ (the Chief Bishop) by the Apostles and their
Successors. As therefore the Synagogue of the Jews could not be without Priests
descended from Aaron, by a continued Race; so the Church of Christ cannot be
without Priests or Bishops, descending from the Apostles to their Successors,
by a perpetual continued Order and Succession. But the Congregations of Luther
and Calvin had never any such Ministers; they never had any Bishops (lawfully
ordained) amongst them, that could derive their power of Jurisdiction from the
Apostles and their Successors, to govern the People: It Is plain therefore, that
they have not the Church of Christ amongst them.

The Third Reason, from the defect of Mission.
THE Third Reason is, from a want of Mission; because they introduced these
Religions of themselves, without any Lawful Authority. This therefore should
make them worthily to be suspected as erroneous, and the Authors of them to be
Wolves and Seducers: For no body in the Church ought to Preach, but those that
are sent by Lawful Authority, according to the Apostle, How shall they Preach,
unless they be sent? Otherwise a great confusion would spring in the Church:
For every one then would take upon him the Office of Preaching, and governing
the Church, and sow what Errors he pleased: For if in a Temporal Republic, or
Humane Government, no Man can intrude himself, and assume the Magistracy to
govern the People in Earthly Affairs, pertaining only to this Life, but ought
to have Commission from the Prince; how much less in the Church, in the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, can any one arrogate to himself the Office of a
Pastor to govern the People, in things belonging to their Eternal Salvation;
but ought to have Authority from the Supreme Head of the Church? For a
confusion of Government in the Church is much more to be avoided than in a
Republic; since this tends to a destruction of Souls, whereas the other is but
the loss of our Fortunes or Bodies.

Again, He that enters not by the door, into the Sheepfold, but climbeth up
some other way, the same is a Thief and a Robber, says our Lord, Joh. 10. But
he that, without any Lawful Mission and Authority, assumes the Office of a
Pastor in the Church, does not enter in at the door, but climbeth up some other
way, as the Fathers every where expound it, and as it is plain enough of it
self: For, what is it else to enter by the door, than to enter by a Lawful way,
by legitimate Authority? For a door is the ordinary way appointed, whereby to
enter into the Sheepfold, and signifies this Lawful Authority, whereby
Ministers ought to be admitted into the Sheepfold of Christ, to govern and feed
Christ's Flock.

Moreover, our Lord says by St. John, He that speaks of himself seeks his
own Glory; but he that seeks his Glory that sent him, the same is true, and
no injustice is in him, Joh. 7.18. By which Words he signifies, we must not
believe those who come of themselves, and are not lawfully sent, because they
seek their own glory and profit, to which end all their Doctrine is directed.

Lastly, The Apostle, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, judges this Mission to be
so necessary, that he requires it in Christ our Lord: No Man takes this Honor
to himself, but he that is called of God, as Aaron: So Christ also did not
glorify himself, that he might be made a High Priest; but he that said to him,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Hence it is, that our Lord so
often inculcated to the Jews his Mission; namely, that he did not come of
himself, but was sent by his Father, and confirms the same many ways.

Hereby it is clear, that Luther, Calvin, and the like new Doctors, are not to
be heard, nor their Doctrine believed, but avoided and detested; because it is
apparent, they came of themselves, without any Lawful Authority. It is evident,
that they have usurped to themselves this Function and Duty of Pastors, and a
Right to Reform the Church. It is manifest, they entered not by the door, and by
a legal way, but climbed up another way, into the Sheepfold; and therefore,
according to the Sentence of our Lord, they are to be taken for Thieves and
Robbers.

Perhaps they will say, they were sent immediately from Christ, Christ sent
them not.
as of old God sent the Prophets, in an extraordinary manner, to Reform the
People, and as Christ sent his Apostles to convert the World; and as St. Paul
(after our Lord's Ascension) was not sent by Men, nor received the Gospel from
Men, but immediately from our Lord Jesus Christ.

But, First, it is not enough to say this, and boldly to affirm it, but they
must prove it, and evince it to be true, lest the People, and other ordinary
Pastors lawfully renounce them, as Impostors. As the Prophets of old, and the
Apostles, did not only say, that God sent them, but abundantly proved and
demonstrated the same, by many Miracles.

Secondly, All Arch Heretics and false Prophet in all Ages, have said the
like; namely, that they were sent of God, and received their Authority from
him. Therefore all are to be embraced or none: For why should I believe (for
example sake) that God sent Calvin rather than Luther, Munster, Arrius, or any
other Arch Heretic, since he cannot show greater Proofs or Reasons of his
Mission, than the others.

Thirdly, If God sent Calvin, then he did not send Luther; and so the contrary;
because, if two Prophecy contradictions, and condemn one another (in their
Doctrine) of resie, they destroy the Religion of each other. Wherefore, if God
sent both of them, he should be against himself, deny and overthrow himself,
destroying by one, what he built up by the other. Amongst the Prophets which
God sent, there was always an exact agreement of Doctrine.

Fourthly, If God sent Luther or Calvin to reform the Church, I ask at what
time, and in what place did God confer on them this Ministry? What Words did he
say to them, either outwardly or inwardly? How did he declare to them the
points of Reformation, what order and method did he prescribe them? How, or in
what Form did he appear to them? Whither exteriourly, in a visible manner, as
he did to St. Paul, or interiourly, by an imaginary Vision, in some ecstasie,
as to the Prophets, and to S. John the Evangelist in his Revelations? For all
these things God is wont to do, when he sends any One extraordinarily; and the
Prophets themselves, presently, when they began to Preach, declared all this,
that the People might understand by whom they were sent, or what charge was
given them; as it appears by the Prophet Isai. Chap. 1. etc. Ezekiel. 1. etc. Dan.
2. and 9. etc. In fine, all the Prophets were used to Evidence this in the
first place; as you may see in their Prophecies. In like manner, it is known at
what time, and by what Words our Lord sent his Apostles, and what he enjoined
them, etc.

But these new Prophets were so inconsiderate, that they never thought of this,
to be reputed immediately sent from God; for there is no mention hereof made by
them; which is a most certain sign, that they are compelled of necessity to
tell a most grievous untruth, by saying, God sent them: For who can doubt, if
they had the least color of Divine Mission, they would not have inserted it in
their Writings, and presently manifested the same to the whole World,
expressing the time, place, manner, and precept of our Lord, together with
other circumstances?

Fifthly, If God sent them, he did not only send them as Reformers of Manners
(as the Prophets were sent) but as Reformers of all Doctrine and Religion; and
therefore an exact narration and description of their Mission was chiefly
necessary, and a nomination of the points which God would have reformed, and in
his Name and Words propounded to the Church; as the Prophets of old were used
to do, when they proposed to the People the Divine Commandments in the Name of
God. But these New Prophets have not proceeded in this manner, but by chance,
and as their matter required, they fell from one Opinion to another; as it
happens in Disputes and Contentions, when their Minds were more and more
exasperated, and as by experience they could learn how to accommodate
themselves in their Affairs, and incommode or undermine the Pope's Authority,
which condemned them: For what ever they perceived would be most prejudicial to
the Sea of Rome, or advantageous to it, they decreed points of Faith
accordingly, and varnished them over with the Word of God, as I shall show
hereafter.

Sixthly, In Humane Policy, if any should pretend Authority to govern, it is
not sufficient to say, that he was sent by the Prince of the Country, who was
far of, and could not conveniently come himself; but he must show his Patent,
or Commission, signed with the King's Seal, which then is diligently examined,
least there should be any fraud in the case; and if there should be the least
sign of a shamm or cheat, it is not to be admitted, till a full and certain
proof thereof be made. The same we see in the Apostolical Legates, who all show
their Patents authentic, wherein their Mission and Commission is contained,
otherwise they are not credited, nor have Authority. What madness is it then to
admit into the Church and Kingdom of Christ, not only New Pastors, but likewise
Reformers of the whole Religion of the Church, only upon their saying that
Christ sent them, and that they have the Spirit of God, without showing any
Patent or Miracle to prove it?

Seventhly, The account of time also, is strongly against them; for if the
Church fell away about 600 years after Christ, and became the Synagogue of
Antichrist, (as they teach,) Why was the Mission of these Reformers delayed to
these times? Why did God forsake his Church 900 years together, and suffer it
to continue in its ruins, in Superstition and Idolatry, as nothing belonging
to him; and after the accomplishment of so many Ages, should send first to her
these New Reformers, or Chief Masters? Is this the Love of Christ toward his
Church, which he has cleansed with his Blood, which he has quickened with his
Spirit, and which he has adopted or chosen for his Spouse? He showed himself
much kinder to his Handmaid, the Synagogue, by sending them many Prophets to
reclaim them, still prone to Idolatry and grand Impieties. Therefore, if these
Men would have been thought Reformers, they should have feigned the Church to
have fallen but a little before them, and not for so many Ages to have lain
putrified in its ruins. Otherwise, this long distance of time confutes their
Mission, and shows it to be very imprudently forged.

Eighthly, Hereunto may be added other most certain signs that Christ did not
send them; as their vicious Life, Pride, contempt of the Holy Fathers, the
Errors, and Lies, wherein they were taken; besides their inconstancy of
Doctrine, which I shall declare in the following Reasons.

Ninthly, and Lastly, They teach that nothing is to be believed, but what is in
Scripture. Let them therefore show, out of the Scriptures, that they were sent
by God to reform the Church. In what place, and by what Words of Scripture did
our Lord give this Authority to Luther or Calvin? Otherwise we cannot believe
them, being themselves Judges, nor receive them as Reformers of the Church.

And here I cannot forbear to insert a ridiculous fancy of the Lutherans, which
yet made a great noise among them: They endeavored to establish the Mission of
their Prophet, by a certain Prophecy of St. Ambrose and St. Augustine,
contained forsooth in this verse, Tibi Cherubin et Seraphin, incessabili voce
proclamant; that is, To thee Cherubins and Seraphins continually do cry: For,
some years ago, they erected an Effigies of Luther, cut in Brass, with this
Inscription: A divine and wonderful Prophecy of St. Ambrose and St. Augustine,
showing the time and coming of Luther, wherein he began to write against the
Roman-Antichrist, as it is contained in the Letters of this Versicle,
representing the date of the year; which is a thing worthy the note and
admiration of all Faithful Christians.

TIbI CherVbIn et SeraphIn InCessabILI VoCe proCLaMant. The Numeral Letters of
this Versicle are 1517. in which year of our Lord Luther began first to Preach.

But this was certainly a very poor shift:

For, First, By such Numeral Hitts nothing certain can be concluded by any Wise
Man, as has appeared by many Examples in former ages, from the success of
things.

But, Secondly, Grant it a prophetical speech concerning Luther; the exultation
and gratulation of the Celestial Spirits for the Preaching of Luther, need not
to be signified thereby (as the Lutherans would have it;) but rather the
blindness of Luther, and all that are of his Sect; as in the 6th of Isaiah
where the Seraphins in like manner cry, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God of
Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory, (from which place, these Versicles
are put in the Hymn,) is designed the excecation or blindness of the Jews, as
by the sequel it is gathered: For God is provoked at the view of his Holiness
(which abominates all Sin) to execute revenge and just Judgment upon so great
Wickedness and Impiety. In like manner, they shall cry for Vengeance at the end
of the World, Apoc. 4.8. To conclude, if we write these Names (according to the
Hebrew manner) by m and not by n; that is, Cherubim and Seraphim, as they ought
to be written; so the Number will rise to 3157. which being ended, the
Cherubims and Seraphims will still cry, Holy, holy, holy; but this Clamor will
not be for joy of the success of Luther's Gospel, but an approbation of his
just punishment, whereby he and all his Associates shall be tormented to all
Eternity.

The Fourth Reason from a want of Miracles.
Miracles necessary.
THese new Religions with the Authors of them, are very much to be suspected,
because they were introduced without Miracles or Signs from God: For these were
chiefly necessary.

First, That so they might show themselves to be no Impostors, but true Pastors
sent by Almighty God, and to convince the World they ought to be received. For,
since it is manifest in Scripture, that in the later days, many false Prophets
shall arise, bragging to be sent from God, therefore our Lord gave us a special
warning of them, not to give ear to them, without infallible proofs of their
Mission, which cannot be but by Signs and Tokens from God; as are Miracles,
Prediction of things to come, Revelation of things hid, etc. for, since these
things are above the power of Creatures, it is plain demonstration they are of
God: And therefore they are like Patents signed with God's Great Seal, in proof
of their Mission from him.

Hence it is, that as many as were ever sent immediately from God, to teach the
people, were empowered to work Miracles, or supernatural Signs, to prove the
verity of their Mission. So Moses being about to conduct the Children of Israel
out of Egypt and give them a Law, came with authority to do prodigious
Miracles, and he himself did innumerable, or God also about him, who so often
appeared to him in a visible shape. So all their Prophets proved the truth of
the Mission by Miracles, or revealing of Secrets. The same did Christ himself,
Lord of the Prophets; who although 'twas demonstrable in Scripture, that he was
the Messiah, and that it evidently appeared by the testimony of St. John the
Baptist; yet presently at the beginning of his Preaching, he showed that he was
sent by his Father for the Salvation of Mankind, by many Miracles; and said to
the Pharisees (that out of hatred, would not give credit to him) if they would
not believe him for his own sake, at least they should believe him, being
convinced by the greatness of his Works. In like manner, all the Apostles
proved the legality of their Mission amongst the Jews and Heathens, by many
Miracles. To conclude, so did the first Doctors of diverse Nations, which were
converted from Paganism to our Faith. Wherefore since their new Prophets say,
that they were immediately sent from God, if they do not confirm it by
Miracles, or supernatural signs (as all others have done, whom God immediately
sent) they ought not to be credited, or believed.

Nor does it avail any thing to say, that St. John the Baptist did no Miracles,
because God worked many Wonders, and supernatural things about him, whereby his
Mission was sufficiently manifest. Also his Austerity of Life, and Sanctity of
Manners, was no small Miracle. Therefore no body could doubt, but that God sent
him.

Moreover, Miracles were absolutely necessary to prove them to be sent, not
only as Converters of Manners, but also as Reformers and Correctors of all
Religion to re-edifie the Church lapsed, to raise again the Kingdom of Christ
extinct, and to make all things new. How great Miracles had been necessary for
them whereby to convince the World, that they were bound to believe such
Wonders and Paradoxes, and to receive them for such Reformers? If they had
raised a thousand from the dead, and cured a hundred thousand lame, blind, and
sick of the Palsy, it had been scarce enough to make one believe so great a
matter. First, Because the Apostle says, Though we, or an Angel from Heaven
preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you,
let him be Anathema, that is, accursed, Gall. 1.8. And repeating the same again
for greater confirmation of the matter, he adds, as I said before, so say I now
again, If any one preach any other Gospel unto you, than that you have
received, let him be Anathama, Gal. 1.9. If we ought not to believe an Angel
from Heaven, preaching any thing contrary to the received Doctrine of Faith;
how many and great Miracles were requisite to be showed by a mortal Man, that
preaches contrary to the approved Faith, before he is to be certainly believed;
as, that Christ's Church is utterly fallen, that Idolatry has got into it, and
extinguished the Faith, that all are in the state of Damnation, that the
chiefest points of Religion are to be reformed, and that God sent Luther or
Calvin to make this Reformation. Was it not fit, that all the Miracles of
Christ and his Apostles should have been revived by this Reformer? Again,
because the Catholic Religion (which now storishes) has been above a thousand
years in possession (as our Adversaries confess) and esteemed over all the
World for the true Religion of Christ, and they that fell from it, were counted
Heretics. Therefore, without great and evident Miracles, to make it appear a
wicked and unjust possession, it cannot lawful^y be disturbed. And the Signs
from God ought to be so apparent, and convincing, that there is no room left for
any Tergiversation, or denial, otherwise we are not bound to believe them, but
rather obliged to favor so long a possession, and not desert the Catholic
Religion. I add farther, that the Catholic Religion, in all those Ages, was
famous for the Glory of Miracles, Wisdom, and Sanctity of the Professors, and
even now is. Therefore there is need of many greater and more renowned Miracles
to be showed, before she can be lawfully dispossessed, cast down and rejected;
also of greater Wisdom and Piety (and that by public Fame) in the followers of
these new Religions, than were ever in the Professors of the Catholic Religion.

Lastly, When the Religion of the Old Testament amongst the Jews was to be
changed, and to pass from the Shadow to the Truth, from the Type to the
Exemplar, although our Lord could clearly out of the Scriptures, convince that
this change was to be made, and that God sent him for this purpose, yet he was
pleased to confirm the same with many and great Miracles, thereby to take away
all occasion of cavilling and backsliding. How many Miracles therefore shall
we think needful, when a change is attemted to be made of the Religion of the
New Testament, which the Scriptures expressly declare shall never be changed,
but that God will be with it to the end of the World, and the Gates of Hell
shall never prevail against it? Who can prudently believe (without great
Miracles) a thing so strange and new, such a Parodox, as well against the
Scriptures, as the judgment of the Fathers? Yea, what Miracles can be
sufficient to make one to believe it to be probable? By this it is plain, that
we deservedly require Miracles of them; and that they deal with us most
injuriously and impiously, when they command us to believe them (in matters of
so great weight) without any Miracles, and unless we do believe them, to
persecute us grievously.

But, say they, we prove our Tenets from the Scripture: Whether they prove
their Tenets from Scripture?
True, but in your own sense, not according to the consent of the Holy Fathers,
and received Doctors of the Church, who lived before our Controversies, and
therefore could not be partial in their Opinions. Again, those proofs of yours
drawn like a Spider's Web out of your selves, are as easily dissolved by
Catholic Doctors. And there have sprung up so many new Reformers, so many
Repairers of the ruined Church, so many Ralsers of Religion extinguished, who,
though they are very contrary amongst themselves, and contradict one another,
each Sect striving to destroy what the other builds, yet all of them confirm
their Principles by Scripture; all of them rely solely upon this Testimony for
their Foundation, according to their own Construction. Threfore this way of
probation must be to all, or none: And to each of these Expositors it may be
said, if nothing is to be believed, but what is in the Scripture; where I pray,
does it tell you, that God sent you to reform the fallen Church, or Religion?

But it may be, they will say, they have no need of Miracles, Whether it be a
Miracle that they have so many Followers.
for it is a Miracle great enough that in so short a time, so many have embraced
this new Gospel. Perhaps this might be some pretense or argument, if their new
Religion were stricter, and more mortifying to the Flesh than the Catholic
Religion: But since they have abolished all the Severities of the Catholic
Religion, and given all liberties to the flesh, what wonder is it, if so many
follow it? What wonder is it, if heavy things (by removing the impediments)
fall downwards; and Rivers (by taking away their dams) run speedily to the Sea?
Our depraved and corrupt nature is very prone to a licentious life, which it
finds in these new Religions: Therefore so many profess them, not because they
are convinced (by force of Reason) to believe that they are more holy, but
because they find in them, that liberty which they covet and seek after, and
can now enjoy the same (without any fear) under pretext of an honest and pious
Religion.

I add also, that this Miracle may be as well brought by all these new
Religions; for many have flocked not only to the Lutherans, but to the
Calvinists and Anabaptists, etc. therefore all should be holy and authorized of
God. But God cannot deny himself, nor destroy what himself has established.
and therefore cannot be the Author of so many contrary Religions which condemn
one another.

The Fifth Reason, from the Life and Manners of the First Reformers.
THE Fifth Reason: Because these New Religions were introduced by Men of Evil
Life, and noted Infamy, Pride, Envy, Malice, and Detraction, having not the
least show of an Apostolical Spirit in them: For, as to Luther's Life, we know,
that he was a professed Friar, and Priest, about fifteen years, and therefore
strictly bound by a double Vow of Continency. We know also, that this Man
forsaking his Monastery, Habit, and Profession, returned to a Secular Life; and
seducing a professed Nun out of her Monastery, married her, and lived daily
with her; whereby (in the opinion of the whole World) he committed a double
Sacrilege, and that as many times as he used the act of Matrimony. What way of
living could be more scandalous? We know, that he was so addicted to Gluttonny
and Lust, as frequently in his Banquettings and Compotations he would say, That
the use of a Woman was more necessary than to eat, drink, Lib de Vit. Conjugal.
Sermon. de Matri.
and sleep; and that it was Lawful to use the Handmaid, if the Wife refused the
Debt or Right of Marriage.

Hierome Bolsecus, Julius Brigerus, and others, describe Calvin's Life to be
full of the worst of Crimes; as false Witness, or Perjury, Murders, Thefts,
bestial Impurities, etc. many other Authors write the same things, which I
never saw yet confuted.

But touching Luther's infamy, it is apparent by the Fact aforesaid, and
notorious to the whole World; when being a Religious Man professed, and a
Priest, he presumed to Marry a professed Nun; for this raises a scandal in the
judgment of Divines; for if in the Civil Law, he is become infamous, that is
taken in Adultery, how much more he that contracts a double sacrilegious
Marriage? For Spiritual Adultery committed against Christ, is much more
horrible and filthy, than carnal Adultery of Husband or Wife.

And as to the infamy of Calvin, It appears out of the Judicial Acts at Noyon,
Bol. in vit. Call. c. 5. Jul. Brig. p. 59.
that he was convicted, and by Sentence condemned to be publicly burnt for
Sodomy, had not the punishment of Fire (by the intercession of the Bishop) been
changed into the penalty of Whipping, and stigmatizing his Back with an hot
Iron. Hence it is manifest, both by Law and Fact, he was infamous.

Concerning Luther's Pride and slander, it is manifest.

First, Because his whole Doctrine took its beginning from it: For when certain
Indulgences were to be published in Germany, this Office was given to to the
Dominicans, which had often been granted before to the Augustine Friars,
whereof Luther was one. This Luther took so extremely in dudgeon, and so
disdainfully to Heart, that first of all he began to disclaim against
Indulgences, and being reprehended for the same, by degrees he alleged many
and greater things against the Pope's Authority, and other points of Faith; and
thereby raised great Commotions and Troubles in Germany; as John Coclaeus (a
Spectator of all these things) writes at large in the Acts of Luther, Anno Dom.
1517. This Pride and Indignation is the very Fountain and Origin of all
Luther's Doctrine; without it, Luther's Religion had not been, nor many others,
of which this is the Parent.

Secondly, Luther, in his Epistle to the Citizens of Strasburg, says, He would
willingly deny the Real Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, on purpose to
prejudice the Papacy, were not the Scriptures so clear to the contrary.

And in another place, he says thus, If any Council should decree or permit the
Sacrament to be received under both Kinds, Lib. de form. Missan.
then we would do neither; but in despite of the Council and its Decree, we
would either receive under one or none, and curse all those that should observe
the Decree of a Council: Here, in contempt and spite of a Council, he teaches
to abstain from a thing necessary to Salvation; when yet we may obey even a
Tyrant, if he commands things Lawful; and oftentimes we are obliged to it.

From whence you may clearly see, by what Spirit he was moved. What can be
compared to so great Fury and Madness!

Also, in his Book against the King of England, he writes, That Kings, Princes,
and Bishops are not worthy to unty his Shoes, and that he will be taken for a
Holy Man in spite of their Teeth. In the same place he says, That he cares not
a Fig for a thousand Cyprians, and a thousand Augustines; also he calls
Christian Princes, Kings, and Emperors; Tyrants, Block-heads, Asses, Fools,
Wild Beasts, Hang-men, Nitts, Bubbles, the Enemies of God, most wicked Knaves,
and makes many scurrilous Songs on them.

Of Calvin's Pride and Detraction, there is enough to be seen in Bolsecus,
although it is sufficiently apparent in Calvin's own Writings; for he despises
therein all the ancient Fathers, and impudently taxes them of Errors. He calls
the Scholastic Doctors, Sophisters, and frequently in his Sermons, Lib. 2.
Instit. c. 14. s. 3. l. 3. c. 4. s. 38. and. c. 5. s. 10. l. 4. c. 12. s. 20.
etc.
breaks forth into these expressions: I am a Prophet; I have the Spirit of God;
if I err, it is you, O God, which leads me into Error, and deceives me, for the
Sins of the People.

In his Letters and smaller Works also, he publishes his own Praises,
Dignities, and Merits in the Church, under some counterfeited Name, as Bolsecus
and others tell us. Many more things of this Nature I might instance, as well
against these and other Authors and Defenders of the New Religions of this Age;
but I meddle with them against my Will. He that would know more, let him read
the Life of Beza, written by Bolsecus, the Flowers of Julius Bergerus, and the
Commentaries of Surius, and others.

Who now that seriously considers these things can be induced to believe, that
God should make such Men the Reformers of his Church, that were so infamous,
ambitious, proud, passionate, envious, of such scurrilous language and vicious
lives, in the judgment of the World? Who ever observed such manners in the
Apostles or Prophets? The Apostles indeed were most of them mean, and of low
condition; but none infamous for any Vice, except Judas, who was expelled; and
although they were illiterate, and simple, yet suddenly they became admirable
for Wisdom, sanctity of Life, and splendor of Miracles. They were wonderful
for their humility, meekness, contempt of the World, possessions and pleasures
of this Life; wonderful for Charity toward their Neighbor, circumspection and
modesty in their Words. The like manners we behold in all those which God made
his Instruments for the Conversion of Nations, or to reform the lives of
Christians: for example, in St. Augustine the Apostle of England, in St.
Boniface of Germany, in St. Adelbert, St. Otho, St. Willebrord, St. Eligius,
and others of other Nations; in St. Benedict, St. Bernard, St. Romuald, St.
Dominick, St. Francis, etc. by whose good Example, and Holy Doctrine, many were
excited to a contempt of earthly things, and love of heavenly.

If now, for the Conversion of manners in some People, God made use of such
Men, whose lives bred admiration in the World, and yet were not sent
immediately by God, but received their Mission in an ordinary way from the
Chief Bishop, the Pope, What kind of Men (I pray) ought they to have been, who
were immediately sent by God, and that to reform the chief Principles of
Religion; yea, to repair the whole Church and Kingdom of Christ fallen to
ruin? although all the sanctity and excellency, all the Virtues and Spiritual
Gifts, which were in St. Jahn Baptist, and all the Apostles, compacted together
in one, had been infused into them; yet all this had scarce been enough to gain
them a sufficient Authority, for so great an enterprise.

And shall we be so stupid and foolish, as to believe that the Divine Wisdom
(in a matter so weighty and prodigious) would make use of Men, not only
destitute of Piety, but also infamous, unchaste, ambitious, revengeful, and
slanderous?

What was this else, but to give a just occasion (to all that had but the least
spark of prudence) not to admit them, but to count them Impostors: For, if
being infamous, they cannot be admitted to any Dignity or Office Ecclesiastical
or Secular, nor be Witnesses to accuse or plead; Cap. infamibus l. 6. l. qui
accusar. l. 1. de postulan.
how can they be allowed for the Reformers of Religion, Repairers of the
Church, Judges of Bishops, Popes, and General Councils, etc.?

The Sixth Season from their Errors, and inconstancy of Doctrine.
THe sixth Reason: Because the Authors of these Religions have manifest Errors,
and are very unconstant in their Doctrine; which is a clear sign they had not
the infallible direction of the Holy Ghost, and therefore were not immediately
sent from God, nor to be credited.

For, as many as ever God sent to instruct the People, were by him so guided
and directed, that in their Preaching and Writings, they could not be deceived.
Hence it is, that no Error in the least, could ever be found in the Doctrine of
the Prophets and the Apostles; which our Lord also insinuates, saying, 'One jot
or one title shall not pass from 'the Law, till all be fulfilled, Matthew. 5.18.
The same more at large teaches St. Augustine, in his Epistle to St. Hierome,
where he says, If in any part of Holy Scripture, there were found but one lie,
it would totally destroy the Authority of that Writer: For he that is deceived
in one thing, may be likewise deceived in another, and therefore we cannot
firmly, and surely depend on him. The same Luther himself teaches in many
places, whose words are these. If I should be false, and so grossly foolish as
to be once cateh'd in a lie, presently all my Doctrine, Honor, and Credit
would fall to the ground, and be utterly ruined: Every one would count me a
most wicked and infamous Rascal, and that justly: And in another place he says,
He that once tells a lie, for certain God never sent him, and is to be
suspected and doubted in all he says; the which he inculcates in several other
places of his Works. Yea, our Lord himself, in the Holy Seriptures, has given
us this sign and mark, that if we can discern a Prophet to utter any thing
false, we may know, for certain, that God never sent him.

Upon this sure and firm foundation, I frame this argument. Whosoever errs but
in one thing in his Doctrine, that Person is not sent from God; but Calvin and
Luther (in their Doctrine) erred in many things; therefore it is certain that
God never sent them.

The Major has been already suciffiently proved, as our Adversaries themselves
confess. The Minor I shall prove. And to omit those things which they falsely
impose upon Catholics, and which they falsely affirm in our Doctrine to be new,
and unknown to the ancient Fathers, and to pass by also their Historical and
Chronological Errors, I shall instance only two of great moment, common to them
both. The First says, That Man has no Free Will, but all things happen by an
inevitable or unavoidable necessity. The other, That God is as well the Author
and Forcer of our Evil Works, as of our Good Works.

That these are most gross and pernicious Errors it is manifest; because they
destroy all Government, all Exhortations, all Laws and Precepts, and all
Judgments and Tribunals: For all these things are in vain, if there is no Free
will; all punishment for Offenses would likewise be unjust; for that which is
not ftee and voluntary, and which God forces us to do, deserves no punishment,
Lastly, they take away Hell, and all penalty of the Life to come. Moreover,
they introduce a Liberty to commit all manner of Sins, as above in the Second
Consideration it is declared.

These two Tenets have occcasioned many to turn from Calvinism, Flores Call.
page 69.
to be Turks or Atheists: For it is better to have no God at all, than to
esteem him the Author and Enforcer of all Sin.

Now their inconstancy of Doctrine (even in the greatest and weightiest
matters) is incredible. From the Creation of the World there has not been a
Writer so forgetful of himself, nor so contrary to himself, and Subverter of
his own Doctrine, as Luther; for he no less contradicts himself, than he does
the Holy Fathers and Councils, and that almost in every Article of Faith; as
Coclaeus (amongst other Authors) shows at large. In opere Inscripto, Lutherus
Septiceps.
Of the Communion of the Eucharist, Gasper Querhamer (a Lay- Saxon) observed in
Luther's Works, In Tabula contrad. Luther.
Thirty six Contradictions, and printed them when Luther was living, to his
great shame and confusion, and the diminution of his Authority. And of
Communion under both kinds, Cochlaeus has noted seven contradictory Articles.
In fine, Cochlaeus's whole Book (called Lutherus Septiceps) contains nothing
else but Luther's Contradictions and contrary Opinions, in almost all his
controverted Articles, in the express Words of Luther. Now, in every
contradiction, of necessity one part must be false.

As to Calvin, Coccius relates Twenty four Contradictions of his, in his very
own Words: It is enough for me to set down two of them: Touching God's
Omnipotency, in one place he says, nothing is impossible to the Word of God,
Luke 1. And in another place he says, That Dream of an Absolute Power in God
(which the School Doctors have introduced) is an execrable Blasphemy, Psa. 23.
Again, I abhor this Doctrine in which the Papist Divines please themselves,
feigning in God a certain Absolute Power. Of Christ's Godhead, in one place he
writes, That Christ is true God, of the same Essence with his Father, De
Predestin.
1 John 5.1. In another place he says, The Name of God, by way of excellency,
Contr. Gentil. refutat. 10.
belongs to the Father only; that he only and properly is the Creator of Heaven
and Earth; ay, and that Son (according to his Godhead) is subject to the
Father. Again, That it is a hard and improper expression of the Nicene Creed:
God of God, Light of Light. In his Second Epistle to the Polanders, he affirms,
That Christ (according to his Divine Nature) is less than the Father. Lo,
whither he tumbles by being a Novelist.

These things being positive and clear in their own Writings, what Wise Man can
be induced to believe, that God sent them to reform the Church? For how shall
they raise the fallen Church, when they so vilely destroy their own Doctrine?
Who have so little Learning, or Prudence, and circumspection, as not to avoid
contradictions in matters of the greatest moment? Certainly, whosoever
contradicts himself, and presently pulls down what he has newly erected, it is
clearer than the Noonday, that he speaks not by the Spirit of God. For if I
build again the things which I destroyed (says St. Paul) I make my self a
Prevaricator, Gal. 2.18. The Spirit of God cannot be contrary to himself,
cannot deny himself.

Take notice likewise, That although in many things they contradict themselves,
and overthrow their own Principles, yet they have Face and Impudence to say,
that they are certain their Doctrine is true, and the very Doctrine of Christ.
For thus Luther writes, I am certain I received my Doctrine from Heaven. Cont.
Reg. Aug.
Again, I am certain that my Doctrine is not mine, but Christ's. And in another
place he says, that he is so absolutely sure, Cont. Stat. and Eccles.
that he will have no Body to be Judge of his Doctrine; no, not the Angels; and
that none can be saved, who believes not his Doctrine

In like manner, Calvin oftentimes says, That he is a Prophet; that he can
deceive none, unless God deceive him; as I have showed in the Fifth Reason.

Hereby it is a clear demonstration, that not only they speak not by the Spirit
of God (having such open and manifest Errors and Contradictions,) but also are
to be looked upon as Impostors, who deceive the People: For he that says he is
certain, that his Doctrine (in which are many Errors and Contradictions) is of
God, may well be supposed not to deal fairly and sincerely, but to speak
against his own Conscience, and so to impose upon the People. It Is manifest,
that such a one has no Internal Illumination from God, to make him certain of
the Truth of his Doctrine, by the Testimony of God: For God cannot testify or
reveal Contradictions. With what Face therefore, can they so impudently affirm,
that they are sure their Doctrine is of God, or Christ's Doctrine? Therefore
they deal not honestly and sincerely, but endeavor to blind the World.

But some will confess that they erred (now and then) at the beginning, when
they had not yet fully received the Spirit of God; but afterward they did not
err, nor change their Opinions. But this has no color of Truth at all: For all
those who ever have been immediately sent by God to teach the People, have
presently (at the beginning of their Mission) had the infallible assistance and
direction of God, so that they could never, in the least, err in their
Doctrine. As it is manifest by the Prophets and Apostles. Nay, there was
greatest need of this direction in the begiuning, because then chiefly all
things were to be discussed, the Teachers and their Doctrine to be examined,
that so they might gain Authority, and be believed: For if they had been
caught in any Error or Contradiction at first, all their Authority would have
fallen to the ground, and perished.

In the like case, if Calvin and Luther were sent by God to reform the Church,
there was great need, that presently, at the beginning, their Doctrine should
be solid and sound, free from all Contradiction and Error, least they might
justly be rejected as Impostors.

Then again, I ask, when (at length) did they obtain this plenitude or fullness
of the Spirit, so as never to err any more? How could that appear to the World,
that Men may know they are to be credited at last, though they were not at
first: For, unless this can be showed, we may rightly presume, that they may
err in their future, who manifestly have erred in their former Writings.

To conclude, that they were various in their Life, that they changed and
mended their Principles, and in diverse little Books, which they published, (and
sometimes in one and the same Book) they writ several contradictions, it is
apparent by those few things aforementioned, and by many more, which
Cochlaeus, Coccius, and others have recorded in their own words. For the longer
they stood out in opposition to the Catholic Church, more invective and bitter
they became against it; and what more mildly they alleged at first, afterward
they made worse, or changed to the contrary.

The Seventh Reason, from tht malicious Deceits and Frauds they make use of.
THat Religion is to be suspected, whose Authors and Defenders use malicious
Deceits, Frauds, and Lies to propagate it: For the true Religion wants no such
helps, but only the false; which being destitute of true and solid Reasons,
must necessarily place its hope and confidence in a Lie.

But the Authors and Propagators of the Lutheran and Calvinistical Religion
used many Frauds and Lies to increase their Sect, therefore it is worthily to
be suspected.

That they used most malicious Frauds and Deceits, False Tenets imposed upon
Catholics.
is manifest; because they imposed upon Catholics many things falsely, that so
they might easier confute them, and make their Religion scandalous; as to say,
That Papists worship Images, Stocks, and Stones, as the Heathens did their
Idols; so whatsoever there is in Scripture against the worship of Idols, the
same they allege against our veneration of Holy Images; wherein they deal not
sincerely and heartily but very fraudulently and falsely; for they know (or may
easily know if they will) that the Images of Saints are never adored in the
Church, as Gods, or with that adoration which is due to God only; as the
Heathens worshipped their Idols; nor in that manner do they reverence Images,
for any excellency in them, but so as it may pass to the Prototype, or to the
Saints reigning with Christ. For the external mark of adoration which is made
before an Image, is a veneration of the Original, or that which is represented
by the Image. As to erect the King's Statue, or to stand bare before it, is no
Honor to the Statue, but is an honor and reverence give to the King.

That the Honor which we exhibit to Saints, is not Cultus Latriae, or the
Honor due and proper to God only, is manifest; because we worship not any
Saint, as Supreme Lord and Creator of all things, but only Honor them as his
Friends, who is the Supreme Lord and Creator of all things. For we so highly
esteem God, as to repute his Friends (whom he has so highly exalted) worthy of
Honor likewise; which certainly can be no injury to God, but rather to God's
greater Honor and Glory; as it is more Honor to the King whose Courtiers are
honored (out of love and respect to the King) because they are his Domestics,
Ministers, and Friends, etc. I mention these things, because many ignorant
People stumble at them.

Again, they cry out against Papists for worshipping Bread as God; and
therefore Calvin frequently calls Catholics, Bread-worshippers, or Worshippers
of Breaden-Gods. But here also they use a grand deceit to beguile the People;
for they know well enough, that Catholics believe there remains no substance
of Bread and Wine in the Eucharist; but that the Body and Blood of Christ,
together with his Soul and Divinity, is there truly, really, and substantially
(under the Accidents of Bread and Wine,) and so they do not adore the Bread and
Wine, but Christ there totally present.

Then again they allege, that Papists put not their confidence in Christ's
Merits, but in their own, and in the Merits of the Saints.

Again, That Papists teach, that Man is not justified by the Faith of Christ,
but by their own Merits and Good Works, and the like; which are nothing else
but mere Shams and Lies invented to make the Catholic Religion odious, and
gull the People.

I could bring here above an hundred Tenets falsely imposed upon the whole
Church, or the Catholic Doctors, if need were. Who can say now the Spirit of
Christ was in such Men, or that they proceeded sincerely in this affair, or
were willing to establish the Truth?

Secondly, They do not only impose false Tenets on us, but also false
Accusations and Calumnies; especially, on those whom they imagine will most
hinder their success; namely, Slaughters, Massacres, Treasons against Princes,
and all kinds of Villainy. Good God, how many Libels were formerly published by
the Lutherans and Calvinists, and now yearly are spread amongst the Vulgar,
wherein they charge Religious Men with most horrible and dreadful Crimes,
though never so innocent? But these deceits have been easily discovered: For
partly in the public Letters of the Magistrates, the innocence of these
Religious Men is witnessed, and the falsity of their Accusers declared; and
partly out of the narration it self, and by the circumstances thereof they were
clearly refuted; for in some of their Libels there are above fifty manifest
Lies detected; in others twelve, fifteen, twenty, etc. For Hatred or Malice is
a thing so raging, inveterate, and blind, that it cares not what mischief it
invents (though without any probability of Truth in the matter) so it may do
harm; but this harm is only momentary, and soon after the impudence of the
Slander is manifested, it turns to the greater commendation of them that suffer
it patiently, and greater shame and detestation of those that contrived it.

Finally, They use false dealing in confirming their Principles; as by adding,
diminishing, changing, or omitting something of Scripture, and Sayings of the
Fathers; or by letting pass the clear places of Scripture, and citing some
obscure places to favor their Doctrine: For Luther, to establish his Doctrine
of Justification by Faith only; where the Apostle says, we account a Man to be
justified by Faith, adds only;) and being asked, why he did so? he answered in
these Words, Epist. ad Amicum de Verbo Sola.
If any Papist is displeased at this, that I should add to the Text the Word
only, tell him from me, that a Papist and an Ass is all one; so I will have it,
so I command it; my Will stands for Reason and Law. We will be no Disciples of
the Papists, but rather their Masters. Once (out of Pride) we will insult and
vapor over these Asses. Again, Prithee answer these Asses nothing else about
the Word only, saving this, Luther will have it so; he is the Doctor over all
Papist's Doctors, etc. Behold the modesty of this Prophet, in excusing his
Fraud!

The said Luther translating that saying of St. Peter, Wherefore Brethren,
labor the more, that by Good Works, you may make your Calling and Election
sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. leaves out these Words, by Good Works; which are clear
against his Tenet, that Good Works are not profitable to Salvation.

The Psalmist says, Vow and pay to the Lord your God; upon which Words Luther
makes this Gloss in the Margent, containing a tripple Fraud: Vow, that God
shall be your God, which is according to the First Commandment, and make no
Vows to the Saints, or other Vows. It is written in the Proverbs 31.10. who can
find a valiant Woman? Luther in a Love-song, put in the Margent of the Text, in
the German Language, this sense; nothing is more lovely upon Earth, than the
love of a woman, to him that can obtain the Happiness of enjoying her.

St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 9. Have we not power to lead about a Woman, a Sister?
Luther adds, a Wife; as if the Apostles led about their Wives; whereas St. Paul
means plainly the devout Women of Jerusalem, which served the Preachers in
necessaries; of which sort many followed Christ, and sustained him, and his
Followers, So does St. Chrysostom. Theodoret; and all the Greek Fathers, together
with St. Augustine and St. Hierome take it.

Zwinglius instead of those words in Scripture, This is my Body, against all
the Greek, and Latin Copies, puts in his German Bible, This fignifies my Body.

In the Acts of the Apostles it is written, Thou will not leave my Soul in
Hell, Acts 2.27. but Beza translates it thus, Thou will not leave my Carcas in
the Grave; and this he confesses he did on purpose against Limbus Patrum,
Purgatory, and Christ's descending into Hell, which he calls foul Errors, and
marvelleth, that most of the ancient Fathers were in that error; namely, of
Christ's descent into Hell, and delivering the old Fathers. What need we more?
He opposes himself both against plain Scriptures, and ancient Fathers,
perverting the one, and contemning the other, to overthrow that truth which is
an Article of our Creed: whereby it is evidently false which some of them say
for their defense, That none of them did purposely translate falsely.

Calvin so expounds almost all the places of Scripture, which the Holy Fathers
allege to prove the Trinity of Persous, and Godhead of the Son and Holy Ghost,
as to make them invalid; whereby as he followed the Jews, Sabellians, Arians
and Macedonians; so he made way for the Socinians, who first came up from among
his followers.

The whole 53 Chapter of Isaiah (which manifestly speaks of Christ's Passion,
Death, and Satisfaction) he Metaphorically Expounds of the troubles of the
Jews, which they suffered for their sins. What could be more violently wrested,
oe more absurdly explicated? What can more resemble the Jews perfidiousness?

Christ says, If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments, Matthew.
19.17. Calvin will have this to be spoken ironically, or in a Jeer.

It is written in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Christ was heard for his
Reverence, Calvin Expounds, for his fear and doubt, and says, that it
signifies, Christ was stricken with so great fear and terror of Death, that he
despaired (as it were) of his Eternal Salvation.

Monsieur de Plessis (a Calvinist) in a certain Book of his touching the Lord's
Supper, has corrupted above a hundred Testimonies of the ancient Fathers and
Doctors, by adding or diminishing; and several Objections which the said
Fathers urged against the Truth, and afterward solved (as it is frequent with
St. Thomas and other School Doctors) he has produced, as their proper Judgment
and Opinion. Of which matter he was publicly convicted by the Bishop of
Eureux, be fore the King of France. These things are known over all France. The
same tricks use all their Writers, when they allege any thing out of the
Fathers, in defense of their Heresies.

Besides, they omit plain places, where the Scriptures or the Fathers explicate
their meaning on set purpose and clearly, and fly to obscure places of
Scripture, and of the Fathers, where they speak only by the by, or of another
thing, and do but touch upon the point in dispute. How many Arguments do they
bring not only against the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist, but
also against other most evident Articles of Faith? As against Free Will,
Inherent Justice, Merit of Good Works, Authority of General Councils, etc. for
there is nothing in our Faith so clear, which may not (in appearance) be
contradicted by certain obscure places in Scripture, or the Fathers: Nor is
there any thing so absurd, which may not be defended. For what can be more
absurdly said, than that Christ's Body is every where as his Divinity is? And
yet they endeavor to confirm this by many Testimonies of the Scriptures and
Fathers. What is more absurd than to say, God is the Author of all Evil? That
Man has no Free Will? And yet they instance many obscure places out of the
Scriptures and Fathers, to ratify these things.

If they seek the Truth, why do they let pass the clear places of Scripture,
and run from the plain to the obscure; and in the explication of them, why do
they not acquiesce to the Judgment of the Ancient Fathers and Doctors (who were
before our time;) but will rely upon their own sense only? When any obscure
Sayings of the Fathers seem to favor them, presently they cite them, and
endeavor to strengthen their Doctrine with the Authority of Fathers: But when
Catholics quote out of the Fathers, that which clearly overthrows their
Doctrine: They Answer, That the Fathers were men, subject to Error, but
themselves depend upon the Word of God, which cannot err.

They reject the Fathers.
If you tell them, that the Fathers relied upon the Word of God. They Answer,
That the Fathers followed not the mind or Spirit of the Divine Word, and
therefore they were deceived. If you ask them, how they came to know, that the
Fathers observed not the true sense of God's word, but that themselves do
observe it? They will Answer, It is evident by the Word of God. But how is it
evident, when there are so many different Interpretations thereof, and all the
Fathers interpret otherwise than themselves, and the Lutherans otherwise than
the Calvinists or Anabaptists? Then they reply, It Is evident to him that has
the Spirit, but to others it is not evident. So the Patrons of each Sect will
Answer; and the final Judgment of their several and different Opinions they
refer to the private Spirit. They reduce all things to the private Spirit.


The Calvinists therefore say, that all the Fathers and Doctors, and all the
General Councils wanted the Spirit to understand the Scriptures; the same Holy
Spirit they affirm the Lutherans and Anabaptists wanted, but themselves only
possess him, that God has given him only to the Calvinists, and therefore to
themselves its manifest, that whatsoever they teach is the pure word of God.

The Lutherans say the same thing of the Councils and Pathers, and also of the
Calvinists and Anabaptists, that they all want the Spirit of God, which is
given only to themselves; and so, say they, it is clear that what we teach is
the plain pure word of God.

In fine, the Anabaptists do the same, challenging to themselves the said Holy
Spirit, and denying him to all others.

But how absurd are all these things, and how distant from all reason? How
incredible is it that all the Catholic Doctors and Fathers should lack the
Spirit of understanding the Scriptures, and that this Spirit should be granted
only to the Calvinists, Lutherans, or Anabaptists? How vain and ridiculous is
it for every Sect to claim this Spirit to their own followers, and without any
other proof, than to say, It is manifest and clear to him that has the Spirit;
but not manifest and clear to him that has not the Spirit. Is not this to walk
in a Circle, and beg the Principle, and resolve all Controversy into that
which is chiefly obscure and can be manifest to none? For how shall I know that
you have the Spirit? When ever did the Doctors of the Catholic Church (in this
manner) prove their Tenets? For every proof or provation ought to be drawn from
that which is more manifest to the Adversary, and easier granted by him. But
this probation (upon which is founded all their Principles) proceeds from what
is more obscure, and depends only upon the Testimony of a private Man, who is a
Party and Accuser in the Cause: for you cannot prove to me, that you have this
Holy Spirit, but by your own Testimony alone, which is to bear Witness of your
self: But he that gives Testimony of himself, his testimony is not true: Joh.
8.13. That is, is not to be esteemed true, unless by some other way he can
prove it: For Example, These Calvinists cannot prove (by other ways) that they
have this private Spirit, but would have us believe them, upon their bare word
and naked assertion, whereby they affirm to know it secretly. Therefore, there
is no reason why they should be credited; but rather there is great reason, why
all should be disbelieved: for the Spirit of God cannot be contrary to it self;
but they are contrary to themselves, and others also: Therefore they are not
guided by the Spirit of God.

And hereunto, and this also pertaining to their fraud, and deceitful
Machinations and Contrivances, they revolted from the Ancient Faith (which had
flourished so many Ages) and they embraced these New Religions. Their Princes
(according to the custom of the Church, received from the time of Constantine
the Great) would compel them to return to the Ancient Religion (which sometimes
they professed) and forsake their Novelties: For which cause they rail against
Catholic Princes, and accuse them of Tyranny, call them Enemies of the Gospel,
and over all the World raise envy against them, as those that would do violence
to their Consciences, against their Eternal Salvation. And lastly, under color
of this Liberty, they raise Sedition and wage War against them: But when
themselves (God permitting it for our sins) get possession of our Goods or
Estates, they grant no Liberty to Catholics, but raise bitter persecutions
against them, and force them (with diverse Torments and Confiscation of their
Goods) to desert their Ancient Religion, and embrace the New, which they never
learned, which never had any Name, but of their Sect, which they owe nothing
unto, which they never saw confirmed by any rational Arguments, but on the
contrary, condemned by the Church (in all the Christian World) with the
greatest and most-weighty Reasons. Is this to deal sincerely, heartily, and
equitably? Is not this the Society of Lions, whose Right consists in their
Power and Strength, who make and unmake Laws for their Interest? And what
Tyranny of Conscience can be compared to this?

In the Church, none are ever compelled to the Catholic Faith, but those who
formerly professed it; nor they neither, but after a lawful and full Proof and
Conviction, to which the Deserters cannot Answer. But these New Reformers
compel those that never professed their Novelties, and before they have
convinced them of Error. In which thing, they act against their own Doctrine.
For they teach, that Man has no Free Will, but all things are done by the
Divine impulse and decree, which none can resist, and that God infuseth Faith
into his Elect only. By what Law then do they enforce Catholics to believe
them, since it is not in their power? Again, since the whole cause of believing
(according to their Decrees) is reduced to the Testimony of the private Spirit,
they do very unjustly in forcing Catholics to believe them, not only against
the Testimony of the private Spirit; but also against the Testimony of the
public Spirit of the Universal Church. For it is certain (out of the
Scriptures) that the Church is governed by the Spirit of God, and therefore
cannot err; but yet, this is in no manner certain of private Men.

The Eighth Reason, from their overthrow of Good Works.
THat Religion which takes away all Practice of Good Works, is not to be
imputed to Christ, who every where commends Good works, and the Observation of
God's Commandments: But the Religion of Luther and Calvin takes away all desire
of Good works; therefore neither of them is to be esteemed the Religion of
Christ. That these two Religions take away all desire of Good works, is
manifest,

First, Because both teach, That Man, with all his Good Works, is never the
juster before God, never the more deserves Eternal Reward, and shall receive
neither more or less Glory in Heaven, for doing but a few, or many or no Good
Works at all: That God regards Man only for his Faith: That all Justice is
contained in Faith alone: For thus says Luther, I would not give one Halfpenny
for all the Merits of St. Peter to help me, De 10. Precept. c. 1.
because he cannot help himself; but whatever he has, he had it from God,
through Faith in Christ.

Here he plainly teaches, that St. Peter is never the juster for his own Good
works, or has received a greater Happiness in Heaven for the same, but was
Crowned for his Faith only.

And again, in another place, De captio. Bacyl. cap. de Baptis.
Do you see how rich a Man is, that is a Christian, and Baptized, who cannot be
damned for what sins soever he commits (though he would) unless he will not
believe; for no sins are damnable, but only incredulity; all other sins (if he
returns, and fixes his Faith upon the Divine Promise) are in a moment absorpt
through the same belief.

Again, in another place, Good Works cannot be taught, De Votis Monast.
without prejudice to Faith; since Faith and Good Works (in the case of
Justificarion) are extremely contradictory; in such sort, that the Doctrine of
Good Works is necessarily the doctrine of Devils, and apostasy from the Faith.

Calvin is of the same Opinion, as it is manifest in his Institutions, where he
says, The Justice of Good Works can by no means be joined with the Justice of
Faith; not only Works done by the force of Nature, but all other (whatsoever
Title they are adorned with) are excluded by the Justice of Faith. L. 3 c. 11.
s. 13. l. 3. c. 15. s. 2. and sequen. and cap. 19. s. 2.4.7.
The same he teaches in many other places

If there is not Merit in Good Works, if they do not render us more gracious
and acceptable to God, and that for them we shall receive no reward in Heaven,
why should we trouble our selves about them? Why should we spend our Fortunes
in works of Mercy, and relief of the Poor? What should we Fast for, and afflict
our Bodies? Why should we be instant in Prayer? It Is great folly to busy our
selves in those things, and be sollicitous for that which will redound nothing
to our profit or advantage. Who sees not (by this Doctrine) that the study of
all Good Works is extinguished?

Secondly, Because both their Religions teach, 'That all our Good Works are so
far from meriting any thing of God, that they are sins, and mortal sins too;
although, by reason of Faith, they are not imputed to Believers.

Luther teaches this in many places, A just Man (says he) sins in every Good
Work. Again, A Good Work well done, In Presol. cont. Eckium. and in assert.
art. 31.
is a Venial Sin by the Mercy of God; but a Mortal one, according to the
Judgment of God. Again, in another place, In assert. art. 32.
Our best Works (whereby we endeavor to obtain God's Grace, In assert. art. 39.
Help and Consolation) are reputed Sin; as the Prophet David says, Let his
Prayer become sin. The same he inculcates in many other places, Psalm. 108.

Calvin likewise teaches the same Doctrine: For (says he) all the Good Works
of Men (if they are rightly taken) are nothing but Filth and Corruption;
Instit. l. 3 c. 12. s. 4. etc. 14. s. 9.
nor can any Good Work proceed from the Saints, which deserves not a just
reward of reproach.

If all our Good Works are truly Sins, Filthiness, and Pollution, which incur
the Wrath of God, who sees not that it is much better to abstain from them,
than to do them? For, by abstaining we offend not; but by doing them we sin.
It Is better not to sin, than sin. We must abstain therefore from Alms, and
other works of Mercy; nay, from all Prayer too; because all these things (as
they are done by us) are sins. What reason can be more efficacious to overthrow
the Practice of all Good Works, than to teach, they make us never the juster,
or better, before God; besides, that they are Sins, Filth, and Corruption?

And it avails nothing, what they say afterward; Whether Good Works are
required as signs of Faith.
that God requires Good Works in testimony of their Faith, or as the signs of
Faith: For this they say, least the People should utterly renounce all Good
Works. But they use this pretense in vain: For how does God require them, if
they be sins, which unless out of Mercy, he did not impute to them, he ought to
vindicate with eternal punishment? Does he require we should sin, to show our
Signs and Testimonies of Faith? How does he require, in testimony of Faith,
that which rather Witnesses a defect of Faith? For those who are sollicitous of
Good Works, thereby Witness that Faith is not sufficient: But if Faith
suffices (as they would have) and Good Works profit nothing, how are Good
Works the signs of Faith? Therefore the study of Good Works is not the sign of
a particular special Faith, (of which they speak, and to which they attribute
all things;) but of the Catholic Faith, whereby we believe, that Faith
suffices not, but Good Works are required to be joined therewith, which are
meritorious of Eternal Life. This belief they reject.

Hereby it is clear, that by these Religions, all Good Works are subverted and
overthrown.

The Ninth Reason, from the licentiousness of Life, which they allow.
THose Religions are not to be Fathered upon Christ, which totally expel the
fear of God from the Minds of Men, and set open the broad Gate to all manner of
sin and impurity of Life: For every where the Scripture teaches the fear of
God, nor is there any thing which it more repeats and commends, since from this
all honesty of Life chiefly depends. But the Lutheran and Presbyterian Religion
drive all fear of God from the minds of Men, and open the Gate of Liberty to
all Sin and Profaness, as much as Atheism. Therefore they proceed not from
Christ the Author.

That these Religions do this, and that, four several ways has already been
clearly showed above in the Second Consideration. The same I now briefly show
again, by these Reasons.

First, Because the Lutheran Religion reaches, That the Decalogue (or Ten
Commandments belong no more to the Faithful in Christ, than the Ceremonial and
Judaical Laws. For thus Luther writes in a Sermon on Moses: From the Text it
plainly appears, that the Ten Commandments pertain nothing to us; for the Lord
did not lead us cut of Egypt, but only the Jews. Moses is not observed in the
New Testament* If I should keep him in any one Article, I should oblige my self
to perform his whole Law. The same he teaches more at large in Cap. 4. Epist.
ad Gal and in Cap. 20. Exodus If we are no more bound to keep the Ten
Commandments, than the Ceremonial Laws (as he plainly teaches in Cap. 4. Epist.
ad Gal.) Therefore as I am not bound to observe the Ceremonial Law; (for
example, to Circumcise the Flesh, to eat the Paschal Lamb* to keep the Sabbath
(which was Satturday amongst the Jews;) so neither the Moral, or Ten
Commandments. If I am now freed from the Commandments, what may I not do? I may
in outward show worship Idols, disobey my Parents and the Magistrates, commit
Murder, Adultery, Theft, bear False-witness, etc. (which are forbidden by the
Decalogue) as I may do things which are repugnant to the Ceremonial Law.

And although Calvin does not so plainly teach the same Doctrine of the
Decalogue, yet occurately he insinuates it enough.

First, Because he teaches, That God's Law is impossible to be kept, even by
the Saints. L. 2. Instit. c. 7.
If it be impossible, then it is not obligatory; for no Body is obliged to
impossibilities: Never any Tyrant bound his Subjects to do things impossible,
and shall God do it? Such barbarous cruelty be far from him. Therefore, when
the Decalogue begins to be impossible, it ceases to oblige, and belongs nothing
at all to us. Moreover, because Calvin teaches, that all our Good Works are
Corruption, Filth and Sin in the sight of God; but no Body can be obliged to
sin; therefore we are not obliged, so much as to endeavor to fulfill any part
of the Commandments. I might confirm the same with many other Reasons, but
these are sufficient; whereby it is manifest, that even (according to Calvin's
Opinion) the Ten Commandments belong nothing to us.

Secondly, These two Religions make no difference of good and bad works before
God, but only before Men; for as the works (which are called bad) have open
Malice; so to the good works of the Just, they attribute an hidden Malice,
because of internal Concupiscence; by reason of which Malice, they will have
these to be deadly sins before God. If it be so, why should I rather apply my
mind to good works (with mortification of Nature and loss of Goods) than to
evil works, whereunto (many times) there is adjoined great pleasure and profit?
For since either of them are evil before God, why should I not rather prefer
those works, wherein there is some temporal pleasure or advantage, before them
that are full of trouble, toil, and loss?

Thirdly, Because each Religion teaches, that a Man is only just before God,
by a mere special Faith, without any good works; and that God imputes no sin to
him, that has this special Faith.

So Luther teaches in many places, as above rehearsed: By which Doctrine he
infers, L. de liber. Christian. and de Captiv. Babyl.
'That only incredulity is a sin, and only dis-believers are damned. The same
Calvin teaches, when he says, 'That all sins are mortal to Unbelievers, but
venial to Believers: He calls them venial sins, because they are not imputed to
them, but are presently forgiven and pardoned, as soon as they are committed;
which Doctrine clearly follows out of that Principle, whereby they decree this
special Faith alone to be the cause of Justification; that is, that man is
justified before God, in that he believes steadfastly, that Christ has fully
satisfied for their sins; for by this Faith, Christ's satisfaction is applied
to them, and made as it were their own; so that by it they are reputed just
before God, although their Will is not inwardly changed. Therefore, whilst this
Faith remains, no sin can hurt them, because they remain in the righteousness
of Christ, which they retain firmly by Faith. Upon this Doctrine there is no
reason to fear the commission of any sin: for no punishment, no vengeance of
God is to be feared, since God imputes no guilt to them, by reason of Christ's
satisfaction communicated to them by Faith.

Can any Atheist desire a greater liberty to sin, and lead as wicked a life as
he pleases? Certain Presbyterian Ministers in England confess this
sufficiently, who, from this Opinion of Calvin (tounhing Justification by Faith
only) among others, deduce and defend these Conclusions.

1. That all those err, Refert ex Fono Guil. Reinold. l. 10. p. 120.
which think to be saved for doing many good works. 2. That there is no need of
laboring to do good Works, for the obtaining Eternal Life, because we have it
already. 3. This is one of the chiefest errors reigning in the Christian World,
to imagine that good Works can any whit avail to Salvotion. 4. That our sins
nothing diminish the Glory of God; all the damage of sin is placed in the
scandal of our Neighbor. 5. Christh as redeemed us with his Blood, and
delivered us from all Sins and Laws; so that there is no Law which obliges us
in Conscience: Here we are clearly freed from the Decalogue (or Ten
Commandments) and from all the Sacraments. 6. That you are nothing to God but
by Faith, as to confess Jesus Christ, and believe that he is risen from the
dead; for so you shall be safe in all other things, God has left you at liberty
to do what you will; for you may do all things, without any scruple of
Conscience: Neither can you Perish, or be Damned for any thing you outwardly
do, or leave undone. All these things they infer, (and that rightly) from
Luther and Calvin's Foundation namely, that Man is Justified by Faith only: in
whose Writings all these things are to be seen, almost verbatim. Who can wish
or desire a greater liberty to be vicious.
Add hereunto what is abovesaid, in the second Consideration, where we have
mentioned three other ways, whereby this liberty is granted. I omit also that
Window which Calvin has opened, when he teaches, F. 3. C. 25. S. 12.
That the pain of the Damned, is nothing else, but to apprehend God to be angry
with them, and terrifying them; although thit punishment is represented to us
by corporal things, as darkness, weeping, gnashing of Teeth, unquenchable fire,
etc. by which words he sufficiently and clearly shows, that Hell is nothing
else but a vain fear; for, if God inflicts no punishment upon the Damned, but
only terifies them, surely that fear is vain and ridiculous, and Hell Torments
nothing to be regarded.

The Tenth Reason, from raking up, and reviving old Heresies.
EVery Religion is to be avoided, which conteins Heresies condemned of old by
the Catholic Church, which have been always taken for Heresies. But these New
Religions contain such Heresies; yea, they seem to be naught else, but the very
Scum of diverse Heresies, broached by several Arch-Hereticks in former Ages, and
of old condemned by the Catholic Church; therefore we ought to fly them. The
Minor is to be proved. Let us consider then the chiefest Tenets of these
Religions.

First, Both Luther and Calvin teach, that there is no Free Will. And Luther in
his Thirty sixth Article affirms this to be the chief Foundation of his
Religion: But this was the old Heresy of Simon Magus, and Valentine, as St.
Augustine witnesses. August. Here Is. 46. Hier. in Prolog. contr. Pelag.
Clemens. l. 3. recognit. Council. Constable. Sess. 8.

Secondly, Both teach, That God is the impulsive Cause of all Sin, and that all
Wickedness is done by the Divine Decree. This was the old Heresy of Simon
Magus and Florinus. Vincen. Liri. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 21.

Thirdly, They both teach, That Good Works are not necessary to Salvation, but
Faith alone is sufficient. This likewise was the old Heresy of Simon Magus,
and of the Eunomians, about the year of our Lord 360. Iraen. l. 1. c. 20.
August. Here Is. 4.

Fourthly, They hoth teach, That no Sins (be they never so many and great) can
hurt them that have Faith; because the Malice of them is not imputed to
Believers: Which was formerly the Heresy of the Eunomians, and of Basilides,
Carpocratis. Witness Irenaeus l. 1. c. 23. and 24. August. Here Is. 54.

Fifthly, Calvin denies the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist.
This was formerly the Heresy of Berengarius, about the year of our Lord 1051.
where you must note, First, that although some privately doubted of the matter,
before Berengarius, and raised Questions; yet none was so bold, as publicly to
profess the same. Witness Hugo Lingonensis, and Aldelmanus Brixiensis in Epist.
suis ad Bereng. and Paschasius l. de verb. instit. hujus Sacram. So that this
was the constant Doctrine of the Church (untouched by all Heretics) till the
time of Berengarius. And the Opinion of Berengarius was (in his Lifetime)
condemned by Five Councils, and himself three times renounced his Opinion, and
at length died in the Catholic Faith, very penitently; who being dead, this
Heresy was extinguished almost 200 years, till the Lollards revived it, as
Trithemius observes in his Chron. to the year 1315. The same Heresy after
Wickliff held, as it is manifest in his Third Article: When Wickliff died, then
this Heresy died also, for about one hundred years, till Zwinglius revived it,
whom Calvin and some others followed. Whereby it manifestly appears, that the
said Opinion was always reputed in the Church for a notorious Heresy.
Therefore, either the Church always erred in the chief Article of her Faith
(and so was never the Church of Christ) or this Opinion, which denies the Real
Presence of Christ's Body in the Eucharist, is truly a Heresy.

Sixthly, Both of them take away all Traditions, and will have all things
contained in the Scriptures only. This was the Heresy of the Arrians, as
appears by St. August. l. 1. cont. Maxim. c. 2. and ult. Also of Nestorius,
Dioscurus, and Eutyches; as you may see in the Seventh Synod, Act. 1.

Seventhly, They both deny the Sacrament of Penance and Confirmation. The same
Heresy the Novatians taught of old. Witness St. Cyp. and Theodor. l. 4. Epist.
2. l. 3. Heret. Fabul.

Eighthly, They both teach, That the Church consists of the Good only: That at
first it was visible; but for many Ages perished; yet all that while to exist
in them only. This was plainly the Heresy of the Donatists, as St. Augustine
Witnesses, l. de unitati Ecclesiae.

Ninthly, They both deny Prayer for the Dead, Fasts in Lent, or at any other
time, etc. This heretofore taught the Arrians. Witness Epiphanius, Here Is. 75.
and St. Aul. de Here Is. c. 33.

Tenthly, Both of them deny Veneration to Sacred Images of Christ and his
Saints, and to Holy Relics, and call it Idolatry. The same of old did
Vigilantius, as St. Hierome witnesses; and so did the Iconomachists, witness
Zonoras, Cedrinus, Nicephorus, Iconomachis.

Hereby is clearer than the Sun at Noon day, that the Chief Tenets of Luther
and Calvin's Religion, are old Heresies, long ago condemned by the Church; and
were always taken for Heresies in the Church. The same might be easily proved
of other Sects. Hence it follows, that these New Religions are nothing but the
Filth and Scum of old Heresies formerly condemned. Vid. Bell. de nov. Eccl. c.
9. and Coccium de sign. Eccl. l. 8. c. 30.

The Eleventh Reason from the want of a Rule of Faith.
THese New Religions have no certain Rule of Faith, which you may follow.
Therefore they are not to be allowed: For Points of Religion ought to be
defined, certain and immutable.

That they have no certain Rule of Faith, whereby can be determined, what is
necessary to be believed, and what not, is manifest: First, Because they will
not allow the Traditions of the Church, nor the Authority of General Councils,
nor of the Ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church, who were before our
Debates.

Luther rejects all Traditions in the First Chapter to the Galat. And Calvin l.
4. Instit. And both of them teach. That nothing is to be believed, nor
received, which is not contained in Holy Seripture. L. 4. c. 8. s 6, 7, 8. and
in Antidoto. ad 4. Sess Coneil. Triden.

General Councils, which have had hitherto in the Church, the highest
Authority, (for they are as the Assemblies of Princes and Noblemen in Christ's
Kingdom,) Luther so contemns, that whatsoever they have defined, he would have
it all to be subject to the judgment of every private Person. Nay, he says,
It Is a great madness that Councils should conclude what we are to believe. In
Art. 115. etc.
Moreover, what we ought to believe and what not, is to be left to the judgment
of every Spiritual Man.

The same Calvin insinuates, saying, 'The 'Church ought not to judge what Books
are Canonical, and what not, but this belongs to the private Spirit. L. 1. c.
7. s. 1.24.

Lastly, as touching the Fathers: Luther 'cares not for a thousand Augustines,
'nor a thousand Cyprians. L^ cont. Reg. Augl.
Calvin also, in many places, contemns them, and averrs that they erred.

Therefore, none of these is a Rule of Faith to them, Whether the Scripture is
a sufficient Rule of Faith.
but they say, The Scripture it self is their Rule of Faith; for this cannot
err: But it is easy to show, that this Rule is not sufficient. First, Because
by this Rule, we cannot judge of Scripture it self, that it is Scripture: So
that this Rule is uncertain to us, which ought to be the most certain of all
things: For it cannot appear out of Scripture, that this or that Book is truly
the Scripture; that it is not supposititious, or counterfeited by some
Impostor; that this or that Sentence is not perverted, etc. Lastly, that there
is nothing added or diminished pertaining to the substance of Doctrine. All
this cannot appear out of Scripture, but is only proved by some humane and weak
Conjectures, if you exclude the Tradition of the Church; and so the whole
Foundation of our Faith, will depend upon a few uncertain Conjectures. Then
again, the force of Scripture consists not in the sound of Words, but in the
Sense, which is the Life and Soul of Scripture: But there may be a thousand
Controversies of the Sense, which cannot be decided out of Scripture, if you
exclude Tradition and Exposition of the Fathers, as it is manifest by
experience: For touching the sense of these Words, This is my Body, and of many
others, there is a great dispute between the Lutherans and Calvinists.

If you say with Calvin, that the Judge of Scriptures, Whether the judgment of
Scripture belongs to the private Spirit.
and the Sense thereof belongs to the inward Spirit; this is nothing else, but
to constitute the dictamen of the Interior Spirit (that is, the private
judgment of every one) to be the chief Rule of Faith: For every one may say,
that he has the Spirit, and by his inspiration judges this part to be Holy
Scripture, and not that; this to be the right sense of Scripture, and not that.
So a Lutheran (according to his Spirit) judges the Epistle of St. James to be
straw, and the Revelations of St. John to be of doubtful Authority: But a
Calvinist (by his Spirit) judges both to be the Word of God. So Luther judges
by his Spirit, to abolish the false Opinion, That there are Four Gospels; In
the Prologue of the New Testament.
for the Gospel of St. John is the only true, beautiful, and principal Gospel,
and to be preferred far before the other three. Likewise the Epistles of Baul
far excel Peter's. The thee Gospels of St Matthew, Mark, and Luke, he would
willingly have renounced, because they are clearly for Merits, necessity of
Good Works, and Observation of the Commandments, and commend Chastity and
Poverty: But since he durst not totally reject them, he is willing to disparage
their Authority, and to insinuate, that they were not written by the Spirit of
God.

In like manner, Calvin (by his Spirit) judges this to be right sense of these
Words, This is my Body: That is, This Bread is the Figure of my Body. But
Luther (according to his Spirit) judges otherwise, and says these Words of
Christ, This is my Body, are thus to be understood. This Bread is truly my
Body. I omit many other sayings; whereby it is manifest, that, according to
them, the private Spirit of every one makes a Rule of Faith, or (which is the
same thing) the Scripture is expounded according to every Ones private judgment.

Secondly, That is not to be held a proper Rule of Faith, which is equally
accommodated, or fitted, to all contrary Opinions, For all the Sects of this
time (although they are at Daggers-point about many principal Tenets) adopt the
Scriptures to be their Rule, and fit it for their purpose: For the Lutherans
say, they rely upon Scripture, so do the Calvinists, and likewise the
Anabaptists; nor is it any wonder, because every one receives the Scripture,
not according to the common understanding of the Church, or exposition of the
Fathers (as Catholics do,) but according to the sentiment of every one's
private Spirit. So you may easily adapt the Scripture for all Heresies. Whence
it is plain, that a Rule, thus framed, can be of no moment, being referred to
every one's private judgment.

Thirdly, If there should be a Judge that should so give sentence in any
Controversy, that one could not plainly tell, whose Cause carried it; but both
Parties should shill contend for the decision of their Cause, he would be
accounted by all Men a very improper Judge, since no Controversy can be
determined by his sentence; for after it there is as great debate, for whom the
Judge gave sentence, as about the Difference they brought before him. But such
a Judge is the Holy Scripture, if you set aside the Exposition of the Church
and the Fathers; for so it always gives sentence, that it cannot plainly appear
to either Party, which side it favors; but both stiffly affirm, that it
stands clearly for him. Hence it comes to pass, that Controversies never have
an end. It Is ridiculous therefore to make only the Scripture the Judge of
Controversies: For, in all Controversies, such a one ought to be made a Judge,
so as to give sentence, that all (and chiefly the Parties in dispute) may
clearly see, which side the Judge is for, or else there can be no end of
Controversy. Therefore, they that make only the Scripture their Judge, show
plainly that they will have no Judge to decide the Cause, but their own private
judgment. For they do, as if Titius and Caius having a Suit at Law, would have
no other Judge but the Book of Justinian, with his Pandects, secluding the
Interpretation of the Doctors; and Titius for his Right should produce some
Law, and say, that it is clear for his Cause; but Caius denies it: Likewise
Caius alleges another Law, affirming, that it clearly makes for him; but
Titius denies it; and so both Parties depart without decision of their Cause;
would not this be a ridiculous thing, and make all say, that neither of them
would have their Cause decided, since both of them would be their own Judge? It
is plainly so with them, that will have no other Judge but the Scripture: For
whosoever reserves the Interptetation thereof to his own Spirit, shows plainly,
that he would not have his Cause lawfully decided, but be his own Judge.

Fourthly, Experience it self shows how insufficient this Rule of Faith is: For
we see, that there is no end of Controversies amongst them, even in their chief
Points of Faith: For the Lutherans, Calvinists, and Fanatics in many things
extremely differ at this very time, and condemn one another of Heresy. The
very Lutherans disagree amongst themselves in many things also from Luther
their Parent and Apostle; insomuch, that at this very time, there are counted
Thirteen Principal Sects of Lutherans, differing by certain Names and Opinions.
The Calvinists dissent amongst themselves, chiefly in the Article, of the Head
of the Church; for a great part of them ascribe this Power to the Secular
Prince, although she be a Woman; these they call Protestants: Others esteem
this a great Sin and Blasphemy: these they call Puritans. The Fanatics dissent
amongst themselves in many things, so that there is reckoned Fourteen several
Sects of them, distinguished by Names and Opinions.

Lastly, It is come now to that pass, that when any one thinks to follow this
Rule, and depend on it, there are almost as many Heresies as Heretics: For
many (especially the ignorant sort) say, they care not what Luther or Calvin
teaches, for that they stick to the Holy Scripture, and Word of God, wherein
there can be no Error; and so they think themselves very secure; for every one
interpretes the Scripture according to his Capacity and Judgment. Hence it is,
that when they think they have Scripture for their Rule of Faith, instead of
Scripture, they have only their own Imagination: For what they fancy the Words
of Scripture signify, they take for the true sense of Scripture: And thus
there are as many different Rules of Faith, as Imaginations of Men.

But how comes it to pass, that every ones imagination should seem to be the
pure Truth, and right sense of Scripture? This proceeds partly from a great
self-love and self-esteem; for he that has a high conceit of himself, is easily
persuaded, that all his own inventions and conceptions of Mind are
extraordinary; partly also from a Diabolical operation, which inwardly perverts
the fancy of Men, that what they apprehend (upon never so slight a reason)
presently they imagine it to be the clear Truth: For where Men (through a
weariness of the Ancient Religion) have an aversion to the Truth, and Itching
Ears to Novelties, they are suffered (by the just Judgment of God) to be
deceived of the Devil. Whilst therefore he operates interiourly in their
Senses, they think they are illuminated with the Divine Spirit, and attribute
to this Spirit, their whole judgment touching points of Faith. Hence it is,
that the apprehension or judgment of every Sect, and almost of every private
Man, seems to be the pure Word of God, nor do they regard any reasons to the
contrary. The Apostle signifies this, 2 These. 2.10, saying, Because they
received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved; therefore God
shall send them strong delusions to believe a Lie: He shall send, not by
commanding, but by letting the Devil loose to deceive them, and lead them into
a thousand Errors, for despising the Truth, or Ancient Religion.

But many of them say, (especially the simple and ignorant) God will not suffer
those to be deceived who seek the Truth with an humble Heart: 'For he has
promised to 'give the Good Spirit to those that ask him: Luke 11.13. But I do
so; I beg of God to enlighten me, and open unto me the true sense of Scripture;
and I daily search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39.

This is a great delusion of the Devil: For how do they seek the Truth with an
humble Heart, who despise the judgment of the Doctors of the Church, the
judgment of the Holy Fathers, and the judgment of General Councils? Who will
not use that way which our Lord has showed and ordained; but require
unnecessary Revelations? For, from them they may understand the Truth, and be
freed from all Error; but they will not submit to them; and think, that, by
their own industry, wit, and private Spirit, they can more certainly find the
Truth out of the bare Scriptures. As if the Holy Fathers, Doctors, and Prelates
of the Church had not searched the Scriptures, or were destitute of the Spirit
of God, and right Judgment, that they could not rely upon them. Now, what
greater Pride can be imagined, than for a private Man, (and for the most part
silly and ignorant of all Antiquity, and the Liberal Arts) to prefer himself
before so great Wisdom, so great Authority and Sanctity, and such a multitude
of Doctors? Let them not therefore think (so long as they are of this mind)
that they shall receive any thing of God, because they wrongfully seek him, and
proudly ask him; but rather that they are deceived by the Spirit of Pride, and
a Lie, to which they are delivered (by the just judgment of God) for so great a
Crime. This is that Spirit which all Heretics (though never so contrary in
their Opinions) boast and bragg of, and from which every one thinks the Truth
is revealed to himself; which, certainly, he that is not stark Blind may easily
perceive; because the Spirit of God cannot reveal contraries.

Add hereunto, that the sacred Scripture, no where sends private Men to search
the Scriptures in Doubts of Faith, but to the Church, and those which precede
therein: So in Deuteronomy. 17. they are sent to the Priests in doubtful matters, who
were then appointed Judges, and those that would not obey them, were to be put
to death. Therefore in the Church, God has appointed Pastors and Doctors, and
would have the Church conspicuous to the whole World, the Pillar and Ground of
Truth: Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Timothy 3.15. that all People might easily consult it, and
acquiesce secure in her Decrees. The Spirit of understanding the Scriputres. is
not granted to every one, as it is plain by the Apostle: 1 Cor. 12. 1 Jo. 4.
'Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God.
Therefore, although the Spirit should suggest any thing to you, yet you are not
secure, because you are not certain, it is of God: For it is manifest, that
innumerable have been deceived: For all Heretics brag of this Spirit; and
Satan frequently transforms himself into an Angel of Light. Hereby it is
manifest, that the private Spirit can be no Rule of faith.

The Twelfth Reason, from another great absurdity.
IF any of these New Religions (for example, the Lutheran Religion) were the
true Religion of Christ, besides the absurdities aforementioned, this would
follow; that all Catholics (which have been hitherto, from the time of the
Apostles) are damned, and sentenced to the Eternal Torments of Hellfire;
because (according to the chief Tenet of this Religion) they wanted justifying
Faith, and therefore Justice before God; so that they remained in their sins,
and died in them: For the Faith necessary to Justification (as this Religion
teaches) is that whereby a Man firmly believes, that he is just before God, by
reason of Christ's satisfaction, which, by Faith, is applied and imputed to him.

But it is manifest, that this Faith was unknown to the World till the time of
Luther: Nor does he deny, but rather glories that he manifested to the World
the true Nature of Justification, hid from the ancient Fathers. The same is
clear, by the Writings of all the ancient Fathers, because (besides Faith in
Christ) they require an inward change of the Will, and purpose of keeping the
whole Law; also, for that they condemn this security of Salvation; and will
have Men to work out their Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. and
be always sollicitous.

Hence it is, that this peculiar special Faith (whereby every one certainly
believes he is just) they all reject, as mere presumption. For although we
ought to believe, that Christ has fully satisfied for us on his part; yet it
does not appear to us, that we have done all things necessary on our part, to
be made partakers of his satisfaction, and that we may not sometime or other
fall from him.

It Is clear then, that all the Ancients wanted this Faith. Therefore so many
Holy Fathers, so many Martyrs, so many Virgins are damned. St. Irenaeus, St.
Justin, St. Gregory Thaumaturgus, St. Gregory Nazian. St. Basil. St.
Chrysostom, St. Damascen, St. Hilary, St. Ambrose, St. Hierome, St. Augustine,
St. Martin, St. Nicholas, St. Anthony, St. Gregory the Great, St. Benedict, St
Bernard, St. Dominick, St. Francis, are all damned; also St. Laurence, St.
Vincent, St. Sebastian, St. Catharine, St. Caecilia, St. Agnes, and innumerable
others (who for Sanctity of Life, Miracles, and the Honor of Martyrdom, were
renowned through the whole World) are damned. To conclude, all our Ancestors
are damned, that have been from the Apostle's till Luther's time; and to use
the Words of Tertullian, The Gospel has been wrong Preached, L. de prescrip.
advers. Heret.
for so many Ages, and wrongly believed; so many Millions of Men wrong
Baptized, so many Works of Faith wrong administered, so many Virtues and Graces
wrong labored for, so many Sacrifices and Divine Services wrong offered, and
so many Martyrdoms wrong Crowned.

But how incredible, absurd, and blasphemous are all these things? How contrary
to the judgment of the whole World, and of all Ages?

Nor can it be said, that they were excused for their ignorance; because no
Body can be saved, without Faith, without the justice of Christ, without
participation of Christ's Redemption; as every where the Scripture teaches,
especially the New Testament. No ignorance can excuse, that a Man may be saved
without these things; therefore there is no refuge here; either they are all
damned, or the Religion of Luther and Calvin (in their principal Opinion of
Justification) is false and impious.

Behold Twelve Reasons, whereby it is clearly demonstrated, that these New
Religions are to be avoided as false and pernicious. The last Consideration now
follows.

The Tenth Consideration, and Conclusion of the whole Consult.
LAstly, That Religion is to be embraced in this Life, which Men are most like
to be willing to profess at the hour of death* and of which they can render a
just account at the Tribunal of Christ: For, in the practice of things, we
cannot be better advised, than by the consideration of Death and Eternal
Judgment; namely, to love that here, which at the point of death, will be most
profitable to us; and to shun that which may bring upon us certain ruin and
destruction, at least put us in great peril of it: But the Catholic Religion
is such, as we shall certainly prefer at the hour of death: As is manifest,

First, By the example of many, who although they have lived Heretics, yet
when they came to die, have desired to die Catholics, as judging it the safer
way.

Secondly, Because every one wishes then, that he had done many Good Works, and
with great diligence had avoided all sin; to both of which, the Catholic
Religion efficaciously exciteth; and to neither of which, does the Religion of
Luther or Calvin; but rather to a contempt of all Good Works, and
licentiousness of Life.

Thirdly, Because the Catholic Religion has many Remedies, which in that
dreadful passage are not to be despised; as Repentance for Sin, Absolution of
the Priest, the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, and the Eucharist, which give
great consolation and confidence to the Faithful. For, by this means, the
satisfaction of Christ is communicated to us: But bare Faith is a very cold
comfort, and a weak thing at the point of death: For how can you persuade your
self, that God will be merciful to you, that you are just, and shall be saved
by the Merits of Christ, who have despised the Remedies ordained by him, and
determined to die out of the Catholic Church? All the Sects of this time boast
of this Faith; and yet certainly all are not saved: For the true Religion of
Christ is but one (out of which there is no Salvation) as not only all
Catholic, but likewise Lutherans, Calvinists, and Anabaptists teach: Therefore
your special Faith will avail you nothing, unless you have the true Religion of
Christ.

Now, that all Professors of the Catholic Religion may easily render an
account of their Religion to the Supreme Judge, and fear no danger for being
Catholics, is manifest: For, suppose, that I stand before that terrible
Judgment Seat of Christ, and am asked, why I followed the Catholic, or (as
Heretics call it) the Papists Religion, and not rather, by forsaking it,
turned to the New Reformed Religion of Calvin. I will answer with great
security, Therefore I professed the Catholic Religion, because it teaches me
to withdraw my mind from the love of earthly things, and fix it upon heavenly:
It teaches me to mortify the Flesh, to fear God, to practice Good works, to
obey my Superiors, to be instant in Prayer, and to cut off all occasions of
Sin: I stuck to the Catholic Religion, because I saw therein many famous over
all the World, for Wisdom, Holiness, Miracles, and the Spirit of Prophecy; it
being impossible for them to be deceived in so great a matter; because I saw
God has established this Church, for several Ages, by many Miracles; because I
saw therein the Promises of God fulfilled; for it is spread over all the World.
To this Church the Conversion of Nations has been made hitherto, and is daily
making. In this Church there has been a continual Concord of the Doctors in
points of Faith. In this Church there has been a perpetual Succession of the
Chair, and Connection of all Ministers with the Apostles. In this Church there
is a speedy decision of all Controversies. This Church, for many Ages* has
stood immovable against all Heresies and Persecutions of Tyrants, so that the
Gates of Hell could never prevail against it, Matthew. 16.18. But I perceived in
all these New Religions, all things contrary to this; therefore there was no
reason for me to renounce the Catholic Religion, or in the least to doubt of
it.

But though I should omit all this which I hay said, Is not this alone
sufficient for my security, that I have followed a Religion. which those have
been of, who were most Holy and Famous for Miracles over all the World; as S.
Benedict, S. Bernaod, S. Diminick, S. Francis, etc. For it clearly appears,
that such Heavenly Souls, so dear and devoted to God, such beloved and familiar
Friends, could not possibly be deceived in so great a business, as the
Salvation of their Souls. Therefore I may securely follow these Guides, in
reference to Religion.

But you now, who have followed some other New Religion, What a Heretic can
answer.
what account (I pray) can you make of it, when you shall be examined before
the terrible Judgment Seat of Christ? Perhaps you will answer the Judge,
Therefore I deserted the Catholic Religion, because I thought it full of
Idolatry, Superstition, and Humane Traditions. I thought that Antichrist
reigned in it; and I thought that Catholics depended upon their own Merits,
and not upon the price of your Blood.

But what if the vail of Diabolical delusion (which now blinds you) being then
taken off, you see your self clearly deceived, what Counsel will you take? For
there will be to more time and place for repentance. Perhaps you will plead
Ignorance; but this will not excuse you; because you might have easily known
the Truth, if you had used that diligence, which the matter required; nor did
you ever want a just occasion of doubting, which should have stirred you up to
a diligent enquiry. As therefore it shall not excuse the Jews, that they erred
by ignorance, because they might have known the Truth, if they would; so
neither shall it excuse you: For, to depart from the Catholic Religion without
sin, you ought not only to think and surmise, (by reason of some slight
suspicions,) but to know certainly, that such Evil Doctrine is taught in the
Catholic Church, by using diligence, and setting aside all worldly interest;
so that no farther scruple could be left, nor any just reason to doubt.

But you are so far from having any such certainty of the Churches Errors, that
no probable reason can be given for it.

For what probability or show of Truth, could induce you to believe that
Religion was full of Idolatry and Errors, which you saw professed by so many
eminent Men, for Wisdom and Holiness of Life? Which you saw or might have seen
confirmed with so many Miracles and Martyrs? Which you beheld diffused through
the whole World? In which you saw so great Concord in points of Faith, and
constant Succession, Continuation, and Conjunction with the Apostles. How could
it possibly be, that in so many Ages, none of the Holy Fathers and Doctors
should spy this Idolatry, these Superstitions and Errors?

Again, how could you be persuaded to believe that to be the true Religion of
Christ, which makes God the Author and Forcer of all Sin? Which takes away from
Men Free Will? Which extirpates all Good Works? Which opens the Gate to all
manner of Wickedness, as much as Atheism? Which takes away subjection to Laws,
and obedience to Princes, under pretense of Christian Liberty? Which recalls
from Hell many old and condemned Heresies? Whose Authors were renowned for no
austerity of Life, no Piety, no Miracles, but Men given to the Pleasures of the
Flesh, covetous of worldly Goods, ambitious, slanderous, envious, seditious,
infamous for Apostasy, sacrilegious Marriages, preposterous Lust, and
inconstancy of Doctrine?

Lastly, If any of these New Religions are true, then the Church of Christ is
fallen for so many Ages; the Kingdom of Christ is overthrown; the Divine
Promises (touching the stability of the Church) are frustrated, and the Gates
of Hell have prevailed against it. Then, for so many Ages, the Gospel has been
Preached in vain, and in vain believed; so many Gentiles have been in vain
converted from Paganism, in vain Baptized, and received other Sacraments; in
vain they fasted and mortified the Flesh, and so many thousands in vain
suffered Mrrtyrdom, by the effusion of their Blood for the Confession of
Christ. Then all our Ancestors are perished; the Holy Fathers are perished; so
many Myriads of Confessors (which were wholly devoted to God, and famous for
Sanctity, Miracles, and Prophecy) are all perished and damned: For they were
all without the true Religion and Righteousness of God, and all addicted to
Idolatry.

But if these things are false, blasphemous, and horrible to think, how could
it be, you did not conceive these New Religions to be false (or at least to
doubt of them) from which such cruel and frightful things are clearly deduced?
But if you doubted, why did you not endeavor to know the Truth, upon which
your Salvation depends?

Our Lord admonishes us to beware of False Prophets, which come to us in
Sheeps-cloathing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves, Matthew. 7.16. What Is
the reason it did not come into your Mind sometimes, and make you afraid, lest
Luther and Calvin, etc. should be in the Number of those False Prophets, which
Christ warns you to beware of? for these came forth clad with a fair pretense
of the Word of God, and purity of the Gospel, as if God sent them to the
Salvation of his Sheep; but, in the mean time, they destroyed these Sheep, with
the venomous Food of their Doctrine: You shall know them Christ) by their
Fruits, Matthew. 7.16. Now what were their Fruits? Seditions, Wars, Plundering,
subversion of Churches and Monasteries, destruction of Cities, extirpation of
the Ancient Religion, and a License to all Wickedness.

We know, by information of the Apostles, that many Heresies shall arise in the
latter days, many false Prophets and Seducers (by the Midwifry of Satan) shall
appear in the World. As often therefore as any New Doctrine rises against the
Church, we ought, at least, to suspect it, and the Author of it.

Therefore I most humbly and earnestly beseech all those who live out of the
Communion of the Catholic Church, A Conclusion of the Work.
by the Goodness of God which created us, and by the Blood of Jesus Christ
which redeemed us, by the Eternal Inheritance which we expect in Heaven, and
the Torrent of Divine Pleasure which they shall drink of, that retain Truth and
Justice, to lay this business, seriously to Heart; that they would consider
whether they rely upon a sure and firm Foundation, that may make them secure of
their Religion at the hour of death, when they shall stand before the Tribunal
of Christ, and in that very moment shall receive an eternal and immutable
Sentence. Let them examine this our Consul^ation, which we have written for
that end. Let them never rest or give over, till they have rightly weighed and
discussed all things, and have obt^ined a full persuasion, in a business of so
great moment, as the Salvation of their Souls.

Let them consider, what great punishment they incur, if the Religion (which
they profess) is Heresy, and they themselves Heretics. That it is a Heresy
(and a most notorious and pernicious one too) all Catholic Doctors, all
Universities, and the whole Christian World (except those which are of it, who
are but few in number, and slender in Learning, to those that are against them)
undoubtedly and for certain affirm it. So that finite Numbers have died, and
are ready to die for the Confession of it to be Heresy, rather than venture
the Eternal Damnation of their Souls, by complying with it.

Heresy, certainly, is a most grievous sin. How great a sin Heresy is.
First, Because it makes a Man prefer his own judgment, before the judgment of
all the Fathers, of all the Doctors of the Church, of all Councils and Bishops
of the whole World; for he contemns them all, as Men void of the Spirit of God;
and arrogates this Spirit to himself alone, and his Companions.

Secondly, The Spouse of Christ (which is the Church) it censures to be an
Adulteress of Satan, and Daughter of Perdition.

Thirdly, It charges her with the crime of Idolatry, and diverse Superstitions.

Fourthly, It belches forth many Blasphemies against the most Holy Eucharist,
and all the Saints

Fifthly, It abuses all Sacred Things most unworthily and scornfully.

Sixthly, It calls the Vicar of Christ, Antichrist, and casts a thousand
aspersions, indignities, and slanders on him, without any show or color of
Truth; the same it does upon all Orders and Degrees of the Church.

Lastly, Every Heretic wishes an overthrow of the whole Church, and that the
Catholic Religion were totally extinguished.

The Heresies therefore of our times swell with Pride, many horrible
Blasphemies, many invectives, and detractions, many Sacrileges and most bitter
hatred against the Church of Church of Christ; for these things are as it were
intrinsically in Heresy; which habitually inclines to all these things, and
daily urges and excites to action.

All Catholic Doctors thus judge of Heresy; and the matter is plain enough of
it self. Therefore Heresy (with its issue and attendance) is a greater Crime,
than innumerable sins of Catholics.

Now I beseech them to consider, How great a punishment the sin of Heresy
deserves.
what will be the great punishment of this sin of Heresy: For, if for one
Crime of Theft, for one Act of Fornication (without true repentance) a Man
shall suffer Eternal Fire, as the Scripture plainly tells us, Gal. 5. Col. 3. 1
Cor. 16. 1 Timothy 1. how great punishment shall he endure for the sin of Heresy,
which is more grievous than a thousand Thefts, and a thousand Fornications? If
the pain which our earthly Fire Inflicts (by the force of Nature) may be
increased a hundredfold, and so augmented till it be hundred times more
grievous, how horrible, how insufferable, how incomprehensible would that
punishment be? Let no Man flatter himself, that Hellfire will be no pain; but
only I know not what Terrors of God's anger, as Calvin dreameth. The Scripture
too plainly shows the contrary: D^part from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire,
Matthew. 25.41. Their Worm never dies, and the Fire is never quenched, Mark 944
God shall rain suares upon the Wicked, Fire and Brimstone, and a burning
Tempest; this shall be the Portion of their Cup. Thou shall make them as a
fiery Oven in the time of thine anger. Our Lord shall swallow them up in his
Wrath, and the Fire shall devour them, Psalm. 11.6. The False Prophet was cast
into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, and shall be tormented day and night for
ever and ever* Apoc. 20 10. The same is the Opinion of all the Ancient Fathers
and Doctors of the Church.

It is therefore most certain, that Hellfire is a true and real Fire, greater
and fiercer than all our Fires, made never so furious by the Art of Man, (which
are but as painted Fires in comparison of the heat of Hellfire) wherein all
Heretics shall burn and be tormented day night for all Eternity; as long as
Hell shall be Hell; as long as Heaven shall be Heaven, and as long as God shall
remain God; and the smoke of their Torments shall ascend before the Face of our
Lord for ever and ever. These are most faithful and true Words.

Then they will curse their Deceivers and Masters who brought them into this
Misery. They will curse the Devil which blinded them, and with diverse delusions
bewitched them, under the color and show of Piety. They will curse themselves
for being so facile to give ease to them, and believe their new Doctrine so
foolishly, without any diligent inquiry; that, in a business of so great
consequence, they were so blind and sloathful.

Lest therefore they should rush headlong into this Sea of Misery, let them
with all care and diligence examine this whole business of Religion by prudent
and pious Counselors; particularly, let them but suspend their prejudice a
little, which uses to be a great hindrance to this serious deliberation; Things
requisite to inquire the Truth.
I mean a certain prepossessed Opinion (which many have) of the Idolatry,
Superstition, and Abuses of the Catholic Church. As, that they Worship a piece
of Bread for God, pray to dead Men, Worship Crosses and Pictures, trust in
their own Merits, believe a Man can forgive Sins, and many such Fopperies; and
are possessed with what themselves have been taught, that they are afraid to
pray to God to have farther information, least they should sin, by seeming to
doubt of the Faith they have been taught by their Parents, and their Ministers,
to whom they have been recommended by them, to harken unto, as Orthodox
Teachers. And if they happen to read any Catholic Books, and meet with some
things they themselves cannot answer, their aforesaid prejudice presently
suggests to them, that those Ministers can answer them; and to discourse with
some learned Catholic, they upon the same ground are afraid, because they
suspect their integrity, and so they remain in the Belief they have been
educated in, as well satisfied. Now I say,

Let them lay aside (for a while) this prejudice, and but suppose they may be
deceived therein, and that things are not so, as they have been told: For, at
least, it seems somewhat incredible, that so many most Holy and Learned Men
(which this Church has always abounded with) should never see this Idolatry (if
there were any;) or seeing it, should not renounce it; but on the contrary
diligently retain and love it. This is an old Calumny of the Mahometans and
Iconomachists, or Image-Breakers. And there was never any Sect of Heretics,
which did not forsake the Church with envious and malicious Hearts, and tax it
with horrible Crimes; for they are forced to make this pretense, that they
might seem justly to depart from the Church.

Secondly, Let them daily beg of God to enlighten them, that they may clearly
know which is the true Religion and Church of Christ, and show themselves ready
prepared to embrace the same. No Man can come to me (says Christ) unless my
Father draw him, Joh. 6.44. None can come to Christ by true Faith, without
illumination of the Heavenly Father. Therefore, let them humbly and daily pray
to God, that he would vouchsafe them a Beam of Light to see and profess the
true Belief; saying with the Prophet David, Lighten mine Eyes, lest I sleep the
sleep of Death; lest my Enemy say (when I depart out of this Life) I have
prevailed against him, Psalm. 13 3, 4. Send out thy Light and thy Truth, let
them lead me, let them bring me unto thy Holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles,
Psalm. 43.3. Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk; for I lift up my
Soul unto thee. Deliver me from the Enemies of my Salvation. O Lord, I fly unto
thee, teach me to do thy Will, for thou art my God; and the like.

Thirdly, Let them add to their Prayer, Alms and Bounty to the Poor. How
prevalent these two things are to obtain of God a Light of the true Religion,
the Example of Cornelius the Centurion shows, to whom the Angel said,
Cornelius, thy Prayers and thy Alms are come up for a Memorial before God; and
now send Men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose Surname is Peter, he shall
tell thee what thou ought to do, Act. 10.4. Let* them imitate the Example of
this Man, that earnestly desired of God to be directed in finding out the true
Religion.

Lastly, Let them diligently (with an ardent desire of knowing the Truth)
consider what is said in this Consultation; and if they have any doubt or
dissatisfaction, let them address themselves to the Catholic Doctors or
Priests, who will easily resolve them in all points of Faith; so that at
length, they shall obtain (by the Grace of God) a quiet Conscience, and full
satisfaction in the knowledge of the true Religion.

This is the Prayer and Supplication of all the Children of this Holy Mother,
in their behalf: That thou, O true and everlasting Light! the Enlightner of Men
and Angels, would enlighten their Minds, and inspire them to do what is here
advised them: For, although they are seduced by the deceit of the Devil, and
have departed from thee, and thy Church; yet they are thy Creatures, made
according to thy Image and Likeness, redeemed with the price of thy Sacred
Blood, and called to the Inheritance and Society of thy Celestial and Eternal
Kingdom. Let no so Glorious a Work of thine perish, which cost thee so dear,
which may render thee Eternal Praises by the Knowledge of the Truth, and
redound to thy Eternal Glory. Dispel this black Cloud which obscures their
understanding, remove the Fascination of the Devil, which blinds the Eyes of
their Mind, and perverts their Fancy and Judgment; strike in them a horror and
fear of that Fire inextinguishable, and those Eternal Flames, prepared for all
those that are destitute of the true Religion; infuse into them an ardent Love
and Desire of obtaining the knowledge of the Truth, to the Salvation of their
Souls. Show them the light of thy Mercies, that they may know thy Sheepfold,
and understand that That was none of thy Sheepfold which they were in before,
but the Devils; in which, whosoever remains, are reserved as Sheep, not to
Life, but to Perdition, that they may be Fuel for Hell fire, and Food for
death, Death shall feed on them, Psalm. 49.4. Bring them back again to thy
Sheepfold, that being refreshed with the wholesome Food of thy Doctrine, and
of thy wonderful Sacraments, they may be healed of their old Wounds made by
Satan, and grow in thy Spirit, the Spirit of Humility, and fear of our Lord,
the Spirit of Meekness and Charity, and be quickened to Eternal Life; that after
this momentary Life, they may be partakers of thy Eternal Glory and Happiness;
and praise, bless, and glorify thy Name for ever and ever, Amen.

Now, Lastly, I admonish all Catholics, An admonition to all Catholics.
that they would seriously consider with themselves, what a great benefit it
is, that God by his special favor (before innumerable others) has made them
Professors of the true Religion; in what a strict obligation of gratitude they
are bound to the Divine Majesty, for so great a Mercy.

How few have this Gift of Faith, if you reflect on the infinite Number of
those, who go astray, or doubt; and therefore the more to be esteemed. Let them
consider, that amongst all worldly Goods, nothing is to be compared to it;
neither Pleasures, nor Honors, nor thousands of Gold and Silver, nor Sceptres
and Crowns. The Jewel of true Religion is infinitely better, and more precious
than all these. He that has it, is truly rich, although poor in Earthly goods,
as being a Citizen of the Saints, a Child of God, an Heir of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and Coheir with Christ, if he lives according to the profession of his
Faith. He that is without the true Religion, is thrice unhappy and miserable,
though he should abound with the Goods and Prosperity of this World. It Is most
certain there is but one way to Eternal Happiness. It is an Atheistical
Opinion, that every one may be saved in different Religions; for, as there is
but one God, one Christ, one Truth, one Right-way, one Justice; so there is but
one true Faith, one true Religion one true Congregation, or Church of God and
Christ, out of which there is no Salvation. Let them beware, lest by a
curiosity of reading or hearing, or uncautious conversation with Heretics, or
desire of pleasing any Mortal Man, or fear of Persecution, or loss of Temporal
Life or Estate, or loss of gain, or ambition of Honor, or for any other cause;
they lose so great a Good: For what is a Man profited, if he shall gain the
whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or, what shall a Man give in exchange for
his Soul? But a loss of the true Religion is a loss of the Soul; which no Wise
Man will part with, upon any account.

Those are unhappy Souls, and unworthy the Name of a Christian, who little
regard the ruin of the Catholic Church or Religion, so they may but safely
and quietly enjoy a Temporal Peace, to live in sensuality, or hoard up riches,
and the trifling goods of this Life. But this madness, and vile esteem of so
great a Good, shall cost them dear, when this momentary Life shall be ended,
and they suddenly fall into an endless Eternity.

Many Seducers are gone forth into the World, many under Sheeps clothing,
under a smooth pretense of God's Word, hide a Wolfish Nature, to the
destruction of Christ's Sheep. Our Lord has admonished us (more than once)
carefully to beware of them. The Apostles and Holy Fathers have often warned
us, Eccles. 13. He that touches pitch shall be defiled, and he that loves
danger shall perish therein, Eccles. 3. The Times were never more dangerous and
destructive to our Salvation, than now: the Fascination of the Devil was never
greater, nor a Spiritual frenzy more powerful with Men; the operation of Error
was never more prevailing and successful; and the minds of Men never blinder;
all which (deservedly) possess the understandings of those that disesteem this
great Gift of the Catholic and Orthodox Religion, and prefer Temporal Things
before it.

Let those therefore that heartily desire to be saved, preserve this Celestial
Jewel, and keep it with all carefulness, because Life proceeds from it; and
because it is a Supernatural Gift, which (without the Divine Assistance) can
neither be acquired nor preserved, being environed with so many Enemies. Let
them daily implore Gods help for themselves, their Children, and whole Family,
and add unto their Prayers, Alms to the Poor, with other Works of Piety; for
Prayer is good with Fasting and Alms, and better than to heap up Treasures of
Gold, Job. 12. Let them lead Lives agreeable to their Religion, and allay their
Thirst after the Goods of this Life, with expectation and hope of Celestial and
Eternal; remembering the Saying of the Apostle. 1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be
rich fall into Temptation, and the snares of the Devil, and many unprofitable
and hurtful desires, which drown Men in destruction and perdition; for the root
of all Evil is Covetousness, which some desiring, have erred from the Faith,
and entangled themselves in many sorrows. By these helps, they may securely
walk amongst the differences and dangers of these Times; and preserving entire
the Gift of the only true Religion, by it easily obtain Everlasting Life. Amen.

To the Immortal and Invisible King of all the World, the only God, be all
Honor and Glory for ever and ever, Amen.
An APPENDIX to the foregoing Consultation.
Whether every one may be saved in his own Faith and Religion.
WE have said, in the Preface of the foregoing Treatise, that it was a stupid
and gross Error of some, that think it sufficient to Salvation, if they
believe in Christ, and that he died for our Sins; and we briefly demonstrated
their Error with certain Reasons: But because this Error is now far spread,
and has infected the Minds of many, I am entreated to explicare the same more
at large. Therefore I shall divide the matter into Two Questions.

The First is, Whether it be sufficient to Salvation, to believe in God, and do
no Body any injury; that is to say, Whether every one may be saved in his own
private Faith or Belief, if he endeavors to live honestly and virtuously?

The Second is, That supposing that Faith in Christ is necessary, Whether that
alone be sufficient, or whether we ought to believe something else?

The First Question.
AS to the First Question, many, at this time, The Foundation of our
Adversaries Opinion.
are of, Opinion, that every one may be saved in his own Faith or Religion. The
Reason which they chiefly give is, because it seems to them incredible, that
all Jews and Turks (many of which Worship God devoutly in their way, and deal
justly with their Neighbors) should be damned eternally, only because they do
not believe in Christ; since, in this regard, they seem not to offend very
much, because (from their infancy) they were taught otherwise: For why should
God (who would have all to be saved) make the way of Salvation so strict? 1 Timothy 2.4. Joh. 3.17. Why should he condemn to Eternal Punishment these
miserable. Wretches (who study to please him, according to their Capacity, who
do no Man any Wrong, but observe Justice and honesty of Life) merely for
ignorance of that which they have not been sufficiently instructed in.

But this Opinion, though consulting only Natural Reason, It is refuted with
Four Reasons.
ir seems to have some show of Truth and Equity; yet considering those things
which God has revealed to us in Scripture, is altogether a Paradox: For, if
every Turk or Jew may be saved in his own Faith or Belief, then in vain the
Apostles and Holy Fathers labored so much to plant the Faith of Christ; for
they might abstain from a profession of this Doctrine, without loss of their
Salvation, and remain contented with the Jews, with a coufession of one God. I
add moreover. Christ therefore was made Man in vain; he wrought so many
Miracles in vain, that People might believe him to be the Messiah, and Savior
of the Would in vain he was Crucified and died; for none of these things were
necessary to Man's Salvation: It had been enough to have sent Preachers through
the World to persuade Mortals to believe in one God. The Apostle uses this way
of arguing, saying, If Justice be by the Law, then Christ died in vain, Gal.
2.21. that is, if Justice may be obtained by the knowledge of one God, and
observation of the Law, then Christ died in vain; because his Death was not
necessary to Salvation.

Second Reason.

Again, the whole Scripture will he found false and lying; which teaches, That
Christ is our Mediator, Redeemer, and Savior, which proposes him a Propitiator
for us, by Faith in his Blood, Romans 3. by whose Svcrifice, we are reconciled to
God; by whose Blood we are cleansed from our Sins, and by whose Faith we are
justified, Apoc. 1.7. for there is no other Name under Heaven given among Men
whereby we must be saved, Act. 4.12. All these things were in vain, and false,
if every one might be saved in his own Religion.

Object. Perhaps some will say, that Christ is indeed our Redeemer, and all
Good to us proceeds from him; yet a belief in him is not abfolutely necessary
to Salvation; for it suffices to believe, that all our Happiness springs from
the Bounty of God, and is needless to know the means of conferring it.

Answ. But this is repuguant to the Holy Scripture, and Reason; because the
Scripture plainly teaches, that Christ's Redemption is not applied to us, Why
Faith in Christ is necessary to Salvation.
but by Faith in him; and therefore all that b^lieve not in Christ, are without
Justification, remain in Sin, and are the Children of Wrath, and Damnation.
It Is likewise against Reason; because to be made partakers of any great and
singular benefit, all reason requires to know our Benefit and Benefactor; that
we may know him (as it is meet) with all thanksgiving; for the condition of the
Benefit and Benefactor, requires this gratitude; therefore, since the benefit
of our Redemption is so strange and great, and he that gave it so sublime and
excellent, and the manner of bestowing* It so wonderful, it is requisite we
should know all this, least we should live and die altogether ungrateful to so
great a Benefactor; least, like the Jews, we should return Curses for a
Blessing, and Blasphemies for Thanksgiving. It Is therefore absurd, that those
who believe not in Christ, should be partakers of the same Happiness with them
that are to be saved by Faith in Christ; the which also is confirmed by this
that none can be saved, who is ignorant of God, and the benefit of his
Creation; else all Idolaters may be saved; therefore, neither he can be saved,
that is ignorant of the benefit of our Redemption; because the benefit of our
Redemption is far greater and more admirable, and pertains more to the Glory of
God and Christ, and requires of us a more ample Honor, Service, and
Thanksgiving.

Nor is it sufficient to know in general, The benefit of our Redemption is to
be known in particular.
that all this Happiness comes to us from God; this is not enough to pay that
gratitude and honor due to him; but we ought to know what and how great this
benefit is; how, and in what manner and way he conferred it; namely, that he
delivered us from Sin, and Eternal Death, that he opened us the passage to
Eternal Life, and that also, by a way most stupendous and strange; to wit, by
uniting our Nature to his own, and therein suffering death for us: For this
chiefly commends his Charity, Mercy, and Justice; this requires of us all
Obedience, all Praise, Benediction, and Thanksgiving; and these are
principally to be known by us, as necessary to Salvation.

Third Reason.

Again, if every one may be saved in his own Faith, then that Faith suffices
to Salvation which is no infused gift of God, but a Humane Persuasion,
conceived by a private judgment, supported by Humane Authority, and built on a
fallible foundation: For although the Turks believe one God, Maker of Heaven
and Earth, and Rewarder of Good and Evil Works; yet this Faith is not from the
Holy Ghost, but from a private Judgment, or rather from the Devil: for they do
not so believe, because God has revealed it to Men by some true Prophet, but
because Mahomet (whom they imagine to be God's Prophet and Instrument to
instruct Mortals) has so declared it in his Alcoran. Therefore, although that
which they believe is true, yet because the Foundation, and all their reason of
believing is false and pernicious; to wit, that Mahomet is a Prophet of God:
the Faith it self (whereby they believe) is deceitful, and (in regard of the
foundation on which it depends) is noxious and destructive to Salvation,
necessarily infecting the Mind with the contagious Errors of that Sect. How
then can it be said, that that Faith is sufficient to their Salvation, or that
they can be saved by this Faith? How can that Faith, which is uncertain,
fallible, and pestilential, be laid for a foundation of Justice and Salvation?

In like manner, the Jews, although they believe the same things, and many more
consonant to Truth, yet that Faith (whereby they believe these things) is
deceitful, and far from the Spirit of God: For, the main reason of their belief
is, because their Rabbis and Doctors of their Synagogue so interpret the
Scriptures: for these are a Rule of Faith to them, or (which is the same thing)
the Holy Scripture, as it is subject to their Interpretation: But all this
reason of believing is false and deceitful, and no less harmful than that of
the Turks. For, now it is as bad to believe the Rabbis to be endued with the
Spirit of God (for the right interpretation of Scripture) as Mahomet to be a
Prophet of God; nor are they driven to less absurdities by force of that
Principle: How then can such a Faith be the Basis or Groundwork of Salvation?

Fourth Reason.

Lastly, This Opinion makes no difference between Turcism, Judaism, and
Christianity, but in some small matters, nothing at all necessary to Salvation;
so that it is all one what Religion you live in, because you may be saved in
any; which is to open a way to the Alcoran, and to equalize Mahomet with
Christ, or rather to introduce Atheism: For, to allow of every Religion, is to
take away all Religion, and think none necessary; since there can be but one
only true Religion.

The Fundamental Reason (on which this Opinion chiefly depends) is of no moment.

For, First, if it be not incredible, That God for many thousand years, An
Answer to the Foundation of the other Opinion.
left the whole World in Idolatry (except the Jewish Nation, a little part of
it) and suffered the same to run headlong into destruction, although amongst
them there were many famous Wits, and serious Worshippers of their Gods, and
Lovers of Humane Justice and Honesty; it ought not to seem incredible, that the
Turks and Jews (at this time) live in the state of damnation.

Secondly, The Turks and Jews (now) who believe not in Christ, are less
excuseable, then (of old) the Heathens were, that did not acknowledge one God,
Maker of Heaven and Earth. The reason is, because, when almost the whole World
was overspread with Idolatry, the violence of common custom swept away all; nor
did reason much sway with private Men to doubt of their Religion; and if any
doubt did arise, there was no easy way of knowing the Truth. But (now) since
the Christian Faith has compassed the World, so that Christians are to be
found every where, both Jews and Turks have manifold occasions to doubt of
their Religion; and if they refuse or carelessly neglect to confer with
Christians about it, out of hatred to Christian Religion, or any other cause,
they render themselves inexcusable before God. For the Affair of Religion and
Salvation is of so great moment and concern, that it is to be preferred before
all other things, and ought (with the greatest care and diligence) to be sought
after (where there is just occasion to doubt) although you were to go into the
remotest Countries for satisfaction.

The Second Question.
THe other Question is, Whether it be sufficient to Salvation to believe in
Christ, and that he died for our Sins, although we refuse to believe many other
things?

Many (especially the Vulgar) think this to be sufficient, if they believe
those things concerning God and Christ, which are contained in the Apostles
Creed; all other matters they count indifferent, and that every one may believe
of them as he is really convinced; for they think that every one may believe
the Creed, according to his own sense and interpretation. Therefore they judge,
that every one which confesses Christ, may be saved in his own Faith, or
Belief; whether he be a Papist, or Lutheran, or Pre^byterian, or Anabaptist or
of any other Sect: For all these hold the same Head, which is Christ, Col.
1.19. and 2.8. all rely on the same Foundation, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor.
3.11. Therefore they cannot fail of their Salvation, although they dissent in
many other things. Hence it is, that some Princes (which are of these New
Religions) labor very much to establish and amplify their Dominions, by
making the Lutherans and Calvinists but one Church, and endeavoring to
persuade the People, that there is no difference amongst them, but only in some
small Matters and Ceremonies.

But this Opinion brings with it many ill Consequences.

First. Because it saves almost all ancient Heretics: This Opinion is confuted
with Ten Reasons. First Reason.
For many of them confessed Christ, and believed the Apostles Creed, according
to their own interpretation. The Arrians then may be saved in their Heresy,
who deny the Son of God to be of the same Substance with his Father. The
Macedonians, who made the Holy Ghost inferior to the Son. The Nestorians, who
held two Persons in Christ. The Eutychians, who affirmed, that the Flesh of
Christ was converted into his Divinity. The Apollinarists, who held the Divine
Word (instead of a Rational Soul) united to the Flesh of Christ. The
Monotholites, who maintained, that there was but only one Will and Operation in
Christ. The Pelagians, who denied Original Sin, and taught, that Man, by the
force of Nature, might be able to merit the Grace of God and Salvation. The
Donatists, who averred that the Church of Christ was every where perished, but
only in their own Communion. The Novatians, who denied repentance to fallen
Sinners. The Montanists, who thought Montanus was the Holy Ghost. All these
(according to this Opinion) are saved in their several Faiths and Heresies,
because they believed in Christ, and the Apostles Creed, as now the Lutherans
and Calvinists do: But what can be counted more absurd, and a greater Paradox
in the Church of Christ? For, if Salvation may be had by such a Faith, why were
so many Councils (by a Convocation of Bishops throughout the whole World)
celebrated, at so great labor and charge, against these Heresies? Why were
they so often Anathematized? Why did the Holy Fathers strive so much to
extirpate them? Why were Catholics so much afraid of society and familiarity
with those Heretics? Why did many of them rather suffer banishment, death, and
all kind of torments, than subscribe to any of their Heresies? Certainly, all
these things were done in valn, foolishly, and injuriously, if Salvation might
be obtained in these Sects; which since no Wise Man can affirm, we must needs
confess, that these Heresies are the Plagues of the Mind, and no Salvation can
possibly consist with them.

Second Reason.

Because it condemns all Antiquity of Error, which always judged, that
Heretics could not be saved; and therefore so fiercely opposed them and always
studied so carefully to confute them.

Third Reason.

Because it condemns the Apostle, who thus writes to Titus: A Man that is an
Heretic, after the First and Second Admonition, avoid, knowing, that he that
is such a one, is subverted and sins, being condemned by his own judgment.
Why is he commanded to avoid him, if his Error was not prejudicial to
Salvation? Why does he say that he is subverted? Again, Their Speech spreads as
a Canker, or Gangreen, 2 Timothy 3.17. As therefore a Canker is Mortal to the
Body, unless it be cut, so is an Heretic to the Company of the Faithful; and
therefore they are forbid to hear their Sermons, or read their Heretical Books,
which are infectious, spreading like a Canker.

But it may be some will say, that no Body is to be esteemed a Heretic, unless
he denies Christ or some Article of the Apostles Creed: But this is altogether
ignorantly and absurdly said; for then he would not be an Heretic that should
renounce the Old and New Testament, and say, that it is connterfeited, or
written by the Spirit of Man, and liable to many Errors, as are the writings
of profane Authors. He would not be an Heretic, that should deny Hell, or
Eternal Punishment; or that should hold, that all the Devils shall be saved;
since none of these things are in the Apostles Creed. He would not be an
Heretic that should condemn Marriage, and allege that Matrimony is
Diabolical; that should judge some Meats to be impure or unclean of their own
Nature, which the Apostle esteems Heretical. Lastly, he would not be an
Heretic, that should affirm that there were Two Persons in Christ, whom St.
John calls an Heretic and Antichrist, 1 Epist. c 4. nor would he be an
Heretic that denies Baptism, and all the Sacraments. Lastly, none of those
forementioned should be reckoned Heretics; which is repugnant to all
Antiquity, and all Doctors of the Church, since the Apostles days.

Fourth Reason.

This Opinion renders all Heresies and Sectaries equal with the Orthodox Faith,
judging Salvation may as well be obtained by them, as by it. Then the true and
Orthodox Religion will be no better than Arrianism, Pelagianism, Nestorianism,
Eutychianism, and other false Religions, whieh is in it self most absurd, and
nothing else but to introduce mere Atheism: For, to grant all Religions to be
good, and that it concerns nothing our Salvation, what Religion we profess, is
to regard no Religion at all: For, if there be any Religion, this can be but
only one, as there is but one Truth, one Justice, one Faith, one Beatitude, one
God and Lord of all things, one Mediator of God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus,
1 Timothy 2.5.

Fifth Reason.

It Is ridiculous to say, that it is enough for a Man to believe the Creed, Of
the Faith of the Creed.
according to his own sense or meaning, since there is but only one Truth,
which if he does not attain to, then he believes falsely; but what ean a false
Faith avail to Salvation? Then it is all one, Whether you believe the Creed in
such a manner, or in no manner. Then every one may be saved, though he does not
believe many Articles of Faith. The same I may say of the Scriptures; for if it
be sufficient to believe the Scriptures, according to every one's
interpretation, since his sense may be oftentimes erroneous, 'twill be also
enough, though you do not believe them at all; For a false Faith can be no more
necessary to Salvation, than no Faith, whereby a Man believes nothing
absolutely.

But if you say, that we must believe the Symbol or Creed in its true sense,
then you condemn the Sectaries of these times, none of which believe all the
Articles of the Creed in the same sense with Catholics; and all of them differ
in the explication of the Creed, amongst themselves: Therefore (since there is
but only One Truth) all the Religions of these Times must necessarily swerve
from the Truth, except One only; and therefore are insufficient to Salvation.

That they differ much in the sense, or meaning, The differences of Sectaries,
in understanding the Creed.
of the Creed, is manifest: For that Article, And in Jesus Christ his only Son,
is explicated one way by the Arrians and many Calvinists; namely, that the Son
is less than the Father; and by the Catholics and Lutherans another way; for
they hold him equal and of the same Substance with the Father. The Article
concerning Christ's descent into Hell, the Calvinists interpret one way,
saying, Christ sustained the Torments of the Damned, doubted of his Salvation,
and was afraid he should have been utterly swallowed up by Eternal Death: The
Catholics and Lutherans interpret it another way, and will admit of no such
exposition* saying, it is Calvin's Blasphemy. The Article of Christ's Ascension
into Heaven, etc. the Lutherans and Vbiquitarians expound one way, holding
Christ's Body to be every where, as his Divinity is; otherwise the Calvinists
and Catholics, who doubt not but that such Expositions do overthrow, in a
manner, all the Creed, as Christ's Incarnation, Nativity, Passion, Death,
Assension into Heaven, and his Coming to Judgment. The Article of Judging the
Quick and Dead, Catholics expound one way, saying, that Christ shall so Judge,
as to reward our Good Works in Heaven, and punish our Bad Works in Hell;
otherwise the Calvinists and Lutherans, who deny all reward to Good Works, and
averr, that an account will be only had of our special Faith at the Day of
Judgment. The Article concerning the Holy Ghost, Catholics and Lutherans
understand one way, the Arrians and many Calvinists another way. The Article of
the Church, Lutherans and Calvinists understand of the invisible Congregation
of the Predestinate; Catholics, of the visible Congregation of Catholics, in
which many are Predestined and many Reprobate. The Article of the Communion
of Saints, the Luthcrans and Calvinists so extenuate, that they take away
almost all Communion, which is taught by Catholics. The Article of Remission
of Sins, they explicate of no imputation, not acknowledging any Internal
Renovation, by inherent Justice, and Grace infused, as Catholics judge Sins to
be remitted.

Hereby is manifest, how great a difference there is in the understanding of
the Creed. Therefore, since there is but one Truth, (this we have showed in our
Consultation, to be amongst Catholics,) all Sects must of necessity hold a
false Faith, and false exposition of the Creed. If therefore a true belief of
the Creed is requisite, it cannot be, that every one may be saved in his own
Faith. If a false Faith suffices, how can a false Faith be profitable to
Salvation?

Sixth Reason.

The Holy Scripture is of no less Authority than the Apostles Creed, nor is it
a less injury to God, to deny any thing expressly declared in the Scriptures,
than to reject any Article of the Apostles Creed; therefore there is no reason,
why our Faith should be tied to the Creed, and in other things we should be
left to our Liberty, seeing we are as much obliged to believe all things in
Scripture, as in the Apostles Creed: For, although we are not bound to know all
things distinctly contained in the Scriptures; yet we ought to believe in
general; insomuch, that we cannot (without the sin of Heresy) reject any part
thereof, as false and doubtful. With what color therefore, or what probable
show of reason can it be said, it matters not how you believe in other things,
so be it you believe in Christ, and the Apostles Creed? Why are we bound to
believe the Creed, rather than the whole Scripture, since it is not of greater
Authority than the Scriptures? This is a fancy, certainly, too vain and rude,
void of any foundation.

Seventh Reason.

In all our Faith, we must not only regard what we believe, Our whole Faith
depends on the foundation or motive of our belief.
but likewise (and that chiefest of all) upon what foundation we believe, or
what is the sole motive of our belief: For, upon this, the whole Nature and
Property of our Faith depends. For as the motive of our belief is (which we
call the Foundation of our Faith) such is the Faith it self. If that be certain
and cannot be deceitful, our Faith also is certain and infallible. If it be
deceitful, our Faith also will be uncertain and liable to Error: For Example,
The Turk believes that there is one God, Creator of all things: Why? Because
the Alcoran so teaches; which he believes to be written by the Spirit of God:
His Faith (although this which he believes be true) depends on a false and
fallacious foundation, by force of which he is bound to believe many false and
blasphemous things; as that there are not Three Persons in the Godhead, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; that Christ is not God, and that he is less than Mahomet;
that Circumcision is to be observed, and the like. Therefore this Faith (by
virtue of this foundation) is fallible and erroneous. It Is the same case with
all Heretics.

The Faith of all Sects depends on a false foundation.
This being laid down, I thus argue. That Faith which depends on a fallacious
foundation (although it believes some things which are true) yet cannot be said
to be sufficient to Salvation; but the Faith of all Sectaries of this time,
depends on a fallacious or wrong foundation; therefore it cannot be sufficient
to Salvation. The Proposition is manifest of it self: For how can that which is
false and lying be the Basis or Foundation of Eternal Salvation? how can the
true Religion (whereby we please God) be founded on a false belief? Certainly,
this is as far from all reason, as if you should say, that Truth depends on a
Lie, Wisdom upon Error, and Virtue upon Vice. It remains then to prove the
Assumption, or other proposition, viz.

That all Sectaries rely on a fallacious foundation, A threefold foundation.
I show thus: They believe their Opinions either for the authority of their
Apostles (such as Luther, Calvin, Melancton, Zwinglius, etc.) who, they
suppose, were endued with the Spirit of God; or because each one, by his own
judgment, conceives them to be contained in the Scriptures; or, lastly, because
the private Spirit inwardly witnesses them to be true; or that such is the
sense and meaning of the Holy Scripture: For whatsoever the Sectaries of this
time believe, they believe for some of these three reasons, and one of the
three they make the foundation of their Faith, and motive of belief: But these
three Foundations or Motives of belief are altogether deceitful as you shall
see.

That the first Foundation (namely, the authority of Luther, Calvin, and
others, that devised these New Religions) is deceitful, is manifest; because
experience shows they could be deceived, and did really err in many things: For
many things they revoked, many things they corrected, they contradicted
themselyes in many things, as is clearly demonstrated in the Ninth
Consideration, and Sixth Reason of my Consult about Religion. Hence it is, that
now but few depend on their Authority, saying they were Men subject to Error,
and therefore their Followers desert them as they list, where they think they
can find some better Doctrine. Their Authority therefore is deceitful, even in
the Opinion of their own Disciples and Followers.

Nor is the other ground less deceitful, to wit, their own private judgment,
whereby they expound the Scriptures: For many things which are indeed false, to
a private Judgment seem to be true; and those things which at first seemed to
be true, are afterward found to be false. Hence it is, that there are such
diversity of Opinions, such chopping and changing of Religions; because Humane
Judgment is very weak, especially in the Mysteries of Faith and Understanding
of the Scripture, which transcend Humane Capacity.

Many Answer, that in believing, Whether they rely on Scripture.
they do not rely on their own judment, but the Holy Scriptures, which cannot
err. How miserably they are deceived herein, appears by this; that almost all
Sectaries say, they rely upon Scripture, when they disagree in many things
amongst themselves and teach things contrary to one another Doctrine, which
could not rationally be done, if they relied upon the lawful understanding of
Scripture, and not on their own private judgment: For the Scripture is no where
contrary to it self; it disagrees in no place with it self; therefore the
reason why they so much differ amongst themselves is, because they interpret
the sense of Scripture, according to their own private Judgment, which is
diverse, according to the variety of Judgments and Understandings of Men. They
rely therefore upon Scripture, not as it is interpreted by the Holy Fathers of
the Catholic Church, but according to their own private Judgment: For the
virtue and efficacy of the Scripture, consists not in the naked Words, but in
the right meaning and interpretation. Therefore their whole foundation is their
own private judgment, which, how deceitful it is, the dissentions of so many
Sects clearly demonstrate.

Lastly, The Third Foundation of their belief (on which many, The private
Spirit.
at this time, depend) is the most deceitful of all, because, among the
Fanatics (who pretend most of all to the instinct of the Spirit) there are the
greatest differences and divisions amongst themselves; which could not be,
unless the Spirit (which rules and governs them, and on which they depend) were
deceitful and various. The same is observable amongst the Lutherans and
Presbyterians, and the different Sects and Factions of them both: for every one
is certain of the truth of his Opinion, by the private Spirit, which instructs
him; whereby it is most manifest and clear, that this Spirit is not the Holy
Spirit, the Spirit of God and Truth (which cannot teach contradictions and be
against it self) but the Wicked Spirit, the Spirit of Error, Who is a Liar
from the beginning, and the Father of Lies, who lives in the Children of
unbelief, Joh. 8.44. of whom the Apostle says, Because they received not the
love of the Truth, that they might be saved, therefore God shall send them
strong delusions to believe a Lie, etc. 2 These. 2.11. And in another place, In
the latter times, some shall depart from the Faith, attending to the Spirits of
Error, and Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1. for every Heresy is the Doctrine
of Devils. And S. John, Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether
they are of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the World, 1 John 4.1.

This is that Spirit which rules in the Hearts of Heretics, and whose
Testimony brag of, as thinking it to be the Holy Ghost. This so blinds their
Understandings, and perverts their Fancies, that they take Light to be Darkness
and Darkness Light; they esteem the most clear Truth of the Catholic Faith to
be Error* and their own foul and dismal Errors to be the clear Truth; and
certainly were they not totally bewitched and blinded, they might easily
perceive, that that Spirit (which inwardly they feel) is not the Spirit of God,
(or at least, they could not choose but doubt of it,) since every Sect (amongst
whom there is so great dissension touching their chiefest Principles) lays
equal claim to the Testimony of this Spirit, boast of it, and follow it, and in
maintaing their Tenets (repugnant to each other) chiefly depend on it. But this
happens by the just Judgment of God: For as the Jews who would not receive
Christ, were permitted to be blinded by the Devil, as it is plainly gathered
from the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. So Heretics* who have deserted the Catholic
Faith (which is no less a Sin than that of the Jews) are permitted to be
blinded by Satan, and led into all Ernour.

And if a Man but attentively consider, A greater facination of the Devil in
our Heretics than in the Jews.
he shall perceive a more powerful operation of the Devil in our Heretics, and
a greater facination of their Mind, than there is in the Jews and Turks; and
this for two Reasons.

First, Because the Jews agree in their Belief, and have no different Sects
amongst them Among the Turks or Mahometans there be only two, and they not much
different: But amongst the Heretics of our days there are numbers of Sects,
some propagated one out of another, by the rise of New Opinions, mutually
condemning one another of Heresy; and all these are sprung up within 100 years
or thereabout, which is a clear sign, that the Devil has a great power in the
Minds of these Man, to disturb their Fancies, pervert their Imaginations and
Judgments, that they can neither stand nor rest any where. Secondly, Because
the vulgar People among the Jews and Turks, rely not upon their own judgment,
nor the instinct and testimony of the private Spirit, but upon the judgment of
their Doctors, or (which is the same thing) upon their Scripture, as it is
expounded by the Doctors of their own Religion. Therefore they have some Rule
of Faith, and Foundation of their Belief, agreeable to Natural Reason; namely,
the consent of their Ancestors, or the Scripture interpreted, according to the
Sense and Religion of their Ancestors.
But most of the Heretics of our Times, regard not much their Ancestors and
Apostles from whom they first received this New Gospel; but looking upon them
as Men subject to Error, (though they also pretended to the Spirit, as well as
these,) forsake them, and rely totally upon their own judgment or testimony of
their own private Spirit, or (which is all one) the Holy Scripture, according
to the sense of their own judgment, or private Spirit; which is an evident
sign, that Satan so effectually operates in them, and infatuates their Minds,
that not only every one frames to himself New Heresies and Opinions, but makes
his own judgment the foundation of his Faith, and Rule of Belief; for every one
thinks he is taught of God (even Women and Children) and therefore secure from
all Error. What greater facination and Delusion can there be than this? Hence
it is, that they have no certain and established Principles, they decree no
Body of Doctrine and Religion, but ramble in uncertainties, as the private
Spirit shall drive them: Nor can there be any dispute with them, about any of
their Principles, because they stick to none, and (by reason of their
ignorance) they know not the Doctrine of their Ancestors: But of this Spirit of
Giddiness we have said more in our Consultation: Consid. 9. and Reason 11.

Hereby it is manifestly concluded, that the whole Foundation of Faith (which
the Sectaries of our time rely on) is deceitful, and therefore their Belief
(which depends on it) is unprofitable to Salvation.

Eighth Reason.

If every one may be saved in his own Faith, that confesses Christ, why is
there so great a dissension amongst Religions? Why do they all condemn one
another of Heresy, and Thunder Anathema's against each other? Why do the
Lutherans refuse to acknowledge the Calvinists for their Brethren, and
publicly in their Sermons and Books, avouch them to be impious and
blasphemous? Why, in the like manuer, do the Chief of the Calvinists (among
whom Theodorus Beza is the Father of all, after Calvin) so treat the Lutherans?
Why do the Anabaptists call themselves the only faithful Christians, and esteem
all others as Infidels? whereby is apparent, that this new fancy of being saved
in any Religion, is not only against the Catholic Doctrine, but also against
all the Sects (that have any zeal for Religion or Piety) and is only too proper
for Atheists.

Ninth Reason.

That one may be saved, it suffices not to keep two or three of the
Commandments, but of necessity he must observe all; according to that of our
Lord, If thou would enter into Life, keep the Commandments, Mat. 8.9 For
Example. If any one should be an Adulterer, or Thief, although he should keep
the other Commandments, yet he cannot be saved (without Repentance) as the
Scriptures every where teach. So likewise, it suffices not to Salvation, to
believe three or four Articles of Faith, but of necessity we must believe all
Articles which God has revealed and propounded to our Faith by his Church. For
the true Faith is no less necessary to Salvation, than Obedience to Gods
Commandments; nor ought Faith to be less perfect and entire than Obedience and
Observation of the whole Decalogue. As therefore our Obedience ought to extend
it self to all the Commandments; so Faith ought to extend it self to all things
revealed, according to St. James, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet
offend in one, is guilty of all; for he that said, thou shall not commit
Adultery, said also, thou shall not kill. Now if thou do not commit Adultery,
yet if thou kill, thou art become a Transgressor of the Law, Jam. 2.10. As if
he should say, he is made guilty of all, and shall be punished as a
Transgressor or Violator of the whole Law, for despising the Lawmakers, who is
the Author of the whole Law. Therefore, in like manner, he that shall deny one
Article of Faith, although he believes all the rest, is become guilty of the
breach of his whole Faith and Religion, because he contemns God, the Supreme
Truth, who revealed no less this than the others: He contemns also the Catholic
Church, 1 Timothy 3.5.
which is the Spouse of Christ, and the Pillar and Ground of Truth, and which
proposes to our Belief, as well this Article, as the rest. Note.
And this is the reason, why he is no less an Heretic, that obstinately denies
one Article of Faith, than he that denies an hundred; because (in regard of
this one which he denies) he despises God the first Verity, which revealed it;
and he despises the Authority of the Church which propounds it; he makes the
Church also subject to Errors and a Lie, whereby he makes all the rest
uncertain, and destroys all Divine Faith: Note.
For if you take away the Foundation of Divine Faith, all Faith must
necessarily fall to ruin and decay, and only Opinion (or human Belief, liable
to Error) remain.

Tenthly and Lastly, This Opinion is very dangerous in the practice; for it
makes a man not care what Religion he is of, what he believes or disbelieves.
Therefore he seeks not after the Truth, and as easily and securely receives
Falsehood as Truth. And yet not only Catholics, but even the more noted Sects,
such as are more eminent for Learning and Wisdom, hold for a certain and
undoubted Truth, that without the true Faith and Religion, none can be saved,
but will perish everlastingly. Therefore the followers of this Opinion are
condemned by all wise Men, and they promise to themselves Salvation upon no
Authority, no Testimony of Scripture, nor the support of Reason, relying merely
upon the vain and foolish Imagination of their own Brains. Let them hear
therefore out of St. Fulgentius, what Antiquity has ever held, and what the
Church has taught in all Ages: For so he writes as a general Rule of Faith.

Hold this for a most certain and infallible Truth, Lib. de fide ad Pet. 6.
Diac. c. 38.
That not only all Heathens, but likewise all Jews, Heretics and Schismatics,
which end this present Life, out of the Catholic Church, shall go into
everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Again, Most firmly believe and doubt not in the least, chap. 39.
That every Heretic or Schismatic baptized in the Name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, if he be not reconciled to the Catholic Church, whatever Alms he
gives, and let him live never so virtuously and devoutly, though be should lay
down his Life, and shed his Blood for Christ's sake, yet he cannot be saved: For
every one that sticks not to the Unity of the Catholic Church, neither Baptism,
nor Plentiful Alms, nor Martyrdom for Christ, will profit to Salvation, so long
as any Heretical or Schismatical perverseness remains in him, which leads to
Death.

This was always the belief of the Holy Catholic Church, and the undoubted
Doctrine of all the Fathers; which if all who are out of the Catholic Church
would seriously and sadly consider, and lay to heart, they would clearly see,
what a dangerous State they live in; and being sensible of their danger, with
Holy Resolutions hasten to the Ark of Salvation, to preserve themselves from
Eternal Ruin; Which that they may do,

Do thou, O Christ, The True Light of the World, Enlighten their Minds, Amen.
FINIS.

