THE CONCLUSION OF THE EARL OF STRAFFORDS DEFENSE The twelfth of April, 1641.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the Year, 1641.

The Conclusion of the Earl of Straffords Defense, the twelfth of April. 1641.
MY Lords,
there yet remains another Treason, that I should be guilty of; the
endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws of the Land, that they should
now be Treason, together, that is not Treason in any one part of Treason
accumulative, that so when all will not do, it is woven up with others, it
should seem very strange.

Under favor, my Lords, I do not conceive that there is either Statute Law,
nor Common Law, that does declare the endeavoring to subvert the fundamental
Laws to be high Treason.

For neither Statute Law, nor Common Law written, that ever I could hear of,
declares it so.

And yet I have been diligent to enquire, (as I believe you think it does
concern me to do.)

It is hard to be questioned for life and honor, upon a Law that cannot be
shown.

There is a rule which I have learned from Sir Edward Cook, De non
apparentibus and non existentibus eadem ratio, (Jesu) where has this fire
lain all this while, so many hundreds of years without any smoke to discover
it, till it thus burst forth to consume me, and my children extreme hard in my
opinion, that punishment should preceed promulgation, of a Law punished by a
Law, subsequent to the Acts done?

Take it into your considerations, for certainly it is now better to be under
no law at all but the will of men, then to conform our selves under the
protection of a law as we think, and then be punished for a crime that does
preceed that law, what man can be safe, if that be once admitted?

My Lords, it is hard in another respect, that there should be no token set
upon this offense, by which we should know it, no admonition by which we should
be aware of it.

If a man pass down the Thames in a Boat, and it be split upon an anchor, and
a Boy, being set as a token that there is an anchor there, that party that
owes the anchor, by the Maritime Laws, shall give satisfaction for the damage
done; but if it were marked out, I must come upon mine own peril.

Now where is the mark upon this crime, where is the token that this is high
Treason?

If it be under water and not above water, no humane providence can avail nor
prevent my destruction.

Lay aside all humane wisdom, and let us rest upon will divine Revelation, if
you condemn before you forewarne of the danger.

Oh my Lords, may your Lordships be pleased to give that regard unto the
Peerage of England, as never to suffer our selves to be put on those nice
points, upon such constructive interpretations, and these are where Laws are
not clear or known, if there must be a trial of wits, I do most humbly
beseech you, the subject and matter may be in some what else, then the lives
and Honors of Peers.

My Lords, we find that in the Primitive times, in the progression of the
plain Doctrine of the Apostles; they brought the books of curious arts, and
burned them. And so likewise as I do conceive, it will be wisdom and
providence in your Lordshipes, for your posterity, and the whole Kingdom, to
cast from you into the fire these bloody and most mysterious volumes of
constructive and Arbitrary Treason; and to betake your selves to the plain
Letter of the Law and Statute, that tellethus where the crime is, And by
telling what is, and what is not, shows how to avoid it. And let us not be
ambitious, to be more wise and learned in the killing Arts, then our
forefathers were.

It is now full 200 and 40 years, since ever any man was touched for this
alleged crime (to this height) before my self, we have lived happily to our
selves at home, and we have lived gloriously to the world abroad.

Let us rest contented with that which our Fathers left us, and not awake those
sleepy Lions to our own destructions; by taking up a few musty records that
have layen so many ages by the walls, quite forgotten and neglected.

May your Lordships be Nobly pleased, to add that to those other misfortunes
befallen me for my sins, not for my Treasons; that a precedent should not be
derived from me of that disadvantage (as this will be in the consequent to the
whole Kingdom) I beseech you seriously to consider it, and let not my
particular case be so looked on as you do; though you wound me in my interest
in the Commonwealth, and therefore those Gentlemen say, that they speak for
the Commonwealth, yet in this particular I indeed speak for it, and the
inconveniences and mischiefs that will heavily fall upon us; for as it is in
the 1. of Henry the fourth, no man will after know what to do, or say, for fear.

Do not put (my Lords) so great difficulties upon the Ministers of state, that
men of wisdom, honor, and virtue, may not with cheerfulness and safety, be
employed for the public, if you weigh and measure them by grains and scruples,
the public affairs of the Kingdom will be laid waste, and no man will meddle
with them, that has honors, issues, or any fortunes to lose.

My Lords, I have now troubled you, longer then I should have done, were it not
for the interest of those dear pledges, a Saint in heaven has left me; I
should be loath my Lords, (there he stopped.)

What I forfeit for my self it is nothing, but that my indiscretion should
forfeit for my child, i^ even wounds me deep to the very soul.

You will pardon my infirmity, something I should have said, but I am not able,
(and sighed) therefore let it pass.

And now my Lords, I have been by the bles^^ngs of Almighty God taught, that
the afflictions of this life present, are not to be compared to the eternal
weight of glory that shall be revealed to us hereafter.

And so, my Lords, even so with tranquillity of mind, I do submit my self
freely and clearly to your Lordships judgments; and whether that righteous
judgment shall be to life or death.

Te Deum laudamus, te Dominum confitemur.
FINIS.

