STRANGE AND BLOODY NEVVES FROM MINIARD: OR A BLOODY MASSACRE UPON FIVE
PROTESTANTS BY A COMPANY OF PAPISTS, MEEting them as they were going to Miniard
to take ship for Ireland. Also how they first encountered them, and how after
some Discourse upon Religion, cruelly murdered them.

As also, how they were taken, and carried to Bristow Castle, With the Copy of
a Letter found in one of their Dublets, directed to the Bishop of CANTERBVRIE.

As it was credibly reported by a Gentleman of good worth, being an Eyewitness
to the same, and by the swiftness of his horse, escaped their Bloody hands,

London Printed for John Greensmith. 1642.

CR

BLOODY NEWS FROM MINIARD.
FIve English Protestants intending their journey for Ireland, purposed to take
ship at Miniard, a place some 40. miles beyond the City of Bristoll.

After they had traveled above a hundred miles, with many a weary step,
drawing nigh to Miniard, even within sight of the town, though scarce to be
discerned, in regard the day was spent, and now one hour within night, they
met with a company of Papists, to the number of fifteen, every man with a good
sword by his side, and a good cudgel in his hand. At the sight of whom, they
were somewhat apal'd: yet took some courage, in regard they were not far off
the Town, and thought that therefore they did not dare to offer them violence.

But it fell out contrary to their expectation, For being met together, the
event well showed that they had some ground and just occasion of their fear.
The first salutation was this, Gentlemen well met, pray from whence came you,
and to what place do you travel: we ask not for any harm we mean to you, but
only are desirous to know. These were smooth words you will say. Well, the poor
men thought no hurt, for true Charity will favorably conster all things: and
therefore plainly told them that they came out of Kent, and were going to
Miniard, and so they purposed (if the wind served) to go for Ireland. To
Ireland, said they, why? that is strange you would go thither, knowing the
estate of the kingdom, how all are up in arms, and the Protestants in fear to
have their throats cut every hour; and now seeing we know so much, we will
understand before we part of what Religion you are; for we promise you, we may
well suspect that you are not right: for there is something in the wind that
moves you to go for Ireland, in a time so dangerous, and troublesome. If it be
so, said the Protestants we are not ashamed of our Religion we are (to tell you
the truth) protestants, and go not to side with the Rebels, but to see some
friends of ours in Dublin. What do you say, said they, do you call the Kings
subjects rebels: by St. Peter, you are some of those that would banish us
Papists out of England, but we will be even with you ere we part: and so
drawing their swords fell upon them, and bloudily sheathed them in each man's
bowels, whilst they pitifully cried out for mercy: but what mercy could be
expected from men of blood, whose hearts were as hard as adamant, and their
minds as cruel as Progne, who bloudily slew her own Son. The murder done, a
Gentleman on horseback riding by, and seeing so pitiful an object, returned
back to Miniard in sight of the murderers, who would fain have taken him, if
they could; and so raised the Country with all speed, who took them in a wood,
as they were at their Orisons on their beads. O how they looked then one upon
another: what a sudden palenesse came into their faces. All their devotion was
gone in a moment, and they readier to take them to their heels, then pray a
minute longer; knowing well enough, that it was but lost labor to implore the
aid either of Peter or Paul. To be brief, they were all carried to Bristow,
and upon examination confessed the deed, and so were worthily adjudged to be
hanged in chains the next Sessions, where we will leave them, and come to the
Copy of a Letter which was found quilted in one of their doublets, not any of
them knowing one word within it, else they would not so carefully have
preserved it.

A COPY OF A LETTER SENT TO THE BISHOP OF CANTERBVRY.
The Contents whereof are vvorthie our attension.
MY LORD,
MAy it please your Grace to accept these poor impolished lines of him that
writes only of good will, earnestly wishing an emendation of life, and
reformation of manners, then your Graces confutation; for it is the duty of
every Christian to imitate his Creator, not to delight in the blood of any man,
but to preserve it.

But again ( my Lord) as it is the part of a man to supply the Corporal wants
of his indigent brother: so especially, he is bound to supply the defects of
the Mind, and to study the welfare of the better part of man, his precious
soul, which after the first death in a moment, either ascends heaven, or
descends hell.

My Lord, it must needs be a precious thing, when the whole world it self is
not comparable to it. Were but this seriously digested in the stomach of a
sound judgment, I believe the world like Rocks and Quicksands would not so
miserably shipwreck, such an infinite number of men's souls as it does. Your
Grace knows that rebus secundis omnes feri elati sunt, I will not say that
your grace is so; but I would desire your Grace to enter into a serious
Solilogue with your self, and to see whether it be so or no; and if your Grace
for the honor of this world, and outward pomp and glory* have not made
shipwreck of your Faith, and pleased man rather then God. No better time to
bring a man home then that of affliction; for whereas Martyrs buy heaven, as
Ignato spoke, with their blood, and others steal it with their good deeds
through Faith in Christ only, (as a learned Father sometime said) a man in
affliction is compelled to it.

My Lord, remember Manasses, how he prayed in prison, do you likewise. And for
the world and Glory thereof, care not for it: remember that thrice Noble
Emperor Henry the 4th. when his Crown was taken from his head, saw nothing but
his Deus Videat and judicet. Let God see and judge. God grant us treasure in
Heaven, where no Thief can approach. Amen.

FINIS.
London Printed for Fr. Coules, and T. Banks. 1641.


