THE EARL OF STRAFFORDS LETTER.

TO HIS LADY.

SENT BY A TRVSTY MESSENGER, WITH HIS PRAYER ON THE Scaffold at Tower hill, 12.
of May 1641.

depiction of Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford Thomas Earl of Strafford L
Leutenant of Ireland.


A Letter sent from the Earl of Strafford, to his Lady into Ireland a little
before his death May, the 11. 1641,
YOu shall receive, my dear Wife, my last words in these my last times: my
love I send that you may keep it when I am dead: And my Counsel, that you may
remember it when I am no more. I would not with my will present you sorrows
(dear Wife) let them go to the grave with me, and be buried in the dust,
and seeing it is not the will of God, that I shall see you any more, bear my
destruction patiently, and with an heart like your self.

First, I send you all the thanks, which my heart can conceive, or my words
express: for your many travels and cares for me, which though they have not
taken effect as you wished, yet my debt to you is noe less: but pay it, I
never shall in this world.

Secondly, I beseech you for the love you bear me living, that you do not
hide your self many days, but by your travel seek to help the miserable
fortune, and the right of your poor Children; your mourning cannot avail any
thing that am but dust.

Thirdly, you shall understand, that my Lands were conveyed (bona fide) unto my
Son, the Writings were drawn at Midsomer was a twelve-moneth, as diverse can
witness, and I trust my blood will quench their malice, who desire my
slaughter: and that they will not seek also you, and yours, to kill with
extreme poverty. To what friend to direct you know not, for all mine have left
me in the true time of trial: most sorry am I, I that being thus surprised
by death; I can leave you no better Estate: God has prevented all my
determinations, that great God that works all in all, and if you can live
free from want, care for no more, for the rest is but vanity.

Love God, and begin betimes in him, so shall you find true and everlasting
comfort, when you have traveled, and wearied your self: with all sorts of
worldly cogitations, you shall sit down with sorrow in the end.

Teach your Son also to fear and serve God, whilst he is young, that the
fear of God may grow upon him, then will God be an Husband to you, and a
Father to him, and a Husband and Father, that never can be taken away from you.

Balo owes me 1000. li. and Adrian 1000. li. in Iernsey, I have also much
owing me.

Dear wife I beseech you for my souls sake pay all poor men when I am dead:
no doubt you shall be much sought unto, for the world thinks I was very rich,
have a care to the fair pretense of men, for no greater misery can befall you
in this life, then to become a pray unto the world, and after to be despised,
I speak God knows not to dissuade you from Marrying again, for that will be
the best for you, both in respect of God and of the world; as for me, I am no
more yours, nor you mine, Death has cut us asunder, and God has divided me
from the world, and you from me: Remember my Child, for his fathers sake who
loved you in his happiest estate; I sued for my life, but God knows it was for
you and yours that I desired it: for know it dear wife your Child is the son
of a true man, who in his own respect despises death.

I cannot write much, God knows how hardly I steal time when all are asleep,
and it is also time to separate my self from the world.

Beg my dead body, which living was denied, and either lay it in Aleanne or
Antley, by my Father and Mother.

I can say no more, Time and Death calls me away.

The everlasting God, powerful infinite and inscrutable, God Almighty who is
goodness it self, keep you and yours, and have mercy upon me, and forgive me
and my prosecutors and false accusers, and send us to meet in his glorious
Kingdom.

My dear Wife farewell, Bless my Boy, pray for me, and let my true God hold
you both in his Arms.
THE PRAYER MADE BY THE Earl of Strafford at Tower hill when he departed this
life, 12. of May, 1641.
O Most merciful father, I thy unworthyest of servants, do most humbly
prostrate my self before the throne of thy heavenly Majesty, and this
multitude of people here assembled to see me suffer, befeeching thee of thy
infinite goodness to receive (when my head shall be divided from my body) at
this instant this distressed soul of mine into thy heaaenly kingdom, and
because the hour of my death is appointed, and the date of my life determined,
at that hour let thy heavenly providence (I beseech thee O Lord) so guide me,
that I swerue not from the truth in this my last Prayer.

And I beseech thee O Lord, from the bended knees of my heart, as well as of my
body, before this multitude of people, to i^fuse the holy spirit in^o me, (that
it may seal unto my soul ^he free pardon and forgiveness of all my sins,
which cry for vengeance from the righteous Judge of heaven and earth, and let
me with the pennitent theife on the Cross find as thon answered him, this
present day I confidently believe I shall see my Lord and savior in the
Kingdom of heaven, where all consolation and joy is forever remaining, and
into whose presence I come, I come, Lord Jesus receive my sinful soul. Amen.

A Letter to a Lady.
MAdam,
Although there be some discovery made known, yet what we intend ^s secure;
you must send two thousand pounds speedily; no danger, less difficult to
compass as yet; you must remain secret; Remember your oath; we shall slay the
Beast with many heads, and destroy the Devils brood, before they dream or
mistrust; burn this Letter; your reward shall be in heaven.

FINIS.

