THE Earl of Strafford's LETTER TO THE KING, TO Pass the BILL occasioned by the
Tumult of the APPRENTICES.
Taken from the Original Copy.
May it please Your Majesty,
IT has been my greatest Grief in all these Troubles, to be taken as a Person
which should endeavor to represent and set things amiss between your Majesty
and your People; and to give Counsels tending to the Disquiet of your Three
Kingdoms.

Most true it is, that this mine own private Condition considered, it had been
a great madness, since through your Gracious Favor I was so provided, as not
to expect in any kind to mind my Fortune, or please my mind more, than by
resting where your Bounteous Hand had placed me.

Nay, it is most mightily mistaken; For unto your Majesty it is well known, my
poor and humble Advices concluded still in this, That Your Majesty and Your
People could never be happy till there were a right Understanding betwixt you
and them; no other means to effect and settle this Happiness but by the
Council, and Assent of the Parliament, or to prevent the Growing Evils upon
this State, but by entirely putting your self in your last Resort upon the
Loyalty and Good Affections of your English Subjects.

Yet such is my Misfortune, this Truth finds little Credit, the contrary
seems generally to be believed, and my self reputed as something of
separation between you and your People, under a heavier Censure than which, I
am persuaded, no Gentleman can suffer.

Now, I understand the Minds of Men are more incensed against me,
notwithstanding Your Majesty has declared, that in your Princely Opinion I am
not guilty of Treason, nor are you satisfied in your Conscience to pass the
Bill.

This brings me into a very great strait; there is before me the Ruin of my
Children and Family, hitherto untouched in all the Branches of it with any foul
Crimes. Here is before me the many Ills which may befall Your Sacred Person and
the whole Kingdom, should your Self and the Parliament Part less satisfied one
with the other than is necessary for the Preservation of King and People. Here
are before me the things most valued, most feared by Mortal Men, Life or Death.

To say Sir, that there has not been a Strife in me, were to make me less than
God knows mine Infirmities give me.

And to call Destruction upon my self and young Children, were the Intentions
of my Heart (at least have been innocent of this great Offense) may be believed
will find no easy Content to Flesh and Blood.

But with much Sadness I am come to a Resolution of that which I take to be the
best becoming me, to look upon that which is most principal in it self, which
doubtless is the Prosperity of your Sacred Person and the Commonwealth,
infinitely before any man's private Interest.

And therefore in few words, as I put my self wholly upon the Honor and
Justice of my Peers so clearly, as to beseech your Majesty might please to have
spared that Declaration of yours on Saturday last, and entirely to have left me
to their Lordships: so now to set your Majesty's Conscience, etc. at liberty, I
do most humbly beseech you, for the preventing of such Mischief as may happen
by your Refusal to pass the Bill, by this means to remove (praised be God) I
cannot say this accursed but (I confess) this unfortunate thing forth of the
way, toward that Blessed Agreement, which God, I trust, shall for ever
establish betwixt you and your Subjects.

Sir, my Consent herein, shall more acquit you to God, than all the World can
do besides; to a willing mind there is no injury done, and as by God's Grace I
forgive all the World, so Sir, I can give up the life of this World with all
Cheerfulness imaginable, in the just acknowledgment of your exceeding Favor,
and only beg that in your Goodness, you would vouchsafe to cast your Gracious
Regard upon my poor Son and his Sisters, less or more, and no otherwise than
their unfortunate Father shall appear more or less guilty of his Death. God
long Preserve Your Majesty.

Tower, May 4th. 1641. Your Majesty's most Humble, most Faithful Subject and
Servant, Strafford.

REader, you have here the Loyal and Unfortunate Earl of Strafford's Letter to
the Late King, shortly you shall have some Occasional Reflections upon the same.

FINIS,
London, Printed for Thomas Burrel, 1680.


