De Iuramento.

SEVEN LECTURES CONCERNING THE OBLIGATION Of Promissory OATHS. Read publicly
in the Divinity School at OXFORD.

By ROBERT SENDERSON D. D. His MAJESTY'S Public Professor there.

Translated into English by His late MAJESTY'S special Command, and afterward
Revised and approved under His MAJESTY'S own hand.

London, Printed by E. C. for Humphrey Moseley, Octavian Pulleyn, and Andrew
Crook and are to be sold at their shops in St. Pauls-Ch^^ch^yard 1655.

TO THE READER.
SHould I tell thee no more but the Authors Name, and by whose Command this
Book was made English, 'twere sufficient Commendation; But (because I intend
not to waste many words) know, that whether thou be a Ruler, or a Subject,
Single, or Married, this Book will concern thee; Since thou can not make any
Oath, Promise, or Stipulation, (and thou can not quietly live without them)
but may here read how far thou stand'st obliged; So that whether thou love
thy own conscience, or thy Neighbors, the Author, (and perhaps the Translator
have here done thee a courtesy.

Farewell.
OF THE OBLIGATION OF OATHS.
The first Lecture.
NUMB. 30. 2. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his
soul with a Bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all
that proceeds out of his mouth.
The Summary.
1. The things to be handled proposed. 2. The definition of an oath. 3. An Oath
is a Religious Act. 4. In an Oath God is called to witness. 5. The matter of
an Oath is something in doubt. 6. The end of an Oath is credit. 7. The
definition given, contains all the four kinds of Causes. 8. Oaths assertory
and promissory. 9. Oaths Comminatory. 10. Oaths Execratory. 11. The
definition and distinction of Obligation. 12. Obligation to guilt and to
punishment. 13. An Oath is in the nature of it Obligatory. 14. The different
obligation of the Assertory, and Promissory.
SECT. I.
I Shall handle this matter with the more expedition, and your better profit,
(as I conceive) if in the very entrance I lay before your eyes as it were a
general Map of my future discourse; for so both you may better understand my
design, and I more certainly bound my speech; that I may either contain it
within the due compass, or if it chance to start out a little, it do not so
loosly wander, but that it may be maturely brought in order, and reduced unto
the point. I shall therefore deliver the whole matter under three heads.

First, That it may be the better understood Oath is in general, what a
Promissory Oath is in particular, and what Obligation.

Then because the determination of uncertain things is to be drawn from from
the fountains of natural Law, and confirmed by general consent, as
Hypotheses, and Touch-stones of the future disquisition, from whence the
decisions of particular cases are to be deduced, and to which they are to be
brought as unto their rules and Canons. These two necessarily premised, of
which one will give light to that which is to be spoken, the other strength and
foundation: I shall come in the third place to salve those doubts, which may
have any

SECT. II.
THE draught of the whole future treaty thus delineated as in a map, now I
betake my self to the matter. Where first is to be explained what an Oath is. I
shall not need to insist upon the name, and the defining thereof: for the ill
custom of swearing is grown to that pass, and the familiar abuse of this so
sacred a thing is such in these debauched times, that it can be unknown to no
man, nay not unto children, what an Oath is. Authors (as the manner is)
variously express the definition of the thing it self, according to their
particular fancies. That of Cicero is the most concise, An Oath, says he, is a
religious affirmation. Where by the way I both admire and am angry at the
forward youths of this age, who I know not out of what erroneous prejudice, but
I am confident, to their own great hurt, avoid Cicero, as a writer of too much
prolixity. But I return: if any man desire a fuller definition of an oath, let
him take this, An Oath is a religious act, by which God is called to witness
for the confirmation of some matter in doubt. Every member of this definition I
shall particularly explain.

SECT. III.
FIrst, I say it is a religious act. Act is put as the Genus; for though an
Oath be properly in the Predicament of Relation, yet because the relative
respect which is in an oath is founded upon the act of the party swearing, it
is not for that reason impertinently defined by such an act; for as much as in
the definition of Relatives, the matter or ground of that relation is usually
put in for the Genus. Now that it is a religious Act, is manifest, first, by
the authority of Scripture, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and
serve him, and swear by his name. From which place the Schoolmen unanimously
conclude, that an Oath is (to use their term) Cultus latriae, that is, an act
of such holy worship as is due unto God alone.

Socondly, It is manisest by the consent of all Nations, amongst whom as led by
one light of nature, the religion of an oath has been ever held most sacred;
insomuch that the very words, Sanctity, Religion, and others of like sense, are
scarce in any other so frequently used amongst Heathen writers, as in this
matter of Oaths; and though they had many rites amongst them, which they held
sacred, yet to an Oath only, for no other cause then that it was in a manner
the most holy of their holy things, remained as peculiar right by the name of
Sacrament. From whence that name passed afterward into the Church, from some
similitude with the military Sacrament of the Romans, yet to signify some
other things. The French also at this day framing the Latin word Sacramentum
unto their pronuntiation call an oath, Unserement.

Thirdly, it is manifest from most evident Reason: because an Oath tends to the
honor of God as being an acknowledgement of his truth, wisdom, justice, and
divine power. For although a falfe oath, or an oath lightly, rashly, or
otherwise unduly taken, discover a certain irreverence to, or rather contempt
of God in the party swearing, and savor too much of Atheism: the act
nevertheless of swearing in its own nature implies a reverence of the divine
Name. For since every oath is made for confirmation of that which is avouched
by the party swearing; and all confirmation ought to be made by something that
is most certain, and of greater authority, (Heb. 6. Menverily swear by the
greater:) He who swears, ipso facto acknowledges God to be his superior, a
witness of the highest authority; of infallible truth, the searcher of hearts,
and the most just, and powerful punisher of all perjury and falsehood. An oath
therefore is a religious act.

SECT. IV.
SEcondly, I say, In which God is called witness. Wherein are these three
things; God called, as a witness, and by way of invocation. In all oaths God
is chiefly called; for although there was a solemnity heretofore amongst
Heathens, Jews, and Christians of swearing either by Creatures, or at least in
swearing not to express the name of God, but the names of creatures only, as
might if need were be proved by infinite testimonies drawn both from Scripture,
and other authors, (to dispute which two things, whether they be, o^ how far
they may be lawful, is not to the present purpose) yet in every oath which is
truly and formally an oath, the testimony of God is either explicitly, or
implicitly used; for both he who swears by idols, which indeed are nothing, 1
Cor. 8. 4. and Jer. 5. 6. are no Gods, swears by those he thinks to be Gods:
and he who swears by any creature, does that in some sort in order and relation
unto God, because he calls the creature to witness, as it were something of
God, that is to say, in which the truth, goodness, and power of God appears,
and which he both acknowledges that by the mercy of. God he enjoys, and
would be loath by the justice of God to be deprived of For example; if a man
swear by his life, by his soul, by his head, by his salvation, etc. it is as
much as if he should say, by that God to whom I owe my life, my soul, my head,
from whom I expect salvation, etc. And in this particular is the difference
between an Oath, and bare assertion or promise, which two men make without any
interposition of the divine Name, either express or tacit. Now in that God is
called to witness, therein an oath is distinguished from a Vow; for in a Vow
God himself is contracted withal as a party, to whom vows are immediately
addressed. But man is contracted withal in an oath, and God brought in not as
a party, but witness. Now in the definition I have said God to be witness
simply and precisely, not a judge and revenger; which nevertheless is added by
some indeed truly, but perhaps not necessarily; and no superfluous thing should
be brought into a definition. I confess he who swears does both adduce God
witness of truth, and avenger of falsehood; but that primarily, and perse, this
secondarily, and by consequence. For that God be witness unto truth,
appertains simply to the nature of testimony: but that he punish falsehood,
concerns not so much the nature of testimony, as the effect. But neither is it
sufficient unto an oath, that God be made the witness, except he be also
invocated; for God may be brought a witness, and that for the confirmation of
a doubtful thing too, even without an oath. As if for the confirmation of this
Thesis, Images are not to be adored, I should allege some places out of
Scripture; certainly this were to adduce the testimony of God for confirmation
of a thing in doubt, and yet as certainly this were no oath; for it is quite
another matter to cite God a witness in respect of a testimony already given,
which may be done without invocation; and to invoke God a witness with respect
unto a testimony now to be exhibited, wherein the formality of an oath
consists.

SECT. V.
THirdly, I said, and it is the last member of the definition, that God is
invoked a witness for the confirmation of some matter in doubt. In which words
is contained both the end, and matter, or object of the oath. The materia circa
quam, or object of an oath, is a Doubtful thing; that is, whose certitude so
depends upon the credit of the speaker, that it can be no other way
conveniently found out. Wherefore first, the Scibilia, of which kind
universal things be, which are ever certain and like themselves, nor can be
otherwise; Secondly, particular things which rest upon the testimony of sense,
which are either so clear and certain in History, universal tradition, or
other public testimony, free from all suspicion of falsehood, that they can
leave no occasion of doubt with men of sound minds; are no fit matter for
oaths. For how ridiculous were it, and unbeseeming a sober man to confirm by
an oath, that a triangle has three Angles; or that virtue is desirable for it
self; or that Aristotle was a Philosopher; or that Cicero an Orator; or that a
youth disputing in the Schools, and being to prove a proposition denied, should
lay arguments aside, and swear it to be true? Wherefore particular things, such
as are facts of peculiar persons with their circumstances, which for the
various chances, and contingencies whereunto they are obnoxious, are so
mutable, and doubtful, that no certainty thereof can be had by way of
demonstration, or other, except that which depends upon the credit of men: are
those things, unto the confirmation whereof, oaths are properly of use: which
the Apostle intimates in that Heb. 6. An oath is the end of all contradiction.
As if he should say, an oath is there to take place where there is no end of
contradiction; one, imagine the Plaintiff, affirming; the other, imagine the
Defendant, denying: except by the interposition of an oath, one part of
contradiction being confirmed, the other part cease, and the whole strife be
determined.

SECT. VI.
ANd this Confirmation (the Apostle in the place mentioned calls it (...)) is
the true end of an oath. For since particular things would be uncertain, and
through their contingency doubtful, nor could be proved but by witnesses, and
all humane testimony would be infirm and fallible, especially through two
defects; one of knowledge, (for we are ignorant of very much) the other of
conscience, (every man being a liar) and yet it would make for men's convenience
that the things in controversy amongst them, and mutually debated, should be
reduced to some certainty, without which there would be amongst men no faith,
nor justice, which are the most firm bonds of humane society; there lies a
necessity of flying to the testimony of God, who can neither deceive nor be
deceived. And thus oaths are received by all nations from divine institution,
or the law of nature, as a fit remedy for this disease. In the judgment of all
men, (...), says Diodorus Siculus, and Dionysius Haliearnasseus, (...): And
the Apostle greater, and more elegantly then, both (...), an end of all strife,
Heb. 6. When we arrive once at this point, Ne plus ultra; all humane dispute
and contradiction must rest here. Not that every thing confirmed by an oath is
simply certain (for then there would be no perjury, which alas is too common)
but because in this condition of mortality (wherein it seems unto divine
wisdom profitable for mankind that they should be conversant with much
obscurity and incertainty of things, to the end that their minds may be raised
unto the things above which are more certain) there can be no greater humane
faith then that which in an oath, by the invocation of the name of God, is as
it were attested and confirmed from heaven.

SECT. VII.
IN this definition of an Oath examined as you have heard, are in some sort
contained all the causes of oaths. That first member in which it is said to be
a religious Act, to wit, of him who swears, necessarily includes the will of
the Agent, that is to say, of the party swearing; (seeing every man is a free
agent, and every humane act voluntary) as the primary Efficient cause. The
second member expresses the Formal cause of an oath, which is the attestation
of the divine Name, or invocation of God as a witness. The third member
contains the other two causes, to wit, the Material and Final. For the proper
Matter of an Oath is the thing in doubt; that is, the truth whereof is not
sufficiently confirmed to him, before whom it is pleaded, by the bare testimony
of the assertor; and the proper Final cause of an oath is, that a doubtful
matter may have that certainty through invocation of divine testimony, then
which no greater can be had in the contingency of humane affairs. This which I
have said, Auditors, is to the end it may render me the more excusable unto you
for the prolixity I have used in explaining the definition of an Oath. Because
when with the help of God I come to state dubious cases, which I intend to do
with respect unto the four kinds of causes, I doubt not but you will then
easily perceive, how profitable it will be to the studious, and advantageous
unto my purpose, to have had a foreknowledge of these things, which concerning
the nature of oaths have been by me so largely handled.

SECT. VIII.
BUt thus much of Oaths in general, what a Promissory Oath is in particular
comes in the next place, but more briefly to be explained. Sundry divisions and
distinctions of oaths according to the diversities they respect are extant in
Divines and Lawyers: by some they are divided into Judicial and
Extrajudiciall; by some into public, and private; into simple, and solemn;
into naked, and execratory; into absolute, and conditional; by others,
otherwise. But the noblest of all, and that which (as I remember) is not by any
of them who have written of oaths, omitted, is that whereby they are
distinguished into Assertory and Promissory. For whereas in every oath (as has
been said) the name of God is taken by the party swearing by way of invocation
unto the testimony of some doubtful matter, it is to be observed, that this
may be done three ways. For a past matter may be doubted whether it were so,
or not so: as, did you see Caius yesterday in the marketplace or no? or a
present one, whether it be so or not; as, have you the money I left in your
hands, or have you it not? or a future one, whether it will be so or not: as,
will you lend me an hundred pound to morrow, or will you not? So often
therefore as God by an oath is invoked witness to a thing past or present,
such an oath is usually called Assertory; Because the party swearing without
any promise for the future, only asserts the thing to have been, or to be as he
then swears. But if God by the interposition of an oath be invoked witness
to a future thing, that oath is called Promissory, because the party swearing
promises to perform something, or not to perform it hereafter. The chief use
of the Assertory is in judicature to determine suits, especially upon the
question of fact. There is small use of the Promissory in judicature, but very
much in promises, bargains, contracts. Many examples of this kind of oath are
found in sacred story, and elsewhere. The servant of Abraham devoutly swears
faithfully Genesis 24. 9
to observe his Lords commands in the choice of a wife for his masters son.
Joshua and the princes of the people of Israel swear, but inconsiderately,
Josh. 9. 15.
to observe the League with the Gibeonites. King Herod swear, but Mat. 14. 7.
very rashly, to give unto the daughter of Herodias whatsoever she should ask.

SECT. IX.
FUrthermore it is to be advertised, that under the title of an oath
Promissory, is also comprehended the Comminatory; such as was the rash oath of
David for the destruction of Nabal, and the impious one of certain Jews, who
vowed that they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. These
and such like are not properly Promises, which word seems rather to signify
something that may be grateful unto another, but by a kind of Synecdoche
joined with a Catachresis (which as it is otherwise familiar amongst good
Authors, so especially in words which respect some future thing; as sperare for
timere, and the like) the name of Promises may Metaleptically be extended to
Comminations. So Gods Oath, whereby he swear in his wrath that the Israelites,
who had tempted him with diverse provocations in the wilderness, should not
enter into his rest, may and uses no less to be called promissory (though not
so properly) then the other of his whereby he swear unto their fathers that he
would give them the land of Canaan for an heritage.

SECT. X.
NEither is it material to the nature or effect of a promissory oath, whether
the oath be barely expressed, or with an execration added; for although there
be some of the Schoolmen, unto whom that oath which is made by a simple calling
to witness, seems to differ in specie, from that which is done with an
execration added, they being induced unto that opinion for this reason, that
God is invoked by that as a witness, by this as a judge; yet if we more
attentively consider the matter, we shall find by what has been said, that
they come both to on^ For every oath in what manner soever uttered, whether
barely, or with execration, either expressly, or at the least implicitly,
invoketh God both as a Witness and Judge, but primarily and perse as a
Witness; secondarily and consequently as a Judge; and that is the most
explicate form of an oath, whereby God is both explicitly called to witness,
and whereunto an execration, or imprecation is annexed: as if a man should
swear thus, I call God to witness, who confound me if I do it not, that I will
do this or that. But ordinarily either this or that part is omitted, and oaths
are more succinctly given, as by those examples in holy Scripture where God is
introduced swearing after the manner of men, is sufficiently manifest. There
you may find God swearing sometime by a simple attestation without any
execration, as in these, As I live, says the Lord, I have worn by my self, by
my holiness, etc. sometimes without any attestation, by an execration only,
but that too, (for the honor and reverence of so great a Majesty, and after
the manner of men almost suppressing by an Aposiopesis, words of ill omen)
elliptically and diminutely uttered; as in that of the Psalm, I swear in my
wrath, if they enter Psalm. 95.
into my rest. This in the mean time seems certain, that every promissory
oath under what form soever conceived, brief, or large, so it be an oath, and
no mere Asseveration or Obtestation, virtually contains both, that is to say,
Attestation, and Execration. For in an oath both Execration supposes
Attestation as athing before it in nature, and Attestation interreth Execration
as its necessary consequent. That of Plutarch is ^^thy. (...), Every Oath
concudeth with a curse of perjurie. And thus much for the nature of a
Promissory Oath.

SECT. XI.
IT remains that in the last place I add something of the nature and force of
Obligation. Of obligation Lawyers say much and with prolixity enough: they
define it to be a Bond of Law, whereby a man is bound to pay that which he
owes. Which definition will be no lest fit to explain those things which are
internal, and appertain unto the Court of Conscience, then those which are
external, and appertain to the Court of Judicature, whether in Church or in
Commonwealth; if the term of Law be not restrained to that which is humane,
and positive only, but so extended, as it take in also universal Law divine and
natural. Now since every obligatory Bond, as may be gathered from the
definition, derives it self from some Law, as the Law is twofold, the one part
divine and natural, the other civil and humane; so the bond or obligation
arising from thence is also twofold; to wit, the natural Bond which obliges
naturally, and in foro externo, by the virtue of divine Law; and the civil
Bond which obliges civilly, and in foro externo, by virtue of humane Law. Some
call that the obligation of equity, this the obligation of justice; whether
properly or improperly, I dispute not: for where we agree in the thing, to what
purpose were it to contend about the terms? But whereas they add a third kind
of Obligation, compounded of the former two, that certainly is not very
convenient, or at the least not necessary: For if a man be bound to the
performance of the same duty (as for example, to feed his aged parents) both by
natural Law, and Civil; this would be no new species of obligation mixed of
the other two, but rather two obligations conjoined, both in the subject, and
object, (in the subject, for as much as they bind the same person; and in the
object, forasmuch as they bind unto the same duty) and yet naturally and
originally distinct. The reason is manifest, for things cannot by their mixture
produce a new species, without some real immutation of themselves. Whence
Aristotle defines Mistion, Misoibilium alteratorum unionem. For in all mistion
there must be alteration, and every alteration is a real mutation, as appears
in the generation of mixed bodies out of the four elements, not entire, but
broken, and altered. But where a new obligation is added unto a former one, as
in this case, the civil to the natural, no real mutation is made of either.
But the former obligation remains in the same state it was in before the
accession of the new and latter. But I will not stay upon these subtleties. In
the matter of oaths we consider the Mor^ll, or Natural obligation only, or at
the least especially; the other, the Civi^l we leave to Lawyers.

SECT. XII.
BEsides that distinction of obligation, which arises from its Original, in
relation unto the Law whence it deriveth: there is yet another, taken from the
Object in relation unto the Debt to be paid, at which obligation aims, and
whereunto it is carried. Now debts are twofold. Debitum officii, according unto
which every man is bound, by the precept of the Law to act: and Debitum
supplicii, according to which every man is bound by the decree of the Law to
suffer if he neglect his duty. In the former sense we say that the mutual
exercise of Charity is a debt, because the Law of God enjoynes it, according to
that Romans 13. 8. Owe no man any thing, but to lov one another. In the latter
sense we say, that sins are debts, as in the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our
debts, and that external death is a debt, according to that Romans 6. 23. The
wages of sin is death. Nevertheless it is to be observed, that the latter debt
is contracted by non-payment of the former. So that if a man fully disingage
his debitum offici^^, by obeying what the Law commands, he remains not
bound debito supplic^i, to suffer that which the Law denounces. To this
twofold debt an^wereth a twofold obligation, of the very same denomination, to
wit, obligation ad officium, to the performance of duty; and obligation ad
supplicium, to the sufferance of punishment; or according to the usual terms,
which comes all to one, obligation to guilt, and obligation to punishment. But
so as the former be in the intention of the Law, as it is in its own nature,
chief and preferred before the latter; for it is the part of a Tyrant, not of
the Law, otherwise to inflict punishment then in relation to guil^: and that
speech of the Apostle is true even in this sense, though perhaps more rightly
to be understood in another, The Law is not made for a righteous man. The Law
therefore intends primarily, directly, perse, and simply, to oblige unto
duty, and obedience. But unto chastisement and punishment, it obliges only
secondarily, indirectly, consequently, and ex hypothesi, that is to say,
supposing the neglect or contempt of du^y. The Apo^tle seems to have joined
both these obligations together, in Romans 13. where he sp^aks of the subjection
due unto the Sovereign power, Y^^ must needs (says he) be subject not only for
wrath, but also for conscrence sake: from which words I gather three things of
concernment to my present intention. The first is, that we may be bound by a
double bond to the performance of one and the same thing; by the bond of duty,
and the bond of punishment; for this is employed in the words of conscience and
wrath. The second, that the conscience of duty ought with all good men to be
valued, and preferred before the fear of punishment. The third, that the
obligation of conscience arises preciselv out of the debt of duty. Whence also
it is manifest, that we, when we speak of the obligation of oaths, as it
concerns conscience, are primarily and especially to be understood of the
obligation which binds us to the performance of Duty, not of that whereby we
are bound to suffer the punishment due unto perjury.

SECT. XIII.
THese two distinctions of Obligations laid, it is forth rmore to be
understood, that every oath is in its own nature binding: in^omuch, as if a man
should swear without any intention to oblige himself, nay although he should
swear with an intention not to oblige himself; nevertheless, the oath taken,
he becomes ipso facto obliged, as in its place (if it please God that I go so
far) I shall more fully show. Cicer^ says right, Our Ancestors would have no
bond for the obligation of faith, stricter then that of an oath. But what could
be more clearly said in this matter, then that which Moses says in the text?
If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to linde his soul with a
b^nd: where that gemination after the manner of the Hebrews, has much
emphasis, and fortifies the signification of the words: As in multiplying I
will multiply; and in blessing I will bless: that is, I will exceedingly
multiply, I will greatly bless: so ligando ligamen, binding with a Bond, that
is, strongly binding; as if he should have said, although even a bare promise
oblige the conscience, and that with the addition of an asseveration, or
obtestation, it oblige more strictly: yet a vow which is made to God, and an
oath which is made to men, but with the witness of God, are the strongest of
all obligations. Wherefore every oath obliges the con^cience, as well the
Assertory, as the Promissory. Of the Promissory, seeing it respects the time
to come, no man can doubt. But of the Assertory, perhaps not without reason
there may be some question made, because all obligation binds unto some thing
that is future; but it has been said before, that the difference of the
Assertory Oath from the Promissory consists in this, that that respects a
thing present or past, this a future. But the solution is easy, to wit, that
the obligation of an oath qua tale, falls not primarily upon the object, or
matter of Oath; for so an Assertory Oath whose object is something past, or
present, could not lay any obligation for the future. But obligation falls
immediately and directly upon the subject, that is the conscience of the
swearer, who in both kinds of oath is bound to the performance of some duty
for the future.

SECT. XIV.
WHich that it may be made more manifest, and that withal it may mo^^ clearly
appear, what the obligation of a Promissory Oath (which I have undertaken to
explain) is, I will do my best to show, what is common to both kinds of Oath,
so far as it concerns the effect of obligation; and what is peculiar unto a
Promissory Oath. And first it must be granted, which is in it self so evident,
as its contradictory implies a manifest contradiction, That all obligation to
duty respects the duty to be performed de futuro; that is, at the least some
time, though perhaps a very small one, after the obligation contracted. Nor is
it hard to be observed, if diligently considered, that this happens unto
every Oath as well Assertory as Promissory; for whosoever swears, obliges
himself ipso facto, to manifest the truth in that which he is about to say,
whether it be in a matter past, or present, by an Assertory, or in a future
matter by a Promissory Oath. And hitherto this obligation is alike common to
both kinds; so that if in either of them the words of the party swearing do
not agree with his mind, he becomes guilty of the breach of his duty: and
thence also (...) necessary consequence obnoxious unto punishment. But in the
Promissory Oath, besides this obligation which falls upon the conscience of the
party swearing, and is common to it and the Assertory, quatenus juramentum;
there is another further obligation proper and peculiar unto it, quatenus
Promissorium, which falls upon the matter of the Oath: by virtue whereof the
Promissory party swearing is bound not only in present to intend to do that
which he swears, that his words may agree with his mind, but also to
endeavor for the future (as much as in him lies) to fulfill that which he has
sworn, that his deeds may agree with his words; that is, he obliges himself
not only barely to promise that which he really intends; but also farther
obliges himself to perform all that which he has promised by Oath; which the
words of Moses in this verse clearly express, If a man (says he) vow a vow
unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul with a Bond, he shall not
break his word, he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth.
And thus as fully as I o^ght, and asclearly as I could, I have unfolded unto
you my sense upon the first head of this discourse, what an Oath is, what a
Promissory Oath, what Obligation. In my next Lecture (with the help of God) I
shall proceed unto the rest in the order which I have proposed.

The second Lecture.
Summary.
1. A Premonition concerning style. 2. Hypothesis 1. Above all things
simplicity becomes an oath. 3. Simulation, and deceit are repugnant unto
simplicity. 4, 5, 6, 7. Simulation does not evade perjury. 8. Hypothesis, 2. An
oath is stricti Juris. 9. The interpretation of an Oath, ought not to be too
loose. 10. All conditions are not to be expressed in an oath. 11. Hypoth. 3. An
oath makes not a former obligation void. 12. An impossible thing obliges not.
13. An unlawful thing obliges not. 14. The difference between an unlawful
oath, and an oath of an unlawful thing.
SECT. I.
HAving explained in the former Lecture, what an Oath is in general, what a
Promissory Oath in particular, and what Obligation; I proceed (as I promised)
to propose some Preoccupations or Hypotheses fitted for our purpose as
foundations, or (if you please) Canons or rules of the whole future discourse;
from whence are to be derived, and to which are to be reduced the
determinations of most doubts. But before I do this, of one thing by the way,
which I go not about to entreat of you, as I should do if I could suspect your
savor, or believe the thing in it self unjust; I desire only to premonish
you, that it is my resolution, so long as I can find wherewithal to be any way
significant in my expression of the matter to be handled, not to labor farther
for words, muchlesse purity of language, and least of all to trouble my self
for elegance, I leave that to such as have leisure, and are delighted to take
pains for that which is unnecessary. I use to relate amongst my friends not
without some sport and laughter, what sweat it cost Paulus Cortesius, a man
otherwise not unlearned, to become the more foolish, who whilst following
Thomas, and Scotus, and many more, he compiled Commentaries upon the four books
of Sentences, growing weary forsooth, of the terms used in the Schools, as
less Ciceronian; for Church (Flowers of Rhetoric!) chose rather to say
Senate; for Ecclesiastical Laws, Senate-decrees, for predestination
presignation, for ordination of Priests, initiation, for Angel Genius, for
Bishop flamen, and the like, being all to besprinkled over with such kind of
powder. Of this disease also I find Cardinal Peter Bembo, and Sebastian
Castalian, somewhat ^ick with others, but those few and more moderately. We
will not, we may not be so elegant. An Orator deserves pardon, nay ought to
be praised, when he is industrious in the choice of his words, if he speak not
only aptly and clearly, but also with purity, and ornament, it is his virtue;
who sometimes mis-becometh not his flowery Chaplet, and embroidery. But a
Philosopher, or Divine, especially in Scholastic Meditations, and knots of
controversy, becomes a curious and adorned st^le, as the laborious Ox would
embossed Trappings. The materials upon which we labor, being contented only to
be taught, neither requires ornament, nor will endure it. To be conversant in
the Pulpit and in the School is not the same: and it is another thing to have a
large field where the fluency of speech may find room, and nourishment, and to
be entangled in briars, from which by any means to redeem a man's self without
blood and wounds is a great triumph. But why do I trouble my self with these
things? If I use such words and expressions as are usual in this kind of
discourse, as I must necessarily do; I am less doubtful of your excuse in
that, then fear^ull that the prolixity of my excuse it self, may stand in need
of another pardon: wherefore I leave Oratory, and have to my Hypotheses.

SECT. II.
OF which let this be first, Simplicity above all things becomes an Oath. That
is to say, such is the nature, and obligation of an oath, as whosoever binds
himself to the performance of any thing by so sacred a bond, is wholly bound by
the religion of his oath, both in his mind seriously to intend, and as far as
lies in his power, willingly to endeavor, that he may faithfully perform
whatsoever he has promised, without fraud, deceit, double dealing, or
simulation. Cicero, as in most things of this kind, is right in this; What
promise soever thou shall expressly make as in the presence of God, is to be
sto^d unto. He who shall do otherwise, being careless of the real performance
of that whereunto he is obliged by an oath, is judged here by Moses, to have
broken his word, that is, basely and unworthily to have violated a sacred
thing, and such an one as ought not rashly to be profaned, and to be guilty of
evident or dissembled perjury. For seeing that there be three sorts of perjury,
whereof the first is almost peculiar unto Assertory Oaths, viz. when a man
swears that to be true which he either believes to be false, or doubts at the
least whether it be true or no; the other two appertain unto the Promissory, to
wit, the second, when a man promises that by an oath, which he means not to
perform; and the third, when he endeavors not to perform that which he
promised and intended: as to the guilt of perjury, especially at the Bar of
Conscience, it matters not much, which way any of the three be committed,
openly or covertly; that being a symptom of a profane, this of a deceitful
heart; both which, except fraud be worthy of a greater hatred, are equally
abominable unto the most holy God, who loves the single in heart, and truth in
the Psalm. 56. 6.

Psalm. 12. 5.


inward man. But such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, that is,
Hypocrites and deceitful persons, the Lord shall lead them forth with the
workers of iniquity, that is, account of them no better then of such as are
openly profant and impious.

SECT. III.
UNto this simplicity of Oaths, two kinds of simulation are repugnant: one a
part ante, either preceding or accompanying the act of swearing; the other a
part post, or following the act: of which, though the former be worst, neither
is void of perjury. David seems to comprehend both in di^tinct, but parallel
places, viz. Psalm. 15. and Psalm. 24. In one of which to the question, Who shall
ascend into the Hill of the Lord? Amongst other things, he makes this answer,
He that has not sworn deceitfully, that is, who did not swear with an
intention to deceive: where all simulation a part ante, to wit, about the
tim^, and in the act of swearing, is excluded. In the other two a like
question, Who shall abide in thy holy tabernacle? Amongst other things, he
returns an answer not much different from the former, He that swears to his
own hurt, and changes not; that is, who after he had obliged himself by an
oath, had rather perform that, though to his great loss which he has
inconveniently sworn, then violate his faith for any worldly profit; where all
simulation a part post is excluded. These things seem to me, either not at all
to be thought upon, or not seriously by most men of these times, who unto all,
(be it what it will) that is proposed by such as are able to hurt, fear not
without difficulty to make a full, and formal oath; nay rather think
themselves only wise, and not without some contempt, deride the simplicity, and
vain fears of others, who that they may not hurt their consciences, seek a knot
forsooth in a bul-rush, and ravell into the forms prescribed by such as can
prescribe. In the mean while they rest secure absolving themselves from all
guilt, and fear of perjury; and think they have excellently provided for
themselves and consciences, if during the act of swearing they can make any
shift to defend themselves, either as the Jesuits do with some equivocation,
or mental reservation; or by forcing upon the words some subtle, and
unnatural interpretation; or after they have sworn they can find some
loop-hole or artificial evasion, whereby such art may be us^d with the oath,
that the words remaining, the sense may be eluded with some sophisme, and the
strength utterly lost. The ancient Christians did not acknowledge this kind of
Theology; nor the sounder Heathens this moral Philosophy. Far otherwise out
of those Augustine said, they are perjured, who preserving the words deceive
the expectation of them to whom they have sworn. And out of these otherwise
Cicero, Whatsoever is so sworn, as the mind of him who took the oath may
conceive, what ought to be performed, that is to be stood unto.

SECT. IV.
BUt that I may not seem to declaim or contend with authority only, I will
prove by some reasons, that Perjury is not taken away by either kind of
simulation. The first reason. Of those many places of Scripture, out of which
singleness of heart, as in all divine worship, so in the duties of our lives,
especially in contracts, promises, vows, and oaths is enjoined. The present
text, that I may omit others, requires of him who takes an oath in express
terms, that he do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth. Ut omnino
faciat, that is, that both at that time he faithfully intend to do, and
afterward to his power faithfully endeavor to do according to all that
proceeds out of his mouth, that is, according to the sense which the words by
him uttered, after the common and received manner of speech, bear in the
understanding of the Auditors, and not according to that sense which he perhaps
during the act of swearing in his secret thoughts reserveth unto himself, and
fraudulently intends. Whereunto that agrees which is brought out of
Isidorus, With what artifice of words soever a man swear, God who is witness
of his conscience, takes the same as he understands it, to whom the oath is
made: and not according to the sense which the party sworn, when he begins to
repent of the fact, goes about to invent for fashion sake, as they speak; not
fully and sincerely to perform the faith of his oath, as he ought, but that he
may after a sort appear unto himself and others to have performed his duty, and
with this artifice very warily, and providently to ^ave avoided the crime of
perjury.

SECT. V.
THE second Reason is drawn from the example of God himself, who as the Apostle
writes, Heb. 6. for this very cause confirmed his promises made unto the
faithful by an oath, that he might witness unto them more abundantly, that
is, as fully as could possibly be, and so as might leave no place to doubt, the
immutability of his counsels in fulfilling of that which he had sworn to
perform: and all this, to the end that they who should believe might have a
strong consolation, and firm trust in him; which nevertheless they could not
have, if it were not impossible for God to lie, or deceive them to whom he had
sworn by frustrating their expectation. But he would deceive and frustrate the
hope and consolation in him of believers, if either whilst he swear, he
intended not to do a^ he promised, or afterward changing his mind, should
no^ perform i^ in due time, nor after the same sense in which his promises were
by them according to the tenor of the words rightly understood. The Lord has
sworn, and will not Psalm. 110. 4.

Psalm. 132. 11.


repent. The Lord has sworn in truth unto David, he will not turn from it.

SECT. VI.
THE third Reason from the nature of truth, which is first and chief of those
three celebrated conditions of an oath extant in the Prophet Jeremy, inculcated
Jer. 4. 2.
by all, and called by the Schoolmen, the three companions of an oath; viz.
Truth, Judgment, Justice. To which Truth is repugnant, not only that which is
false, but that also which is feigned; not noly a bare and evident lie, but a
covered one also, howsoever palliated. Certainly whosoever speaks falsely unto
his neighbor, polluteth his speech with a lie: and he has spoken falsely unto
his neighbor, who has been the occasion of deceiving his neighbor of that
hope which he had rationally conceived from his speech. Since therefore by
simulation of either kind a Lie is not avoided, if through our fault our
neighbor trusting to our words be deceived, surely neither is Perjury ^rcided,
if through our fault he be deceived, by trusting unto our oaths; seeing that
Perjury is nothing else but a lie confirmed by an oath. So that Perjury after
an oath taken is the very same, that a Lie is in a bare promise.

SECT. VII.
THE fourth Reason, from the proper end of an Oath: which by that has been
said when we explained the definition of an oath, appeared to be confirmation
of a thing in doubt; that is, that as great certainty may be had of things
otherwise uncertain and depending upon the truth of men, as is possible to be
had in humane affairs. For an oath is instituted of God by the light of nature
for a remedy of humane defects in the search of truth, that it might be the
last mortal refuge for the defense of Verity, when all other kinds of proof
are deficient. But this end would be utterly overthrown, nor could any certain
credit be given to men, if it were lawful for the party swearing at his
pleasure, so to enervate that which he verbally pronounces to the end to
obtain belief, either by any tacit ambiguity in swearing, or after the oath
taken, by any new invented and as it were posthume interpretation, that it lose
its whole force, and become altogether ineffectuall. If either of these were
lawful, an oath would not be the end of all contradiction, but the beginning,
and rather give occasion of new strifes, and contradictions, then determine old
ones. This door once opened, what can be imagined so false, for the defense
whereof some kind of at least diversion or subterfuge might not be found out,
whereby it might be delivered from the lie? In the mean time how great a
perversity is this, that what the wise God has ordained for an aid of truth,
should by impious man be turned into an instrument of falsehood? Verily unless
men had rather use the sacred ordinance of God to other ends, then that for
which it was ordained (as a pious man can hardly do) that which is the end of
an oath ought likewise to be his end who takes an oath; now that is to give
such assurance unto the hearer, that he may become more secure, and certain of
the truth of a matter which was before in doubt. But he who dissembleth, goes
about to possess the auditors with a false belief, and so not only suffers
others to be deceived, (which nevertheless seeing it might and ought to be
hindered is against Charity) but intends also to deceive them, which besides
that it is against all justice and honesty, is joined with high indignity to
God, and contempt of his holy name. And to my understanding, scarce any kind
of perjury seems to be more diametrically opposed to the scope of the third
precept in the Decalogue, or to those very words, Thou shall not take the name
of the Lord thy God in vain, then that which arises out of this simulation.
For the word Vanity, to speak properly and adequately, as it takes in all that
is any way false, so in a kind of peculiar manner, and most properly, it
signifies that which is false in such a manner, as bears some show of truth;
so that if a man would express by a definition, the nature and essence of
Vanity, (though it be ens rat^onis only, and has no true essence) yet by
analogy with ens reale, he could not do it better, then by framing an Idea his
imagination compounded of Nothing as the Matter, and of a Lie as the Form. Thus
Hope which feeds it self with a lie, and is at the length frustrated, and
brought to nothing, is Vain hope. And to the present point, he who promises
any thing to come certainly to pass, takes the name of God for the
confirmation of truth, which nevertheless comes all to nothing, that either
not intended or not performed which he promised; the same directly, and to the
letter, takes the name of God in vain, violateth Gods Commandment, and is
guilty of the heinous crime of perjury. And thus you have a sufficient
confirmation of the first Hypothesis, concerning the Simplicity of oaths.

SECT. VIII.
THE second follows, which is of kin to this, and appertains to the right
interpretation of an oath; briefly it is this, The obligation of an oath is
stricti juris. I understand here jus strictum, not in that sense wherein it
occurreth so often amongst Lawyers, for the rigor of the Law, which is opposed
to equity, to wit, by which judgment is turned Amos 6. 12.
into wormwood, and which is for the most part so interwoven with injury, that
it is almost become a proverb, Summum jus, summa injuria. But somewhat more
mildly for so just an interpretation of the Law, and so circumscribed to her
bounds, that the words of the Law be not stretched farther then is fit by way
of complacence or favor to any party; or forced to serve any man's turn or
profit. In a word, strictum jus is here so taken, as may not exclude the
interpretation of Law, tempered with equity; but excludes the interpretation
of the Law corrupted with favor. Now seeing to interpret, is nothing else but
to expound a thing wherein there lies some ambiguity or obscurity; it is to be
understood, that a threefold interpretation or exposition may be given of the
same thing. Rigid, Favorable, Just; Rigid and favorable are the extremes:
and, as most extremes be, vicious. And as there is for the most part a certain
coincidence of extremes, but so unhappy an one, seeing they recede both ways
from the medium, that they ever meet in that which is ill; and for the most
part in that which i^ worst; too rigid and too favorable an interpretation of
the Law meet in this, that each of them by an unjust acceptance of persons,
offers in a manner violence unto the Law, wracking it with too subtle an
exposition to the ease of one party, and grievance of the other; but with this
difference, that he who is animated with hatred to the parties, presses the
more rigid interpretation; and he who is led with affection, follows the more
favorable. But a mean between both, and just interpretation, is that which
without respect of persons investigate^h the true and genuine sense of the Law,
out of natural equity and justice, and the words themselves, as far as they
agree with equity and justice. And this, if out of the words it may
sufficiently appear, is in all cases exactly to be followed. But because it may
happen, and often happens, that controversies arise about the proper and
natural sense of Laws, and other matters which need interpretations; where
for the dubiousnesse of the thing a just interpretation is not to be had, of
necessity we must allow unto this mediocrity (as I may call it) her prudentiall
Latitude. As the Ethics say that the mediocrity of virtue consists not in an
indivisible point, or Arithmeticall proportion, but in a Geometrical. In a Law
therefore which is doubtful, now a stricter, now a milder interpretation
according to the nature of the thing in question, supplieth the place of a just
interpretation: whereof the strict, being remoter from the favorable, comes
nearer to the rigid; and the mild being nearer to the favorable, declines the
more from the rigid. As in the Morals, that virtue which is the mean between
Covetousnes, and Prodigality, the more remote it be from either extreme is
called Liberality, or Frugality. There are therefore some things so ordained by
nature, that they require as due, the allowance of a milder interpretation, to
wit, such an one, as may not be bound up in the straightness of words, but
left more at liberty (to use Cicero's term) cum quodam laxamento: such for
example is res testamentaria in our Law. So by the rule of charity, the words
and deeds of others, especially of Princes, Parents, and other rulers, the
writings also of pious, and learned men (unless there lie very just cause of
suspicion to the contrary) are to be handled with a mild interpretation,
according to the usual saying, Doubtful things are to be interpreted in the
better sense. But there are diverse other matters, as Privileges, Deeds of
contracts about debt, and most of those things which bind legally, and amongst
them Oaths: in which when question is made of the true sense, it is much
better, and more suitable unto the nature of the thing to use the stricter, then
the milder interpretation.

S^CT. IX.
WHen I say therefore that an oath is stricti juris, that must be thus
understood, the sense of an oath where it is sufficiently manifest in the
words, is exactly to be stood unto: but where the sense is doubtful, we must
take diligent heed, lest we be too indulgent unto our selves and our own
affections, or yield unto our selves too free, and loose a license of
interpretation, whereby we may become exempt from the bond of the oath in which
we are bound; as also that for our own interest, and profit sake, we impose not
upon the oath which we have taken, or any part thereof, other sense then that
which any other pious and prudent man (who being unconcerned in the business,
is of a^freer judgment) may easily gather out of the words themselves. The
reason is twofold: one in respect of others, to wit, for the fear of scandal,
lest a weaker brother led by our example, think it lawful for him to do as he
sees we have done, though he be ignorant of those subtilties, by which alone
we use to absolve our selv^s from the crime of perjury. Another in respect of
our selves, for fear of perjury; of which heinous crime we become without
question guilty, if that milder interpretation which encouraged us unto the
oath, chance to deceive us. And this r^ason is founded upon the most general,
and profitable rule, which in doubtful matters commands the choice of the
safer part. But where the words of the oath proposed according to the common
and obvious sense of them, seem to contain some unlawful thing, it is safer
not to swear, then by a looser interpretation so to work them unto our sense,
that we may more securely swear unto them; it being apparent that this kind of
oath may be refused without danger of perjury, but not apparent that it may be
taken without fear or danger of the same.

SECT. X.
Nevertheless heed is to be taken on the other side, lest this strict
interpretation whereof we speak degenerate into the rigid one. For that which
the Lawyers say of Privileges, holds generally in things of like nature, and
especially in Oaths, that they are neither too strictly, nor too largely to be
interpreted. Wherefore when I say, that an oath is stricti juris, I am so to be
understood, that therein nevertheless as in every oath, how simply soever
taken, and free from exception, all those exceptions and conditions, both may
and ought to be presumed which all Laws allow unto an oath, to the end that it
may be binding; whereof these that follow are the chief, and those perhaps, to
which most of the rest may be reduced. First, it is to be presumed, If God
permit, according to that of James, If the Lord will, we will live, and do this
or that. Wherefore if Caius swear unto Titius that he will be at London the
fifth of January, and pay the money he owes him, if he happen at that time to
be kept in his bed by sickness, or were robbed of his money by the way; in
this case he is not guilty of perjury. The reason is, that all things being
subordinate unto divine will, and providence, and no man having power to
dispose of all events, he who does what lies in his power to wards the
performance of his promise, has fulfilled his oath: for seeing that an
impossible thing oblig^th not, as anon you will hear, every oath is of common
right to be understood with this clause, If it please God, or the like. The
second thing to be presumed is, As far as is lawful; for an unlawful thing
obliges not. As if a m^n should swear indefinitely to observe all the Statutes
and Customs of a Corporation, he were not thereby obliged to observe any that
were not lawful and honest. The third thing to be presumed is, A salvo to
superior power. Wherefore if a son swear that he will perform some lawful
thing, and his father ignorant thereof lay some other command upon him which
hinders the per^ formance of his oath, the son is not obnoxious to the oath:
because by divine and natural Law, he is bound to obey his fathers commands.
And he who has sworn not to stir from home, if he be summoned by a lawful
Judge to appear, is bound to go notwithstanding his oath. The reason is, that
one man's act ought not to prejudice another man's right. The fourth thing to be
presumed is, Rebus sic stantibus, that is, if things remain in the same state
wherein they now are. Whence he who has sworn to restore a sword, is not bound
to restore it to a mad man. And he who has sworn to take a woman to wife, is
not bound to take her, if he find afterward that she is with child by
another. These and the like conditions, whose reason is clear, are fit in every
oath to be presumed, though they be not expressed, and he would be too rigid an
interpreter who should go about to exclude any of them. But if any man shall
admit more doubtful exceptions and dissonant not only from the words of the
oath, but from all right reason, and not approved by common right, or consent
of nations; verily he shakes the very foundations laid by God of an oath, and
opens a large field unto all kind of perjuries, by his rash enterprise. And
so we leave our second Hypothesis of the strict interpretation of an oath.

SECT. XI.
UPon which, as also that before of the simplicity of an Oath, I thought good
more largely to insist (though many things have fallen into my meditations not
unworthy knowledge, which neverlelesse for brevity sake I have omitted) both
because the clearer interpretation of them seemed unto me very necessary in
these most dissolute times, wherein men generally play with oaths, as boys do
with Cockals, and that there is very considerable use of these two Hypotheses,
in that which with Gods help, I am about to say in my future Lectures. The rest
I shall more briefly dispatch. The third Hypothesis; An oath makes not a
former obligation void. An oath has naturally its obligatory power; but
constructive only, not destructive; that is, it may lay an obligation where
there was none before, or strengthen one that lay before, but it cannot take
away that which it finds, or impose another which is repugnant unto it. The
reason is; because by all obligation some right is conferred upon another, for
whosoever is obliged is obliged unto another, and it seems most unjust that by
the mere act of one the right of another without his own consent should be
weakened. Nor will i^ make any thing to this purpose, whether that obligation we
suppose, were natural or acquisite. Natural and necessary obligation is that
whereby we are bound unto the performance of some duty unto another, which by
the Law of nature we owe him in relation to our person, which as I observed in
our former Lecture, some call obligation of Equity; because it originally
deriveth from the Law of nature, which is both most equal, and the rule of all
equity; such is the mutual obligation between the husband and wife, the father
and son, the master and servant, the Prince and his subjects. Acquisite and
voluntary obligation, which is also called Civil, (by a Synecdoche speci^i)
and of justice, because it is just that a man should be bound unto that
whereunto he has voluntarily bound himself; is that whereby we are engaged
unto the performance of some duty to another, which we owe him by agreement,
and virtue of some proper and voluntary act: such is the obligation which
arises from promises, vows, oaths, leagues, and other humane contracts, and
conventions. If therefore an oath be o^fered unto any man containing any thing
repugnant unto a former obligation, whether natural, or acquisite, a^ if it be
repugnant unto the obedience due unto a Parent, or the Prince, or if it be
repugnant unto that which was lawfully sworn, or promised before; such an oath
no man can take, or taken, fulfill with a safe conscience: Who does either of
these, is perjured.

SECT. XII.
THe fourth Hypothesis follows, which is so evident of it self, that it is a
rule of the Law, and needs no proof. An impossible thing obliges not. And
this is extended unto all kind of impossibility which may happen in matter of
Law. Now a thing may be impossible either per se, or per accidens. Perse three
ways; First, by a natural impossibility, as for a man to fly, a fish to
speak. Secondly, by an impossibility of fact; as for Caius staying this day at
London to meet Titius tomorrow at Venice. Thirdly, by an impossibility of Law;
as it is said impossible for a man to do that which he has no legal power to
do; in which sense that ordinary speech is to be understood, Id tantum
possumus, quod jure possumus. Thus it is impossible for the Mayor of this City
to confer upon any man the degree of Doctor. If a man should swear an
impossibility of any of these three kinds, his oath were vain and from the
beginning null, and by consequence could not at all oblige him, to endeavor
that which he swear, much less to perform it. But the nature of a thing
impossible by accident only, is somewhat different. As if a man having sworn to
pay an hundred pound within a month, which is not impossible perse, be hindered
by some unexpected accident, in such sort that he cannot make the sum within
the time appointed. Albeit he be not obliged in conscience to the performance
of his promise, to wit the payment of the whole debt within the time limited,
which is now rendered impossible; nevertheless he is obliged to do what he can,
viz. to pay as much, and that as soon as he is able. The reason of both is,
that because in this case impossibility only impedeth the obligation. The
obligation is only so far taken away as the performance is impossible, but in
the rest remains. And he who cannot pay all he owes, ought yet to pay all he
can.

SECT. XIII.
THe fifth Hypothesis: An unlawful thing obliges not. An unlawful thing is
whatsoever is against any precept of God in the Decalogue, or a virtuous life,
whatsoever is repugnant unto our piety toward God, or our charity toward our
neighbor, whatsoever is averse to the common good, or peace Ecclesiastical,
Political, Domestical; in a word, whatsoever is sinful. Hereunto appertain
those common sayings, An oath is not the bond of iniquity. In sinful promises
revoke thy faith, etc. The reason is, because every unlawful thing is against
duty, but all obligation is to duty. Furthermore, whatsoever is unlawful, is
in some sort forbidden by God, (either immediately, or by consequence) but Gods
prohibition obliges unto the not doing of that which is forbidden, which
obligation a subsequent oath, as appears by the third Hypothesis, cannot make
void. Nay, he who has sworn to do that, which he cannot do without sin, is so
far from being obliged unto the performance thereof, that he is rather obliged
in no wise to perform the same. But you will say, for a man not to fulfill his
oath is perjury: nay verily if the thing be unlawful whereunto thou were
swor^, thou wast then perjured when thou swearest: thou are not perjured, when
thou repentest. And therefore to fulfill an unlawful thing because thou have
sworn it, is to heap wickedness upon perjury, like Pelion upon Ossa, or
drunkenness to thirst; to fulfill rather the measure of perjury, then thy
oath; to persevere in perjury with obdurity, and impenitence.

SECT. XIV.
NEvertheless concerning this Hypothesis, I must advertise, that this question,
Whether this or that oath be lawful? differs very much from that, Whether this
or that oath oblige? For although it be certain that what ought not to be
performed, ought not to be sworn, nevertheless it may come, and does come very
often to pass, that what ought not to have been sworn, ought notwithstanding
to be performed. Of this the league made by Joshua with the Gibeonites, is a
most evident example. The difference lies in this: where an oath is therefore
unlawful, because that which a man swears is an unlawful thing, there he
sins both ways, in swearing, and in performing: as if one should swear to
slay an innocent, and do it, he is guilty both of perjury and murder. And such
an oath is in no ways binding, which is the true sense of this last
Hypothesis. But where an oath of a thing which is not unlawful, becomes
otherwise unlawful by some external defect, or through some undue
circumstance; it may oblige the party swearing to the performance of his
promise, except there appear other impediment. And in this case comes in that
vulgar speech, Fieri non debet, factum valet. We may therefore distinguish; an
oath may be said unlawful two ways, either in respect of the thing sworn, or
the act of swearing. An oath unlawful in respect of the thing sworn does in no
wise oblige: an oath unlawful in respect of the act of swearing obliges,
except it be hindered by some other cause. But thus much of these Hypotheses,
which I thought fit to lead in the ensuing discourse, being props and
supporters whereupon those things whereof I shall speak hereafter concerning
the bond of an oath, and the sollution of that bond, are sustained.

The third Lecture. Containing sixteen Cases.
Summary.
1, 2. The use of method, and order of the things to be handled; of the matter
of an oath. 3. Oath of a thing simply impossible. 4. Oath of an impossible
thing, and from the beginning improbable. 5. Oath of an impossible thing, and
from the beginning probable. 6. Oath of a necessary thing. 7. Oath of an
unlawful thing. 8. Oath of a thing simply unlawful. 9. Oath of a thing
unlawful by Circumstance. 10. Oath of a thing which seems unlawful to the
party swearing. 11. Oath repugnant to former obligation. 12. Oath hindering some
good. 13. Oath tending to the hurt of the party swearing. 14. Oath giving
scandal to another. 15. Oath of an indifferent thing. 16. Oath to do what
another would have to be done. 17, 18. Oath to preserve Laws, and observe
statutes. 19. Caution concerning a right understanding of the things mentioned.
SECT. I.
I Begin here to launch into a va^t sea, being to fulfill the promise and speak
of the doubtful cases of conscience, which appertain unto the bond of an oath,
which I shall do according unto the four kinds of Causes. But before I weigh
anchor, give me leave to advertise you, that I shall no^ trouble my self very
much in the Method of those things which are to be handled. Truly the use of
Order in all kinds of study and discourse is very great and necessary, without
which a man by assiduous and abundant reading, may perhaps acquire unto himself
a mass of various learning, but that confused, indigested, and without any
great profit; on the other side that excessive curiosity of method, (which I
find some too industruously to affect) I have ever thought fit to be avoided
as a kind of troublesome superstition, and no small remora to such as are
studious; it shall satisfy me so to reduce all that which I am about to
deliver, unto certain Classes, that at the least some reason of resemblance or
analogy, may show why I do it; nor shall it trouble me much if a fault be
found that the sense and interpretation of an oath is not well reduced to the
formal, or some effect of it to the final cause. Now seeing where all the
causes concur to produce an effect, Matter in the first place is required, as
the first subject of generation; in the next the Efficient Cause, which by
acting produces the form; in the third the ^orm, which by the action, of the
efficient is to be introduced into the matter. Lastly, the End for whose sake
the efficient operateth. We, as it were following these steps of nature, will
begin with Matter, and thence in their order proceed unto the rest.

SECT. II.
BY the matter of an oath, I mean that about which it is employed, and for the
confirmation whereof it is made, whether it be considered as to be sworn, or as
sworn. Of a thing to be sworn, the question is, whether it be lawful to swear
after this or that manner? Of a thing sworn, the matter being stated, whether
the conscience be, and how far it is obliged by the oath? be it lawful or
unlawful; (for obligation may arise from an unlawful Act) And this question
only is proper to our purpose; Nevertheless I shall often cursorily express,
at the least where I find that the same pot may whiten either wall, what I
think of the other question also, especially since by intimation of my friends,
I understand it is expected by some, and will be acceptable unto the most of
you. The matter therefore of an oath, (that I may return to the business) is
either definite or indefinite. That which is certain and definite, may be
considered according unto its esse natural, or existence; to wit, whether it
be a thing possible to be performed or impossible; or according to its esse
morale, or quality; to wit, whether it be a thing necessary, unlawful, or
indifferent?

SECT. III.
THe first doubt is, what obligation there is in an oath, containing an
impossible thing: that is, if a man should swear to do a thing which he is not
able to do, whether he be, and how far he is obliged thereunto. The Cases which
occur in this doubt, are especially three. First, where the thing to be sworn
was from the beginning, and during the act of swearing, evidently and simply
impossible, either by impossibility of nature, when the thing in it self, and
barely considered without respect unto circumstance, implies a manifest
contradiction, or is repugnant unto the nature of any species of ens, as if a
man should promise to teach an Ass to speak. Or impossibility of fact, Cum res
est in potentia (as they speak) remota ad fieri; that is, when there is no such
repugnance in the nature o^ the thing it self, but it might be done, yet
through defect in some circumstance, (for example) too great distance of place,
straightness of time, or any other cause, that potentia is so hindered that it
cannot proceed unto act: as if Caius being this day present at Oxford, should
promise to sup with Titius to morrow at Paris. Or lastly, impossibility of Law;
when a man undertaketh to do any thing which is forbidden him by the Law, and
whereunto he has no legitimate power: as if Caius not being heir, should
promise to give unto Julius some proportion of the goods of Titius deceased. In
answer to the doubt in this first case, I say briefly, An oath of a thing
simply impossible, is neither lawful nor obligatory. It is not lawful,
because it is void both of judgment, and truth: for what man of sound
judgment, or of good credit, can intend to do, that which he knows
impossible to be done? Neither does it oblige, no not so far as to endeavor,
much less to perform; For it has been already said that an impossible thing,
(quatenus impossibilis) obliges not; and it is foolish to endeavor that which
thou can not effect.

SECT. IV.
THe second Case is, when a thing in it self not impossible, yet during the
time of the oath given seeming so impossible, that it is much more likely not
to be, then to be possible afterward to be performed, becomes at length by
some interposed obstacle impossible; for where the concourse of many things is
so necessarily required to the perfecting of any design, that one of many being
wanting, the rest must necessarily be frustrated (as if a wheel or pin, though
a small one, should be taken out of a watch, the rest of the fabric would be
useless) it can hardly happen but the pains taken in such a business, must
needs be fruitless: For example, if Caius should undertake by his industry to
procure unto Titius a new, and obscure man the Consulship, at the next
Commitia, and to carry it against Competitors for birth, glory, virtue,
authority, the most renowned of all the City. I answer, that such an oath is
not lawful, without the express addition of some clause; as, If I can, As far
as lies in my power, etc. If you shall say, it were needless to add a clause
which de lege communi ought to be presupposed. I answer, by the interpretation
of the Law, such clauses are presupposed, where it may be presumed the party
swearing could not foresee any thing which might be an impediment unto the
performance of his promise: but where that cannot, but rather the contrary may
be presumed; to wit, that he could not but foresee many impediments, there so
mild an interpretation is not granted de jure communi. Nevertheless this
kind of oath obl^g^th, not to performance, which we suppose to be impossible,
but to endeavor so long as there is hope though small, that it may be possible:
yea and the more the difficulties be, and the greater their resistance, the
more industriously to persist, and persevere with the more undaunted courage.
But if the thing be over apparently desperate, and manifestly impossible, the
obligation cease, from the ground expressed, that no man is obliged unto an
imp^ssibility.

SECT. V.
THe third case is, when the party swearing verily, believing the thing
probable, and faithfully intending to do it, doubts not (by Gods help) but he
shall be able to make good his words; nevertheless afterward by some
emergent, and unexpected accident, which could not by any humane reason be
foreseen or prevented, finds the matter at the length become impossible. As if
Callias dwelling at Thebes, having sworn to pay unto Socrates at Athens five
talents at a day appointed, should lose the money which he had carefully
provided, by theft, rapine, or cousenage, or should be taken prisoner upon the
way, so that he were not able to make payment of the debt in due time. Such an
oath is lawful, though the clause, (If I can) be not added, the same being to
be understood of course, and by the common interpretation of the Law. In which
regard this seems unto me good reason of difference between this Case, and
that which preceded. Seeing that the faith of promise, be given unto the party
unto whom we swear, is the end of an oath; it is expedient that so much as
seems sufficiently conducing thereunto, be fully expressed, during the act of
swearing, that so our credit may be the more ratified unto the party; but that
so much on the other side be concealed, as might render our credit the more
suspected. For as in an improbable matter the party swearing would not easily
be credited, but thought a forward, rash and too confident man, if without
exception or expression of difficulty he should barely promise performance of a
thing full of uncertainty: so on the other side, an exception added where there
is no appearance of danger^ might render the party swearing suspected; and show
as if he sought nothing else by so impertinent diligence; but a shift or
sub^erfuge for the violation of his faith. Now this kind of oath obliges the
party swearing, if he cannot make all good, to make good all he can; and if
great damage happen unto the other through nonperformance of his oath, to
apply a rem^dy to it, at the least in part, by some other benefit, as
opportunity may enable him, especially if the obstacle happened by his
negligence, want of prudence or other fault committed. And so much for the
first doubt.

SECT. VI.
THe second about an oath of a necessary thing follows. By a necessary thing,
I understand that which lies upon us in respect of our duty, by virtue of
divine precept, and even without an oath, in such manner as if we do not,
though without an oath, perform the same in due time and place, we become
guilty of sin: such are to feed our needy parents, to pay our debts, and the
like. Whereunto belong those oaths required from the subject of allegiance to
the King, and of acknowledgement, and defense of his royal supremacy, which
are taken in conceived words, by such as are admitted unto the Magistracy, or
any public office, to the end they may faithfully perform the duty of the
same. Of the obligation of this kind of oath, there can be no controver^ie;
for unto those things whereunto we are bound even without an oath, certainly we
are much more obliged by an oath; to wit, the new obligation of an oath, being
added unto that before by a precept: Wherefore we will stay no longer upon this
doubt.

SECT. VII.
THe third doubt is concerning an oath of an unlawful thing. I call that an
unlawful thing which cannot be done without sin, forasmuch as it is contrary
unto some divine precept; all sin being averse unto the Law of God. Now this
kind of oath is so unlawful, that not only the party swearing, but he also by
whose authority, counsel, or other means, a man is compelled or inveigled so
to swear, commits sin. But of the party compelling, I shall perhaps speak
hereafter; in the mean time, the party so swearing commits sin, whether he
intend to do as he swears, or intend it not. If he intend to do it, he
sins in willing an unlawful thing, and so swears not in justice; if he
intend it not, he sins in lying, and so swears not in truth; But whether
he intend it or not, it is certain, that he is in no wise obliged. It comes
indeed very often to pass (so contemptuous are men of the Majesty of God) that
through ^impatience of revenge, fear of danger, hope of profit, importunity of
friends, a kind of awe, or complacence, or some other occasion, many are
induced (whilst they indulge too much unto their own affections) to promise in
the presence of God, the performance of such things, as they either at the
present know certainly to be unlawful, or at least afterward when they are
free from their depraved affections, easily perceive impossible without sin to
be accomplished: and yet such is the perverseness of humane judgment
bewitched with the tricks, and delusions of that skillful artificer in this art
the Devil, that you shall see many whom you cannot by any duty of conscience
compel unto a good action, nevertheless so violently carried by the religion
of an oath unto wicked actions, that what they have unlawfully sworn, they
think themselves through a most pernicious error obliged by the bond of their
oath irresistibly to accomplish. But it has been shown before in our fifth
Hypothesis, and confirmed by manifest reasons, that of an unlawful thing as
unlawful there can be no obligation, and that evil can receive no validity
from an oath.

SECT. VIII.
WHich that it may be the better understood, and applied unto the particular
cases, seeing that all unlawful things are not of the same kind and degree, I
think that it will be fit that I speak somewhat more distinctly of this matter.
Whatsoever therefore is unlawful, is unlawful either ex se, or ex accidente:
again, that which is unlawful ex se, is so either primarily, or secondarily;
things unlawful, ex se primarid, and in the highest degree, are such as are
forbidden by God unto all mankind, whatsoever is against the sacred Law of
God, comprehended in the two Tables of the Decalogue; whatsoever is repugnant
either to our piety in the worship of God, or brotherly charity in the works of
justice, and mercy, is after this manner unlawful. And concerning a thing in
this first manner unlawful, is the first Case. As if a man should swear that
he would sacrifice unto I dols, or adore the image of the blessed Virgin, which
are sins of Commission: or if he should swear never to be present at divine
ordinances, or hear holy Sermons, or participate of the Lords Supper, or
sanctify the Lords Day, which are sins of omission, against the precepts of
the first Table. Or if a man should swear to kill his father, or cast his new
born child out of doors, or meet an adulteress at an appointed place and hour,
to accompany others in theft, robbery, fraud, or any the like crimes, which are
sins of commission. Or if he should swear not to relieve his aged and needy
father, to give alms unto the poor, not to pay his debts, etc. which are sins
of omission, against the precepts of the second Table. In these and such like
things simply and universally unlawful, the forementioned Hypothesis, by the
consent of all, is likewise simply and universally of force, and vigor; to
wit, that there can be no obligation in such a vow, promise, oath, either in
its self, or otherwise acquired. Pacta quae turpem causam continent non sunt
observanda, say the Lawyers. Nay though it were a grievous sin to vow, swear,
bargain, or otherwise to promise a thing generally unlawful, yet is the sin in
performing the promise much greater, which whosoever does, makes himself
guilty of a double crime, one of the same kind with the fact considered in its
self, put the case it be theft or murder, another of violated religion through
irreverence and abuse of the divine Name, forasmuch as an evil thing is
established, as far as lies in his power, by his authority.

SECT. IX.
THe second Case is of a thing unlawful, ex se secundarid, that is, not in its
own nature unlawful to all but to some only, according to the condition of
their persons, as they are members of some community, or according to their
particular vocation. For it is unlawful (and that ex se, not ex accidente only)
for such as are members of any Politic body to do any thing repugnant to the
Laws of their Community; which nevertheless as forbidden by God, is not
primarily, immediately, and in specie unlawful, but secondarily, mediately,
and in genere, by virtue of the general Divine Mandate which enjoyne^h
obedience unto rules, in all lawful and honest things; It is also in the same
degree very near, and upon the same g^ound unlawful for such as execute any
Office, Function, or particular Calling, as we usually term it, though perhaps
improperly that state or condition of life wherein a man is placed to do any
thing incongruous with the nature or rule of that function or calling. For a
thing may be lawful to a Civil Magistrate, which is not to a Minister of the
Gospel, and so on the contrary that may be lawful to the Merchant, which is
not to the Husbandman, that to the Master which is not to the servant, that to
the married man, which is not to the batchelour, and the like; God having
generally given them this Law, that every of them faithfully perform the duties
of his calling, and modestly contain himself within the bounds thereof. If
therefore an English Merchant should swear to send Wool to Hamburgh, or any
other merchandise prohibited by law to be transported out of this Realm; or if
any Magist^ate should swear that he would not punish theft, or adultery; or a
Bishop or Presbyt^r, never to preach nor administer the Sacraments; or an Hi^de
not to obey his Master, commanding him to yoke his Oxen or reap his Corn;
whereof the first is repugnant unto the Laws of the Kingdom, the r^st unto the
conditions of pr^per vocations: All these oaths would be of a thing in that
degree whereof I have spoken unlawful; and the oaths themselves for that
reason unlawful, and would not ordinarily oblige. I say not ordinarily,
because there may perhaps be cases in which an oath that seems repugnant unto
some Law of Community or Vocation, though it ought not to be taken, may
nevertheless being once taken become obligatory. For example, in the penal Law
disjunctive; suppose this to be the Law of the City, No Citizen thereunto
elected shall refuse the office of Praetor; if he do, he shall be fined an
hundred Crowns. Caius a Citizen thinking himself unfit to bear office, or to
avoid some inconvenience, that might happen unto him from thence, swears that
he will never be Praetor of the City; he is chosen by the Citizens, he excuses
himself by his oath, they regard not his oath, but urge him to accept of the
Magistracy; What is the Law in this case at the bar of Conscience? I answer, he
ought not to have sworn, especially not compelled thereunto by any necessity;
for he might have refused though he had not sworn. Nevertheless having sworn,
he seems to be obliged, and not be in a condition without perjury to comply
with the desire of the Citizens: he is bound therefore to pay the fine, and to
refuse the P^etorship. I would be understood precisely, in respect unto the
point to which I now speak, viz. the matter of the oath, and also precisely, in
respect to the repugnants thereof unto the law of the City: For in respect of
the ends or cause, nay even in respect of the matter it self, as it is an
hinderance of a greater public good, or for some other consideration, there
may be just reason in it to make the obligation void. Nevertheless ordinarily,
as I have said, an oath made against the Law of an whole Community, or of a
particular Vocation, obliges not. And thus much be said of the things in
themselves unlawful.

SECT. X.
THe things which are not unlawful ex se, yet are unlawful ex accidente,
follow. Now a lawful thing happens to become unlawful, either by the error
of the party swearing, or by some ill effect of the thing sworn. Wherefore the
third case is, where a man promises by oath performance of a thing perhaps
lawful in it self, which nevertheless he believes to be unlawful, or fears
not to be lawful; as if a man (before these times) upon his admission to a
Benefice (as they call it) Ecclesiastical, should have promised to observe all
the rites commanded by Ecclesiastical Law in public Service, as the
Surplice, sign of the Cross at the Font, kneeling at the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, and the like; which he nevertheless through some light prejudice,
thought to be superstitious and papisticall; What is the obligation in this
case? I give you three things by way of answer. First, I say, that such an
oath, during such an error cannot be taken without great sin: for he sins
grievously, who sins against his Conscience though erroneous; the judgment
of the understanding, being unto every man the first rule of working, if the
will follow not that judgment, swerving from the rule it must necessarily be
carried into obliquity. It is an old saying, He who goes against his own
conscience, is on his way to Hell. Certainly he who swears unto that which he
thinks to be unlawful, had sworn unto it, though it had been really
unlawful; and so the thing though lawful to another, is as to him unlawful.
It is the Apostles sentence, Romans 14. 14. where he distinguishes between that
which is unclean of it self, and that which is unclean to another, plainly
teaching that that thing which is not unclean, nor unlawful of it self, may
nevertheless be unclean, and unlawful unto him who esteems it to be unclean,
or unlawful. Secondly, I say, that such an oath obliges not: the reason is
manifest by the third hypothesis; for an oath cannot take away a former
obligation, nor introduce an obligation contrary unto it. But the oath which is
taken against the dictate of Conscience was preceded by another former
obligation arising from that dictate. For the dictate of Conscience, whether
right or erroneous, ever binds at the least not to act against it. Now a
subsequent oath cannot remove this obligation, but becomes rather invalid it
self, and loses all strength and vigor. Thirdly, I say, if the party
swearing being afterward better informed, acknowledge and correct his error,
the oath which at first obliged not, begins from thence forth to oblige; for
the power of obligation is as it were naturally and inseparably in an oath, as
the power of moving downwards is naturally and inseparably in a stone, which
power is always ready to put forth it self, and to proceed unto act, except it
be hindered by some impediment: Wherefore as a stone that it may move again,
after it has rested a while, needs not any other new power to be derived
unto it from without, but of its own nature, the obstacle being removed
presently descends: so an oath, that obligation of erroneous Conscience, which
at first withstood its operation, being removed, without any delay, or need of
other help, is of its own force obligatory.

SECT. XI.
THere are other cases concerning things unlawful by accident, in respect of
the evil effect of the same; to wit, as they may be impeditive of good, or
causative, or at the least (for we mast use such words) occasionative of evil.
A good thing impeded may be antecedent or future. The fourth case therefore is,
where the thing sworn seems to be unlawful in that it hinders the
performance of some antecedent good: of a vow imagine, or of a promise first
made: as i^ he who had first bound himself with a vow to some work of piety or
charity, should afterward take an oath which might hinder the performance of
his former vow. For example, if bound by a vow to give weekly the half of his
gain to the poor, he afterward swear to contribute his whole gain to the use
of war; or as if Caius having promised to sell his land to Titius at a certain
price, should afterward swear to se^l it unto Julius at a greater rate. Th^s
case has no difficulty, for it is clearly answered, and the answer is founded
upon the third Hypothesis, That such an oath is neither lawful, nor
obligatory; because that former obligation however contracted, whether by
agreement, or by vow, or by bare promise, or by mere duty remains valid, and
puts a bar upon all subsequent acts to the contrary.

SECT. XII.
THe fifth case is, when that which is sworn seems impeditive of some future
good, as if one should swear that he would never be surety for another, nor a
Minister of the Gospel, being of parts very fit for that calling; or having the
sole knowledge of some useful Art, never to discover it unto any man; or the
like. The reason of the doubt ^s, that the lesser good, in comparison with the
greater good, holds in some sort the proportion of ill; wherefore an oath,
though otherwise honest, yet if it hinder a greater good, seems to be evil.
Of the doubt in this case, no general and certain solution, able to comprehend
all particular sorts, can be given, because it is employed in comparing the
greater and lesser good, which depend^th very much upon the laying of
circumstances, wherein the variety being infinite, all cannot be comprehended
under certain and definite rules, but the matter for the greatest part must be
left to the arbitration of some prudent person thereupon to determine, as by
weighing arguments on both sides, with as much faith and diligence as he can,
may at length seem unto him pro hic and nunc most expedient; yet in the mean
time seeing it is not simply true (except warily understood) that every man is
alway^s bound to do that which is best; for solution of the doubt, in this case
it may be said that an oath is not unlaw^ull, nor loses its force of
obligation precisely, because it hinders a greater good, unless other
circumstances also concur (as they usually do) which may either prove it
unlawful, or not obligatory. An example will illustrate the thing: (...) is
taught by the inventor Titius, a medicine of sovereign virtue or some other
excellent art, but upon condition of an oath, That during the life, or without
the leave of Titius, Caius shall not discover the same unto any man. The
noncommunication of so great a secret seems to be against the public good,
and yet by the dictate of reason Caius is obliged bona fide to perform what he
promised, otherwise injury would be done unto Titius, whom it concerns, that
the secret be not divulged, which without such an oath first taken, had not
been communicated unto Caius himself.

SECT. XIII.
IT remains in the next place that we treat of things unlawful by accident, in
as much as they seem to be causative, or at the least occasionative of some
evil, and that either to the party swearing, or to others. Wherefore the sixth
case is, where the thing sworn is hurtful to the party swearing, either by
bringing upon him certain temporal loss, or by exposing him to the danger of
temptation. As if Caius should swear unto Titius the spendthrift to lend him an
hundred Crowns, never a thousand to one to be repaid, which, would be to his
loss; or if Fabius at the request of his wife made upon her death bed to defend
her children from a stepmother, should bind himself by oath from second
marriage, whereby perhaps he might expose himself to the danger of burning. I
answer first, that this kind of promise is not rashly, or without mature
deliberation to be made, nor except there be weighty reason for it, yet that it
is not simply unlawful: for although all occasion of evil be diligently to be
avoided; nevertheless seeing nothing which is not in it self, but by some other
reason unlawful, can necessarily, and universally be an occasion of evil; and
seeing there is not any thing simply and in it self unlawful, only because it
may be an occasion of evil; all promises of this kind ought not simply to be
condemned, especially if probable danger of any great inconvenience, upon
diligent consideration appeared not unto the party swearing at the time when he
took his oath. Secondly, I say, if the oath turn to the temporal hurt of the
party swearing only, without injury to a third person; the party swearing is
bound though to his great loss, except the party to whom he has sworn be
willing to release him of his oath. They are the express words, Psalm. 15. That
swears to his own hurt, and changes not. Where in the Hebrew, the first word
is of the preter tense, (juravit in malum) the later of the future (and non
mutavit) as if he should have said, It is the duty of a godly man, having sworn
unto his neighbor that which he cannot perform without his own great damage,
to be constant nevertheless, and to ratify that which he has promised, and
(as it is in our Text) to do according unto all that proceeded out of his
mouth. Thirdly, I say, the oath obliges, though it exposes unto hazard of
temptation, except it be otherwise vicious. Because if that might suffice to
make an obligation void, there would hardly remain any thing that might oblige,
seeing through the cunning of the Devil and corruption of the heart of man
there is nothing so free from danger of evil, but it may become unto our
destruction (except we be protected through the mercy of God) a snare of
temptation: yet through the assistance of Divine grace, this obligation should
rather be an useful buckler against the darts of the Tempter, for as much as
thou art engaged to yield the less, and strive the more, because thou art
bound by the Religion of an oath, not to do that whereunto thou art tempted.

SECT. XIV.
THe seventh case is, where the thing sworn seems unlawful in respect of the
danger of scandal, which might thereby be given unto others, we through our
fact affording them occasion of ruin. Many warnings, and those very heavy ones
to avoid scandal, are extant in the Epistles of St. Paul, that especially to
the Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 8. 10. And verily a good Christian ought to take most
diligent heed in all his conversation, not only to preserve his own, but not to
offend another Conscience, not only to seek his own, but the convenience of
many, and to consider as well what is expedient for them as lawful for
himself, lest otherwise he abuse his liberty to the destruction of his brother.
But how far lawful things ought to be forborne that scandal may be avoided, is
neither in few words to be said, nor the business of this present discourse.
All that seems fit to be said of it in this place is, that the danger of
scandal only, if there be no other reason why the thing should be thought
unlawful, is not sufficient to hinder the obligation of an oath taken, as has
been said in the precedent case of the danger of tentation, seeing that either
holds in all points the same proportion.

SECT. XV.
HAving now weighed the chief cases of things impossible, necessary, and
unlawful, I proceed to the rest of the other doubts. The fourth doubt is of an
oath rei liberae; that is to say, of a thing which is neither necessary, nor
unlawful, but in the mean and indifferent. In which indifference seeing it
arises from a twofold cause, from the will of the Legislator neither
commanding nor forbidding; and from the levity of the thing; two cases
answerably occur. The first case is, when a thing is not by any precept, or
interdict Divine or humane legitimate so detrrmined, but every man prohic and
nunc, according to the exigence of circumstances, may at his choice do or not
do as he sees expedient; Let him do what he will, he sins not, 1 Cor. 7.
36. As if Caius should swear to sell his land to Titius, or to lend him an
hundred Crowns; The answer is brief, an oath in this case is both lawful and
binding. The second case is, where a thing is so trivial, that it is not worth
the deliberation of a wise man, nor matters a straw whether it be done or not
done, as to reach up a chip, or to rub ones bearb, etc. or for the slightness
of the matter is not much to be ^steemed; as to give a boy an apple, or to lend
a pin, etc. An oath of a thing indifferent after this manner is altogether
unlawful. For it argues either irreverence of the name of God, (if through an
habit of swearing, as it is too common) it be used unawares; or if wittingly
and knowingly, of open contempt; for God is not to be invoked witness, except
in doubts worthy his vindication, and where the cause is as well weighty as
just. And in this all agree. But what of the obligation? It is the opinion
indeed of most Romish Casuists, that an oa^h or a sinall and trivial thing is
in the nature thereof null, and binds not, because forsooth a small matter is
not proportionable to an oath, and Lex non ^ur at de minimis But I wonder they
who would be thought to see into other things like Lynx, should be blind in one
so appa^ent, except it be done to give place unto that rotten distinction of
mortal, and ven all sins, a Ieaven with Which they have ^oully corrupted the
whole lump of mo^al Theology. But that an oath is binding in a matter of the
least moment is evident; First, because weighty, and trivial things have a like
respect unto truth and falsehood. Secondly, because in the assertory oath, he
who affirms otherwise of the thing (be it never so small) then it is, is
perjured; wherefore a simili, he also in the promissory, who does otherwise
then he sweared to do. Thirdly, because God would else be made witness of
falsehood. Fourthly, because every party swearing is bound to perform all he
promised as far as he is able, and it is lawful: but to give an apple to a boy
is both possible and lawful; he is bound therefore to perform it, he ought not
so to have sworn, but having sworn he ought to fulfill his oath.

SECT. XVI.
THe fifth doubt remains, where we swear unto a thing indefinite and
uncertain; and it contains three cases especially. The first case is, when
one man delivers himself as it it were into the power of another, promising
to perform whatsoever the other will impose upon him; as when a Prince swears
unto his favorite, to give him in acknowledgement of his faithful service
whatsoever he shall desire; or a friend, or servant, swears unto his friend or
master to obey what he shall command. In this case I say first, that this kind
of oath, if it be simply understood according to the tenor of the words, is
unlawful. He injureth God, whose servant every man is, who makes himself a
servant to man and slave to another rashness. Secondly, I say, that something
else must necessarily be understood to make it lawful. For example, I swear to
do as you will have me, meaning whatsoever is just, honest, possible; and so
far, and in this sense it obliges. The Kings of the Persians and Jews seem
anciently to have used this, as a solemn form, and for the fuller oftentation
of their grace, and magnificence, to have sworn indefinitely; Ask what thou will, and it shall be given thee even to the half of my Kingdom; so swear
Assuerus King of Persia unto the Queen his wife; and she asking a just and
necessary thing, he according to his oath commanded it to be done. But Solomon
having promised almost in the same form the Queen his mother to give her what
she should ask, and she in favor of Adonia asking a thing, which Solomon
already acquainted with the ambition of the man thought too unjust, Solomon
notwithstanding his oath, fulfilled not the the desire of his mother. By which
fact he sufficiently showed that he swear with no other intention of
performance then as the thing asked should be just. By which example he has
taught us, that in oaths indefinitely made unto the will of others, the
condition ever to be understood, is, if the request by the rule of good and
honest be modestly asked, it is just and reasonable it should be faithfully
performed. There is yet a third example of an oath of this form, Matthew. 14.
where Herod the Tetrarch to favor the Danceresse his brothers daughter, swear
to give her what she would ask: she asked a most wicked thing, the head of an
innocent man, and not condemned, to be cut off, and put in a Charger. The King
commanded it to be done for the ^aths sake, and them which sat at meat with
him. For alas! the religious, and the bashful Prince was ashamed in the
presence of so many guests not to fulfill that, though with most execrable
wick^dnesse, whereunto he had bound himself by the Sacrament of an oath. Let
Herod's be an example unto us of warning, but Solomon's of imitation: and let us
remember that an oath so indefinitely made, is ever to be understood with i^
just exception, and to be extended unto those things only which in probability
were thought upon du^ing the act of swearing, and not unto those which if they
had then been thought upon, the oath had not been taken.

SECT. XVII.
THe second case is, when subjects are required to take an oath for
preservation and defense of Laws and Liberties, Privileges, Prerogatives, and
preheminences of some superior power, as of a King, a Commonwealth, or Lord
Paramount; such as are amongst us the oaths of Homage, of Royal Supremacy, and
the like. No man denies these oaths, either to be lawful or obligatory; but
in respect of the frequent incertainty of the Laws whereunto they relate, it
may very well be doubted how far they oblige. Doubtless the Subject to his
power is obliged to defend all rights which appear either by law or custom
Legitimate, whether defined by the written Law, or in force through long use of
time, or prescription, ^^at is, so far as they are known, or may morally be
known. But he is not equally obliged unto the observation of all those which
are controverted or doubtful, especially since powerful men are accustomed to
stretch their Teathers, and leap over the Landmarks of their neighbors, not
contenting themselves within the bounds of their own right. Nevertheless a
subject ought to be always prepared in mind, so soon as the justness of those
things which are doubtful shall appear, to acknowledge and defend them.

SECT. XVIII.
THe last case is, where an oath is required of member of any Community, as of
a City, University, or College, Society of Merchants, or Handicrafts men, to
observe the Statutes, Customs and Liberties of that Corporation; If you ask
what the obligation is? I answer, first, that the party sworn, is obliged
simply unto the observation, as far as in him lies, of all fundamental
Statutes. By fundamental, I understand such as most necessarily and nearly
concern the preservation of the public estate, order, and honor of the whole
body or Community. But Secondly, not that always and necessarily, to the
rigor of the lett^r, but as they are put in practice, and received by custom,
and as they are with approbation observed by others. Thirdly, concerning the
lesser Statutes appeartaining only unto external form and decency, which by
the condition of the matter, or form of the Sanction, or any other probable
conjecture, a discreet man may judge not to have been framed with intention of
rigid obligation; he is obliged to observe them ordinarily; yet so as without
scruple of conscience he may sometimes, having just cause for it, pretermit
that which is prescribed to be done by some Statute, provided it be without
scandal or contempt. Fourthly, the obligation is extended unto Statutes to be
made for the futu^e, provided they be possible, just, and honest. Fifthly, if
any Statute after the oath taken be abrogat^d or grown out of use, the
obligation of the oa^h as to the Statute cease; and he is not bound any
longer to observe it, unless he have sworn in express words unto the matter
it self, decreed by that Statute. For in that case, though the Statute be taken
away, the obligation remains. Sixthly, seeing Statutes of Corporations be
very many, and many of them unknown to many, and that it is most difficult, nay
scarce possible to observe them all exactly, and to an hair, he who shall
behave himself so honestly that willingly he omitteth nothing appertaining to
his duty, and is morally diligent to attain the knowledge of all those Statutes
which tend thereunto, and resolves faithfully and without scandal to be
serviceable unto the estate, honor, and peace of his Community, as far as
humane frailty will permit, performs doubtless with a very good conscience
his faith given for the observation of the Statutes; and by the rule of just
and honest, discharges the duties whereunto he obliges himself. And the like
is to be understood of the public Laws of a Kingdom.

SECT. XIX.
ANd this shall suffice to be spoken of the first Classis of Cases. But left it
be thought my intention to permit too great a license of oaths, because I have
so often said that this or that kind of oath is not unlawful, I thought fit
maturely to advertise you, that I have said nothing this day, nor shall
hereafter, that may give any man reason to believe it lawful for him to swear
at his pleasure, it being well known unto me that an oath is a sacred thing,
not without great necessity, and then seldom, and with much reverence to be
used. But my meaning throughout is, that an oath upon this or that occasion is
not simply and generally unlawful. For example, when I said on oath impeditive
of a greater good is not unlawful; or an oath of an indifferent thing is not
unlawful; my sense was, that an oath ought not therefore to be concluded
simply, and generally unlawful, (so it have all the rest of the due
conditions) only because it is impeditive of a greater good, or only because it
is of an indifferent thing, or which comes all to one, that there is not in
those considerations any such impediment, but it may be lawful, if it be
otherwise necessary, and in all other respects duly qualified.

The fourth Lecture. Containing seventeen Cases.
Summary.
1. The efficient cause of an oath, and the things to be handled, proposed. 2.
Oaths of children. 3. Oaths of mad men and fools. 4. Oaths of men drunk and
enraged. 5, 6. Oath of one being in the power of another. 7. The authority of
him, who gives an oath. 8. Faith to be kept with enemies, heretics, perjured
persons. 9. Whether an oath oblige the Heirs of the party swearing, and how
far. 10. Oath to be performed by the Heir or Success^r. 11. Voluntary oaths.
12. Oath obtained by fraud. 13. Oath taken through some light fear. 14. Oath
extorted by force or fear. 15. Money promised unto a Theif ought to be paid.
16. Solution of objections. 17. Whether silence promised unto a Theif be to be
kept.
SECT. I.
THe principal difficulties appertaining properly unto the matter of an oath,
being finished in the foregoing Lecture; we proceed unto the solution of those
doubts, which may be reduced unto the Efficient cause. The Efficient cause of
an oath is, as to our purpose twofold; the Agent, to which effect properly
belongs, and the Impulsive cause. Again the agent is either principal, or
more remote from the effect. For as two persons at the least, to wit, the
person swearing, who engages his faith, and the deferent, as they speak who
follow Cicero, or person to whom the engagement is made, must as terms of this
relation concur in the obligation of an oath. So each has his part in the
work. The first, and especial belongs to the person swearing, the second to
the Deferent, or person to whom the oath is made. In both agents, the condition
or aptitude of the person is first to be considered, next the extension of the
obligation: Wherefore in this kind of efficient cause, such doubts are in the
first place to be considered, as arise from the defect of some condition
requisite on the part of the principal agent to qualify him for an oath. And
two things especially are requisite unto such a qualification, rational
judgment, and lawful power. For an oath ought to be taken with a mind both
deliberate, and resolved to perform the promise; But he who is not endued with
rational judgment, can neither be deliberate, nor he who is not his own man,
but in the power of another, make a steadfast and effectual promise.

SECT. II.
WHerefore the first doubt is, How far the oath of a person not endued with the
faculty of judgment, obliges? Which defect seeing it may arise from diverse
causes, diverse cases are therefore contained under this head. The first is of
Children so soon as they attain unto the use of reason, which at what time of
their age it may happen is not, nor do I think can be defined, seeing some are
sooner, and some later ripe; The Civil Laws of the Romans, and the municipall
of most Nations, pitch upon certain years under which they admit not children
either to take assertory oaths, or to be compelled unto promissory: such
amongst us is the age of 16. he who is younger, is neither admitted to be a
witness in judgment, nor required to take the oath of All^giance, nay if he
have taken an oath, it is null in Law; this is right at the Bar of Justice, not
at the Bar of Conscience. Children should be taught from their tender age by
their parents, and pupils by their Tutors, early to understand, and duly weigh
the power and efficacy of an Oath, the guilt and punishment of perjury, that
they may beware the wicked custom of the one, and horrid crime of the other.
For it can hardly be imagined of what necessary or lawful use the oaths of
children should be, they being both unfit to judge, and not in their own power,
unless parents in whose power they are should require it at their hands, for
the faith^ull performance of some commands. As fame reports Han ball, about the
ninth year of his age, to have been set by his Father Amilcar before the Altar
during the time of Sacrifice, and there bound by oath to be a perpetual enemy
to the Roman name. But oh shame! what is become of Domestic Discipline
amongst Christians? Children scarce able to speak, are heard in every street
tearing the sacred and dreadful name of God with profane lips, and oaths,
both without fear, and punishment: seasoned with the abominable stench of which
vice like new vessels, it will hardly out when the cask becomes aged, and
rotten. But I would not be carried away with the tide of grief, and
indignation, I return to the point, and say, that oaths of children before
they attain to years (as we call them) of discretion, or know what deceit is,
through defect of judgment, are neither lawful, nor obligatory. But so soon
as they are capable of deceit, and can in some, though small measure understand
what the nature, and force of an oath is, which happens for the most part^
about the seventh year of their age, and earlier in many forward wits, or such
in whom malice supplyeth age; the oath of a child, though it be absolutely
unlawful (unless that one case, if a parent require it, may be excepted)
being taken obliges, if there be in it no other impediment. The reason is,
because an act in its own nature obligatory, such as is the act of swearing,
proceeds from a mind endued in some sor^ with the faculty of judging.

SECT. III.
THe second case is, of the oaths of mad men, and the third of fools: to whom
the vice of unseasonable belching forth of oaths, even when they think least
upon it, is familiar; which although we may, and God who is most merciful, and
expects not an harvest where he sowed not, perhaps will forbear to impute
unto them for sin, because it proceeds from invincible error, yet most
certain it is of every oath, and pronounced by our Savior, that it comes of
evil; from the instigation of the Devil, and common corruption of man's heart,
through which all the children of Adam are inflexible unto good, and wax unto
all kind of wickedness: to make a doubt whether such oaths be lawful or
unlawful, were vain and useless. For to weigh whether things be lawful or
unlawful, belongs to such only as can in some measure judge, whether done or
to be done they agree with their rule the Law of God, and right reason: which
Law it were in vain to plead unto such as are destitute of that faculty, and
void of understanding; Certainly he who requires reason of a mad man, is mad
with reason. This kind of oath therefore as much as it is the act of a
distracted person, is in no wise binding; except otherwise frantic, he enjoy
his reason by lucid intervals; in which case it binds no less during the
time he so enjoys the use of his reason, then one made by a man of sound and
reposed judgment.

SECT. IV.
THe fourth and fifth cases are of oaths made by men who are drunk, or in
rage, promising or threatening something, which in sobriety and cool blood they
would not have promised or threatened. The reason of doubt is, that whereas some
judgment, at the least of a deliberate, mind is requisite to make an oath
obligatory; Drunkenness and wrath, which are but short fits of madness, so
perturb the judgment, and for a time take away the use of reason, that till
the one have slept, and the other reposed his mind, neither seems much to
differ from a mad man. But of these oaths, this in the first place is certain,
that neither kind can be excused of sin, but whether drunkenness, or the
vehemence of anger aggravate the sin which is the act of swearing, or rather
extenuate it, all are not agreed, nor seems it possible to answer simply and
sufficiently unto this problem by a single affirmation, seeing judgment in
the point depends very much upon circumstances. But be it as it will, the
question is not to this purpose. The nature of the doubt shows it to be
unfit, that a drunken or angry man should swear at all, because during that
distemper he cannot swear in judg^ment, but must necessarily blab out
whatsoever his wine or passion (which are immoderate Counselors) shall
persuade, and which in cool blood, and sober, he would give any thing were
unsaid, or unsworn; nevertheless we must distinguish of obligation. For first,
the thing whereunto he swears, is either unlawful, or lawful and honest: If
unlawful, (as it happens for the most part, especially in oaths which fall
vehemently from angry men blinded with eagerness of revenge) it is evident
that they oblige not; for it has been sufficiently demonstrated that an
unlaw^ull thing is not obligatory. Wherefore it was p^udently advis^d of
Abigail, and piously followed by David, when animated by the unworthy reproach
of an ungrateful man he had sworn the destruction of Nabal and his whole
family, in that he dispensed with his oath, and withheld his hand from blood.
But if the thing sworn be lawful, as that often is, which drunkards
ostentatiously promise, then we must look Secondly, what and how great the
excess of drunkenness was, whether in a degree to hinder only, or perturb the
use of reason, or utterly to deprive of understanding, and transform the man
into a beast. He who swear having wholly lost the use of his Reason, is bound
when he is sober, seriously to repent, both of his debauchery and rash oath;
but is not obliged to do as he swear, because during the act of swearing he had
not that use of reason, without which there is no judging of things with
deliberate understanding. But the use of reason hindered only, and not so taken
away, but that he might, though drunken, in some measure judge and resolve, it
seems he is in some measure obliged to fulfill his oath, at least in part, if
it may be done without his very great hurt, and this both in respect of his
antecedent deliberation sufficient to bind, and for punishment of his
rashness, that he may learn for the future to be wiser, and lead a sober life,
lest he stumble into that drunkenness which will stick by him sober. But if
performance of the oath be to the great hurt or inconvenience of the party
swearing; as if a man being drunk, should promise to sell the land whereupon he
keeps his family for little or nothing, he seems not to be obliged. The
reason is, that such a promise is a certain sign of the absence of his
understanding. Wherefore seeing his mind was not fully free during the time of
the oath, neither is the obligation full. Perhaps in this case it would not be
the worst end of an ill business, if it should by both parties be wholly
referred unto the arbitration of an honest and prudent man to be by
circumstances determined, what part of the thing promised, the party sworn
deserves to make good in punishment of his drunkenness, and temerity.

SECT. V.
THe second doubt is, of his oath who is not in his own power, but another. As
if a son or pupil in the power of Parents or Tutors, or a servant in his
Masters, or wife in her husbands, or subject in his Princes, or a soldier in
his Captains, or the like should take an oath without permission of his
superior; What and how far avails this oath? I answer, he who is under the
power of another ought not to determine of any of those things, wherein he is
subject by an oath, without express consent of his Superior, where it may
conveniently be had, or at the least without his tacit consent; that is, where
the party swearing may probably conjecture that his Superior, if leave were
asked, would not refuse to grant it. If he does otherwise, he sins in
swearing, neither is he obliged to perform what he swear; nay he is obliged not
to perform it, unless his Superior being made acquainted with the matter give
him leave; as is at large explained by Moses through this chapter in the case
of a vow or oath, (for as to obligation they appear the same in this verse)
made by a Virgin, whilst she is in the house of her Father, or by a wife in
the house of her husband; The sum is, that the vow of a Virgin, if her Father
knew of it, and contradicted it not, is valid, because by silence he seems to
have given consent; but if he contradicted it, it is void. And the same by
Analogy may be determined of all such as are under the power of others, so far
as they are under such power: which for two reasons appears by that which
has been said. First, because he does injury unto another, who as it were by a
right of his own, disposes of the right of another; but by our fifth
Hypothes^s no man is bound by an act injurious unto another, seeing that an
unlawful thing obliges not. Secondly, every man is bound by his duty to be
subject unto his Superior, and obey his will in those things wherein he is
Superior: which obligation by our third Hypothesis, a subsequent oath cannot
take away. Wherefore we must necessarily conclude, that the oath of one who is
under the power of another without the others consent, is neither lawful, nor
obligatory.

SECT. VI.
NEvertheless this conclusion is not so absolute, but it may admit of two
exceptions; one respecting the party swearing, the other, the consent of the
Superior. For the party swearing, it is to be considered that there is scarce
any person enjoying the use of reason so fully in the power of another, but he
is at the least in some things at his own disposing; and of these every man may
according to his discretion, even without leave, or acquainting his Superior
with the matter, so determine, as may be obligatory. The servant of Caius ought
not to let out his labor to Titius, or lend, or give unto him any part of his
Masters goods, without the consent of Caius; because things concerning the
performance of duty, disposing of goods, or other service of the family, are
wholly in the Masters power. But the servant or son of Caius may promise even
without acquainting Caius to give unto Titius that which is peculiarly theirs,
and if they confirm their promise by an oath, they are bound whether he will or
no to perform it, because each has free right, to dispose of that which is
peculiarly his, and is as to that in his own power. Secondly, for the consent
of the Superior, it is to be observed, that unto the ratification of the oath
of the inferior, precedent consent expressed, is not necessarily required, but
it suffices if it be tacit, whether antecedent, or subsequent. Tacit
antecedent consent I understand to be, when from the lightness or equity of
the thing, or other probable cause it may very well be presumed, that the
Superior if he had been asked, would have consented unto, or at least not
forbidden the fact; as if Caius being from home, or not acquainted with the
business, his wife should cloth a poor man with an old suit, or give an alms
to a beggar, or his son, or servant, upon his neighbors entreaty should lend
an Ox, or a Cart, or other Instrument of husbandry or housholdstuffe, or
should contribute their assistance to build a neighbors house, or bring home
his Corn. Tacit subsequent consent I understand to be, when the Superior, in
whose power it is to make any promise rashly made by the inferior, if he see
cause, invalid; coming afterward to knowledge of the promise, does not
presently and openly contradict it, nor discovers by any certain expression,
that he so far disproveth the act, as that he would not have it fulfilled,
according to that which is directed by Moses in the 6. 8. and other verses of
this Chapter, where to make the vow of a daughter or wife invalid, an open and
mature signification of the dissent of the father or husband is required. For
it is not enough to render the daughters vow invalid, that the Father say it
displeases him, but he must openly declare against it, verse. 13. 16. si
renuendo renuat, and tollendo tollat; As if he should say, he must constantly
withstand the fact, and by interposing his authority forbid the performance of
that which is promised. It is also required that the same be speedily done,
verse. 6, 8, 9, 13, 15. upon the day that he heard it; As if he should say, if
he conceal his dissent but a day, he has established the vow for ever; for he
is presumed to have been willing, who slowly expresses himself to be unwilling.

SECT. VII.
HAving considered the party swearing, the deferent or person to whom the oath
is made comes in the second place to be considered, and is concerned in the
third doubt; wherein two cases occur, one respecting his authority, the other
his faith. The first case is, where we make a question of his authority who
requires an oath of us. For if he be a legitimate Superior, and so
acknowledged by us, nor require other oa^h of us, then what is decreed by the
Law, and confirmed by daily and approved custom, no man doubts but such an
oath may both lawfully be taken, and ought faithfully to be performed. But
where he who requires the oath, seem^th to have no right so to do, but to
usurp a power which belongs not unto him, it may very well be doubted whether
it be lawful to t^ke an oath by him so offered; and if we take it, whether,
and how far we are obliged by it. First, I say, that a pious and constant man
ought as much as in him lies to decline all oaths imposed by such as have no
lawful authority: not only because it is an ordinary thing to compel those
upon whom they exercise Tyranny unto unjust promises, but also because every
man is bound to defend his right, and liberty to the utmost, and not tamely to
thrust himself into the yoke of another Tyranny. But secondly, if besides
command such force be used as he cannot resist, and there be no refusing with
out extreme danger, to avoid I say, the certain consequence of a very great
inconvenience, a pious man, but sadly, heavily, and with some expression of
reluctance, may take such an oath, provided the words of the oath (which
seldom happens upon this occasion) contain nothing unlawful in it self
contrary to known Law, or derogatory from the right of any third person;
otherwise he ought to refuse it, even to the hazard of his life, and to endure
the utmost rather th^n oblige himself in an unlawful bond. Thirdly, he who
has taken an oath, given by a person, who had no lawful authority, but in all
other respects lawful, is many ways bound unto the performance thereof.

SECT. VIII.
THe second case is, where he unto whom the oath is to be made, is an
Infidel, Heretic, or one who has formerly broke his faith. First I say, it
is lawful to swear unto an Infidel, Heretic, or perjured person; it was done
by the Patriarchs, Isaac and Jacob, also by Joshua, and the Princes of the
people of Israel; these made leagues with strangers and Infidels, and on both
sides confirmed their mutual faith by solemn oaths. Secondly I say, that faith
given unto such is in any wise to be kept. We use to object unto Papists, that
they hold faith not to be kept with Heretics; wherein the Jesuits of this age
exclaim that great injury is done unto them. They are ashamed forsooth in so
clear light openly to profess a doctrine so wide of all right reason, and
pernicious to humane society. But our men have proved, even by showing the
places, that some of their Doctors have defended that Conclusion, whose books
are neither prohibited nor expurgated. But let them all deny it in words, this
at least is apparent, if we may judge of their opinion, either by the
principles of their doct^ne, or by their actions, and reason of those actions,
as their own Historians of most unsuspected faith have related them, there is
no such cause why they should so confidently exclaim that we have slandered
them. In the mean time whilst they would shift of this opinion, they tacitly
acknowledge it either false or impious. The Prophets sometimes reprove the
Kings off Judah, especially Eze k17. almost throughout the chapter, that they
kept not their faith sworn unto the Kings of Babylon; the place is remarkable,
and by Chrysost^me largely and elegantly explained. Nay in this kind the faith
of Regulu^ and others is renowned in Heathen story, who made good what they had
sworn even unto enemies, and Carthaginians (a most perfidious Nation) though to
the hazard of their lives. Silius adorneth Regulus with this commendation,
calling unto him as it were by an Apostrophe. Their Fame to late posterity
shall sound,
Faithful to faithless Carthaginians found.


But you will object perhaps those vulgar sayings, To deceive a deceiver is no
deceit, and Cum Cretensibus cretizandum. To which may be added those which
Grotius uses, on the speech of Brutus, in Appian; Romans kn^w no faith nor
Religion of an oath to a Tyrant: the other out of the old Tragedian, where one
says, Thou have broken thy faith; the other replyeth, Which I neither gave,
nor give unto any faithless person. I answer, that these taken from common
practice, rather show what uses vulgarly to be done, then what ought to be
done; or if you admit them for truths, that they are only approveable in such
cases, where the oath was taken upon condition; either expressed, as thus, I
swear to give you an hundred Crowns, if within a month you rede^m your land
which I have in Mortgage; or at the least tacit, as when two oblige themselves
by mutual oaths to fulfill mutual promises with mutual respect. For
example; if Chremes the Master, swear unto his servant Sosia, to give him
annually ten Crowns, and Sosia likewise swear unto Chermes, to serve him eight
years; He of the two who first violateth his faith, presently absolveth the
other from the bond of his oath. But if two oblige themselves mutually in
promises of different kinds, or not at the same time, or otherwise without
mutual respect, faith violated by the one, absolveth not the others
obligation, but each is bound to stand unto his oath, though the other have not
performed his part. For example, a King simply, and without respect unto the
allegiance of his subjects, swears to administer his government righteously,
and according to Law; the subjects at another time simply, and without respect
unto the duty of the Prince swear allegiance, and due obedience unto him; they
are both bound faithfully to perform their several duties; nor would the King
be absolved from his oath, though Subjects should not perform their due
obedience, nor subjects from theirs, though the King should turn from the path
of justice.

SECT. IX.
HItherto of the condition both of the Agent, to wit, the party swearing as
principal, and of the deferent or person to whom the oath is made as less
principal: The fourth doubt follows concerning the extention of the
obligation in respect of both the persons; wherein two cases occur. The first
concerns the person swearing, Whether, and how far the oath obliges his
Heirs, and Successors? For example, Caius having bought a field of Titius,
swears simply to pay him an hundred pounds within six months, within the time
Caius dies, the question is, whether by virtue of the oath made, the Heir of
Caius be bound to pay the money promised? I answer, the Heir of Caius in
respect of the thing, which gave occasion unto the oath is bound to pay,
forasmuch as he enjoys the field for which the money was promised: for the
heir who inheriteth the estate of the person deceased, is bound de jure, to
pay his just debts, it being most equal that an estate should pass with the
engagements that are upon it. Nethelesse the hei^ is not bound by virtue of the
oath made by the person deceased, by which means if he pay not, he is unjust
only, not perjured. The reason is, because an oath is a personal bond, and
contracteth a spiritual obligation only, at the internal Bar of Conscience,
not a civil, and temporal one at the external Bar of Justice. But in
personal things no man is bound without his own consent. If it be said, that
Caius by his personal act may well oblige himself and his heirs unto some
performance, as we see it daily done by instruments of Law; and therefore from
the like, that he may also bind his heirs by an oath, especially, if he say in
express words, that he swears for himself and his heirs. I answer, that
there is not in either like reason. Because the personal obligation which is in
the Conscience must necessarily be personal, as a man's conscience is proper
unto himself; and cannot pass into another: but temporal obligation follows
a temporal thing, which seeing it may pass unto another person, may also lay
an obligation upon another person; wherefore the heir is bound by the equity of
the thing, not the virtue of the oath.

SECT. X.
THe second case concerns the person to whom the oath is made, whether he who
has sworn the performance of a thing unto another, the party unto whom he
swear being deceased, be bound to make it good unto the Heirs or Successors of
the said party? I answer, ordinarily he is. It is certain the party swearing is
obliged, if he expressed that he would perform the oath unto the heirs of the
other. It may also be taken for granted, that he is bound though he expressed
it not, if the oath taken relates to dignity; because dignity varies not with
the change of persons. Whence if any subject or soldier swear fidelity unto
his King or General, the oath is to be taken as made unto them also who
succeed unto that dignity. The same may be said in matter of debt, and sundry
other things wherein consideration of duty, or contract gave occasion of the
oath. If you shall enquire how it comes to pass, that the bond of an oath
being personal as to the party swearing, is not also personal as to the party
unto whom the oath is made, but passes unto his heirs, or successors: or which
comes to the same matter, how it comes to pass that a man may engage himself
unto another, and his successors, though successors be not expressed in the
oath; but cannot oblige himself, and his successors, though they be expressed
in the oath. I answer, the reason of the difference lies in this, that in the
one case obligation of a man's self is meant, in the other, obligation of
others. Any man may oblige himself spiritually as he will or pleases, and
therefore may by his proper act oblige himself, as well to the successors of
another as to the person himself; but a man cannot lay an obligation upon
another unless he also consent, and therefore he can by his act spiritually
oblige himself only. Now whereas I said in answer unto the doubt in this case,
that the party swearing is ordinarily obliged; the reason why I said so is,
because it may be that sometimes he is not obliged; for seeing that the
intention of the party swearing, ought to be judged of according to the nature
of the thing, and subject matter, where from the nature of the thing promised,
and other circumstances it may probably be conjectured, that the party swearing
intended only a personal promise unto the person unto whom he swear, and not
unto his successors, the obligation of the oath divolveth not unto those
successors.

SECT. XI.
BUt of active causes this may suffice, I pass to the impulsive, which are
partly external, and partly internal. Internal, when a man through the mere
motion of his own will, not compelled by any other, freely offers himself to
take an oath, or through some transportation of anger, love, or other passion
of a perturbed mind, or through delight in sin, and impious custom of
swearing rashly, and without judgment, besprinkleth his discourse with oaths.
Which vice, both in respect of the heaviness and frequency of the sin, I could
wish were more often, and vehem^ntly reprehended in Sermons, as I see it was
diligently, and sharply done in his time by the most devout man, John
Chrysostom, left by the just judgment of God, through oaths the earth mourn,
and the Lord swear in his wrath, that he will not hold them guiltless, who so
contemn his dreadful Name, that they fear not to invoke his most sacred
Majesty as witnesse^, and arbiter without any necessity. But I shall not say
much concerning oaths of this kind. All spontaneous oaths, are absolutely
forbidden, except upon weighty and necessary occasions. It will be worth our
while, to hear Augustine of himself; I swear, says he, but as I conceive
compelled thereto by great necessity, whilst I see that I am not believed
without it, and that it is not expedient for him who believes me not, not to
believe me. As if he should have said, we may only then swear, when it is
expedient that we be believed, and cannot be believed without we swear; And in
this case (in which only it is lawful) a voluntary oath is the more binding,
for being voluntary; because there is no straighter obligation then that which
we take willingly upon our selves.

SECT. XII.
WHerefore letting these pass, I proceed to external impulsive causes, which
are especially two, Deceit and Force. The fifth doubt therefore is, of an oath
into which we are inveigled by craft and deceit, that is, when one man led into
error by another man's word or fact, swears to perform something, which if
he had not been deceived by another, he would not have sworn. Of which we have
an illustrious example in Joshua, and the Princes of the people of Israel, who
deceived by the Gibeonites, faigning themselves to be strangers come from a far
country, to desire a league with the people of God, admitted them unto the
league, and swear a peace with them; Nor did the Israelites when they found
themselves deceived presume to retract the oath, knowing themselves bound by
the Religion thereof, but granted life and peace unto the Gibeonites, a^ they
had contracted: Nevertheless they found out an expedient, (imposing upon them
the condition of servitude in the vilest offices) whereby the Gibeonites might
pay for their craft, be kept in their duty, and not be able for the future to
hurt Israel; of which fact says Ambrose, Joshua thought not the peace which he
had given to be revoked, because it was confirmed by the bond of an oath, lest
whilst he argued others perfidious, he should break his own faith. By which
example it is plain that an oath, though obtained by deceit, has the strength
of obligation. And lest that any man should think that Joshua and the Princes
were too superstitious in this matter, they resisted not only the people who
thought the Gibeonites, notwithstanding the oath, ought to be sl^in, rendering
this reason of their advice, We have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel,
now theref^re we may not touch them. But God so approved afterward of the
thing by a double sign. One when he bestowed upon Joshua, fighting for the
Gibeonites against the Kings, who had made a confederacy for their destruction,
a remarkable Victory, accompanied with an illustrious miracle; the other, when
above an hundred years after, King Saul's unjust violation of the League made
with the Gibeonites was punished with three years famine, and at the length
expiated with the death of seven of his sons, by Gods express Command
publicly hanged.

SECT. XIII.
Nevertheless this case will admit of a distinction. For the error whereinto
the person sworn is led by the deceit of another, if it be about a circumstance
only, or about the cause of a thing, as if it were extrinsick and accid^ntall,
takes not away the obligation, as appeared but now in the error of the
Israelites conc^rning the Gibeonites. The like might be said in case Caius
should swear to take the widow of Titius to wife, believing her though poor to
be rich, he must take her, this error rendereth not his oath invalid: and the
the like is to be said of o^thes of the like kind. But i^ the error be about
the substance of the thing, or its proper cause; as if Caius should swear to
marry this particular woman under the name of Titia, believing her to be Titia,
though she be not, and afterward should find his error, he is not bound by
oath; for an error in the substance of the thing, which was the proper cause of
the oath, rendereth the promise invalid, and obligation void.

SECT. XIV.
THe sixth and last doubt is, of force, or of an oath extorted by fear, against
the will of the party swearing, in such manner as if the fear were not, he
would not swear; and truly this is a difficult and intricate question;
nevertheless I will endeavor to explain it with as much brevity and
perspicuity as I can. The first case is, where the fear is slight, and such as
cannot easily affect a constant man, as if through the fear of unjust censure,
or of derision, or displeasure of some powerful person, a man should promise
by oath the performance of something which would be inconvenient for him, and
such as, were it not for the fear, he would neither do nor promise. In answer,
I must first repeat which in the whole matter of oaths is most religiously to
be observed, that if any thing be proposed to be sworn, which is against the
Law of God, against the duty of a Christian, against a virtuous life, against
the Laws of the Country, against a former obligation, or in any other respect
unlawful, such an oath ought not through any hope of profit, or fear of
danger; to be either taken, or performed. This presumed, I say, that a slight
and empty fear ought to be contemned by a valiant man, (that is by an honest;
for he cannot be honest who is not valiant) and every oath of this kind to be
constantly and boldly refused. The righteous are bold as a Lion, P^ov. 26. 1.
of which fortitude, he who is destitute can hardly do any thing worthy of a
good man. For he that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that regards
the clouds shall not reap, says Solomon, Eccles. 11. 4. N^y it can hardly come
to pass but he shall do many things unbeseeming a good man; for by the
Testimony of the same Solomon, Prove. 29. 25. The fear of man brings a S^are.
But if any man being overseen, through want of courage, have suffered himself
to be ensnared, he has bound his soul with a bond, and is obliged to perform
what he promised.

S^CT. XV.
THe second case is, where fear is great and just, and such as may affect a
constant man, as the fear of captivity, loss of all his goods, of infamy,
torture, and (which is the King of fear) of death it self. I say first, as
before, if the oath contain any unlawful thing, it ought not to be taken by
any honest man, though to save his life, nor taken can be observed without sin.
Hearken oh ye Christians unto the golden speech of an Heathen. The man who is
just and steady to Hor. 3. lib. 2. Ode.

Himself, armed Tumults cannot bow;
Nor awed by the Tyrants look,
Is from his stable purpose shook.


Secondly I say, If a matter be extorted by force, or prevalent fear, which is
neither unlawful, nor injurious to any man, but more or less inconvenient
only unto the party swearing; as if a Traveller falling amongst Thieves, who
with their swords at his breast, should threaten him death, unless he swear
unto them to ransom his life, with a sum of money, the party may in this case
lawfully promise the money, and ratify the promise with an oath. The reason
is, that of two ills proposed, a man may, and a wise man ought to use the
less, and the loss of money is a less ill then the loss of life. Thirdly, I
say, that this oath obliges, and that the money promised unto the Thieves, is
in any wise to be paid: which though it seem to have been said sufficiently
manifest; yet because this assertion has considerable adversaries, and amongst
them Cicero, a man of singular judgment, and as rightly principled in all that
concerns the bond of an oath, (this, one thing excepted) as was possible for
a Gentile; it will not be wide of our purpose to confirm this assertion with
some reasons. First, therefore he who swears a lawful and possible thing, is
bound to perform it: but to pay money promised unto a Thief is neither
unlawful nor impossible: therefore he is bound. Secondly, he chose that which
then seemed unto him best, and which if one of the two were now necessarily to
be taken by him he would choose again: wherefore it seems that what was
prudently chosen cannot honestly be refused. Thirdly, that which was promised
to a certain end, ought by the party promising to be performed, when he has
obtained his end. Because every contract upon condition, that condition being
performed, ought also to be performed; which is the very basis whereupon the
obligation of conditional vows is supported; But he who contracted for his
ransom with a Thief, did it to the end that he might redeem his life;
therefore having redeemed his life, and enjoyed the end at which he aimed, he
ought to perform that which he promised. Fourthly, the wisdom of the flesh
ought ever to be suspected, as an enemy unto the purity of the heart, and a
trap unto the peace of the Conscience; and what is the wisdom of the flesh if
this be not, where profit seems to strive with honesty, nay honesty being
rejected, profit to be embraced? That man will not much trouble his mind,
whether money promised be to be paid, who esteems Faith and Religion beyond
riches; and quietness of mind, beyond all worldly gain. Fifthly, Regulus and
others, (as has been said) who kept their faith with enemies, though upon the
hardest conditions, are celebrated by Heathen Writers: And Cicero himself
commends Pomponius the Tribune, who performed that whereunto he swear
compelled through fear, adding this applause, So much in those times was an
oath esteemed.

SECT. XVI.
BUt they who are of another opinion object: First, that enemies are of a
different nature from thieves, and pirates. For say they, we may deal with
enemies as we do with adversaries, with these by the Civil Law; with those by
the Law of Nations; and therefore faith ought to be kept with them, but with
thieves, enemies of mankind, there is no society of law, and therefore none of
faith. I answer first, skillful Lawyers affirm some legal rites of society to
appertain even unto thieves, of whom if we should borrow money, it ought by the
Law of Nations to be restored; wherefore ^ pari, promises made unto them ought
to be performed. Secondly, though no performance were due unto the thee^, as a
person unworthy thereof; for which reason, breach of bare promise might perhaps
be more excusable, yet ought we at least to perform our faith unto God.
Secondly they object, that through such contracts honest men may be undone by
rogues, which would be a public mischief. I answer, nay rather the lives of
honest men saved from rogues, which will be a public good. But, Thirdly say
they, by this means robbery and rapine would be established, whilst thieves
pass not only unpunished, but rewarded. I answer, if it be so, it is so only by
accident, through their vice, not his who does not any way help the thieves,
nor approve of their fact by promising, nor approves of it by performing his
promise, but rather in providing for his own safety, prevented so much of their
wickedness, that they remained thieves only, and not murderers. Fourthly, they
object, that the obligation of an oath arises from a deliberate act of the
judgment and will, where the will therefore is so far from freedom, that its
action may rather be called coaction, there follows no obligation. I answer,
and it is confessed by all, that the will cannot be forced. There may indeed be
coaction, in respect of an external and remote principle of action, but in
respect of the nearest principle, which in all humane action, is the will;
there can be coaction. He therefore who makes an oath unto a thief, that he
may save his life, does it willingly with an unwilling mind, wherefore this
kind of oath is not simply, but mixedly involuntary; that is to say, an action
partly unwilling, because it is not done willingly, partly voluntary, because
it is done with election, though not the freest, yet free enough to deserve the
name rather of voluntary, then involuntary, because choice of two things being
granted unto the agent, it is in his power to take which he had rather: And he
wills, who had rather. He therefore is not truly said to have sworn
unwillingly, who when he might have let it alone, chose rather to swear. For
death being threatened except he would swear, it was left to his choice, whether
he would rather suffer the mischief threatened, or be redeemed from that
mischief, by the obligation of an oath. He considered, he chose to be obliged,
therefore he would be obliged; and he who confesses that he would be obliged,
argues absurdly that he was constrained; and therefore is not obliged.
Fifthly, they object, that the Traveller owes the thief nothing, and therefore
is not bound to pay him any thing, seeing as has been said, all obligation
relates unto some debt: now that nothing is owing unto the thief is proved,
because no right can be founded upon injury, and it seems to be most unjust,
that a man should by his injurious fact acquire any right unto himself:
therefore unto the thief, who terrified the traveller, and contrary to the duty
of an honest man, extorted from him an unjust oath, no right accreweth; and so
neither is the party sworn obliged. I answer, a twofold obligation may arise
from an oath: one unto the person, to whom the oath was made, as a party; the
other to God, by whom the oath was made, as witness, and revenger. Many things
may hinder the former obligation, so that he to whom the oath was made, may
acquire no right nor any thing in conscience be due unto him from the party
sworn: and from this kind of obligation, and debt proceeds the objection.
But the obligation ceasing in respect of the man, who offered injury and
violence; yet the obligation made unto God remains; to whom irreverence is
offered when a man admits of an oath which he intends not to fulfill; and
injury, when having admitted of it, he regards it not.

SECT. XVII.
ONe case yet remains peculiar unto this place, and that is where a man
falling amongst thieves, to save his life, is constrained to promise them
silence by an oath; that is, never to reveal their theft unto any man, or to
discover their names unto the Magistrate. It is very hard to determine any
thing in this kind, says Frederick Baldwine, late Professor at Wittenberg;
yet adds, that he thinks it safer that the person keep not the silence
promised; but discover the matter unto the Magistrate, albeit he have sworn to
the contrary. It seems he is of opinion that the oath is not obligatory, but
the three reasons he gives, as he proposes them, barely, and briefly without
further confirmation give me no satisfaction. First, he says, that this oath
is of an unlawful thing. If so, there is an end, other arguments are
needless. But this he takes without proof for granted: If it be thought
unlawful, because it is the duty of a good Commonwealths man, to give notice of
lewd persons unto the Magistrate, that so they may receive condign punishment;
it is granted, but it does not therefore follow that it is always sin, not to
give notice, seeing the affirmative precepts of duty oblige not simply unto the
performance of the same, but when we are able, and it is required by the
exigence of circumstances. Secondly, he says, that such a kind of oath
seems to have a certain kind of Collusion with the thieves, which is
pronounced so timerously as shows he had not much faith in this argument,
[Kinde of Collusion, a certain kind, and seems to have]. Which whether it be
true or not, who would undertake to prove, that it is not lawful for a
Traveller, if to the apparent hazard of his life, he fall amongst thieves, to
do something which might seem to have a certain kind of Collusion with them?
That which he brings in the third place, the impediment of Justice,
encouragement of wicked persons in their impiety, occasion of leading others
into the like hazard of their lives through such silence, would be prevalent
indeed, if the Traveller were gotten out of their hands safe and unsworn. But
we suppose, except he had sworn, he had been slain. I ask theref^re whether in
such certain danger of ^^e, was it lawful for him to swear, or not lawful? If
not lawful, (and certainly the two first arguments either prove that or
nothing) he had perished; and who then should have given the Magistrate
information of the thieves? The inconveniences which are objected from this
silence, might they not (seeing dead men are enjoined perpetual silence) be
objected from his death? But if it were lawful to swear, then it is also
lawful to keep the oath, except some emergent accident as it may fall out,
unexpectedly do render the thing lawful when it was sworn afterward
unlawful. Let this therefore, till the contrary be proved by stronger
arguments, remain both in this case and the rest, where deceit, fear, tyranny,
and the like are exercised; That an honest man either ought not to swear at
all, (which if the thing it self be not unlawful seems hard in imminent, and
apparent danger) or ought religiously to observe his oath. And thus much for
the Efficient cause of oaths. In which I was desirous to have been briefer, if
the matter would have born it; My discourse has increased upon my meditations,
beyond what I expected, and yet whilst I study brevity, I have willingly
omitted many things whereof I might profitably have spoken.

The fifth Lecture. Of the External Form of an Oath, Containing ten Cases.
Summary.
1 Oaths by signs only without words. 2 Oaths by the Creature. 3 Oaths by
Idols. 4 How to know whether a man have sworn or no. 5 The first trial, the
form of the words. 6 The second, the force of the words. 7 Of Joseph's form; by
the life of Pharaoh. 8 Third trial, the custom of the Country. 9 Fourth, the
intention of the party swearing. 10 The use of the said trialls. 11 The solemn
rite of an oath. 12 Whether solemnity increase obligation. 13 Solemnity of
oaths omitted.
SECT. I.
THe Material and Efficient causes of oaths have been handled in the
foregoing Lectures; We come to speak of the Formal cause. Now the form of a
thing being either external or internal, the cases of this Classis are so
under two heads to be divided, as may bring those things which appertain unto
the words, or signs of an oath, because they are received by the interior
senses, under the name of External form; and those things which appertain unto
the sense and interpretation of the same, which is the work of the mind, under
that of Internal form. An oath in respect of external form, consists of
signs only, or of words only; or of both: wherefore the first doubt is of the
oath which is made by signs only without words. There have been, who have
thought, except the words I swear, or the Name of God be expressly used, as I
swear I will perform it, by God I will do it, I call God to witness, So God
help me, or the like, that it is but a bare promise, and no oath; and therefore
obligatory under peril of falsehood only, not of perjury; so that he who
fulfilleth not his promise, which ought also to be performed, is guilty of
violated faith, but not of a violated oath. And amongst the Casuists, Bartolus
is said to have judged words, at the least some, so necessary unto an oath,
that unless the testimony invoked were in express words pronounced, it could
not formally be an oath, nor under that name obligatory. But these two opinions
are worthily rejected by all. For seeing words are but interpreters of things
conceived in the mind, whereof they are characters, if it be possible for
those things conceived, (though perhaps not so conveniently, yet sufficiently)
to be signified by other means, as writing, nods, signs, etc. to the
understanding of others; no necessity enjoyneth the use of words. So mutes,
they who have had their tongues cut out, and such as lie speechless upon their
deathbeds, when they contract Marriage, make their Wills, or perform any thing
which cannot be done without a clear and undoubted signification of their
assent, which they are unable to express by word of mouth, use by nods, by
lifting up the hands or other signs, to signify their answer unto the
question asked. Which signification is no less valid unto all intents and
purposes of the Law, then if it had been expressed by word. And it is the very
same in an oath, to which so God be any way invoked witness, whether
expressly by word of mouth, or tacitly by any signs, whereby the persons
whom it concerns, may manifestly perceive that the party desires as in the
presence of God to engage his faith, such an act is both formally an oath, and
fully sufficient to oblige the conscience, according to that verse which
Stobaeus brings out of an old Comedian. The oath is firm, if I but give a nod.


He is therefore very much deceived, and his own impostor, who thinks himself
either free from, or more loose in his obligation, because he uttered no word
that might express an oath. If to another asking him a question, as in the
presence of God witness and arbiter, by the manner of his behavior he seem
plainly to consent; or if where it may be advantageous unto him, (in respect of
some wordly gain) that he should seem to have sworn unto the words of another,
he knowingly and wittingly make use of a friend, to witness though falsely
that he has so sworn, he has bound by that fact his soul with a bond, and
ought no less to do according unto all that which proceeded out of the mouth
of the party asking or requiring; then if it had proceeded out of his own
mouth: if the thing be lawful, he must perform it; but if he know it to be
unlawful, he cannot by this trick evade perjury.

SECT. II.
FUrthermore as oaths may be sworn by signs only, without words, so they may
and most commonly are by words only, without signs; as appears by those rash
ones, which slip out in common discourse, and others. Now the words of an oath
may be considered yet two ways, either in respect of the things by which it is
sworn, or according to the manner of expression, and form of speech in which it
is sworn. Wherefore the second doubt is concerning the obligation of an oath,
in respect of that whether person or thing, by whom or which it is sworn, where
two cases occur. The first ease is, whether he who swears by the creature be,
and how far he is obliged? That oaths by the Creator are binding is most
certain, and generally granted; but of oaths by the creature there is some
doubt: Nevertheless by way of answer, I say first, that to swear by a creature
absolutely, ultimately, and terminatively so as to constitute the end, and
strength of the oath in any creature without relation to God, is simply
unlawful: The reason is manifest, because by that means the reverence due unto
God only, is given unto the creature. For an oath, as has been said, is Cultus
Latriae, which ought not to be given to any creature, for as much as the party
swearing, by invocation of God as witness, and revenger, acknowledges him
ipso facto, searcher of hearts, to whom it is known whether the mind agree
with the words, and the most just and powerful punisher of sinners, whereof
neither is in the power of any created thing. Nay such an oath were even by the
consession of Papists apparently idolatrous. Secondly I say, to swear by the
creature relatively, and as it were transitively, as Papists use to do by the
blessed Virgin, or other Saints, or relics of Saints, that is (as they
expound it) not ultimately and terminatively to place the worship upon them,
but relatively, and transitively, to pass it by, and through them upon God, is
at the least superstitious; because it appears neither by light of reason,
nor testimony of Scripture, that the power of searching hearts, or punishing
perjury, is by God entrusted with, or delegated unto any of his creatures how
holy soever. Thirdly I say, to mention any creature in swearing without mention
of the Name of God, as if a man should swear by his head, y his soul, by his
salvation, by this fire, by this bread, etc. (though for the danger of
scandal, and show of evil, it were much better to abstain from such forms,
yet) merely for this reason, that we ought to swear by God only, is not
unlawful. Because either in these forms we swear not at all, or by God only.
Which that it may be the better understood, lest I should seem to bring some
new, and suspected doctrine into the Church, or to be indulgent unto that
execrable custom of swearing by the creature, which to the grief of good men
is grown so common; It is to be noted, that in forms of this kind, wherein
mention is made of some creature, as it were by way of swearing, that the oath
nevertheless is in truth often sworn interpretatively by God himself. As in
all those which after the common manner of utterance have in them a kind of
execratory sense, Upon my soul, Upon my salvation I will do this or that:
where the sense is, Let not God bless my soul, Let not God give me eternal
Salvation, if I do it not. And in those also wherein such things are nominated
as are apt to stir us up unto some remembrance of God; as when the Jews
anciently swear By heaven, By this holy sacrifice, etc. meaning By God whose
Throne is in Heaven, By God unto whom this holy Sacrifice is offered, etc. But
where the names of such things are used, which have not in their nature any
specially or obvious aptitude of raising us unto any thought of God, nor seem
to imply any execratory sense, as if a man should swear at the table, or at the
chimney, By this bread, By this fire, etc. though by the manner of the
expression, these forms may seem to be a particular kind of oath, yet in
truth, and interpretatively they are not oaths, but rather mere obtestations,
as anon in the third doubt shall be more fully explained. Fourthly, I say,
every oath made by the creature, whether lawfully or unlawfully, that is,
whether it be terminated in the creature (as the worship of Images is by the
vulgar Papists) which is Idolatrous, or sworn by the creature transitively,
that thence mediately, and ultimately it may extend to God, (with which little
trick the Popish Doctors endeavor to defend their Imageworship) which
nevertheless is superstitious: if it be really and formally an oath, and not
an obtestation only, obliges no less the party swearing unto the performance
of his promise, then if he had sworn in express words by God himself. The
reason is, because in every oath truly and formally such, God is in some sort
invoked witness. Fifthly, I say, though by that perhaps which I have now said,
this kind of oath may in some sort be defended, as not simply and generally
unlawful, at least if it be understood, as I have expressed it: yet seeing it
is certainly no less obligatory then other oaths, and that no necessity enjoy
neth the use of it; (because where it is expedient to swear, we may use other
forms, and where it is not expedient, we ought not to swear at all) It is the
duty of that Christian who would seriously provide for the peace of his own
conscience, wholly to abstain from this kind of form. Whereunto they will
easily be persuaded who shall thoroughly consider the Original, or issue of the
same. It Is Original it owes partly to the Idolatry of the Chaldaeans,
Egyptians, and other superstitious Nations, who swear by the Sun, the Fire,
and other creatures which they esteemed Gods; partly unto the reverence of the
Divine Name and Majesty amongst the people of God, which happily in the
beginning just and pious, in process of time degenerated by degrees into
superstition, the debauchery of oaths so heightened by evil custom, that
ordinarily they chose rather to swear by obvious things, then as Philo says,
to have recourse unto the Creator, and Father of all things. The same practice
amongst the Ancient Greeks, (most of whose rites and manners may easily be
tracked from emulation of the Hebrews) is observed by Interpreters of the Greek
Poets, who write that they were not ordinarily wont to swear by the Gods, but
by such things as were next ^at hand, or before the eyes, as Bread, Fire,
Water, Fowl, Serpents, and the like: But that which seems to have been begun
in reverence of Divine power, is at length shrunk unto so great irreverence and
contempt of the same, that through the craft of the Devil, and just judgment
of God suffering sin for the punishment of sin; piety degenerated into
superstition shot up again into open impiety. For when once they began to
abstain from the name of God, and swear by the Creature, licentiousness of
oaths would admit of no bounds; nor stand in any awe of perjury; A Poet
elegantly decides the perjury of a Prince.

Who thought his Scepter not the Gods. He thought it lawful having sworn by
his Scepter, to do otherwise then he ought to have done, had he sworn by the
Gods. Augustine says of the Maniches, they swear frequently by the creature,
and without any scruple. That amongst the Jews, from the time this custom of
swearing by the creature waxed strong, the reverence of oaths decayed very
much, is most apparent by the words of our Savior, Mat. 5. and 23. Which two
places laid together afford a sense, tending to the correction of a double,
(perhaps a treble) error. First, that the Jews granted unto themselves, so
they abstained from the Name of God, liberty of swearing in every trifle.
Secondly, that they thought it no sin to swear though by God, if that were
true which they swear. Thirdly, that whilst they swear but by the creature and
not by God, they thought a falsehood no perjury: for so they perversely
interpreted that place, Thou shall not for swear thy self, but shall render thy
oaths unto the Lord. Wherefore Christ teaches that oaths taken not in the
Name of God, but of creatures, are as truly oaths, and as fully obligatory as
those wherein God is expressly mentioned. And thus much shall suffice for the
former case.

SECT. III.
THe latter case is of an oath made by Idols or false Gods. For solution of the
doubt in this case, First I say, that such oaths are simply unlawful,
apparently Idolatrous, and expressly prohibited by God; for they direct the
true worship due unto the true God only, unto Gods which are not true; contrary
unto the precept, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him,
and swear by his Name. And God himself grievously upbraideth his people with
this sin, Jer. 5. 7. How (says he) shall I pardon thee for this? Thy children
have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods. Secondly I say, that such
oaths oblige upon pain of perjury, and ought to be observed, and that he who
has violated his faith so given in a lawful thing, is perjured; so says
Augustine, Because he has sworn by such as he ought not, and done contrary to
his oath, that which he ought not to have done, he has committed double sin.
And again, he who swears by a stone, if he swear a falsehood, is perjured.
You may perhaps object, that this wherein God is not invoked witness, seeing a
false God is no God, can be no oath, and therefore is not obligatory. I answer,
though a false God be indeed no God, (because as truth and ens, so falsehood
and non ens are convertible) he is nevertheless a God in the opinion of him
who swears; which is sufficient to induce obligation. And therefore such an
one ex Hypothesi is a true oath; to wit, the erroneous Conscience of the party
supposed; forasmuch as he is bound in conscience to perform the thing which
according to the judgment of his conscience he has confirmed by an oath.
Where faith sworn by a false god is violated, injury is done unto the true God.
Because the party swearing, Though under false marks, yet by a general
comprehension reflecteth upon Divine power. Whence Augustine, The stone does
not bear thee speaking, but God punishes thee not performing: alluding, as I
conceive, unto the solemn rite of the Romans, where the party swearing held a
flint in his hand, and pronounced these words, If I knowingly deceive, let
Jupiter cast me from all good men, as I this stone; which said, he threw the
stone immediately from him; and they who had performed this ceremony, were said
Jovem Lapidem jurare. He therefore who forsweareth by a false god, shall find
the true God revenger of his perjury, and contempt of Divine Power, and
Religion, says the Author of the Book of Wisdom. Nay Augustine is so
confident, that he fears not to affirm it less evil to swear by a false god
truly, then by the true God falsely. Which speech of his may not be understood
at large, and upon the whole matter, but strictly as to the falsehood and
perjury, which in that place are only considered. Thirdly I say, upon the
obligatory power of this kind of oath, depends the solution of that question
which was put by one Publicola unto blessed Augustine, handled at large by the
Author, in his whole Epistle, 15. 4. Whether it be lawful to require an oath
of one who we know will swear by Idols. Augustine holds the affirmative, and
proves it first by example of Abraham, who confirmed the League contracted
with Abimelech by oaths mutually given and received, Genesis 21. and of Jacobs
Covenant made with Laban, Genesis 31. Then by reason, because otherwise there
would be no convenient means whereby Leagues might be made, and public faith,
and peace preserved with Idolaters: nor does the true God any where forbid the
good use of faith, though wickedly sworn by false gods. If it be said, that
this were to partake of another sin: Augustine answers, we do not by this
means associate our selves with him who swears by false gods, Devils, in the
evil of sin, but in the good of his contract, whereby he engages, and
performs his faith. And so much for the second doubt.

SECT. IV.
THe third doubt follows, which considers the manner of expression and
verbal form of an oath. The reason of the doubt is, that seeing every oath,
truly, and formally such, obliges under guilt of perjury, but not such forms
as are not oaths: it were needful we should be able, amongst those forms
which seem to be oaths, by some note or character to know which are, and which
are not properly, and formally oaths. In which matter I confess, of so many
of the Casuists as in this straightnes^e of time I could peruse, I find none
satisfactory, some of them touching this question lightly; others handling it
indistinctly. To the end therefore I may propose something concerning this
point more distinctly, as my have to other things will permit; It is to be
noted that unto a bare assertion or promise, some confirmation of faith is
usually added, and that by Asseveration, Obtestation, or by an Oath: which
three albeit they may seem little distant, and rather to differ in degree, then
kind; nevertheless intrinsecally, formally, and specifically they are each
distinct from other. It is true, this distinction, through their affinity, the
end at which they aim, and words whereby they are expressed, is oftentimes so
obscure, that it is very hard, either not altogether to confound them, or
skilfully and dexterously to distinguish them. Wherefore that every one of
these may be the better discerned from other, four things, which may serve as
trials of every form of speech, whether it be an Oath, an Obtestation, or mere
Asseveration, are to be considered, viz. The form of words, the proper and
genuine sense of the same, the custom of the Country, and the intention of
the party swearing.

SECT. V.
FIrst, it may be sometimes sufficiently apparent, by the very Form of the
words, whether a man have sworn or not. Swear unto me that you will give me an
hundred. I swear; or By God I will: or I promise Before God I will: or As God
help me I will give you them. If any of these, or the like, be answered, it is
an oath, whosoever uses such form, is ipso facto obliged; and if he perform
not the thing promised, guilty of perjury. But in this, now, Will you give me
an hundred? I will give you them, the very words adding no further confirmation
of faith, make but a bare Promise. You told me you would give me an hundred;
will you give me them? Certainly I will: Believe me I will not deceive you.
Here some kind of confirmation is added unto the promise, but it is plain by
the very form, that this is but a mere Asseveration, neither an Oath, nor so
much as an Obtestation, seeing God is neither called to witness, nor any other
pawn of faith engaged. How shall I know that you will give me that hundred
which you promised? Here Is my hand, By the faith of an honest man, I will give
you them; As truly as the Sun shines, I will do it; Never believe me more, if
I dot not, etc. The words themselves show that they contain more then a bare
asseveration, but they are not an oath yet. These therefore are rather
Obtestations, wherein for further Confirmation of a matter promised, or
assevered, we interpose something which is dear unto us, or certain, and
manifest unto all, as a pawn of our faith. Wherefore if it plainly appear by
the mere form, that the thing assumed for confirmation of the promise be
properly an Oath, a bare Asseveration, or an Obtestation, there needs no
fur^her ^xamination.

SECT. VI.
BUt because it happeneeh very often through the resemblance of some ambiguous
or large signification of a word, or some other cause, that it cannot certainly
be judged by the words uttered, whether it be an oath or no; in the second
place, we must be attentive unto the proper and genuine sense of those words,
and from thence make the Judgment. For it may appear by the forms, that all
those speeches which appeal unto the Name of God; or wherein the Greek (...),
the Latin Per, or the English By, are used, with the accusative case, are
formally oaths. Led by which reason only Soto conceived, so much difference
between the terms, By my faith, and In faith; By my troth, and In troth, that
he determined those to be formally oaths, these none. But if the genuine sense
of the words be well looked into, there will be no difference between the
Propositions, By and In, being applied unto the same thing; for we are to judge
of them, as the thing they are applied unto is Sacred or Civil. The form By
God, is properly an oath, by virtue of the words: for the Name of God is a
sacred thing, and he who speaks after that manner calls God to witness.
But that By my faith, (though by the custom of some Country, or intention of
him who speaks, it may be an oath) is no oath by virtue of the words, but a
mere Asseveration, or at the most an Obtestation. Because humane faith is not a
sacred, but a civil thing; and he who speaks after that manner, calls not
God to witness, but speaks as he believes, or declares, that the thing is
uttered with serious and sincere deliberation of mind. For the genuine
Interpretation of the words, By my faith, whether in an assertory or promissory
matter, is this, I speak from my heart; I tell you my very thought; I pawn my
faith to you that the thing is so; If to my knowledge I deceive you, let me
never be believed more, etc. Wherefore the interposition of faith, makes not
an oath by virtue of the words, unless perhaps it recall us to some oath which
we have formerly made. As in this University, when a man is required to answer
unto a question, by virtue of his Oath, according to this form, You shall speak
by your faith given unto this University. And when Convocations are solemnly
called, whereunto the Doctors, Masters Regent, and Non-Regent, are warned by
the Beadles to repair, Per fidem, per fidem, per fidem. The like in my opinion,
(though others I know think otherwise) is to be said of that of Paul, By our
rejoicing 1 Cor. 15. 23.
which I have in Christ I dye daily; to wit, that it is properly no oath, but a
serious asseveration only, that as he was subject unto death, so he was daily
prepared for death, when it should please God to call him.

SECT. VII.
NOw it may perhaps by so much as has been said, be conveniently determined,
what is to be thought of those words, whereupon Interpreters variously dispute,
of Joseph unto his Brethren. By the life of Pharaoh ye are Genesis 41. 15.
Spies. Some are of opinion that Joseph having been long conversant with
Pharaohs Courtiers, as infected with a touch of their disease, began to savor
at the least in this point of their manners and example, the Egyptians being
accustomed to swear by the Kings life; as the Romans in latter ages were by the
Genius of the Emperor. But I cannot easily suffer my self to judge otherwise
of the words and actions of men famous for piety then necessity compels. I
see diverse of the Ancients in contributing unto the fame of the Saints, too
indulgent unto their own wits, whilst they would cover apparent defects, with
specious excuses. An error much more pardonable then theirs, who in this Age
delighted with the contrary, love to be curious enquirers into the faults of
devout men; and lest matter should be wanting unto calumny, by perverting
blameless actions, bestow cracks upon Crystal glasses, as it were in the
washing. Others allow a more favorable Interpretation unto the speech of
Joseph, that he used for once only this form of swearing, familiar unto the
Courtiers, as an accomplishment of his disguise, and that he might more
skilfully represent the person of an Egyptian Prince, which he counterfeited,
lest he should be discovered by his Brethren. But I do not like to lay this
burden, though somewhat lighter, upon the shoulders of the most holy man
without any necessity. The third opinion is theirs, who absolve Joseph from all
guilt; but with this reason, that they think it was lawful for any man before
Christ forbad that kind of oath, to swear by the creature. Which opinion I
confess so far, as it acquitteth Joseph of sin, I allow; but of the reason for
it I cannot allow. For first, it appears not that Christ did more especially
forbid oaths by creatures, then such as are made by God; for he generally
prohibited the unnecessary ones of either kind. A new prohibition of that
which was always unlawful, would have been needless: And that which he spoke
of oaths by the creature in particular, tends to show that this kind of oath
once made contrary to what the Jews thought of it, is no less obligatory, then
those which are made by the Name of God expressed. Secondly, neither is it
true, that it was lawful before Christ for pious men by any dispensation, or
divine indulgence, to swear by the creature, seeing that worship is due unto
God alone; as from Deuteronomy. 6. and Jer. 5. has been proved; which latter place,
though perhaps it peculiarly concerned them who swear by Idols, and false Gods:
yet the strength of the argument which the Prophet uses, generally taken,
comprehends them also who swear by creatures; seeing that it may likewise be
truly said of creatures, that they are not Gods. Thirdly, the nature of an
oath, as appeared by the definition thereof, shows sufficiently that it was
never lawful to swear by creatures: Heathens themselves confessing that divine
Invocation belongs unto the essence of an oath. Which things being so, and
this reason insufficient to excuse Joseph of all crime: the fourth opinion
follows, which explaining the genuine sense of Joseph's words, supposes him
not to have sworn at all, and therefore not to have sinned in swearing amiss:
For if he swear by the life of Pharaoh, either the life of Pharaoh was invoked
as witness, which were ridiculous to think; or contained some execratory, or
imprecatory thing in it, which what it could be without a very harsh and forced
Interpretation of the words, is not easy to divine. But the sense of his words
will be very plain, and easy, if they be expounded by an Indicative speech,
thus; By the life of Pharaoh, ye are spies; that is, as true and certain as it
is that Pharaoh lives, so true and certain it is that ye are spies; like that,
By this Sun that shines I tell you true, which is as much as to say, this is
so true whith I tell you, as it is true that the Sun shines. Whereof neither
in my opinion is formally an oath, but an asseveration rather confirmed by a
vehement obtestation. I am not ignorant that much may be said for the contrary,
which though it be not of weight to make me alter my judgment; nevertheless
it is of weight to make me think it fit that every man should be left freely to
his judgment, provided he condemn not another, and grant me this, That it
cannot at least by virtue of the words, except it appear by other means, be
clearly proved that Joseph swear, seeing the words contain no Invocation of
witness, nor of vengeance.

SECT. VIII.
THe third trial whereby an oath is to be known, is the custom of the
Country, place, or Community. For there may be some speeches which neither by
their Form, nor force and natural sens^ of the words appear to be oaths, yet
through received use in some Nation and common estimation may be accounted
oaths; as on the other side, such as by the tenor of the words a man would
take for oaths, may be esteemed no oaths. The reason is, because the value of
words, is like that of money, not by Nature, but agreement, or rather use: that
is, their worth is accordingly as they are esteemed. To find an example
thereof, we neeed go no further then some of our own forms: for whereas Faith
and Truth (especially as to this purpose) are words of the same signification
and efficacy, in as much as he who is void of truth, is void of faith, and he
who is void of faith, is void of truth also. Nevertheless our Countrymen
through long use are possessed with an opinion, that he who says, In faith,
swears, and he who says, In truth, swears not; as also that In Truth is
but a mere asseveration, and By my troth, an oath. Of which things it were a
folly to demand other reason then custom; To whose Arbitriment belongs,
The right, the Law, the rule of tongues.


Whence it follows that he who whilst he looks only at the form or force of
the words, takes the liberty in common discourse of such kind of speeches,
without discretion, or scruple, as have by long use obtained amongst us the
force and estimation of oaths, violateth the precept of Christ against
swearing; scandalizeth his brother, and exposes himself unto the danger of
perjury.

SECT. IX.
THe fourth and last trial whereby an oath may be known, is the mind, and
intention of the party swearing. For be it so, that a form of speech appear not
by the words themselves, nor by the common estimation of men to be an oath:
Nevertheless if a man using such a form, either through mistake imagine
himself to have sworn, or through some deceitful intention would be thought to
have sworn; that form, though it be not really, and in it self an oath, will
have nevertheless as to that man, the full obligation of an oath to all
effects; and if he violate his faith so given, he is guilty at the Bar of
Conscience, not only of falsehood, but perjury: for as by the judgment of the
Apostle, he who esteems a thing common or impure, which in it self is not
impure, makes it nevertheless impure as to him; and is bound to abstain from
it as if it were really common, and impure. So by the rule of contraries, he
who esteems a thing holy, which in it self is not holy, makes it
nevertheless holy as to him, and is bound to abstain from it as a thing really
holy. And if error in the understanding excuse not from obligation, much less
may deceitfulness in the will: Because it is most just that an impious and
fraudulent man, should fall into the pit, which he dug for his neighbor,
and that his feet should be caught in the snare which he set for another.

SECT. X.
THe use of the four trials which I have explained, is this, that to know when
a question or scruple of Conscience arises concerning any form of speech,
which seems to be an oath, whether or no it be truly and formally an oath,
and consequently contain the force of obligation? Recourse may presently be had
unto these trials, and the examen of the form made by them as Diagnostick
signs, and that in the order which I have proposed, beginning with the first,
and running through the rest, as there shall be occasion; that is, except the
examen appear sufficiently made by the way, to show it to be an oath. For that
which is an oath, may appear to be but an affirmation, by the examination of
some one mark; but it cannot be denied to be an oath, till the whole examen be
perfected through every mark. The ends of this examen are two, the one before
the oath, that a man may bethink himself, whether it be fit to use such a form,
or no? the other after the form used, that he may understand how far he is
obliged.

SECT. XI.
OUr discourse has been hitherto of such oaths, as are made by signs without
words, or of such as are made by words without signs; we come now to speak of
such as are compounded of both. Now signs are joined with words, for the
greater either solemnity of the act, or dignity of the person. Wherefore a
fourth doubt is concerning a solemn oath, where the first case, or first
question is, of the Rites and Ceremonies used in solemn oaths. Of the rites of
the Gentiles many have written many things, which elsewhere to recite were not
worth the while, much less to our present purpose. Alexander Neopolitanus
takes, notice of some of the chief of them; Those were esteemed most sacred,
where touching the Altars of the Gods, they swear in conceived words; and those
next, in which they swear Jovem lapidem. Now they are said to swear in
conceived words, who ^ither all repeat the formal words of an oath, or some
one, the rest signifying their consent unto his words, by some word or sign.
Holy Scripture makes mention of two rites especially amongst the ancient
Hebrews. Whereof one was peculiar unto such oaths, as Superiors by their
authority required of their inferiors for the faithful performance of their
commands. The first example of this kind is Genesis 24. where Abraham requiring
an oath of fidelity from his servant concerning the choice of a wife for his
son, commands the servant to put his hand under his thigh. The like Jacob
upon his death bed commanded his son Genesis 47. when he committed his buryall in
the land of Canaan unto Joseph's care. Which rite whether observed in token of
faith, whereby they believed in the blessed seed, which was to come from the
thigh of Abraham; or in Commemoration of the Covenant which was made with
Abraham when he was circumcised; or for any other cause, we find not founded
upon any express command of God, but to have been for ought we can gather of
free Institution. By which the perverse and superstitious severity of those
men, who blame all rites in Divine Worship as execrable and abominable Idols in
the Christian Church, which for decency and order sake are instituted by humane
authority, without the express precept of God, is the more to be admired. The
other rite amongst the people of God was elevation of the right hand toward
Heaven, during the act of swearing; and this was used in oaths voluntarily
taken, and not by command of others. Which rite whether through imitation of
the Hebrews, as in many other things; or by a kind of natural direction,
looking toward the God, whom they believed to dwell in the most high place;
the people of most Nations have observed. And of this as of the former, we have
the first example in the story of Abraham, Genesis 14. but no more founded for
ought we know upon any special command of God then the other. Nevertheless
the use thereof increased so much upon posterity, that by a Metonymie of the
Adjunct, we find the phrase of lifting up the hand, frequently put for the act
of swearing, yea and the word (...) which properly signifies the right hand,
is not seldom taken for an oath by the Hebrews and Arabians. Whence some of
the Interpreters understand those words, Psalm. 148. 11. to be spoken of an
oath; Whose mouth speaks vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
iniquity, or rather of lying and falsehood; for so properly the Hebrew words
(...) signify. Yea even God himself, where he is represented swearing after
the manner of men, uses that kind of speech, I lift up my hand to heaven, and
swear by my right hand, Deuteronomy. 32. 40. To this rite are frequent allusions in
the Prophetical Books of either Testament. And here we have another occasion
of wonder, that this Ceremony should not only be tolerated in Christian
Churches, but approved by those very men, who are so far from approving the use
of other rites of the Old Testament (though they be all alike lawful or
unlawful amongst Christians) that they will not endure them, but cry out
importunately to have them banished from all devout Congregations. As
concerning the rites of Christians, that I may omit the rest of the various
Ceremonies used in the primitive Church, and according to the differences of
times and places variously observed: There is one which derived unto us from
the Primitive times is yet in use, viz. to swear in conceived words, laying the
hands upon the holy Gospels of God. And this kind of oath, in which besides
the pronunciation of the words, some visible external gesture of the body is
used; as touching the Altar, the Thigh, the Book, casting away the Stone,
lifting up the Hand, and the like, is usually called a Corporalloath.

SECT. XII.
OF these rites which are used in solemn oaths, the second case, or the second
question is, Whether, and how far they strengthen the obligation of an oath:
that is, Whether a solemn and corporal oath have any greater strength of
obligation then a simple oath; whence the violation of the one might contract
heavyer guilt, then that of the other. In answer, I say first, that it is
grant^d, by Casuisis, not only of the Romish party, but also of the reformed
Churches, that the solemnity of the act aggravateth the sin of an oath, as well
as of a vow, seeing oaths and vows are in most things alike, especially in
their obligatory virtue. To swear corporally is more then by writing or bare
speech, says one of them; and another, By how much the solemnities are
increased, by so much greater is the perjurie. Secondly I say, although we
yield the perjury to be more grievous, yet a solemn oath of it self, and in its
own nature, is not more obligatory then a simple one; because the obligation of
an oath, as it is an oath, (for it obliges also as it includes a promise, but
I say as it is an oath) arises precisely from this, that God is invoked a
witness, and revenger no less in a simple oath, then in the solemn, and
corporal; for the Invocation is made precisely by the pronunciation of the
words, which is the same both in the simple and solemn, and not by any
corporal motion, or concomitant sign, in which the solemnity of the oath
consists. Wherefore, Thirdly I say, that solemnity aggravateth the s^n of
perjury is accidental, but yet necessarily and inseparably, not contingently;
and that for two reasons. First, in respect of the greater deliberation. For to
this end is the solemnity of external rites ordained, that it mightstrike the
mind with the greater reverence of the act, and as it were sense of Religion,
to the end the agent might be bent upon the act with the greater attention and
deliberation: and every sin caeteris paribus is the more grievous, by how much
it is against the more deliberate and precedent act of the will. Secondly, the
perjury of a solemn oath is the more grievous, because it gives the greater
scandal. For with the more solemnity a thing is done, the more attentively it
is observed by most; and therefore if there be offense in it, the example will
be the more notorious and pernicious. Fourthly I say, seeing it is granted to
be expedient in an oath, which is part of Gods Worship, that for the greater
reverence of the Act, a certain solemnity of rites and Ceremonies should be
used, as also a prescribed form of words; it seems that no just reason can be
given, why both the moderate use of solemnity, and a certain form of words
should be banished from the other parts of public Worship. I confess though I
have thought upon the thing with my self, and enquired much of others, I could
never yet find out, why these should not be taken from oaths, as
superstitious additions, or be retained in the rest of Gods service, as
profitable helps to piety. I leave it to him who can unriddle it: it is beyond
my skill.

SECT. XIII.
THe fifth doubt remains, which is neither difficult, nor shall be tedious,
and it is of an oath wherein some part of solemnity is omitted, in respect of
the dignity of the person: As when an Oath is given unto a Prince, or some
great Officer, at his Coronation, or time when he receives trust and honor,
the ordinary rites (as the Touch and Kiss of the Book, etc.) omitted; the
words unto which he is to swear being read unto him, he is only admonished upon
the word of a Prince, or upon his Honor, etc. faithfully to observe the same.
Unto which admonition, if he moving his hand unto his breast, answers only
that he promises, the oath is accounted taken: In this case I say briefly,
that the party sworn is no lefse obliged in Conscience, to the faithful
performance of the things promised, then if he had pronounced with his own
mouth every word, and syllable, and had exactly accomplished therest of the
Ceremonies, and Solemnities. And thus much shall sufsice to be said of the
external form of an oath. Perhaps ye expected, as I had determined, that those
things which appertain unto the Internal form of an oath, should have been
comprehended also in this Lecture. But that part contains some doubts of
great use, and moment, and worthy of larger room, espcially that part which
explaineth in what sense an oath ought to be understood. Wherefore lest I
should injure you with too much prolixity, or the matter with two much brevity,
I shall do my endeavor that in the next Lecture, together with the final
cause, (which contains not many doubts, nor much difficulty) I may finish
that which I have to say of the Internal form.

The sixth Lecture. Of the Internal Form and final cause of an Oath;
Containing seventeen Cases.
Summary.
1 Of the Internal form or Interpretation of an Oath. 2 Where the parties are
agreed upon the sense of an oath. 3, 4 Whether verbal equivocation avail any
thing. 5, 6 -- or mental Reservation? 7 That an oath is not to be eluded by a
studied subterfuge. 8 In what sense voluntary oaths are to be understood. 9,
10 -- And in what, oaths that are required. 11 How far the sense of an oath
depends upon the scope of the same. 12 An oath upon condition. 13 Of the
first and second Intentions of an oath. 14 When a lawful thing is sworn for an
evil end. 15 Whether the party swearing not intending to swear be obliged? 16
An Oath by the way of Complement. 17 When a man is doubtful whether he have
sworn or no. 18 A man willing to swear, but intending not to oblige himself.
SECT. I.
WE proposed a twofold form of an oath, External and Internal: the External
following the signs and words, which are objects of our External senses we
finished in our last Lecture. We come to the Internal, which consists in the
sense and Interpretation of the words, and is the work of the mind. Now in
this place I take the sense of the words not in respect of the Forms, by which
we understand a thing to be sworn; for of this we have formerly spoken in the
trials of oaths, (when we discoursed upon the outward form) but in respect of
the promise confirmed by an oath, and contained in the words. A matter truly of
great moment, and manifold use, and in either relation, worthy of your most
diligent attention; for it is of much concernment, to know in what sense you
swear, because he is forsworn, who performs not what he promised, in the same
sense wherein he promised, or ought to have promised it: and that not in oaths
only, but in Vows, Promises, Leagues, Contracts, and all other conventions,
wherein it behooves an honest man that his dealing be fair, and his performance
exactly agreeable with the true sense of his undertakings. Wherefore to the
point. The words of an oath, are either clear, or ambiguous.

SECT. II.
THe first doubt is of the obligation of an oath, the words whereof are plain,
and have a manifest unquestionable sense: where four cases occur. The first is,
where the words of an oath or promise, are so clear either first by their
proper and ordinary signification: or secondly, by the manner of speech
received, in any Country: or thirdly, by mutual consent of the parties, that
their sense is fully agreed upon, by the persons interessed. For example of the
first; I Caius promise unto thee Titius, to give thee possession of my Land in
Tus^ulan, if within a months time thou pay me an hundred Crowns. Example of the
second; John bargains with Peter for the hundred Marks which I owe you, I will
deliver you to morrow an hundred of my Wethers; Or, for the benefit of your
Land, I will pay you the yearly rent of three Bushels of Wheat. In the former
of which examples, although an hundred be a word so ambiguous, that sometimes
it signifies five score, sometimes six score, yet by the received use of it
throughout England, the intention of the parties would be so manifest, that
there could arise no controversy about the sense thereof because we all know
that an hundred, when we speak of money signifies five score, and when of
Cattle six. So a Bushel in the latter example, is a measure, containing double
the quantity in the Northern parts of this Kingdom, which it denotes in the
Southern. So wheresoever the bargain be made, the use of the place will so
explain the ambiguity, that plain dealing men could by no means disagree about
the signification of the words. Example of the third, Titius desiring to buy
one piece of the land of Cai^s, bordering upon his own having formerly beaten
the price, at their next meeting, asks, Will you sell me your land at the
price you set upon it? I will; though no peculiar mention be made of that piece
which bordereth upon Titius; yet it is evident by the foregoing discourse, that
the same was peculiarly understood. And this kind of oath, obliges the party
swearing to perform his promise fairly, and in that sense upon which without
elusion it is manifest the Contractors were agreed. And he who bargained to
deliver an hundred Wethers, has not made good his agreement till he deliver
six score.

SECT. III.
THe second Case is of an oath, where the words according to their common
signification are clear enough, but the party swearing having no will to oblige
himself in that sense intends another, whereof the words by reason of some
ambiguity are not altogether incapable, and industriously concealeth his
meaning in such sort, that the Auditors understand one thing, and he another.
This is that verbal equivocation, which amongst some other Casuists and
Scholasticks, the Jesuits especially maintain and practice; examples whereof
are most frequently found in assertory oaths; because by their Doctrine, the
chief use of this equivocation is, when a man examined by an impotent Judge, or
not legally, or having some other reason to dissemble the truth, fitteth the
words unto his occasion, by changing their genuine sense into one more strained
and remote from the matter in question. As if a Jesuit apprehended, should
swear that he were a Smith, meaning that his name was Smith; or an Apprentice
commanded to tell where his Master is, should swear he dyed a month ago,
meaning that he then dyed stockings. The like may happen in promissory oaths;
as if a General having made a Truce with an Enemy for ten days, should give
him a Camifado, because in the Capitulation mention was made of the days
only, not of the night. Livy and others relate the story of the ten Romans,
taken by Haniball, and after they had sworn upon certain conditions to return
unto his Camp dismissed, one of which (says he, others say two) most unlike a
Roman returned the same day, pretending something forgotten, but intending to
absolve himself of his promise, and before night overtook his Companions: which
deceiptfull trick of his was accounted so base, that he was not only scorned by
the vulgar, branded with ignominy by the censors, but adjudged by the Senate to
be taken, and by a public Guard delivered unto Hannibal. Nevertheless
Jesuits so vigorously defend this equivocation, that Jo. Molanus Professor at
Lovain, justifies the murder of John Huss perpetrated against the public
faith engaged unto him for his safe Conduct, for this reason, that the Conduct
undertook for his safe coming, not for the safety of his return. And now let
Jesuits confidently complain of the great injuries done them, whilst we say
they hold faith not to be kept with Heretics; for if this be to keep faith,
they need not much trouble themselves, with whomsoever it be contracted,
whether it ought to be kept or broken. But whole Books of this Jesuitism are
largely and solidly confuted by the Reverend Father in Christ, John Morton now
Bishop of Duresm, Henry Mason, and other of our Contrymen, worthy the
perusal of such as desire further satisfaction in this point. In the mean time
our result is, that the party swearing after this manner, both sins in his
equivocall oath, and is notwithstanding that tacit equivocation bound in
Conscience unto the performance of his promise in that sense, which the words
yield of themselves, and are without constraint apt to beget upon the minds of
others: unless he act accordingly, he is not guiltless of perjury.

SECT. IV.
SOme reasons of this assertion I have already alleged in the confirmation of
our first Hypothesis, I shall now add but briefly a few more. The first, an
oath according unto the sum of that Hypothesis, ought to be most simply, and
effectually understood; unto which simplicity this artifice of industrious
ambiguity is repugnant. The second, it is a great profanation of the Name of
God, to invoke him as witness and searcher of hearts to attest the truth of
words which agree not with the heart of the party swearing; for what were this
if not as far as lies in man's power to make God, who can neither deceive, nor
be deceived, an Impostor and Patron of base dissimulation. The third
equivocation is contrary to the very institution and nature of an oath, whose
chief use is to be an end of strife and controversy, and to give as certain
security in uncertain things, as humane nature is able to afford, it being
Expediendarum litium maximum remedium. But that certainty which we seek in an
oath, is los^ in equivocation; for what certainty can there be in his answer,
whose meaning is uncertainty? nor are Controversies thus ended but aggravated.
The fourth, the party so swearing deludeth his neighbor, and knowingly
deceives, contrary to the precept, Ne juret in dolo, and to the ancient form,
Si sciens fallo. The fifth, promise in the promissory is as affirmation and
negation are in the assertory, and contains an answer unto the question, or
intergatory propos^d by the Deferent, which unless it quadrate and agree with
the Intergatory proposed, is no truth, but a lie. For out of the question and
the answer springs as it were one proposition, which must be utterly false,
where the answer is made in a different sense, from that wherein the question
was asked. No^ does that qualification to which the Patrons of this simulation
fly afford them refuge. To wit, that we may not use this equivocation at our
pleasure, but only before an incompetent Judge, such as have no right to
require an oath, or who compels us to swear without just cause, or exacteth
that which is not due, or the like. But to omit that these are but their bare
allegations only, not confirmed by authority of Scripture, of the ancient
Church, or indeed of good and solid reason, the force of these arguments by
which we maintain the contrary, is neither overthrown, nor weakened by this
qualification. And although it should be granted, that an unjust force might
null that obligation, made to man, because it is not reasonable that an unjust
act should acquire any right; yet no injury done unto us by men, can give us
just cause to injure God, by casting off that obligation which we made unto him
the searcher of hearts, to whom such right by every oath occurreth through the
Invocation of his Name. To conclude, this Jesuiticall Doctrine licenseth the
lust of lying and perjury unto impious men, notwithstanding that qualification,
which though it remain, yet the sole judgment, when it is, and when not
expedient to use it, is left unto the party swearing. Wherefore if a man
against right and reason be constrained to swear, he ought either absolutely to
refuse the oath or to take it in that sense wherein it is given without
simulation or equivocation.

SECT. V.
THe third Case allied unto this is of mental Reservation, which the Jesuits
defend with the same reasons, and define with the same qualification, they do
verbal equivocation: For as in that by wresting the words pronounced unto
another sense, so in this by some addition not pronounced, but conceived in
mind, the party swearing eludeth the Intergatory. So they say a Priest, if he
be examined by an Heretical Magistrate, whether he be a Priest, may answer
that he is no Priest; meaning of Bacchus or Apollo And an adulterous wife if
she be questioned of adultery by her jealous husband, may swear unto him that
she committed not adultery, meaning not to the end to tell him. The like they
hold in promissory oaths, that a Traveller to save his life may swear to give
money unto a Thief, though he never intend it; provided that when he swear, I
will give thee so much, he understood if I owe it thee, or if thou demand it
before the Magistrate. But as this mental reservation is built upon the same
sand with verbal equivocation, so is it destroyed with the same dash; for it
rooteth all faith and assurance out of men, makes God an Imposter, is
deceitful unto our neighbor, perverteth the use and end of oaths, sets
open a great gate to all kind of lies and perjuries, and is so much worse then
equivocation, as more difficult to be prevented. For equivocation foreseen or
suspected may be prevented, by such diligent explication of the words, as may
leave no loop-hole of ambiguity. But no humane art or providence, if men will
be juggling, can prevent this pouch of this Reservation. Where will you find a
knot to tie this Vertumnus unto one shape? Bind wicked Proteus in chain
A thousand fold, it is all in vain.


Jesuits and Priests reserving unto themselves the liberty to reserve any
thing, are not afraid with a serious brow, to take our oath of Allegiance,
though penned with such accuratenesse of words, as leaves no hold for cavil,
nor way for escape; yet that very clause where in express words they promise
that they will faithfully observe all the premises according unto the tenor of
the words pronounced by them, and according to the plain and natural sense,
and true intent of those words, without any equivocation or mental
reservation, they understand at the same time with this reservation; to wit,
that I will tell you.

SECT. VI.
THey lie nevertheless at a ward to put by perjury; for say they, of the
verbal and mental sentence one entire sentence is compounded, in which taken
altogether there is no falsehood. For example, if a Priest swear in express
words that he is no Priest, with the addition reserved in his mind, but not
uttered, that I should tell it you; this whole sentence say they put together
is true, viz. I am not a Priest that I should tell it you. Nor does any reason
seem to forbid a man the liberty, if he please, to compose his speech of
verbal and mental terms. For why in our prayers, if one should pronounce
those words only our daily bread, and express those other give us this day in
his thought only, should the speech be entire and lawful, and acceptable unto
God; and unlawful to do the like in an oath? That this Jesuiticall
Legerdemain may fully be discovered; First, it is admirable that these most
acute Artificers should not perceive the Fabric of this defense not to be
raised, but upon the utter ruins of faith in all humane judgments, contracts,
and promises. For the argument they use, if it were of any weight, would as
well justify the practice of this equivocation before a lawful Judge, and in
a just matter, (which they say ought not to be) as before an incompetent Judge,
and in an unjust matter; seeing that a sentence composed of the verbal and
mental parts, is in each of the same truth or falsehood. And this answer may
suffice ad hominem: but ad rem, I say secondly, that a sentence composed, as
has been said, of the verbal and mental parts, may be admitted when a man
converseth with his own thoughts, as in private meditation, or when he
addresseth himself to God alone, as in prayer or thanksgiving. But when the
has to do with men, as in oaths, where he is to bear such testimony as may be
heard, and understood by others, a sense mixed of verbal and mental parts, is
in no wise to be admitted. The reason of this difference is manifest, because
that which he bears hidden in his breast, is no further known unto others then
he declares it by word of mouth. But to God before whom nothing is hidden, the
darkest secrets of the heart are transparent. So that when men pray or
meditate, it is all one, as to the point of truth or falsehood, whether they
pronounce their whole thoughts, or part of them, or none at all. But men who
cannot dive into the heart further then words and actions discover it, must
weigh the truth or falsehood of a speech by those things only which may yield
testimony unto the hearers. Which since those reservations which are kept
within cannot effect, the truth of a speech is to be judged only by the words
pronounced, and not by mental Reservation:

SECT. VII.
THe fourth Case follows the fact; for as before, and in the act of swearing,
there ought to be a purpose of fulfilling the promise in the same sense wherein
it was proposed, without any equivocation or mental reservation: so ought
there afterward to be a desire and endeavor in due time faithfully to perform
the same, according unto that sense wherein it was sworn, without any evasion
or subterfuge; and as it is one kind of perjury to strain the words during the
act of swearing, unto another sense, then that wherein they are understood by
the Auditors, so is it another kind of perjury having sworn honestly, not to
proceed sincerely, but decline, and elude the strength of the oath, (though the
words be preserved) with some new forged invention, variously turning and
dressing the words to cloak the guilt of their Consciences, as Tacitus says of
some. Stobaeus tells a pretty tale from Herodotus of one Archetimus, who had
deposited money in the hand of his friend Cydias; Archetimus upon a time
desirous to have the same restored, Cydias loath to part with the gold,
disclaimeth that he ever received it. The matter brought before the Judges, the
Plaintiff accuses, the Defendant denies, each with like confidence, neither
by any witness. The Judges other proofs being wanting decreed the
determination of the controversy by Oath; the day is appointed, Cydias in the
mean time puts the gold into an hollow staff which he had cunningly boared,
and withal counterfeiteth sickness; then appearing at the time with his
staff as newly recovered, delivers the same unto Archetimus to hold, whilst
he approached the Altar, and till he had performed the solemnity of his oath;
This done with a most composed mind and countenance he swears that he had
received gold from Archetimus, but had restored it again unto him. At which
Architemus netled with his loss, and transported with indignation to see
perfidiousnesse joined with so much impudence, threw the staff so hard against
the pavement, that it brake, and discovered the money, the fraud of Cydias, and
the whole truth of the matter: Which act the writer of the story calls an
imbroydered ly; and observes, that Cydias in reward of his perfidy came to a
miserable end. Many such examples are extant both in Historians and common
practice, out of which I shall collect some profitable observations. The first
is, that even dishonest men are so far touched with some Conscience, and
obligation of an oath; that though none at all or very small regard be had to
justice and honesty; yet through an instinct of nature, they think themselves
bound to quit themselves of their faith engaged, by performance of the same.
The second, that unl esse corrupt affections be vigorously withstood, that
spark which is left in us of natural light will go near to be altogether
extinguished by them, or so raked up in that heap, that we shall rather give
our minds artificially to palliate, then sincerely to avoid perjury. Thirdly,
that he who desires to keep himself free from all spot of perjury, must
diligently ponder every word in its own strength, and sense of the oath which
he is to take, that if it ought not to be kept, it may not be taken, or if it
be fit to be taken, it may be fulfilled without deceit or simulation; for
unadvisedly to chop up holy things is impious, and too late when they are once
swallowed, to chew them. And so much for the first doubt, which amounts unto
this sum, That the words of an oath where they are so clear in themselves, that
amongst honest men there can be no question of their meaning, the party
swearing is obliged in that sense which they apparently afford, and may not
either in swearing, or when he has sworn, stretch those words upon the Last of
his interest, by any studied Interpretation.

SECT. VIII.
THe second doubt is, where the sense of the words is in question, and the
Cases are three. The first of spontaneous oaths, as in promises proceeding from
the mere motion of good will, and a kind of liberty of the mind, rather then
duty of right or respect. The common and true answer is, that these promises
are to be taken according to the intention of the party swearing, because every
man is the best interpreter of himself. For example, if any of us should bind
our selves by a vow, or promise, to give unto the poor of a Village, or
Collector for them ten shillings a month; if the poor, seeing month as we use
it is an ambiguous word, should by the promise pretend unto the first pension
upon the 28. day of January, and so for the rest of the months upon the same
day, taking a month for the space of four weeks, which is one signification of
the word; and he on the other side should say that it was not due till the last
of January, and so forth, taking month for the twelfth part of a year,
according to the distribution of the year in the Calender, which is another
signification of the word, it were most just that the ambiguity should be
interpreted, rather in his sense then theirs; because that Pension was not due
in justice, and before the promise, but in charity, and by virtue of the free
promise, without agreement or contract. And of this kind of oath ought these
words to be understood which are cited in the gloss upon the Canon Law, It is
manifest that God takes not the oath as he unto whom it is sworn, but as he
who swears understand^th the same. But that this may rightly be apprehended,
two things are observable: One, that it holds especially in spontaneous
oaths and promises, for in such as are required the reason differs, as shall
be said anon: The other, that the party swearing is in the present case obliged
to hold unto his promise in that sense which he either really intended when he
swear, or was willing the Auditors should believe. And not in any which he
shall please afterward to impose. For God who beholds the heart, is not
deluded by words. Nor ought the intention to serve the words, but the words the
intention.

SECT. IX.
THe second case is of oaths and promises, which are offered unto, or required
of the party swearing, whether of right, or under pretense of right; such
especially as Rulers of authority command their Subjects, or Laws ordain, as
with us those of Supremacy and Allegiance, those which the Statutes of the
University require of Graduates, and the like; Also those which either party in
lawful Covenants demands of the other or are used in Bargains, Leagues and
other mutual Contracts, for the confirmation of mutual faith. For answer in
this case I say, that this kind of oath ought regularly to be understood in
that sense which the party unto whom the oath is made seems probably to
intend; so that the party swearing is bound under pain of perjury to fulfill
his promise, (if it be lawful and honest) according to the intention of the
deferent. The words are understood according to the mind, and intention of him
to whom the oath is made, says the Lawyer. The reason is, because this kind
of oath is taken to the end he to whom it is sworn, may by interposition of the
same be assured, that the promise of the party swearing shall be performed unto
him; but he would be no wh^t the more assured of that performance, if the words
were to be interpreted at the will of the party swearing, and not according to
his own sense; for there is a different nature of obligation, where debt is
claimed by promise, and where promise is claimed by debt. God himself who is by
Law no man's debtor, makes himself through his free promises our debtor; and
he who obliges himself by a voluntary vow, oath, or promise unto any deed of
Charity, ipso facto contracteth debt. But because this debt is not founded upon
his right unto whom the promise is made, but flows merely from the free act
of the party promising, it is most just that he should be his own Interpreter,
who is most concerned to know how much, how far, and in what sense he intended
to oblige himself. On the other side where the promise is founded upon some
antecedent right, either that of subjection, and duty, by Superior Authority,
or of Justice, and contract by agreement, between parties; Because he to whom
the promise is made has right to enquire the same, and is most concerned that
it be faithfully performed, reason requires that the obligation of the promise
should rather be judged according to his mind, and interpretation, then by the
sense of the party promising.

SECT. X.
THe third case is, where the Deferent offering an oath of ambiguous sense,
desires only that the words be sworn, leaving it unto the judgment of the
party swearing, to take them in what sense he pleases. I say it may very well
be suspected that some deceit is couched in them, and that a pious prudent man
ought therefore to refuse an oath proffered upon such conditions: which I shall
make good by a threefold proof. First, in regard of the oath it selt, in which
the first thing required is truth; for a speech of indefinite, and ambiguous
sense, before it be distinguished, is no true proposition, indeed no
proposition, seeing a proposition as by the definition thereof is known even to
children, ought to signify a truth or falsehood without ambiguity. Secondly,
in regard of him to whom it is sworn. For the proper end of an oath is, that he
to whom it is made may have some assurance of that which before was uncertain.
But what certainty can be had in words of an uncertain sense? Thirdly, in
regard of the party swearing, who if he take the oath upon that condition,
prepares either scandal for his neighbor, or a snare for himself; for this
kind of covin cannot be imagined to have other drift, then either that others
might be drawn by our example, (though against their Conscience) to take the
same oath, which is to give scandal unto our neighbor; or that something else
by virtue of that oath might afterward be required of us, which is either
unlawful, or inconvenient, and that were to set a snare for our selves.
Wherefore let a prudent man beware how he suffer himself thus to be imposed
upon, or esteem the fear or favor of any at that rate, to swallow the bait,
wherein he knows certainly, there is an hook. Assuredly that the act of
swearing may be duly performed, it is expedient the sense of the words be most
clearly agreeed upon, by all the interessed parties, which the Ancients call
Liquido jurare. -- Scis tamen and liquido juratus dicere posses.


And it appears by an old form, the deferent when he offered an oath to the
party about to swear was wont to say, Qua de repeto liquido jures.

SECT. XI.
BUt enough of these, I come to the third doubt, which is of the sense of an
oath according to the latitude or extent of the same, That is, whether the
sense of the words be, and how far it is to be measured by the scope. The first
case is, where the cause of an oath was particular, yet the words are general.
For example, Papal usurpation was the cause of the oath of Royal Supremacy,
he arrogating unto himself the exercise of Supreme Jurisdiction in
spiritualibus, throughout this Kingdom. I answer, such an oath is obligatory,
according to the express words in the utmost latitude: The reason is, that the
intention of a Law, though made upon particular occasion, is general, to
provide against all future inconveniences of the like kind, or nature. And
therefore albeit in the preamble of a Law, particular mention be often made of
that grievance, which gave occasion to enact the same, yet those words wherein
the Law is contained, are for the most part general; which is done
industriously, and on purpose by Lawgivers, that other things of like nature
may fall within their comprehension. Wherefore as Lawyers take their Responsall
upon the sense of the Law, not from the preamble, but body of the Statute; so
of the right interpretation of an oath, ought judgment to be made, not from
the preface, but from the body of an oath.

SECT. XII.
THe second Case is, how far an oath is to be understood with some conditions.
I answer briefly, First, if the words contain an express Condition the party
swearing is not bound, till the condition be performed. As if Caius promise
Titius an hundred Crowns to morrow, if Titius give him this day possession of
such or such land; the possession not given, Caius is not bound by his promise.
Secondly, if there be no express Condition, yet all those conditions and
exceptions which are presumed by Law and common custom are to be understood,
as I will do this or that, If God permit, If it be not against the right of
another, If things remain as now they stand, If I be able, If be it lawful,
etc. as was said more at large in the explanation of the second Hypothesis.

SECT. XIII.
THe third Case is of the first and second Intention. For the seems to have
fulfilled his oath, who does according to that which he intended in the second
intention, which is the end; although he perform it not according to the sound
of the words, which contain the first intention only, or means. For example, if
a man engage himself by vow, oath, or promise, to allow ten shillings a month
to the poor of such a Parish, and in January and February give nothing, but in
March send them thirty shillings. I answer, that if the party swearing intended
to oblige himself unto the substance of the thing only, and not unto the
circumstances and manner of it, he is not obliged unto that way which the words
seem to insinuate. Whence in the example propounded, if he had paid a whole
three months pension in the first month, doubtless he had performed his
promise; yet it may be that by accident, and consequence he might become
obliged, even unto the manner of the thing, because every man is obliged,
caeteris paribus, and if there be no other impediment, in doubtful matters to
choose that which is safest: As in the example proposed, it were safer to pay
the pension in the manner promised, that is, rather every month ten, then in
the third thirty, both in respect of the danger of sudden death, and uncertain
events, and to avoid those scruples which may arise even from neglected
circumstances. I should therefore advise a pious man, that he be careful to
fulfill every of his vows, oaths, promises, according unto the tenor of the
words, and of his intention, as far as conveniently he may, even to the
slightest circumstance; lest through contempt of small matters, he create
scruples unto himself, or by degrees get such an habit, as may cause him to
contemn greater. But however unto one thing I exhort all, and it is the sum and
topstone of this whole discourse, concerning the sense and interpretation of
oaths, that above all they be watchful, lest they be too indulgent unto
themselves in this business, or whilst they pamper their own desires, weaken
the bond of an oath with over mild, and loose interpretations, and so expose
themselves unto the danger of perjury. And thus much shall suffice to be spoken
of the Formal cause.

SECT. XIV.
THere remains a little to be said of the Final Cause; The first doubt is,
when a thing lawful in it self is promised with an ill intention, or to an ill
end. First I say it is simply unlawful to promise any thing, though lawful,
with an evil intention, or to an evil end: The reason is, because as one
defect in any humane action is enough to render the whole action evil, (for
good is the effect of an entire cause, evil of a partial) so especially a
defect derogating from the end, which holds the principal place in moral
things; at which that speech of our Savior is thought to aim, But if thine Eye
be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness. Secondly I say, if any man
shall have sworn any thing unto another for a dishonest end, yet without any
dishonest conditions to be performed by the party, he is obliged to fulfill the
promise. If a man promise a woman a Jewel, intending with himself to engage
her by that token unto immodest love, nevertheless without show of any unchaste
condition, he is bound by the promise. The reason of each is, because it is
lawful to give a Jewel, but to give it upon lewd conditions, unlawful.
Thirdly I say, that which is promised upon dishonest unlawful conditions, the
conditions performed ought to be fulfilled, at least if the thing be lawful.
If a man promise a sum of money unto another, for adultery, false witness, or
any other wicked exploit, he is bound when the other has performed the
conditions, to stand to his promise and pay the money. So Judah rightly
understood himself obliged to send the Kid unto Thamar his daughter in law, as
the promised price of her Whoredom. The reason is, that although the bargain
were, yet the thing promised in that bargain is not unlawful. Wherefore it
ought not to have been done, but being done it is valid. And by what has been
said it is sufficiently clear, that an unlawful oath of a lawful thing may be
obligatory.

SECT. XV.
THe second doubt reflecteth upon the Intention of the party swearing. That
Intention I mean, not which aims objectively at the matter of the oath, or
thing promised, whereby we enquire what the party swearing intended by this
promise, in what sense, and how he obliged himself: For of such intention we
have already spoken, when we discoursed upon the sense and interpretation of an
oath: but that intention is here understood, which aims objectively at the
act of swearing; whereby we enquire whether he intended to swear, or to oblige
himself, or not. Upon which Scholastique dispute, very much, but more subtly
then profitably, I shall contract as much of them as is useful into a narrow
room. The first Case is, when a man through evil custom heedlesly abounds
with unnecessary oaths; I say first, that this kind of swearing is most
certainly a very grievous sin; not only Originally and in respect of the Cause;
because it flows from a depraved habit; but also formally, and in respect of
the Act, for as much as an act in it self sacred, is rashly exercised, not in
Judgment, and without reverence. Secondly I say, that such oaths, if the act
of swearing through the impetuosity of the mind were altogether inconsiderate,
are not obligatory. But if any deliberation of mind were present, though
small, they are in part obligatory. The reason of either member of this
assertion is, because deliberation of mind is required to make any humane act
binding, and the measure of the obligation arises from the measure of the
deliberation.

SECT. XVI.
THe second Case is, when in Honor, or Complement (for so Cafuists speak) a
man giddily swears in a matter of small moment. For example, if one
contending with another, and p^essing him by way of respect unto precedence
should swear (as it often happens) not to stir out of the door, sit at the
Table, or touch the cup, till the other were first out, or fet, or had begun.
Nay since commonly the persons so striving both swear the same thing, if such
oaths were obligatory, one of them must needs be foresworne, because of
necessity one must do that, which each swear he would not do. First I say as
before, that an oath of this kind is rash, and not without sin, because
without judgment. Secondly, that it is nevertheless in it self obligatory,
except the act were altogether void of deliberation. But thirdly, that such
obligation may either be stopped or taken away in such manner, as who does
otherwise then he has sworn, may avoid Perjury. That is to say, the obligation
may be stopped, if it be understood with a tacit condition, or exception; in
this sense, If it please you, or if the thing be left unto me, I will not stir
till you go first. It may also be taken away, because seeing it proceeded from
consideration of the place due unto the other, that other receding from his
right, the obligation cease, as (God willing) when I come to the solution of
the bond shall more plainly appeat.

SECT. XVII.
THe third Case is, whether a man doubtful whether he have sworn, or no, be
bound by by his oath? Some think he is not bound: from the rule of the Law; In
doubtful cases possession is the better title. But seeing this rule is of
force in things appertaining only unto commutative Justice; as if the Heir of
Caius should doubt whether the goods of the deceased bequeathed unto him by
will were lawfully gotten; some, and more truly perhaps, think he is bound,
unless he can clear his doubt. The reason is, because of doubtful things the
safer is to be chosen: and certainly it is more safe to think himself obliged,
then not obliged; because by that error he exposes himself at the most, but to
temporal inconvenience, by this unto the danger of perjury.

SECT. XVIII.
THe fourth case, whether man willing to swear, yet intending not to oblige
himself, be nevertheless obliged? Most of the Scholasticks and Casuists, they
especially who were before Cajetan, deny him to be obliged; and Ovids Cydippe
defends herself from perjury at this ward, It is the mind with which we
swear,
And I had no such meaning there.


But the opinion of Cajetan, and his followers is sounder, who hold the party
deliberately swearing to be bound, whether he intend to oblige himself or not.
For the act of swearing is both in it self obligatory, and proceeded from a
deliberate mind. Therefore obligation, unless it be otherwise impeded, must
necessarily follow. Wherefore seeing that obligation flows necessarily and
naturally from an oath, it is not in the power of man to hinder or remove it;
for the nature of things stated, no man can hinder their necessary effects.
Were it not ridiculous, if he who has signed, and sealed a bond, shall plead
that he had no intention thereby to oblige himself? Nay, would he not be
obliged notwithstanding that plea? He therefore who takes an oath, is as much
obliged by the act of swearing, whatsoever he intended, or profess he
intended. For he who intended the cause, is presumed also to intend the
necessary effect of that cause.

And thus, the goodness of God directing, and your patience accompanying me,
at length I have finished this difficult and scattering dispute concerning the
Bond of an Oath: the other part of this Treatise, which concerns the Solution
of the Bond, I shall shortly (by Gods help) deliver in one Lecture.

The seventh Lecture. Of the Solution of the Bond of an Oath; and of the use
and abuse of Oaths; containing five Cases, and so many Conclusions.
Summary.
1 What truth is required in a promissory oath. 2 What the solution of the Bond
is. 3 Whether an oath may be dispensed withal? 4 The Popes power of dispensing
with oaths examined. 5 Whether an oath may be commuted. 6 The Superior may
invalidate the oath of his Subject. 7 The matter of an oath ceasing, the
obligation cease. 8 An oath may be released by him unto whom it is made. 9 It
is not unlawful to swear. 10 The custom of swearing in ordinary ^discourse
evil. 11 A man ought not to swear without necessity. 12 Cautions in oaths
required by others. 13 An oath is not to be taken with an unsati^fied
Conscience.
SECT. I.
THe solution of the bond or tie wherewith he who swears binds his soul,
and whereof we have hitherto so largely discoursed, is the task of this day,
and conclusion of the work proposed. Of which solution before we descend unto
the particular kinds, two things are to be observed in general. First, that
solution of the bond is proper unto a Promissory oath, and has nothing to do
at all with the Assertory. In every oath whether assertory, or promissory,
there ought to be truth; but with this difference, in the assertory, a single
truth, and for the present suffices, where in the promissory a double truth is
required, one respecting the present, the other the future. The present truth
regards the act of swearing, and consists in this, that the party swearing
say true when he swears; that is, that his mind agree with his words, and
that he be resolved to hold unto that which he promises. Which act of swearing
in the promissory wholly agrees as to the truth and falsehood with the act of
swearing in the assertory. For the matter of that truth in either act, seeing
it regards the time present, passes as it were into a kind of immutable
necessity, in as much as an oath, so soon as it is made, may instantly be said
to have been true or false; which truth or falsehood, when the act has once
passed, is as impossible to be altered, as it were to make a fact to have been
no fact. That obligation therefore whereby the party swearing is bound for the
present to say truth, falls upon the act it self of swearing; and is
inseparably conjoined with that act, and for that reason cannot be loosed, nor
separated from the oath: and of an assertory oath, except this for the present,
there is no further obligation, because the matter thereof is some fact past or
present. But in a promissory oath, the matter whereof is a thing to be
performed for the future, another truth is also required for the future, which
regards the matter of the oath; and consists in this, that the party
swearing make that which he has promised to be true; that is, that he fulfill
his promise. Now seeing the matter of a promissory oath, to wit, things to be
performed for the future, are through the uncertainty of future events,
obnoxious to manyfold changes and alterations: hence it comes to pass, that
the obligation which falls upon that matter, and whereby the party swearing
is bound in future to fulfill his promise, is mutable, and separable from the
oath. And this is that, which we call Solution of the Bond. From whence also
follows that which is to be observed in the second place; to wit, that the
solution of the Bond in a promissory oath, ought not to be understood in
relation unto the former obligation, which arises from truth for the present,
and is common with this, and the assertory oath; but ought to be understood
only in relation unto the later obligation, which arises from truth for the
future; which is proper and peculiar unto this. That is to say, every person
swearing promissorily, ipso facto, and by virtue of the act of swearing is
simply, and indissolubly obliged in present, to intend faithfully and from his
heart to effect that afterward which he promises; but having sworn, it may
come many ways to pass, that he may not be bound for the future, to fulfill
that afterward which he formerly promised and intended. In a word thus, He is
always forsworn, who intends not that which he promises; but he is not
always forsworn, who performs not that which he promised.

SECT. II.
NOW that a thing promised may nevertheless lawfully, and without danger of
perjury or other sin, not be performed, must necessarily happen one of these
two ways, either that there was no obligation from the beginning, or that it
was (by solution of the bond) since taken away. If the thing promised were,
when it was sworn, either impossible, or unlawful, the oath taken unto the
same imposes no obligation, nor needs solution, but penitence; for as much
as in so swearing grievous sin is contracted, but no bond; for we have already
shown, that impossible things, and unlawful things are in no wise obligatory.
Wherefore solution of the bond supposes antecedent obligation, and implies
that the same may be afterward so taken away, or at the least obstructed, that
he who was formerly bound up so close with the bond of his oath, that he might
not under pain of perjury do otherwise then he had promised, is now no farther
bound unto the performance of his promise. The business therefore now in hand
is to find out a certain reason, whereupon he who has obliged himself by the
bond of an oath unto the performance of a thing, may rest secure in his
Conscience that he is delivered from that bond; and no farther bound unto the
performance of that promise. To which solution those five ways commonly
assigned, we shall examine in their order.

SECT. III.
THe first Case is of the dispensability of an oath; Whether and in what the
dispensation of a Superior, may take away the obligation thereof.
Dispensation, as the word is commonly taken, signifies exemption of a person
from the ordinary course of Law granted, by special favor of him who is in
authority. As if a man who is subject to any Law, should by especial grace of
his Prince be exempted from obedience unto that Law, as we see daily practiced
in Universities, where upon reasonable grounds dispensations are usually
granted unto particular persons, whereby they are in some things freed from the
observation of the Statutes. Now the right of dispensation is founded upon that
equity, which requires that sometimes the rigor of Law be in some things
remitted, to the end that equity may not be excluded. For seeing Laws were of
necessity made in general terms, and have regard unto that which is commonly
and for the most part good and profitable for the public, which nevertheless
pro hic and nunc, may happen to be unprofitable, or at the least less
convenient; it therefore seemed good, where that which is established by Law
appears to be exceeding burdensome, or inconvenient to some private person,
and the public to receive no great detriment by the omission thereof, that the
Prince, or other legitimate Superior, should have power to determine, that the
Law in such cases is not to be observed. And this is that which in Law we call
Dispensation. Now what power is in secular Princes to dispense with their Laws,
the same do the Popes of Rome arrogate to themselves in dispensing with Vows
and Oaths. Whose impudence in this kind, whilst they absolve subjects of
their Allegiance to Kings, null Leagues and Contracts made by Princes, untye
the straightest knots of vows and oaths by commutation, relaxation,
dispensation, contrary command, or other artifices at their pleasure, and for
their profit, I could wish some who most justly condemn, did not most wickedly
imitate. But though others de facto exercise this power of dispensing with
oaths, yet the Pope only challenges it unto himself de jure. Many even before
Luther have grievously complained of this thing, and sharply inveighed against
the abuse of Papal Dispensations; unto whose writings I refer the studious,
and betake my self by some arguments to prove the bond of an oath simply
indispensable, so that no power at all of dispensing with it, is either in Pope
or any other. First, because the obligation of an oath is of Divine natural
Law. But Natural Law is not subject to Humane Power, seeing God alone is the
Author and Lord of Nature: nor could it ever yet be shown, that God has
granted unto any kind or order of men, authority to dispense with the Law of
Nature. Secondly, because this power of dispensation being granted, the chief
end of an oath, which is security (as I may call it) for the thing promised,
would utterly be overthrown: for he unto whom the oath is made can have no
assurance, if the promise of the party swearing may be dispensed with, that it
should ever be fulfilled. Thirdly, because an oath in that very act and
instant, whereby it imposes the obligation of swearing, and the promise of
performance, acquireth right of the thing promised unto the party to whom the
oath is made; which two effects of an oath are so combined, that the one
granted or denied, the other also at the same time must necessarily be granted
or denied. Wherefore suppose the obligation of the party swearing taken away by
dispensation, and it follows that the right of him to whom the oath was made,
is also taken away by the same; and farther, that such Dispensation must be
either needless, or unreasonable: needless and superfluous, if it be done
with his consent, to whom the oath was made; if against it, unreasonable and
unjust. For he being willing, the obligation (as I shall show) may be remitted,
even without dispensation; but to take away his right against his will, is
injury. Fourthly, because in a promissory oath, obligation is not only made
unto our neighbor, as it is promissory, but to God also as it is an oath.
Wherefore granting, which is not to be granted, that Superiors have power to
take away the obligation, whereby in regard of promise man is obliged to man;
yet would it be unsupportable presumption, that dust and ashes should arrogate
unto it self authority to take away the obligation, whereby man is obliged unto
God as witness and revenger. Fifthly, because humane dispensation is a matter
of external Judicature. But the obligation of an oath, is in the conscience
within, which is subject unto no Judge but God; and belongs not unto the
Empire of man. Wherefore he who claims the right of dispensing with oaths,
be he what he will, assumeth unto himself divine Power, seateth himself upon
the bench of internal Judicature, and exercises Dominion over the Conscience.
And such dispensation is de jure null, and invalid; even as that sentence is
invalid unto all intents and purposes of the Law, which is given by a Judge in
a Court where he has nothing to do, because there he is no Judge.

SECT. IV.
HEre the Patrons of Dispensation are wonderfully perplexed, how to ward the
blow of the first argument, which is all they use to object unto themselves. It
costs them much sweat to roll this stone, (for they see it is the part of the
Popes Authority, which lest his Kitching languish, must in any case be
maintained) and they may put the gain in their eye; seeing they cannot find
wherewithal to make a solid defense, nor could ever yet agree amongst
themselves, by what right the Pope arrogateth unto himself this power of
dispensation. Which one thing were enough to argue them conscious of their weak
pretenses. For as in waging war, so in exercising power, the cause which is not
stedily asserted, may well be presumed unjust. Some deduce this power of
dispensing with vows, and oaths, from the absolute and Oecumenicall Authority,
whereby the Pope is Lord of the Earth, and Emperor of the whole World. For
seeing every person vowing or swearing is the Popes subject, this condition say
they is understood in every vow or oath, to wit, If it please our Lord the
Pope. Whereupon it follows, that when the Pope signifies, which he does by
way of dispensation, that he is not pleased the thing sworn should be ratified,
the obligation presently cease. Which opinion granted, the Pope at his
pleasure may rescinde any oath, either with just cause or without it. Wherefore
this rejected as too gross, others, and among them some modern Jesuits deny,
that the Pope can dispense with oaths, or dissolve Royal Contracts, or that
he ever did it properly; that is, by taking away the obligation, or the
obligation remaining by exempting any private person from the same: But they
say that he dispenses only improperly; that is, by declaring the oath in that
case not obligatory, by reason of the hinderance of some good, or consequence
of some ill, if the oath should be kept. But on the contrary, besides the
evidence of his practice, which shows that the Pope exercises in this matter
more then declaratory power, or (which comes to as much) under pretense of
declaratory power, can determine of Leagues, Vows, Oaths, Contracts between
Kings, or any other at his discretion, being in this case Supreme and sole
Judge, whose sentence must be obeyed, without appeal. It is worthy
consideration, First, that either the Cause is manifestly just, why a thing
promised by oath ought not to be performed, as if it be impossible, dishonest,
or any way unlawful; and then the party swearing may of his own authority, nay
ought withoutwaiting for dispensation from the Pope or any other, to retract
the thing sworn: for where there is no obligation, the Conscience is free, and
needs no dispensation. Or secondly, that no just cause appears why the oath
should not be kept: and then it must be kept; and he who either asks, or
grants Dispensation, sins; Because the obligation which neither can nor
may be removed by humane power, remains. Or lastly, that the thing is
doubtful, and appears not by reason of difficulties on both sides, whether
the party swearing be bound to the performance of his promise: and then it will
be profitable to consult with pious, and prudent men, skillful in divine Law,
and to resolve with their advice what is most expedient. In which matter seeing
knowledge is more requisite then power, I understand not why the Pope should be
fitter then another man, unless it were certain the Pope excelled other men in
prudence, and piety; for that which is not credible, certainly is not
necessary. Thirdly, others not satisfied with this declaratory Dispensation, as
detracting too much from the Popes authority, have beaten out an answer of
wonderful subtilty, that the obligation of an oath, which is of divine
Natural Law, may really be taken away by Dispensation of the Superior: but
that it must not therefore be said, that the Superior dispenses with Divine
and Natural Law; because say they, that Divine Law of Nature is, that an oath
so long as the strength and obligation thereof remains, should be kept; and
with this Law the Superior dispenses not, but by his Dispensation takes away
that strength of the oath, whereby it obliged the party swearing before the
Dispensation. But this subtilty opened unto the quick would be found a mere
trifle which avails nothing, or implies a contradiction; and is refuted by
the Jesuit Achorius, though Sayrus the Monk be about his ears for it. So
whilst these Cadmean brethren dispatch each other by mutual blows, nor can
find any reason whereby to arm themselves in proof; they really confess that
the cause which they have undertaken, cannot be defended. Wherefore I conclude
that neither Pope, nor Prince, nor Synod, nor Senate, nor Ecclesiastical nor
Secular Superior, has any right to dispense with Leagues, Contracts, Oaths,
or to absolve any man from that Bond wherein before the Dispensation granted he
was engaged.

SECT. V.
WIth this first of Dispensation, the next question, or the second Case of
Commutation of an Oath is allied. Now Commutation (as the word expresses) is
nothing else but translation of the obligation from one matter to another,
which whether greater, less, or equivalent, seems in some respect to be more
convenient. And Commutation differs from Dispensation, as a species from the
genus, or part from the whole. For if a Bond could be loosed either by the one
or other, it would be wholly unbound by Dispensation, by Commutation in part
only. The doctrine of Cafuists concerning Commutation, amounts to this sum:
First, that a private man of his own authority, without his Superiors
Dispensation, may commute a vow, or oath, into that which is evidently better;
which they confirm by Gods example, who does not always fulfill his temporal
promises to the letter, but often changes them for the better; and for
confirmation of this opinion, they bring the speech of Gregory, He infringeth
not his promise or purpose, who changes it for the better. Secondly, that
promise cannot be commuted to that which is evidently worse, or whereof
question may be made, whether it be better, without authority of a Superior
qualified with legitimate power of judging and determining in that point.
Thirdly, that by Commutation preexistent obligation is wholly taken off from
the former matter, and new obligation brought in and laid upon a different
matter. But this whole doctrine is built upon a false foundation, to wit,
dispensability of an oath; which being (as we have proved) null, this
superstructure of Commutation must necessarily fall to ruin. Wherefore briefly
I say, that the bond of an oath cannot be remitted or losed, either in whole by
Dispensation, or in part by Commutation, without consent of all the parties;
But the consent of him unto whom the oath is made, is more especially required,
because such right is acquired unto him, as without his own consent ought not
to be taken away. For the example of God it suiteth not, because his promises
as they are all of free bounty, so the temporal ones are also conditional,
and to be understood with exception of the Cross, of the good pleasure of God,
and of that which he knows to be most profitable for us. Neither is the case
of a Vow, and of an Oath altogether alike in respect of Commutation; for in a
vow seeing it is made to God alone, some liberty may perhaps be granted unto
the person vowing of changing the same into another which may be evidently
better, and more acceptable unto God, there being nothing in this alteration
injurious unto a third person: but in an oath which is made unto man, injury
might be done him, if it should without his consent, and against his will be
commuted into any other thing. As if Caius sworn to pay ten pound unto Titius,
should give him an Horse worth ten pounds, it would not satisfy his oath, for
it is not reasonable that a man should be forced to commute a thing due unto
him. Wherefore the bond of an oath cannot be loosed, nor the obligation taken
away by either of these inventions.

SECT. VI.
BUt it seems it may by the three ways remaining; to wit, Irritation of the
Superior, Cessation of the matter, and Relaxation of the party. Wherefore the
third Case is, of solution of the bond by irritation declared by the Superior.
Now Irritation, (for so with the Casuists, we must speak, though barbarously)
signifies an act of the legitimate superior, whereby of his Authority he
rendereth an oath made by his Subject without his consent null and void. For
that legitimate Superiors may rescinde Vows, and Oaths, of such as are not
free, but under their Authority, Moses teaches (as when we were upon the
efficient cause we observed) largely throughout this chapter. The reason is,
that he who is in the power of another, is not in his own, nor can oblige
himself in things wherein he is subject, without leave from his Superior; and
therefore he ought not by any act of his to bring obligation upon himself
without the others consent, either expressed, or upon reasonable grounds
presumed. For the rights of Rulers over their Subjects are by the immovable
and eternal Law of God perpetual. Moreover the duty of Subjects together with
the right of obedience and subjection, are by the same perpetual Law,
perpetually and indispensably obligatory. Which antecedent obligation (by our
third Hypothesis) obstructeth the effect of a subsequent oath, in such manner
as it cannot be binding: for the former obligation ever prejudgeth the latter,
and renders every act introductive of new, and contrary obligation, invalid.
Wherefore in this case I say first, that a Subject ought not by oath to promise
any of those things wherein he is subject unto another, without the consent of
his Superior at the least presumed. Secondly, that if he have sworn, and the
thing be lawful, he is so long obliged unto performance, as it appears not
to be against the will, dignity and profit of his Superior. Thirdly, that the
Superior if he have by express consent, whether before or after, once
ratified the promise of his subject, cannot make the same afterward void, or
null the obligation thereof. Fourthly, if the Superior so soon as he comes to
know of the matter, openly and peremptorily, declaring his dissent, forbid the
performance of the same, that the transitory obligation presently cease, and
the subject by virtue of his former obligation of duty, which is permanent, and
perpetual, is bound notwithstanding his oath to obey his Superior. Whence if
any man subject unto the power of another, whether Master, Father, or Prince,
voluntarily compelled by force or fear, or misled through fraud, or example of
others, happen to make any oath, whereunto he believes his Master, Father, or
Prince, had he bi^ present, would not have condescended; the same has sinned
against his duty in swearing, and is bound in no wise to fulfill that oath.
Resolved therefore upon this question, that irritation of a legitimate
Superior may cancel the Bond of an Oath.

SECT. VII.
THe fourth Case is of the solution of the Bond, by cessation of the matter, or
some considerable alteration happening unto the principal cause of an oath:
And it is then to be supposed that the matter cease, when between the time of
the oath sworn, and that wherein it is to be performed, the state of things is
so changed, that if the party could have foreseen what would have followed, he
would by no means have sworn. I answer briefly, that the matter of the Vow,
Oath, or Promise ceasing, the obligation thereof must also cease: as in
natural and artificial things, where matter is defective, the action of the
agent must be likewise of necessity deficient. For neither can fire burn except
it have combustible matter, nor a Carpenter make a fourm without wood.
Wherefore if a Soldier swear obedience unto his General, the War ended, and
the General reformed, he is not bound by his oath to yield him obedience. And
if a Father swear never to alter the Will whereby he made his son his Heir, yet
finding his Heir afterward practicing upon his life by poison, the Father is
no farther bound by his oath, but notwithstanding the same may alter his will,
and adopt another Heir. The same may be said where a man having heard the
Statutes of any College or Society read unto him, swears to observe them; if
these Statutes happen afterward to be revoked or abrogated, the party swearing
is absolved from the bond of his oath. The reason is, that the root of
obligation being pulled up, the branch must needs wither. Now the matter which
gave occasion unto the oath, was the root of that obligation which sprang from
the oath. For an Oath follows the nature and condition of the Act wherewith
it is joined, that is the matter which it contains; as an accessory follows
the nature of its principal: and Accessories, say the Lawyers, are extinct, if
you destroy the Principals.

SECT. VIII.
THe last Case is of Solution of the Bond by Relaxation of a party; to wit, of
him to whom the oath was made: as if Caius should promise any thing to Titius,
whether Titius remitting the obligation, Caius be obsolved of his promise?
Where the first thing to be observed is, that this kind of speech To remit an
Oath, and the other which resembles it, To favor a man of his oath, are not
always taken by good Authors in the same sense. For sometimes they are used in
relation to an oath to be made, and so he is said to remit an oath unto
another, or to favor him of his oath, who the other being prepared to swear,
contented with his good will, waveth his oath, and crediteth him without it; or
for any other reason requires not an oath from a person of whom he has right
to require it. But for the most part they are taken with relation unto an oath
made, and so he is said to remit or favor a person of his oath, who pardons
the performance of that which the person had promised, nor though he have right
to do it, requires the thing due by virtue of that oath. So Sue^onius says,
that Tiberius ^^voured a Roman Knight of his oath, suffering him to put away
his wif^ taken in Adultery with his son in law, though he had sworn never to
repudiate her. And the Emperors Antoninus, and Verus, signified to one who had
sworn never to be of the order, and yet was created Duumvir, that they f^^oured
him of his oath. And this is that remission or favoring of an oath which
Casuists call Relaxation. Whereof I say first, that this Relaxation takes
place in Oaths, Leagues, Bargains, and other humane Contracts, not so in Vows.
The reason of this difference is, because vows are made unto God as a party,
but man has power to remit those only which are made to man. Secondly, I say,
if an oath be sworn in favor of another, that is in order unto his honor,
power, profit, or other convenience, that it is not binding, ex^^pt he in whose
favor it is made, accept, and ratify the same. As in our Law, a bond obliges
not Caius to pay an hundred pounds unto Titius, though ^^gned with the hand of
Caius, and sealed with his seal; except Caius deliver it unto Titius, and
Titius, or some other accept of it, in his name, and to his use. Thirdly I say,
an oath so made, if the person unto whom it is sworn confirm the same, and
expect the performance, cannot be relaxed by any third person. The reason is,
because no man can take away right acquired unto another, without consent of
the party. Whence it follows, that the obligation (as we have formerly said)
of an oath cannot be taken away by dispensation, except the party be willing.
Fourthly I say, if he to whom the oath is sworn remit it, and would not have it
be kept, that the party swearing is forthwith absolved, and no more obliged in
conscience to perform the thing which he had promised. Wherefore Caius being
sworn to pay Titius an hundred pound, if Titius afterward remit the debt, he
is no farther bound by his oath. The reason is, because any man may recede from
his own right, and pardon a debt due unto himself, and the debt being absolved,
it must needs follow, that the obligation cease, seeing solution of the debt is
the period of obligation, as appeared by the definition of the same, and
amongst us by the form of a bond, the conditions whereof performed, the bond
becomes void, and of none effect. If you object that the debt is not absolved,
because the promise is not performed. I answer, it is the same to all intents
and purposes of the Law, whether it be really fulfilled or acknowledged by the
party whom it concerns as fulfilled. The reason is, because the acceptance
of the person interessed, is interpretatively payment: and so, the matter as it
were ceasing, the obligation cease, much after the manner whereof we have
spoken in the foregoing Case. And this is that which Lawyers call
Acceptilation, by which (though a Civil Solution, and not real) they affirm
obligation to be no less taken away then by the real. If again you object,
that although the obligation made to man might be taken away, by Relaxation,
yet it seems the obligation to God should remain, as was answered in case of
an oath extorted by fear. I answer that the bond relaxed, after the manner
expressed, does no injury unto God in the violation of an extorted oath,
because a promise made in favor of another, is only directed unto God as
witness of the promise made unto man, and revenger of the violation of that
faith which is engaged unto the other; which faith seeing he violateth not, but
fulfilleth his promise, he is wholly absolved from all obligation, both toward
God and man. Fifthly I say, that solution of the Bond by Relaxation of the
party, extends so far as pleases the party relaxing. As if Caius have sworn
to pay Titius an hundred pounds, and Titius have afterward remitted fifty
pounds, the obligation is not wholly absolved, but in part. That is, the bond
as to the fifty pound remitted is void, but it remains good as to the fifty
pound not remitted. Again, if Caius have sworn to pay Titius an hundred pounds
within 20 days, and Titius perceiving that Caius cannot without inconvenience
unto himself pay the money at the time appointed, give him other twenty days:
This Relaxation made by Dilation, or propagation of the time, remitteth so much
of the obligation, that he is not bound to pay the money within the time
limited, by his oath; yet he is bound, and that by virtue of his first oath, to
make payment within forty days. Sixthly I say, that Relaxation by a party is of
force, so far as that party is concerned, but is not of force to the prejudice
of a third person. The reason is, because any man may by act remit, as much of
his own right as he pleases, but no man can diminish the right of another,
without his knowledge and against his will. Let men therefore so recede from
their own, that the rights of others receive no detriment. Thus Abraham, Genesis
14. receded from his right, when after the victory won upon the four Kings, he
bestowed his whole share of the spoil upon the King of Sodom, reserving unto
the three Commanders, his fellows in arms, their due proportions. Whence Caius
sworn to pay an hundred pound unto Titius and Julius, if Titius pardon him his
part of the debt, he is absolved as to that which was due unto Titius; but
remains bound as to that which is due unto Julius. Upon the same ground
Relaxation by consent of the parties avails nothing in Contracts of Marriage;
because therein man's profit is not regarded only, but the Ordinance of God
also, to whom great injury would be done, if that contract though with mutual
consent of the party should be violated. For the virtue, and and efficacy,
which this Relaxation, whereof we now speak, has to null obligation, supposes
that act which introduced obligation, to have considered nothing else but the
good, and profit only of the party relaxing. If any other party be by right of
his own interessed, that the obligation should not be remitted, the obligation
is not remitted.

SECT. IX.
NOw the sum of what has been said concerning Solution of the Bond in an Oath
is briefly this, That the Bond of an Oath cannot be released by Dispensation of
any Superior, or Commutation, so as to free the Conscience of the party
swearing from performance of the promise: but may nevertheless be rescinded
and made void by a Superior having lawful authority, cease through defect of
the matter; or be relaxed by him unto whom the promise was made, so as to lose
all strength of obligation. The promise which I made at my entrance upon the
Office of Public professor, being now (by Gods assistance) performed,
according to my talent, with as much brevity, p^rspicuity and fidelity, as I
have been able; I thought fit to add some few admonitions concerning the use
and abuse of Oaths, as Corollaries, whereby our lives, and Consciences may be
profitably directed, not by way of exhortation, as they use in Sermons, but
remembering I teach in the School, and not in the Church, by way of Thesis, or
practical Conclusions, briefly proposed, and clearly explained.

SECT. X.
THe first Conclusion is against Anabaptists and Socinians, That the use of
Oaths is lawful. I prove it first by the practice in the Old Testament. The
godly Patriarchs swear; Controversies were determined by oath according to the
Institution of Moses in the Law; the Prophets prescribed the condition of
oaths to be observed. Nor can any just reason be rendered, why this should be
lawful for the pious under the Old, and not for the faithful under the New
Testament; seeing it is apparent from the end of an oath, whose use is
perpetual, that it appertains not unto the Ceremonial Law abrogated by
Christ; and from the form which seems to have nothing common with the type. I
prove it, secondly, by the example of God, of Angels, of Apostles: those being
often introduced in holy Scripture, swearing after the manner of men, these
Historically. Thirdly, by the custom of all Nations, who directed by the light
of Nature, have judged the bond of an oath for the convenience of Civil
Society, the surest confirmation of Faith, then which there can be no clearer
discovery of the Law of Nature. Fourthly, from the end of an oath, which is the
confinmation of truth in doubtful matters, where all other proofs are
defi^int; which end seeing it is necessary for the composing and determination
of Controversies, it must needs be that the necessary means unto the end,
should be at the least lawful. Fifthly, from the nature of an oath containing
nothing in it self which is intrinsecally evil; for neither is a religious act
evil, nor the Confirmation of a doubtful thing evil, nor Invocation of Divine
testimony evil; of which members the essential definition of an oath
consists.

SECT. XI.
THe second Conclusion, The use of Oaths in common discourse is unlawful. The
first proof is from the nature of an oath, Because every religious act being a
part of Divine Wotship ought to be performed with due reverence, and with some
both preparation and attention; all which must needs be far off, when oaths
are rashly scattered without judgment, or heedlesly without consideration. The
second from the end, which is the confirmation of a doubtful business, seeing
our ordinary discourse is for the most part upon frivolous matters, which
either are not doubtful, or not of moment to require religious confirmation;
or if they were, would be little more credited for his oath, who makes
swearing his common custom; for such will be as soon believed, if that which
they say seem true, without an oath, or if otherwise, no whit the sooner for
swearing. The third from the Cause whence such kind of Oaths are derived;
which is either a vicious habit contracted by long and pernicious custom;
which habit is the fruit, and mark of a profane, if not Atheistical heart; or
some exorbitant perturbation of the mind^, as excessive anger, intemperate joy,
with which whilst the mind boyles, the mouth foameth to the dishonor of God;
and at which those words of James seem peculiarly to aim; Chap. 5. verse. 1^.
But above all things, my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by the
Earth. In the foregoing ver^es, he exhorts the faithful to suffer injuries
with patience, and in the following v^r^e teaches the Christian how to
entertain himself whether he be sad or cheerful: a place worthy to be the
exercise of learned men, and something more diligently considered, then as yet
it has been by Interpreters. Perhaps this cursory Paraphrase upon the words
such as it is may contribute something toward that end; as it seems unto me
they express thus much. Set the examples of ancient Prophets and holy men
before your eyes. If ye suffer adversity, imitate their patience. If in all
things you cannot attain to that perfection, yet thus far at least, except ye
be extreme negligent, you may go with ease, above all things, take heed lest
too impatient of your grief, or too much transported with your joy, ye break
forth into rash oaths, to the dishonor of God, and shame of Christian
conversation. But rather contain your selves, whether troubled or rejoicing,
within the bounds of modesty; mingle not heaven, and earth^ let not all things
be filled with your oaths and clamours; if you affirm orderly a thing, let it
be with calmnesse, and a mere affirmation, or negation: But if either of these
passions be more impetuous, and strive to overflow the narrow channels of your
bosoms, it will be your wisdoms to let it forth unto the glory of God. Do
you demand by what means? I will tell you: Is any amongst you afflicted? Let
not his impatience break forth into oaths and blasphemies, the floodgates of
wrath; but rather let him pray, and humbly implore God that he would vouchsafe
him patience, till his heavy hand be removed. Is any merry? Let him not bellow
it forth in Oaths, like a Bacchanalian, but rather sing it in Hymns and
Psalms unto the praise of God; who has made his cup to overflow, and crowned
him with happy days. If any man admit not this latitude unto the Apostles
words, let him use his own judgment. I have only expressed that which I think
probable, and give no man Law. But to return, if I have digressed; it is
certain that the words of James altogether condemn that evil custom, which is
now grown amongst high and low* men of all sorts inveterate. It would cost me
many leaves to sum up that which has been declared against this impious use by
holy Fathers, ancient Doctors of all Nations, Hebrews, Greeks, Latins, yea
even Heathens; of many take a few: Sirach the wisest of the Hebrews, Accustom
not thy mouth to swearing: As a servant that is continually beaten, shall not
be without a blew mark, so he that swears, and names God continually, shall
not be faultlesse. A man that uses much swearing shall be filled with
iniquity. Amongst the Greeks, Eusebius the Heathen Philosopher, Many (says he)
exhort men to swear the truth, but I am of opinion that men ought not easily to
swear at all. Amongst the Latins, Augustine; Beware of oaths as much as you
may, because it were better not to swear, though a truth; not that it is sin to
swear truth, but that it is a most grievous one to swear falsehood; into which
he may the sooner fall, who accustometh himself to swearing. And in another
place, a false oath is destructive, and even a true one dangerous. But what
need is there of other testimonies, seeing this daily and unnecessary use of
swearing is so positively forbidden, as scarce any thing more in holy
Scriptures; by Christ himself; But I say unto you swear Mat. 5. 34.
not at all; and by his Apostle St. James, in the place cited, Above all things
swear not.

SECT. XII.
THe third conclusion, An oath ought not to be made but upon a just, weighty
and necessary occasion. An oath is of those things which are neither evil in
themselves, as murder, sacrilege, perjury, and all other vices be; nor of
those which are desirable of themselves, as deeds of Charity, Justice,
Obedience and all other virtues; but of such as are good only because
necessary, by Hypothesis, and for their end, and not desirable, but in order
unto that end, of which sort are all those which are ordained for the redress
of some defect, as Physic. For as a medicine was not invented for it self, but
for health; and as there would be no use thereof, if men's bodies were not
obnoxious unto diseases, (Honor the Physician for necessity sake:) so an oath
is instituted for the confirmation of faith amongst men; nor would be of any
use, if mankind were not alas too subject unto ignorance, and perfidy; which
perhaps was our Saviors meaning by those words, Matthew. 5. 37. comes of evil.
Wherefore as the use of Physic, where it seems not necessary to the
preservation of life and health, is to be avoided: so oaths are likewise to be
avoided where necessary preservation of humane society, and confirmation of
faith seem not to require them. That admonition of Epictetus (as all the rest
of that Stoic) is wholesome, Avoid an oath, if you can, wholly: if not, as
much you may. An oath is a sacred thing, but by how much the more sacred, by so
much the more dangerous, if unduely taken. As medicines of the greatest virtue
and efficacy are the more hurtful unto the body, if rashly and unskilfully
administered. The use of assertory oaths is necessary in Commonwealths,
especially in Courts of Justice, for the investigation of truth in matter of
particular fact, whereunto belong oaths, witnesses, Compurgators, etc. In
extrajudiciall and private businesses, it is not so frequent, yet it may be
sometimes necessary; to wit, where it concerns a man very much to be
believed, and he cannot be believed except he swear. The promissory oath is of
no use in Justice, but of very great in extrajudicials, both public and
private. First public, to keep subjects in allegiance unto their Princes; for
the confirmation of Leagues and Contracts of Kings and Commonwealths; for the
observation of Laws, and Statutes; and consequently honor, order, and peace of
politic bodies, and Societies; for the faithful administration of public
Offices, and the like. And also private, as the Ancients often used it, for
establishment of Contracts; performance of Conditions between buyer and seller;
payment of debts; restitution, loans, profits, trusts, etc. But in most matters
of private concernment, other ways may be taken with less scruple of
Conscience, and better assurance against the perfidy of wicked men: as Pawns,
Feoffees, Bonds, Witnesses, and other judicial obligations. And where such may
be conveniently used, it is best to abstain altogether from oaths; lest by
frequent swearing, and upon slight occasions, the too familiar use of a thing
so sacred degenerate into contempt; or whilst we practice swearing, we learn
perjury. Augustine says truly; Except a man have tried, he cannot know how
hard a thing it is to shake off the custom of swearing; and not to do that
rashly, which sometimes he must do necessarily.

SECT. XIII.
THe fourth Conclusion; It is a grievous sin, unduly to exact an oath. Now he
exacteth unduly, First, who compels another to take an oath, which is
neither ordained by the Law, nor received by custom, nor established by
undenyed prescription, without Intermission. Secondly, who exacteth an oath
evidently repugnant, or which seems by that sense, which the words bear,
according to their use in common speech, to be repugnant unto a former oath
lawfully taken. Thirdly, who compels another to swear unto an unlawful
thing; to wit, against his duty to God, to his Superiors, against the Laws of
the Kingdom, against a good life. Fourthly, who offers an oath of ambiguous
sense, or any way captious; thereby to ensnare the conscience, life, liberty,
or fortune of his neighbor. Fifthly, who without necessity either terrifieth
any person by threatenings, compels him by authority, or inveigleth him by
persuasion; example, deceit, or other means to an oath, which he knows to be
against the Conscience of that person. Would to God all such as are in
Authority would seriously consider with what a foul and indelible brand,
Jeroboam the son of Nebat has stigmatized his name and Conscience, in causing
the people of Israel to sin, and how grievously they provoke the Lord to wrath,
who abuse the power he has given them for the edification unto the destruction
of others.

SECT. XIV.
THe fifth Conclusion; An Oath is not to be taken with a relucting and
unsatisfied Conscience. The first proof, because that which is not of faith is
sin. The second, because we ought to swear in Judgment: which certainly he
does not who goes against the judgment of his Conscience. The third, because
such an action must needs be occasioned by regard had unto some temporal
advantage, or fear of some loss, or hope of some profit, or desire to obtain
favor, or the like. And how ill does it become a Christian to prefer the world
before God, dirt before heaven, the body before the soul, temporal gain before
eternal joy, the follies of this before the hopes of eternal life, external
peace before the quiet of Conscience? The fourth, because the party so swearing
evidently exposes himself to the danger of perjury. For he who through fear,
or hope of any temporal loss or gain, may be induced to swear, will hardly if
the like fear or hope dissuade, be induced to perform his oath, and yet
Heathens themselves have numbered perjury amongst the most heinous crimes, which
kindle the anger of the immortal Gods; not against the guilty only, and their
posterity, but even to the destruction of whole Nations. How much more ought
we acknowledging the only true God, who has solemnly professed that he will
not hold him guil^lesse that takes his Name in vain, to fear and tremble, lest
whilst we behold on every side the plentiful^ and luxurious crop of Oaths and
Perjury, grown already ripe for the Harvest, God the most just Judge, to the
utter destruction of so perfidious and profane a generation, should instantly
thrust in the sharp sickle of his judgments? We have already been sensible
that our most merciful Father is provoked unto wrath, and his infinite
patience wounded and (as I may say) overcome with our intolerable wickedness,
converted into fury. Where all are extreme, it is not easy to say for what
particular crime. Yet certainly he who seriously considers how far we have
been, since God has smitten us with a more heavy hand, from bewailing those
most grievous sins of oath^s and perjury, nay rather how vastly they are
increased, here through the uncontrouled, and unpunished licentiousness of
oaths and blasphemies, there through the foul Hypocrisy of perjury hid under
the specious pretense of Religion, cannot choose but think upon those words of
the Prophet Jeremiah; Through Oaths the Land mourns.

Wherefore Men, Fathers, and Brethren, I bese^ch you as many as are here
present, and all, wherever they be, who wish well unto the public peace of
this Church, and Kingdom, or to the private of their own souls, and
Consciences, that we take most diligent heed, lest we fall into contempt of
Gods most holy Name, and violation of our own faith; that we fly all
unnecessary Oaths, constantly refuse those which are unlawfully requi^ed,
faithfully perform those which we have lawfully taken, as far as is in our
power, courageously restrain the licentiousness of sin in oaths; and
continually implore our great and good God, that he would give us (being taught
by his correction, and humbled under his most powerful hand) hearts to fly
unto his mercy, to acknowledge his Justice, to implore his grace, for the
remission of all our sins, amendment of our lives, and salvation of our souls,
by and through the merit of our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father, and
the holy Spirit, three Persons, and one God, be the Kingdom, the power and the
glory, for ever and ever.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.
An exact and large Table, of the most remarkable things contained in this Book.
The Number denotes the Page.

ABraham's league with Abimelech, 163

Accessaries extinct by the principal ceasing. 249 Act of an Oath implies
reverence of the Divine Name. 8 Advisement to be took before one swear. 206 All
obligation to duty, respects duty de futuro. 30 Any man may recede from his
own right. 252 Asseverations, Attestations, and Oaths differ. 164 Assuerus ^is
oath to Esther. 96
B.
Bond of an Oath is indispensable. 234. 247 By my faith, and by my truth, are
oaths. 167. 175
C.
Childrens oaths. 109 Christ generally forbids unnecessary oaths. 171
Commutation of an oath is unlawful. 242. Confirmation the true end of an oath.
13 Conscience to be preferred to fear of punishment. 27 Cydias his oath. 240
D.
David's oath touching Nabal. 19 Debts twofold. 25 Definition of an oath.
Dictates of conscience, bind us not to act against it. 84 Difference between
an oath and a vow, 10. between an oath and an assertion. ibid. in Doubtful
matters the safest part is to be taken. 53 Doubting of an oath. 223 Drunken
men's oaths. 111. it is unfit for them to swear. 112 Duty of subjects
perpetually obligatory. 246
E.
Efficient cause of an oath twofold. 105 Egyptians oaths. 157. 170 Enraged
men's oaths. 111. it is unfit for them to swear. 112 Error in the substance
makes the oath invalid. 134 Every oath is in its nature binding. 30 Evil can
receive no validity from an oath. 76 Exceptions and conditions to be prefumed
in oaths. 54 Excessive curiosity of method to be avoided. 65 Extent and
latitude of an oath. 215
F.
Faith and justice, firm bonds of humane society. 14. Final cause of an oath.
16. 218 First and second intension of an oath. 216 Force of words. 167 Forms
of oaths. 149 Forms of words. 165
G.
God swearing. 21 God chiefly called for a witness in all oaths 8. especially
in true and formal oaths. 9 God is invocated in all oaths. 10 God not to be
invocated as witness, but in doubts worthy his vindication. 93
H.
Hannibals oath. 108 Habit of swearing. 220 Heirs of the party s^earing, how
far bound by his oath. 126 Herod's oath. 4. 19. 97 He that ^wears by Idols,
swears by them he thinks to be Gods. 9 How to know whether a man have sworn o^
^o. 163
I.
Jacobs covenant with Laban. 163 Jesuits defend AEquivocation. 194 Impossible
things oblige not. 60. things may be impossible three ways. ibid. Impulsive
causes of oaths. 130. they are twofold. ibid. Intention of the party how to be
judged. 130 Intention frees not a man from perjury. 224 Internal forms of
oaths. 188 Joseph's oath. 169 Joshuas oath. 19. 132 Irritation of a lawful
Superior, cancels the bond of an oath. 247 Judahs oath to Thamar. 219
L.
Law twofold. 23 Lawful power required in an oath. 206 Lawful to swear to an
Infide^. 122
M.
Madmens and fools oaths. 109 Manichees did swear frequently by the creature.
159 Matter of an oath either indefinite or definite. 66 Mental reservation in
oaths. 198 Mind and intention of the party swearing. 176
O.
Oaths of those who are not in their own power. 115. without his consent in
whose power they are. 117 Oaths made to Infidels ought to be kept. 122 Oaths
are personal bonds. 127 Oaths obtained by fraud. 132 Oaths extorted by fear
135. by a slight fear 136. they bind. ibid. Oaths made to Thieves are binding.
138 Oaths by signs without words. 151 Oaths by the creature 153. are
unlawful ibid. it is good to abstain from them, 157 Oaths made by Idols 160.
are double sin. 161 yet they are obligatory. 162 Oaths according to the
custom of the country. 174 Oaths given to Princes. 183 Oaths of Allegiance
taken by Jesuits. 200 Oaths of Allegiance. 73 Oaths upon condition. 215
Oaths in complement. 221 Oaths religious acts. 6 Oaths ends of all
contradictions. 13 Oaths are the greatest humane faith that can be. 15 Oaths
assertory and promissory. 17 Oaths invoke God both as a witness and a Judge.
21 Oaths oblige the conscience. 29 Oaths instituted of God. 45 Oaths make
not former Obligations void. 58 Oaths of things simply impossible, are not
obligatory nor lawful. 66 Oaths against the law of a community. 80 Oaths of
things which the parties swearing think to be unlawful. 82 Oaths impeditive
of some future good. 86 Oaths tending to some ones hurt. 88 Oaths giving
scandal hinder them not from binding. 92 Oaths in cases indifferent both
lawful and binding. 93 Oaths bind in the matter of least moment. 94 Oaths
of homage and Supremacy. 98 Oaths of members of Communities. 99 Oaths are of
those things which are not evil in themselves, 264. nor desirable, ibid. good
because necessary. ibid. Oaths not to be taken with reluctance, nor an
unsatisfied conscience. 269 Object of an oath is a doubtful thing. 11
Obligation what it is. 23. it is twofold. 26 Obligation of conscience, arises
precisely out of the debt of duty. 27 Obligation of an oath is stricti juris.
48. tempered with equity, but not corrupted with favor. 49
P.
Paulus Cortesius, and Peter Bembo too much affected to elegancy. 35 Perjury is
of three sorts. 38 Perjury not taken away by any kind of simulation. 41
Philosophers and Divines are not to affect oratory. 36 Pomponius his oath. 140
Promissory oaths. 17. under them Comminatory oaths are comprehended. 19. what
difference between them and Assertory oaths. 29. to be understood in that
sense as the party to whom the oath is made intends. 209 Proper matter of an
oath. 15 Proper obligation of a promissory oath. 31
Q.
Qualities required in one who deferreth an oath. 120
R.
Rational judgment required in an oath. 106 Relaxation freeth a man from his
oath. 250 avails nothing in contracts of Matrimony. 256 Religion of an oath
always held most sacred. 7 Regulus his oath. 123 Rights of Rulers over their
subjects perpetual. 246 Rights fitting to be in Divine worship. 180 Rites of
the Old Testament all alike lawful or unlawful. 181 Romans oath. 170
S.
Sense of an oath how to be taken. 190 Silences sworn to Thieves. 144
Simplicity becomes an oath. 37. to which two kinds of simulation are
repugnant. 39 Simulation is against the third Commandment. 47 Single and
double truth. 228 Sins against the Conscience are grievous. 83 Solemn rites of
oaths. 178 Solemnity of the act aggravates the sin of an oath. 183 Some things
require a milder interpretation. 51 Some legal rites of society appertain even
to thieves. 140 Solution of the bond of an oath what it is 229. proper to a
promissory oath. 227 Solomon's oath to Bathsheba. 96 Speech of ambiguous and
indefinite sense, before it be distinguished, is no proposition. 212
Spontaneous oaths forbidden unless it be upon necessary and weighty
occasions. 131. 307 Summary of what is contained in the book. 3 Superfluous
things not to be put in definitions. 10
T.
Tacit antecedent consent. 118. subsequent. 119 Things cannot by their mixture
produce a new species, without some real immutation. 24 Things unlawful ex
accidente. 82 Two swearing mutually. 125 Twofold obligation may arise out of an
oath. 143
U.
Verbal forms of oaths. 163 Verbal equivocation in an oath. 192 Unlawful
things oblige not. 53. 61 Unlawful things several ways. 76 Unlawful things
secundario. 78 Unlawful oaths to be refused, even to danger of life. 121
Unlawful to promise any thing to an evil intent. 218 Undue exaction of an
oath is a grievous sin. 267 Vows made to God, and oaths to men are the
strongest of all obligations. 29 Use of oaths lawful. 257. in common
discourse unlawful. 259 Use of promissory oaths in justice. 266
W.
What ought not to be performed, ought not to be sworn. 63 What truth is
required in a promissory oath. 227 What is not of faith is sin. 269 What are
not fit matters for oaths, 12. what are. ibid. Who swears by the creature, does
it some way inrelatio^ God. 9 Whosoever is obliged, is obliged to another. 58
Why an oath called Sacrament. 7 Will cannot be forced. 142 Words are
interpreters of things conceived in the mind. 150
FINIS.

