STRANGE'S CASE, STRANGLY ALTERED


Or, a HUE and CRY after a Strange old Yorkish Tike full of Black and Blue, Red
and Yellow Spots, of a Motley, Dun, Brindled, ill-livered Color; neither
Mastiff nor Mungrel, Tumbler or Lurcher, Lap-Dog nor Setter, Bull-Dog or
Bear-Dog, Wolf-Dog or Sheep-Biter, but all of them: of a Strange Amphibious
Nature, lives on Land or on Water, in Court or in Kennel, run away from his
Master, about the 26th Instant, seen on Saturday last behind a Coach, between
Sam's Costee-House, and Madam Cellier's, whoever has (or shall) take him up,
have a special care of him (unless you know his ill qualities) for he has a
thousand Dog-Tricks, ( viz.) to Fetch for the Papists, Carry for the
Protestants, Whine to the King, Dance to Noll's Fiddle, Fa^^ on the Courtier,
Leap at their Crusts, wag his Tail at all Bitches, hunt Counter to the Plot,
Tonge-Pad the Evidence, and Cringe to the Crucifix; but above all this, he has
one damned old ^rick of slipping the Halter. If there be any that can give
notice of this dangerous Curr, to the men in Authority (who have been several
days in Grand Quest after him) or bring him (if h^^e not there already) to the
Sign of the Popes Demi-Culverin, next Door to the Masquerade Committee, in the
Street of St. Lud, or to the Tantivie Abhorrers, at the Levitical-Club-House in
(...) Mary-Alley, so that he may be tied up from his Meat, for the Good of the
Public; he will do his Country good Service, the Protestants Right, the Law
Justice, the King a Kindness, undeceive the Church, and himself a mighty Favor
in obtaining the Marks-Royal, of a Loyal true Englishman, a Right good
Protestant, and a hearty Lover of his King and Country; all Which shall be paid
him down (on the Spot) for his honest Care and Pains.

The Figures above may be thus Explained.
I.
WAS ever Gallows better set,
Where Hangman, Rope and Roger met?
No Fault at all (save one)
The Curr by chance the Noose did slip,
By help of Devil and his Whip,
Ill Luck as could have come.
II.
Thus having 'scapt the Fatal Tree
In devilish haste, away flies he
For Scotland, France or Rome;
No matter which (for all he strives)
And needs must go, when Devil drives,
Together with his BROM.
III.
The Curr thus scared, is skulkt from Town,
With Cross, and Beads, and Pen in's Crown,
About his Neck the Rope,
Was Fellow to the self same String
In which St. Coleman Late did swing;
Blessed Relics for the Pope.
IV.
Behold, how Strange does Levite look!
Now Champion has the Cause forsook,
They Will want their Rogers-Trusty
To Bark against Dissenters loud,
May please the Knaves, and cheat the Crowd,
With Lies grown stale and musty.
V.
The Devil too's turned Cat in the Pan,
Now Hodge has served him all he can,
What would the Devil have more?
It Is pretty sport to see his Sire
Thus Lash his Haunches for his Hire,
'Cause he the Mass forswore.
VI.
But Father Pope is wondrous kind
Unto his Ban-dog, out of wind,
See how the Knave does sawn,
When Towzer (Rogue enough) has been,
To merit from the Man of Sin
As well is Sleeves of Lawn.
VII.
Next take a view of Macks sweet Face,
To whom the Tories all give place,
And hereby hangs a Tale.
He buys a Traitors Service dear,
Who runs, and hides his Head for fear,
When Is Plotting cannot prevail.
VIII.
Now, Pluto, is your time; put on,
And take them all to Acheron,
It is your due to have 'um,
Secure them on Stigian Shore
That they may trouble us no (...),
And hang them up that save (...).
Amen.

