A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES Held at Dorchestor in the County of Dorset,
upon the fourth day of March in the year of our Lord 1669.

By JOHN STRAIGHT. Master of Arts, sometimes a Member of Queens College in
Cambridge, now Vicar of Stourepain in the County of Dorset, and Chaplain to the
right Reverend Father in God, John late Lord Bishop of Sarum.

CONTAINING The Metaphorical description of a sincere Christan: 1. By his care
and providence. 2. By his pains and industry. 3. By his wisdom and discretion.
4. By the ensuing perils and dangers. 5. By the invalidity of all perils and
dangers. 6. By the cause and reason of this firm validity.


Non dormientibus provenit Regnum coelorum, nec otio and desidia torpentibus
Beatitudo aeternitatis repromittitur, Leo.

For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works which: God
has ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2. 10.

London, Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain. 1670.

TO THE Right Worshipful ROBERT BARKER Esquire High Sheriff of the County of
Dorset.
SIR,
ALthough I have often experimented the infallibility of that Adagie (veritas
odium parit) yet I cannot account it fit that truth should be concealed, nor
clanculary crowded up into a corner: The truth therefore is this, (you know it
Sir, and I am willing that others should be made acquainted with it also) that
I was very unwilling to undertake to Preach at the Assizes for you: You must
needs acknowledge the many arguments I used to excuse my self from it: As
First, my age being now past my Ninth and great Climaterical: Secondly, the
crasiness of my body, Thirdly, my frequent distempers, both of the vellicating
Stone and torturing Gout, all which were not only great impediments to my due
preparation for such a service, but might have taken me off and utterly
disinabled me to do it at the destined time for it. But none of these (to make
use of Terence his phrase) could causam dicere with you: No nor could all these
together prevail to pass by me, and persuade you to pitch upon another more fit
for that employment. And now since that is past you have proceeded to another
postulate, viz. to request and that not barely, petere, but expetere, the
publication of those my poor and weak endeavors; you continue pressing of me
to be in the press again. Give me leave Sir to expostulate with you a little
with the Poet: Proper.
Quid mescribendi tam vastum mittis in equor?
Non sunt apta m^ae grandia vela rati.


I must also tell you further Sir, that I had even almost Protested against
Printing in such times as these are, in which that ingenious invention is so
much abused with contentious and useless, I might add pernicious and seditious
Pamphlets. But seeing your importunity will not receive a modest denial, I have
now therefore thus far yielded to your request, that after a serious scanning
of these my rude notes (if they happen to gain the favor of an Imprimantur)
they then should be published to the perusal of others. And then Sir, if after
their pass they chance to meet with the whip of some censorious dispositions
(of which sort of people the world is now too full) who will perhaps say that
these thing are too mean for this ripe and exquisite Age, I for my part shall
acknowledge them to be so, and you must bare the blame who have forced them
from me: Yet withal let me desire such to consider, that at the building of
Solomon's Temple, there was room as well for the burden bearers as for other
more curious Artificers; and at the making of the Tabernacle, not only the
bringers of blew Silk and Purple and Scarlet, Exodus 25. 4, 5.
but even the poorest which brought but Goats hair and Rambs Skins were
accepted. However it happen, this is my comfort, that they that know my
reservedness, will acquit me from popularity and seeking my self abroad, and
will not brand me with that busy humor by which too many in this scribbling
age, have even made the times to surfeit with their needless papers. Sir, I
have now but two things more to say, The one of which is to you, and the other
is for you. That which I have to say to you is this, That if this my Sermon
shall afford any good either to your self, or to any other truly fearing God,
I shall not then repent my giving way to the granting of your desires by my
thus imparting it to pulick view. The other thing is a Supplication for you,
that the God of goodness would perpetuate your present happiness here in this
world, and crown you with everlasting happiness hereafter in the World to come,
and this is the hearty prayers of him who is

SIR, Your nearly related and humbly devoted Servant, John Straight.

To the Indulgent READERS.
BEnevolent friends, it were but lost labor to tell you why I gave way to the
Printing of this Sermon: I have said enough of that before, and shall not now
nauseate you with a crambe. You see what importunity can do, even with those of
the most private and retired dispositions I must now acquaint you that I expect
not to escape the lash of censure, as having had some experience thereof, by
the printing of a former Sermon upon a just occasion mentioned in the Epistle
to the Reader: When I was by some malevolent spirits stigmatized with the title
of a vainglorious person for it: As if an affectation of public notice had
only put me upon the publication of those mean conceptions, when as the Lord
knows how conscious I was, and yet am of my own weakness and defects. But there
is I see, a spirit of pride and bitterness in too many, Saint Aug.
qui vel non intelligendo reprehendunt, vel reprehendendo non intelligunt as
Saint Austin speaks. And to such ignorant uncharitable censurers I wish either
a more sound judgment, or a more sober affection. The desire to disgrace
another certainly cannot spring from a good root. Seneca.
Cupio si fieri potest propitiis auribus quid sentiam dicere, sin minus dicam
and iratis as sometime Seneca said. I am contented to receive a scarre from
Zoilus, so as some others may escape a wound, having learned in some measure
from the blessed Apostle to go through all reports. Seneca.
Male autem de te opinantur homines sed Mali, says Seneca, Moverer, side me
Marius, si Cato si Lesius sapiens, si alter Cato, si Scipiones duo ista
loquerentur moverer, si hoc judicio facerent, quod nunc morbo faciunt. I only
add Martials quirp to such kind of carping back-biters and Procustean Tyrants,
and so dismiss them Mar. Epigr. l. 11. Epigr. 93.
Mentitur qui te vitiosum Zoile dixit; non vitiosus homo es, Zoile, sed Vitium.
And thus returning to the moderate, unprejudiced and candid Readers hereof, to
whose considerate and prudent inspection and revising I commit it, desiring
that they may rather see more than they expect, than look for more than they
find in it. And if then after their perusal they acquire any emolument, either
of delight to please their fancy, or of wholesome instruction to regulate their
conversation, let them bless God, thank the High Sheriff of the County of
Dorset, and send up a Supplication to Heaven for me, who do unfeignedly desire
the truth of Grace in them, and the increase of it also on all the Israel of
God, and am

Your most humble Servant in the work of the Ministry JOHN STRAIGHT.

A SERMON Preached at the Assizes held at Dorchester in the County of Dorset,
March the 4 th 1669.
Luke 6. 48. He is like a man that built an house and dug deep and laid the
foundation on a rock, and when the waters arose the floods beat upon that house
and could not shake it, for it was founded on a Rock.


SAint Paul traveling from Malta to Rome sailed Act. 28. 11.
in a Ship of Alexandria whose badge (by which Ships are usually discerned one
from another) was Castor and Pollux. Gods Children are traveling hence to
Heaven, and sailing through the turbulent waves of this troublesome World, to
the tranquil Haven of eternal happiness; though not in a Ship of Alexandria,
yet in the bark of their bodies; their badg to discry them from hypocritical
time-servers, and cognizance to discover them from such as call Christ Lord,
Lord, but do not the things that he speaks, is not Castor and Polux, but he
that hears my word and does the same, he is like a man that built a house,
and dug deep and laid the foundation on a Rock, and when the waters arose,
the floods beat upon that house, and could not shake it, for it was founded on
a Rock.

The words (you see) are the cognizance of a sincere Christian, the very badge
of a true beleiver, Metaphorically deciphered out unto your view by these six
subsequent things

First, by his care and providence, in building him a house.

Secondly, by his pains and industry in digging deep.

Thirdly, by his wisdom and discretion, in laying his foundation on a Rock.

Fourthly, by the ensuing perils and dangers, in the rising of the waters and
beating of the flood.

Fifthly, by the invalidity and weakness of those perils and dangers, in that
they could not shake it.

Sixththly and lastly, by the cause and reason of its firm validity, for it was
founded on a Rock. He is like a man which etc.

A sound and sincere Christian, is first described by his care and providence
in building him a house, He is like a man which built an house. I find in
Scripture four kinds of Builders. First, God himself. Secondly, Gods
Ministers. Thirdly, one building up another. And Fourthly, every particular
Christian building up himself.

The first kind of Builder is God himself: So the Psalmist; except the Lord
build the house, their labor is but lost Psalm. 127. 1.
that built it.

Now God he builds four sorts of houses. As First, a house of his providence,
to wit, the great and glorious fabric of this Universe, The Heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work. Secondly, a house
of his Psalm. 19. 1. 1 Cor. 6. 19.
spirit. Know ye not that your bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost which
is in you, so the Apostle. Thirdly, a house of correction for those that are
incorrigible. Tophet is ordained Isa. 30. 33.
of old, says the Prophet Isaiah. Fourthly and lastly, a White Hall, a
Star Chamber, a house of glory, not made with hands, but eternal in the
Heavens, so Saint Paul. 2 Cor. 5. 1.
Let the house of Gods providence banish distrust, and teach us thankfulness.
Let the house of his Spirit, bridle our carnal concupiscence, and induce us to
consecrate our bodies a living sacrifice holy, acceptable unto God. Romans 12. 1.
Let his house of correction make us tremble at sin, and move us to newness of
life. And lastly, let his house of glory instruct us to wean and withdraw our
affections from the transitory things of this present World, and Phil. 1. 23.
persuade us to a longing with Saint Paul, to be dissolved and to be with
Christ which is best of all. And this of the first knd of Builders.

2. Gods Ministers are a second kind of Builders. For behold this day have I
set thee over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms to pluck up and to root out,
to destroy and to throw down, to build and to plant, its God own commission
Jer. 1. 10.
to the Prophet Jeremiah. Now these they build three manner of ways: Verbo,
Vita and Precibus. By Preaching, by Practicing, and by Praying.

First, By preaching, Peter love thou me? feed my Joh. 21. 17. Phil 3. 17.
Lambs.

Secondly, by practicing. Brethren be followers of me, and look on them which
walk so as you have us for an example.

Thirdly, by praying. For this cause we cease not to pray Cor. 1. 9.
for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will
in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, so St Paul.

3. A Third kind of Builder, is one building up another: Wherefore exhort one
another, and edify one another, even as ye do, so the Apostle Jonathan must
build up David, 1 These. 5. 11.
and David Jonathan. Brethren if a man be suddenly taken in any offense, ye
which are spiritual restore such a one with Gal. 6. 1.
the spirit of meekness, the word in the Original is (...) build him up by
putting him in joint again.

4. The Fourth and last kind of Builder, is every particular Christian
building up himself. So Saint Jude in his Jude verse. 20.
General Epistle. But Beloved edify your selves in your most holy faith. And
this is he that hears the word of God and does it: This is he whose
foundation is faith, and whose house is good works. Bonav.
Similis est hic aedificanti domum pe^ profectum virtutum, so Bonaventure; this
is he which is like a man that built an house.

Obs. Gods Children they are not careless hearers but careful builders: Their
Religion rests not in the ear, rowles not in the eye. floates not on the
tongue, nor in a word does it only consist in the bare show of outward
holiness; No, no, its foundation remains in the heart, and its roots in the
inner man: They hear the word and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience,
so our Savior tells us; they seek not so much to seem, as indeed to be
religious; they are therefore builders not of slight Luke 8. 15.
or superficial boothes, but of solid and substanstial buildings; (...), He is
like a man that built an house. Dyonis. Carthus.
Qui verbis Christi obedit spiritualem demum, secretumque mentis thalamum, el
virtutum, aedificationem, bonorumque actuum nexum fundat so Dyonisius
Carthusianus. He that yields prompt obedience to Christ's commands builds
himself a spiritual house, a secret Cabinet of his mind, a building of virtues,
and a close compacted tenement of good deeds. Good works beloved they are the
structure of every Christian builder, the inseparable companions of every true
beleiver. This is a true saying says Saint Paul, and these things I will that
thou should affirm; Tit. 3. 8.
that they which have believed God, might be careful to show forth good works.
Faith must be showed by good works: For as the body without the spirit is dead,
even so, Faith without works is dead also Saint James. James 2 18.


Faith therefore though it be the foundation of good works and evidence of
things not seen, yet it is nothing worth if works be wanting, nor can it
justify any man before God, unless by good works it self, be justified before
men. Was not Abraham our Father justified through good James 2. 21.
works, says Saint James, when he offered Isaac his Son upon the Altar that
is, was he not by his works known and found to be justified? Did not Jobs works
thus manifest his faith? Who was no less than eyes to the blind, feet to the
lame and a pitiful Father to the distressed poor, as he testifies of himself.
Yea as possible it is to separate light from its fountain the Sun, as good
works from saving Job 29 15, 16. Tit. 1. 16.
faith the mother.

Use 1. What then shall we think of all those that have only a form of
Godliness denying the power thereof: Such as profess that they know God and yet
by works deny him, and are abominable and disobedient, and to every good work
even reprobates, as St Paul speaks of them to Titus. Surely beloved these
though perhaps they may acount themselves in the number of Gods faithful
builders, yet are they indeed no better than Babel builders, building to
themselves nothing else but aerial Castles of sad and sempiternal confusion;
clouds they are without water carried about of winds, corrupt trees without
fruit twice dead, and plucked up by the roots, wandering Stars to whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness for Jude verse. 12.
evermore, so Jude in his general Epistle verse 21. Serpit hodie putrida tabes
hypocrisis per omne corpus Ecclesiae and quo tolerantius eo desperatius, eoque
periculosius quo communius. Bern.
The corrupt consumption of counterfeiting hypocrisy creeps at this day
through the whole body of the Church, which is so much the more desperate, so
much the more dangerous, by how much the more endured, by how much the more
common 'twas the complaint of good Saint Bernard in his time, and I would to
God there were not as great need at this time for me to make it mine; for do no
not all, or at least, most of all, slighting sincerity, content themselves with
the bare show and formality of Religion? Nay, which is worse, is not religion
commonly made a cloak to palliate deformed vice, which seldom or never dare
show her self in public, unless she steal the robes of virtue, and actuate her
mischief with sly hypocrisy: Is not Pharisaical avarice now veiled under a
pretense of long prayers as sometimes we read it was in our Math. 23. 14.
blessed Saviors time? Is not Herodians cruelty now covered over with the
vizard of holy devotion as heretofore it was with a (...), that I may come and
Math. 2. 8.
worship him? Yes, yes, we are I fear most of us all like whited tombs
appearing beautiful outward, but are within full of rottenness: We have fair
leaves but foul fruit, good words but no good works, and yet we would be
counted in the number of Gods faithful builders too; but let us not, O let us
not dear Brethren I beseech you, any longer deceive our selves with a vain
conceit of couzening God, who is not mocked like men with shadows, nor yet
mislead like us with outward shows. Let us not think to mask our impiety from
his omniscient Majesty under religious pretenses, nor yet to muffle our
hypocrisy under the garment of zealous devotion. No, no, Bonav.
Ostensio enim reverentiae in ore fallax est, nisi adsit pariter exhibitio
obedientiae in opere as Bonaventure well observes; in vain do they honor God
with Isa. 29. 13, 14.
their lips, whose hearts are far from him, so the Prophet Isaiah. Who shall
ascend into the Mountain of the Lord? Psalm. 24. 3, 4.
and who shall stand in his holy place? 'twas the question of worthy David, and
his answer immediately follows, even he that has innocent hands and a pure
heart, that has not lift up his mind unto vanity, nor sworn to deceive his
neighbor. Chrysostom.
Answer me now O dissembling hypocrite (says Saint Chrysostom) if it be good
to appear good, why will thou not be, that which thou would fam appear to
be? And if it be ill to appear ill, why will thou be that which thou would
not appear to be? but if it be good to appear good, it is than far better to
be good: and if it be ill to appear ill, it is far worse to be ill; be
therefore that which thou appearest, or else appear what thou art, so far
Saint Chrysostom. Check now thy self thou vermonger, that with a madding
thought thus chasest fleeting shadows: for frivolous it is for thee externally
to profess thy self the servant of Christ and yet to wear the devils Livery. In
vain it is for thee to acknowledge God to be thy only Lord in public prayer,
and yet to obey in all things the world, the flesh and the devil in thy private
practice: Yea impious it is to be thus the divils 1 Cor. 4. 20. Romans 2 13.
builders in substance and Gods only in show; Non enim in verbis situm est
regnum Dei, for the Kingdom of God is not in word says the Apostle: Non
Auditores sed factores legis justificabuntur; not the hearers but the doers of
the Law shall be justified, so the same Apostle Quid Iam. 1. 22.
vocatis me domine, domine, etc. Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the
things that I speak says our Savior. Be ye therefore doers of the word, and
not hearers only deceiving Math. 7. 21.
your own selves, so Saint James. For not every one that says Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father
which is in Heaven, so likewise our Savior Christ. Labor not therefore any
longer (dear Brethren) I beseech you to cover your nakedness with the
fig leaves of vainglorious hypocrisy, but now at length endeavor to compass
your loins with the girdle of sincerity, that so ye may be found of God, not
fictitious, but faithful builders, not supine, but industrious doers, which is
the second thing, by which a sound Christian is here described, viz. by his
pains and industry in digging deep, and comes next in order to be spoken of.

(...) qui fodit and fodit in altum, which dug, and dug deep.
Idlenss (beloved) is a cruel stepdame to virtue, and want of employment, the
most corrupting fly that can blow in any humane mind. Ezekiel. 16. 49.
By this Egistus grew adulterate, by that the Sodomites incestuous He therefore
that would be a good Christian, he must take pains, he must dig deep Bonav.
Per descensum humilitatis as Bonaventure speaks, Stella.
Dura poenitentiae opera exercendo, so Stella commenting on this place. We must
not think to go to Heaven with a wet finger, it is not a Lord have mercy on us
will bring us thither: No, Beloved, we must be dug, yea and deep dug too
here in Gods vineyard, before we can come to receive our reward: We must weep,
we must watch, we must pray in the evening, morning and at noonday, and that
instantly: We must search the Scriptures with diligence, read Gods word with
delight, and meditate in the same with continuance both day and night. Non est
a terris mollis ad astra via. The way to Heaven is no easy way, it is no going
thither in a Feather bed: Menand.
(...), if thou will be happy thou must labor for it, so Menander: Many there
are I know who fain would go to Heaven, but loath they are to take the pains:
gladly would they enter in at the straight gate that leads to life, but loath
they are to strive: yea and willingly would they receive the penny, but loath
they are to undergo the labor. Sed numen non favet otiosis nec pigris, vult
enim sua munera ad nos per nostram venire industriam, so Plutarch. The supreme
power cares not (says he) for sluggish and sloathful persons, but will have
his gifts come to us through our own industry.

Applic. Away then, away, I say, with that dangerous and diabolical suggestion
of Satan; if I am predistinated to salvation, I shall certainly be saved: I Will
therefore take neither care nor pains, but live as I list. No, no, beloved our
industry must co-opperate with the grace of God inciting us, and diligence must
be given to make our calling and election sure, so Saint Peter tells 2 Pet. 1.
10.
us. For though it be most sure in Gods electing purpose: Yet can no man know
the certainty of it, but only by this, viz. by yielding prompt obedience to
Gods commandments, by joining virtue with faith and with virtue knowledge, with
knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience, with patience godliness,
with godliness brotherly kindness, and with brotherly kindness 2 Pet. 15, 6, 7.
8.
love: For if these things be among you and abound, they will make you that you
neither shall be idle, nor unfruitful in the acknowledging of our Lord Jesus
Christ so far Saint Peter.

Use. 2. Be admonished now therefore O ye fruitless fig trees at length to
bring forth fruit worthy of repentance, and cumber not the ground here in Gods
vineyard with barren idleness: Let not your Talent which God has lent you lie
rusting in a napkin, but now employ it to the best advantage; and if you would
be partakers with Gods children in their happy recompense, be you sure then to
participate with them in their laborious pains. Socrates I remember, reports
of one, that quenched his ardent desires of going to see the olympic Games,
with the thought of the tedious travail thither; but far be this from us
beloved: Let not the conceit of a painful passage to eternal happiness, deter
any of us from undertaking this so profitable though painful a journey thither,
nor drive us with the unjust Steward in the Gospel, to Luke 16. 3.
a quid faciam? fodere non valeo: to a what shall I do? I cannot dig No, no,
Hierom.
Nam nullus labor durus, nullum tempus longum videri debet, quo gloria
aeternitatis acquiritur as St Hierom speasts No labor ought to seem great, no
time to be esteemed grievous, by which eternal glory is attained. There was
never good thing easily come by. The Heathen man could say, that the Gods did
sell knowledge for swet; and so may I say, that our God sells Heaven for
industry; Plutarch.
wherefore my beloved brethren, work, yea and dig out your salvation with fear
and trembling, fight the 2 Timothy 4. 7. 1 Cor. 9. 24. 1 Cor. 15. 58.
good fight, and so run the race of Christianity here, that ye may obtain the
Crown of immortality hereafter: Be ye steadfast and unmovable, and abundant
always in the work of the Lord forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord. And thus I pass from this second thing by which a sincere
Christian is here described, viz. from his pains and industry in digging deep,
unto the third, which is his wisdom and discretion, in laying his foundation
on a Rock.

(...). And laid his foundation on a Rock.
The Papists though perhaps hitherto may seem to appropriate this description
to themselves alone, or at the least to challenge a priority in it before us
Protestants, and that because they are most beautiful builders in works of
merit, most industrious laborers in painful pilgrimages, yea, and most deep
diggers too, even under Parliament houses; yet because they are defective in
this third thing, by which a true beleiver is here described, viz. because they
want wisdom to lay their foundation on a Rock, they are therefore hence
excluded from among the number of Gods faithful and fruitful builders, who do
not only build houses and dig deep, but lay their foundation also upon a Rock:
Posuitque fundamentum supra petram: And laid his foundation on a Rock. Positio
est or do partium in loco, so the Philosopher: Position is the true ordering of
several parts in their proper place; hence therefore after the removal of all
impedimental rubbish taken away by our digging deep, immediately here follows
a positio fundamenti, a laying a foundation. Which foundation is faith in
Christ: for other foundations can no man lay says the 1 Cor. 3, 11.
Apostle. Now this foundation of faith must be laid upon a Rock, even upon that
spiritual Rock Christ Jesus, as the 1 Cor. 10. 4.
same Apostle speaks, Non super petrum, sed super petram: Not upon Peter, nor
yet his successors (the Popes I mean) as the Papists would fain have it meant;
but upon that firm, sollid and immovable Rock of Peter's confession Math. ^.
16. 18
(Thou art the Son of the living God) upon this Rock will I build my Church
says our Savior: As if he should have said, upon this thy firm confession by
which thou do acknowledge and believe me to be Christ the Son of the living
God, will I build my Church, Flock and Family, and them will I endue by my
spirit with the like faith in me. That confession which thou have made, shall
be the foundation of all beleivers, so Theophylact. Supra Petram aedificat, qui
supra Christum aedificat so Stella, He that builds and lays his foundation
on Christ builds and lays it on a Rock.

Four reasons I find, why Christ may and that not unfitly be resembled to a
Rock.

First, Because a Rock is a sound, firm and stable stone, Petca enim est rupes
penitus immobilis: on which whosoever builds, builds most strongly,
builds most surely. Christ in like manner, is a stone, yea, a corner stone,
utterly unmovable, He that builds on him, builds most firmly, builds
most safely, against whom Math 16, 18
the Gates of Hell cannot prevail.

Secondly, a rock is a stone, as well of offense as defense; it defends and
keeps from ruin that which is built upon it: so likewise does it offend and
break to pieces all obstacles, that shall justle against it. Christ in like
manner is a stone of offense as well as defense: as he defends and keeps
his Elect that are founded and built upon him from ruin and destruction: So
likewise does he offend and break to pieces like potters vessels all wicked and
ungodly obstacles, that shall jussel against him, to them is he made a stone to
stumble at, and a Rock of offense as Saint Peter speaks. And that they that
justle against Christ thus, must needs be confounded: hear what our 1 Pet. 2. 8
Savior Christ himself says; Whosoever shall fall on this stone he shall be
broken, but on whomsoever it shall fall it will dash him to pieces.

Take heed therefore (beloved) of justling Christ, either Math. 21. 44.
by your contemptuous mocking of his service: or disdainful deriding of his
servants, lest the like confusion seize on you, that sometime fell on Julian
that justling Apostata, which constrained him in horror of heart to confess
and to cry out, Sozom.
Vicisti Galilee, vicisti Galilee.

Thirdly, A third reason why Christ is resembled unto a Rock, is because that
hence did refreshing water sometimes gush out and that in abundance for the
miraculous releife of the children of Israel in the dry and thirsty wilderness.
And Moses lift up his hand and with his Rod he smote the Rock twice, and the
water came out abundantly. Numb. 20. 11 Ps. 78. 15, 16 Wisdom 11. 4
He cleft the Rock in the wilderness, and gave them drink as out of the great
depth. He brought floods also out of the stony Rock, so that it gushed out like
the Rivers: so the Psalmist. And again, when they were thirsty, they called
upon thee and water was given them out of the high Rock, and their thirst was
quenched out of the hard stone. This, all this Saint Paul explaineth, and
applies to Christ. And the Children of Israel did all drink the same spiritual
drink for they drank (says he) of that spiritual Rock that followed them, and
that Rock was Christ.) This 1 Cor. 10. 4
Rock was struck for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, as the
Prophet Isaiah says. From whence flows unto all Gods children that live in
the dry and thirsty wilderness of this wicked world, most large refreshing Isa.
53. 5.
streams of living water, Salientes in vitam aeternam, springing up unto
everlasting life: as our Savior Christ himself tells us.

As therefore the children of Israel in their dry necessities quenched their
souls with the sweet streams that Jo. 4. 14.
issued out of that typical Rock in the wilderness: So let us beloved, in all
our dry dolours and thirsty distresses, run unto this Rock of Christ, refresh
our parched souls. Psalm. 46. 1.
with the living fountains of his holy Gospel, and quench our thirsty hearts
with the most comfortable waters of his evangellical promise.

Fourthly and Lastly, Christ is resembled to a Rock, because a Rock is a
receptacle for innocent Doves to preserve them in safety from the piercing
claws of devouring Birds; so likewise is our Savior Christ a receptacle for
all faithful, simple, meek, harmless, Dove-like Christians, to defend them from
the raging malice of all the malignant Kites of the World that would devour
them; he, he is the Rock of our salvation, and present help in trouble. A Rock
(beloved) beyond the reach of all, though never so malevolent adversaries, in
whose cliffs the Dove like-Christian abides most safely, on which he builds
most surely: Statuitque fundamentum super petram, And laid his foundation on a
Rock.

Obs. It is then you see the duty of every good Christian not to build on
merits, but to lay their foundation on a Rock: not to trust confidently in
their own deserts, but to rely faithfully on Christ's deservings. The Father of
the faithful built not on merrits, But laid his foundation Genesis 15. 6
a Rock: For Abraham believed in God, and that was accounted to him for
righteousness. Behold, he that lifts up himself, his mind is not upright in
him, but the Habac. 2. 4.
just shall live by his faith. To trust then in our selves, or in any worldly
thing besides, is never to be at quiet: The only rest is to rely upon God by
faith (for being justified by faith we have peace with God, through Jesus Rom
5. 1.
Christ our Lord.

The reason of the point, or cause why Gods children ought not to rely on good
works is evident; For by faith 2 Cor. 1. 24 Gal. 2. 16
ye stand says the Apostle. And again, We know that a man is not justified by
the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, so the same Apostle. Be
it known unto you therefore men and brethren, that through this man is preached
unto you the forgiveness of sins, and from all things which ye could not be
justified by the Law of Moses, by him every one that beleiveth is justified, so
Saint Paul. Act. 13. 38, 39


Good reason therefore have we, to distrust our selves and to disclaim our own
righteousness, seeing that in us there dwells no good thing; seeing we are
all gone out of the way, and that there is none that does good, no not Romans 7.
18 Psalm. 14. 3 Isa. 64. 6.
one: In a word, seeing that we have all been as an unclean thing, and all our
righteousness as filthy cloutes. And great reason have we to lay the foundation
of our faith on the Rock of Christ's merrits, who of God is made unto us wisdom,
sanctification, righteousness and redemption as Saint Paul expressly tells
us. 1 Cor. 1. 30


Applic. How grossly then do they err, that forsaking this Rock, fasten their
foundation chiefly on the fickle sand of good works, and that as Maldon in loc.
Romans 7. 24.
Firmissimum salutis suae fundamentum, as Maldonat the Jesuit on this place.
Whenas (alas) who knows not how miserable, and how wretched we are in our
selves, carrying always about us, no less than a body of death, from which
with the Apostle we may well cry out, who shall deliver us? If therefore I
would justify my self (says Job) mine own mouth shall condemn me, if I would
be perfect, he shall judge Job 9. 20.
me wicked. And again, If God found no steadfastness in his servants, but laid
folly upon his Angels, how much more in them that dwell in houses of clay,
whose foundation is in the dust? Well therefore may we pray, even the best of
Job 4. 18, 19
us all, with holy David, Ne intres in judicium domine, Enter not into judgment
O Lord with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. For
indeed (beloved) Psalm. 143. 2.
the most perfect keeping of the Law, and the exactest observation of Gods
commandments that can in this life, by any be performed, deserves in it self,
no reward, nor can it of it self profit us to justification; for when we have
done all those things which are commanded, our Savior Christ himself, has yet
wished us to confess, that we are still but unprofitable servants. And if
unprofitable Luke 17. 10
then, when we have done all that is commanded us, seeing we have done no more
than was our duty to do; how much more unprofitable, how much more undeserving
are our weak endeavors, which come so short of fulfilling the least
commandment? Hence Saint Bernard, Ber. Ser. 52
Hoc totum hominis meritum, si totam spem suam ponat in eo qui totum salvum
fecit: sufficit ad meritum scire, quod non sufficiant merrita. This is the
whole merit of man, if he put his whole confidence in him that saved him: it is
merit enough to know, that merits are not available. For grace ye are saved
through faith (says the Apostle) and that not of your selves it is the gift of
God, not Ephesians. 2. 8.
of works, least any man should boast himself. Hence Saint Augustine, Saint Aug.
Quisquis tibi enumerat vera merrita sua, quid tibi enumerat nisi muneratua?
Whosoever numbreth, or reckons up his merits unto thee: what does he number
or recount to thee, but thy gifts unto him?

Let Papistical merit mongers therefore (if they will) brag still of the
condignity, and boast yet of the congruity of their good works; we with the
Apostle, will through the spirit, wait for the hope of righteousness through
faith. Let them I say, go if they please, unto the Allmighty clad in the
polluted garments of their own righteousness, with a Da mihi quod merui: We
like true Israelites, will expect our heavenly fathers blessing in the perfumed
garments of our elder brother: In a word let them (if they will) like
superficial Carpenters content themselves with specious structures, on sandy
foundations, we like substantial Builders, will comfort our selves with sollid
erections on sure foundations, Hofm.
Profecto stulti sunt, qui tantum aedificant splendide, and non utiliter: Et
stulti sunt qui sibi satisfactum putant, si solum numerentur, inter Electos,
etiamsi non numerentur cum electis, so Hofmister. Truly (says he) they are
fools who build only for show and not for profit, and they are fools that
think it enough for themselves to be accounted here of the Elect, although
hereafter for want of a good foundation, they be not numbered with the Elect. It
is the root (beloved) that susteines the tree, and the foundation that supports
the building. Stella.
Structura quamvis exterius magnifica sit, and altitudine excellens, firma
tamen non erit nisi solido firmoque nitatur fundamento, so Stella. The building
(says he) be it never so sumptuous, never so stately, never so lofty, yet will
it not be stable, unless it be grounded on some sollid and firm foundation. Our
spiritual building in like manner, be it never so specious, be it never so
glorious to the eye of the world, yet will it not be 1 Timothy 6. 12, 19
permanent, except it be grounded on a firm foundation: unless its foundation
be laid upon a Rock: Statuitque fundamentum supra petram: And laid his
foundation on a Rock.

Dig not, O dig not then to your selves any longer broken cisterns that will
hold no water, build no longer on sandy foundations, that will withstand no
weather, but fight the good fight, and lay the good foundation, that when the
waters do arise, and the floods do beat upon your buildings, they may not shake
them: which is the fourth thing by which a sincere Christian is in my Text
described: Namely by the perils and dangers immediately ensuing his discretion
in laying his foundation on a Rock; and comes now next in order to be spoken of.

And when the waters arose the flood beat upon that House.
A true Christian can no sooner be built upon the Rock, but he must instantly
look for storms of affliction; a true convert can no sooner be ingrafted into
Christ, but he must suddenly expect to undergo the Cross: Gods Elect children
can no sooner lay their foundation on this Rock of Christ, but presently the
bitter waters of distasteful afflictions will arise, yea, and the sorrowful
floods of horrid tentations will beat upon their buildings. Is Saint Paul 2
Cor. 12. 7. Psalm. 102. 3, 4, 5, 6. John 6. 4. 7
built upon this Rock? He shall have a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan
to buffet him. Is David a man after Gods own heart? He shall be much perplexed
with many miseries. Is Job an upright man in the Land of Vz, He shall suffer
many afflictions. In a word, as Paul when he came to Macedonia, so we, even
every one of us, so soon as we look toward Jerusalem which is above; so soon
as we make a conscience of sin, we shall be troubled on every side: fightings
without and terrors within: fightings without with open and professed enemies
to 2 Cor. 7. 5
the truth, and fears within from false brethren, fighting without by the
continual assaults of outward tentations, and fears within by spiritual
derilictions, and conflicts with despair.

Nunquam bella bonis, nunquam dissidia cessant.
Et quoeum certet, men's pia semper habet. Prosper.

With wars intestine are the godly always pressed,
And pious minds with something do contest.
To such conflicts and assaults the dearest of Gods children are subject in
this their pilgrimage here, and if you would have a reason for it, it is
evidently this, viz. because they are now become the devils open enemies, they
must therefore look to be assaulted, both by stratagems and violence. The devil
like a cunning fowler, spreads his nets, for them only that are out of his
clutches, not for them that are in his own custody. No Prince makes war with
his Loyal Subjects. The wicked are as sure as temptation can make them: to them
therefore he speaks as freindly as Holofernes sometime did to Judeth: Fear not
in thine heart, for I never hurt any that would serve Nebuchadnezzar the King
of all the earth; so he also, I never molest any that are content to serve me,
the Prince of the present world, as he is termed, Jo. 14. 30.

Q But why may some man say, does God permit the waters of affliction to arise,
and the floods of temptations thus to beat upon his childrens buildings?

A. Truly beloved the reasons for it are many, but I will satisfy my self,
and I hope content you also with these three following.

First, God suffers the waters of affliction thus to arise against his own
children, that he might the better manifest his anger against sin, that all may
take notice if he spare not his own children, but and if judgment begin at
their houses, what the wicked may, nay what they must expect, and where the
ungodly shall think to appear.

Secondly, Therefore does God permit the floods of temptations to beat upon his
childrens buildings, that he might thereby manifest unto the world the fidelity
of his chosen; now I know, says God to Abraham, that thou fear God: Not
that God was ignorant of this before his bitter trial of him, by commanding him
to sacrifice his only Son, but that by this fact of his, he might make known
that his obedience unto others. God by this extraordinary act of self-denial,
made Abraham's faith and obedience manifest to others. Not unfitly therefore are
Gods children likened to spices, whose odoriferous savor is then strongest
smelt, when they are soundliest pounded. Saint. Greg.
Virtus per quietem se exercuit in Job, sed virtutis opinio commota per
flagella fragravit says Saint Gregory.

Thirdly, and lastly, therefore does God permit both the waters of affliction
to arise, and the floods of temptation also to beat upon his childrens
buildings, that he might preserve them in safety from that great gulf of
presumptuous security, and that he might keep them from the straggling by paths
of eternal destruction, who otherwise Psalm. 119. 67.
would be too too apt to start aside, and with David before his affliction to
go astray, the best ground untlled soonest runs out into rankest weeds: Such
are Gods children, sudenly overgrown with security ere they are aware, unless
they be often exercised with Gods plough of affliction. Greg. in Mor.
Electis suis ad se pergentibus dominus hujus mundi iter asperum facit, ne dum
quisque vitae presentis requie, quasi viae amenitate pascitur, magis eam diu
pergere, quam citius pervenire delegit: ne dum oblectatur in via, obliviscatur
quod desiderabat in patria: so Saint Gregory. God (says he) permitreth his
childrens pilgrimage here to be very bitter, and extreme sharp, least any of
them should be so far in love with the pleasantness of the path, as to forget
what they so earnestly desired in their country to come. Crosses therefore
though in themselves they be bitter arrows, yet are they shot from a loving
hand, and 1 Samuel 20. 10
therefore become like to Jonathans sometime shot to David, serving only for
directing caveats. Apollonius writes of certain people, that could see nothing
in the day, but only in the night. Many Men I am sure, are so blinded in the
Sunshining day of prosperity, that they then see nothing belonging to their
good, only in the night of misery are their eyes open, and to them Schols
crucis is converted into Scholam lucis: which is the third and last cause I
mentioned why God permits the waters of affliction to arise, and the floods of
sorrows sometimes to beat upon his childrens buildings. From which I pass unto
the reasons why afflictions (as I conceive) are here and elsewhere too in
Scripture compared to waters, which are likewise these three following. First,
Propter confluentiam. For their confluency. Secondly, Propter utilitatem. For
their utility. Thirdly, Propter salsitudinem. For their saltness.


First, I say for their confluency: for as one way follows, and falls on the
neck of another, even so do afflictions in the righteous pursue each other: One
deep calls another as the Psalmist speaks: They come so thick upon them as
stormy waves at sea: a perspicuous Psalm. 42 7.
example of this we have in Job while he was yet speaking (says the Text) came
anoth^r; and then while he was yet speaking came another: and again while he
was yet speaking came another, etc. We live here beloved in an Job. 1. 16, 17,
18.
ocean of troubles, wherein we can see no firm Land: One wave falling on the
neck of another ere the former have wrought all his spite; mischeifs strive
for places as if they feared to lose their room, if they hasted not: this for
their confluency.

Secondly, afflictions are likened to waters in regard of their utility, in
respect of their profit; for as the one serves to cleanse the outward, so does
the other serve to purge the inner man. David's experience shall be a sufficient
proof of their utility, in this respect who by them was reduced from his
erroneous straglings, to a constant keeping of Gods commandments. Neither are
waters profitable only for purgation, nor afflictions only for restoration,
but both also for transportation. For as without Ps. 119. 67.
the benefit of water, we cannot pass into another country as France, Spain, or
Italy; so neither can we pass from hence to Heaven, without the benefit of
affliction: there is no going thither unless we sail through the salt waters
of affliction: witness that holy Apostle who constantly averreth, That we must
through many afflictions enter into the Kingdom of God. But happy beloved, yea
thrice Acts 14. 22.
happy are those mishaps that make a way to a greater perfection: and this for
their utility.

Thirdly and lastly, afflictions are resembled to waters, because of their
saltness and harshness to be endured. See water though for curing of the itch
and many other things it be very sovereign, yet by reason of its extreme
saltness it is very unwelcome unto most men's pallates. Afflictions in like
manner though they are very wholesome and profitable to heal all spiritual
diseases in regenerate men and therefore in one place especially ^ommended by
the Apostle for the curing of itching ears. Yet are they also salt and harsh,
very distastful and wondrous difficult to be endured even of the very best of
Gods children; 2 Timothy 4. 3.
we need not travail any further for an example of this than to our Savior
Christ himself whose words were these, Father if it be possible let this cup
pass from Math. 26. 39.
me. The way to Heaven beloved, is by the gates of Hell, and like that which
Jonathan and his Armor-bearer 1 Samuel 14. 13.
passed, Rocky, Foul and Thorny. No sooner do the waters arise, but presently
the Floods do beat upon the house; And when the waters arose, the flood beat
upon that house.

A threefold Flood I find that beats upon all Gods childrens houses. First, A
Flood of sin. Secondly, A Flood of sorrow, and Thirdly, A Flood of godly anger.


First, A Flood of sin: I know my iniquities, (says David) and my sin is ever
before me, And O wretched man that I am (says Saint Paul) who shall deliver me
from this Psalm. 51. 3. Romans 7. 24.
body of death? There is a Flood of sin.

Secondly, A Flood of sorrow: I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my
Conscience bearing me witness in the holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness
and continual sorrow in Romans 9. 1.
my heart: So the same Apostle. These two like Hypocrates twins, go always
hand in hand; there was never sin without sorrow, nor ever sorrow without sin.
All dishonest actions, are but earnests laid down for succeeding sorrows.

Thirdly, the third kind of flood that beats on Gods childrens houses is the
flood of Gods anger: And of this the Prophet David complains thus: Thine
indignation Psalm 88. 6.
lies hard upon me, and thou have vexed me with all thy storms. This flood of
Gods fury has much beaten upon us, and that for many years together. You
cannot forget that fearful flood of civil war and intestine dissentions Jer.
48. 12. 2 Samuel 21. 17.
amongst us: When God sent unto us (as he did unto Moab) such as emptyed our
vessels and brake our bottles, and quenched (for a time) the light of our
Israel. You must needs remember the next flood of foreign War at Sea, that
beat so sorely against our buildings. You cannot forget the next flood of
Plague and Pestilence that swept away so many thousands. And to name no more at
present, you must needs remember that fiery flood of Gods fury: Fluvius Dan. 7.
9. 10.
igneus rapidusque as the Prophet Daniel expresses and renders it, showing the
inevitable and consuming force of Gods Judgments. You cannot I say, forget that
fiery flood that but lately beat down so many stately buildings in the
Metropolitan City of this Kingdom. Well, what good effect have all these
floods produced in us all this while? What amendment is there in the rich? What
reformation is there in the poor? Alas, alas, but small I fear: For who does
not see what a deluge of profaneness and impiety does yet overflow the Land? Are
not Gods good creatures too too much still abused in surfeiting and
drunkenness? in rioting and wantonness, in strife and envying? Are not people
still as profane, still as irriligious, still as ungodly, still as sinful as
ever? Lay it to heart beloved, and know, that the Lord has more floods to
power forth upon us, if these prevail not to reform us.

Applic. to the Judge.
Give me leave, now (my Lord) first to address my self to your Lordship, for
the begging of your assistance, to prevent the future floods of Gods anger from
falling on us, and that by your impartial distribution of Justice; you are set
in Gods place, you are to walk in Gods path, and to be a follower of him, who
is no prosopoleptick, with whom there is no respect of persons. Let me (I
beseech you) move you to that which you both know, and I Romans 2. 11.
presume are ready to put in practice also; you know the saying of the Poet.
Qui rogat ut facias, quod jam facis, ipse ^ogando
Laudat, and hortatu comprobat acta ^uo.


I shall only add good Jehosaphats caveat to the Judges Chr. 19 6.
in his time, which is this; Take heed what ye do, for ye execute not the
Judgment of man, but of the Lord, and he will be with you in the cause and
Judgment, that is, he will be with you, to preserve you if you do justly, or
else he will be with you, to punish you, if you do the contrary.

To the Sheriff
Next a word to you Mr. Sheriff, for your assistance also to prevent the future
floods of Gods anger from falling on us; Ezekiel. 17. 18, 19. and Mat. 5. 33.
and to this end let me request you Sir to know your place, and to consider
your oath, look to your under officers that they abuse not poor men with
exactions, nor the Country with exorbitancies.

To the Justices.
Next I turn to you (much honored Justices and Gentlemen) let me I beseech
you, crave your assistances also herein; which that you may the better afford,
I pray be pleased to call to mind your several oaths, remember to what you are
sworn, and be not remiss, nor negligent in the performance of them. You have
good Law and Authority to punish swearing, whoring, drunkenness, profanation
of the Lords day, and other enormities: Oh have a zeal for the due execution of
such good Laws. When any come to you for justice against such offenses, put
them not off with Gallio that deputy of Achaia, who would be judge of no such
matters. Gentlemen you are called (Sheilds) Ps. 47 9. The Sheilds of the earth
belong unto God, ^aith the Psalmist. Your place is to stand between Acts 18. 15.
God and the people, and by your timely censuring and punishing of known sins,
to prevent the floods of public plagues from flowing in upon the Land wherein
ye live. You are termed also (Healers) Would God you would go to the quick, and
heal our breaches in the causes thereof. Town and Country are sick of
separation, and swarm with scismaticks, that in things but ceremonial peevishly
spurn at the grave authority of the Church; and out of a needless nicety are
theives to themselves of those benefits which God has allowed them, Good Laws
there are to reclaim them, to suppress their Conventicles, to restrain their
seditious spirits, but there is but little or no execution of them; Gallio
cares not for these things. Gentlemen, it is not material how good a man's will
be, if the executors, who are put in trust, do not perform it. The Laws I may
call Gods will, and the will of his vicegerent (the King) it is no matter how
good they be, if those who appointed executors, neglect to put them in
execution. In this case they are no better then scarecrows, which being set up
in the fields by Husbandmen to keep away birds, at the first view are somewhat
terrible to the fowls, but after a while seeing them still in the same place,
and doing nothing, they make bold with them and sit on their heads, yea and
worse then that too. So beloved, the Laws though never so dreadful at first if
they be not duly executed by them that are in place* to do it, they grow in
contempt, and give occasion to refractory spirits to go on with boldness in
their perverse and wilful ways. You may take this from Solomon, who well
observed it, and tells you, That where sentence is not executed speedily
against an evil work, the hearts of the sons of men, are fully set in them to
do evil. Where Justice is delayed, there sin reigns. And will not this bring
a flood upon us think you in the end, if not timely prevented? Liberty has
lost us many already, and will lose us more yet if it be not looked to in time,
Gentlemen.

In the name of God therefore let me implore your helps: O men of Israel help!
Be you I beseech you Priscilla's and Aquila's, helpers in Christ Jesus: So
shall ye be Romans 16. 3.
Epinetusses too, even praise worthy for it: So shall ye be Portae and
introitus aliorum, as Saint Chrysostom well observes on Romans 16. 5. so shall
ye be Ports, Gates, good passages, and safety inlets to many poor souls, that
else might perish through peevish self-willedness. Oh beloved, that you would
be of good Josiahs temper to take away the abomination of stubborn separation,
from all that are under your several jurisdictions! That you would do as he
did, Even compel them to serve the Lord their God, in the 2 Chronicles. 34. 33.
Prove. 19. 25.
unity and uniformity of his divine worship. Smite a scorner, and the simple
will beware, says Solomon. And that man that will do presumptuously, not
harkening unto the Priest that stands before the Lord thy God to minister
there, or Deuteronomy. 17. 12, 13.
unto the Judge, that man shall dye, and thou shall take away evil from Israel.
So all the people shall hear and fear and do no more presumptuously. Hoc
hominum genus (says Learned Paraeus commenting on the first Chapter of the
second Epistle to the Corinthians) Authoritate potius compescendum, quam longis
disputationibus refellendum. And thus (right Worshipful) having (as briefly as
I conveniently could) shown you how you may, and ought to be by your actings,
instrumental to prevent the future Floods of Gods anger from flowing in upon
us, and in particular of that Flood of Anarchical confusion impending over us:
I shall Luke 14. 23
shut up my exhortation to you in the words and charge of that Master of the
feast in Saint Lukes Gospel. Go out into the highwayes and hedges, and compel
nhem to come in, that the houses of God may be filled.

To the Lawyers,
A word likewise to you Lawyers next (if at least any of you have leisure from
your Chamber, to hear a word of Church-struction) let me entreat your helps
also to anticipate the future floods of Gods anger from falling on us; and to
this purpose, be pleased I pray to ruminate upon the end of your profession:
(...) It is not you know, to sow diffension: It is not to widen differences,
neither is it to fill your own coffers, nor yet to show your ready wits, and
voluble tongues in speaking probably of every subject good or bad; no, no, the
end of your profession, is to help every man to his right, to cut off strife
and contention, and to restore peace and unity in the Commonwealth. Let not
your mouths therefore be corrupted, let them not prove like the Oracle of
Delphos, of which Demosthenes complained in his time, that it did (...) speak
nothing but what Philip who gave it a great fee would have it say. Be not (I
beseech you) of the number of Protagorasses Scholars, whose profession as
Gellius tells us) was to teach, Quanam verborum industria causa infirmior,
fieret fortior: How to make the worse cause seem the better.

To the witnesses and Juries.
I must next direct my speech to you that are to be Witnesses, and to you also
that are to be Juries, for your concurrance also to prevent the future floods
of Gods anger from falling on us. For this cause, let me admonish you to take
heed of your several oaths, consider what you do, beware of bribery: deal
uprightly in every case between Jer. 22. 13 Deuteronomy. 17 11.
man and man, with every man without declining to the right hand, or to the
left: So shall ye sanctify the name of God, by whom ye do swear to speak
truly: and so shall ye sanctify the name of God, by whom ye swear to deal
truly and uprightly.

Lastly, a word unto all in general, and so an end; let us all (as we tender
the good of our precious souls) be persuaded to sanctify the Lord God in in
our hearts: let us every day sum up our accounts with God, and as Hierome
says, Ita aedificemus quasi semper victuri, ita vivimus, quasi cras morituri;
Let us so build as if we were to live ever: and let us so live as if we were to
dye to morrow. And in so doing, though the waters do arise and swell horribly:
yea, and though the floods do exalt themselves and beat upon our buildings, yet
they shall not shake them: which is the fifth particular by which a sincere
Christian is in my text described: namely, by the invalidity of all perils and
dangers, in that they could not shake it: which should now come in order to be
spoken of; but I fear I have trespassed too far already upon your patience.

Let us now therefore beg at the hands of God, that he would be pleased to work
in the heart of every one of us, a holy desire and a conscionable care, to
discharge our several duties in those places which God has put us. And to this
end.

Lord grant, that the words which we have heard with our outward ears, may
take deep impression in our hearts, that they may bring forth in us the fruits
of such Christian care and providence: The fruits of such sanctified pains and
industry: and the fruits of such saving wisdom and discretion, that when the
waters do arise, and when the floods do beat upon our buildings, they may not
shake them; and this Lord we most humbly beg at thy merciful hands, for the
merits of thy most dear Son, and our most loving Savior the Lord Jesus Christ:
To whom with thee O Father and thy blessed Spirit, be ascribed, as is most due,
all Honor and Glory, Power and Dominion, Might and Majesty, the rest of this
day and for evermore. Amen,

FINIS.

