Of the Reverence due to GOD in his Public Worship.

A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen, AT WHITE HALL, March 25, 1694.
being the 5th. Sunday in LENT.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, NICHOLAS Lord Bishop of Chester.

Published by Their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren, for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St.
Paul's Churchyard, M DC XCIV.

A SERMON Preached before the King and Queen.
ECCLES. V. j. former part. Keep thy foot when thou go to the House of GOD.
IN the beginning of this Chapter Solomon prescribes several Rules to be
observed by us in the Worship of God, as ever we expect to recommend our selves
thereby to his Favor and Acceptance. The first of which is general, and
extends to the whole public Worship; the other are particular, relating to
some special parts of it.

The general Rule is that which I have chosen to insist upon, Keep thy foot
when thou go to the house of God.

In treating of which, I shall, by God's Assistance, do these Three things.

I. I shall briefly show the Meaning of the Words, and what is the Duty therein
prescribed. II. I shall enforce the Duty by proper Arguments. III. I shall
suggest some further Helps by way of Direction, in order to the better
Performance of it.
I. I shall briefly explain the Words, and show what is the Duty therein
prescribed. Keep, or take heed to thy feet, so I read them; the Hebrew Letters
being plural, though the Pointing, which I take to be but a late Invention of
the Masorites, is singular.

Take heed to thy Feet when thou go, or rather when thou come: for so the
Original Word signifies, and is so translated in several other Numb. 10. 29.
Genes. 19. 32.
places; and that it ought to be so rendered here, appears, because all the
Duties afterward mentioned, to which this word in common belongs, are such as
are to be performed, not when we are going, but when we are come to the House
of God. So that I read the Words thus. Take heed to thy feet when thou come
to the house of God.

The Jews were wont to express their Reverence toward God, when they came to
his House to worship him, by putting off their Shoes at their Entrance into
it. Whether this Custom was derived from the Patriarchs before Exodus 3. 5.
Moses; or from that Command God gave to Moses and Joshua, To loose their Josh.
5. 15.
shoes from off their feet, because the place whereon they stood was holy
ground, need not now be disputed. It is sufficient, that this Rite of
Veneration was used by them, when they approached to God in his Public
Worship. Now that Solomon here alludes to this Practice, no Man, I think, will
question, who considers, That all other Accounts given of this Expression, seem
very foreign and impertinent to the Matter he here treats of.

The Duty therefore here enjoined is, That we behave our selves decently and
reverently when we come to worship God in his House. So that when Solomon says,
Take heed to thy feet, he does in effect say; Do not come rudely into the House
of God, nor behave thy self carelessly when thou art there; but address thy self
to God with that Reverence and godly Fear, which becomes so glorious and
dreadful a Majesty.

Before I proceed, that my Design may be clearly understood, I shall premise
Two things.

1. That which I intend to speak to at present, is not that Reverence which is
due to the House, by which it ought to be distinguished from all other Houses,
upon the account of its peculiar Relation to God: but that which we are to give
to God, when we present our selves there to worship him; in like manner as all
those particular Duties afterward mentioned, relating to the several Parts of
Worship there to be performed, are such as immediately respect God himself.

2. Though bodily Reverence is the only thing expressed in the Text, yet the
Reverence of the Soul, of which that of the Body is but a Sign, is supposed and
impli'd; since all outward Expressions of Devotion, how solemn and pompous
soever, which do not arise from within, are no better than Hypocrisy, and by
consequence are abhorred by God, who sees in secret.

So that the Reverence here required, is both that of the inward, and that of
the outward Man. That of the inward Man consists in such Thoughts and
Affections, as are in some sort becoming the God we worship; in awful
Apprehensions of his glorious Majesty, of his unspotted Purity, of his
unsearchable Wisdom, of his Almighty Power, of his Presence with us, and
observant Eye over us: and in such an humble sense of our own Unworthiness to
be admitted into his Presence, as becomes us not only as we are his Creatures,
but much more as we are Sinners. That of the outward Man consists in such a
Deportment of the Body, as is a fit Expression of the inward Reverence of the
Soul; As in standing, bowing, kneeling, lifting up the Eyes and Hands toward
Heaven; in diligent Attendance to his Word read and preached, and in other such
visible signs, as openly declare, That we esteem him worthy to receive all
Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power. Both these are our bounden Duty,
especially the former; though the latter is that which my Text has more
immediate respect to. The Decency, says St. Chrysostom, required of us in
public Chrysostom. de verb. Esaiae, vid. Dom. Hom. 1.
Worship, is, first to approach unto God with a broken and contrite Heart; then
to show the inward Disposition of the Heart, by the outward Deportment of the
Body; as by standing, by the decent composure of the Hands, by a meek and
contracted Voice.

Now, that in our Approaches to God, we may thus reverence him both in Body and
in Spirit, I proceed,

II. To enforce the Duty by such Arguments, as will make it plainly appear,
That all the Reverence we can possibly give to him, is no more than what upon
all accounts we stand indispensably obliged to.

To which purpose let us consider,

1. The transcendent Excellencies of his Nature; That all Perfections of Being,
not only meet in him; but are all in him without measure. That he is immensely
great in Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Justice, Truth; and that in proportion to the
Excellencies of his Nature is the Glory he inhabits; He dwelling in that Light
to which no Man can approach. Such is the God we worship, in Glory
inaccessable, in Wisdom unsearchable, in Power uncontrollable, in Truth
immovable, in all other Perfections infinitely exalted above all Blessing and
Praise.

And what are we? What but Earth and Ashes, Smoke and Vapor, as St.
Chrysostom expresses Chrysostom. in Act. c. 14. Hom. 30.
it? What is our Strength? What is our Wisdom? What is our Power? How weak? How
silly? How scanty? So near to nothing are we, that we seem to be, rather than
are, Psalm. 39. 5, 6.
for Man walks in a vain show (as the Psalmist speaks); at our very best
estate we are all Vanity. It is the Observation of the Father now mentioned,
That when St. Paul would show the distance between God and Man, he does not
represent it to be so great, but we may conceive it to be much greater. For
what says he? Chrysostom. de Incomprehens. Dei Not. Hom. 2.
Shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus?
Has not the Potter power over the Clay, to make of the same lump one vessel to
honor, and another to dishonor? The distance, says he, between God and Man,
is as great as that between the Potter and the Clay; Yea much greater; for if a
Man seem more Noble and more Beautiful than the Clay, it is not the diversity
of Nature, but the Skill of the Artificer that has made the difference: but so
great is the distance between God and Man, that neither can the Tongue express,
nor the Mind conceive it.

Let us consider,

2. What God is to us; and in what Relation we stand to him.

It is he that raised us at first, out of Nothing into Being; that spoke the
word and we were made. And shall we not with the humblest Reverence, fall down
before the Lord our Maker?

It is he, by whom we live and move, as well as have our Being; in whose hands
our Breath is, and whose are all our Ways. And shall we not devoutly adore him,
upon whom we continually so entirely depend, that we can neither breathe nor
live, any longer than he sustains us?

It is he, that daily pours his Benefits upon us. All those Enjoyments that
render our Being, more desirable than not to be, we owe solely to him as our
constant Benefactour. And shall we not revere his Goodness, to whom we owe all
the good things we enjoy? Shall we by our unseemly Carriage toward him, provoke
him to become our Enemy, who has been so great a Friend to us?

It is he upon whom we depend for all future Blessings; from whose Bounty alone
we can hope for the continuance of our Comforts in this World, and for an
Immortal Bliss in the next. And shall we not pay all possible Respect to him,
by whom we hope to be made everlastingly happy?

It is he that has redeemed us from the hands of our Enemies, not with such
poor corruptible things as Silver and Gold, but with the precious Blood of his
own beloved Son. Since therefore we are not our own, ought we not to glorify
him, both with our Body and Spirit, which he has purchased at so dear a rate?

In short, if the foregoing Considerations do not move us, let us once more
consider, That this God who is our Maker and Preserver, our munificent
Benefactour, and most merciful Redeemer, is also our supreme Judge, from whose
Sentence there lies no Appeal. We must, there is no avoiding it, but whether we
will or no, we must all appear before his dreadful Tribunal, to give an account
of our Behavior toward him. And can we hope for a favorable Sentence from
him, if in our most solemn Worship of him, we carry our selves toward him, as
if he were a Being so mean, as deserved not to be feared by us?

Consider,

3. That this great and incomprehensible Majesty, is in a peculiar manner
present with us, when we assemble together in his House to worship him. Though
he be substantially present every where, yet in some places he is present in
greater State, (as I may say) than in other, and by consequence a more awful
Deportment is there required of us. Heaven is the Place where he keeps his
Court, where his chief Ministers of State constantly attend his Throne, where
he most illustriously displays the Majesty of his Glory, and from whence he
dispatches his Ambassadors to negotiate his Affairs in this lower World: But
now as Earthly Kings have usually their different Palaces, one in the Imperial
City, surpassing all the rest in Splendor and Magnificence; others of
inferior Note in more obscure Palaces, and at a great distance from the Seat
Imperial, so this King of kings who dwells in Heaven in Glory unapproachable by
mortal Eyes, has also his Mansion-houses in which he dwells here on Earth, and
has his Officers of State there also attending on him, though not in such
shining Robes as in Heaven. Such are the Places set apart for his Public
Worship; in these he is otherways present than in common Places, and therefore
these are by way of distinction called in Scripture His Houses, and He is said
to dwell in them. Thus he dwelt among his ancient People; first in the
Tabernacle, as his moveable House, while they were in their Travels through the
Wilderness: and in the Temple afterward as his fixed Habitation, when they came
to be settled in the Land of Canaan; as this latter is expressly called by David
his Palace, so he 2 Chronicles. 29. 1, 19.
himself said of it, Here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein.

If it be now enquired, how or in what manner, God is more peculiarly present
in Church Assemblies, than in other places? Though I might show you, that he is
so, sundry ways and in diverse manners, and more particularly by the
communication of his Holy Spirit, to all those who come duly prepared to
receive it; yet as more proper to the Argument I am now upon, I Answer briefly,
by the Presence of his Heavenly Attendants, See Mr. Mede upon this Text.
the Holy Angels; as a King is more eminently present where his Court is, than
where he himself is alone in Person. Hence Jacob having seen a Vision of
Angels, upon his awakeing says, Surely the Lord is in this place, and Genesis 28.
16, 17.
I knew it not. What? did not Jacob know, that God was in every place, and by
consequence in that where he then was? Yea doubtless. The meaning therefore is,
God is in a more solemn manner in this place than in others, he is here, as in
his Palace, with his prime Ministers attending on him; as appears by what
follows, How dreadful is this place? this is no other but the House of God,
this is the Gate of Heaven.

Now that the Angels are present in the Assemblies for his Worship, we have
sufficient evidence, both in the Old Testament and in the New. The Psalmist
speaking of Mount Sion, the place set apart for his public Worship, says, The
Chariot of God is twice ten thousand, thousands of Angels, the Lord is among
them, Sinai is in Psalm 68. 17.
the Sanctuary (so the words are to be rendered according to the Original.) By
the Chariot of God is meant the Host of Angels, by which God's special Presence
is conveyed from Heaven to Earth, and the plain meaning of the words is this,
That a great Host of Angels does now attend upon God in Mount Sion, the place
of his Public Worship, as they did formerly on Mount Sinai, at the giving of
the Law there. This Angelical Presence was represented both in the Tabernacle
and in the Temple; by the Figures of the Cherubin woven in the Curtains of the
former, and carved in the Walls of the latter.

And if the Angels gave their attendance at the Jewish, can it be thought that
they pay not as much respect to our Christian Worship? If that low and carnal
Service had so great an honor vouchsafed to it, can it be imagined, that that
which is more Spiritual, and more becoming the Divine Nature should have less?
If any Man can entertain a thought so unreasonable, he may soon be convinced of
his error, by calling to remembrance, That St. Paul took it for granted, that
the Angels were present at Religious Christian Assemblies, and thought this
alone a sufficient Reason, why Women should there present themselves in a
decent Dress. For this cause (says he) ought the woman to have power 1 Cor.
11. 10.
on her head, because of the Angels. By Power is here meant a Veil, the Token
of her Husband's Power over her, (by a Trope not unusual in Holy Scripture) so
that the Meaning is, Such regard ought to be had to the Angels, who attend our
Public Worship, and observe our Demeanor in it, that the Woman, out of
Respect to them, ought to be decently habited, to have a Covering on her Head,
in token of her Subjection to her Husband. Were this peculiar Presence of God
with his Holy Angels duly considered, one would think it should cause all Women
professing Godliness, to present themselves in the Church, in a more modest and
humble Dress, than some of them do.

To compose us yet to greater Reverence, let us consider,

4. What the Meaning and Intention of Divine Worship is. Is it not (as far as
we are able) to honor God according to his excellent Greatness; to acknowledge
the infinite distance that is between Him and us; to make profession of our
entire dependence upon him, and subjection to him? This surely is the plain
Import of every part of Religious Worship.

In praising God, We declare the peerless Excellencies of his Nature, and
ascribe to him the Glory of his admirable Works. In putting up our Petitions to
him, for the prevention or removal of all evil, and for the obtaining of all
good things, we acknowledge his All Sufficiency, and our own Emptiness. And
what do we else in Thanksgiving, but gratefully own our Obligations to his
bounteous Goodness, for all the good things we either have or hope for?

Thus the Meaning of every Act of Divine Worship, is to give Glory to God, by
entertaining such Thoughts of him, and Affections toward him, as are in some
sort suitable to the Perfections of his Nature, and to those Relations we stand
in to him; and by representing to others by outward Signs, the inward Devotion
of our Souls toward him.

And though it be true, That the Body may bow, when there is no submission of
the Soul to God; the Hands may be lifted up to Heaven, when the Heart is in the
Ends of the Earth: yet when the Soul is possessed with the Fear of God, it will
naturally discover it self by a suitable Composure and Deportment of the Body.
And therefore when the outward Behavior is such, as no way testifies our
honorable Esteem of God, we cannot truly be said to worship him, because we do
not then honor, but rather despise him. And such is the Carriage of too many
Persons in many of our Religious Assemblies, so far from giving God the Glory
of his incomprehensible Majesty, that they durst not behave themselves so
disrespectfully in the Presence of their Earthly Prince; especially when they
come to pay their Homage to him, to receive his Commands, or to beg some great
Favor of him. For would any Man show that Contempt of his Prince as not to
attend to his Voice, but turn away from him, and talk with another Man, while
his Prince is signifying his Will and Pleasure to him, and laying his Commands
upon him? Would any Man laugh in his Prince's Face, at the same time, that he
is begging the Pardon of his Rebellions, and supplicating to him for his Life?

But how lightly soever these Persons may behave themselves in the Church; if
at any other time they can prevail with themselves to be serious, I beseech
them to consider,

5. How highly they hereby incense the Displeasure of God against them.
Contempt though from an Equal, can hardly be born with Patience; how much more
provoking must it needs be from an Inferior, and more yet from a Dependent?
Were another Man so entirely your Creature, that he could not stir a finger, or
so much as draw one breath without you, would not any the least Disrespect from
him, greatly provoke your Displeasure against him? With what Indignation then,
think you, must the Sovereign Lord of All resent the insolent Contempts of such
poor impotent things, as cannot subsist a moment longer than he pleases, and
whom with the least breath of his Displeasure he can blow into Hell?

By the blast of God they perish, by the breath of his nostrils they are
consumed, as Eliphaz Job 4. 9.
speaks.

God is not wont, I grant, to suffer his Anger to break out upon the first
provocation; nay, he commonly bears long with the most presumptuous Offenders.
Such is his Goodness, that he is not willing that any should perish, he
therefore gives them time to repent, and in that time lays before them the most
powerful Motives to bring them to it. But though he bears long, yet he will not
for ever bear with them; his Patience will have an end, and when that is once
expired, his Wrath will kindle against them. And who knows the power of his
Wrath? Can you think you shall have Courage to bear up against, or Strength to
resist his Almighty Arm? Can the dry Stubble contend with devouring Fire? If
not, it then concerns you to consider,

6. That our God is a consuming Fire. This very Argument the Apostle uses to
awaken us to Fear and Reverence in his Worship. Let Heb. 12. 28, 29.
us have Grace, says he, to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly
fear, Why? for our God is a consuming fire. The word (...), in the Style of the
New Testament more especially, denotes, that serving of God which consists in
his solemn Worship, and so plainly implies, That God is a consuming Fire, not
only to those who do not worship him at all, but to those also who worship him
without Reverence, and godly Fear.

Thus he was to Nadab and Abihu the Sons of Aaron, in the proper literal sense;
they Lev. 10. 1, 2.
presuming to offer Incense with common Fire, a Fire went out from the Lord and
devoured them. Should God be so severe to all those, who offer up their Prayers
to him with common Affections, and put no difference between their Deportment
in his House, and in any Civil Court, how many that come to the Church, would
never go from it again, but would (as Ananias and Sapphira were) be stricken
dead upon the place.

It Is true, God seldom in comparison shows himself so severe in this World,
because this is the Day of Grace; the Day of Vengeance is deferred till the
next. All that Wrath which Sinners by their hard and impenitent Hearts, do here
treasure up unto themselves, he reserves it for them till that dreadful Day of
Wrath, and of the Revelation of his righteous Judgment, When 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8,
9.
the Lord Jesus shall he revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming
fire; taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. He will then be
so consuming a Fire, that his very Presence will inflict everlasting
Destruction upon all those, who either now choose not to know him, that they may
without fear neglect him; or if they know him, refuse to acknowledge and
glorify him as God. But were this Destruction such as would put an end to
their Being, it would be the less terrible; yea so far from being terrible to
them in that dismal State of Misery; in which they will then be; that, might
they have their Wish, they would beg no greater Favor of God, than to be
reduced to nothing: But alas! they shall be destroyed, not simply as to Being,
but as to all such Being, as is not inexpressibly worse than no Being; Nothing
will remain to them, but to be cast into Hell, where the worm dies Mark 9. 44,
46, 48. Rev. 14. 11.
not, and the fire will never be quenched, but the smoke of their torments will
ascend for ever and ever. They will then be experimentally convinced, to their
Eternal Sorrow, That it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands Heb. 10. 31.
of the living God; of that God who lives for ever; and therefore will never
cease to inflict vengeance upon them. However they may think to trifle with God
now, they will then find, to their woe, That he will not be mocked.

To what has been said upon this Head, I shall add but one Consideration more,
which is such as, one would think, should be of force, if not to affright, yet
at least to shame Christians, out of all careless and negligent Behavior in
the House of God. And that is, That even Turks and Heathens, yea the very
Devils, will rise in Judgment against irreverent Christians, and condemn them.

So devout are the Turks, that they suffer not themselves, so much as to look
about them, but perform their Religious Offices with such Attention of Mind,
that they think they should lose the fruit of their Prayers, if they should
then but scratch their Head with their Finger; as an Eyewitness informs us. For
what, say they, Busbeq. Epist. 3.
if when a Man is to speak with the Bashaws, his whole Body is composed to
Reverence; how much greater Reason is there, that the same Respect should be
given to GOD, who so much exceeds all humane Height and Greatness. So intent,
they think, they ought to be at their Prayers, as not to be diverted, though
the Execution of the Sultan's Decree, should in the same moment be commanded,
Sir Paul Rycaut's Present State of the Ottoman Empire, lib. 2. chap. 23. Edit.
1.
(as another Author tells us.)

For Heathens, it may suffice to say, That this was one of Pythagoras's
Precepts, When Lilii Greg. Gyrald. Pythag. Symb. Interpret.
thou come into the Temple worship, and while thou art there do nothing else.
And another of his Rules was, That no Man should go into a Temple when he is in
a Journey. The meaning of which is, That God should not be worshipped by the
bye, or when a Man is otherwise employed; but with the greatest Solemnity and
Intention of Mind. Numa Pompilius decreed, That his Citizens should neither
see, nor hear Divine Matters, in a careless manner, and with wandering
Thoughts; but laying aside all distractions of Mind, should wholly apply their
Meditations to Religion. And Plutarch tells us, That In the Life of Numa
Pompilius.
he took care, that in the Time of Divine Worship, no noise should be heard in
the Streets, which might obstruct or disturb the seriousness of Devotion: what
shall I say more? Those who believe the Being of God, and yet do not Reverence
him as God, the very Devils will rise up in Judgment against them: for though I
do not say they worship God, yet it is certain they do not despise him, but
dread the thoughts of his Power and Justice; for the Devils believe and
tremble. Jam. 2. 19.


I proceed now in the

III. And last place, to suggest some further helps by way of direction, in
order to the better performance of this Duty. I say further helps, because all
the Arguments beforementioned are so many helps toward it. And,

1. That we may the more devoutly worship God in his House, let us before we
come thither lay aside our worldly Thoughts and Affections. Let no man (as St.
Chrysostom speaks) enter In Vid. Dom. Hom. 1.
the Church, having the cares of this World about him; no man with a wandering
and distracted mind; but let him lay all these down without the doors, and so
let him come. For coming thither (as In Cap. 1. Evang. Johan. Hom. 1.
he says in another place) We come to Heaven, not in respect of the place
indeed, but of the temper and disposition of our minds; for a Man while he
lives on Earth, may ascend to Heaven, and take a view of the things that are
there, etc. Let no Man therefore in the Church think of his domestic affairs;
but on the contrary while he is yet at home, let him begin those things he is
to do in the Church.

Unless we thus leave the cares of this Life behind us, we shall do nothing
less, than that which we pretend is the only thing we come to do. For the bare
presenting of our bodies before God, can by no means be interpreted a
worshipping of him, if our carriage be such as plainly testifies, That our
hearts are far from him. They therefore have little reason to reckon themselves
in the number of his sincere Worshippers, whose thoughts in his House are so
much set on the things of this World, that they cannot prevail with themselves
to forbear talking of them, even while the Divine The Lessons, Epistle, and
Gospel.
Oracles are reading; which one would think should (if any thing) command their
attention, as being the Voice of God without any Gloss, or Comment upon it of
Man's Devising.

2. In order to the loosening of our thoughts from earthly things, and raising
them up to the things above. Let us when we are going to his House reflect upon
such like Considerations, as those I have before proposed. Let us seriously
consider the most adorable Majesty of that God we are going to worship; That he
is of purer Eyes, than to behold Evil, and cannot look upon Iniquity; that he
will not hold them guiltless that take his name in vain. And when we are come
into his House, let us especially remember, That his holy and jealous Eye is
upon us, to observe not only the Deportment of our Bodies, but the most secret
Motions and Inclinations of our Souls. Were our Minds thus possessed with a
quick sense, that this Great, and Glorious, and Holy, and Allmighty God, has
his Eyes constantly upon us, could we suffer our own Eyes to be always rolling,
as if our only Business in coming to the Church, were to observe what Faces and
Fashions do there present themselves?

3. Let us seriously consider, of what great moment, to our selves, every part
of the Divine Worship is. What is it we ask of God in our Prayers? Is it so
small a thing, that our Condition will not be much the better or the worse,
whether it be granted or denied us? Oh no! It is nothing less than the Pardon
of our Sins, and the Assistance of his Grace, to be delivered from his Wrath,
and to be received into his Favor; which if we obtain, we shall be
inconceivably happy; if we miss, we shall be for ever intolerably miserable.
And can we be too serious, too intent, too earnest in begging such things as
these? What is the consequence of our Thanksgiving, when it is sincere and
hearty? Is it not the continuance of those Blessings which we have already
received, and the procuring of those which we yet want? Were we sure, that what
we now have would abide with us for ever, and that we should never stand in
need of more, we might then think our selves the less concerned, to return
Thanks for what is passed: but alas! it is not so with us; whatsoever we have
is God's, and he may recall it when he pleases: and nothing can more highly
provoke him to deprive us of our present Enjoyments, than our Unthankfulness
for them. Because she knew not that I gave her her corn, and wine, Hos. 2. 8, 9.
and oil, and multiplied her silver and gold; therefore will I return, and take
away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, etc. So
God threatened unthankful Israel.

Is the Word of God read and preached of such little concernment to us, that it
matters not much, whether we attend to it or not? Is it not the Rule, according
to which we shall be judged, at the great and dreadful Day? So St. Paul tells
us, God, says he, shall judge the secrets of men Romans 2. 16.
according to my Gospel. Yea, the Judge himself has told us the same. He that
John 12. 48.
rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him, the word
that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day. All they to whom
the Gospel is published, shall be judged by the Gospel; and as that either
acquits or condemns them, so shall they receive their Sentence from the mouth
of the Judge. And can we pay too awful Attention to that Book which contains
those Rules of Righteousness, by which we shall be tried, and adjudged to a
State of Weal or Woe for ever? Considering therefore that every part of the
Divine Worship, is of such high Importance to our selves, we cannot surely be
too attentive and reverent in the performance of it? If all that has been
hitherto said, should not be thought enough, to compose us to a devout Frame of
Spirit; Let us consider,

4. The near approach of Death, and that after Death comes the Judgment. How
soon this earthly Tabernacle may be dissolved we cannot tell; the present
instant is all that we are sure of, the remainder of our Time is wholly in
God's hand, and who knows but he may contract it to the next moment? Do we not
almost daily hear of some who are suddenly cut off? But the longest term to
which our Hopes can extend, how short is it? For what are Forty, Fifty, or
Sixty Years more? Will they not pass away as a Shadow? Be in truth as short as
those have been which are already passed, which now they are passed, seem
nothing to us? They who now make their Religion but a matter of Drollery, when
grim Death shall stare them in the face, their Thoughts, as well as their
Countenances, will then be changed. That Noble Earl, who in the times of his
health treated God and Religion, with as much Contempt, as his profane Wit was
able to invent; what awful Thoughts had he of the Divine Majesty, when Death
presented it self to his view? How passionately did he then cry out to a
Gentleman that came to visit him; O remember, that You contemn God no more; he
is an avenging God, and will visit You for Your Sins.

But did Death put an end to our Being, it would then be no great matter,
whether God were our Friend or our Enemy; but as sure as it is, that we must
die, so certain is it, that we shall be brought to Judgment. Rejoice, O young
man, in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer Eccles. 11. 9.
there in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the
sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring
thee into judgment. O the Tremblings and the Agonies they will then be seized
with, who are now so merrily disposed, that they cannot prevail with themselves
to be serious, when employed in the weightiest Business in the World! How
ghastly and distractedly will they then look, who now sport themselves with all
that is Sacred? The Buffoon will then be struck dumb with Horror and
Amazement, who now makes it his common Divertisement to ridicule Religion. Into
what dismal Cries and Lamentations, will their Rantings and Revellings then be
changed? O were there any place for Hope left, with what Sorrow would I now
confess my Sins, which I formerly made a mock of! How earnestly would I implore
the Mercy of God, for the Pardon of them! How importunately would I pray for
the Grace of God's Holy Spirit, to give me a new Heart! How attentively would I
listen to those Divine Lessons, I formerly despised! And how careful would I be
to put them in practice! But Oh! it is now too late; the Door is shut, and will
never again be set open to me. No Cries nor Tears, no Sighs nor Groans will now
avail; the Judge is inexorable, nothing remains, but that I suffer the
Vengeance of that God, whose Grace and Mercy I formerly set at naught.

Did we set before our Eyes the Terrors of the Lord; could we carry it so to
his Face, as to provoke his Wrath against us? No doubtless, had we a vigorous
sense of these things upon our Hearts, how devout should we be in our Prayers?
How attentive in hearing God's Word? How careful to remember, and put in
practice what we hear? In a word, How should we then work out our salvation
with fear and trembling? I shall add but one Help more, and that is,

5. Let us pray earnestly to God, to give us his Holy Spirit, to excite in us
an awful sense of his Glorious Majesty, to inspire us with heavenly and devout
Thoughts and Affections; to open our Hearts to attend to his Word; and to
compose our Minds to a steady attendance to every part of Divine Worship. If we
thus pray with our whole Heart, our Requests will certainly be granted. For so
God has promised. If thou criest after knowledge, and liftest up Prove. 2. 3, 5.
thy voice for understanding, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord,
and find the knowledge of God. Thou shall then experimentally know, what it is
to be truly Religious, and shall find thy self tied by the strongest Bonds
imaginable most devoutly to worship the Almighty Creator, Preserver and
Governor of the World. To whom be ascribed, etc.

FINIS.

