A DISSUASIVE FROM REVENGE: IN A DISCOURSE Upon these Words, Recompense to no
man evil for evil, Romans 12. 17.

BY NICOLAS STRATFORD, D. D. Dean of S. ASAPH.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard.

MDCLXXXIV.

TO My Worthy and Beloved Friends, THE INHABITANTS OF Manchester and Salford.
THough after much importunity, I was at length prevailed with to quit my
Relation to you; yet 'twas not without great reluctance and uneasiness to my
self. And that was the true and only reason, why I took no leave of you; for a
solemn Farewell, as it would have been no real Benefit to you, so, I was well
assured, that it would have added to my own Affliction.

What the prevalent inducement to my removal was, is, I suppose, well known to
your selves. As for others, it is sufficient to let them know, that it was not
from any unkindness to me on your part, nor out of any low or mercenary
respects on mine. That I did not consult my own Ease or Profit, or any other
little selfish Interest, the Parish for which I left you, is an evident
argument. And so far were you from making me weary of you, by any manner of
Disrespect or Unkindness toward me, that the experience I had of your
long-continued and unwearied kindness to me, was that, which, above all other
considerations, kept me so long with you, and made me always very backward to
hearken to any overtures of removing from you.

Do not therefore imagine, that I am forgetful of the Favors I have received
amongst you. I am indeed highly sensible of them, and shall ever own my self
obliged to you for them; and in token of my Gratitude, shall not only readily
accept, but industriously seek after opportunities of serving you; and shall
account it a real addition to my own, if I may be any way instrumental to
advance your Good.

And as I heartily wish your Wealth and Prosperity in all other respects, so I
shall especially pray for, and (as much as I am able at this distance)
endeavor to promote the welfare of your souls; that they may be prosperous and
in health, as your Bodies and outward Estates generally are; that ye may grow
in Grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18.
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

To which purpose I have Printed the ensuing Discourse, and heartily recommend
it, not only to your Reading, but to your Practice; beseeching you to accept
it, as a small expression of my great Affection to you.

1. S. Paul tells us, that 1 Timothy 1. 5.
the end of the Commandment (that to which the whole Christian Doctrine tends,
and in which all its parts are united, as lines in a common center) is Charity.
That Romans 13. 8, 9.
he that loves another, has fulfilled the Law. For this, Thou shall not
commit Adultery, Thou shall not Kill, Thou shall not Steal, Thou shall not bear
false Witness, Thou shall not Covet; and if there be any other Commandment, it
is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy Neighbor
as thy self. As all duties of Piety are contained in the love of God; so love
to our Neighbor is productive of the whole duty we owe to him. For as it
follows, Love v. 10.
works no evil to his Neighbor: No evil either in Thought, Word or Deed. For
this alone, will cleanse our hearts from wishing any evil to him; this will
stop our Mouths, from speaking any evil of him; this will hold our Hands, from
doing any evil to him. Nor will it only restrain us from the working of evil,
but it will put us upon the doing of all that Good for him, which we would
desire he should do for us, were we in his circumstances, and he in ours; and
will make us as truly condole with him in his Misery, and rejoice in his
Happiness, as if we our selves were in his condition.

So great a Grace is Charity, so comprehensive, that it carries all other
Graces along with it; and in proportion to our increase in this, will be our
proficiency in all the rest.

We need not therefore wonder that our blessed Savior, (whose great design was
to render his Disciples exemplary to the rest of mankind, in all virtuous
dispositions of mind) has so much inculcated this Grace upon us, so vehemently
pressed it with the most efficacious arguments, and so powerfully recommended
it to our practice by his own unparalled example. And not only so, but as if
this were that Grace, which above all other, would adorn our Profession, and
recommend him and his Religion to the good esteem of the World, he has made it
the peculiar Badge of his Disciples; For by this, Joh. 13. 35.
says he, shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another.

And this was indeed the Character by which the first Christians were
conspicuous and distinguished from men of all other Religions: While they were
generally hated and persecuted, and looked upon as the filth and offscouring
of all things, such was their love, not barely one to another, but even to
their Persecutors; that the Heathen World stood amazed at it, and their most
obstinate Enemies, were either confounded or converted by it.

As therefore the beloved Disciple, when by age he was disabled to preach, said
no more to his Auditors, than Little Children love one another, because this is
virtually All; for as it presupposes the love of God, so it includes in it our
whole Duty to Man, all the several parts of which, are but so many streams
which flow from this as their common fountain; so in like manner I earnestly
exhort and beseech you, that ye be kindly affectioned Romans 12. 10.
one to another with brotherly love, in honor preferring one another. That ye
love 1 Pet. 1. 22.
one another with a pure heart fervently. That by this means ye may be perfect
and entire, wanting nothing; but being readily disposed to every good work, may
stand complete in the whole will of God.

Nor is this charitable temper of soul, more advantageous to your Duty, than it
is to your interest; as it is in its fruits pleasant and profitable, and every
way beneficial both to your selves and to your Neighbors. For,

2. Let this Grace rule in your hearts, and there will be no Strifes nor
Debates, no crossing the Designs, nor undermining the Interests one of another;
but ye will all conspire as members of one and the same body, to promote each
others happiness. For this alone will expel and subdue all those mischievous
Passions and inordinate Appetites, that are the great and only disturbers of
your Peace, and will possess your souls with all those benign and gracious
Dispositions, that do beget, and preserve, and increase, and continue it.

What are the great Make-bates and Destroyers of Peace, but Pride, Envy,
Covetousness, Anger, Wrath, Bitterness, Revenge, and other such like malignant
ill-natured Affections? All which are banished from, and can find no
entertainment in that soul in which Charity reigns. For Charity 1 Cor. 13. 4,
5, 6, 7.
envyeth not, vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self
unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil,
rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoiceth in the Truth.

So far is a charitable person from repining at his Neighbors Good, that he
heartily rejoiceth at it; and were it in the power of his hand to effect, as it
is of his Heart to wish it, he would leave no man destitute of any good, which
he could wish to enjoy himself. And in case he do not meet with that good
esteem and kind usage he may justly expect from his Neighbors, as he is not
troubled and disquieted in his own mind, so consequently he cannot be
troublesome or vexatious to them; but sits down contented, choosing rather to be
accounted nothing, than by endeavoring to make himself something, to disturb
their ease and repose. He is indeed possessed with such a low opinion of his
own worth, that he cannot take it ill, if others think meanly of him too; yea
the higher he is exalted by God in any endowments above others, the lower he
debases himself for the good of others. As he does not behave himself unseemly
to any man; so he thinks nothing unbecoming and unworthy of himself, by which
he may be really serviceable to the Good of any. And no wonder that he readily
condescends to the meanest employments, for the benefit of his Brethren;
because he seeks not his own, but is of such a generous temper, that he
studies the Profit of others also. And being of such a public spirit, he is
not easily provoked to wrath, upon the account of any private wrong; as he
carefully endeavors not to give, so he is slow to take Offense; because he is
not apt to entertain an ill conceit of others, or to put a bad construction
upon their Words and Actions, but will ever interpret that which is doubtful,
to the most favorable sense: And when it is so apparent, that his Neighbor is
to blame, that he cannot wholly excuse him, yet he will not fail to make
allowances for Infirmities, and as far as he can with truth and honesty, will
extenuate those Faults which he cannot absolutely deny: Yea, though he sees
that his Neighbor is maliciously set against him, and designedly does him all
the mischief he can; yet he will not suffer the Peace to be broken on his part;
but notwithstanding the utmost Provocations, he is meek and humble, and patient
and ready to forgive; All the good he receives from his Neighbor, he owns
himself indebted to him for, and is ready, as he has opportunity to repay it;
but so far is he from repaying of Evil, that he requites it only with Good.

Such are the peaceable fruits of Charity; so that in proportion to the growth
of this among you, will be your Peace and Unity among your selves. And, O how
good and Psalm. 133. 1.
pleasant a thing is it, for Brethren to dwell together in Unity!

3. Nor will Charity only maintain Peace among your selves, but 'twill also
keep you from creating any manner of Molestation or Disturbance to your
Governors.

Justice teaches you, to render to Caesar the Romans 13. 7.
things that are Caesar's; yea, to render to all men their dues, Tribute to
whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom
Honor. And Charity, which is more liberal and open handed, will be so far from
not giving them what is their due, that rather than usurp upon their Rights, it
will choose to part with its own.

Besides, Charity and Humility are inseparable companions, they mutually beget
and nurse up each other; so that by how much the higher you grow in Charity, by
so much the lower will you grow in Humility.

Now a humble person is so far from exalting himself above those that are over
him, that he readily stoops to those that are under him. He accounts nothing a
greater instance of Pride and Arrogance, than to control those, to whom he is
in duty bound to submit; to prescribe Laws to those, from whom he ought to
receive them; since this is by interpretation, to set himself above God, whose
Authority Magistrates are invested with, and whose Vicegerents they are. He
leaves it therefore to his Governors to determine what is fit to be imposed,
and thinks himself only concerned to obey; and if it sometime happen, that he
is not able to discern the reason of a Law, yet he questions not, but there is
sufficient reason for it, because his Superiors (as standing upon higher
ground) are able to see further than he can. He does not therefore dispute,
much less remonstrate against their Injunctions, but humbly bows and submits to
them.

And if he be unhappily brought to this Exigent, that he cannot do what his
Governors command, unless he break the Commands of the absolute Sovereign of
Heaven and Earth; he will then raise no opposition either against their Persons
or Government, but meekly suffer what they inflict, as knowing that they are
the Ministers of God, and that whosoever resists them, rises up in Rebellion
against God himself.

If therefore you are under the power of this Grace, you will not need to be
taught, to obey Heb. 13. 17. 1 Pet. 2 13, 14.
them that have the rule over you; to submit your selves to every humane
Ordinance, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as to
those that are sent by him; because this alone, will so effectually dispose you
to yield obedience to these Precepts, that you will not be able without
offering violence to your selves, to do otherwise.

But I will not be over tedious, and therefore shall remit you to the following
Discourse, in which you will find one prime branch of this Divine Grace, (which
has so powerful an influence for the producing of those forementioned, and
many other blessed effects) recommended to your consideration, Affection and
Practice.

Finally, Brethren, 2 Cor. 13. 11.
farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace; and
the God of love and peace be with you. I shall ever remain,

Your faithful and affectionate Friend and Servant, Nic. Stratford.

ROMANS XII. 17. Recompense to no man evil for evil.


THough no Precept can be more plain, yet we shall scarce find any that is more
generally neglected. So much is the sin in fashion that is here prohibited,
that he is thought unworthy the name of a Man, who does not practice it; and
nothing is looked upon as a more undoubted argument of a poor, cowardly Spirit,
than patiently to pass over, and tamely to put up an injury.

Yea, so far are many from not recompensing evil for evil, that they recompense
evil for good; they curse those that bless them, and despitefully use those who
most heartily pray for them.

And though it is true, that in all Ages men have been more or less propense to
this evil practice, yet in the present Age, by reason of a more than ordinary
concurrence of many unhappy Causes, more irreconcilable Dissentions, more
implacable Animosities, more bitter Envyings; in a word, more ill nature and
malignity of temper are to be found, than formerly; by reason of which, men are
more strongly bent, more impetuously hurried, both to the doing and repaying of
injuries one to another. And therefore a Discourse upon this Subject, is now
more especially seasonable, in order to the calming of men's enraged passions,
the sweetening of their embittered Spirits, the restoring of peace, the
reviving of Charity, and the putting a stop to the further growth of this
unchristian practice.

And that the ensuing Discourse may by the grace of God be effectual to these
great and blessed ends, after I shall have first spoken somewhat briefly of the
practice here prohibited, declaring the import and extent of it; I shall show
you how sinful and foolish, how irreligious and unreasonable it is, by such
Arguments, as may be of force to convince your judgments, and to work your
Wills and Affections to an utter aversation from, and abhorrence of it.

1. As to the first; that which is here prohibited, is in the general, the
repaying of evil for evil. For the more full understanding of which, and the
right stating of our Duty, I shall briefly show these four things.

1. The extent of the evil here forbidden to be recompensed.

2. How many ways a man may be said to recompense evil for evil.

3. That the Prohibition reaches to all men, of what degree or quality soever.
Or, that no man is permitted to recompense evil for evil.

4. No, not to any man; there being no man in the world, to whom any man in the
world, may recompense evil for evil.

1. First, The evil here forbidden to be recompensed, is not this or that evil
only; but evil indefinitely, and without limitation; and so is comprehensive of
all sorts and degrees of wrong that one man can receive from another. Whether
it be that evil which is hurtful to his Mind, as Grief and Vexation; Or to his
Body, as Stripes and Wounds; Or to his Goods, as Theft and Rapine; Or to his
Reputation, as Reproach and Slander. Whether it be the evil of the Hand, or of
the Tongue; Or but so much as the evil of the Eye, the envying the happiness of
another, or wishing that mischief may befall him, which he before wished might
fall upon us. In short, there is no kind of evil that one man can do to
another; and therefore no mischief that one man can receive from another, that
the evil in the Text does not extend to; and consequently no kind of injury
that we are not here forbidden to recompense.

2. Secondly, We may recompense evil for evil these two ways. Either First, by
repaying evil in the same kind; as by returning blow for blow, railing for
railing. Or Secondly, by repaying it in some other kind; as by punishing
another in his Estate, for the Injury he has done us in our Body or good Name.
And this Recompense may be made either by our selves, or by procuring that it
be done by others. That a man should be his own avenger, was not permitted by
God to the Jews. For that Law of Retaliation, requiring Exodus 21. 22, 23, 24.
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, wound for wound, stripe for stripe; the
execution of it was reserved to the public Magistrate upon complaint made by
the injured party. And therefore it cannot be so much as imagined, that such a
liberty as this should be indulged to Christians, whose hands are more closely
and strongly tied up from retaliating of injuries than the Jews were.

Nor is it enough for a Christian not to repay himself, the wrong he has
received; but he is moreover obliged, not to procure or endeavor, no nor so
much as desire, that it may be repaid by others. Some persons, who readily
grant, that they may not avenge themselves by their own hands, think they may
be allowed to do it, by the Ministers of public Justice: in case therefore of
any injury received, their next work is to address to the Magistrate, and under
the specious pretenses of Law and Justice, to wreak their Revenge upon their
offending Brother; Whereas this is in truth, to recompense evil, as much as the
other; for though the Executioner be not the same, yet what difference is
there, as to the thing it self, whether a man receive the same wound, from my
own hands, or from the hands of another that are set on work by me? He
doubtless is as highly criminal before God, who procures an evil to be done by
another, as he that does it himself. And therefore this falls under the
prohibition in the Text no less than the former.

But because in matters of wrong, a man may lawfully in several Cases fly for
Sanctuary to the Law (though never for repaying the wrongs received, and that
he may be even with his Adversary) for prevention of mistakes, and in order to
your further satisfaction, I shall in a few words tell you, what is permitted
to a Christian in this case, and from thence infer what it is that is here
forbidden.

First, A man may lawfully defend himself, and his just Rights, against the
assaults of an injurious person. Thus S. Paul did again and again; One while we
find him pleading Act. 22. 2.
his privilege as a Citizen of Rome, and under the protection of the Roman
Laws, securing himself from the evil designs of his Adversaries. At another
time we hear him appealing to Caesar, Act. 25. 10, 11.
when Festus, to gratify the Jews, would have delivered him up into their
hands. It Is not therefore defensive, but offensive weapons that we are
forbidden the use of. We may by all innocent means, endeavor to save our
selves from hurt; though we may not so much as wish the mischief of our
Neighbor, how injurious soever to us.

Secondly, We may lawfully require Restitution or satisfaction, for the damage
we have sustained, and in case the Offender be so unjust as to deny it, we may
by the assistance of the Magistrate extort it from him. But with these two
Cautions.

1. Provided, that the damage be considerable; for to create trouble and
charges to another for a slight trifling interest, is utterly inconsistent with
that Meekness and Gentleness, and Goodness and Mercy, which are the
constitutive ingredients of a Christian. And this is that only which seems to
be forbidden by our Savior, Matthew. 5. If thine enemy smite thee on the right
cheek, turn to him the other also; and if he sue thee at the Law, and take away
thy coat, let him have thy cloak also, etc. But when the loss is such, as in
the judgment of unpassionate and disinteress'd persons is valuable; such as if
not repaired, may render us less able to discharge those duties that either in
our private or public capacities are incumbent upon us, we may then exact an
amends from him who was the cause of it.

2. Provided the Offender be able, either in whole, or at least in part, to
make reparation. For to prosecute him who has done the wrong, in case I know he
is utterly unable to make any part of amends for it, can be nothing else but
purely to render evil for evil; because I do evil to him, without doing any
good to my self; I add to his burden, and do not at all lighten my own. Yea,
that I may make him more miserable, I make my self so too, by putting my self
to a fruitless expense and trouble, and by exposing my self as well as my
Neighbor, to those many temptations to injustice and uncharitableness, which a
Law suit is ever attended with.

But in case the Offender be fairly responsible for the Wrong he has done; and
the Wrong be so burdensome, that we cannot without much pain and affliction
bear the weight of it; I know nothing in the Laws of Christ, that forbids us to
relieve our selves, by exacting satisfaction in a legal way from the party
injurious.

Provided still, that we do it with a single design of repairing our Rights,
without any mixture of malice, without any desire of doing mischief to the
wrong-doer; and that we give proof of our charitable affection toward him, by
putting him to no more grief than needs must; and by being ready, as occasion
serves, to requite his Injuries with kindnesses. If these Cautions be observed,
I think it is no way unbecoming our Christian Profession, to seek a reparation
of the losses we have sustained.

3. In case the Wrong be not barely to our selves, but such as redounds to the
damage of the public, it is not only lawful, but it may be our Duty to
prosecute the Offender. When our private interest is so wrapped up with that of
others, that we cannot relinquish our own, without betraying of their Rights;
not only in Justice, but in Charity too, we may be obliged to a legal Process;
And because we are bound to prefer the Public before any particular man's
private benefit, we should show our selves unworthy of humane Society, should
we neglect the redress of an injury, that is any way destructive of the public
good.

Now, though in the cases mentioned, much evil may be sometimes brought upon
the delinquent party; yet since this evil is that which the person injured does
not so much as desire, much less endeavor; but would on the contrary, if it
were in his power, prevent; and the only thing he designs and endeavors, is
the defense or recovery of his own, or the public Rights; therefore the
mischiefs which unavoidably happen to the Criminal, are not to be imputed to
him that prosecutes, but to be laid at his own door.

The thing then that is here forbidden, is, the returning of evil to another,
not with a design simply to repair our own losses, or to secure the public
good; but on purpose to grieve and afflict him, who has before afflicted us,
that we may thereby gratify our own angry and revengeful humor. When we shall
wound another in his Body, Goods, or Name, because we have suffered a wound
from him, though the wound we give, can afford no cure for that we have
received: Yea though in the prosecution of such unworthy malicious ends, we
take Sanctuary at public Justice, and require no more than the Law of the Land
allows; though there be a necessity that humane Laws should interpose in
matters of this nature; and though the Judge may not deny what the Law grants, if
we are so uncharitable as to demand it; and though in no human Court we stand
accusable for any crime upon this account; yet so unworthy a thing is this, so
much below that noble and generous Spirit that Christ came to raise and exalt
us to, that he thought fit to forbid it, and that not only to some, but to all
men; which brings me to the next thing proposed.

3. The persons to whom this Command is given, are all the Sons and Daughters
of men, to whom it shall ever come. As the foregoing Precepts, Let love be
without dissimulation. Abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is good.
Be kindly affection'd one to another, etc. extend to all men, so does this too.
And therefore in another Text the note of universality is expressly annexed,
see that none render 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15.
evil for evil. No person of what quality or degree soever.

Which I the rather observe, because I find that some persons, who treat upon
this subject, do exempt the Magistrate; the reason is, because he is
indispensably bound by virtue of his Office, to recompense evil to evildoers.
But this exception ought not to be made. Not that I think the Magistrate, is
not obliged to render evil to those that do evil; but because the evil of
Punishment inflicted by the Magistrate, is so widely different from that of
Revenge here forbidden, that if we extend this Command to the Magistrate,
'twill be no bar to the execution of his Office.

That therefore I may give the Magistrate his due, I not barely grant, but
assert, that he is commissioned by God, for the punishment of evildoers, as
well as for the praise of them that do well. This we are taught by the two
great Apostles, S. Paul and S. Peter. S. Paul tells us, That Rulers are not a
terror Romans 13. 3, 4.
to good works, but to the evil. Will thou not then (says he) be afraid of the
Power? do that which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same, for he is
the Minister of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be
afraid; for he bears not the Sword in vain; for he is the Minister of God, a
Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. And S. Peter commands us to
be subject to every 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, not only to the King as Supreme, but unto
Governors also, as unto those that are sent (that is, commissionated) by him,
for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well.

Yea, I grant, not only that the public Magistrate, but that Parents and
Masters, and other Superiors in private Authority, are invested with power to
punish those that are under their charge, proportionable to the merits of their
Offenses, in all such cases as are not reserved to the public Magistrate. And
which is more; that not only wrongs done to others, but even personal injuries,
or those done to themselves, by those that are placed in subjection under them,
may be lawfully punished by a Magistrate, Parent or Master respectively.

But though all this be granted, yet it will not hence follow, but that the
Supreme Magistrate himself is as much obliged to the Duty in the Text, as the
meanest of his Subjects (and therefore private Governors much rather). The
reason is, because the evil here forbidden, is that of Revenge (in the strict
notion of it) which both in its Original, Attendants, and Ends, is so remote
from the punishment of Delinquents by persons in Authority, that a man may
daily inflict the one without being touched with the Guilt of the other. For,
1. In Revenge, the person Episcop. de Magistrate. c. 7.
who takes it, apprehends himself injured, either in his Person, or in his
Relatives, or in some thing that appertains to him: Whereas it rarely in
comparison happens that the Magistrate himself is injured by those he punishes.
And so far is it from being necessary, that it should be so, that sometimes on
the contrary, the persons punished by him are such as have highly obliged him.
2. Revenge derives it self from spite or malignity of mind: Whereas the
punishment taken by the Magistrate, proceeds (or at least should do so from
good will either to the person or to the public, or both. In all punishments
both capital and others, from love to the Public; In all less than capital,
from love both to the Public and the Person too. And therefore, 3. Revenge is
ever accompanied with pleasure and delight in him that takes it; But Punishment
is attended with grief and commiseration of mind in him that inflicts it. How
often does the Magistrate weep when he pronounces Sentence against a
Malefactor? and the bowels of a Parent yearn over that rebellious Son whom he
chastises? And therefore, 4. Private Revenge and legal punishment are greatly
different in their Ends. For the End of Revenge is merely to satisfy Anger, or
to allay my own, by beholding another Grief: Whereas the End of all
Punishments, that are not capital, is the Amendment of the Person punished; and
of all Punishments whatsoever, the Terror of the Example that others may be
afraid, and not tempted by impunity to commit the same Offenses; and the peace
and security, the good Order and Government of public Societies.

By what has been said, I think it is sufficiently evident, that Punishment and
Revenge (in the common sense of this word) so widely differ, that though the
latter be forbidden to the Magistrate, yet that will be no hindrance to the
execution of his Office by inflicting the former. And though it is true, that
the Magistrate is called a Revenger for wrath; Yet the Romans 13. 4.
word is there used (as it is also when applied to God) in a larger and more
benign sense, and not in its usual and worst notion. For even the Magistrate
who executes the Law upon others, in case he do it with Spite and Rancour, to
vent his own Passions, and to ease his Spleen, he thereby becomes himself, a
breaker of the Law of Christ.

The sum is, To render evil to another, merely because he has done evil to
us; to take Pleasure in another Pain; To think our selves more happy, because
we have made our Neighbor more miserable, this is no more allowed to the
highest, than it is to the lowest. Not the greatest Prince upon Earth, is
permitted in this sort, to recompense evil for evil. No,

4. Fourthly, Not to any man in the world. Recompense to no man evil for evil.
To no man, not to the most inveterate and implacable Enemy; Not to a
Schismatic or Heretic; Not to a Turk or Jew, (...), etc. Chrysostom. in loc.
no nor to a Heathen; Not to the most Irreligious or Atheistical wretch in the
world: Not to any man of any Nation, of what Quality, State, Opinion, or
Religion soever, may we thus recompense evil for evil.

The result of what has been delivered is this: That no man in the world may
repay to any man in the world, either in the same kind, or in another; either
by his own hands, or by the hands of others, any manner of wrong or mischief,
merely by way of retaliation or recompense for the injury he has received from
him. He may indeed defend his own Rights, he may seek the reparation of such
wrongs as are weighty and valuable, if the party obnoxious be able to make it:
And in case the injury be such, (as if no amends be made for it) will redound
to the damage of human Society, he not only may, but ought to prosecute the
Offender, and bring him to legal punishment, though no advantage accrue to
himself thereby. But without respect to these, or such like Ends, to create
grief and misery to another; that is, to do evil to my Neighbor, for no other
reason, but because he has done so to me, is a thing so base and unbecoming a
Man, that it ought not so much as to be named among Christians.

And that it is so indeed, I shall now show you by such Arguments as will, I
hope, be of force to convince you, how both unreasonable and irreligious, how
foolish and brutish, as well as sinful this practice is; that you may be
thereby wrought to an utter aversation from, and abhorrency of it.

The Arguments being many and various, I shall for methods sake, and to avoid
confusion, reduce them to several Heads. I shall

I. Show you how repugnant it is to the holy Religion we profess. II. How
impious in respect of God. III. How hurtful to our selves. IV. How unreasonable
even in respect of our Neighbor who has wronged us. V. How destructive of
public Peace, how pernicious to human Society.
For whether we consider that Religion to which we owe all our hopes of
Happiness; whether we consider God, our Neighbor, or our Selves; whether we
consider our own private or the public good, we shall not be far to seek for
store of such Arguments, as may sufficiently represent to us, how contrary it
is to our Religion, how evil in it self, how provoking to God, how hurtful to
our selves, how prejudicial to our Neighbor, how opposite to the public good,
to recompense evil for evil.

I. Nothing can be more plainly contrary to the nature, more inconsistent with
the design of the Religion we profess; which is so far from being troublesome
and vexatious, hurtful and revengeful; that it is on the contrary most
peaceable, gentle, Jam. 3. 17.
easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits. More particularly.

1. To render evil for evil, is utterly inconsistent, with those gracious
Qualities and Dispositions of mind, which it is the main design of our Religion
to plant and promote in us; such are Humility, Gal. 5. 22.
Meekness, Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness. These are
the Graces by which Christians ought to be known, and distinguished from other
men, as by their proper Badge and Livery. And therefore S. Paul commands us (as
we desire to approve our selves the Elect of God, holy and beloved) that we put
on bowels of Col. 3. 12, 13, 14.
Compassion, Kindness, Humbleness of mind, Meekness, Long-suffering, Forbearing
one another, and Forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any.
And that above, or over all these, we put on Charity, which is the bond of
Perfectness. That is (by an Hebraism usual in the writings of this Apostle) a
most perfect bond, by which we shall be more closely tied together, and
entirely made one, than by any other bond whatsoever. And S. Peter requires,
that above all things, 1 Pet. 4. 8.
we have fervent Charity among our selves, and that for this reason, because
Charity will cover a multitude of Sins. A multitude not only of those sins
which are committed against God, but against our selves; and 'twill cover them
from our own, as well as from other men's eyes, that we shall never see them, so
as to requite them. And that an universal Charity extended even to the most
merciless Enemies, is the great Glory and Perfection in which Christians ought
to outshine others, we learn from our blessed Savior's own mouth, who after
he had commanded us to love our Enemies, and propounded the Example of God
himself to move us thereunto, he concludes, Be ye therefore Matt. 5. 48.
perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

By all which (and much more which might be produced to the same purpose) it is
evident, that the Spirit and Temper, which the Gospel of Christ is designed to
work in us, is as opposite to that of Enmity and Revenge, as Light to Darkness.
For how can he be easily provoked by the injuries of another, who is Meek, and
Gentle, and Patient and Long-suffering? How can he repay evil to his Neighbor;
who notwithstanding all the evil he has suffered from him, is kindly
affectioned toward him? How can he take Pleasure in the Afflictions of his
Enemy, who has a fellow feeling of his miseries, as if they were his own? It
cannot be, there is an utter inconsistency in the thing it self; and therefore
were all such as profess themselves Christians, of such a temper as their
Religion requires, there could be no such thing, as a thought of Revenge found
among them. As will be further evident, because,

2. Nothing can be more repugnant to the Preceptive part of our Religion.
Should we take a particular view of those practices, which are condemned by the
Laws of Christ, we should scarce find any that is more contrary to, that bids
more defiance to his Commandments, than this does. For,

First, Nothing is more expressly prohibited; and that not barely once in my
Text, but the Prohibition is frequently repeated: Be ye all 1 Pet. 3. 8, 9.
of one mind, says S. Peter, having compassion one of another, be pitiful, be
courteous; Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing. And S. Paul
elsewhere repeats the same Command, with a special charge prefixed, to engage
us the more to the observance of it: See (or look to it) that none render evil
for evil. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 15.
The same Prohibition is also given by our Lord and Master: But I say unto you,
Matt. 5. 39.
that ye resist not evil. Which should rather be rendered, avenge not evil; it
being directly opposed to the Law of Retaliation before mentioned.

The truth is, if we consult Moses and the Prophets, we shall find, that God
anciently forbad this, even to the Jews, with respect to those persons who were
of their own Nation and Religion, Thou shall not avenge, no nor so Levit. 19.
18.
much as bear any grudge against the Children of thy People. Which we find
afterward repeated by Solomon: Say not Prove. 20. 22.
thou, I will recompense evil; and again, Say not I will do to Prove. 24. 29.
him, as he has done to me: I will render to the man according to his work.
And though in case the injured party required it, the Magistrate was bound by
the Law of God, to render an eye for an eye, and Exodus 21. 23, 24, 25.
a tooth for a tooth; Yet it is manifest by the Texts before quoted, that God
did not approve of this uncharitable temper, though he was to give some
indulgence to it. And if God did not allow this in a Jew, can we think that he
does not much more condemn it in Christians? who have many more, and those much
stronger motives and obligations to Charity and Forgiveness, than the Jews had.
For,

Secondly, So far must he be from rendering evil for evil, that on the
contrary, he must return good for evil. So the Apostle commands in the words
before my Text; Bless them Romans 12. 14.
that persecute you. And to show the great weight and necessity of this Duty,
he again inculcates it, and expressly forbids the contrary; bless and curse not.
(...). Chrysostom. ad Romans Hom. 22.
not, as S. Chrysostom observes, do not remember injuries, neither avenge them;
but he requires that which is much more than these, Not to avenge is the part
of a Philosopher; but to pray that they may be happy, who do what they can to
make us miserable, is becoming an Angel. And no less than this, does our Master
expect from all his Disciples; for he himself not only counsels, but strictly
commands us, To love our Matt. 5. 44.
enemies, to bless them that curse us, to do good to them that hate us, and to
pray for them that despitefully use us, and persecute us. He says not (...),
etc. Chrysostom. in loc.
, do not hate, but love; do not hurt, but do good. And to quicken us to
obedience to this Command, he has more effectually taught us the same lesson
by his own Example; in not only forgiving his mortal and most malicious
Enemies, but praying to his Father to forgive them too.

And this indeed is not more, than what even the Jews, (how ill-natured, and
hard hearted soever) were in a great measure obliged to, toward those enemies
at least, who were of their own Nation and Profession. For God expressly
commanded them: If thou Exodus 23. 4, 5.
meet thine Enemies Ox or his Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it
back to him again; if thou see the Ass of him that hates thee, lying under his
burden, and would forbear to help him, thou shall surely help him. Nor were
they only obliged to show kindness to their Enemies Beasts, but to their
Persons, in relieving their necessities, and supplying their wants. For if
thine Enemy hunger, give him bread to eat; and if he be thirsty, give him water
to drink: was given by Solomon in command to the Jews, a thousand years before
our Saviors manifestation in the flesh. And (as I shall afterward have
occasion to show) was highly commended by many Heathens. They therefore by the
way are greatly mistaken, who tell us, that to love, and to do good to our
Enemies, is so peculiar to Christianity, that it was altogether unknown to the
World, before Christ taught it to his Disciples.

We have seen with what strong bonds our Hands, and our Tongues, and our Hearts
too are tied up, either from doing, or speaking, or so much as wishing any evil
to any man, by way of return for the evil he has done to us; since this is not
only frequently and earnestly forbidden by the Laws of our Religion, but rather
than avenge a former, we are commanded to expose our selves to a succeeding
Injury; Yea, to be so far from repaying evil with evil, that on the contrary,
we recompense evil with good.

Unless therefore we resolve to go and do likewise, let us no longer think our
selves Christians. Why call ye me Lord, Luke 6. 46.
Lord, says our Savior, and do not the things which I say? Christ will own
none for his Servants, but those who obey his Commands; and he wonders that
others should be so impudent, as to challenge him for their Master; for it is
certain, that his Servants we are to whom Romans 6. 16.
we obey. Let us not then think well of our selves, for being Christians in
name, unless by our works, we show our selves Christians indeed; for so far are
we from being the better for our holy Profession, that we are in truth much the
worse, in case our practice be a contradiction to it. As therefore we desire to
approve our selves, what we profess to be, let us be so far from being overcome
with evil, that we overcome evil with good.

But if the bare Commands of Christ should be slighted by us, yet methinks the
Rewards promised to those who obey them, and the Punishments threatened to
those who neglect them, should be a powerful and prevailing Motive. And
therefore,

Thirdly, Consider, what great Rewards our Religion promises to those who
observe these Commandments, and what dreadful Punishments it threatens to those
who despise them. For if we Matt. 6. 4.
forgive men their trespasses, our heavenly Father will also forgive us. A
Promise comprehensive of all the happiness our hearts can wish; for blessed is
he whose iniquities Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
are forgiven, whose sins are covered: blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes not iniquity. And this Blessedness, (says the Amen, the true and
faithful Witness) shall be the portion of those, who heartily forgive the
Offenses of their Brethren. And for our greater assurance he repeats it again.
When ye stand praying, forgive, Mar. 11. 25.
if ye have ought against any man, that your Father also which is in Heaven may
forgive you your trespasses.

Not that we are so to understand this, as if to forgive our Enemies, without
the concurrence of other Graces and Duties, were alone sufficient to entitle a
man to the forgiveness of his sins (as some men may perhaps flatter themselves,
and thence conclude that they are safe, in case they do but forgive their
Enemies, whatsoever other sins they indulge to). No; how acceptable soever this
is to God, we may not expect that it should be of any avail in order to our
everlasting happiness, unless it proceed from those Christian principles, which
will engage a man to the sincere performance of all other Duties, and produce
an entire Obedience to God's Commandments. That therefore the Reward is
expressly annexed to this Grace, it is not to exclude others; but to show the
excellency, and the absolute necessity of this, how highly pleasing it is to
God, and what great influence it has in order to the commending us to his
Favor and Acceptance.

And as no less than Happiness is the Reward promised to those who obey these
Commandments. So as great is the Punishment threatened to those that despise
them. For if Matt. 6. 15. Mar. 11. 26.
we forgive not men their Trespasses, neither will our Father which is in
Heaven forgive our Trespasses. Yea, he shall Jam. 2. 13.
have Judgment without Mercy, who shows no mercy. What measure we mete to
others, God will at length mete it to us again. If we forgive our Neighbor, he
will forgive us. If we show mercy, we shall obtain mercy. If we will not
forgive, neither will God: If we recompense to others their Offenses against
us, he will at last recompense ours against himself. And how inexpressibly
miserable must that man be, with whom God will deal according to the merits of
his Sins?

We have seen, that nothing can be more opposite to the nature and tendency of
our Religion, than to repay injuries with injuries: That it is a manifest
contradiction to those Graces, which it is the chief design of our Religion to
plant and promote in us; That it bids open defiance to many of its express and
most peremptory precepts; that it is threatened not only with temporal, but
eternal Punishments; and that the greatest Rewards are promised to the contrary
practice. Is it not a strange thing, that persons who are of a spiteful and
revengeful temper, who are impatient of the least neglect, who will not pass by
the most trifling Affront, who cannot be so much as civil, unless it be to
those who are so to them; who resolve not to die in their Enemies debt, but to
pay him home in his own coin; is it not strange, I say, that such men as these,
should take themselves for Christians? But let them reckon themselves such as
much as they please; while by their actions they plainly contradict the
Religion they pretend to, they do thereby but proclaim their Hypocrisy.

Nor shall we wonder that our Religion has put in so many Prohibitions against
this vice, and armed us with so many weapons to oppose and vanquish it; if we
seriously consider, what Impiety it involves toward God, how hurtful it is to
our selves, how unreasonable in respect of our Neighbor who has wronged us,
how destructive of humane Society; and consequently how much it is condemned
even by that Law which is written in every one of our hearts: which I now
proceed to discourse of in the order proposed.

II. He that avenges himself on him that injures him, is highly impious toward
God, and that upon two accounts especially.

First, Because he sacrilegiously usurps God's peculiar Right. This Argument we
find used by the Apostle in the next Verse save one to my Text. Dearly Romans 12.
19.
beloved, says he, avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath.
The wrath here spoken of, may be either God's wrath, or our own, or that of our
Adversary. If we understand it of the wrath of God, the meaning is; Do not
anticipate the Vengeance of God, but leave it to him to punish those that harm
you. If of our own wrath, the sense is; Suffer it not presently to break out
into Revenge, but give it time to cool and expire, by a metaphor taken from
matter suddenly inflamed and rarefied, which if pent up into a narrow compass,
consumes or shatters in pieces all that stands in its way; but give it room,
and it spends it self, and is extinguished without doing any mischief. If we
refer it to the wrath of our Enemy, the meaning is; Do not violently resist it,
but decline and flee from it; Or if that cannot be, bear it patiently, and do
not return wrath for wrath. And why must we thus give place to wrath? the
reason follows; because it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says
the Lord. This we find written Deuteronomy. 32. 35. where God says of himself, To me
belongs Vengeance and Recompense. And therefore the Psalmist thus addresses
to God, O Psalm. 94. 1.
Lord God to whom Vengeance belongs, O God to whom Vengeance belongs. So
proper is Vengeance to God, that it belongs to none besides him, except only
those, to whom he has given special license to execute it; that is, to public
Magistrates, and Superiors in Authority, who by virtue of their Office, are
also Avengers: but what is inflicted by them, is to be accounted no other than
the Vengeance of God, because they as God's Ministers are commissioned by him.
Whosoever therefore arrogates it to himself without authority derived from God,
he invades his Prerogative, and sets himself up in his room; he takes God's
work out of his hand, as if he could do it better himself. Which how highly
provoking it must needs be to a jealous God, who will not give his Glory to
another, we may easily imagine.

But that we may not entertain any low and unworthy conceits of God, I add by
way of Caution; that Vengeance as attributed to him, is to be taken in a benign
and favorable sense, for an act of distributive Justice, by which, as the
Supreme and righteous Governor and Judge of the World; he rights those that
are wronged, and renders punishment to evildoers, according to the merit of
their works; abstracting from all those Perturbations and imperfections, from
which it proceeds, and with which it is attended in us, by reason of which, we
are altogether unfit to be our own Avengers.

Secondly, By avenging our selves, we are not only unjust to God, in usurping
his Rights; but guilty also of the most horrid Ingratitude, in not rendering to
him according to the Benefits we have received from him. How merciful is God to
us? how patient and long-suffering? how many and great Indignities, do we daily
offer to him? how little or nothing are the greatest Injuries, that the most
potent and embittered Enemy can do to us, in comparison of our Offenses against
him, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of
lords? Should he be extreme to mark our sins against himself; nay should he
recompense to us the Iniquities but of one day, the best of us would not be
able to abide, but should be crushed into the bottomless Pit, under the
unsupportable weight of his Vengeance. Yea, so far is he from punishing us
after our sins, and rewarding us according to our Iniquities, that he showers
down his blessings upon our heads, and daily loads us with his Benefits.

And what does he expect from us by way of grateful Retribution? Why, that we
should be also kind and merciful to our Fellow Servants, as he is to us; that
we should forgive their little offenses against our selves, as he forgives our
great ones against himself. That God expects this, our Savior has plainly
taught us in the parable of the King, who called his Servants to an account for
what they owed him: For, what says the King to that Servant to whom he had
forgiven ten thousand talents, when he was so unmerciful to his Fellow Servants,
that he would not forgive him an hundred pence? Thou wicked Servant, Matt. 18.
32, 33.
I forgave thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me; should not thou
also have had compassion on thy Fellow Servants even as I had pity on thee? Had
God required some great matter of us, should we not readily have done it? since
all that we can do, yea all that we can suffer too, falls incomparably short of
what we owe him; When therefore he requires us in token of our Thankfulness,
not to avenge our selves upon, but to forgive our injurious Brother (a thing so
small, so easy, so reasonable, so infinitely below what he might justly exact
from us) what Monsters of Ingratitude must we needs be, if we stick at this?

We have heard how impious this practice is in respect of God; how unjust in
assuming to our selves, what is proper to God only; how ungrateful, in refusing
to deny our selves so little by way of return, for those innumerable and
inestimable Benefits, he has vouchsafed to us: If therefore we have any love
for God, yea, if we have any respect or regard to him, shall we not abandon and
abhor it for the future? and instead of heaping coals of Vengeance upon our
Enemy's head to consume him, heap only coals of love, which may soften and melt
him.

III. But in case we should have no regard to God, yet 'twill be strange if we
have no love for our selves. I proceed therefore in the Third place to show
you, how great an evil it is to our selves, to recompense evil for evil to any
man. (...). Chrysostom. in Matthew. c. 18. Hom. 62.
For though we design to hurt our Enemies only, yet we are therein grossly
mistaken, since in hurting of them, we really do so much more mischief to our
selves, that our most invenomed and spiteful Adversary cannot wish that worse
may befall us. For,

First, He that repays an Injury, does the very same evil, with him who first
inflicted it; and by consequence involves himself in the same guilt, and makes
himself as bad a man as he. The main thing in which they differ, is, that the
one goes before the other; He that begins the wrong, leads the way, and is
first in the transgression; he that avenges it, follows after, and does the
very same thing that he did before him.

That which he is wont to plead for the excusing or lessening of his crime is
this; that he is provoked to it by the wrong another has already causelessly
done to him: Whereas this is in truth, so far from excusing upon some accounts,
that it rather aggravates his sin, and renders him so much the more
inexcusable. For what is the reason, you are so angry with your Neighbor? Is it
not because you judge he has done that which he ought not? because he has
done that which is unbecoming a just and a good man to do? And will it think
you, excuse you, that you do that which your Neighbor has done, because it is
that which you believe he ought not to have done? Can you think your selves
e're the more innocent, in imitating another in those actions, which you your
selves condemn as vile and unworthy? None can be so absurd, so des^^^^te of
common sense, as to imagine it.

This lesson we may learn from many Heathens. One of them tells us, That we
ought to do justice (...). Hieroc. in Aur. Pythag. Car. p. 69.
not only to those who are just to us, but to those who injure us; lest by
repaying the wrong they do, we make our selves equally bad with them. Another
says, That if it be (...). Max. Tyr. Dissert. 2.
evil to wrong another, it is alike evil to retaliate the wrong; that is, he who
first does the injury, does that which is bad, he that returns it does nothing
better. A third Plato in Crit.
concludes, That since it is simply evil to do an injury, therefore he that
has suffered one, must not avenge it, because he of necessity does an injury
who retaliates it. Yea some of the Philosophers have gone so high, as to
affirm, that if there be any difference between the one and the other, he that
revenges the injury is of the two the more highly criminal. I shall be bold to
affirm, says Maximus (...). Max. Tyr. Dissert. 2.
Tyrius, That if there be an excess of one injury above another, he that
revenges, is more unjust, than he who was beforehand with him in doing the
wrong. And Seneca says, I shall not doubt to averr, that he is more wicked that
avenges, Non dubitabo dicere, magis improbum esse eum, qui illatam ulciscitur,
quam qui infert injuriam. Sen.
than he who began the injury. One reason of which is manifest; because he
offers violence to his own Conscience, before he can do so to his injurious
Brother, by doing the very same evil himself, which he before condemned in him.
Conscience certainly cannot but tell him, that it is as a great sin in him to
wrong another, as it is in another to wrong him; that he is as much bound not to
trespass upon his Neighbors Rights, as his Neighbor is bound not to trespass
upon his: When therefore either by words or actions, he returns that evil to
his Neighbor, which he before condemned his Neighbor for doing to him, he
must of necessity control the dictates of his own Conscience, and be
selfcondemn'd. And what an intolerable wrong this is to himself (however
insensible he may be of it at present) he will come to understand, when his
Conscience which is now debauched by false and foolish principles, and
miserably enslaved to his Passions and Lusts, shall once come to be disabus'd
and set at liberty; How will it then accuse and upbraid and condemn him? what
Vengeance will it then take, for all those rude indignities he has offered to
it?

Secondly, By retorting of wrongs, we lose many great and unvaluable Benefits,
which by the patient indurance of them, we should receive by the wrongs
themselves. As those Animals, (...), etc. Plut. de capiend. ab Host. utilitat.
says Plutarch, which are most healthy, and of a strong stomach, digest
Serpents and Scorpions; and some there are which turn Stones and Shells into
nourishment; whereas those that are weak and diseased, do nauseate even Bread
and Wine: So fools corrupt and abuse Friendship, whereas those that are wise
know how to make a good use of Enmity, and to turn it to their own advantage.
It Is certain, there is no injury so bad, but if we are not wanting to our
selves, we may improve it to our great gain. Your Enemy perhaps has a spiteful
eye upon you, watches narrowly for your halting, puts a bad construction upon
your innocent words and actions, catches at every little fault he observes in
you, and magnifies every mote into a beam: What should you now do? I will tell
you, or rather let a Heathen tell you (I mean Plutarch). Instead of doing so to
him again, be (...), etc. Plut. de cap. ab Host. util.
more cautious and circumspect, keep a stricter watch over your your self,
neither speak nor do any thing rashly and inconsiderately, amend whatsoever
has been amiss, endeavor to outdo him in whatsoever is praiseworthy, be to
him an example in Justice and Goodness, in thy Words irreproveable, in thy
Actions pure, etc. By this means, you will extract good out of evil, and make
that which was designed for your Disease, to become a sovereign Medicine; You
will outwit and defeat your Adversary, and make him sore against his will to
become your Friend. And therefore Diogenes, Plut. ibid.
when one asked him, by what means he might revenge himself on his Enemy;
Answered (more like a Christian than a Heathen) by being thy self a virtuous
and good man.

Besides, there is no injury you receive, but as it is designed by God, so it
is apt of it self, to promote and exalt those Graces, which are the Strength
and Ornament, the Riches and Glory of a Christian; such I mean, as Charity,
Humility, Meekness, Gentleness, Patience, Long-suffering, and the like. These
are all exercised by him who calmly suffers, and does not proudly throw back
the injury; and by exercise they are strengthened and brightened, made more
vigorous and illustrious.

And by improving in these Graces, we are rendered more like to the blessed
Jesus, who in the practice of these especially, has proposed himself as a
Pattern to us. Yea, we are made conformable to God over all blessed for ever;
who glories chiefly in this, That he is the Lord God, merciful Exodus 34. 6, 7.
and gracious, long-suffering and abundant in goodness, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin. And what should we more
ambitiously affect, than to resemble the most glorious and infinitely blessed
Being? Especially when we consider, that as we become more like him in Holiness
here, so we shall be also advanced to a greater likeness to him in Glory
hereafter: for by how much the greater the injuries are, which for his sake we
meekly sustain; (...). Chrysostom. ad Romans Hom. 22.
by so much the greater shall be our Reward in Heaven, and the more glorious
our Crown. In brief, so many, and so great are the Spiritual advantages for
which we stand indebted to our Enemies, that Saint Chrysostom speaks of it as
a matter of admiration. See, says he, what great Gains accrue to thee by meekly
(...), etc. Chrysostom. in Matthew. c. 18. Hom. 62.
bearing of injuries. First, And which is indeed the greatest, the Remission of
sins. Secondly, Fortitude, Patience and Perseverance. Thirdly, Meekness,
Gentleness and Humanity; For he that knows not how to be angry with those who
grieve and afflict him, much more will he be complaisant to his Friends.
Fourthly, An uninterrupted calm and tranquillity of mind, to which nothing is
equal, etc. So that we may justly conclude with the same Father; That by how
much the more injurious, by so (...). Chrysostom. ibid.
much the greater Benefactor our Enemy is; since the Good we get by him
increases, in proportion to the evil we suffer from him.

Yea, which is yet more wonderful; Whereas the only thing we fear from our
Enemies, is some outward evil, either in our Body, Goods or Name; a meek and
charitable return to the injury he has done us, will not only defeat his
malice, but on the contrary, will render it highly advantageous, by procuring
to us that very Good, which alone it threatened us with the loss of. How many
Harms will this prevent? and keep us out of the reach of many formidable
Dangers, which by the contrary course, we should expose our selves to.
Agreeable to which is that Story which Seneca tells us of an Sen. de ira, l. 2.
c. 33.
old Courtier: When one asked him, by what means he attained to old age, a
thing so rarely met with in a Prince's Palace: He answered; By receiving Illud
quoque occurrat, quantum commendationis nobis allatura sit clementiae fama, and
quam multos venia amicos utiles fecerit. Sen. de ira. l. 2. c. 34.
Injuries, and giving thanks for them.

'Twill recommend us to the love and esteem of all wise and virtuous persons,
since nothing is a more undoubted Magni animi est injuririas despicere. Sen.
argument of a great and generous Soul; of one who Nullum est argumentum
magnitudinis certius, quam nihil posse, quo instigeris, accidere. l. 3. de ira.
has gotten the mastery over his own unruly Passions and Appetites, and is
able to govern himself. And therefore Solomon tells us, The Prudence Prove. 19.
11.
of a man deferreth his anger, and it is his glory to pass over a transgression.

'Twill render us amiable even to our Enemies; Yea, (as S. Chrysostom tells
us) though they be very Devils, (...). Chrysostom. in Matthew. c. 18. Hom. 62.
and will beget in them a venerable esteem of us: And by consequence, it is of
all means the most powerful, for converting them from Enemies into Friends.

These are some of those highly valuable Benefits, which a man reaps from
injuries, who is of a charitable and forgiving temper; all which the angry and
revengeful man deprives himself of: Nor does he only these and many more
Advantages, but he also brings upon himself the contrary mischiefs. For,

Thirdly, He chafes and inrages the smart and pain of the injury he has
already received, and renders it more intolerable. Whosoever heartily forgives
a wrong, he is no more disquieted at the thoughts of it, it is to him as if it
had never been; he is as well contented (that is, as happy a man) as if no such
evil had been done to him: Whereas on the contrary, the man that meditates
Revenge, he daily renews his own Grief, and makes it more sharp and afflictive
by putting new stings into it; He galls himself so much the more, by his
impatient struggling under his burden; He frets and inflames those wounds, that
would otherwise soon heal, and do well of themselves; and so instead of
wounding his Enemy, he vexes and torments his own soul; and as the Apostle
speaks in another case, pierces himself through with many sorrows.

Nor does he only make the evil he already suffers, more painful and
burdensome; but which is worse,

Fourthly, He provokes his Enemy to wrong him more, and usually brings greater
evils upon himself thereby. Revenge is both the Daughter, and the Mother of
injury; the Daughter of that which went before it, the Mother of many that
follow after: For an injury repaid, seldom fails to increase and multiply upon
him that repays it, and that not only in the same kind, but in a worse; by
retaliating a reproachful word only, how often does the Avenger expose himself
to Blows and Wounds, yea, frequently to Death it self?

I know it is said; That to pass by one injury is the readiest way to invite
another. As fire is made the more outrageous, by pouring upon it the softest
oil; so the calm bearing of the first Affront, instead of cooling, will only
inflame the wrath of our Adversary, and make him more intolerably insolent.

It Is true, this is said; but by whom? by men of wild and savage tempers, who
having put off humanity, are fit only to dwell in a Wilderness, and to
associate with Beasts of prey. But as a Monster in nature, is no Argument
against the regular course of things; so neither are such Prodigies in
morality, any prejudice to the common sense and practice of mankind. What
Solomon asserts from his own observation, has been always and ever will be
found true in the general, viz. that a soft Tongue Prove. 25. 15.
breaks the Bone; that is, by gentle and good words, a person of the most
churlish and untractable temper is appeased and overcome. And if by words only,
how much more, by kind and obliging Deeds? Instances of this nature, frequently
occurr both in Profane and Sacred History, of which I shall at present mention
but one, and that is King Saul. Scarce ever was any man more envious, and
maliciously set against any man, than he was against David; yet when his evil 1 Samuel 24.
Spirit was raised to the height, how was it charmed and laid! how did he
relent and dissolve into tears, at the meek and humble words, and the
unexpected kindness of David to him!

But what need I insist upon particular Instances? I appeal to your own
experience, whether any men are usually so free from injuries? whether any lead
so safe and quiet, and peaceable a life, as those who are most meek and
patient, most good and gracious and ready to forgive?

For do but turn your eyes the other way, and you will soon have a dismal and
horrid Prospect. Mark the malicious and behold the revengeful man, and you will
find it is otherwise with him. How often is he surrounded and assaulted with
Dangers and Mischiefs? how frequently is he engaged in Quarrels and Frays? What
Solomon says of the Drunkard, is as truly applicable to him: Who has woe? who
has sorrow? Prove. 23. 29.
who has contention? who has babbling? who has wounds without cause? who has
redness of eyes? he who is impatient of every abuse, he who retaliates every
injury. For by returning the evil, we provoke and inrage the evil-doer; and not
only so, but we give him the same plea and pretense, for avenging himself upon
us, that we before had, for avenging our selves upon him; and by this means,
the evil will never cease, but will be tossed backward and forward without end;
and the further it proceeds, so much the more mischievous and malignant will it
grow.

These are some of the evils, which the spiteful man brings upon himself; and
such (one would think) as might be more than sufficient to affright us to the
greatest distance from this sin. And yet,

Fifthly, These are so little, that they deserve not to be mentioned, if
compared with those evils he brings upon himself from God; for by his Enmity
against his Neighbor, he makes God an Enemy to himself, who will not entertain
any thoughts of Reconciliation to him, till he be first reconciled to his
offending Brother. Now God's sore Displeasure against him is manifest by the
dismal fruits and effects of it. For,

1. So angry is God with him, that he will accept no worship from him; but all
his most Religious services shall be rejected as unclean, as long as he is out
of charity with his Neighbor. This we are taught by our great Master; If thou
bring, says he, Matt. 5. 23, 24.
thy Gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has ought
against thee, for any injury thou have done him, leave there thy Gift before
the Altar, do not dare to present it to God, but go first and be reconciled to
thy Brother, (that is, do thy endeavor to appease his anger, and to get him
reconciled to thee) and after thou have so done, then come and offer thy Gift.
And if God would not accept a Gift from him who had done an injury, till he had
sincerely endeavored to make satisfaction for it; would he not much rather
have abhorred it, if at the very time when he offered it, he designed or wished
any mischief to his Neighbor?

And as all the Sacrifices of old were rejected, when sowr'd with the leaven of
malice in him that brought them; so as little acceptable will all our Christian
Sacrifices be, unless attended with Charity and Forgiveness in those that offer
them. For as with the merciful, God will Psalm. 18. 25, 26.
show himself merciful; so with the froward he will show himself froward.

I need not tell you, that he is no fit Guest for the Feast of Love, who
harbors hatred in his heart against any man; since our Church in the Office
for the holy Communion, has expressly forbidden all such to approach the Lord's
Table; supposing that the Cup of Blessing would to them be turned into a Cup of
Wrath; and that they would eat Judgment to themselves, instead of Mercy. But
which is worse: Not so much as any Prayer that is made by them (however fervent
and importunate) will ever be accepted; Yea, so far will it be from being
acceptable, that it will be indeed an Abomination to the Lord.

Nor need we wonder at this; for, as the Father before quoted, reasons: If any
one who has offended thee who art (...), etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 20. in Matthew.
but a man, should humbly address to thee, and implore thy Pardon, and while he
lay prostrate at thy feet, espying his Enemy, should presently leave off his
suit to thee, and fall foul upon him; would he not instead of atoning thee,
provoke and inflame thy Displeasure to a greater degree against him? If so, how
much more reason is there, that God should be angry with those Prayers that are
presented by persons of such a malignant and wretched temper?

Yea should such persons as these, not only offer up their Prayers to God, but
their Blood too; should they give their Bodies to be burnt, die 1 Cor. 13. 3.
Martyrs to the true Religion, 'twould be a Sacrifice unacceptable to God. And
in what a miserable state must that man be, all whose Prayers and Praises, and
other most holy things are turned into sin? And yet this is not the worst, his
misery is still greater. For,

2. As long as he refuses to forgive his Brother, he puts a bar to the
forgiveness of his own sins. He that revengeth Eccl. 38. 1, 4, 5.
(says the Son of Sirach) shall find Vengeance of the Lord, and he will keep
his sins in remembrance; he shows no mercy to a man which is like himself,
and how does be ask forgiveness of his own sins? If he that is flesh, nourish
hatred, who will entreat for pardon of his sins? And (as I have already showed)
our Savior himself expressly tells us, that if we do not forgive, neither Mar.
11. 26.
will our Father which is in Heaven, forgive our Trespasses.

Yea, when God gives us a Pardon, it is upon condition that we also pardon
others. If therefore we fail in our part, our Pardon will be recalled, and all
our sins will return again, in their full weight and vengeance upon our own
heads, as our Savior also teaches us Matt. 18. 34, 35. Now as the man is
blessed, to whom the Lord will not impute sin; so how inexpressibly cursed and
miserable must he be, upon whom the Lord will lay the guilt of his Iniquities?
For,

3. The inevitable consequence of this, is Loss and Pain, endless and
unsupportable. Such as in malice resemble Devils in this world, they shall have
their portion with Devils in the next; be everlastingly separated from the
presence of God, (in whose presence there is fullness of joy) and suffer the
Vengeance of that eternal fire, which they themselves by the coals of their
Revenge have kindled. And who can dwell with devouring fire? who can dwell with
everlasting burning? If in their cool and sober moods, they think the
fantastic pleasure of Revenge, a sufficient Recompense for those evils; let
them still go on, and gratify their Diabolical appetite.

Sixthly, Nor can we think this hard measure from God, if we consider, that it
is no more, than what they themselves daily pray for. For as often as they use
the Lord's Prayer, or any other Prayer conformable to it, they pray to God for
their own Damnation. The reason is obvious, because we pray, forgive us our
Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; that is, we ask the
forgiveness of our sins against God, but upon condition that we also forgive
the trespasses of our Brethren against our selves. If therefore we do not
forgive, we in effect pray, that God would never forgive us, but deal with us
according to the merits of our sins.

And can the man who studies Revenge, think of this without horror and
trembling? Can he think the Punishment his own sin deserves, so small, that he
can find in his heart to pray to God for it, rather than remit the Punishment
of his Neighbors offenses? If it be possible that any man's understanding
should at present be so darkened, and his Conscience so stupefied with the
fumes of his inordinate Passions; yet when he shall feel the Vengeance which he
now prays for; when he shall come to know experimentally what the wages of his
sins are, he will be sufficiently sensible of the madness of his choice. How
will he then rage against himself, and aggravate his own folly? How will he
become his own Tormenter? and execute himself the Vengeance of God upon his own
soul?

I might farther enlarge upon this Argument, but I think it needless. More than
enough has been already said to convince you, that he who recompenses evil to
his Enemy, has no Enemy in the world so bad as himself; that he brings more
mischiefs upon his own head, than it is in the power of any other, either men or
Devils to do. Should we therefore be so impious as to have no regard to the
Religion we profess, yet methinks we should be powerfully swayed by our
Interest. If for God's sake we will not mortify this Devilish Passion, yet
shall we not do it for our own? Have we no compassion for our selves? Or can
our Lusts so perfectly reconcile contradictions, as to make our Pains to become
our Pleasures? If not, we need not so much as deliberate; no man was ever yet
so mad as to question, whether he should choose to be happy or miserable.

It may perhaps seem superfluous to add more Dissuasives from this sin; for
should we be so monstrously degenerated, as to contradict not only our
Religion, but our Reason too; should we be so far from approving our selves
Christians, as not to act like Men; yet in case we are not fallen below the
Brute Creatures, the Arguments already proposed will prevail with us; since
there is not the vilest of the Beasts that perish, that by the bare instinct of
nature, does not shun those things that are destructive of its own welfare.

Yet because many men suppose they have a sufficient plea for their Revenge,
from the injustice of the person they take Revenge upon; because however evil
it may be in it self, and however hurtful it may be to us, yet it is no more,
they think, than what is due to him; for what (say they) is more just and
equal, than that a man should reap as he sows? that as he does to others, it
should be done to him again?

IV. I shall therefore proceed in the Fourth place to show you, that Revenge is
inhumane and unreasonable, even in respect of the person who has done us
wrong. And that upon these three accounts especially.

First, Because he is so nearly related to us by nature, and (if he be a
Christian) by Religion too. The man whom we are so highly incensed against, is
he not our Brother? is he not of the same blood? does he not derive his
Pedigree from the same common Parents with our selves? Now Moses thought it a
good Argument; Sirs, ye are Brethren, why do ye Act. 7. 26.
wrong one to another? And is not the Argument altogether as forcible, Sirs, ye
are Brethren, Why do ye recompense wrong one to another?

It Is true indeed, the close union that is between us, ought to have kept him
from doing us wrong, and therefore he is so much the more to blame for doing
it; but supposing he has done it, it should be also of equal force to withhold
us from avengeing it. If one foot should be so unkind as to kick the other,
shall the other also be so unnatural as to return the blow? The reason is much
the same in the Argument now before us. We are all members of one Body, or (as.
S. Paul expresses it) we are members one Ephesians. 4. 24.
of another; and therefore it is as unreasonable for us to recompense evil one
to another, as 'twould be for the Members in the natural Body so to do. And so
much the more monstrous is it, because, as the Apostle tells us, if one member
1 Cor. 12. 26.
suffer, all the members suffer with it; or if one member be honored, all the
members rejoice with it. And therefore to do despite to our Neighbor, is in
effect to be cruel to our selves; and to show favor to him, is to be kind to
our own flesh. And since our Neighbor is so nearly united to us, is as it were
a part of our selves, we may thence conclude,

Secondly, That the wrong he does to us, is ever to be imputed to some Weakness
or Disease of Mind; either to Ignorance, or Passion, or some other Distemper he
labors under; since we may well take it for granted, that were he truly
himself, did he rightly understand and duly consider what he does, he could
never entertain a thought of hurting those who are bone of his bone, and flesh
of his flesh.

As in the natural Body, no member creates any grief or pain to its
fellow-member, unless it self be first sore or diseased; so likewise in the
Civil or Mystical Body, the members that are sound and healthful, are so far
from breeding any annoyance to others, that they are all mutually useful and
serviceable to each others good.

And is it not unreasonable to repay that evil to our Neighbor, which had he
been master of himself, he would have been so far from doing, that he would
from his heart have abhorred the very thoughts of it? Should a man in a violent
Fever or Frenzy never so much abuse us, should we not think it an unmanly
thing to fall foul upon him again? Quis enim phrenetico Medicus irascitur? quis
febricitantis and frigida prohibiti maledicta in malam partem accipit, etc.
Sen. in Sap. non cadit Injur.
Should we not rather excuse and pity him, saying, Alas, it is his distemper,
he knows not what he does; if he live to come to himself, he will be heartily
sorry for it. And shall we not much rather have compassion for him, whose soul
is darkened with Ignorance, inflamed with Anger, puffed up with Pride, rackt
(it may be) with covetous and insatiable desires, disaffected not in one, but
in all its Faculties, so that there is no sound part to be found in it? And
therefore instead of inflaming his Distemper, by returning the evil upon his
own head, we should rather by all mild and gentle applications, endeavor to
remove it, and to bring him to a sound constitution of Soul.

And in case our charitable endeavors this way prove ineffectual, and he still
persists in his evil practices, and grow intolerably troublesome and afflictive
to us, there is one Remedy at hand of God's own appointment, which in such a
case we are allowed to have recourse to (not with a design of doing the least
mischief to him, but of securing our selves from the mischief he would do to
us) I mean the Ministers of public Justice, whom God has appointed to be the
Physicians of the Body Politic, for the curing or cutting off such diseased
members, that breed nothing but disturbance and annoyance to their
fellowmembers. However it is certain, that his condition calls for our Pity
rather than our Wrath, as is further evident, because,

Thirdly, By the wrong he does to us, he does a far greater injury to himself.
He perhaps hurts our Body, but (...), etc. Hieroc. Fragment. Sermon. 10.
what is that to the wounding of his own soul? In seeking to rob us of our good
name, he deprives himself of his Innocence and a good Conscience. He makes some
little trespass upon our Lands; if he do it wittingly, without Restitution or
Satisfaction, he will shut himself out of the Kingdom of Heaven. The mischief
he does to himself, so infinitely exceeds that he does to us, that there is no
comparison between them; And shall we be so cruel as to wrong him more? No:
rather by meekness and Patience, by kindness and Goodness, by friendly advice
and counsel, let us teach him better things, and endeavor to bring him to a
sober mind.

You have heard how opposite it is to our Religion, how impious toward God,
how hurtful to our selves, how inhumane with respect even to the Offender, to
recompense evil for evil. I proceed now to the last general Head proposed.

V. Nor is it less destructive of the Public, than it is of the private Good,
either of our selves, or our Neighbors; As it breaks the Peace, inverts Order,
overturns Government, and should it be generally practiced, would introduce all
the mischiefs of War, Anarchy, and Confusion.

It Is a true saying, That it is the Second blow makes the Fray; for if the first
be patiently born, no Quarrel ensues upon it, no more mischief is done; but
when that is returned, a Civil War is presently commenced, which by a
successive reciprocation of affronts and injuries, may perhaps be continued
longer than the lives of those who began it, and be derived from them to their
Posterity.

Though there are some Places that are not infested with any sort of wild
Beasts, (as it is reported of Crete) Plut. de capiend. ab host. utilitat.
Yet since the World was never brought to so good a pass, that any Country
could be found, that is free from Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife;
but in all public Societies, there have ever been no small number of covetous
and rapacious, of proud, contentious and ill-temper'd persons, who have been
too apt to give provocations; if every one that is provoked, should pursue
Revenge, all Peace would soon be at an end, all humane Society would dissolve;
from men we should be transformed into ravenous Beasts, that would mutually
bite and devour one another.

Nor can it be imagined how this mischief should be prevented, if every man
should take upon himself to be a Judge and an Avenger in his own cause: For in
case he that apprehends himself wronged, will needs be a Judge; by the same
reason, he that does the wrong, may assume to himself the same authority: And
if every man be his own Judge, their determinations will be as contradictory as
their Judgments, and their Judgments as their Prejudices and Passions and
Interests; and so the War must of necessity be endless.

The Sum is this: In case we were permitted every man to be our own Avengers,
then, 1. There would be no place left for the Office of the public Magistrate.
2. Every private person would ascend the Tribunal and the Throne, and become a
Lawgiver and a Judge in his own cause. 3. We should then have as many
unsubordinate and Supreme Judges, as there are particular persons in the World,
who do and repay wrongs one to another. 4. Their Judgments would be as
contradictory to each other, as their Affections and Interests. 5. Their
Resolutions and Determinations would be as contradictory as their Judgments.
And therefore, 6. They could never come to an agreement among themselves, but
must be in a perpetual state of War. From whence would follow in the
conclusion, the dissolution of all humane Society. For if every man who is
supposed at any time to do any kind of injury either in word or deed; and every
man who supposes himself to have received any sort of injury, should rise up
one against another, and take upon them to avenge themselves; their number
would be so great, as to put the World into confusion, and render it an
habitation fitter for Wolves and Tigers, than for men.

As therefore we desire not to be the Disturbers and Destroyers of the public
Peace, let us give check to all desires of Revenge; since the more these are
indulged, so much the more will the peace be broken. And therefore the Apostle
having in the Verse next after my Text, commanded us, as much as in us lies, to
live peaceably with all men; he immediately adds, as a means in order to this
end, and as that without which we can never attain to it, not avenging your
selves.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 42. l. 20. read was pleased. p. 71. l. 6. r., that upon some account, it.
p. 73. l. ult. r. it; marg. l. 6. r. (...). p. 75. l. 17. r. as great a p. 87.
at l. 4. insert the first Note. p. 89. l. 5. r. ly lose.


