CAMPANELLA REVIVED. Or an Enquiry into the HISTORY OF THE Royal Society,
Whether the Virtuosi there do not pursue the Projects of Campanella for the
reducing England unto Popery.

BEING The Extract of a Letter to a Person of Honor from H. S. with another
Letter to Sir N. N. relating the cause of the Quarrel betwixt H. S. and the R.
S. and an Apology against some of their Cavils.

WITH A Postscript concerning the Quarrel depending betwixt H. S. and Dr.
Merrett.

Aut hoc inclusi ligno occultantur Achivi;
Aut haec in nostros fabricata est machina muros,
Inspectura domos, venturaque desuper Urbi;
Aut aliquis la^et error: equo ne credit Teucri.
LONDON, ^^^^^^d for the Author, 167^.

TO THE READER.
THis ensuing Letter was a part of what I sent long ago to a Person of Honor
in this Nation, to represent the occasion of the quarrel betwixt Me and the
Virtuosi, and showed the necessity of pursuing it: by such arguments I used as
gained his approbation; and the generality of serious men have assented
thereunto, though their opinion was, that the design might be of great danger
and trouble to the bold undertaker. After that, I inserted it into a discourse
concerning the Virtuosi, in which I debate many other things: viz. In
opposition to Dr. Merrett, I deduce the original of Apothecaries from the times
of Hippocrates and Aristotle thorough the Roman and Greek Empires; and show
with what prudence both Physicians and the Civil Magistrates concurred to their
institution: and I have largely entreated on that Question, which the Virtuosi,
in order to the ruin of the Faculty of Physicians, and of the Trade of
Apothecaries, to the great alteration of the Practice of Physic, and
aggrandising of themselves, have started, and with much confidence and more
ignorance handled. I show not only sundry particular impostures obtruded upon
us by some of them: as also an account of a certain Model of the R. S.
published in Germany, and written from London; in which there is so little of
truth, that I wonder any of the Virtuosi Vide P^ J^cob, (...). page 65, 66, 67.
should abuse Foreigners with such a Relation; or imagine that renown to be
durable the foundation whereof is so vain and unstable. It is there that I
demand they would make goood their promise to the learned Olaus Borrichius,
that none of their Vide Th. (...). Epist. C^ntur. 4. Ep. (...).
Colleagues should publish any thing but by the allowance and consent of the R.
Society, that thereby it might be ^cured against the cavils and exceptions of
all Men. Which assurance of theirs, how ill they have managed, I dare appeal
unto the world as Judges. I am now indisposed to publish the whole Treatise,
and reserve it for some additions which Mr. Evelyns discourse of Forrest-Trees
may invite me unto; the Second Edition whereof wants not its defects; and if I
should trouble my self to examine his account of the Birch-Tree, it will appear
as ridiculous as the History of Saltpeter: and it is to me a Miracle, that
neither He, nor all his Correspondents should inform us better of so obvious a
thing: Neither is it less strange that I should be necessitated to dispute
against another Virtuoso, Mr. Chamberlain, whether it be our King's
Prerogative Mr. Chamberlaines p^ent State of England, page 341. Edition 3. and
page 61.
to define what Books of Scripture are Canonical, and what Apocryphal? And,
whether it be the Interest of our Monarchy that all the Commonalty be kept poor
and in a complaining condition? But I pass from these considerations, to some
exceptions made against what I have already published. It is said, that I have
maliciously represented the places censured in their History: which if I have
done, it is because they maliciously writ them: for I am not conscious of
mis-alledging them, or of imposing any other sense thereon, than the words do
bear: and if any man can interpret them otherwise than I do, I confess I have
wronged them: but if it be not possible to do so, they must blame themselves:
However, supposing the passages might bear a more favorable construction, yet
since the sense I follow is the most natural, since that they might be
construed to the prejudice of the Church of England, it is judged by me, and
others, to be an important service to the Public, to extort a positive
Declaration of their meaning, lest another Brerely make a benefit from those
words to overthrow the Protestant Religion. I am further pressed with this
intergatory, why I should imagine that the R. S. would subvert the Faculty of
Physicians, there being so many eminent men of that Profession admitted
therein, and so esteemed by them, as that they cannot be judged to vilisie that
Faculty. I answer, Quid verba audio, cum facta videam? I see they do do it, and
therefore a^ not to be harangued into another sentiment. At first they would
have incorporated the College of Physicians into their Society: but that the
prudent and grave did decline: then they promoted the Anti-Colledge of
Pseudo-Chymists, encouraging Odowde and his ignorant Adherents in opposition to
the Physicians: and this is not more notorious to the world, than it is also
that those objections with which M. N. and other Quacksalvers amuse the Age
were suggested unto them by the Virtuosi, and derived their repute from them.
As for Mr. Glanvills book, it was perused by several of their Members, and
corrected by them, and how much we are reduceable to a Society that could allow
of that, and would not at my reiterated importunities call it in, or disclaim
it, Let all Physicians judge. Nor would I have any man to believe that there
are so many eminent Physicians of the R. S. for neither is the number of those
admitted considerable; few of note but have deserted it again; the rest approve
not of it: so that all they talk of (...) not amount to three understanding
persons; and were they more, I do not find our Faculty better secured than that
of Divinity, or the two Universities are by such Members thereof as are
imbodyed into this Trojan-Horse. It is said also, that my Animadversions on Mr.
Glanvill contain little of matter; to which I answer, that they contain enough
to have made twenty Virtuosi famous, and would have acquired them a Memorial of
ingenious and noble Experimentators: they contain enough to show the ignorance
of that person who had so insulted over all University-learning, and
particularly over the Physicians: They contain enough, since they contain more
than they all knew: and I think I have done great service to the learned, in
showing that these Virtuosi are very great Impostours, or men of little
reading: either of which Imputations, if just, will secure us from their
arrogance, and abate their esteem. I am blamed for diminishing the glory of our
Nation, by ascribing all discoveries to the Ancients, or else to Foreigners: to
which I answer, that they take off from the glory of our Nation more, who usurp
the inventions of others: I rather preserve the credit of the English (though
not of the Virtuosi) then diminish i^: undue praises add not to any man's
esteem: nor do I think I derogate from Dr. Willis, if I should say that his
notion about the use of the Cerebrum and Cerebollum was fairly intimated by
Carla Ruini, that ingenious Bolognese, in his Italian Anatomy of an ^orse:
neither do I lessen the performances of the Honorable and curious Mr. R.
Boil, when I averr that Aristotle did held the Air to be ponderous, and
weighed it before him; or that the Elasticity of the Air was (as to name and
thing) fully proposed by Pecquetus; and which is more than I have yet said, yet
it is true, even the comparison betwixt the Atmosphear and Flocks of Wool is
urged by him. Fingito tibi Aerem (...). (...). Anat^. ^p. 8. p^tum.
hunc velut spong^osi vel LANEI potius cumuli terraqueum orbem ambientis molem:
-- And, Insitus ^reae substantiae ad rarescendum Elater spongiae LANEVE naturam
imitatur. As little is Dr. Croone or Dr. Thr^ston i^jured, if I say that the
Experiment about reviving a strangled Fowl by blowing air into the Lungs, was
practiced by Vesalius, and Bogdan, and was vulgarly known before, though
perhaps V s^l. de s^l r. hum. corp. l. 7. c. (...).
not to the Virtuosi: and that the same Phenomenon succeeds, if when Children
are Still-born any one blow into their Mr. (...). apol^g. pro (...). (...).
Breech: which experiment is well known to many Midwives; nor do they doubt the
recovery of the Child, if the Guts do rumble thereupon. These, and such like
averrments of mine, being true, do not lessen the just esteem of any man, and
argue candor in me, not malice. Besides, since that the Virtuosi did with this
borrowed glory attempt to over-bear the Universities and all others as Idiots
and Ignoramus 's, 'twas necessary to inform them that neither the Ancients, nor
modern Academicks were so foolish as they painted them out to be, nor the R. S.
so inquisitive as they would seem: and that if others would practice those
Artifices, even the Peripateticks might signalize themselves as easily as the
Royal Society. But I reserve the further prosecution hereof till another time:
that which follows being of more importance to the Monarchy and Religion of our
Kingdoms, than that I should detain my Reader any longer from it.

Henry Stubbe.
Warwick May 16. 1670.
CAMPANELLA REVIVED, etc.
NEver was there any sort of people that by so many Artifices endeavored to
insinuate themselves and their Religion into all places and countries, as that
of the Papists: there is no Treaty or promise can secure an enemy from their
secret underminings: there is nothing so un-moral, which their Casuists do not
allow of, and practice; nothing so impious, or bloody, but is an ingredient in
their councils, when subservient to their ends: there is no shape or disguise
which they will not assume, no humor which they will not comply with; not an
Action of theirs but ought to be suspected, since their Confessors have that
influeuce over their Layety, that whatsoever may, but at a distance, prejudice
or tend to the detriment of their Church, they instantly put a period and stop
thereunto. I speak not this to reflect upon the Society, who have found so
great encouragement from that party, by the concurrence of their persons and
purs^s: and so freely keep a correspondence with them from beyond seas: I only
say, that as such an intercourse is not unknown to the Congregatio de
propaganda fide, so (whatever Mr. Sprat suggests) they do not apprehend the
constitution to be any way to the prejudice and dis-service of their Faith and
Church. I believe it is not displeasing to them, to see how friendly the
Protestants and Papists converse together in this Assembly: and it must needs
raise their hopes of ^ringing things to a closer union, when they perceive the
strangeness, that ought to be, and has been betwixt them, taken off, and to
read addresses commencing with, Holy Father. How much an Orator gains upon his
Auditors when he has made them attentive, and what a step that is to gaining
upon their esteem, and how conducing that is toward the persuading them to
what he intends, I well understand: but what benefit and advantage Popery may
derive from this, that our Nobility and Gentry, our Divines and Lay^ty, laying
aside all memory of the French and Irish Massacre, and Marian persecutions, the
Gunpowder Treason, the firing of London, and forgetting all ani^osities and
apprehensions of future dangers, converse freely with, and write obligeingly to
them, testify a great esteem of them, and from the dis-use of all harsh but
to^true censures, come at length to lay aside all rancour and bitterness of
thoughts; I say, how great benefit Popery may draw hence, I cannot well
comprehend: yet I guess in part from what the Historian sets down From Page
(...).
enduring each others company, they may rise to a learning of each others
opinions; from thence to an exchange of good offices; from thence to real
friendship: till at last by such a Gentle, and easy Method, our several
intere^s and sects may come to suffer one another, with the same peaceableness
as men of different trades live one by another, in the same street. Is not this
a very fair account of what the R. S. will bring things unto? and can we wonder
that the Papists should be very civil in their returns to an A^embly that so
highly obliges them? But they add, It is dishonorable, to pass an hard
censure on the Religions of all other Countries: Page 63.
It concerns them, to look to the reasonableness of their faith; and it is
sufficient for us to be established in the Truth of our own. Well! Adieu to all
the Sermons of Bishop Andrews upon the fifth of November: all that King James
writ against the Papacy, and to prove the Pope to be Antichrist: farewell to a
great part of our Homil^s, to part of the thirty nine Articles; the examples in
Scripture whereby the prophets and holymen declare against Edom, Tire, Sidon,
etc. or against the Scribes and Pharisees, or Dian^ at Ephesus, or the Idols at
Athens, these arc dishonorable and pernicious. Give me leave to speak to these
Virtuosi in the language of the Romish Saint Francis, viz. Salvete ^ratres
Asini; salvete sratres Lupi. Oh! how the followers of Conthen the Jesuit hugg
themselves to hear these insinuations^ Multum profecit error, cum id obtinuit
ne delegatur. See but the ways Conthen. (...). l. 2. c. 18. Sect. 6.
which he proposes in order to the reducing of Heretics to the Roman Church
again there, and if this procedure be not agreeable to the examples which he
suggests, may I never find credit. You see what applauds Mr. Sprat would have
gained from that Jesuit for this History: but how would Campanella have clapped
his hands for joy to see this happy establishment which he so long ago
projected, in order to the converting of England, Holland, and other heretical
countries? It was his darling design, and which that ^ryer (one of the most
politi^k that ever was) so often inculcates in his book of the Spanish Monarchy.

Campanella touching the Spanish Monarchy. Chapter 10. page 47.
His Prince Should banish all Theological Questions out of I follow the English
Ed^tion: but the Latin is more Emphatical.
the Transalpine Schools: seeing that all the Divines of those parts turn
Heretics, by not continuing sirm to the Holy constitutions of the Pope, but
are still raising up fresh controversies: and the wits of these men are to be
exercised only in the disputes of Natural Philosophy.

He shall do well to shut up all the Greek and Hebrew Schools; because that
these two languages have been destructive to Monarchy; and are besides the main
pillars by which those Heresies that chiefly reign at this day are built Our
Author did not think of the Universal Character of Mr. Dalgerno.
upon. And therefore, on the contrary, let him endeavor to bring in the
knowledge of the Arabic tongue; by means whereof the Mahumetans may be the
better convinced; and the troublesome Transalpine wits may employ themselves
rather in confuting the Turks, than in vexing the Catholics with their
disputes.

Let him also erect Mathematical Schools -- because by this means the Peoples
Minds will be diverted from creating Us [Papists] any trouble, and will be
incited to bend their Studies that way, which may be useful to the King.

Chapter 25. page 157. Concerning England.
Now as concerning the weakening of the English, there can no better way be
possibly found out, then by causing divisions, and dissentions amongst
themselves, and by continually keeping up the same; which will quickly furnish
the Spaniard [or French] with better and more advantageous Opportunities. And
as for the Religion of that people, it is that of Calvin; though very much
moderated, and not so rigid, and austere as it is at Geneva: which yet cannot
be so easily extinguished and rooted out there, unless there were some certain
Schools set up in Flanders (with which the people of England have very great
commerce) by means of which (...) much better done by the (...) now at
Arundel-House, under the encouragement of
there should be scattered abroad the Seeds of Schism and Divisions in the
Natural Sciences; as namely betwixt the Stoics, Peripateticks, and Telesians,
by which the errors of the Calvinists may be made manifest. -- Being of a
Nature that is still desirous of Novelties, and change, they are easily wrought
over to any thing.

Chapter 27, page 177. Concerning Flanders and lower Germany.
To conquer them there are but two ways left now to be taken: the first of
which is to sow the Seeds of Division amongst them: and the second to draw them
forth of their own Country. Cadmus having a design of erecting a Monarchy at
Thebes, whither he came a stranger, is said first to kill a Serpent; by which
was signified, the Defense and Safeguard of Thebes: and then afterward to sow
the Teeth of it; that is to say, to scatter abroad the Poison of Desire of
Innovation, and an earnestness to be instructed in the knowledge of Learning,
namely in such new Sciences and Arts, as he had brought over with him from his
own Country. And hence Soldiers are said to spring up, who through mutual
discord, slew each other; and the remainders of them that were left, joined
themselves with Cadmus, their Head and Captain; so laying the foundation of the
Kingdom of Thebes in Boeotia. I affirm therefore that these very courses ought
to have been taken by the King of Spain; and not a war to have been only
maintained against them all this while.

And certainly, if the Southern people would ever conquer, or lay the
foundations of a Monarchy over the Northern, seeing that they are not strong
enough to bring the same about, they ought to have recourse to the Arts either
of Cadmus, or of Jason: although of the two, Jason went the more wisely to
work; seeing he first won the Heart of Medea, that is, the
good will and affections of the Northern women to him. -- Afterward Jason by
the enchantments of Medea, slew the Dragon, that is, the Guard of the Kingdom;
such as are the valiant and warlike men of a Nation, with the Preachers. And
then did he by the means of Enchanted Ointments, tame fierce Beasts, the
Brazen-footed and Fire-spitting Bulls; that is, by his friendship and gifts, he
won over to him the Nobles and principal men of the Kingdom. And at length, by
them he sowed about the Teeth of the Dragon; that is, by the assistance of the
Nobles, he spread abroad the seeds of Discord and Dissension about Religion,
Arts, and Honors. Whence, in the last place, sprung up Soldiers, that is,
Factions; (such as are those of the Guelphs and Gibellines, the Pontificians
and Imperialists, the Lutherans and Catholics) wherein they killed each other:
But those that remained, chose Jason for their Head, and Commander; and though
few in number, yet afforded Him their assistance in the getting of the Golden
Fleece, that is to say, such an Empire as we hear speak of.

After this he proceeds to direct several things, whereof one Page 180.
is, that by all means it be solidly taught, that the Pope is not
Antichrist; for upon the gaining of this point (says He, and I desire it may
be marked) do all the rest depend: And, (in order to the casting away of all
practical Divinity, and the introducing of some such Religion, as Mr. Sprat
would have) It must Page 181.
be unanimously and stoutly maintained against them, that All Commentaries
whatsoever that have been written upon the Bible, whether by Catholics or
Heretics, ever since S. Augustins time, are to be suspected, and not to be
trusted unto. Mr. Sprat says that the foundations on which the Church of
England stands, are no other, but (in the first place!) the Rights of the Civil
power: the imitation of the first incorrupt Churches (in Page 362.
the second place! and thirdly) the Scripture expounded by Reason. Page 355.
Religion ought not to be the subject of Disputations: It should not stand in
need of any devices of Reason: It should in this be like the Temporal laws of
all Countries, toward the obeying of which there is no need of Syllogysms or
distinctions; nothing else is necessary but a bare promulgation (the Papists
phrase is sufficient proposition!) a common apprehension, and sense enough to
understand the Grammatical meaning of Ordinary words. Thus he casts off all
Scholastic and Polemical Divinity, and writes as if he did not own the Three
Creeds, and four general Councils, or thirty nine Articles: we must use no
Syllogisms, though to prove the Trinity, or meritoriousness of Christ's death,
or our interest therein by a practical Syllogysm, and fides specialis
misericordiae: no Analogy of faith to regulate us by: no Church History: in
fine, we must look no farther than the Grammatical meaning of ordinary words,
though the Sacrament, and Hoc est corpus meum, be the subject of the debate. --
I find indeed that Campanella adds, that the multiplying Page (...).
of Books, and the spinning out of Controversies, do but add Authority to a bad
cause, and besides also shows like a kind of Victory.

These Heretics, after they had put forth new Bibles into the world, and
wresting all the Fathers and Historians as they pleased, put such
interpretations upon the same as they thought good: they then began, in order
thereunto, to apply themselves to the study of the Hebrew and Greek tongues,
and started a thousand Grammatical Niceties, wherewith they have filled up many
great Volumes: insomuch that the whole North in a manner makes a Grammatical
war upon us, rather than a Spiritual: Whereas We have long since laid aside the
study of Languages, ever since we overcame the Hebrews, Greeks, and Latins,
and have made them submit themselves to Christianity, or else have divested
them of the power of discharging all Political and Sacerdotal Administrations;
as it is with the Jews at this day. And therefore we intend not now to trouble
our selves any further with petite Sophistical Niceties, Nor ever shall have
occasion to be troubled with them, (...) our Historian prevail.
and Grammatical Quirks: but relying only upon our own strength of Wit, we let
alone all prolix courses of Disciplines, and the tediousness of writing huge
Volumes: mean while that these men spend their time herein, and weary us out
almost with their Cavillings, although they do not get the better of us. I
conceive therefore, that these men should be
taken off from these Grammatical Heresies, namely, by some New Arts and
Sciences, and such wherein we are excellent our selves. And to this end the
King should erect certain Schools in all the principal Cities, wherein the
Arabic tongue should be taught: that so by this means there may be such among
his Subjects, as shall be able to Dispute with the Turks, Moors, and Persians,
who by the use of that Tongue do spread their Mahometanisme, as we do
Christianity by the Latin Tongue; and so by these means our intestine wars
may be laid aside, and our Arms turned against foreign enemies.

There should be Schools also erected for the Mathematics,
and Astronomy, unto which these Northern people should be invited to come, by
proposing Salaries for such of them, as shall apply themselves to the
Discovering, and giving an Account of such Stars and Constellations, as are
found in the other Hemisphear, in the new world. For by these means there would
redound to the Spanish Empire both Honor and Profit. I would also have the
Schools of the Old Philosophers to
be opened again; as of the Platonists and Stoics, and of the And (...) and
(...) too
Telesians, that so the people may be diverted from Theological Questions, and
may apply themselves to study Questions of Philosophy: for those come nearer to
the Christian faith, than the Doctrine of Aristotle does. Now the King in doing
these things, shall sollow the example of Hercules, who to the end he might the
more easily overcome Antaeus, drew him
forth of his own Territories; and also of Cadmus, who brought over New Arts
and Sciences with him into Boeotia; and by means of the same, got to be Prince
of the Country. And by taking of this course, the Principal among the
Heretics, when they shall see there is more to be gotten there then here,
forsaking their Heresies, will become Ringleaders
in the Sects of Philosophy and Astronomy.

-- There should also be erected public workhouses for
the exercises of Mechanical Arts, to which this people is exceeding apt: and
so by this means will the Business of Navigation be much promoted, together
with the skill of besieging Towns, and of taking them in by the use of
Artificial Fireworks. By these means the People (probably) will be taken off
from their False Religion, and divided one
from another; to the great advantage of the Kingdom of Spain, to whom many
will now come and tender their service: and his Empire, which of late has been
contemptible and hateful to the world, shall recover its ancient Splendor and
Honor.

These are the passages which I think I first accommodated to the Royal
Society, and which served me as a Key to expound their History by: and although
the indignation I conceived against Mr. Glanvill of the affronts he and his
Assistants had put upon the Physicians was the first motive which put me upon
writing, yet it was a regard I had to the Religion and the Education of our
Youth (which I found undermined by these Campanella's) which imboldened me
never to lay aside my Pen. I was afraid lest our Virtuosi with their trinkets
and experiments would serve this Nation such a trick as the Pyed-Piper at
Hammel in the Duchy of Brunswic did those Inhabitants: W^^rus d(...) 1^. Sect.
2.
He first played in the Town and all the Rats and Mice followed him, which He
so destroyed: then He played again, and their Children followed him, and thence
He lead them out of the Town unto an Hill, into which He went, and they
followed him, and perished all. Some of these passages I have censured in my
first book printed at Oxford; it being manifest, that without a Regard to those
Popish Machinations, no man would have inserted any thing of such import which
was no way necessary to the vindication of the Virtuosi or matter entreated on.

To his ever honored Friend, Sir N. N.
SIR,
ALthough the multiplicity of business arising from my practice in the
Country, and the great inclinations I have to improve each vacant minute, in
the prosecution of my studies, although these occasions render me not so civil
to my friends by any intercourse of Letters, as I seemingly ought to be, yet do
not they at all diminish my respects for them, so that they may as absolutely
as ever dispose of my services, though the confirmation thereof be not daily
renewed unto them with all that noise of ceremony and Flattery with which this
impertinent age does abound. Your Letter brought with it all those
circumstances that could justly endear it unto me; and I was infinitely
satisfied to understand that I had so important a place in that memory which
retains nothing vulgar and trivial: These sentiments alone were enough to
transport me into some vanity, and place a greater value on my self than I know
I merit, because you write, that is think, I have some; and I am almost ready
to yield that to the opinion of your judgment that which I have many
demonstrations against. I am pleased to understand that so many serious and
real Patriots of this Kingdom do approve not only of my undertaking the Royal
Society, but of my performances therein: what others, especially judicious and
sober persons, say of us, is a thing no virtuous person ought to look upon with
indifference: though the greatest comforts in all actions arise from that
content which our own breasts afford us. My life has been a continual scene of
dangers, which the Rebellion in Ireland, Poverty, Sickness, and other accidents
invo^ed me in, but though in a thousand misfortunes I have refl^cted on my
condition as irreleivable, yet of all the intrica^ies that ever I encountered,
tho beginning of this Quarrel did represent unto me the worst and most
perplexed I (...) encountered: All the others appeared like the contrivan^, of a
resistless Fate, this to depend upon my own election; All others did at once
acquaint me with the whole prospect of the h^rd I was in, and my thoughts
discovered unto me clearly what grounds I might rely upon for hopes, and what
^casions I had to despair, and amidst these resentments I was prepared for any
issue Providence would ordain me: but in this I could not any ways imagino
what might be the consequence of the attempt, whence to derive any assurance,
or where to terminate my fears: so that I was forced to abandon all those
melanchollick apprehensions, and to deduce my encourageme^ts from the necessity
of the Action, and from that despair which made all troubles and even death it
self pleasant, since I could make no other estimate of England, but that even
the poor remains of Religion and Learning amongst us were so imminently
endangered, that I could not expect their long continuance, nor with patience
think how to survive them. All men represented unto me the perils into which I
threw my self, but none moro than I foresaw my self: none had the confidence to
imbolden me, many dissuaded me: but in the whole affair I consulted the
tranquillity of my own mind, and determined upon that courso wherein I found the
most content, not the most profit: and agreeable to the directions of that
Hebrew Proverb, Though sixty Councillors tender you an advice, yet reject not
the dictates of your own breast, I fixed upon those resolutions which were most
conformable to my Soul, and in which I found my internal peace best
established: I left the conduct to God, whose glory was concerned so highly,
and bottomed my self upon this ground alone as to outward supports, that my
design must be agreeable to all that regarded the interest of the Monarchy and
Religion of this land, the welfare of the Church or State, the happiness of
this Generation and of Posterity: and instead of making particular friends (or
matter of great uncertainty now) I hoped that the particular concernments of
the Church of England, the two Universities, the College of Physicians, and of
all Artisans, would supply that defect. The History of the R. S. and Mr.
Glanvills plus ultra, did furnish me with undeniable arguments of the common
danger; and the general and constant discourses as well as deportment of the
Comical Wits or Vertuosi were such, that no ^ss or comment could create another
representation of things. Sir, it is not unknown to you what influence
Education has upon any Government; that without a regard hereunto the best
Laws become useless and ineffectual, thorough the contempt and malepertness of
the Subjects: and the most noble designs of Princes frustrated for want of
befitting instruments to carry them on: By the sole force of good Education
sundry Governments have subsisted, whose constitution has been defective, and
whose disturbances and calamities have been such as would have shattered into
pieces and confusion any weaker foundation: of this Lycurgus took an especial
care, and the paucity of his Laws was admirably supplied by his diligence
herein: and the neglect hereof is justly censured by Aristotle Aristot. E^ic.
l. 10. c. 9.
in other Republics. Upon this account our prudent Ancestors, (knowing how
much more untractable Northern people were than others, sacrificing upon any
occasion their lives unto their passions) have been eminent in their cares for
the educating of our Youth, Gentry and others, to such knowledge and customs as
was necessary to the due honoring of God, and the welfare of the Nation and
Government. From this care had our Universities their original, and that
public breeding in Free Schools: and the advantages are these, that by the
Uniformity of the instruction men's minds may be better united and cemented
together, (no material difference arising, nor each seeming to the other
foolish and ridiculous, where all are inured to the same sentiments) and not
only that confusion is prevented which private Tutors would occasion by
insusing different and repugnant principles into the Youth, but even the
deportment and inclinations of all becomes evident to the Magistrates and
others, which best and most naturally discover themselves in their tender and
anwary years, from whence the prudent can judge what to hope, or expect from
them in their maturity, how to discourage, distrust, confide in or employ them:
the Tutors they have, the Books they converse with, the studies and usages
which they like and dislike, are thereby known: and of those evil fruits which
some men have afterward produced, it is notorious that the first buds and
bl^ssoms were, or might have been observed during their continuance at the
Universities. Pardon a despised Peripatetick if I tell you that it is an
opinion Aristotle betrays me into, that the source of all our evils, and the
continuance of them, is derived from the neglect of public Education: nor does
there appear to me any possibility of remedying thereof, or reconciling us by
the establishment of new Laws (how penal soever) but by resetling a fitting
Education: this dillgently pursued, would insensibly and infallibly atchieve
that which no Laws will ever do where they are to encounter grown men, whose
resentments are violent, and their reasons weak especially as to remote
consequences. This general advantage to the public, was attended with another
not of less importance: viz. that since the condition of our Nation and
Monarchy requires that all be principled in the Protestant Religion in
opposition to Popery (the restoration of which would endanger the Title of our
King to his Let these Considerations (if others from P^ety seem contemptible)
teach us wisdom before an absolute impossib^y to redr^ss our evils: Loave us
(...) cons^tion but despair, for not h^g t^ly for^een and prevented them.
Crown, or render it feudatary and obnoxious to foreign power, as any man that
is acquainted with History must know: it would also embroyl us in the
restitution of Churchlands, which as they make up the greatest part of most
men's estates, so the rendition of them; if I can judge of the posture of
England how, will be more facile than that of the Episcopal Revenue lately was)
and in conformity to the Church, whilst custom, example, and uniform
instruction would represent those ceremonies and habits as decent, orderly and
rational, which would otherwise seem uncouth, and fantastical: Besides these,
it was a further security to our Government, that the Education there did
qualify men to a submission to and love of our Government: It being evident
that the Paliticks of Aristotle suit admirably with our Monarchy, and men are
well prepared to own and support a reiglement, which that intelligent
Philosopher so long ago represented as the Idea of humane policy, in opposition
to the Seignioral and absolute Monarchy. The Ethics there are gen^rous, and
subservient to Religion, and civil prudence, and all manner of virtue: the
Logic and Metaphysics are so entwisted with the established Religion, and so
requisite to the support of it against Papists and Socinians, that without a
miracle the neglect hereof must bring a change in the former: even common
wisdom teaches us that we must vary our Weapons and Militia according to what
our enemies practice: thus when the world assumed Guns, we have been forced to
abandon our Archery, and quit those fortifications which sufficed against all
former approaches, since the battering Canon were introduced: the learning of
the Sarracens prevailing on the minds of men endued with reason, the Monks and
Ecclesiastics were forced to Study School Divinity in opposition to them, and
not to rely upon the sole support of Authority, Legends, and feigned Miracles:
and whilst that Subtlety of reasoning and distinguishing continues amongst our
Adversaries, it is no less than apparent madness to cast our Arms away, and
desert those courses by which alone so great a part of the Nation is to be
reduced, and Foreign encroachments prevented. The Study of Learned Languages is
so necessary to Ecclesiastical and Civil History, and the understanding thereof
(together with the Original Scripture) so requisite to our State and Church,
that they must be enemies to both that discourage those Studies, and looked
upon as such as manifestly go about to ruin their Native Country. With what
facility are those Arguments solved in an Academical way, which perplex the
ignorant? What sense do those terms bear to an understanding person which seem
iusignificant and contradictious or non-sensical notions to those of lower
intellectuals? What intricate cases are resolved, when it is made evident that
their Authors are spuri^us, or intended otherwise? As to that usual exception
that it is an empty and mean employment for generous youth to be wasted in the
studying of Languages, and chopping of Logic; it arguos no judgment in those
that use it: for nothing is mean, despicable, and empty, without which so high
and important benefits cannot be attained: By the same reason, the exercises of
the old Romans in the Campus Martius, the Palastra and Olympic games, the
modern Training, and Cudgel-playing, or shooting at Butts, must be exploded;
yet no wise man will assent hereunto: and it is evident, that those other
studies are as subservient to the ends proposed in them, as those others are to
what is designed therein. All these so considerable advantages which our Church
and State derives from Academical education, are designed to be overthrown by
the Historian, and the common entertainments of the Virtuosi consist in
debauching our Nobility, Gentry, and all the youth from those studies, as
useless, empty, and impertinent: and how just, how necessary ought that
undertaking to seem universally which has no other end than the silencing of
these Comediants? They magnisie, in opposition to all other knowledge, the
Experimental Philosophy: were the thing well modelled, managed by discreet
persons, and the Question rightly stated, there would be no controversy
betwixt us: the pursuit thereof would creat us some profit, and much of
pleasure: but whosoever accustomes Children or Youth to those divertisements,
shall never breed up any eminent personage, nor reduce them afterward to
serious and sedentary studies: as daily observation shows: And whosoever
asserts that such innocent works will certainly have a more sure effect in the
composing History of the R. S. page 342.
and purifying men's thoughts, than all the rigid precepts of the Stoical, or
the empty distinctions of the Peripatetick Moralists: it is certain he never
was acquainted with the Stoics, or Peripateticks, but is a Virtuosi. I prosess
some shame to think that any man should oppose this Mechanical education to the
other, and make use of it to disparage that Moral discipline which instructs us
in the nature of virtue and vioe, of Distributive and Commutative Justice:
humane actings, and the due course, as well as exorbitances of our passions:
But to prefer the advancement of such Experiments before the most renowned
Actions In the D^tion of the Hist^y.
of the best Princes, is so strange a passage, that I only say, it is well the
Author thereof is an enemy to, and unacquainted (...) in More Nebuch^ l. 2. c.
37.
with University-Learning. Non est conveniens proportio inter res differentes
specie. Non enim oportet dicore quod hominis perfectio est tanta, vel major
equi perfectione. All that is said about the erecting of Mechanical or Sensible
Philosophy of Nature, is but empty talk: Humane nature, is not capable of such
achievements: it is evidontly impossible to attain any exact knowledge of the
surface of our whole Terrestrial Globe: and the depths of the Earth and water,
are no less unsearchable: and as to the component particles, their nature,
figure, motions, and combinations are known only to the Deity: so that no
prudent person is to be amused with these Rosicrucian promises: As to the
collection of the History of Nature, were it not universal, it might be of some
use, and afford not only matter for the railleurs, but other pretty
illustrations and similitudes for the Rhetoricians; but I must here complain of
them for making us false relations, which will create us more trouble than if
they had done nothing: and also for this, that since these men take upon them
to upbraid all the Aristotelians and Ph^ians for not attending unto
Experiments, yet do they do little more than steal the Experiments of others,
and publish them as their own, without ever referring to Authors, except an
ingenious Virtuos be concerned: would these persons be pleased to declare
solemnly unto the world that they understand nothing of ancient or modern
Writers (you may see by Aristotle's gravitation of the Air, that they never
read him: nor Galen, or Pliny, or Aristotle, who speak of Apothecaries such as
ours) it were but candor in them, and the best way to secure their credit from
being thought Plagiaries and Cheats: so, if they would but get any one to teach
them Latin and Greek, it would have saved me some trouble, as you will see in
my Animadversions on their History: In fine, I doubt not but to make it plain
to all the world, that some having been so negligent, most so ignorant, we can
expect no great things from them, nor are to be concerned for them at all in an
affair of such importance as the change of our Education and Religion. They
might have appeased me, would they have called in those two books; but since
they would not do that, I suspect their intentions, and that they drive on
Campanella's project: why should they else have scrupled at it? Is it below
them to acknowledge their errors, whereas they blame the Peripateticks for
refusing to confess theirs? I am informed by you that they say many of my
citations are false (...) but no man of reading will say so: they were true
when they went from me; if the Printer have mistook, I cannot help it: a
Stratagem of theirs hindered me from correcting the Press: I know some books
are misnamed, but such Scholars as they pretend to be (and who offer to tell
the Parliament of what in each invention is new or old) can easily correct
that: as where I cit^ Scheinir: ros. Vagin: any ordinary man can tell it should
be rosa Ursin: and so for other defaults: but if the poor Devils cannot tell
how to apprehend such Errata, if they will send to me, I will rectify any
citation, rather then they should give them a needless trouble in denying it.
There is not one allegation that I have not consulted my self, except what
relates to Pecqu^t and Mersennus: and neither of those (...)
were they injured in; but my books being burnt at London, those two pieces I
wanted: but as to Pecquet, if you look into him: you will find not only the
gravitation of the Atmosphear, but the Elasticity and comparison with a Fleece
of Wool, and Experiment of the Barometer (not the non-sensical appellation)
related as amply as in any of the Virtuosi: and it is in this manner that I
have injured them. But they must say something to preserve their credit; yet
have I a thousand faults more to charge them with: but I reserve them for
another Treatise, which if they do not submit to the two Universities, and the
College of Physicians, I will publish. In truth, no Physician can join with
them, or give them any countenance without betraying his Paculty to most
unworthy Empiricks. It is intolerable that a company of men that know not what
belongs to a Disease, or Remedy, should arrogate as they do. I have already
showed the long use of Ivy-berries for the (...), and Myns^ de Catha^co (...).
I do not (...) A. (...), because he adds not (...).
Plague: this they bring (out of Parkinson!) for an Arcanum! The L^nar P^ls as
to the main ingredient was public in Tenthelius and (...): but the making of
the Luna Catharti^ into Pills with white-bread crumb^ is their invention^ And
if the additional crumbs of bread works not the miracles (as indeed neither do
the Pills answer expect^tion at all) neither is the addition of Nitre n^w, nor
the discovery above what we knew before. I dare undertake to make an
Experimentator of any insipid Aristotelian at this rate, let him but pretend to
other men's discoveries: a little wit and a brazen-face will serve to that
purpose, without studying. As to what you farther add, that they decry me for
an Atheist, and one of no Religion: First, I reply that it does not become any
of them to upbraid me therewith; or if that procedure be excusable, it admits
only of this Apology, that being to Character a man altogether unknown to most,
and not intimate with any of them, they make themselves the Original, and so
copy m^ out thence: this is a fallacy our senses commonly betray us into; for
the things which we are unacquainted with farther than by report, or deceitful
Telescopes, we presently fancy to resemble more or less those objects we daily
converse with: and the Virtuosi being sensible Philosophers, act according to
their principles herein, though not according to real truth. Secondly, if ever
my tongue (I am sure my actions have not) ever given any occasion to conjecture
so of me, I beg pardon of God and the world for it: but the occasion of such
reports was rather from the malice of men, than that they had any ground for
it; unless this were one, that during the late times, because I would join with
no party in a Church, they imagined that I could be of no Religion; whereas I
did no more than Chrysostom and others before me: A second enducement may have
been a custom natural unto me, to defend the absent or depressed, or excuse
them against the censures of illiterate Adversaries: other ground I know none,
and it is not to be deduced by any man from any of my present writings I am
sure; but the contrary: And it is strange that men pretending to a respect for
our Church, should thus conspire to defame me for so seasonable and powerful a
defense thereof: it being obvious to see that hereby I recede from my Temporal
interest, which they know might be better made up by open debauchery,
indifferency as to Religion, flattering and lying: not to mention the present
and future dangers I run into by this attempt, the final issue whereof is
scarce likely to antedate my death: If a profession of the Protestant Religion,
Union with the Church of England, an unblamable life, and the hazards I now
encounter voluntarily, cannot justify me against these imputations, let them
produce as much in their behalfs, and acquaint me what more is requisite, and
they shall find I will not decline any fitting testimony whereby to undeceive
them: so that they ought not to upbraid a man who appears principally concerned
for the Church and Protestant Religion with such a Calumny, which might with
great show of justice be fixed upon all the Abettours of that History of
theirs. As for the rest you write about, I value it not: those untruths are
easily refuted; and as yet I cannot believe that they will avow them in Print:
Let us leave them Sir, to talk a little as yet; they have been used to spend
their discourses in commendation of one another; be contented that you have
some new discourse: would you have them so soon to hold their peace? I know a
Gentleman who in the wars of Ireland at one blow cut off a man's head; and the
headless trunk clapped spurs to the horse sides and rid about ten yards after:
Let these loosers talk a little; and then retire and work, and so cure their
passions (according as Mr. Sprat advises) and endeavor to regain their
credit, which I think is irrecoverably lost, if others, by my example, will
pursue their failings. As to his Majesty, he cannot suffer when these Spirits
dis-appear, who like those Phantasmes in the Mines have made a great show of
(...)
doing much, but upon enquiry no such performances are really found: All
posterity will celebrate the glory of his intentions to improve the knowledge
and trading of this Nation: and he is possessed of so many Royal Virtues that
render him the object of all our esteem, that the removal of these now will not
derogate from, but illustrate his Renown, and confirm England in the Reverence
of his generosity and their detestableness: But I doubt I trespass too much
upon your patience, and that you are tired, as I am with writing, but not with
any professions that becomes

Your most humble Servant Hen. Stubbe.
Warwick June 2^ 1670.
The Postscript.
SIR,
THE News you write me about Dr. Merrett did at first a little surprise me, and
had I not during this last year been accustomed to the puny Stratagems of the
Virtuosi, I should have wondered much to understand that I was entitled to the
Lex Talionis, or that Apology for Apothecaries to practice Physic. But the
Comediants finding their anger insignificant against me, by reason of the
advantages which their ignorance had given me over them, have ascribed unto me
a book which admits of an easy reply, and which enterferes with the College of
Physicians, that so they might seem to bassle and inodiate me at once in the
judgment of that profession for which I seem concerned. I cannot make any
particular desence, not having seen his book: but if Dr. Merrett had consulted
the principal Apothecaries, I doubt not but some of them could have given him
an account of my intentions, and how different my sentiments were from those of
that Author: and it was easy for him to learn that I was not the penner or
approver of the other piece. I writ to some of the Company of Apothecaries
desiring them to compose the growing fewd betwixt them and the College, and
told them that I neither could nor would encourage them against that
Illustrious Assembly; that it was the interest of Physicians to employ
Apothecaries, as a distinct profession; and that it was the prudence of States
that it should be so: that I could deduce the difference of the employments
thorough Ancient and Modern Greece, as well as Rome: and that the reasons to be
alleged against Physicians prepairing their own Medicaments were such as
admitted of no answer, nor evasion amongst understanding men: but that I could
never invent or meet with any arguments that could induce me to allow of
practicing Apothecaries; and that I understood so well the extent and
difficulty of my profession, that (however they might in some cases prosper) I
could never defend that assertion. I desired them to consider that if any heats
or indignities had passed from the College toward them, it was their wisdom
to pass them by, and not to abandon their important concernments to indulge any
passion: that the effect of this contest would be, that the impertinent
Virtuosi and insolent Quacksalvers would carry away all the advantage: to
conclude, there were many defaults needed regulation in them, that although the
Physicians in general would be prejudiced by this dispute, yet so many eminent
persons would continue famous, as might divert the Storm upon the heads of the
Apothecaries, and if the College would join effectually therein, the project
is not difficult, though I would not intimate it. I did therefore earnestly
recommend unto their considerations an union, and that they would not delude
themselves that they could prosecute their Trades long, is that famed body of
men did resolve against them, with whose determinations I did not doubt but all
intelligent practitioners in the Country and Counties would comply: but I
hoped we should not be put upon those extremes. I advised them to reflect upon
our common Enemies the Royal Society, and see if they were not the principal
Incendiaries: that all the books that had been yet written on that Subject
proceeded from them; and that I looked on it as a design of theirs to
aggrandise themselves upon the ruin of the College (a thing they have always
endeavored) and Apothecaries: that there wanted not of them who purposed to
erect a Laboratory and Shop, whence all should be furnished cheaper and better
than now, as to general Medecines, provided they would act themselves in the
more common and frequent Medicaments: that if they proceeded herein, the
Virtuosi might facilitate their design, though their igrance and unfaithfulness
be such that all men ought to oppose these Projectors. Upon this account I did
largely handle that Question, Whether Physicians ought to make their own
Medicines? which I resolved in the Negative, and urged all those arguments
(with several illustrations) which have hithert^ s^ayed with prudent Governors
and Physicians to establish the received usage: but I protested against any
encouragement for Apothecaries to practice. I answered all that Dr. Merrett had
alleged, and showed his intolerable ignorance in that book; and if we might
take an estimate of his parts from that writing, 'twas manifest he might better
employ his time in studying the method of Physic, than composing Medicaments:
that after 30. years practice 'twas evident he understood not the Rudiments of
that noble Science, nor could state a case therein. As for Dr. Goddard, who had
writ more warily and with greater prudence, I only dissented from him in the
Antiquity of Apothecaries, and treated him as a Physician whom I pittyed for
being mixed with so illiterate a company. This was the purport of my Treatise,
which was joined with another miscellaneous Discourse about the errors and
cheats of the Virtuosi; and the pernicious influence they would have ere long
upon all Trades and Professions, when they had more inspected them: that they
began with the rectifying Apothecaries, but where they would end I did not
know: that it behooved all men to combine against them, the tendency of whose
designs was so satal and malignant: that I hoped the Physicians would consult
their common interest in opposition to the Thomsons and Odowdes, etc. and act
with that moderation which became wisemen, and who were tender of continuing
the renown of their Faculty, which would suddenly else devolve into the hands
of Empiricks; and demean themselves with that moderation which might end in an
accord with the Apothecaries: that this quarrel was inconsiderable, and indeed
(as Dr. Merrett confesses) of no longer continuance then that of the R. S. and
would receive a period with their overthrow; which not only all Doctors, but
all good men ought to endeavor; that the disasters of the late Dutch War, the
Plague, and Fire of London were less inconveniences than their perpetuity: that
these calamities admitted of some remedy here after; but the evils they are
likely to occasion us, would never be corrected by any humane prudence; and I
doubted whether God would support us by his providence, when they had debauched
the Nation from all Piety and Morality, as well as civil Wisdom. This was the
subject of that Book, which I doub^ not but will be approved by all judicious
persons: and the College (...) see that I can write against Dr. Merrett
without derogating from them; or rather that my intendments were to support
them, and not dis-serve the Apothecaries in the least. I intend to make it
public in Michaelmas Term: the passage of Campanella being taken out thence,
has occasioned that breach in it which I have not leisure now to redress: and
perhaps I may call those other writings of the Virtuosi to an examination,
which have been the principal cause of all these controversies, and which if
they be not refuted, it is in vai^ to attack the Medela Medecin, Mainwairing,
etc. They must blame themselves, not me, for any undertaking of this nature;
ordinary prudence would have enabled them to foresee the issue of those kind of
writings; and a proportionate candor now would induce them to retract them,
without enforcing me to show how many unreasonable trials they put us upon; how
many impertinences they suggest unto us; how delusory their Medic^ments are;
how it is their usual practice to vouch those things for new discoveries which
we very well knew before, and to which if they were strangers, it is because
they were not acquainted with the practice of the most eminent Physicians. Let
them therefore hence forward permit the Physicians to be Judges of their own
Science, and give them the credit best to understand their own deficiencies,
and the occasions of any failours in their practice. The blind may as well
judge of colors, the insensible concerning the objects of feeling, as the
Virtuosi of Physic. This is no knowledge that arises from natural wit alone:
Fancy without judgment, reading, and observation will not enable them
hereunto: This is a performance too great for the Merretts and the Sydenhams:
as I shall show hereafter; and as little agreeing with Dr. Sprat; or Mr.
Glawvill, whose abilities in matters relating to their profession are so
contemptible, that 'twere folly to expect much from them where they profess
not. I have not time to enlarge farther, being now employed otherwise, and
having appointed to spend the next week or two at Bath in attendance of a
Neighboring Patient.

Yours, etc.
^agley June 14, 1670.
FINIS

