PRESBYTERIES TRIAL: OR THE OCCASION, AND MOtives of Conversion to the
Catholic Faith, of a Person of quality, in Scotland.

TO WHICH IS SVBIOYNED, A LITTLE TOVCH-STONE of the Presbyterian Covenant.

Beloved, believe not every Spirit: but prove the Spirits, if they be of God:
because many false Prophets are gone out into the world. 1. John 4.1.

If thou seem to thy self, to have been already sufficiently tossed; and
would make an end of these labors and pains: Follow the way of the
Catholic Discipline; which has proceeded from Christ himself, by his holy
Apostles, even unto us; and from hence, shall descend, and be conveyed to
posterity. Aug. lib. de Vtilitate credendi, c. 8.

Truly, the Covenants and Leagues of Heretics are Thorns clasping one
another. Hier. in cap. 1. Nehum.

Printed at Paris, anno 1657

Permissu Superiorum.

THE PREFACE TO THE CHRISTIAN and well-disposed Reader.
COURTEOUS READER,
Although all Christians do^ acknowledge, that, of all the affairs in this
world, there is none of that importance unto man, as the saying of his soul,
and that Salvation cannot be obtaynd, without the true Faith and Religion; yet
manifest experience daily shows, that many thowsands do carry themselves so
slouthfully in that most important affair of Religion; as if it were a matter
of the least, or rather of no consequence. For we see, that, in whatsoever
Error or Heresy (though never so monstrous) men are bred for the most part they
continue in the same; or else, according to the mutability of their Inconstant
Leaders, they pass after them, from one falsehood, into another; without making
any further search for the Truth. This is truly one of the greatest miseries,
and the most deplorable folly of man; that he should be so slothful, and
almost insensible, in these things, which concern his eternal Salvation;
whereas he is so diligent and careful, about his Temporal affairs, which are
incomparably of lesser moment. Neither is this negligence and folly proper
only to the rude and ignorant; but it is also very ordinary to many, who are
neither fools, nor vicious; but rather have good store of worldly wisdom, and
of Moral virtues.

This then, being vndenyably the common Lethargy, of almost all those, who
live in the false Religions and sects of perdition, wherewith the world is now
pestered: it is no small favor, which they receive, who, by the divin mercy,
are awakned out of that dead sleep; and, being made to open their eyes, do see
their own danger; and seeing it, strive, by all means, to free themselves of it,
by seeking earnestly, with imploring the divin assistance, the right way unto
eternal happiness. This favor God has been pleased to vouchsafe lately, unto
diverse Protestants, in Scotland, awakning them, by the great Confusion and
Division (most sensible and Natural Marks of Falsehood) that had fallen upon
their Religion; and by the grievous Dissensions, that have been rageing a long
time, amongst their inconstant Teachers. And amongst others, he was pleased to
grant this favor unto a certain honorable personnage, who had been a very
zealous Protestant, relying altogether upon the Ministers words: But, so soon
as he saw their horrible contradictions and Dissensions, and that they
condemned and accursed, what themselves had before taught and practiced; yea and
furiously enforced others to follow them, and swear to all their Innovations,
replenishing, in the mean time, the whole Nation with unspeakable miseries and
calamities; he thought it was not fitting, nor secure for him, to trust any
longer these Inconstant Guides, in a journey of such importance; since he could
not prudently trust Guides, of such qualities, in an earthly Voyage. Wherefore,
being thus awakned, and not a stranger from good letters, he did set himself
seriously to seek the Truth; choosing the Divin Scriptures for his Rule, and
the Holy Fathers for Interpreters of the same: by which means he conceived,
that he should attayn unto the knowledge of the practice and belief of the
Primitive Church: which, by all sides, is acknowledged, to have been the true
Church. And so beginning his search, with the Trial of the Innovations, which
were lately introduced by the Presbyterians, he did not only soon find them,
to be against the Scriptures and holy Fathers; but also he began to see a
glimse of the Truth of the Catholic Religion, which he had heard so often
defamed by the Ministers. For he clearly perceived, by pervsing especially some
pieces of S. Augustins works, and the Protestants Apology, that the holy
Fathers and Primitive Church believed diverse points, which are condemned by
Protestants, and are still believed by Catholics; whereat he was not a little
astonished: especially, when he saw this acknowledged by the chief Divines of
the late English Church, which pretended, above all others, to be most
conformable unto the primi ive times: whose Testimonies are diligently
collected by M. Breirly, in the forementioned Apology.

Having then thus seen the great deformity of the Scottish Presbyteian Kirk,
which is so monstrously different from the Primitive; and the great
prevarication of the late English Church; he remained, for some time, in great
perplexity of mind, not being able of himself, to overcome some difficulties
and preiudices, which had been a long time beaten into his ears, against the
Catholic Religion: Till at length, falling into the acquentance of a Roman
Catholic, whom he perceived to be somewhat versed in these questions; he was
pleased, to unfold his mind to him; and after diverse conferences, received not
only full satisfaction of his doubts; but also was instructed in the chief
principles, and immovable grounds, of the Catholic faith: whereby, he saw
also the sandy grounds of the Protestant Religion. Being therefore in end fully
resolved, to enter into the bosom of the holy Catholic Church; he desired,
the said Catholic would be pleased first, to draw up in some few sheets, the
Occasion and Motives of his Conversion; to the end, that, having these papers
by him, he might be more able to give satisfaction to others, who might enquire
of him, the reasons of his change. Which was done accordingly, with intention
only that it might serve for his private use. But some other zealous
Catholics, coming thereafter to the sight of these papers, were of opinion,
that they might prove profitable to others; if the same Method being observed,
the matters there touched, were a little more enlarged, and then published. And
therefore they jointly desired, the said Catholic would be pleased, to
undertake that labor; giving him good hopes, that, not only the new Converted
Catholics would be thereby confirmed; but also, others, who were seeking the
Truth, might be helped and assisted; besides some other goods, which they
thought might redound from it. In obedience to whose Desires, this labor was
undertaken, by him; and now it is his earnest wish, that it may answer their
expectation, albeit perhaps, for that end, some more time had been requisite.

Thus, Courteous Reader, thou have heard the occasion of writing this book:
Now, thou may be pleased, to see a little the Model and Method of it. In the
first place, are set down the Occasions of that Honorable new Converts doubts,
concerning the Truth of the Protestant Religion; such as are the Ministers
Inconstancy in Doctrine and Discipline, their great Dissensions and Divisions,
Their Tyrannizing over men's Consciences, Their Contradicting their own
Principles etc. In which matters, some late histories or passages are
interlaced, without expressing the names of persons therein concerned; because
that was not necessary, since the things here touched are public, late, and
fresh in all men's knowledge and Memories, within the Country; and the persons
also well enough known: Neither is it the digrace of any men's persons, Hier.
Apolog. 3. cont. Ruffin. c. 11.
which S. Hierom calls the Machines of Heretics, but the correction of their
Errors, which is here intended. After the occasion of the doubts is showed, in
some few chapters; then follows the Trial of the last pretended Presbyterian
Reformation, in the principal points thereof: as its condemning of Episcopacy,
the abolishing the hymn of Glory to the Father, etc. the denying the
Apostolical authority of the Apostles Creed; neglecting to say our Lords
Prayer, etc. In all which points, the Presbyterians are found to go against the
word of God, and the Primitive Church; the former doctrines and practices of
many among themselves; against their first Reformers, and many learned
Protestants: So that this last pretended Reformation is showed, to be nothing,
but a real Deformation, destroying, not only the Apostolic office and
government, established by Christ, in his Church: but also the two chief
Pillars, or heads of the Christian Religion: to wit our Lords Prayer, and the
Apostles Creed. Then follows the Trial of the first pretended Reformation,
which is also showed, to have destroyed in effect, the other two chief Pillars
of Christianity: to wit, the Divine Commandments, and Holy Sacraments: and to
have brought in a most Erroneous doctrine of Justification by Faith only;
expressly against the Scriptures and holy Fathers. So that these two pretended
Reformations are shown, to have made up, between them, the hideous work of
Desolation. After this, the whole Protestant Church, by the undeniable
principle of the perpetuity of Christ's Church, is proved, not to be the true
Church of Christ: And by the same undeniable principle, the Church in Communion
with the Sea of Rome, and she alone, is demonstrated, to be the true Catholic
Church of Christ, and to have, in all ages, still continued in the same
doctrine, which she received from Christ and his Apostles; notwithstanding the
calumnies of Heretics. Then lastly, the same truth is proved by the Marks,
whereby the true Church is clearly designed in the Scriptures; as by her Unity,
Sanctity, Universality, and Apostolical Succession: by which marks, the holy
Fathers also did prove the true Church, in their times. To which is subioyned a
brief Examination of the Presbyterian Covenant, or Confession of Faith; which,
although it was much Idolatrized of late, is showed to be nothing, but a
Denial and Abiuration of the holy Faith, with many execrations and
blasphemies, against it. This briefly (Courteous Reader) is the Scope and
Method of the ensuing Treatises, which, the Author thereof earnestly wishes,
may tend to thy profit: That, if thou be a new Converted Catholic, thou may
be confirmed thereby, in thy holy Faith: If one, who after many tossings in
Errors, art seeking the Truth; thou may be assisted to find it, where only it
can be found: if lastly, thou be one, who not through malice, but through
negligence, or ignorance, adheres unto Errors: thou may be stirred up, to try
them, and to seek diligently the Truth, which is a work most worthy of thy
pains. Neither is it so hard, as some do imagine to find the Truth: since God
Almighty, according to his infinite goodness and wisdom, has prepared the way
to heaven, so much the more certain and easy to be known, how much more Error
and deceit in it, brings greater loss, with it: and therefore, he has promised
so plain and direct a way unto Eternal happiness, that fools may not err by
it. Esaias 35.5.
Whence it is evident, if thou seek this way with diligence, and after the
right manner: thou may have great confidence, by Gods grace, to attayn unto
it. But then, thou will seek it in the right way, [according to the advice of
the glorious Doctor S. Augustine to his friend Honoratus] if thou do use
fervent and frequent prayer, Aug de vtil^. cred^s. 15 16.
strivest to have peace and tranquillity of mind: if thou will hear that
Church, which God has established on earth, with so great authority, and which
is called Catholic, both by her own, and by strangers. For it is by Authority
only, whereby men can come unto the knowledge of Divin Truth: and there is no
Authority equal unto this, which began by Miracles, and is most famous for
Multltudes of peoples and Nations: and therefore, if thou proceedest orderly:
at this Authority thou ought to begin, as the same holy Father affirms.
But, if thou contemnest so great Authority, and only openest thy ears to the
Enemies and Calumniators of so famous a Society; which has been also
calumniated, by all the former heretics, as well, as by these of this Age:
thou can not be excused, neither can thou arrive unto the possession of
solid Truth. Therefore, if thou be wise, follow the former advice of S.
Augustine, who was so wise and so learned a Doctor, and who had such great
knowledge and experience in this affair. And if thou would take a short and
compendious way, to come unto the Truth; Try only that one question of the
Church, according to the marks abovementioned, whereby it is clearly designed
in Scripture: and thou will not only soon find, that they cannot agree to thy
New, Inconstant Church: but also, thou will quickly see, that they agree to the
Catholic Church, which has ever endured, and against which, Hels gates, could
never prevail: and so, with the true Church, thou will find a^l Truth: because
it is ever governed by the Spirit of Truth, and is the Pillar and ground of
Truth. This is the right manner for thee, to attayn unto the Truth, and to true
Happ^nesse: To which, that God Almighty may direct and bring thee, shall be
earnestly desired by thy welwisher.

F. W. S.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
Chap. I. THAT God, by the Confusion of Error, stirs up many to seek the
Truth. p. 1. Chapter II. Of the Ministers Inconstancy; and of the Alterations, made
by the late Presbyterian Reformation. p. 8. Chapter III. Of the Ministers
Dissensions and Divisions. p. 15. Chapter IV. Of the Presbyterians Rigor, and
Tyranny over Protestants. p. 26. Chapter V. Of the Presbyterians contradicting
their own Principles. p. 34. Chapter VI. Of the Presbyterians Disobedience to the
Civil Magistrate: and of their pretext of Piety. p. 46. Chapter VII. Of Episcopacy,
condemned as Antichristian, by the Presbyterians. p. 53. Chapter VIII. Of our
Lords Prayer, neglected to be said by the Presbyterians. p. 71. Chapter IX. Of
Glory to the Father etc. or the Hymn of Glorification, taken away by the
Presbyterians. p. 78. Chapter X. Of the Apostles Creed, denied to be Apostolical by
the Presbyterians. p. 89. Chapter XI. of the Article, of Christ's Descent to Hell,
perverted by the Presbyterians. p. 102. Chapter XII. A Reflection upon the last;
and an Entrance into the Trial, of the first Supposed Reformation. p. 115. Chapter
XIII. Of the possibility to keep the Divine Commandments, with the assistance
of Gods grace: denied by the Presbyterians and their first Reformers. p. 118.
Chapter XIV. A Consideration of the Presbyterians principal grounds, against the
possibility of keeping the Divine Commandments. p. 136. Chapter XV. of
Justification by Faith only, maintaind by the Presbyterians, and their first
Reformers, as the principal article of their Religion. p. 153. Chapter XVI. Of the
Nature of Justification, according to the Catholic doctrine. p. 167. Chapter
XVII. Of the Presbyterians three principal Errors, concerning Justification.
p. 178. Chapter XVIII. Of the Excellency of the Christian Sacraments: and
particularly, how they confer Grace: which is denied by the Presbyterians. p.
194. Chapter XIX. That Baptism takes a^ay Original sin: which is denied by the
Presbyterians. p. 204. Chapter XX. That Bap^^sm is necessary for the Salvation of
Infants: which is denied by the Presbyterians. p. 211. Chapter XXI. Of the real
presence of Christ's body in the holy Sacrament: which is denied by the
Presbyterians. p. 224. Chapter XXII. Some Reflections upon both the pretended
Scottish Reformations. p. 246. Chapter XXIII. That the true Church must be
perpetual, and must endure without interruption unto the end of the world. p.
251. Chapter XXIV. That the Protestant Church has not been perpetual; yea was not
at all, before Luther: and therefore is not the true Church p. 257. Chapter XXV.
That the P^ot^stant Church was not Visible before Luther; neither in the
Waldenses, Albigenses, Wi^lefists, nor Hussits. p. 265. Chapter XXVI. That the
Protestant Church has not continued Visible in the Grecians, Armenians, nor
Aethiopians. p. 272. Chapter XXVII. That the Protestant Church was not visible in
the primitive Church, or in the holy Fathers; nor thereafter, in the Roman
Church. p. 276. Chapter XXVIII. That the Church of Christ ought to be always
Visible: and therefore, an invisible Church cannot be the true Church. p, 287.
Chapter XXIX. That albeit the true Church might be invisible; yet the Protestants
had no invisible Church, before Luther. p. 297. Chapter XXX. That the Church in
Communion with the Sea of Rome, and she alone, is the true Church. p. 310. Chapter
XXXI. That the Church in Communion with the Sea of Rome holds now, and has
still held the same doctrine, which was taught first by Christ and his Apostles.
326. Chapter XXXII. The true Church proved from the Scripture; and first by her
Unity. p. 352. Chapter XXXIII. The true Church proved by her Holiness. p. 361. Chapter
XXXIV. The true Church demonstrated by her Universality: for which she is
called Catholic. p. 376. Chapter XXXV. The true Church proved by her continued
Succession and the lawful Vocation of her Pastors: for which she is called
Apostolic. p. 385. Chapter XXXVI. The Conclusion. p. 399,
APPROBATIO.
EGO infra scriptus, in Sacra Theologiae Facultate Parisiensi, Magister,
Testor, librum hunc, quem diligenter Perlegi, cui Titulus est. Presbyteries
Trial: or the Occasion, and Motives of Conversion to the Catholic Faith, of
a Person of quality in Scotland, Authore F. W. S. nihil prorsus continere, aut
Catholicae Fidei; aut Moribus Christianis absonum: Imino Doctrinam Sanam, and
vere Euangelicam, in eo explicat and confirmat eruditus eiusdem Author: necnon
oppositos non-nullos Errores, maxim Nationem Scoticam heretica prauitate
infestantes, non minus clare, quam solid refutat and refellit. Quod
Chirographo meo significaui, Parisijs 25. Augusti Anno 1656.

HEN. HOLDEN.

APPROBATIO.
NOS infra scripti, in Sacra Facultate Parisiensi, Doctores Theologi,
Perlegimus diligenter Librum, cuius inscriptio est; Presbyteries Trial; or the
Occasion, and Motives of Conversion to the Catholic Faith, of a person of
quality, in Scotland Authore D. F. W. S. In quo, non solum nihil occurrit Fidei
Catholicae aut bonis moribus aduersum: sed plurima reperimus docte, erudite,
and clare proposita, quae ad Conuersionem cum omnium, tum praecipue istarum
partium, Hereticorum conducere possunt, vt and ad Catholicorum Confirmationem.
Quare, nostro Iudicio dignissimus est, qui typis committatur. Datum Parisijs,
die 13. Nouembris. Anno Domini 1656.

ED. TIREL. RI. NVGENT.

Ego idem sentio,

Fr. IOANNES PONCIVS Ordinis S. Francisci. S. Theologiae Lector Iubilatus.




PRESBYTERIES TRIAL
CHAP. I. That God by the confusion of Error, stirs up many to seek the
Truth.
SO great and admirable is the goodness of God, that (as S. Augustine has
observed) he would not permit sin to be in the world, Aug. in Enchirid. c. 27.
and 100.
unless he did draw good from it: And so infinite is his power joined with that
goodness, that from the worst, and most wicked actions, he can, and does
extract the greatest goods. Joseph did acknowledge in himself the experience of
this truth, when he said to his brethren, who had unnaturally sold him: you
thought evil against me, Genes. 50. ver. 20.
but God has turned it unto good, that he might exalt me, as you see this day,
and preserve much people. But this truth is more admirably seen in that most
horrible crime of the Jews, of crucifying the Lord of glory; out of which God
did extract the greatest of all goods; to wit the Exaltation of Christ, and the
Redemption of mankind.

Since then that Heresy is confessed by all Christians, not only to be evil,
but one of the greatest evils, as being the corruption of a most excellent
good, to wit the divine faith: Gods goodness would never permit it to arise,
and for a time to continue against the true faith, and the holy Church; unless
he cowld and did make it tend to the good of both. S. Paul touches this
matter, when he says to the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 11.19.
Heresies must be, that they which are approoved may be made manifest among
you. That they must be; proceeds, by the permission of God, from the
vickednesse, and free choice of man, and from the malice of the Devil, whom
our Savior calls the Enemy, Math. 13.26.
who sowes tares in the field, where he had sown the good seed. That Heresies
are turned into good, proceeds from the goodness, and special providence of
God, who of evil works good; as he does here, making heresies tend to the
manifestation of those, who are approved, and constant in the faith.

But the providence and goodness of God is specially wonderful in this
matter, that he does not only draw good from Heresy, but also he makes it,
against its own nature and intent, to serve for the further manifestation of
the truth: and he turn's all the plots and cunning design's of the Authors and
Promoovers of falsehood, to the ruin and confusion both of it, and of
themselves; and to the exaltation, of that, whereof they intended so eagerly
the destruction. This was evident of old in the Arrians; who used all slight
and might to obscure, and extinguish, the great mystery of the holy Trinity.
But it did never shine so brightly, neither was it so fully discussed, and
clearly understood, till the Arrians begun to bark against it, as S. Augustine
speaks. Aug. in psalm. 54.
So that by the many fold grace of our Savior, that, which the Enemy intends
for hurt, and destruction; God turn's into help, and advantage.

These things, for the most part, are now (by the goodness of God) become very
evident in the Scottish Covenant, and Presbytery, which prospered so much for a
time: and yet at leuth are come to naught, notwithstanding all the wise and
deep plots that were so subtly devised for the standing and advancing of
them: And notwithstanding the great power of Armies, which did raise, and
uphold them in these Nations: And by which they should in a Martial, rather
then Apostolic manner have been propagated troughout the world, as the
Ministers, and some others fondly imagined, but more foolishly bragged. The
great Covenanters also have been much disappoynted, and come short of their
design's. There was nothing, wherein they so much gloryed, as in their
prosperity, and in the ruin, which fell upon all their opposers; whereby they
avowed publicly and frequently, that their cause was clearly owned by Heaven.
All their discourses, and sermons, were nothing but Panegyriques of that great
ingyring light (as they termed it) which God had made shine to them, above all
other Nations. They did brag not a little, that they were Gods Covenanted
people, and he their Covenanting God, which high privilege no nation else
could claim. Their wisdom in their counsels, and diligence in executions,
were highly esteemed, and much cried up by many. There seemed nothing in humane
prudence fitting for the advancment of their cause, but they tried it: And
nothing could appear a cross, and hinderance to their designs, but they
provided for it. And yet notwithstanding all these pretended privileges,
exploits, and diligences: the Covenanting Presbyterians have been brought to
confusion, their prosperity so much bragged of, has quickly turned into
adversity, and their self conceated wisdom, Job. 5. v. 13.
has now appeared to all men to be manifest folly. For God, who takes th2
wise, in their own craftiness: and dissipats the counsels of the froward, as
it is in Job, has made that witty or crafty course, which they took, for their
own standing; tend to their ruin: and has caused their fall to proceed from
those, whom they least, or in no wise suspected: that is from their own
Covenanting, and Leagued Brethren, whom they had of purpose raised, and
vpholden, to be a prop to themselves, and a ruin to their Enemies. And now is
verifyed in them that, which S. Paul foretold, showld befall to all false
Teachers, and Seducers. 1. Thimoth. 3.9.
They shall not long prevail, for their folly shall be made manifest to all
men. Yea, it has not only pleased God to bring the Covenant and Presbytery to
such a stay, and to frustrate the designs of their Promoters; but he, who
draws good out of evil, has drawn this good from them, amidst the many
deplorable evils, which they have directly brought upon this Nation: That many,
who were not sensible of the great error, wherein they were lying, have been
awakned (as it vere) out of a dead sleep, by the huge confusion of the Covenant
and Presbytery, and so, seeing their own danger, have been stirred up to seeing
for the truth, and to see the day of God, as S. Augustine speaks. Multi vt diem
Dei videant per haereticos e somno excitantur Aug. lib. de vera relig. c. 8.
Amongst which number his unspeakable goodness has been pleased to make me
one, who by all appearance, would have lived and dyed in a gross security of
the religion, wherein I was bred: if the Covenant and Presbytery, by their
confusions, changes, and violence had not furiously endeavored to dispossess
me of many points, which I formerly believed (as I was taught) for undoubted
truths: and by that means pressed me to make an earnest search to inform my
self of the true grounds of these alterations, and to find some settled ground,
whereon I might safely rely, for the Salvation of my soul, and not be tossed
to an fro, with every wind of doctrine, in the wickedness of men, and
circumvention of error.

Whilst there was nothing, but some little jarres betwixt the Bishops and a few
Ministers, for conformity to the 5. articles of Perth: which concerned kneeling
at Communion, private Baptism, Confirmation of children, observation of
Christmasse, and of some few festival days; I was never moved to doubt of the
religion publicly professed. For these dissensions were not, (as I conceaved)
in substantial points: neither was the manner of them very vehement and
rigorous, by reason of the Bishops temper, who did not urge these things
violently, though established both by) Ecclesiastical and Civil laws. Besid's
the Ministers who opposed them were but few, and not considerable, either for
learning or prudence, in regard of those, who were of a contrary judgment. All
this time, I lived in a deep security, in an implicit faith of the Church of
of Scotland, and its doctrine; imagining that it was the very same, which was
taught by Christ, and his Apostles. But so soon as that great storm of the
Covenant did arise, none got leave to sleep any longer at rest, in that bark:
all were awakned by these unskilful Mariners, to whom we had rashly trusted
our souls: who fell at such odds and dissensions amongst themselv's, that
hardly ever such confusion and noise was heard or seen: every one of them
contradicting, condemning and accursing another, and making such factions, that
they seemed to thirst after nothing but blood, with which they may be
sufficiently glutted, since they begun. This tempest and confusion has brought
such shipwreck upon the Church (to speak nothing of the miseries of the
Country) that many of sound judgment, seeing the danger, have been moved to
abandon that confused and sinking vessel, and putt themselv's in one more
solidly built, and governed by more sober, wise, and discreet Pilots.

This confusion was the occasion of my first doubt, which made me begin to
examine the particular points of these new dissenssions; and to try the ground,
whereon our religion, so easily shaken, was weakly founded. And finding, that
all was built upon the sand, I made there after a diligent search, to find out
that true religion, and holy Church, which Christ the wise Master builder had
promised in the Scriptures, to build upon a Rock, which could not be shaken;
neither by the deceits of men, nor by the power and malice of the Devil.

Having then after a serious, equitable and zealous search of the truth, found
it by Gods grace, to be, where the Ministers clamours, and my education made me
least suspect it was: And therefore being to abandon that religion, and
particular new, inconstant confused Church, wherein I was bred; and to
incorporat my self into the universal, ancient, perpetual and invariable
Church, protected alway's from heaven, against the gates of Hell; I thought
fitting to to recollect the occasion and reasons of my happy change: both for
the contentment of my own mind, that I may briefly see, what I have long and
diligently sought after; and for the satisfaction of others, who perhaps may
imagine I had done rashly, desiring earnestly God may be glorified in both.

The reasons, which moved me to think strange of our religion, were these
following, all which I saw with my eyes. 1. The Ministers Inconstancy in
Doctrine. 2. Their Dissensions 3. Their contradicting their own Principales.
4. Their Cruelty over men's consciences. 5. Disobedience to Civil Magistrates,
with a show of Godliness, without any effect or truth of it.

CHAP. II. Of the Ministers Inconstancy; and of the Alterations made by the
late Presbyterian Reformation.
THERE is hardly any thing that makes people to stumble more at religion, then
the often changing of it: and nothing makes them more apprehensive of their
Pastors falsehood, then their levity and inconstancy in their doctrines and
practices. For how can people think that religion true and solid, which they
see is never constant, but is alway's changing like the Moon? And how can they
but suspect their Pastors to be false prophets, whom they hear at diverse
times teaching them contrary doctrines? For it is evident by the light of
reason, that such lighsnesse and inconstancy, especially, when it is
accompayn'd with a proper condemnation of their own former doctrines and
practices, is a real open confession of their former errors, if not of formal
deceit's. And therefore it shows them to be either deceitful, or at least
blind Guides, to neither of which, can people either prudently or safely
entrust, their souls. If such wandering and erring Guides, after some
experience had of them, would not be followed nor trusted in earthly voyages:
How much less are these to be followed or trusted in our voyage to heaven,
which is of greater concernment?

As lightness and inconstancy are far from the office of true Apostles, so
they are always proper to false Teachers and Prophets. S. Paul writing to the
Corinthians freeth himself, and other true pastors from such imputations. 2.
Cor. 1. chapter v. 17. and seq.
Did I use, says he, lightness? or was my preaching It is, and it is not: for
the son of God Jesus Christ, who was preached by us among you, by me, and
Sylvanus, and Timothee, was not: It is, and it is not, but. It is was in him.
But upon the other part the same S. Paul writing to Timothee, shows that all
false Teachers are light and inco^stant. Evil men, 2. Thimoth. 3.
says he, and seducers prosper to the worse: erring and driving into error.
This is the worst and most deplorable kind of inconstancy, which proceeds from
evil to worse: which is too evident in the Presbyterians, who have abrogated
condemned and deformed many things, which their first Reformers had left
untouched, allowed and practiced, as shall be presently seen. For under vain
imagination of a new Reformation, they have gone further from the truth; and
under pretext of attayning greater purity, they have plunged themselves more
deeply into the puddle of error.

First then, they changed the government of the Church by Bishops which had
continued a good time, and was established both by Civil and Ecclesiastique
laws: yea, they did not only change and abrogate the government of Bishops;
but they condemned also their very office as unlawful and Antichristian; and
forced others to swear and subscribe to their sentence. And in place of
Episcopacy, they brought in a parity of Ministers, and a form of discipline,
which they call Presbytery: Declaring that this was the only government
conform to the word of God, and which Christ had ordained for his Church: to
which sentence also all behoved to swear, And therefore, to the two marks of
the Church, ordinarily assigned by Protestants, the Presbyterians joined their
discipline as the third: whereby they declared, that all Protestant Churches,
which wanted this government, were not true, or at least pure Churches of
Christ. So that, they made their Presbyterian discipline, a substantial point
of doctrine; the contrary whereof was taught, believed, and practiced in the
Bishops time in the Isle of Britain, and in all places, where the Lutheran
Protestants lives. And what ever was the practice of the French Calvinists, yet
they did not definitiu'ly declare the office of Bishop to be Antichristian; but
kept society with these Protestant Churches, where Episcopal government was
established, and wrote most respectiv'ly unto the Bishops themselves: as may be
seen in the Survey of the new discipline.

Secondly. After the change and abolition of the old government of the Church:
They proceeded next to abolish all set prayers, all the orders and directions,
which were ordained by I Knox, the first Fundatour or Reformer of this Church,
for administration of the Sacraments, and of Marriage: yea all set forms of
prayer were disallowed, and cancelled, upon pretext that they nourished
tepidity, and smoothered the fervor of the Spirit, according to which, all
persons were ordained to pray; albeit oftentimes it proved the Spirit of
giddiness: as appeared by their frequent Tautologies and bablings. But it had
not been so much matter for abrogating Mr Knox his prayers, if they had not
been too bold with the most excellent of all prayers, made by our B. Savior
himself, and recommended by him to all Christians. For although the Ministers
were accustomed before, to end their imperfect prayers, as they spoke, in that
most perfect form of prayer, made by Christ, which was also the practice of
their first Reformers, Knox chron. p. 288.
as may be seen in Knox Chronicle, at the conclusion of the prayer for a
benediction to the Superintendent: yet it was left off any more to be said by
these new Presbyterian Reformers: and the rest of the brethren thought it most
secure for their own own standing to follow their Leaders. Albeit they
cashiered all other set prayers, yet they might have excepted this, both for
the excellenty of it, and the dignity of the Author. They indeed spoke nothing
publickely and directly against it; till one of their prime Apostles did not
stick to call the frequent use of it, most irreverently, a Papistical charm.

Thirdly they changed not only the prayers, but also the manner of singing
psalms; for they took away and abolished the hymn of Glory to the Father and
to the Son etc. with which the Psalm was ordinarily concluded, according to the
custom, which was kept from the beginning of the Reformation. This was not
done by any formal act but (as a Minister spoke) by a desuetude of the
principal Covenanters, whose example the rest of the Ministers followed. But
there was one thing which happened in this matter not unworthy of remark, and is
very famous throughout the country: For whilst the people of a Parish, in
Anguse, were singing at the conclusion of a psalm, Glory to the Father and to
the Son etc. as not knowing of the new alterations; they were presently
interrupted by their Minister, who cried aloud No more Glory to the Father, No
more Glory etc. which accident rendered the Presbyterians very ridiculous to the
old Protestants.

Fourthly, they proceeded further, and struck at the root of the Christian
faith, to wit the Apostles Creed, denying it to be Apostolical: The contrairy
whereof we was taught in our younger years, as was believed troughout the whole
Christian world. And after they had thus denied the letter, and authority of
it, they proceeded next to corrupt the sense of that Article He descended into
hell, as we shall see shortly. Their inconstancy and changes may be instanced,
in diverse other points and practices, as in their taking the Communion
sitting, and condemning kneeling as unlawful. Their dividing of the bread
among themselves, wherein they place no small purity of their religion, and not
taking it out of the Ministers hand, as the custom was before. Their
condemning private Communion and private Baptism, although administrated upon
extreme necessity; which I found to be pernicious errors, especially in so
far, as concern's Baptism. Their condemning as superstitious, the religious
observation of Christmasse, and of all other festival days etc. All which are
not only contrary to the doctrine of the most famous Protestant Churches
abroad, but also were contrary to the doctrine, laws and practices of this
Church at home. By which inconstancy of the Ministers, and the alterations made
by the^; the people was not only miserably tossed to and fro, and carried about
with violent winds of new doctrines: but also they knew not what to believe,
and almost loosed all belief, since they saw, that many points, which they
believed before, being taught them by their own Pastors, were now condemned by
the same Pastors, who are very like unto these whom the Apostle S. Jude calls
wandering stars.

Having thought seriously upon these things, I made this reflection with my
self. How can this Scottish Church, which changes like the Moon, and is as
unsteadfast as the wind; be the true Church of Christ which must be firm and
steadfast as a rock? How can these Ministers, who draws, yea driwes the people
into such varieties of faith, Ephesians. 4.11.14.
be the true Apostles of Christ; seeing they were established (as S. Paul
testifies) to conserve the people into the Unity of Faith? They must be false
Pastors, who do toss the people to and fro with the inconstant winds of their
new doctrines: since true Pastors were ordained by Christ to keep the people
into the constant profession of the old doctrine, which was once delivered, and
generally professed throughout the world, and to preserve them from such
tossings. As the scripture shows that inconstancy and lightness, belongs to
false Teachers; so I found that the holy Fathers did observe it by experience.
Iren. l. 1. c. 18. etc. 5.
S. Ireneus says: They delight to find out, every day some new thing. Let us
now see their inconstant doctrine. etc. But 5. Hiero. most pithily describs
their humor. The feet (says he) of those who err, Hier in cap. 16. Ezech.
are alway's wavering, neither are the footsteps sure, which are against the
truth: but they run here and there, and are carried about with every wind of new
doctrine, whilst they pass from one falsehood, into another falsehood. Therefore
seeing the great inconstancy, and changes of the Scottish Church: I desired to
find out a more constant, and skifull Guide to rely upon, to lead me unto the
kingdom of heaven.

CHAP. III. Of the Ministers Dissensions and Divisions.
AS the Inconstancy of a Church in faith and doctrine, gives just occasion to
many, of doubting and stumbling at it is religion; so Dissensions and Divisions,
which necessarly flow from such Inconstancy, are no less, but rather more
sensible evils, and gives greater and more universal scandals. For there are
many, who would take no notice of Inconstancy; and yet are awakned by the
confusion, that ever attends Dissension and Division.

It Is evident by the light of reason, that nothing becomes more the house of
God, then unity and order: and that confusion and dissension, are only fitting
for Babel, or the house of the Devil: and as Unity tends to preservation, so
Dissension hastens to destruction. Therefore our B. Savior being to found his
Church, which was to be a heavenly house upon earth, of admirable order, and to
stand for ever; did pray most earnestly for the Unity of it, S. Thn chapter 17.
by which he knew it would be both beautifyed and conserved. Yea, he shows,
that by the admirable Unity of his Church; the world showld know, Ibid. ver.
21.23.
that he was sent from heaven, and be made to believe in him. Therefore these
Churches, which have no Unity, but are torn by Dissensions and Divisions:
cannot be the true Church of Christ, neither can they long last. As Unity does
design, beautify, and conserve the true Church; so Dissension points out,
deformes, and ever at lenth destroies all false Churches. Our Savior says;
Luke 11.17. Gal. 5.15.
Every kingdom divided against it self, shall be made desolate. And S. Paul:
If you bite and eat one an other; take heed you be not consumed one of an
other. And that this division and destruction befalls to all false Churches:
Luther himself does testify. A kingdom, says he divided in it self, Luth.
tom. 3. wit, in psalm. 5. fol. 166.
cannot stand: neither did Heretics at any time perish by force or art, but
by their own mutual dissensions: neither does Christ our Lord fight against
them by other arms, then by sending among them the Spirit of giddiness and
dissension.

Now, what miserable dissensions have happened these years by past, into the
Church of Scotland, by which it has been much deformed, and a considerable
part of it destroyed; are known far and near, at home and abroad. For these
dissentious have been, for matter, manner, and the miserable effects that have
flowed from them, very remarkable. The matter of them concerned no less
points, then the Government of the Church established by Christ, the authority
of the Apostles Creed, the use of the Sacraments, of private Baptism and
Communion, the use of our Lords prayer, and of Glory to the Father, the keeping
of holy days, and the rest of the articles of Perth, the Covenant it self, the
Head spring of all Dissensions, and the authority of the Civil Magistrate etc.
But the form and manner of these dissensions, has overcome the matter: for it
has been so great, and confused, that it turned the eyes of all the world, to
look upon that strange and bloody Theater, which was thereby erected in great
Britain, and to take special notice of the diverse representations made upon
it. All has been done on each side, that tongues and hands could do, to defame
and destroy one an other. Three famous Kingdoms have been thereby miserably
embroiled, in shedding their own blood, and brought to horrible confusion. And
besides the alterations, that have happened in the State: these Dissensions have
made great desolation and destruction in the Church. For the Presbyterians, by
their strong assaults, have destroyed the late English Episcopal Church, which
was esteemed so glorious: and the Independents again, who sprung up from the
Presbyterians, have by their strong oppositions to Presbytery, Christ, Mod.
page 75.
much weakened it, and taken the power of stinging from that snake, as the
Christian Moderatour calls it.

Moreover, the Presbyterians, so soon as they had perfected their work of
destroying the Church of the old Protestants: fell presently into Dissensions
among themselves, which were atte^ded by Divisio^s, whereby they are now cut
into small pieces. The first Dissension appeared, when some of the most able
Ministers among them, opposed the unexpected reformation; that is, the
abolishing of the hymn of Glory to the Father, and taking away the use of our
Lords prayer, and such other innovations: for which opposition, covered with
other pretexts, these Ministers were deposed. Then, in the last National
Assembly, at S. Andrew's, in the year 1651. there appeared a new sect, which,
of Presbyterian Protestants, became Presbyterian Protestatours; protesting
against the Authority of that assembly. This Protestation has made great
division amongst them; so, that the two factions will hardly sit together in
Synods; but keeps their conventions a part. Diverse bitter invectiues have past
since that time, betwixt these two parties: but the Civil power is so strong,
and provident, that it keeps them from biting one another. Now lately again,
new divisions have risen. For some of the chief Protestatours, have abandonned
altogether Presbyt'ry and Covenant, as humane inventions (although before, they
preached and cried them up, as divine and clear truths) and have rendered
themselves Independents. And some of these, after a little pause in
Independency, that they may attain yet to a greater purity, which they imagine
does consist in going further from Popery, are become Anabaptists.

But among all these Changelings, there are two Ministers in the North most
famous; because one of them was esteemed very learned, and both of them were
very zealous Covenanting Presbyterians, who by word and work, violently forced
others to be like to themselves. They commonly styled the Independents,
erroneous Sectarians, perjured persons, and Covenant-breakers. Any word spoken
against the Covenant or Presbytery, was called by them horrible blasphemy. And
yet, shortly after the Independents became Masters, they begun to extol
highly a new light, that had appeared unto them; and on a sudden they quitted
both Covenant and Presbytery, as humane inventions, and became Independents.
This change so unexpected, was the cause of much admiration to many, and of
many observations; but this, which I heard a friend make, before some company,
seemed to me most remarkable. Either (said he) these Ministers were ignorant,
before their change, of the falsehood, which they now acknowledge in the
Covenant and Presbytery; or they were not ignorant, but knew the falsehood of
the^? If they where ignorant: Then they were scarcely worthy to be Ministers,
much less to be esteemed of so great learning, as one of them was reputed
heretofore, and both are now declared to be, by their new preferments to the
highest places of dignity and learning, that can be had in a College or an
University. Were these men Masters in Israel, and yet vere ignorant of a
question, that had been so long in agitation, for which there had been so much
trouble and bloodshed? Did they not know so much; as what Government Christ
had established in his Church? If they were ignorant of the falsehood, which
they now acknowledge to be in the Covenant and Presbytery: Then in the time of
their ignorance, they could have no clear and certain knowledge of the truth
of them How then could they be so unreasonable, as to preach and cry up these
shings as divin truths, and clear engyring lights? Yea how could they be so
vn-Christianly cruel, as to persecute and force others, making them swear these
things to be divin truths, whereof themselves had no certain knowledge, and
which now they condemn as gross falsehoods, and humane inventions. Math. 15.14.
Our Savior says: If the blind lead the blind: both shall fall into the
ditch. These men did not only blindly lead, but they did also furiously drive,
both the seeing and the blind into the dirch. If it be said that they were not
ignorant: but knew well enough the falsehood of the Presbyterian Covenanting
way, which they followed, and yielded to the times, for some wordly respects:
Then they fall into a worse inconveniency, then before. For by, that means,
they would be guilty of most deep and damnable hypocrisy; since they had not
only professed and practiced such things, as were directly against their own
conscience, but also fotced many others to do the same, with oaths against
their consciences. Thus he. For my part, I do not know, how to free these
Ministers, of one of these imputations. And many thinks it probable, that this
new light would never have cleared the eyes of their minds; if the light of
some temporal interest had not first illuminated the eyes of their bodies.

Shortly after this separation, there arose scandalous dissensions, betwixt an
old Apostle of the Covenant, and one of these new Independents; who had agreed
before like Simeon and Levi to do hurt. For near the space of a year, their
sermons, preached in the same Church, were nothing, but continual
contradictions, railings and scoffings at one another. What was said by the one
in thefore noone, was co^trould out of the same pulpit, by the other in the
afternoon. The Presbyterian did bend all his wits to prove, that Presbytery
was iure diuino. And the new convert, would neither have it, to be good nor
expedient iure humano. Yea sometimes they would choose the same text, and in
the same Church, before the same Auditory; they would with contentious zeal
deduce contradictory conclusions, As out of this text: Psalm. 93. v. 5.
Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord, the new Independent did amply infer,
that none ought to be acknowledged members of the Church, except those, who
were visible saints, And from the same text the old Presbyterian, did strive to
show, that, in the Church, there was both chafe and wheat, the evil mixed
with the good. Some of the people took great scandal, and others, especially
the old Episcopal Protestants, made good sport of these dissensions. And
although, by intercession of some friends, an agreement was made at last,
betwixt these two Ministers, to make them abstain from their public, and
scandalous contradictions; yet, that concord did not last long, their inward
fire did shortly burst forth. For one day, after Sermon, the Independent
inviting the people to his Communion. which he was to give the next Sunday: he
was publicly interrupted by the Presbyterian, who accused him of Apostasy from
the Covenant and Presbytery, and straightly charged the people to receive no
Communion from him: And with this confusion the meeting ended; but the
Ministers bauling continued a space thereafter. The event did show, that the
Presbyterian got the better of this conflict: for the other did not appear at
the day appointed, to give the Communion, as he had promised. Yet, the fullness
of the Presbyterians victory was much diminished, by reason, the others place
was supplied by his Colleague, who besides others, had both the Presbyterians
daughter and son-in-law for two of his Communicants.

I conceived, that all these dissensions and divisions did fall forth by Divin
providence, to give people sufficient notice, that a Church of so great
confusion, cannot be the true Church of Christ, which ought to be a house of
great order and Unity, and to show, that these Ministers, who are the Rulers,
or rather M s-rulers of such a confused Church, and who brag so much of the
Spirit, are not led by the Spirit of God, which is not contrary to himsef* but
by the Spirit of error and giddiness. And although sometimes, the Ministers,
to cover the ugly deformity and great scandals of all their dissensions, would
pretend, that their differences were not in fundamental points; yet at other
times their words did vary, and their actions contradicted ever their words.
For they changed their tongue, as the diversity of questions did trouble them;
or the interest of their cause did press them. When they were not urged with
their dissensions; then, they cried up Presbytery as the only scepter of
Christ, the only government of the Church iure divino, the only means to
uphold Christ's Kingdom, and to hold out the wild boar of Anti-Christianity.
It Is well known also, how necessary and fundamental a point the Covenant was
esteemed; and how the Ministers put it, very near, in balance with the book
of life. But their actions did show more sensibly, then their words, that they
esteemed their dissensions to be in substantial and fundamental matters. Or
else they have been void, not only of Christian charity, but also of humane
discretion. For how could they have embroiled all these kingdoms, into so
great confusion and bloodshed; for such matters, as themselves esteemed only
circumstantiall and not substantial? How could they with any discretion, force
these points of their now Reformation, which they thought only ceremonial, and
not substantial, so furiously and substantially upon others?

But whither their differences were in fundamentals or not, for the Matter:
It Is evident, that they were substantial and fundamental for the manner, to
the substantial destruction of one and other, and almost to the fundamental
subversion of three kinhdomes. Yea I found, that the Presbyterians in Queen
Elizabeth and King James time were more ingenuous, and confessed freely, that
their differences from the English Church, were in weighty and substantial
matters. For thus they speak in M. Rogers. M. Roger praefat. Doct. Aug. number.
^1. and 13.
The controversy betwixt them and us, is not (as the Bishops and their
favorers would deceive the world) concerning Corner Capes, Surplices, etc. but
of more weighty matters, as of the true Ministry, the Government of the
Church. And again we contend with the Formalists, whither Jesus Christ ought
to reign. In this cause, we ought so to oppose Ever the Conformists: that if,
we had as many lives as we have hairs, we ought rather to loose them all, then
to leave off our enterprise. Upon the other part, the English Church, or the
old Protestants do acknowledge, that they differ Substantially from the
Presbyterians. Covell just. d f. art. 11. p. 67.
This Doctor Covel plainly protests, in all their names. Least any man,
Says he, should think our contentions [with Puritans) were in smaller points,
and difference not great; each side has charged one the other with heresies
(if not infidelities) yea even with such, as quite owerthrow the Principal
foundation of our Christian faith. And albeit, they would not confess their
differences to be in fundamentalls; yet it is evident, they are so. For what is
more fundamental to a Church, then the Government established by Christ? what
is more fundamental then the foundation of faith, to wit, the Apostles Creed?
what more fundamental, then the Sacraments of the Church and the Lords prayer?
And in all these, they have Tragical differences: besides, in many other
points, no less substantial, although not so sensible; as in Predestination
and Reprobation, Universal grace, whether God absolutely decerns, or only
permits sin, whether the Sacraments confers grace; whither Christ's body be
really present in the Eucharist? Whither Christ redeemed the world by shedding
his blood and corporal death, or by suffering in his soul the pains of Hell?
Whither man, after the fall, has free will? and many more which may be seen
collected in the Protestants Apology: Apol. Protest. tract 2. c. 3. sect. 5 sub
2. and 3. ad 10
in all which, the old Protestants and the Presbyterians do teach, ooposite
doctrines, and accuse others of gross errors, and sometimes of blasphemies.

Having then diligently considered these things, I made this reflection with my
self. How can this Scottish Church, which is like a Babel of confusion, be the
true Church of Christ, which, for order and Unity, ought to be like to the
heavenly Jerusalem? How can that Church, which is the unhappy root of so much
Dissension and Division, be the Church of Christ, which is no less the root
of Unity, then it is the pillar and ground of verity? I see, that ever one sect
begets an other, which not only divids, but strives also like vipers brood to
destroy the former. Such confusion and Dissension becomes not the Church of
Christ, but are more proper for the Synagogue of Antichrist. If the true
Church may be known by her Unity; then the false Church is no less but more
easily discerned by its Dissension. Math. 7.16.
Our Savior says of all false Prophets, who appears at first in sheeps
raiment: you shall know them by their fruits, Aug. in psalm. 149.
and S. Augustine shows, that their fruits, are dissensions. We sought, says
he, among them the fruits of charity: and we find the thorns of Dissension. If
therefore we observe our Saviors rule, and judge the Ministers by their
fruits, we will soon find them not to be true Prophets; and their Church,
wherein their is such Dissension, not to be the true Church of Christ; but
rather a Babel of confusion. Therefore, I will endeavor, by Gods assistance,
to seek out a Church, which has not only constancy, but also order and Unity,
that becomes the house of God.

CHAP. IV. Of the Presbyterians rigor, and Tyranny, over Protestants.
MERCY and truth do ordinarily go together, and it is a great sign, that these
have no truth, who show no mercy. Solomon giv's good advise to keep both
together: Let not mercy and truth, Prove. 3.3.
says he, leave thee: put them about thy neck, and write them upon the tables
of thy heart. The Covenanters did not follow this sound counsel, for albeit
they professed much truth and purity; yet they show little Christian meekness
and mercy: which made many, grossly to suspect, that they had nothing but a
pretext of truth. They complained much of hard usage under the Bishops, and
cried for compassion of tender consciences: And who would have expected hard
usage from such men? Or, that they would have strained other men's consciences,
who would not suffer their own to be touched? If they old not attain unto
some degree of Christian perfection, in meekness and mercy: they might at
least have practiced a moral virtue; Not to do that unto others, which they
would not wish to be done to themselv's.

At the beginning of the Covenant, in the year 1638. the Presbyterians
appeared first like lambs: for they used nothing but mild invitations, and
many plausible words, to induce men to renew (as they spoke) the National
Covenant with God, the breach of which was the cause of all miseries, and the
keeping of it would be the source of all happiness. This was the only means to
divert Gods imminent judgment, to conserve purity, and hold away Popery. And
according to this mild tenor, Commissioners and Ministers were sent to all
parts of the Country, to draw the hearts and hands of all men to the Covenant.
All this time, they professed, that they would urge, or force no man, against
his conscience: but shortly after, they had by these fair mean's, got their
number and power increased; they changed their tunes, they left off entreaties,
and procceded to threatenings; and from these, they went to their Ecclesiastical
Censures, to deprivation of Ministers, Excommunications, to plundering and
sacking of men's houses, sequestrating their estates, imprisoning their
person's, and persecuting all the old Protestants, whose consciences tied them
to live conform, to the law's of Church and state, not as yet abrogated. The
Presbyterian Ministers tongues, were sharped like two edged swords, cutting in
pieces all men's honor, reputation and honesty, who dissented from them,
although never so inoffensively: And they never ceased by their continual
clamours, to whet the material sword against them. So that, albeit they begun
with Jacobs voice; yet they ended with Esaus hands: They appeared first like
lambs; but their ravenous nature did soon show, that they were only covered
with lambs-skinnes.

1. Their spiritual Tyranny, over men's consciences, was very great: for they
were not content with Obedience to their doctrine and new orders, which, almost
all Protestants would have given: retaining only an internal liberty,
according to the light of their minds, not to condemn the former government,
doctrines and practices, as in themselv's unlawful and against Gods word. But
the Presbyterians required all men to swear, that they thought and believed,
Presbyterian doctrine and discipline, to be only lawful, according to Gods word,
and the contrary, of Episcopacy; and the other points which they had condemned
to be false and erroneous, which was to force men to sin, by making them not
only do, but also swear things, that were directly against the light of their
consciences; which is the highest degree of of soul Tyranny. Yea, the
Presbyterians rigor and cruelty, was not only great, but also Universal: for
none, of whatsoever condition or quality, could be free of it. Although at the
beginning, men were only admitted to subscribe the Covenant; yet shortly
thereafter, the more zealous sisters obtained that favor, and others, who were
not seeking that courtesy, got it pressed upon them. At lenth it came to
children at school, to servants, young maids, and all sort's of persons,
without exception. And these, who could not write their own names into the
Covenant, behoved to do it by a public Notary: so, that they would have none
to be left out of Gods Covenant, and the Covenant of grace, as they spoke. The
Ministers, who did not conform themselv's to these new orders, were presently
rendered odious by the name of Papists, and, by populare tumults raised against
them, were forced to leave the Country. And many others, who swore all that
the Presbyterians could require; yet, because they did not seem to be zealous
enough in the cause, were deposed; and they, with their wives aad children,
exposed without compassion, to great want and misery. Then for the lay
Protestants: these among them, who could not be drawn on, by the Ministers
fair words, threatenings nor censures, were driven to obedience by Ministerial
Armies; which consisted, principally, at the beginning, of Highlanders, whom
the old Protestants called Argyle Apostles; who by their sakeing and burning of
some good houses, converted more to the Covenant, then the Ministers had done.
For diverse persons of quality were imprisoned and fined, till affliction gave
them understanding, and made their wills pliable to accept and swear the new
Reformation: whose example many others followed.

Moreover, the Presbyterians pressed all Noblemen and Barons, to receive into
their houses, Chaplains of their choosing or approving; to say unto them
extemporary prayers. But one of their employments, and that not the least, was
to observe, what they heard or saw, spoken or done, against Presbyt'ry, and the
blissed work of reformation (as they called it) and to make a true relation of
all their observations, to the Presbyt'ry; upon which depended their preferment
to a Church. And, when any of these Chaplains seemed not to be faithful
enough, in giving these relations; the Presbyt'ry would sometimes summon other
servants, to depose upon oath, what they knew spoken or done, in the family
against Presbyt'ry: which, being rightly considered, was no small trouble to
these persons, who could nor be free of Presbyterian Tyranny, within their own
private families; in many whereof, the Presbyterians would have raised up more
then one Judas.

The rigor and Tyranny of Presbyterians, was not only spiritual over men's
Consciences; but it was also Temporal over men's Estates and persons. For besides
the grosses fines, which they imposed upon those, who could not get implicit
faith soon enough, to hear and believe them; they made a general misery to
overflow the whole Country, by their new inventions, to maintain and advance
their plots and design's: as by their Leavie money, Lone money, Monthly
maintenance, Blind bonds, and diverse others. Their Soldiers (who were
ordinarily styled Saints,) were very unruly, and insatiably avaritious; so that
they proved sore Saints to many, whereof the North of England had some
experience. Then the Presbyterians severity over all their Opposers became so
well known; that none expected favor, who fell into there hands. The
Ministers cried alway's for justice, to divert from the land, (as they gave
out) Gods judgments. It would be tedious to relate all the particulars, that
have past of their severity. That alone, which they used against the Lord
Montrose, and his fellow Captives, made their temper sufficiently known to all
Europe. For although they coul'd not have been much blamed, supposing their
principles, for removing out of the way, such an active enemy; yet, the manner
of it show too great passion and cruelty. Some respect might have been had to
his ancient Nobility, to his personal Gallantry, and many worthy parts: but
especially to his admirable Clemency showed to his Enemies after many notable
victories obtayn'd over them. But notwithstanding all these respects, when he
fell into the Presbyterians hands: they were not content to put him symply to
death, unless they satisfied their passion by putting disgraces upon him. For
they brought him up the high street of Edim: borough, bound with ropes to a
chair in a Carte, bareheaded, the common Executioner riding in livery, covered
before him: which spectacle was so cruel and lamentable, that it wrested tears
from many of his Enemies. This was the Triumphal Entry, he got into that
city, which was in his power, after the battall of Kilsyth, to have burned
and sacked, but of his innate clemency did spare it. And within two or three
days, after this solemn entry, they caused him, not only to be hanged; but
also to be dismembered and quartered; ordaining his Head, Legs, and Arms to
be affix't in the principal Towns of the Country, and the trunck of his body
to be buried under the common gallows. And all this was done, by express
order of the Presbyterians, who excluded all other, from having voices in
Parliament. That scaffold, which was erected, at the cross of Edimborough, for
the execution of Montrose, did remain vnremoved, about the space of two
months, conrrarie to all former custom: upon which, every week, the
Presbyterians offered up diverse sacrifices of gallant and worthy men: so, that
it became a heap of blood; and therefore it was called by many of the people,
The Ministers Altar: who [as they alleadged] delights not in unbloody
sacrifices. Yea, some of the, Ministers hatred against Montrose was so great,
that it did not end with his death; but pursued his memory after death; calling
him publicly, a perjured Traitor, a Dog, the Malignants God, with many such
uncivil epithets. Then they bragged: who durst any more oppose them, or set
their faces against them? That God had now owned their cause, and had brought
their greatest Enemy's to confusion; as they had often prophesied, for which,
ever thereafter, they ought to be believed. But all the severity and rigor,
that had past, was nothing to that, which many wise men foresaw was
approaching; if the reign of Presbyt'ry had endured longer. Before Montrose
death, the Presbyterians were not free of fears, and were not fully Masters:
but shortly after getting home the King, whom they made to subscryb and swear
their Covenant and solemn League, and to confirm all their proceedings; they
had higher design's. But, as the Christian Moderatour has observed, their fall
was nearer then they expected; and the hand of God stopped them in their full
carriere: So, that they were not only rendered unable to do more hurt, which
they intended; but also, they were happily hind'red from doing any more that,
which they practiced, at least in their accustomed rigor.

These obvious considerations made the rigor and severity of Presbyt'ry,
appear to be very Tyrannous unto me. For thereby I saw; that it was both
Spiritual and Temporal, and extended to the Souls and Bodies, lives and
Estates, yea, and to the very Memories of men, after their death; and that for
pretext of religion, to Protestants, whom sometimes they acknowledge to be of
their own religion. And therefore I made this reflection with my self. How can
this Presbyterian Church have Christian truth and purity, since it is so void of
Christian meekness and mercy? How can these Presbyterian Ministers be Christ's
true Disciples, Matthew. 11.29.
since they do not learn nor practice his lessons? Christ says: learn of me
for I am meek and humble of heart. They learn this lesson backward: for they
show no Meekness nor Humility, but rather the contrary, all Pride and cruelty.
Our Savior says to his Disciples, Love your enemies. Math. 5.44.
The Presbyterians hates and persecut's their friends, their own Brethren,
Protestants. Truly, I cannot think there can be much truth among Presbyterians,
where there is so little mercy. They would have done well, to have joined these
two together, and used Salomons wise advise; Let not mercy and truth leave
thee; and then perhaps they had found more credit.

CHAP. V. Of the Presbyterians contradicting their own Principles.
TRVTH is alway's consonant to it self. Wise men do not fall into manifest
contradictions; and good men do not practice these things, which they blame and
condemn in others. Now, in many things, the Presbyterians appeared to me, to
contradict their own principles, ^oth in deeds and words; whereby they
bewrayed the vanity of their fair pretexts; and show, that some of their
Principles were so false, that themselv's were forced, to go often against
them and controwle them.

1. This appeared in their pretext of tender Consciences, which truly I, and
many others, believed they, for the most part, had: till they took the power
of ruling, or rather domineering over other men's Consciences. But, as it is in
the proverb, Magistratus indicat virum. Many seem good, so long as they have
no power to do evil. The Presbyterians tenderness of conscience was most
esteemed, when it was least known: but, so soon as it was brought to the
light, it lost more credit, then they acquyred power. When the prime
Ringleaders of this mad Presbyterian Dance, were urged to conformity in the
Bishops time. O then they cried up their tender Consciences! They could not so
much as carry a Cassocke, nor make a Sermon on Christmasse, in remembrance of
Christ's Nativity, nor Baptize a child privat'ly, although at the point of
death; Their tender Consciences could not digest such hard meats: they would
stand to the purity of their Reformation, which had abandonned all such
Superstitions. But after they became Masters, they seemed to swallow down some
more gross morsels; and, for all the pretended purity of their first
Reformation, they would yet Reform and purify it more. For then they digested:
the denying of the Apostles Creed, the abrogating the hymn of Glory to the
Father, the forbearing of saying our Lords prayer (all which were practiced by
their first Reformers) besides the many terrible oaths of the Covenant, and
their obedience sworn to their Superiors, Civil and Ecclesiastical: all which
and many more they swallowed down, without the least trouble of their
Consciences. Now, how can such men be justly thought to have tender
Consciences, who started so at straw's, and leap't over Mountains? who are like
those, of whom our Savior says: Math. 23.24.
They strain a gnat and swallow a Camel.

2. As they pretended much tenderness of Conscience, in time of their
Subjection; so they cried then much for Compassion, which almost they all
found. For it cannot be denied, that the Scottish Bishops used no great
severity against them: but gave, to those who were in possession of Churches,
and to all Laiques wharsoever, full power of enjoying both internal and
external inoffensive liberty of their Consciences. But so soon, as the
Presbyterians had unhorsed the Bishops, and got upon their Saddle; they ruled
the raines, and used their Spurs in a more Cavalier-like manner. Let men cry
never so much Mercy and Compassion: the Presbyterians would show none. Neither
would simple Obedience content them: Oaths were also required, not only to make
men obey, but to swear themselv's out of their Consciences. Apparently the
Presbyterians thought, no others, besides themselves, had Conscience; which is no
small sign, that they had not much: but whither they had, or had not; it was
evident, they had no compassion. The old Protestants were long under the
Presbyterian rod: and it was preparing also for the Independents, Anabaptists,
and other new sorts of Protestants, who are permitted to serve God in their
own Gospel way. The rod had some mercy, for it happily broke in the
Presbyterians hand, which had none. In this, the Presbyterians carried
themselves very irrationally, that in their Subjection, they would have, and
found also compassion from others: but, in their Exaltation, they would show no
Compassion to them.

3. They inveighed most sharply against the Bishops, for meddling in Civil and
State affairs, as unbeseeming Ecclesiastical persons: and yet the Presbyterian
Ministers did meddle much more in them, then ever the Bishops had done: but
with this difference; that, the Bishops, as Lords of Council and Parliament,
had the freedom of their voices with the rest, but could not carry any
business; unless the consent of the Temporal Estate did concur with them:
neither could they hinder any affair, which the most voices carried. The
Presbyterian Ministers, did not indeed sit in Council or Parliament; but they
sat in another Iudicatory, which made it self Superior to both, and drew all
weighty affairs to it is cognizance For although the Council or Parliament
concluded any thing in state affairs; it was not to be obeyed, unless the
Presbyterian Commission of the Church had given consent, without danger of
their thundering censures: as was evident in the matter of the Engagement,
after the bad success whereof, they entered into peaceable possession of
Superiority, both over Councel and Parliament. For all things were sent to the
Commission of the Church, with submission to their Approbation or Reprobation.
By them, the Malignants were purged out of the Army of the Saints: and, when
that Army had bad success at Dumbar, they were again by them admitted. which
bred a great rent among the Ministers, for being so inconstant in their
principles.

4. They accused the Bishops of Tyranny, and domineering over the Lords
Inheritance; and yet themselves became more guilty of these vices: as may
appear to any man, who will compare together their deportments. Yea such a
huge difference will be seen, that the Bishops fault, in regard of theirs, will
appear but like a Mote to a Mountain. The Bishops, in the space of 40. years,
scarcely deposed four Ministers; and that, not for following inoffensively the
liberty of their Consciences: but for their inordinate zeal and bitter
invectives. The Presbyterians, in less then the fourth part of that time, have
deposed some hundreds, many of which had never spoken against them. Then, the
Bishops troubled no Laics, carrying themselves peaceably; neither did they
impose any oaths upon them: but the Presbyterians troubled all conditions and
qualities, in a most rigourous manner, with fearful oaths; which to many, as
being against their Consciences, were flat periuries.

5. If we reflect a little upon Pride, which the Presbyterians did so much
condemn in the Bishops: and judge by the effects, since God alone knows the
hearts: the Presbyterians seems to have out stripped the Prelates, both in words
and Actions. For it has appeared, as an inseparable property, in the Ministers
of the Presbytery, especially of the rightest stamp, and deepest grain; to
make their own will, not only a rule for themseves; but also a law to others,
and that without Control: which is the highest point of pride. Their proud
contemning words, uttered publlckly agrinst persons of greatest quality, are
well enough-knowen: because they are yet fresh in men's memories. Their proud
carriage, may be known by this alone, that they made the greatest Noblemen of
the Kingdom, not only do public penance in Sackcloth, before the people, in
the Church, for their opposing the orders of Presbytery: but also they behooved
to Petition in that hairie-gowne, five or six Ministers sitting in the
Presbytery, and so often as they were called, so often they were to appear,
before that high Iudicatory, in their Penitential habit. And thus after a great
deal of ceremony (as if it had been a great courtesy) they would at lenth be
admitted, to take the Covenant, and with most terrible oaths, and holding up of
hands, permitted to swear obedience unto the Presbytery. And although, all this
odedience, was known to many, and to the Ministers themselves, to be more
external then internal, more for worldly then spiritual ends, to be free of the
Presbytery's vexations; yet the Ministers stood not so much for the heart: they
were satisfied, if this external adoration was given by men of greatest
quality, unto their Sovereign Tribunal. For then they bragged, that none
thereafter durst stand out any more against them. The Cedars were made to bow:
and the Shrubs might be affray'd to be broken. An Officer of the English Army
observed some traces of this pride, to be yet remaining, even in the
Presbyteries subjection. For, in a letter dated from Edinburgh, in February
1651. and cited in the Christian Moderatour, he writ's thus to a friend.
Christ. Mother. p. 74. and 75.
You would wonder to observe the strange Pride and proceedings of the
kirk-Clergy etc. And in an other letter dated in April. 1652. he makes this
observation. Believe it, all our other Enemies are tame heasts to the high
Presbyter, and yet with the winding and turning of a religious pretense, and an
artificial zeal against heresy, he will like a tame snake (if not warily
avoided) get into your bosom If this ingenious Officer observed so much, when
he saw Presbyt'ry in its Declination; what would he have observed and said, if
he had seen it, in the hight of it is Elevation? I have known some Moderat
Presbyterian Ministers wish, that the Presbytery had not carried thing, with
such extremity of rigor, and so high a hand. For indeed it was not convenient,
that these, who condemned Pride in others, should exercise much more themselves.

6. They profess, that every particular Church is fallible, and so
consequently their own; as their frequent changes, and manifest experience do
show. Therefore I judged they did very inconsequentially, in exacting so
rigorously an undeniable obedience, with oaths, to a fallible, and perhaps an
actually erring Church: with which, you must wheel about again, when it
wheels; and turn with it, as a Weather-Cocke, with the wind. You must swear,
this year, that to be true, which peradventure, the next year, the same
Exactours, upon pretense of new lights, will have you swear to be false.

7. They inveigh often against implicit faith, as Popish and Antichristian:
and yet themselves practice it, in a most gross manner, and very
inconsequentially. That they practice it, is manifest. For, who among the
people, has express knowledge of all points of the Covenant, and of their new
Confession? And yet, they are made to abjure all the points of the one, and to
believe all the articles of the other. Yea, it is known by experience, that few
of the Ministers themselves, know all the points abiured in the Covenant: as
opus operatum, Stations and the like: and yet all are abiured. Therefore they
practice in deeds, what they renounce in words; and they do the same thing,
which they judge and condemn in others. Yea, it is considerable, that they do
not only go against their principle: but also they abuse implicit faith, in
such a gross and irrational manner, as cannot be imputed unto the Roman
Catholics. For these, believing explicity their Church to be infallible, and
to be continually assisted by the holy Ghost, conform to this principle, do
most rationally, to believe implicitly all points, which the same Church
teaches and believes; just as a Protestant, believing explicity the Scripture
to be Gods word, although he does not know expressly all the sentences and
verses in it, yet, with great reason, he believes implicity all to be true and
revealed by God, which is contayn'd in it. But, the Presbyterian Church being
fallible, and professing it self to be so; requires very irrationally an
implicit faith to all her doctrine, whereof a man can prudently believe no
more; then he sees and knows. Moreover, the Presbyterians have fallen into a
third more gross and inconsequentiall error, concerning this implicit faith.
Fore they have forced many, not only to swear and subscrive such things,
whereof they were ignorant; but also such things, which the Presbyterians
themselves knew to be against the express knowledge, and Consciences of the
Swearers and Subscrybers: which, is to force men to sin: as is evident out of
the 14. to the Romans. This is a rare kind of implicit faith, which can
consist with explicit belief of the contrary. I heard from a person worthy of
Credit, that, when this inconvenience was proposed to a prime Apostle of the
Covenant; how many were driwen to perjury, by swearing against their
Consciences; he answered. That it was all one to him, let them look to it.
And, upon an other occasion, he said to a Roman Catholic, (who after great
trouble, offered at lenth to take the Covenant) If thou be not sincere, I shall
make thee damn thy own soul.

8. They appeared also unto me, to go clearly against an other Principle of
theirs, to wit: That the Scripture is the only Judge of Controversy. And yet
the Presbytery did make it self only Judge. And after it pronounced sentence,
all were obliged, yea and forced to give obedience, albeit many could not find
their Doctrinal Decisions in the Scriptures. But I found, that the simple truth
was; they gave the Scripture the only name of a Judge, and keep't all power of
Judging to themselves: just as they did with the King, to whom they gave a bare
empty title, but keep't to themselves the real possession and exercise of all
Royal power and authority.

Lastly, they seemed to overshoote themselves very much, when, not long before
the battle of Dumbar, they made their solemn Appeal to God, for decyding the
justness of either cause, by the victory, that was to ensue, whereof they
thought themselves very certain, as indeed they had great probability. The
English Army, (notwithstanding many disavantages wherewith they were pressed)
accepts the Appeal, and makes also their recourse to God, after the same
manner. And at lenth, the question being decyded in favor of the English; when
the most Eminent person of that Army put the Ministers in mind, of their Solemn
Appeal, and how God had pronounced sentence against them: he received this
answer. You must not Judge the goodness of a cause by the event. Which words
vere very inconsequentiall to their Appeal: and in which absurdity they had
not fallen, if the victory had be fallen to them. Many Ministers, since that
time, have blamed the rashness of that Appeal; as being grounded more upon
humane confidence, then any Divin assurance.

By these considerations, I discovered clearly, the vanity of the Presbyterians
many fair pretenses; and how their deeds contradicted their words; how
themselves did the same things, which they condemned in others; and how their
Principles were so false, that themselves behooved to controull them. They
pretended great tenderness of Consciences, when they were Servants, but show
strong Consciences, when they were Masters. They cried much for compassion in
their subjection: but would show none in their Exaltation. They condemned the
Bishops for meddling in Civil affairs: and yet their Ministers did rule the
affairs of State. They accused others of pride and Tyranny: and yet their own
little fingers have been more heavy, then the others loins: and they have
showed more pride and contempt of others, in one year, then these, whom they
accuse, had done, in forty. They profess themselves to be fallible in faith,
and yet they will be infallibly believed, and undeniably obeyed. They renounce
implicit faith: and yet they practice it, and, in a most gross and
unreasonable sense, exacts it. They pretend the Scripture to be the only Judge
of Controversies: and yet they will take all power of Judging to themselves.
They will be esteemed true Prophets, when they guess right: and they will not
have themselves thought false Prophets, when they divin wrong. They would have
their cause esteemed good for it is prosperity: and they will not have it
thought evil when it falls into adversity. In a word, their doctrin's and
practices were so full of contradictions, that I found many of them, not only
to be humane, but also false inventions: which may be showen in diverse other
particulars: but these for our intention are sufficient, to show that I could
not prudently believe them, much less could I hazard my Salvation upon them.

CHAP. VI. Of the Presbyterians Disobedience to the Civil Magistrate; and of
their pretext of Piety
GOOD Christians are alway's good Subjects: and these who are true to God, are
ever true to men. As they render unto God, what is Gods: so they give unto
Caesar, what is Caesar's. Upon the other part, these, who are false to men, can
never be true to God: and they, who are disobedient to their earthly
Superiors, can never be obedient to their heavenly Sovereign. When the laws
of men are against the law of God, then it is better to obey God then man: but
when there is no such opposition: then the law of God obliges us to obedience
and subjection. S. Paul does earnestly exhort all Christians to this duty, when
he says: Romans 13.1. and seq.
Let every soul be subject to higher Powers, for there is no power, but of
God; And those, that are, of God, are ordained. Therefore he, that resists
the power, resists the ordinance of God. And they, that resist, purchasse to
themselves damnation. S. Peter also makes the like exhortation 1. Pet. 2.13.
and 17.

How the Presbyterians have carried themselves, in the duty of Subjects to the
Civil Magistrate and to their other Superiors, is so generally known, and so
fresh in all men's memories, that it needs not be described, nor amplifyed. The
very naming of a Presbyterian, is sufficient now to raise in men's minds, the
true notio^ of one, who will obstinatly deny obedience to those, to whom he
owes it; and will rigorously exact obedience from those, who owes him none.
Indeed, if the Presbyterians own words be taken, they will be esteemed not
only Saints, but also most loyal and obedient subjects; for so often they have
termed themselves. But their actions always bewrayes their words. Conf.
West. chapter 33. n. 4.
They profess in their new Confession of faith: that no difference of
religion, yea infidelity it self cannot take away the Civil Magistrates just
right, nor his peoples obedience and duty to him. And yet in their practice,
they would not admit the King, till he swore and subscribed their Covenant and
solemn League; which many thought were very bitter potions, that went much
against his stomach. Many other instances may be brought, of their inordinat
carriage to their Superiors, and others, by which they raised both scandal and
prejudice, against their religion: for people, seeing them to be evil Subjects,
and worse Masters, could not think them to be good Christians: but I forbear,
not being willing to rip up too much their sores, wishing rather, that all
their bypast miscariages may be forgot and buried, by their calm carriage and
dutiful obedience, in time to come. But apparently, some in present power have
no great hopes of much voluntary amendment in them, unless the rod of
discipline be still kept over their heads: for an eminent English Officer, in
his printed letter above cited, speaking of the Presbyterians, Christ. Mod. p.
74.
says: If they be not closely looked unto, they will set all on fire again.

Then, for their pretext of piety, I observed great show, but no substance;
some floorishes, but small fruits; huge pretexts, but no performances. We had
indeed much preaching, praying, fasting, and such like exercises. But what were
their long preachings? Nothing but continual praises of the Covenant, the
Solemn League, and Presbytery, which they cried up to the heavens, and omitted
(as our Savior observed of the Pharisees) the weighty matters of Gods law:
Math. 23. v. 23.
as Judgment, mercy, and faith. Yea their sermons were replenished, with
constant and most bitter railings against their Opposers; and all those, who
did not favor their cause: by which means, they armed the people with fury, to
advance the Covenant and Presbytery. What were their fasts: But humiliations,
as the Prophet Esaias says, for strife and debate, Esaias 58. v. 6.
and to sin with the fist of wikednesse? God faith to the Jews. Is not this
the fast, that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the
heavy burden, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?
But the fasts, which the Presbyterians have choosed, were contrary: for their
fasts were to tie more firmly their Covenant, which has proved a band of
wickedness: to lay heavier burdens upon the peoples Consciences; to oppress
these, who were free; and to augment their yokes, by inventing many new oaths,
to the oppression of many souls. It was much observed, that shortly after
their solemn fasts, we were always sure of some great claps. The fast was
ordinarily a preparation to some violence, or evil work, that was intended.
This made many understand, what Queen Marie Stuart meant by that famous
saying. That she was as much affrayed of a Fast of the Ministers, as of an
Army of Soldiers: for experience taught her, that these fasts, were sure
prognostikcs of ensuing tempests. Their long prayers also, which were often
seasoned with Tautologies, and sometimes with no good sense, did not prove them
to be Saints, more the^ the like did sanctify the Pharisees. They bragged much
of the Spirit, but show no fruits of the Spirit: if these be the fruits, which
S. Paul reckons out to the Gallatians? Gal. 5.22.
The fruit of the Spirit, says he, is Love, joy, peace, long-suffering
gentlnesse goodness, faith, meekness etc. They rather show and performed the
works of the flesh, which the same Apostle does there recount. The works of the
flesh are manifest, Ibid. v. 19.20.
which are, fornication etc. hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife,
seditions, heresies, Envyings, murders, etc. If they lived in the Spirit, then
they should have walked in the Spirit, as the same Apostle exhort's: and so,
they would have been better believed.

In a word: if piety consists in many external sighs and groans, in long
prayer and graces, in wringing of hands and making of strange faces, in turning
of the eyes, and in doleful houlings and cries, which were commonly called the
Sough; If piety, I say, consists in such things, we had abondance of it: but,
if it require some greater perfections and better fruits: Then we were very
scarce of it. Indeed, if we would hear and believe these Presbyterian
Ministers, we were the happiest people of the world: for they said, we only of
all Nations had the honor, to be Covenanters with God; we had the truth of the
Gospel in greater purity then Geneva it self. We had such a clear and engyring
light, that the like had not shined to any other nation, since the time of the
Apostles. Yea one, who is esteemed a principal Apostle among them, did not
stick to affirm in the pulpit, amidst the manyfold Confusions, troubles and
miseries, which had fallen upon this Church and Nation: That the Angels and
Saints of heaven, if they could leave the sight of God, would be glad to come
down, and see the admirable order and beauty of the Presbyterian Church of
Scotland Neither is this, to be much wondered at; for it is probable he spoke as
he thought, and as the proverb is. The Crow thinks ever her own bird fairest.
And every fool esteem's much his own Babel. But many indifferent men thought,
that he was one of those, of whom S. Paul speaks to the Philippians; Philip.
3.18.19.
Enemies of the Cross of Christ; and whose glory is in their Confusion.

These practices, at least a great part of them, were the occasion of my first
doubting that the Presbyterian Church, could not be the true Church of Christ.
For by the Prebyterians changes and inconstancy in doctrine, I saw evidently
they were not governed by the Spirit of truth, which Christ promised to his
Church; but by the Spirit of error, whic is always various.

By their great Dissensions and Divisions, I perceived they had no unity, as
becomes the house of God: but were a confused Chaos, as many heads, so many
different opinions; and that it was not truth nor authority, that prevailed in
their meetings; but the usurpation of some few Ringleaders, who owerawed the
rest and made them succumb. Yea, I saw that inconstancy in doctrine flows
naturally from their principles: and that their inconstant Church does
necessarly breed dissensions; but has no means to lay them, nor take them away.

By their cruel severity over men's Conscien^ and persons, etc. I saw they had
little Christian Love and meekness, which virtues Christ had recommended so
earnestly to his true disciples, by which he said the world should know them.

By their clear contradicting their own principles, I perceived, they were not
men led by reason; but miscarried by passion and inconsiderat zeal, which made
them fall into inconsequentiall discourses, not worthy of men of prudence; and
by which, themselves show the falsehood of their own principles.

By doing their duty so ill to man; I saw evidenty they performed not well
their duty to God: by their violent disobedience to their Earthly Superiors, I
knew they could not be humbly obedient to their heavenly Sovereign: By their
great pretext of piety, without any substance; and by their bragg's of the
Spirit, without any fruits of the Spirit, but rather with the works of the
flesh; I perceived, they were both corrupt in faith and manners. And albeit,
some of the more simple had great zeal, and no evil intentions; yet others of
a higher or be, who moved the rest, gave no small ground to make many suspect,
that they were not sincere Christians.

Although, all that has been already said, (which are not old nor hidden
stories, but such things as were done in our own times, and obvious to our
senses) did show unto me sufficiently, the unreasonableness of the new
Presbyterian Reformation: yet, for my further satisfaction, and least I might
be deceived, I resolved to try diligently and impartially, the grounds of these
new changes and alterations; and to use the Apostle S. John's counsel to prove
the Spirits. My dearest, says he, believe not every Spirit, S John 1. Epist
ch, 4. v. 1.
but prove the Spirits, if they be of God: for many false Prophets are gone out
into the world. Now the trial, which I intended, was to try their doctrine, by
the pure word of God, which these Reformers gave out to be their only ground.
When the Scripture was express and clear, then I was resolved to be fully
satisfied: but when the Scripture was not evident, and the question di^ not so
much concern the scripture, as the true sense of it; then I intended to follow
the interpretation and sense of the holy and learned primitive Fathers: who
have been, after the holy Apostles, the Pillars and Propagators of
Christianity: and I resolved to prefer their constant testimonies, according to
the practice of the primitive Church, to the inconstant guesses of new
vpstarts, according to the practice of their wavering Church, who are as far
inferior to the holy Fathers in Holiness and Learning; as they come short of
them in Antiquity and Renown. And with this resolution; I began to examine the
question of Epicopacy, which gave so great occasion to all the broiles and
alterations, that have ensued.

CHAP. VII. Of Episcopacy, condemned as Antichristian by the Presbyterians.
AS I knew the Church of Christ, which is often called in the Scripture, the
kingdom of heaven, to be the most excellent Society, that ever was upon earth,
to tend to a most Spiritual and heavenly end, and to be directed by most holy
and divine laws: So I justly conceived, that the goodness and wisdom of
Christ, had established a most excellent order and form, for the government
of that heavenly kingdom, which he had founded upon earth: and that, whosoever
would strive to overturne that order and government, would be guilty of
Spiritual Treason, and of Sacrilegious Presumption. We have had, for many
years, furious contentions, in our Nation, concerning the government
established by Christ in his Church. The Bishops, who had governed from our
infancy, were deposed, at the beginning of the troubles; and their office was
declared to be contrary unto the purity of our first Reformation, to have no
warrant in Gods word, and to be in it self unlawful and Antichristian. And,
in place of Episcopacy, was brought in a parity of Ministers, and the
Presbyterian discipline; as the only government established by Christ in his
Church, and only conform to his word etc. But after due trial, I found the
Presbyterians, in all these matters, to come very short of their pretenses.

To begin then with our Reformation. I imagined, a good space, that Episcopal
government was not used, till many years after the Reformation: wherein I was
deceived by two reasons: 1. because it was generally affirmed, that King James
brought first in Bishops, at the Assembly of Glasgow, anno 1606. 2. Because the
Puritanicall Ministers were accustomed, to accuse the Church of Scotland, for
having fallen from her first love and they always pretended, that they were to
reduce all things, unto the purity of their first Reformation. But I found the
contrary in their own Records. For M. Knox his Chronicle shows, that, at the
beginning of his Reformation, which happened in the year 1559. the Church
newly planted, was governed by Super-intendents, who had authority over whole
Shires, could ordain and depose Ministers, had a larger stipend then others,
and kept their places all their lifetimes. It expresses also the manner of
their election, and the names of those, who were first chosen, with the bounds
of their power and jurisdiction, as may be seen, in the said Chronicle page
253. 284. and 325. of the London impression. And what is this, but Episcopal
power under an other name? This government remained unquestioned, the space of
16. years, till M. Andrew Melvil, a man of a fiery and Presbyterian Spirit,
coming from Geneva, in the yeaere 1575. began to make factions, and by all
means labored to introduce the holy Geneva discipline, which he cried up to the
heavens, and as far abased the Episcopal function, as a mere Antichristian
corruption. The whole matter is largely described, Spots word hist. lib 5. p.
275.
in the late Bishop of S. Andrews history: where he shows, that the
confusion, troubles and tyranny, which the Presbyterian government brought
into the Church, and the Seditions it raised in the State, were so great; that
K. James, (who had often that sentence in his mouth: No Bishop, No King) was
forced, to reduce things unto the first Reformation, and to restore Episcopacy.
So that it is very evident, that the Presbyterians do falsely pretend, that
Episcopacy or Superiority of Pastors, is against the purity of their first
Reformation, and that parity of Ministers, or Presbyterian government is
conform to it: the contrary being most certain, out of their own Records.

Next, I found they came as little speed of their pretense, of the word of God,
which is so far from condemning Episcopacy, as evil and Antichristian; that it
rather commends it, as good and Christian. 3. Tim. chapter 3. v. 1.
S Paul, writing to Timothee says: This is a true (or faithful) saying. If a
man desire a Bishops office, he desires a good work. And that we may not
contend about names, I find the same S. Paul acknowledging, in Timothee, the
power of judging and ordaining Presbyters, in which the power and Svperiority
of Bishops principally consists. For in the 5. chap. of the same epistle, he
says; Against a Presbyter, receive not an accusation, but under two or three
witnesses. And ver. 22. Lay not thy hands suddenly on no man. He shows also,
that he had left Titus, in the isle of Crete, to ordain Priests by cities.
Tit. ch 1. v. 5.
By this, I saw (as I conceived) clearly enough, that all Pastors are not
equal, but some are Superior to others: and that a Bishop and a Minister is
not the same, as the Presbyterians do pretend, since the one has power to
judge and ordain, which the other has not. Thereupon, I made this
observation. If it be a true or faithful saying (as the Apostle speaks) to
call the office of Bishop good; Then it is neither a true nor faithful saying
to call it evil, as the Presbyterians speaks. If the office of Bishop be a good
work then it was no good work in the Presbyterians to condemn it, as
Antichristian. For that is not only to contradict the Scripture, but also to
incur the curse threatened by the Prophet. Esaias 5.20.
Woe unto them who call's evil good, and good evil.

More over Christ himself did institute diverse degrees of Pastors in his
Church, when he choosed 12. Apostles, Luce c. 6.
and thereafter 72. Disciples. Now it appeared very evident unto me, that, as
the Apostles were distinguished from the Disciples, by their diverse
institution, Luce c. 10.
number, and more entire familiarity with Christ, by whom they were privily
instructed; so they were in a higher degree and dignity, above the other
Disciples: which truth is much illustrated and confirmed by the solemn
assumption of Matthias, who was before one of the Disciples, unto the Apostle
ship, Act. 1.
or as S. Peter shows, out of the Psalms, the Bishoprike of Judas. Lastly,
God did institute, in the old Testament, diverse degrees of the high Priests,
the other Priests and Levits, as Calvin himself confesses. Therefore it seemed
unto me, there was no repugnancy, Call. lib. 4. Inst. c. 6.. 2.
why the like goodly Order and Subordination of Pastors, might not also be, in
the new Testament: yea rather all reason does require, that these things ought
to be, in the Church of Christ; and that more excellently and perfectly; then
in the Synagogue of the Jews, since this is but a shadow and type of the
other.

But although the Scriptures, being duly considered, seemed clear enough, in
this matter; yet for more security, and to take away endless ianglings, and
wranglings, which some contentious heads, makes upon the clearest words of
Scripture: I had my next recours unto the interpretation of the holy Fathers,
and practice of the Primitive Church. And I found, that they did not only
understand the Scriptures, for the Superiority of Bishops over other Pastors:
but also, they condemned the contrary opinion, as a wicked heresy in Aerius. S.
Augustine, Aug. lib. 19. de Ciu. c. 19.
explaining these words of S. Paul above cited, who desires a Bishops Office,
desires a good work. says: the Apostle would show, what the Office of a
Bishop is: for it is a name of of labor, and not of honor: that he may know
himself not to be a Bishop, Who delights to preside and not to profit. Hier.
ap. Cornel. in hunc loc.
S. Hierom shows, that, in the primitive Church, the Office of a Bishop was
the next degree to Martyrdom: for Bishops being the chief Leaders of
Christians, were most diligently searched out and persecuted by the Pagans.
Therefore the Office of a Bishop being so high and excellent, so hard and
dangerous, it was no wonder, that the Apostle did require, so many excellent
virtues and qualities in any, Dion. lib. de Eccles. hier. c. 5.
who desires that office, which he call's a good work. I will only add to
these, two most ancient Fathers, for confirmation of this truth. S. Denis
Arcopagita the disciple of S. Paul, describing the Hierarchy, instituted by
God, in the Church; puts the Bishops, in the first place, the Priests in the
second, and the Ministers or Deacons in the third. And S. Ignatius the disciple
also of the Apostles and Bishop of Antioch, does show this excellent
subordination of Pastors, in the Church: for thus he writes in one of his
epistles. Priests be subject unto your Bishop: Deacons, unto Priests: Ignat.
epist. ad Ta^sens
and you people, unto Priests and Deacons. Who shall observe this comeliness
of Order: I would willingly change my Soul with theirs; and our Lord be with
them for ever. The Presbyterians have not only, not observed that comeliness
of Order; but they have condemned it, and brought in the ugliness of confusion
and therefore, they want this holy Martyrs benediction. The holy Fathers also
do constantly teach, that the Bishops do succeed unto the Apostles, and the
Priests unto the 70. Disciples: and therefore the Bishops: are greater, then
the Priests. Yea the most eminent among all the holy Fathers, were Bishops
although diverse of them, were advanced to that dignity, much against their
will. And besides all these testimonies, I found the practice of the whole
primitive Church, which was always governed by B shops, from the beginning. I
must profess that considering all these things, I was fully satisfied, and
resolved not to abandon all these authorities, of Scriptures, Fathers, and the
whole ancient Church, for the Ministers strong cry's and bare words, which they
only bring against them all.

I was much confirmed in this resolution, when I found the contrary opinion,
concerning parity of Pastors, which is now maintayn'd by the Presbyterians, to
be condemned, as an ancient heresy, by the holy Fathers. S. Epiphanius writes
thus of Aerius. His speech was more furious, then became any man: for he said
what differs a Bishop from a Priest? there is no difference: the order is one,
the honor one, and the dignity is the same. And confuting it a little after,
Epiph. haeres. 75.
he says: That this matter is full of fully, is manifest to all wise men. For
that a Bishop and a Priest are not the same, the divine word of the Apostle
does teach. And after he has proved, from the words of the Apostle above
cited, that Bishops, who have power of Iudgeing Priests, are above Priests:
then he proves also the Bishops Superiority, by their power of Ordination. How
is it possible, says he, that a Bishop and a Priest can be equal? For that
Order begets Fathers unto the Church: but the other has no power to beget
Fathers, it only begets Children unto the Church, by the lauer of regeneration,
and not Fathers and Masters. And how is it possible, that one can ordain a
Priest: who has got no imposition of hands, Aug. lib de haeres. hare. 53.
for Ordination? S. Augustine also reckons up this error of Aerius, in his
book of heresies. Yea S. Hierom, who, of all the holy Fathers, does most
extol the order of Priestood, and brings it (as would seem) in some
comparison, with Episcopacy, excepts always the power of Ordination: for thus
he writes. Hier. epist. ad Euagr.
What does a Bishop, except Ordination, that a Priest does not also? By all
which, it is manifest, that, if the Presbyterians had been living above tuelve
hundred years ago, they had been condemned, in this point, as Heretics, by
the holy Fathers; and that with more reason, then the Aerians: who never
proceeded to their hight of arrogance, to call the Office of Bishop, unlawful
and Antichristian.

Now against all this, what brings the Presbyterians for themselves? pure
Scripture; at least they pretend so: which is an ordinary custom to all those,
whose errors are most against Scripture. They bring ordinarily two places,
wherein they have greatest confidence. The first is Math. 20.26: where our
Savior says unto the Apostles. You know that the Princes of the Gentiles
overrule them: and they that are the greater, exercise, power against them. It
shall not be so among you, etc. The like words are repeated, the 22. of S.
Luke. v. 24. The second place is 1. Tim. 4. v. 14. where the Apostle says to
Timothee: Neglect not the grace, that is in thee, which is given thee, by
prophecy, with imposition of the hands, of the Presbytery, or of the
Eldership: as some of their bibles translates it.

I considered diligently these places, and the rest which they bring, and I
could not find, in any of them, either Superiority of Pastors condemned, nor
Equality approved, much less a Iudicatorie of 9. or 10. Ministers, with a
changeable Moderator, established to Judge over their brethren, in all matters
Ecclesiastical. There needs no more, to know the truth here, but to open our
ey's and read the places: for impudence it self cannot affirm, that the
Scripture does there expressly condemn the one, or approve the other. Therefore,
it is a vain and false pretense of the Presbyterians, to allege their
discipline to be contained expressly in the Scripture. After express Scripture
fails them, then they run to their own glosses and Consequences upon the
Scripiure, which they will have the people to believe, as Scripture: wherein
they commit a double deceit. 1. To promise pure Scripture, and then in place of
it, to give you their own glosses or rather guesses, which are not to be found
in Scri^ture. 2. To oblige you to believe, these glosses and humane inventions
to be Scripture, or as Scripture. As if one, who had promised, to give an other
a quantity of gold, and in place of it, would give himonly brass: and then
after this deceit, would also oblige him to esteem the brass to be Gold. But
albeit these glosses and consequences be not in Scripture; yet it may be, they
are clear of themselves and necessarly deduced from the Scripture, as the
Presbyterians pretends. I found this pretense also to be false. For if they
were so evident and necessary: then men of judgment would easily see such
glosses, and make such consequences. But the holy Fathers, who were not only
men of great Judgment, but were also most Eminent for learning and holiness,
never made any such interpretations and consequences upon the Scripture.
Therefore the Presbyterian glosses, etc. cannot be clear and evident, which
such holy and piercing ey's could not see; or if they saw them, it was only to
condemn them, as has been showed. And albeit this authority be more then
sufficient; to overthrow the pretended clearness of all these new glosses:
yet, when I considered, that the most learned of all the Protestants side: as
all the Lutherans in Germany, Suedland and Denmark, who have their
Superintendents, and the late Protestant Church of England, Scotland and
Ireland; and which is to be much here considered, the Scottish Church at its
first Reformation; never made any such Interpretations upon these Scriptures,
but had their Bishops and Superintendents: then I esteemed it a madness to
imagine, that these Presbyterian glosses could be clear and necessary: which
neither: the holy Fathers, the whole primitive Church, and so many Learned
Protestants, and all their Churches could not see. And albeit the French
Protestants do admit of the Consistorial discipline; yet, they do not declare
Episcopacy, to be absolutely Antichristian, or that their form is only
Christian; much less, do they think it so necessary, as to overturne
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, for setting it up. Of which Beza and du Moulin may
be sufficient witnesses. Beza cont. Errast. fol 1. Mons. Moulin buck. 30. a^t.
sect. 12.
The first says: Whosoever does judge this discipline not only unprofitable,
but hurtful to their Churches: Let them enjoy their own sense. And much more
to this purpose. The other says: In so much as concerns Ecclesiastical
discipline, we do not hold that equality of Pastors, is absolutely necessary.
Who esteem not that order a point of faith, or a doctrine of Salvation. we live,
thanks be to God, in brotherly concord with our neighboring Churches, which
follow an other form, and where there are Bishops and some Superiority. In
Veron tom 2. contro de Hier.
And Monsr Blondel, a famous Minister in France, has lately written a book
entitled of the Primacy in the Church: where he teaches, that although
Superiority of Pastors be not by Divine right; yet, it is not against Divin
right: and therefore, neither is equality of Pastors by Divine right. All
which are very far, from the doctrines and practices of our Scottish
Presbyterians; who stands very single and bare, of all authority Divine and
Humane; having all the world against them, not only the holy Fathers and whole
ancient Church: but also all the old Protestants: both Lutherans and
Calvinists. And if we shall add unto these, the Independents and Anabaptists,
and other new Protestants, who admits of an equality, among Pastors, but
condemns Presbyterian power and Tyranny; their small authority and number is
yet much diminished, and the clearness of their glosses is much obscured
Lastly, if we will take away, from the Presbyterians number, all these, who, by
deceit or force, were gained unto it; their authority will appear very
slender, and the number of knowing and willing Presbyterians, scarcely
considerable: for now, when force has failed them, many are daily falling from
them.

As I found the Presbyterians destitute of all authority, to back their new
glosses; so I perceived their reasons and Consequences, to be mere Sophismes:
as this, which they wrest out of our Saviors words, in S. Matthew above cited,
does show. Christ, say they, forbids ruleing among the Apostles, as the Princes
of the Gentiles used over their Subjects, saying: It shall not be so among you;
but whosoever will be the greater among you, let him be your servant etc.
Therefore, say they, none ought to be greater then an other, but all equal. And
from this equality they infer, that there ought, to be a Presbytery. Which is
as ridiculous, as if you would say, the King or Supreme Magistrate forbids all
domineering, or Tyrannizing of his subordinate Judges, such as is used among
the Turks: Therefore he forbids all Superiority of one over an other, and makes
all his Judges equal: whereas indeed there follows no more, but that he
forbids Turkish Tyranny. After the same manner, Christ forbids among the
Apostles, Heathenish Tyranny, but not lawful and Christian Superiority. Yea,
does not Christ propound himself, for an example, in the same place; and was
not Christ Superior to the Apostles? Therefore it is evident, he only requires
there, greater humility in those, who were to be in greatest dignity, as S.
Hierom, writing on this place, does observe. So that our Saviors words here,
are so far from inferring an equality; that they necessarly suppose an
inequality of Pastors. And, if such Presbyterian consequences were admitted,
they might, upon the same ground, bring in a Levelling in the Civil, as well as
in the Ecclesiastical Estate. Yea, they would destroy their Presbyteries, which
they would have only to stand; as the Independents do reason well against them.
For it is much less lawful, for tuentie or many to Domineer over their
brethren, (as the Presbyterians have done, and would do) then for one, of worth
and virtue, to have and exercise Christian Superiority and Jurisdiction. As the
old Protestants, do show the falsehood of the Presbyterians first consequence,
by which they would wrest from our Saviors words an equality of Pastors; so
the Independents and other new Protestants do show the falsehood of their second
consequence, by which, they would infer from that supposed equality, the
government of their Presbytery. For these new Congregations do admit equality;
and yet will not hear of Presbytery. The like insufficiency may be showed of
their glosses and consequences, upon that place of S. Paul to Timothee, where
he speaks of Presbytery: from which they would most ridiculously infer parity
of Pastors, and the whole platform of their discipline, with the power of
their Sovereign Iudicatory, which they call Presbytery. All which glosses and
consequences are not only against the sense of the holy Fathers, and of the
ancient Church; but also against the sense and interpretation of almost all the
old and new Protestants: which is sufficient to show them to be false and
groundless. And therefore for brevities sake, we will not insist longer in
refutation of them. This only may be observed by the way, that the
Presbyterians, are brought to a hard straight: when, for all their discipline,
which they brag is so clearly in Scripture, they are enforced to run to one
word; and that also they must Etymologize and understand, against the sense, of
all Christian Nations and Ages.

But albeit the Presbyterian discipline cannot be found in the Scripture, nor
Fathers, nor cannot by any right reason be drawn from them; yet perhaps it may
be good in it self, and a heavenly thing. Well then: we shall, according to to
our Saviors rule, try it briefly by its fruits. It made indeed great promises
of it self, and had some fair floorishes: but the fruits did not answer to
expectation, neither were they proportionable to the great labor that was
bestowed in planting, nor to the abundance of blood, that was shed for
watering that unhappy tree. Among many high commendations of Presbytery, which
are collected in the 34. chap. of the Survey of the holy Discipline, it was said
in Queen Elyzabeths time The want of Presbytery is the cause of all evil. It Is
not to be hoped that any Commonwealth can floorish without it. Without this
discipline, there can be no right religion. These who reject this discipline,
refuse Christ to reign over them. At the beginning also of these troubles in
Scotland, the people were fed with large promises of the good of Presbytery.
For then it was said, that all Prelatical pride and Tyranny, should cease: all
innovations, should have an end: the purity of the Gospel, should be restored:
and all blissings should be poured down with Presbytery upon this Nation.
These were the promises and floorishes of Presbytery: but the fruits have
proved just contrary. For there was never more, yea hardly ever such pride and
Tyranny: never more Innovations: never greater miseries and calamities: and
never less solid religion, and more inclination to Atheism: as may appear by
reflecting on what has been said above. It cannot be denied, (whatsoever the
Government of the Church be) but our Savior does require mecknesse and
humility in the Governors of it; and yet the Covenanters (in the judgment of
many) have carried themselves, as if Christ had not required these virtues, but
rather the contrary vices. Therefore, many of the wiser sort of those in
England, who were weary of Episcopacy, after they had taken a short Trial of
Presbytery, soon smeld out the nature of it; and finding they had changed for
the far worst, and that their Consciences were oppressed by more heavy
Taskmasters, they did quickly cast off that heavy yoke; and so finding out a
third way of Independency, have many ways, since that time, both outwitted,
and overthrown the Presbyterians, by their own weapons.

To conclude this matter: I found after a serious trial, that Superiority of
Pastors, is conform both to the old and new Testament: that Episcopacy, is so
far from being Antichristian and against Gods word; that it is most Christian
and expressly contained in the word of God, which was so understood by the holy
Fathers: and that this was the government of the primitive Church, in the
purest times, when the office of a Bishop, was not so much a place of honor,
as a work of labor, and the next degree to Martyr-dome; as is evide^t in the
Bishops of Rome, thritie of which and above, did successively, after S. Peter,
shed their blood for Christ. And upon the other part, I could not find parity
of Ministers, and the new discipline in the Scriptures: but rather, I found that
it was against Scripture, against the holy Fathers, and the whole primitive
Church: against sound reason, and good government: against many Protestant
Churches, and the learnedest men of that profession: and against the practice
of our first Reformers: and that it brought in confusion in the Church, and
Tyranny over men's consciences: that it was condemned, as an ancient heresy, by
the holy Fathers; and that, as an evil tree, it had lately produced much evil
fruit. Therefore I could not abandon all these divine and humane authorities,
these manifest reasons and experiences, which I found in confirmation of
Episcopacy, and in condemnation of Presbytery, for the strong cry's of some few
passionat Ministers: who, as they are destitute of all divine and humane
authority; so they scarcely profess to satisfy men in reason. They will have
their bare words, accompanied with a sigh or a groan, to be sufficient, to
oblige all men, to swear, and believe, all that they say or can invent; albeit
you find never so great authotity, yea and reason it self to the contrary. It Is
known, how a great Apostle of the Covenant, cried out against some Ministers,
who, shortly after the beginning of these troubles, came to reason for
Episcopacy, or to demand reason, for the abolishing it, and setting up of
Presbytery. Away, Away, said he, with your reason; you must quite all reason,
and help poor Christ a lift. Which he said truly in a part. For any man, who
would believe them, must quite reason, and more too.

I found, at lenth, this matter concerning Episcopacy, or the government of
the Church, to be of greater consequence, then many thinks, or I was at first
aware of. For what can be more fundamental to the Church, then the Order and
government, which Christ has established in it? What can be a more dangerous
and fundamental error then to overthrow, yea, and accurse that order and
government, which Christ had settled in it? If it be Treason in any Kingdom or
Commonwealth, for any private faction, to overthrow the fu^damental
Government, which is established in them by law; What high treason is it
against Christ: to abrogate and accurse that order and Government, which he,
with so great wisdom, had settled in his heavenly Kingdom? Therefore if
Episcopacy be ordained by Christ, and so be, iure diuino, as it appeared
sufficiently to me for the reasons lately touched; In Antidot. by S. N. 3.
part. p. 134.
Then, as the Puritan Author of the tuelue general arguments, reasons well,
and acknowledges ingenuosly: The Churches of Scotland France Low Countries and
other places. cannot be a true Church: but the Synagogue of Satan,
contradicting therein both Christ and his Gospel. Moreover, if there can be no
true Church without lawful Pastors; and no lawful Pastors can be without
lawful ordination; and none has power of ordination except Bishops alone, as
the doctrine and practice of the ancient Church do show: Then the destruction of
Episcopacy brings alo^g with it, the destruction of all lawful Pastors, and
so consequently, of a true Church and Sacraments which is a most desperate
error; as it was a most cruel Tyranny, to enforce others to swear and believe
it, against their Consciences.

CHAP. VIII. Of our Lords Prayer, neglected to be said by the Presbyterians.
AFTER I had tried the Presbyterians abrogation of the Apostolic government,
which Christ had established in his Church; I proceeded next, to consider
brieflly their innovation, concerning the most excellent of all prayers, which
himself had made, and recommended to his Church. We were taught, from our
infancy, to ^ay our Lords prayer: and the Ministers themselves did ordinarily
conclude their prayers with it. Christ made it, and the Scriptures contain it.
So that we had not only the dignity of the Author, and the authority of the
Scriptures; but also the practice of the Ministers, and of the whole people, to
render the use of this divine prayer, laudable and profitable. But after the
Presbyterians took upon them to be Reformers, they abolished all set prayers,
and this also was worn out of use, as well as the rest. Yea, as they all
neglected, any more to say it, so there were some, who thought not that
sufficient, unless they spoke also too boldly against the use of it. I could
never see any probable pretense for this Presbyterian innovation; which (as I
am informed) seems so strange and incredible to strangers, that they can
hardly believe it. Therefore this alteration being so unreasonable, I did
quickly discover the absurdity of it.

1. I found it, to be against the practice of our first Reformers. 2. Against
the Scriptures. 3. Against the ancient Church, and holy Fathers. 4. That the
Presbyterians by forbearing to say this prayer, did rob themselves of the
benefit of the most excellent and efficacious of all prayers. 5. That they did
not bring so good prayers in the place of it.

Because the Presbyterians, pretended always, to reduce all things to the
purity of our first Reformation; I informed my self of the practice of our
Reformers; and I found they made public use of this prayer; as may be seen in
M. Knoxes Chronicle page 288. where, at the conclusion of the prayer, for
election of the Super-Intendents, it is said: We crave the increase of thy
grace, as by thee, our Lord, King, and only Bishop, we are taughs to pray: Our
Father etc. So that this Presbyterian innovation, is clearly against the purity
of the first reformation.

2. It is also manifestly against the Scripture, for after our Savior had
reproved the hypocritical prayers of the Pharisees, and much speaking of the
Heathen; Math. 6.9.
he says unto his disciples: Be not you therefore like to them etc. Thus
therefore shall you pray. Our Father etc. And because, some do very
phantastically pretend, that our Savior, did not prescribe this prayer to be
said; but only did show it, as a form, or model of prayer, to be followed:
they are clearly convinced out of the 11. chap. of S. Luke, where our Savior
said to his disciples: when you pray: say, Luke 11.2.
Father, hallowed he thy name etc. Our Savior here, says not; say thus or
after this manner: but say, Our Fathers. etc.

^. This Presbyterian innovation, is also much against the practice of the holy
Fathers; and primitive Christians; who used this divine prayer frequently and
daily. S. Augustine bears witness of this, when he says. Aug. in Enchir. c. 71.
The daily prayer of the faithful, does satisfy for our daily and light
offenses: for its theirs to say; our Father which art in heaven. Where the holy
Father, call's this prayer, for the daily use of it, the daily prayer of the
faithful And albeit, Aug. l. de Magistro c. 1. and in epist. 121. ad Probam
as the same S. Augustine testifyeth elsewhere, there be not an absolute
necessity, of saying the same words, but to pray in the same or the like sense:
yet the Church of Christ in all ages, did ever give such respect, unto this
heavenly prayer; that she has continually used, not only the sense and
meaning, but also the very words of Christ. And although also, she made use of
other prayers; yet she never omitted this, but used it daily and frequently, as
deserving most justly the preeminence above all other prayers.

4. The holy Fathers do show, not only the excellency of this divine prayer,
but also the great efficacy of it, to obtain from God all benefits. S. Cyprian
writes thus of it is excellency. O deerly beloved, Cyp. de Orat. Dominica.
how great and how many are the mysteries of our Lords prayer! They are briefly
collected in speech, but they are Spiritually copious in power: So that nothing
is omitted in our prayers and supplications, which is not contayn'd, in the
compend of that heavenly doctrine. Tertull. lib. de Oratione.
Tertullian calls our Lords prayer. Tho Breviarie, or Compend, of the Euangel
And says: that how much it is shortened in words, it is as much enlarged in
senses. But there needs not much commendation of the work, to those who know
the Excellency of the Author. The same S. Cyprian does show the great efficacy
of this prayer, in these excellent words. Cypr. ibid.
Since we have Christ, an Aduocat with our father, for our sins; when we
sinners do supplicat for our offenses; let us bring forth the words of our
Aduocat. For when he says: what ever you ask from the Father, in my name, he
will give it unto you: how much more efficaciously, shall we obtain what we
ask in Christ's name; if we ask it by his own prayer? And again, he call's
it a friendly and familiar prayer, to pray God with his own: to make the
prayer of Christ, ascend unto his ears. The Father, says he, will aknowledge
the words of his Son: when he who dwells inwardly in the heart, is also
outwardly in the tongue. S. Augustine, in the place lately cited, does show also
the virtue of this prayer, when he says: that the daily saying of it, does
satisfy for our daily and light offenses, without which this life is not led.
Therefore the Presbyterians by neglecting to say this prayer, did deprive
themselv's, of the benefit, of the most excellent, and efficacious of all
prayers. And therefore, albeit they took exception, against all set forms of
prayer, which were made by men, and would say them no more; yet they might have
alway's excepted this prayer, which was made by God: both for the excellency of
it self, and the dignity of the Author. But all were put in the same Category.
Yea, there were some of the deepest Presbyterian dye, who did not think it
sufficient, to neglect the saying of it: unless they spoke also irreuerently,
against the use of it. And there were some so unreasonable, that they would
maintain, it was not only unprofitable to say our Lords prayer; but also
unlawful. We noted above, how a great Apostle of the Covenant, called
publicly, the use of saying often our Lords prayer, a Papistical charm. An
other Minister in Galloway did glory (as I was assured by a person of known
honesty) that he had banished, out of his parish, two Idols: to wit, Our
Father etc. and God of all glory and peace etc. Which was a short grace, that
was said ordinarily after meat: for all graces, as well as prayers, behoved to
be extemporary, even among the Laiques, who intended to be in the right
Presbyterian Mode. But as that person, to whom this Minister spoke, answered
him well, saying: If you have banished these two, which you call Idols: I fear
you shall bring in worse Idols in their place. So it fell forth. For in place
of that divine, short, and excellent prayer, made by God: we got long, tedious,
inconsiderat prayers, made extempore by men; which, for the most part, were
full of Tautologies, and idle bablings. As Tertullian said well of our Lords
prayer. That it was short in words, but large in senses: So the contrary may be
said, not unfitly, of the Presbyterians extemporary prayers: They were large in
words, but very short of sense. And this was the Noble exchange that we made:
which certainly was for the worst.

Seeing then it is evident, that our Lords prayer, is the most excellent of all
prayers; that it was made by Christ for our use: that it was highly esteemed,
and frequently used by the holy Fathers, and the primitive Church: that it is
most efficacious to obtain from God all benefit's; and besid's, that it was
said publicly, by our first Reformers, and is yet used by all the old
Protestants; I could not approve the Presbyterians innovation, of forbearing to
say it. Much less could I approve, the irreverent, or rather blasphemous
opinion, of some, who maintained, that it was both unprofitable, and unlawful
to use it: which I found also to have been maintained, many years ago, by the
Brounists and Puritans: as may be seen in Britannomachia Ministror. lib. 2.
cap. 6. dogm. 13.14. For what is the authority of Presbytery, against all these
authorities, which are brought for the laudable use of our Lords prayer? And
how much less is it to be esteemed; since this innovation, did not proceed
from any general consent, of the whole Ministry: but from some few giddy
domineering heads, which Tyrannized over the rest, and made them to follow
their example. For now, since Presbyterian power is a little quailed, diverse
Ministers, are clinging in again, to their old custom, of saying this divine
prayer; which they may do now, without danger.

I admired much, when a Catholic friend show me, Gualter Chronol. saecul. 11.
cap. de Vvaldens errore 29.
that the Waldenses defended an error just contrary, in this matter, to the
Presbyterians. For they maintained, that no other form of prayer, was to be
admitted, except our Lords prayer, as may be seen in Gualterus: and these,
admits almost all other prayets, except that. I thought the Waldenses and we
had agreed better together: for I had often heard, that we were all of one
religion. But the same friend made an other observation on this matter, which
seemed to be more smart. For after he had showen me a ridiculous story, which
is related, toward the end of the Preface to M. Knoxes Chronicle, with many
fabulous-like circumstances; and which thereafter, I found (not without some
admiration) to be repeated in B. Spots woods new history: Spots. hist. lib.
How there fell forth a great dispute and trouble among the Doctors of S.
Andrew's, 2. p. 91. Anno 1550.
a little before the Reformation; Whither our Lords prayer, should be said only
to God; or if it might he said to the Saints also? Now, said he, this fable by
Divine providence, is truly turned on your Presbyterians. For they will not
have our Lords prayer to be said, neither to God, nor the Saints; and they
withdraw men, by their evil example, from saying to their heavenly father: Our
Father* which art in heaven. etc.

CHAP. IX. Of Glory to the Father etc. or of the hymn of Glorification, taken
away by the Presbyterians.
FROM the reformation of our Lords prayer, which was said to our heavenly
father; the Presbyterians proceeded next, to reform, or rather to abolish the
hymn of Glory, which was ordinarily sung in praise of the holy Trinity. This
Innovation seemed very strange, and gave great scandal to many. For besides,
that it had been used from our infancy, and was sung publicly in all Churches,
at the conclusion of of the Psalms: it contained not the least appearance of
evil, but rather, did appear to tend much, to the honor of God, to whom all
praise and glory principally belongs. And albeit it be not, word by word, in
one place of the holy Scripture, as our Lords prayer is; yet the sense, and the
like words, if not the same, are to be found in it. For what is more expressly
contained in the new Testament, then the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, in whose
name we are all baptized: and which, all true Christians do acknowledge to be
one true God? And what is more clear in Scripture, then that Glory is due unto
God? S Paul says: to the King of the worlds, immortal, 1. Tim. 1.17. Pet 2.
epist. 3. chapter ver. 18. Jude ver. 25.
invisible, only God, be honor and glory for ever. Amen. S. Peter also
speaking of Christ, says: to him be Glory both now and to the day of eternity.
Amen. And S. Jude: to the only God our Savior, by Jesus Christ our Lord, be
Glory and magnificence, empire and power, before all worlds, and now, and for
all worlds evermore. Amen. There is nothing more frequent in the Revelatio^,
then redoubling of this Glory to God. S. John says, that he heard every
Creature, in heaven and upon earth, saying: Apocal. 5.13.
to him who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb benediction, and honor,
and glory, and power, for ever and ever. Therefore, since the giving of Glory
to God, is the principal exercise of the Saints, in heaven: why may it not, or
rather, why ought it not, to be the exercise also of the Saints on earth? S.
John says, he heard a voice come out from the throne, saying. Apoc. 19.5.
Say praise to our God all you his Servants: and you that fear him, little and
great. Why then should the Presbyterians hinder both little and great, to sing
this hymn of praise and Glory unto the holy Trinity? Why should they go
against their own former practice, and that custom which was observed by
their first Reformers, and which is yet keep't in all the more ancient
Protestant Churches? How could one of their Ministers interrupt the people,
when they were singing that hymn, by crying out no less ridiculously then
scandalously: No more Glory to the Father: No more Glory? Indeed, if the
Presbyterians denied the mystery of the holy Trinity, as the Arians did, they
might upon that false ground, had some pretense of reason, for this innovation:
but acknowledging the truth of that Divine mystery, they appeared very
unreasonable for abolishing that hymn, which was ordinarily said in praise of
it, and which has so good ground in the holy Scriptures.

Being therefore desirous, to know this matter from the source, I had my next
recourse (according to my accustomed method) unto the primitive Church, and
the holy Fathers. And there I found that this hymn was most ancient, and an
Apostolical tradition: that it was highly esteemed, and much used by the
Catholic Church in the primitive times: that as some heretics did much
endeavor to pervert it; so the Catholics did labor as diligently to
preserve it, in the same purity, as it had descended unto them, by continual
practice and tradition. And lastly, I found, that God did approve the laudable
use of this hymn, by some notable miracles. All which we shall briefly show.
Basil. ad Amphiloch. de sp. 5.


How the hymn of Glorification was used, from the very time of the Apostles,
S. Basil the Great does largely show. For when the Sacrament of Baptism was
administrated by them, in name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, the faithful answered: Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the holy Ghost. Which custom of glorifying God; the same holy father does
affirm to be an Apostolical tradition, which had been every where observed,
throughout the whole Church. Of this matter, Cardinal Baronius treats amply,
in his third tome, anno 325. Where he also shows, that this hymn was of so
great authority and esteem, in the ancient Church, that, when the holy
Fathers, in the Council of Constantinople, were to establish a rule of faith,
against some Heretics, who denied the Divinity of the holy Ghost; they would
have inserted in that Symbol, a testimony from this hymn of Glory, for the
Divinity of the holy Ghost, in these words: Who with the Father and the Son;
Baron. tom. 3. anno 323. n. 174.
is adored and Con-glorifyed. And albeit this hymn was much used in the
Church, from the beginning; yet it was sung more frequently, in honor of the
blessed Trinity, after the Arians began to corrupt it.

How the Arians did strive to change and pervert this hymn, the same Card.
Baronius shows out of Sozomen: Baron. ibid. n. 173.
for as they had changed the form of Baptism, by saying: I baptize thee in
the name of the Father, by the Son, in the holy Ghost: so also they corrupted
the hymn of Glorification, by singing: Glory be to the Father, by the Son, in
the holy Ghost. Which diversity bre^ a dissension in Antioch, between the
Catholics and the Arians: whilst they would keep the ancient custom, and the
others would bring in their corrupt innovation. Therefore the great Council of
Nice, Baron. ibid. n. 176.
which had condem-the Arian heresy, for the more confusion of it, gave order to
continue these hymns in the Church, which were in use to be sung formerly in
praise of the holy Trinity, and especially the hymn of Glorification, which
the Arians had changed and endeavored to pervert, as they had impiously denied
the mystery of the holy Trinity, in whose honor it was said. And from this
time, that hymn began to be more frequently used; so that the Country people
would sing it, whilst they were busied about their ordinary labors. For how
much the Arians did strive to suppress and pervert it; so much the Catholics
did labor to preserve and celebrat it. For which cause, S. Ambrose did
conclude all the new hymns, which he made, to be sung by the people, during
the time of the persecution which he suffered of the Arians, with the hymn of
Glorification, as S. Augustine testifies. Ang. lib. 9. Confes^ c. 6.7. Ambros.
in Auxent
And therefore, being accused by the Arians, for having deceived the people,
with the verses of his new hymns, he answered: I do not deny that etc. What is
more powerful then the Confession of the Trinity, which is celebrated every
day by the mouths of the people? They labor all earnestly to confess the
faith: they know to praise in verse, the Father, Son and holy Ghost: and they
are all become Teachers, who scarcely could have been Scholars. Yea, to
confound yet more the Arians, who blasphemously said, that the Son was made by
the father in time, and that there was a time, when he was not, the holy
Council of Nice was pleased to add unto the ancient hymn of Glorification,
Glory to the father etc. That appendix: As it was in the beginning, and now,
and ever shall be, world without end, Amen. Which clause did appear in my
judgment, as a prophecy, serving not only for the confusion of the Arians, but
also of the Presbyterians.

Moreover, the Christians of old, vere so careful, to preserve the integrity
of this hymn, as it had been delivered unto them by their religious Ancestors;
that they would not suffer so much as one syllable of it to be altered: So that
diverse of the faithful did take offense at some expressions of great S.
Basil, who ended his Sermons with the Glorification, for not observing prec^sly
the words of it. And therefore he wrote an excellent book de Spiritu sancto,
to give satisfaction unto the Catholics, and to take away all advantage,
which the heretics might have drawn from his expressions. Where he
professes: Basil. de Sp. S. cap. 27.
that it is not lawful to any person whatsoever, to reject or write otherwise
the syllabe, And, which proceeded from our Lords mouth. The same did Pope
Vigilius testify (as Baronius relates) to Eutherius a Spanish Bishop, Baron.
tom. 7. anno 5^8. p. 279.
who had showed him, that some evil Christians in Spain, had changed both the
form of Baptism, and the hymn of Glorification, by taking away from them
both, the particle And, before the holy Ghost, saying I baptize thee in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, holy Ghost. Doing the like also when they
sung the hymn of Glorification: To which the Pope ansuered, that these were
novelties and dangerous errors; wherein, if these persons would obstinatly
continue, they could have no communion with the Catholic Church. By this, and
diverse other experiences, I perceived, how careful the ancient Christians
were, to preserve the purity of divine truths, and of Apostolical traditions;
that they would not quite not alter so much as one syllable of them, to please
all the Heretics in the world. What would they thought then of the
Presbyterians, who have not taken away on syllabe; but the whole sentence and
substance of this hymn?

Lastly, I found that God has been pleased, to approve the laudable use of
this divine hymn, by miracles. For, whereas diverse Catholics had their
tongues cut out, by the wicked and cruel Arians, in the persecution, which they
endured under Hunericus the Arian King of the Wandals; by the admirable power
of the holy Ghost they spoke distinctly without their tongues, and did
celebrate the divinity of Christ: as Baronius shows, by the testimony of
irrefragable witnesses, Baron. tom. 5. anno 484.
as of Justinian the Emperor, and diverse others, who saw some of them with
their eyes, and beard them speak. Which matter also Cornelius a Lapide does
touch, in his Commentaire on the 8. chapter to the Rom: v. 28. Moreover, the same
Baronius does also relate, out of many good Authors. Baron. anno. 1055.
how Hildebrand the Popes Legate in France (who became thereafter Pope Gregory
the 7.) did, by this hymn miraculously discover diverse Simoniack Bishops, in
that Kingdome-For when one time, a learned and eloquent Bishop was accused of
Simony before him, which he would by no means confess, being suddenly
commanded by the Legate to say: Glory be to the Father and to the Son, and to
the Holy Ghost; he pronounced indeed clearly and distinctly the Father and the
Son; but by no means could he pronounce the Holy Ghost. By which miracle he was
moved to confess his fault, and to quite his Bishoprique: after which
confession, he pronounced distinctly the whole hymn. Diverse other Simoniack
Bishops, in that Country, were induced by the same miracle, to do the same. So
that God Almighty, for approving the use of this heavenly hymn, has made his
approved Servants, who wanted their tongues, miraculously to pronounce it: and
from these, who had tongues, but vere unworthy, he took away even their
natural power to utter it.

What shall we say then of this inconsiderat Presbyterian sect, which has
outstripped the Arians, the most wicked of all Heretics? For these did only
change a little this glorious hymn, which yet; with that change, might admit a
good sense; although they made it for a perverse end: but the Presbyterians, to
their greater ignominy, have totally abolished it. Wherein they have shouen
themselv's against the Scripture, and to be clearly opposite unto the holy
Prim^tive Church, to the sacred Council of Nice, to the custom of their first
Reformers, and to go against their own practices, and of the other Reformed
Churches abroad. Yea, in an other consideration, the Presbyterians appear, in
this point, to be worse then the Arians. For these Heretics, denying the
mystery of the holy Trinity, by opposing one or two places of Scripture (which
they did privately and falsely expound) to the constant and ancient belief of the
whole Christian world; did rationally, supposing these ill principles, to
change the hymn of Glorification, which was said in in honor of the holy
Trinity, yea, if they could, to have altogether abolished it: which doubtless
they had done, if shame could have permitted them. But they left this effronted
action to the Presbytery, which is more passionat and less rational, then the
Arians. For the Presbyterians pretending to believe the mystery of the holy
Trinity, have most irrationally abolished that hymn of Glory, which had been
said in honor of it, from the beginning of Christianity. I was much
astonished, when I considered, into what miseries and raveries, inconsiderat
passion, and furious zeal do drive men, who under pretense of greater purity,
and of more close adhering to the Sriptures, stray alway's further from them,
and fall into greater impurity and defile themselv's with more filthy errors.

This innovation, shortly after it came in, was very hardly pressed against me,
by a Roman Catholic of my acquentance: who took occasion thereupon, to say
unto me. What is the reason, that M. Knox your first Reformer, whom you esteem
no small light, did not abolish the hymn of Glorification, as your
Presbyterians have lately done? Or, if he did not see all things, how could it
escape the sharp eyes of these two famous first Apostles, Luther and Calvin,
whom you believe to have bein sent extraordinarly by God, to reform the
Church? They neither saw, nor could see any thing blameable in it. When he saw,
that I answered nothing, but only blamed the Presbytery, for their
inconsideration and inconstancy, which indeed was all that I could say: he told
me that S. Paul manifests the true Source of this, and the like innovations.
For, speaking of false Teachers, he says: Evil men, and Seducers, shall wax
worse, erring and driving into error. So, that, 2. Tim, 3.13.
what the first Reformers (who could not on a sudden deny all truths) left
untouched, your second Presbyterian Reformers have abolished: as they have done
here the hymn of Glory, which was said in praise of the holy Trinity: and for
which, you have got the noble exchange of continual praises of the Covenant and
Presbytery. But as the great Council of Nice did add unto the ancient hymn of
Glory to the Father etc. that clause. As it was in the beginning etc. For
confusion of the Arian heresy: So also it has, by the same addition,
prophetically foretold the continuance of it for ever, to the confusion of this
new sect called Presbytery, which is most consonant to that of S. Paul: To God
be glory in the Church, and in Christ Jesus to all generations, world without
end Amen. Ephesians. 3.21.
That Church, which has triumphed over the Arians, who corrupted this glorious
hymn; will also triumph over the Presbyterians, who have abolished it. Yea,
this hymn shall not only continue to the worlds end, in the Church Militant:
but it shall be also the exercise of the Church Triumphant, which shall never
cease, for all eternity, to sing praise and glory, unto the most holy Trinity.
Thus ended my Catholic friend: whose words I found to be more weighty; a good
space after, then they appeared to me, at the time, when he spoke them.
Moreover, I remember he desired me to consider, that these innovations against
our Lords prayer, and the hymn of Glory, were such black actions; that the
prime Presbyterians who introduced them, were ashamed to make acts to forbid
them, as they had done for abolishing of Episcopacy, and some other points; but
only brought them in by a desuetude, as they speak, and so wore them out of
use. Which, shows, said he, that they would gladly have some things done
covertly, which they are ashamed to avow publicly.

CHAP. X. Of the Apostles Creed, denied to be Apostolical, by the Presbyterians.
THERE was hardly any thing, that the Presbyterians did, which made me stumble
so much; as their Innovation, concerning the authority of the Apostles Creed.
They were not content with their Reformation, or rather abrogation of the
Apostolic government, unless they also did deny the Creed to be made by the
Apostles, and so wear it out of use, as they had done our Lords prayer. At the
end of of their new Catechism, they speak thus of the Creed: Shore Cat.
West. in fine.
Albeit the substance of the doctrine comprised in the Abridgement, commonly
called the Apostles Creed, be fully set forth in each of the Catechismes, so as
there is no necessity of inserting the Creed it self; yet it is here annexed,
not as though it were composed by the Apostles etc. In which words, they reach
covertly two things. 1. That the Creed it self is not necessary, if we have the
substance of it, as it is explained in the new Presbyterian Catechism. 2. that
it needs not be esteemed, to be composed by the Apostles. But their practice
did show more evidently their meaning. For they did not only declare it, not to
be Apostolical, and therefore to be only a humane collection: but also they did
no more say it, neither did they require it to be said any more of others; as
the custom was formerly at Baptismes. And by these means, they put it out,
both of estimation and use.

This innovation gave great scandal to many, who thought justly, they could
thereafter be sure of nothing, since their Creed was called in question. This
was universally esteemed, before the Covenant began, the badge or mark of a
Christian, and the principal foundation of the Christian religion. The
authority of it was held so sacred, that it was an ordinary proverb in men's
mouth's, when they would give great assurance of performing any thing they had
promised: that before they failed. They would as soon deny their Creed. As it
was called the Apostles Creed; so it was taught for such. and so it was
believed and esteemed to be. It was publicly said, in the Church, by parents,
at the Baptism of their Children; and it was required to be said by the
people, when they were Catechized. But all these things were altered and
overturned by the Presbyterians. The authority and esteem of the Creed was
dash't, by their denying it to be Apostolical: and the custom of saying it,
both publikly and privately, was taken away; so that it was soon worn out,
both of use and request. If they did this so easily with our Lords prayer,
which is contained in Scripture; how much more easily would they do it with the
Creed, which is not in Scripture and which they pretend to be a mere humane
collection? And so, in a short time, they would get it to be altogether
slighted, as a humane invention, and banished out of the memories of men.

Wherefore being desirous to penetrat this matter more inwardly, I found after
some diligence, that the same grounds, which can be brought for the Apostolic
authority of the Scriptures, are also brought, and that in an eminent degree,
for the like authority of the Creed. And therefore, if we receive the one, we
cannot reject the other. I shall briefly collect, what I found, or has been
showed unto me, for the Apostolic authority, great excellency, and frequent
laudable use of this divine Symbol. Baron. tom. 1. Annal. an. 44. n. 15. and
seq.
Cardinal Baronius in the 1. tome of his Annals does show, by the testimony of
the holy and ancient Fathers, that the Creed was composed by the holy Apostles,
a little before they were to part, and go into several Countries, to preach
the Gospel unto the Gentiles: to the end there might be a certain, short, clear
rule of faith, in which they all agreed, wherein they were to instruct all
persons, and by which, as by a certain badge, all Christians might he known.
For this cause, it was not committed to writing; but was delivered by lively
voice, and imprinted in the hearts of Christians, by the faithful diligence of
the Apostles. This S. Hierom, Hier. epist. 61.
and S. Augustine do testify. The first says: The Symbol of our faith and hope,
which was delivered by the Apostles, is not written in paper or ink, but in
the fleshly tables of the heart. The other affirms, Aug. ser. 119. de temp.
Idem ser. 69. de expos. Symb.
that the Creed was not written; that it might be retained in the hearts of the
faithful. And again he says. The holy Apostles did deliver a certain rule
of faith, which being comprehended in tuelve articles, according to the number
of the Apostles, they called a Symbol; by which the faithful may hold
Catholic unity, and tread under feet heretical impiety. To these two great
Doctors, Ambro. ser. 38. and epist. 81.
agrees also S. Ambrose, who says: The holy faith is contained in the Symbol
of the tuelve Apostles, who, as skiful Artificers, meeting together, have made
a key by common counsel. And again: Let us believe, says he, the Symbol of
the Apostles, which the Roman Church does ever preserve and keep's inviolate.
And if we will ascend higher, S. Iren. lib. 1. c. 2. and lib. 3. c. 4. S.
Clement, epist. 1. ad frat Domini. Basil. de de Sp. S c. 27.
S Ireneus Bishop of Lions, and disciple of S. Polycarpus, shows that diverse
Nations believed without Scriptures, by tradition, which certainly was of the
Apostles Creed. S. Clement, the disciple of S. Peter, and Coadiutor of S. Paul,
does testify the same: Diverse other Fathers may be seen, cited in Cardinal
Bellarmin tom. 1. de verbo Dei non scripto, lib. 4. cap. 4. S. Basil does
reckon the Apostles Creed, as a principal Apostolic tradition. And, in a
word, I found that all Christian Nations and Ages, have borne testimony of this
truth.

Moreover, I found that in the primitive times, this Symbol was holden in so
great reverence, that in General Councels, it used to be first recited, Baron
vbi su. pra. Aug. de Symb.
and laid down, as the ground of the whole Ecclesiastique building, as
Baronius does show. To this purpose; S. Augustine calls it. The foundation of
the Catholic faith upon which the edifice of the Church, built by the hands
of the Prophets and Apostles, did rise. ad Cat. lib. 3. c. 1. Leo ad Pull. Aug.
ep. 96.
And S. Leo says, that this short and perfect Confession of the Catholic
Symbol, which is sealed by 12. sentences of the Apostles, is so furnished with
heavenly armor; that by this sword alone, all opinious of Heretics may be
cut of.

As I found such greet testimonies to prove the Apostolic authority of the
creed; so I did find, that the holy Fathers, did highly praise the excellency
of it, as of a work worthy of such divine Architects. S. Augustine calls it.
Aug. ser. 42. de trad. Symb.
The comprehension and perfection of our faith. It Is simple, says he, short
and full. That it is simplicity might serve the rudnesse; it is shortness the
memory; and its fullness the instruction of the hearers. Elsewhere he calls it
the Compend of the Scriptures. lib. 1. ad Catech. Id. m ser. in Vigil.
Pentecost.
And again he says: This is a Symbol brief in words, but large in mysteries.
For whatsoever is prefigured in the Patriarchs, whatsoever is declared in the
Scriptures, or foretold by the Prophets. etc. is contained, and briefly
confessed in it. And in his Sermon above cited de Traditione Symboli, speaking
of the Creed, he says: These are not humane words, but heavenly mysteries of
our Lord. But most notable and efficacious are the words of Rufinus to this
purpose. The Apostles, Rufin. in praef. de expos. Symb.
says he, being to part from one an other to preach, they laid down this
mark of their faith and agreement: Not as the children of Noe being to part
from each other, rearing up a tower of brick and slime, whose top should reach
unto the heavens: but building the fortresses of faith, of lively stones, and
heavenly pearls, which should stand steadfast against the face of the enemy:
which neither the winds should shake, nor floodes subvert, nor boisterous
storms or tempests move. They therefore being to separate, building the tower
of Pride, were deservedly punished with the Confusion of tongues, that not one
could understand the speech of his neighbor: but these, who built the tower of
Faith, were endued with the skill and knowledge of all languages; to the end,
that the one might be the mark of Sin, and the other the monument of Faith.
Thus Ruffinus.

Lastly; the same holy Fathers do show the frequent laudable use of the
Apostles Creed, in the primitive Church. It was first taught and delivered unto
those, who desired Baptism; and it was required to be publicly said by them
immediately before their baptism. This custom (as Ruffinus shows) was
carefully observed in the Roman Church. Ruffin. ibid vt supra.
S. Augustine also does witness, how the Godfathers did say it, in name of the
Infants whom they presented to Baptism: and therefore he earnestly exhorts
every Christian, when he comes to the years of discretion, to say frequently
the Apostolic Creed, which he professed by the mouths of those, who presented
him to Baptism, and call's it the Mirror of a Christian: Render says he,
your Symbol render it unto the Lord: Aug. homil. 42.
be not weary to rehearse it: the repetition of it is good, least
forgetfulness creep on thee. Do not say: I said it yesternight I said it to
day, I say it every day, I have it well. Remember thy faith: behold thy self:
Let thy Creed be a Mirror unto thee, there see thy self if thou believe all,
that thou confesses thy self to believe, and rejoice daily in thy faith. Let it
be thy riches, the daily Apparel of thy Soul. Do you not cloth your self
when you rise? So by remembering thy Creed, cloth thy Soul, least
peradventure forgetfulness make it naked. S. Ambrose calls it the Seal of our
heart, which we ought daily to review; and the Watchword of a Cristian, Amb.
lib. 3. de Virginib. tom. 4.
which should be in readiness, in all dangers.

By all which irrefragable testimonies, the sacred authority, great excellency,
and frequent laudable use, both in public and private, of the Apostles Creed,
did appear sufficiently unto me. So that I found, for it, the consent of
peoples and Nations; the testimonies of the holy Fathers, the Martyrs, Saints,
and Christians of all ages: that is of the Universal Church, the pillar and
ground of truth: which are the greatest assurances, that can be had upon earth.
And therefore I rested fully satisfied with them. But I was much more confirmed
in this resolution, when I understood by a serious conference with a friend;
that there was the same certainty for the Creed, that there is for the
Scriptures; to wit the Tradition or testimony of the Church. S. Augustine
delivers clearly this truth, concerning the Scriptures. Aug. cont. epist. fund.
c. 5.
I would not have believed (says he) the Euangel, unless the authority of the
Catholic Church had moved me etc. and that authority being once weakened,
neither can I believe the Euangel. This testimony and authority of the
Catholic Church, was proved to me, to be the most easy, manifest, and
infallible ordinary way, that can be had on earth, to come unto the certain
knowledge of what books are Scriptures: yea it was clearly proved to be the
only way: so that, if once this testimony be weakened, there is nothing left,
but guessings and wanderings, after the manner of blind men; as experience does
show in the difference, between the Lutheranists and the Calvinists, who agree
in all their supposed ways of knowing the Scripture; and yet can never agree
in the same Canon of the Scriptures. But of this matter, we shall have occasion
to speak more fitly hereafter, in the question of the Church.

If then the Scriptures cannot be certainly known, but by the testimony and
authority of the Church, and are to be believed for the sam^, as S. Augustine
does affirm; the Creed also may be known, and ought to be believed to be
Apostolical, for the same very reason; since the same testimony and authority
are for both. Yea the Tradition and Testimony of the Church, for the Apostles
Creed, has, in a certain manner, some preeminence, above that which is for
the Scripture. For it is more ancient; more universal; and more manifest. More
ancient: because the holy Fathers and the whole Church, do constantly affirm,
that the Symbol was composed by the Apostles, before any part of the new
Testament was written. It was more universal: because it was received every
where, at the very first plantation of Christianity, whereas diverse parts of
the Scripture, being directed only to some particular Churches, could not be
communicated, but after some space, to the whole Church. It was also more
manifest: because there were some books of the Scripture, doubted of, by some
of the ancient Fathers, till the Universal Church did determine the Canon of the
Sciptures: but there was never any ancient Christian, who doubted of, or denied
the Apostles Creed, there was such a clear and Universal tradition for it. And
besides; the Creed, in it self, is very clear; as being a short rule of faith,
ordained for the capacity of the most simple; according to which, the
Scriptures, that are more obscure, ought to be understood.

Seeing then the whole Church, in the primitive times, and in all ages, has
professed that the Apostles made and taught the Creed; it remains most
certain, that the Apostles did teach it: for greater certainty then this,
cannot be had. If the Apostles taught, and delivered it unto the first
Christians; then they being so taught, were obliged to receive it, with the
some reverence, wherewith they did receive the Scriptures, which were delivered
or directed unto them, by the same Apostles. And if the first Christians, were
so obliged, why not also their children and their childre^s children, and so
downward, from age to age, until the end of the world, shall have the same
obligation? If this obligation held in the first age; why not also in the
second, and in every succeeding age? Or when should this obligation cease? Or
why more at one time, then at an other; since the same assurance remains at
all times? Or why should it cease more for the Creed, then for the Scripture;
since the same testimony is for both? and if there be any preeminence in this
matter, the Creed has it; as has been showed.

Wherefore, as I was, by these considerations, fully satisfied of the
Apostolic authority and laudable use of the Creed, in the primitive Church,
so I could in no wise approve the Presbyterians innovations against it: but
rather did much admire of their presumption. For by their denying the Creed to
be Apostolic, I saw they denied the clear rule, and endeavored to subvert
the very foundation of the Christian faith. By their taking away both the
public and private use of it, they would have robbed Christians, of the
heavenly apparel and spiritual armor of their souls, as the holy Fathers
above call it. And all this they do, relying upon no other grounds but their
own gesses; which they oppose, and would have to be preferred to the constant
testimony, and irrefragable authority of the whole Christian world. The Jews
brought at least, Aug. in psalm. 63. v. 7.
sleeping witnesses against the resurrection of Christ; for which folly S.
Augustine mocks the^, and says, that they themselves were sleeping and failed
in their search. But the Presbyterians bring neither sleeping nor waking
witnesses; and yet they will blindly judge, in a matter done above 16. hundred
years ago, and boldly pronounce sentence against an ancient fundamental truth,
which had been received and professed by the Christians of all ages. But albeit
the Presbyterians do reject the authority, and testimony of the Church, yet I
saw (if they followed their own principles) they might as easily, discern the
Creed to be Apostolic; as they pretend they can know the Scriptures. For the
Majesty of the style, the harmony of the parts, the purity of the doctrine, and
the like, do concur in the Creed, in an eminent degree, as we have seen above
out of the holy Fathers who do so highly praise it, for its perfections, as a
work Worthy of such heavenly Architects. And the matter being considered in it
self, the Creed in all these qualities, is equal, if not Superior, by outward
appearance, unto the Scriptures. For in them, there are many seeming
contradictions hard to be explained: but none in this. Many things in
Scripture, not so full of Majesty, as about S. Paul's cloak etc. 2. Tim. 4.13.
but the creed is totally replenished, with most sublime and divine mysteries.
Therefore, if the Presbyterians could by these marks discern the Scriptures,
they might as easily discern the Creed to have been made by the Apostles.

Albeit I admired much, how the Presbyterians could upon so weak grounds, deny
the Apostles Creed, against such invincible authorities; yet I was much more
stricken with admiration, when I considered, what they brought in place of it.
For in place of the Apostles Creed, we got the Presbyterians Covenant. As that
was denied to be Apostolical; so this was cried up to be Divine: for it was
called, Gods Covenant; the Confession of faith etc. As parents were accustomed,
at the Baptism of their children, to say the Apostles Creed, in which they
promised to bring them up; so now they were made promise, to breed them in the
Covenant, which was too long to have by heart, or to be repeated. This was
truly a rare exchange; to deny the Creed to be Apostolic, and to cry up the
Covenant to be Divine. To rob us of a most ancient, clear, brief, positive,
Sacred Confession of faith made by the holy Apostles, famous in all ages, and
universally received troughout the whole world, full of great mysteries, and
divine expressions: And to give us, in place of it, a new, long, obscure,
negative Confession, or rather Confossion of faith, full of terrible oaths,
execrations and combinations, devised by some few discontented heads, and by
cunning and force, obtruded upon this Nation; much suspected, at the beginning,
to be nothing but a mere pretense of religion; as it was notoriously known to
be a humane invention; and as it is now at lenth, after all its disguises,
manifested for such unto the world. It Is good fame has not lasted long,
neither at home nor abroad. It got some footing in England, by cunning and
worldly interest; but these soon failing, it was quickly detected and
rejected. The Christlan Moderator says to this purpose. Christ. Mod. p. 2.
That the last Reformation settled with so solemn a Covenant, and carried on with
so furious a zeal, is already, by better lights discovered, to be merely
humane, and therefore deservedly laid aside

Therefore to conclude this point: I found clearly, that the Creed has been
always held to be, and is Apostolic: that it is the foundation and perfect
rule of the Christian faith: that it is a work worthy of the holy Apostles:
that it is such a strong and heavenly fabric, that it cannot be overthrowen
by no storms nor tempests, by no force nor violences, and that it overcomes
all heresies: that the ancient custom of saying it publicly at Baptism, and
often privately, and daily, is most laudable and profitable to Christian people.
And upon the other part, I found, that the Presbyterians, by denying the Cred
to be Apostolic, have denied the foundation and clear rule of the Christian
faith, and most unreasonably have worn out, both the public and private use
of it: And that they completed their new Raformation, when they not only
rejected the Creed; but obtruded the Covenant in place of it. And lastly I
found, that as the Presbyterians new doctrine in this matter, is most erroneous
and presumptuous; so that all their endeavors, have proved vain and
frivolous. For that fortress of faith, which was built by the holy Apostles,
of lively stones, and heavenly pearls, as Ruffinus speaks, has held out
stronger tempests, then the Presbyterians weak blasts; and therefore it still
stands immovable. Whereas the Babel of their Covenant, which they were so
diligently building, and upon which they could never get the Capstone, as they
often regrated, has ended in Confusion, and in a short space has come to
ruin. Now, all these things being considered, I refer my self to any man,
void of passion, if I could reasonably, much less Christianly, exchange the
pearls of the Apostles Creed, for the dross of the Presbyterians Covenant.

CHAP. XI. Of the Article, of Christ's Descent to Hell, perverted by the
Presbyterians.
AFTER that the Presbyterians had thus endeavored to shake the authority of
the Apostles Creed, least peradventure their small authority, might not
prevail against all Christianity, what they could not get effectuated by
denying the letter, they labored to perform by corrupting the sense, and
especially of that article, Short Cotech. Vv st. in fine.
He descended into Hell. For in their new Catechismes, they interline, or put
on the margent, this gloss with it. He descended into Hell that is. He
continued in the state of the dead, and under the power of Death, till the
third day.

I Observed, that although we had, and said the words of the Creed, before the
Covenant began; yet we did not know the true sense of it, in this and some
other articles, albeit as S. Augustine shows, it was made plain and short,
that it might serve the capacity, understanding, and memory of the simple. For
there was a great quarrelling, before these greater troubles, among some of the
Ministers, for the sense of these words, He descended into Hell. Some publicly
taught, that they behoved to be literally understood, of a real and local
descent: others of the preciser sort, called that a Papistical interpretation,
against which, they did most sharply inveigh; and taught, according to Calvin,
that the sense of them was, that Christ did suffer in his Soul the horrible
torments, of a condemned and forsaken man; which gloss was called by the
former Ministers, a horrible blasphemy.

To come then to the true sense of this article, about which there was such
contrariety among the Ministers, I had my recourse to the holy Scriptures and
Fathers; and I found, that there was scarcely any article of our faith more
clearly contained in the Scriptures, and more unanimously avowed, by the holy
Fathers, who brand those, who do not believe it literally, with the name of
Infidels. And lastly I found, that diverse gross ways have been devised by
the Ministers, since their pretended Reformation, to pervert and obscure it:
and when the falsehood of one is discovered, they always find out an other, but
will never embrace the true sense of it.

The light of reason does show to every Christien, that it is not sufficient
for man's Salvatian, to hold the words of the Creed; but it is necessary also to
follow the true sense of it. This the holy Fathers do teach, who show likewise,
that, as Heretics ever endeavored to pervert the true sense of the Creed; so
the true Church does ever retain and maintain it. S. Cyril, with the
Alexandrin Synod, writes to this purpose to Nestorius, Who pretended to believe
the Nicen Creed, and yet denied the blessed Virgin to be the Mother of God.
Cyril. Alex. cum Syn. Alex. epist. 10. ad Nestor. Aug. tom. 3. de fide and Symb
c. 1,
It Is not sufficient (says he) that you profess with us the Symbol of faith
etc. For you do not understand, nor expound it rightly, but rather perversely,
although you Confess the words of it with your tongue. S. Augustine also says,
to the like purpose. Under the few words contained in the Symbol, many
Heretics have endeavored to hide their poisons, to whom the Divine mercy
has resisted, and does resist by spiritual men, who have not only merited to
believe and receive the Catholic faith, in these words; but also, by the
revelation of God, to understand and know it. So the Presbyterians, although
they have denied the Creed; yet under the words of it, they endeavor to hide
their poisons.

Although the article of Christ's descent to Hell, were not in the Creed (which
is a clear and easy rule of faith, that ought to be plainly and literally
understood) yet it is so clearly in the Scripture, that it cannot be denied,
without wresting of it. S. Peter, in his first Sermon does apply unto Christ,
Psalm 15. v. 9*10.
a prophecy of David, in the 15 Psasme, which says: My heart has been glad,
and my tongue has rejoiced; my flesh also shall rest in hope. For thou will
not leave my Soul in Hell; neither will thou suffer thine holy One to see
corruption. ^cts. 2.30.31.
After S. Peter has proved, that this Prophely cannot be understood of the
Prophet David, he shows that David meant of Christ, in these words. Whereas
therefore he was a Prophet etc. forseeing, he spoke of the resurrection of
Christ. For neither was he left in Hell, neither did his flesh see corruption
There is both the old and new Testament fot this truth. The Prophet David
foretelling, and the Apostle S. Peter expounding, and showing the fulfilling of
it, to wit: that Christ's soul was not left in hell, neither did his flesh see
corruption. What can be reasonably more required by any Christian? Aug. epist.
ad Exodus 99.
But let us hear S. Augustine so understanding it. That our Lord (says he)
being mortifyed in the flesh, did go into Hell, is very certain. For that
prophecy, which says: Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell cannot be
contradicted: which least any man should presume to understand otherwise, the
same Peter does expound it, in the Acts of the Apostles etc. And then he
concludes in these words: Quis ergo nisi infidelis etc. Who them, except au
Infidel, will deny Christ to have been in Hell? Behold, what in S. Augustius
judgment, are all Presbyterians, who do contradict the prophecy, which, he
says, cannot be contradicted, and who understand it in a contrary sense; which
S. Peter did expound, least any man should presume to understand it otherwise.
Which is indeed to go against the Scriptures, both the old and new Testament,
the Prophets and Apostles, the holy Fathers and the whole Church; and, in a
word, as S. Augustine speaks, to be Infidels.

S. Hierome, expounding that place of S. Paul in the 4. to the Ephesians: Hier.
in cap. 4. ad Ephesians.
And that he (Christ) ascended, what is it, but because he descended also first
into the lower parts of the earth: says: The inferior parts of the earth are
taken for Hell, to which our Lord and Savior did descend. Where it is also
showed, for what end our Savior did descend. He, says S. Paul, ascending on
high did lead captivity captive: and gave gifts to men. Upon which the same S.
Hierome says: Our Lord and Savior descended into Hell; that being Victorious,
he might lead with himself the Souls of those, who were kep't there enclosed.
Whence it came to pass; that after his resurrection, many bodies of the just
were seen in the holy City. The Apostle shows the same truth, in the 2.
chapter to the Collossians; Coloss. chap. 2. ver. 15.
where he says. And (Christ) spoiling the Principalities and Powers, has
led them confidently in open show, triumphing them in himself. I pass by,
for brevities sake, Pet. 1, Ep. c. 3. v. 19.
some other passages, as that of S. Peter, how Christ in his Spirit did go
down, and preached unto the Spirits in prison, and the like: which are
understood, by some of the holy Fathers, of Christ's desce^t to hell; these
already brought, appeared to me, to be most clear and sufficient. Moreover, I
found S. Aug. understanding the words of Christ to the good thief, This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise: far otherwise then the Presbyterians do. For
he says: Non ex his verbis etc It is not to be thought by these words, Aug.
epist. 57. ad Dardan
that Paradise is in heaven: for the man Christ Jesus was not to be in heaven
(to wit, that day) but in hell, according to his Soul, and in the grave,
according to his flesh. And a little beneath, he subioynes: The Scripture
clearly shows, that he was in Hell, according to his Soul. But as the same
holy Father shows, out of the 87. Psalm; He was so in hell, that he was free
among the dead, and did there begin his triumph, over all infernal powers and
principalities, and freeing the Souls of the just, from their captivity, did
carry them gloriously with himself unto the heavens, into which he did first
enter, and opened them unto all true faithful Christians. For so it was
fitting. That he, who is the head of the body, the Church; Colos. 1. ver. 18.
the beginning, the first borne of the dead as S. Paul speaks, and the first
fruits of these, who are asleep, 1. Cor. 15.20.
may, in all things, hold the Primacie. I know these things are laughed at, as
if they were fables, by the Presbyterians; who founds their faith upon their
own groundless fancies, and will believe nothing, which does not suite to
their humors, albeit it be most clearly contained in the Scriptures, so
understood by the holy Fathers, and so believed by the Christian world. But I
intend God willing, to prefer these solid grounds to Puritanical imaginations,
which are without, yea and against Scriptures the holy Fathers, and whole
ancient Church, and lastly against the clear words of the Creed.

As I saw the true and clear sense of this article; so I found, that the
Ministers have used many crooked windings and turnings, to obscure and deny the
true sense of it. For first; they have not stood to corrupt the letter of the
Scripture. 2. they followed a sense invented by Calvin, which was not only
false, but by many esteemed blasphemous. 3. When for shame they had abandonned
that sense, the Presbyterians have of late invented a new one, not so impious,
but very ridiculous. And lastly, to complete the work, they have denied the
whole Creed to be Apostolical; which is the cleanliest way that has been yet
used.

For their corrupting of the words of Scripture, Beza, Calvin's entire brother,
may carry the prize. For, in the Bibles of his translation, he turns these
words, 2. Acts 31. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell After this manner. Thou will not leave my body in the grave. And; when this manifest corruption of Gods
word was objected to him, by Protestants, he answers, in defense of his
version, against Sebastian Castalio, Beza cont. Sebast. Cast. ap. Bellar. lib.
4. de anima Cha c. 12.
saying: No man can doubt, but here is meant of the body and grave, unless
one would be blind in the midday. This must be a strange light, or rather a
strong illusion, which the Presbyterians alone see. But the reason which Beza
gives there a little before, for his changing; Soul into body, and hell into
graves is very remarkable. I did not this rashly, says he, since we see, that
this place is chiefly wrested by the Papists, for establishing their Limb: and
the ancients also, devised from it, the descent of Christ's soul into hell. Our
Presbyterians in Scotland, were one degree inferior to Beza, for they did not
corrupt two words, as he did, but only one, as may be seen in the great bibles,
printed at Edinburgh, by Andrew Heart; where they read thus the foresaid text:
Thou wilt not leave my Soul in the grave, putting grave for hell, which
corruption was amended in the new Translations, that was made by order of King
James, who said in the conference at Hampton Court, that he had never seen a
true and sincere translation of the bible in English: but, of all these he had
seen, that of Geneva was the worst.

Having thus corrupted the text, they did also invent corrupt senses of it.
Calvin the great Foundator of Presbytery, understands, by Christ's descent to
hell; that he suffered in his Soul the pains of a damned man, and that
doubting of his Salvation, he vtteted words of desperation. For thus he writes
in his Institutions. Diros in anima cruciatus, Call. lib. 2. instit. cap. 16.
sect. 10.
damnati ac perditihominis pertulit etc. that is: he suffered in his soul, the
horrible pains of a damned and lost man. And writing on the 27. chap. of S.
Matthew, ver. 46. he says, that a word of desperation did fall from Christ. And
a little after. Sow see, says he, Call. in 27. Math. v. 46.
that he was vexed on all sides, that being overwhelmed with desperation, he
ceased from calling upon God, which was to renounce Salvation. O most strange
doctrine, which I find to be condemned by many as flat blasphemy! And yet
Calvin esteem's so much this blasphemous fancy, that he makes it the price of
our Redemption. For thus he writes: Nothing had been done, Call lib. 2 instit.
vt sup.
if Christ had only dyed a Corporal death: but it was also requisite, that he
should feel the severity of the wrath of God. And when this was objected as a
blasphemy, by F. Campian, Whitaker did second and sustain it, Vvitak. lib. ^.
cont. Dureum. sect. 18.
saying, that Calvin wrote most truly, that nothing had been done, if Jesus
Christ had only suffered a corporal death. Yea he calls this a doctrine most
full of comfort. These doctrines are so falls against the Scriptures, which show
nothing more frequently and clearly, then that we are redeemed by the blood and
death of Christ; and they are in themselves so absurd and blasphemous, that we
need spend no more time, in refutation of them: for they are of the same kind
with those, of which S. Hierome speaks, when he says. that to discover them,
is to vanquish them. Yea some Ptotestants have written against them, as Doctor
Bilson B. of Winchester in his book, Bilson in Apol. Prot. tract. 3. sect. 3.
number. 40.
which he intitles The full redemptein of mankind, by the death and blood of
Christ: And in the defense of the article, that Christ descended into hell etc.
But, notwithstanding all the gross absurdities of this sense, invented by
Calvin, yet it was generally followed by the Presbyterians, and by many other
Protestants, who denied the local descent of Christ's soul to hell. For
although it sounded very ill; yet it behooved to be kep't by the Presbyterians,
for want of a better, until a new one more commodious was found out, which now
lately has been performed by the new Reformers of these times, who see further
and more clearly, then M. Calvin, who, although he was famous in his own
generation, and was reputed to be an Apostle, sent extraordinarly by God, to
reform the Church; yet did not so much as know his Catechism, nor the true
sense of the articles of his Creed; but invented such a sense, as some of his
disciples have abandonned it, as false; and others, as blasphemous.

As Beza, in his version of the Scripture, turned, Hell into Grave; so he
understood this article of the Creed, he descended into Hell: that is, He
descended into the grave. Which error, together with the former coruption,
invented by M. Calvin, a learned Minister in Edinburgh, did publicly refute,
in diverse Sermons, a little before the troubles: for which he was much
persecuted by the Puritans. He show that Bezas corruption made a gross
Tautology, in the Apostles Creed, or it made an explication more obscure, then
the thing it explained. The Tautology would be very gross to say: Crucified,
dead, and buried, he descended into the grave; that would be twice buried. Or
if you make descending into hell, the explication of burial, that is a rare
Commentary, to explicate a matter, which is clear and needs no Co^mentary by
that, which is more obscure, and cannot yet be rightly understood by
Protestants: as appears by their dissensions. The same Minister show, that
both these vices were against the end of the Creed, and the wisdom of the holy
Apostles, who made it short and plain, that it might serve the capacity of all
men: and therefore it was to be free of idle Tautologies, and obscure
Commentaries. But, at that time, this Minister did not know, that the
Presbyterians were to deny the Creed, to have been composed by the Apostles; by
which his arguments are answered, although by falling into grosser absurdities.

The third sense devised by the Presbyterians, at Westminster, is subject to
the like inconveniences, that is: both of Tautologies, and obscure glosses. For
they say, by that article, He descended into Hell, is understood, that he
continued in the state of the dead, and under the power of death, till the
third day. For first, it would be a Tautology to say dead and buried, and then
repeat again he remained dead, or in the power of death: that is sufficiently
known, by the words, that follow, to wit: The third day, he arose from the
dead. For he behoved to remain dead so long as he was dead, and he was dead
till the third day, that he arose from the dead. So, that the addition of he
descended into hell, understood in the Ministers new coined sense, would not be
only superfluous, but also ridiculous. Then, if they will make Christ's descent
to hell, an explication of Christ's remaining dead, the Commentary would be more
obscure then the text, which is clear of it self. How would the Presbyterians
be pleased, if one would say of John Calvin, or Knox, or of their late Apostle
M. Henderson, that they are dead, buried, and descended into hell? And if this
man, being accused before the Presbytery, would bring, in his own defense, the
Ministers new Commentary, that he meaned only by these words, that they
remained in the power and state of death, because they are not as yet risen
from the dead. I am morally persuaded, what ever Commentary could be brought,
either their own or any other, the Presbyterians would be ill pleased with
such a Text, and would think it was sufficient to have said, that they were
dead and buried, without this addition. They descended into Hell.

But, of all the expositions, that ever I found on this article, that of the
late Protestant Bishop Usher, is the rarest, which D. Vane speaking of the
Ministers iuglings describes thus. D. Vane Lost sheep. page 243 1. Edit.
O what Serpentine wriglings and windings to escape the assaulters, do they
make! O what perverse, ridiculous and contradicting answers and evasions do
some of them make! In which they show at once both much wit, and much folly.
For fools could not speak, as they do; and wise men would not. In so much,
that B. Usher, Primat of Armagh, a very learned man, to avoid the Confession of
Christ's descent into Hell, according to the article of the Creed, in the plain
sense thereof, does so turn it and wind it, that he makes the sense of the
words, He descended into hell, to be, He ascended into Heaven. To such pitiful
refuges, does the weakness of a bad cause drive them etc. Thus he. And so, by
this Bishops Commentary, for descend we have ascend, and for Hell, Heaven. But
all these senses being nowayes satisfactory, the Presbyterians took the
cleanliest and easiest way, to deny the Creed it self, to be Apostolic; that
so men might not care much, or take great notice of the sense, when all
authority is taken from the text. That shift might, in some manner, serve their
turn, if this truth were not, as expressly in the Scripture, as it is in the
Creed.

Now, I would inquire at any man of conscience, or ordinary discretion, who
will consider impartially these things, what I should do in this case? should I
believe the Presbyterians, who have no Scripture for them, in this point, but
in express words, against them? should I give credit to those, who, to
maintain their error, did first manifestly corrupt the words of Scripture,
with false translations; and thereafter, did pervert the sense of them, with
blasphemous interpretations? should I believe those, who although they quitted
their first sense of blasphemy, did invent another full of Tautology, not so
impious, but very ridiculous. And who last of all, to complete the work, did
deny their Creed? Or should I believe the old and new Testament, the Prophets
foretelling, and the holy Apostles expounding? the holy Fathers so
understanding, and the whole primitive Church, assisted by the Spirit of truth,
so believing and professing? And last of all, should I believe my Creed, which
the whole Christian world did receive, as a most perfect, plain rule of faith,
composed by the holy Apostles, for the capacity of all men? I must profess,
that, after such a Trial, I could not put these authorityes, in the balance
together; much less could I prefer the Presbyterians inconstant, new opinion,
to the ancient, constant belief of the whole world; unless, I would have
renounced both Reason and Conscience.

CHAP. XII. A Reflection on the last, and an Entrance into the Trial of the
first supposed Reformation.
HAVING, by the Divine grace, and by the former considerations, discovered, as
well the falsehood of the forsaid Presbyterian Innovaons, as the ancient truth
of the Catholic doctrine, I was advised and much encouraged to make the like
trial, of the principal points of our first Reformation: as concerning the
Commandments, our justification, and the nature and effect of the Sacraments.
For i^t was represented unto me, that there was no less pretext of pure
Scripture, and a like loud cries of a great engyring light, for the last; then
was for the first Reformation. And seeing, by the former trial, I had
discovered these, last pretenses to be false: Why may not I have some
confidence to do the like, with the first, if I would use the l ke diligence?
And if the last Reformers have been mistaken and misled by passion, why might
not also their Predecessors over see themselves too: Or what assurance can any
man have of their infallibility, more then of the others? The Alterations, that
have been lately made by the Presbyterians do show (even in their Judgment)
that their first Reformers were not infallibly assisted. 2. I was put in mind,
that I had found lately some of the most eminent among them, to be Corrupters,
or as S. Paul speaks Adulterers; both of the letter and sense of the
Scriptures: and therefore, they are not to be altogether trusted, without
trial. In a word, great promises and assurances were made to me, that I would,
by this trial, find out the falsehood of the first, as I had done of the last
Reformation. and, by that means I might attain unto the possession of solid
truth, whereon I might safely rely, for the good of my soul. As truth can
endure just trial, and desires nothing more, by which it is more manifested; so
falsehood cannot abide trial, but always shuns it, because thereby it is
deceits are detected.

Catoch. Romans q. 12. Sa pientisfime Maiores nostri etc.
Lastly, it was showen unto me that the ancient Pastors of the Church, did most
wisely reduce the whole substance of the Christian doctrine, which is, of it
self, so large and plenteous, into these 4. heads: to wit the Apostles Creed,
the Sacraments, the Divine Commandments, and our Lords prayer: for all things
which belong either unto the knowledge of God, the creation and government of
the world, or the Redemption of mankind, the rewards of the good or the
punishments of the wicked, are contained in the Apostolic Creed. The signs
and instruments, which God has instituted for attaining grace, are the holy
Sacraments. The divine Commandments, show, what we ought to do; and our Lords
prayer does contain all, what we can wish or desire. And therefore, these are
(as it were) the four great Pillars, whereon the whole fabric of Christianity
relyes. Now it was told me, how I had found, by the former trial, that this
last pretended Reformation, had overturned two of these Pillars* to wit the
Apostles Creed, and the Lords prayer; besides the fundamental government,
established by Christ, in his Church. If then, I should find also, that the
first Reformation had overturned the other two Pillars: to wit the Divine
Commandments, and the holy Sacraments: Then I might Conclude, that the end and
intent of these Reformations (what ever was the intention of the Reformers)
has been, under the pretense of Reformation, total Deformation, and the
destruction of the Christian religion, and that, betwixt them, they have
completed that hydeous work of Desolation. For, if the first refomation took
away two, as the next has taken away other two; Then they both together have
subverted (so far as they could) the 4. great Pillars of Christianity: and the
last Presbyterian Reformation has completed, what the first had begun, and
had not perfected.

I begun then the trial of our first Reformation, with it is doctrine, concerning
the divine Commandments, and specially of the impossibility to keep them:
which was taught by our first, and is yet maintained by our last Reformers. For
it was showen to me, if the Commandments of God were possible to be keept (as
all wise and just laws are ordained for that end) that they may be observed;
Then we, by teaching they were impossible to be keep't, destroyed the very end,
for which the Commandments were made, and so destroyed the Commadements
themselves.

CHAP. XIII. Of the possibility, to keep the Divine Commandments, with the
assistance of Gods grace; denied by the Presbyterians and their first Reformers,
I had for some space, a preiudicate opinion, in this matter, against the
Catholic doctrine, which affirmed, as the Ministers taught, that it was
possible for any man to keep all the divine Commandments; yea and to do more
then God had commanded. I conceived that to be false. For, since no man, to my
knowledge, or their own confession, had kep't them all, or does keep them; I
thought it not possible they could keep them. For it would seem, if a thing
were possible, some one, among so many thousands, would put it in act. Upon the
other part, I was not well satisfied with our own doctrine, which teaches,
that it is altogether impossible to keep the Commandments of God: by reason of
a dangerous consequence, which a Catholic made me see to follow thereupon, to
wit: That so many thousands should be damned for not doing that, which was
utterly impossible for them to do. I wondered how that could stand with the
goodness and justice of God. For greater Tyranny and injustice cannot be
imagined, then to punish one with eternal misery and grievous pains, for not
doing that, which was altogether impossible for him to do. The light of Nature
would not permit me, to impute such cruelty to God, whose goodness and mercy I
knew to be unspeakable.

Having therefore seriously implored the Divine assistance, that I might come
to the knowledge of the truth, I received the first spark of light, in this
matter, by knowing the true state of the question. For I found that the Roman
Catholics did not teach, that men were able of themselves, that is by their
own strenth, or by any natural power, to keep the Divine Commandments; but
only they teach, that men are able to keep them, by the assistance of Gods
grace Now that particle of divine grace, was ordinarily suppres't by the
Ministers, in this question. And, when I knew this to be the true meaning and
express doctrine of the Catholics, as may be seen, Large Catech. West. after
the C mmandements.
in the Council of Trent, session 6. Canon 18. I imagined there was no real
Controversy, till I found, in the new Presbyterian Catechism, a particular
exception made against Gods grace. For, having there made this question: Is any
man able perfectly to keep the Commandments of God? They answer: No man is
able, either of himself, or by any Grace received in this life, perfectly to
keep the Commandments of God: but does daily break them, in thought, word and
deed. And, in the answer to the third question thereafter, They say, that every
sin, even the least, deserves Gods wrath and curse, both in this life, and
that, which is to come. This book is very obscure, in most points; but here it
speaks somewhat clearly: although again, by foysting in the word, perfectly,
it seems to cast a mist over our ey's, that the Authors of it, may lurk in
their obscurities, as we shall see hereafter. I found the Catholic doctrine to
be contrary, set down in these terms, by the Council of Trent: Consil. Trid.
sess. 6. can. 18.
If any man say, that the Commandments of God are impossible to be kep't, by a
man even justified, and constituted under grace, let him be accursed.

Being therefore desirous, to know the truth, I began first to consider the
testimonies of Scripture, for the strenth of Gods grace, to enable men to keep
his Commandments; which testimonies I found to be very strong and express. 1.
I saw that God promisheth clearly, in the Scriptures, to enable men to keep his
Commandments, yea and to make them actually keep them. Ezech. 36.27.
God says in Ezechiel: I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk
in my statutes, and you shall keep my Judgment, Ezech. 37. v. 23.24.
and do them. And again he says: They shall be my people, and I will be their
God, and David my servant shall be King over them etc. they shall also walk in
my judgments, keep my Commandments and do them. Where nothing is more clear,
then that God has promised, to enable men to keep his Commandments. But Gods
promises are true, for he is faitfull, Romans 4.21.
(as Abraham the Father of the faithful did profess and believe) and
whatsoever he has promised he is able and willing to perform. Therefore his
promises, which are ever true, have been truly and faithful fulfilled: And so
consequently some, by the help of Gods grace, have actually kept his
Commendements. Therefore they are not impossible, but possible to be kept by
the grace, which God gives in this life.

Secondly, I found, in the Scriptures, a real performance of this promise; for
some are recorded there by name, to have actually kept the Commandments of
God. S. Luke gives this excellent testimony of Zachary and Elyzabeth, the
parents of S. John Baptist: Luke 1.^.
They were both just before God, walking in all the Commandments and
ordinances or, (as it is in the Catholic translation) the iustifications of
our Lord, blameless. So that they were not only just before men, but also
before God, and they did not only walk in one, but in all the Commandments of
God, without blame. Genesis 6.9. Genesis 5.22.24.4. Reg. 2.11. Job. chapter 1. v. 1.
The Scripture also calls Noe, a just and a perfect man. Enoch and Elias were
so just and holy, that they are said, in the Scripture, to have walked before
God, and were translated. Job is also called, in the Scriptures, a perfect and
upright man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil. But most clearly is the
justice of Abraham exalted, by the mouth of God himself, who said to his Son
Isaac: Genes. 26.3.4.5.
I will perform the oath, which I swear unto Abraham thy father etc. In thy
seed, shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. Because that Abraham
obeyed my voice, and kept my precepts, my Commandments, my Ceremonies, and my
laws. What can be more clear, to prove the possibility of keeping Gods
Commandments, with the help of his grace: and to disprove the impossibility of
observing them. For what is impossible to be done by men, even with the
assistance of Gods grace, no man has done, or will do. But God himself and the
Scriptures show, that diverse have kept Gods Commandments. Therefore with the
help of his grace, they are possible and not impossible to be kept. Yea, it
appeared most consonant unto all reason and piety, that, if the Commandments
were possible, and were actually kept, by Gods grace, in the law of Nature, and
under the law of Moses, they should be more possible, and more easy to be
kept, under the law of Grace: when, by the fullness of Christ's Redemption,
Grace is more plentifully powered forth, and in which time, Esaias 30.26.
the Prophet Esaias foretells that the light of the Moon, should be as the light
of the Sun, and the light of the Sun should be sevenfold, and as the light of
seven days.

Thirdly, I found the Scripture to be so far from affirming the Commandments
of God to be impossible; that they avow the clear contrary, yea, and more then
the contrary. For a thing to be impossible, is much more, then to be hard or
difficult. What is impossible to men, cannot be done by any man: what is hard
and not impossible, may be done, although with difficulty. Now the Scriptures
affirms, that the Commandments of God are easy, which is not so much as
difficult, and therefore much less are they impossible. Christ says: Math.
11.29.30.
Take my yoke upon you etc. For my yoke is easy and my burden is light. And S.
John, a most faithful interpreter of our Saviors words, affirms, that Gods
Commandments are not heavy. John. 1. ep. chapter 5. v 3.
This is the love of God, says he, that we keep his Commandments: and his
Commandments are not heavy. And again, He that says, Chap. 2. v. 4.
he knows God and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and truth is not
in him. What is easy, light and not heavy, is neither hard, heavy nor
impossible. But the Commandments of God are an easy yoke, a light burden, and
they are not heavy, as our Savior and his beloved Disciple do affirm.
Therefore, they are not hard, nor heavy, and much less are they impossible.
Yea, I found it was the love of God, that made the Commandments, which seem
so hard and difficult to others, to be easy unto the Saints. David says, Psalm.
119.
that the Commandments of God were more sweet, then the honey or the honey
comb: and again, I did run in the way of thy Commandments, when thou did
enlarge my heart. Moreover all the children of God, love Christ, and they who
love him, as himself testifyeth, keep his words; John. 14.23.
and S. John says: This is the of love God that we keep his Commandments.
Therefore, having diligently considered these testimonies of the Scripture, I
found, that the Scripture was clearly for the possibility of keeping Gods
Commandments, with the assistance of his grace, as the Catholics teach; and
against the impossibility of observing them, as the Prerbyterians and almost
all Protestants hold. Whereupon, I took occasion to admire at two things.
First: how it was possible, that all the points of our religion are expressly
in Scripture; and that the contrary points, maintained by the Papists, are not
in Scripture; but condemned by it: since, upon serious trial, I found the
Scripture to be, in this matter, so clearly against us. 2. I did no less
admire, that I, reading frequently the Scriptures before this search, did not,
till now, observe our doctrine to be contrary unto it. But a Catholic to whom
I imparted my thoughts, some space thereafter, did quickly free me of these
admirations, by showing me the reasons of both. The first, said he, is not to
be much admired. For if the first Reformers had not pretended, that all their
new doctrines were expressly in the Scriptures, they had got no followers: and,
if the Ministers, did not continue to make the same pretense, there would be
few or none, so foolish, as to abide with them. This same pretense of Scripture
all Heretics have ever made, although their errors were clearly against
Scripture: And this pretense they must all make, if they intend to find any
Credit. The reason also of the second, said he, is no less evident: For it is
no wonder that, till of late, you did not find your doctrine to be contrary unto
the Scriptures: because you did read them before, very superficially, without
solid reflection and attention, as the most part of Protestants do, and many
also read them with preiudicate opinions, framing their faith unto the
Scripture, but wresting the Scripture unto their errors. That is not to search
the Scriptures, to which our Savior did exhort the Jews, who contented
themselves with the like superficial reading of them; and therefore could find
nothing of Christ in them. But he show, if they would search; that is, read
diligently and consideratly, they would find, that the Scriptures bare
testimony of him. The like may be said truly of the Catholic Church and
Religion: that, if the Protestants would search the Scriptures, they would find
therein sufficient and clear testimonies of them. Thus spoke the Catholic.

But although the above cited testimonies of the Scripture, appeared
sufficiently clear unto me; yet, least relying upon my own judgment, I might be
deceived: I had my next recours, after the Scriptures, to the exposition of the
holy Fathers, and to the belief of the holy Primitive Church. From which, the
old Episcopal Ministers did affirm, that the Papists were altogether
degenerated, and we were made by them to believe, that as our doctrine was
conform to the Scriptures, so it was also conform to the holy Fathers, who
were all said to be of our religion, true Protestants. But to speak mildly
whithout any exaggeration, I found that to be a gross untruth, and that the
Puritans, who either not claim the holy Fathers, or yield them unto the
Papists, are much more ingenuous in this matter, then the old Protestants, as
shall be seen God willing, in the progress of this Trial.

Concerning the possibility of keeping the divine Commandments, I found three
things to be clearly contained in the holy Fathers. 1. They affirm that the
Catholic doctrine is expressed in the Scriptures, which they did so understand
and expound. 2. They prove it by the light of reason, drawn from the nature,
justice, and goodness^ of God. They not only condemn the contrary, that is
Presbyterian doctrine as an heresy, but they accurse it, as a blasphemy against
God.

In proose of the first, S. Crysostom brings these words of our Savior, above
cited; My yoke is easy and my burden is light, Chrysostom. lib. de compunct. cordis.
and says. Christ him self has truly affirmed of his Commandments, that
there is nothing laborious, nothing troublesome in them, saying: my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light; And we, on the contrary, make them heavy, which
he has made light, and what he has made sweet, we make bitter, by sinning.
If there were any thing laborious in the Commandments, deservedly and decently
labor should accompany virtue; for rewards are propounded after labors. etc.
And elsewhere he explaines the same words daintily thus. Idem h^mil. 6.
Hearing my precepts to be a yoke, be not affray'd: for it is replenished with
rare delight. Neither fear ye that I name it a burden, in Math
for it is light. How then said he before, the gate to be narrow, and the way
to be straight through tribulation? O that is, when thou art drowsy, or a
dastard; but when with courage thou do that work, then the burden shall be
light etc. S. Augustine proves by these words of S. John: And his Commandments
are not heavy, that the Commandments are not only possible, but also easy, and
he shows, that it is the Love of God, which makes them light, and the want of
that love that makes them seem heavy. The precepts of God, says he, Aug. lib.
de not. and gra. c. 69.
are good, if we use them lawfully. For in so much, as it is believed most
firmly, that God, who is just and good, cannot command impossible things*
thereupon we are admonished, what we are to do in easy matters; and in
difficult, what to request and pray for: For all are made easy to charity, to
which alone the burden of Christ is light, or it is the burden it self which is
light, according to that which is said. And his Commendements are not heavy.
And let him, to whom the^ be heavy, consider, that it could not have been said
in holy Scripture, they are not heavy, unless there could be such a
disposition of heart, to which they are not heavy, and let him pray for that,
which is commanded And a little after: How can that be heavy which is the
Commandment of charity. For either a man does not love and then the command is
heavy; or else he does love, and then it cannot be heavy. In which words,
diverse notable things are contayn'd. I took notice principally of these. 1.
That he says, the possibility of keeping the Commandments is most firmly
believed. 2. he does not only prove it by Scriptures, but also by the nature of
God; that he, who is just and good, could not command things impossible. 3.
That the Commandments of God are heavy to those, who want the love of God; but
they are light to those who have it. Yea, the same holy Doctor shows, by the
testimony of S. Paul, that Christ came into the world, and laid down his life,
for this end; that he might obtain grace unto us, whereby we might be enabled
to keep the Commandments of God, which were before so hard and difficult. Rom
8.3.4.
Thus speaks S. Paul. For that, which was impossible, to the law in that it was
weakened by the flesh: God sending his Son in the similitude of the flesh of
sin, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh: That the justice of the law might
be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Aug.
lib. de Spi. and lit. cap. 19.
Upon which words S. Augustine says: The law was given, that grace might be
sought after: and grace was given, that the law; might be fulfilled: for not by
any fault of the law the law was not fulfilled; but by the wisdom of the flesh,
which fault was to be showed by the law, but to be cured by grace. For that
which was impossible for the law etc. S. Hierom brings the same place of ^.
Paul, against the Pelagians, to prove that man is not able by his own strenth
or free will, Hieren. ad Ctesiphont.
but only by the grace of Christ, to keep the law of God. Behold there the
Catholic doctrine, affirmed by the holy Fathers, not of their own heads, but
proved by the Scriptures. And that this was the general belief of the holy
Fathers, and of the ancient Church, it was made appear unto me, by the second
Arausican Council, celebrated about S. Augustins time, Araus. Council. 2. c. 25.
which makes this profession: We believe, according to the Catholic faith,
that by grace received in baptism, all such as are baptized, Christ helping
and cooperating, may and ought to fulfill, if they will labor faithfully,
these things that belong to Salvation. So it is evident, that the holy Fathers
and ancient Church, believed this doctrine to be contained in the Scriptures:
which is sufficient for my purpose.

This same truth is confirmed by S. Augustine, not only by the Scriptures, but
also by reason. Some one may say, says he; I can by no means love my enemies.
To which he answer's thus. God says to thee in all the Scriptures, Aug. sermon.
61. de temp.
that thou can. Consider now whether thou or God ought to be believed: and
therefore, since truth cannot lie, let humane weakness forbear it is vain
excuses. For he, who is just, could not command any thing that is impossible:
and he, who is good, will never condemn man for that, which he could not
avoid. So that, according to S. Augustine, the Presbyterians belief is not only
against all the Scriptures, although they pretend to believe nothing beside
Scriptures: but also against sound reason: that is, against both the justice
and goodness of God. Hieron. epist. ad Celant.
S. Hierome also affirms that these, who say, that God has commanded any
thing impossible, pronounce God to be unjust.

Moreover, the same two most renowned and holy Fathers do not only teach the
Catholic doctrine; but also they censure the contrary, that is the
Presbyterians opinion, as blasphemy, in the Heretics of their time. We
accurse, says S. Augustine, Aug. sermon. 191. de temp. execramur eorum
blasphemiam etc. Hier. in Symbol. ep. 17.
their blasphemy, that affirm God commanded any thing impossible to man; and
that Gods Commandments cannot be kept of any man in particular, but of all men
taken together. The same is repeated by S. Hierome. So that these holy Fathers
do judge this error not only to be an heresy, but also a blasphemy. And yet
these new Reformers (which is a thing most admirable and deplorable) make such
blasphemies, the principal articles of their faith: and they have also most
tyrannically enforced others, under pretext of giving them only pure Scripture,
to swear and believe such horrible errors and blasphemies, for divine truths.
But I found that some more prudent and conscientious Protestants, have
abandoned this wicked Calvinisticall opinion, yea and condemned it, as the holy
Fathers had done, for blasphemy. Mr Shelford a Minister in England, has
written a Treatise expressly on this matter, Shelford p. 147.
to prove the possibility of the law, with the assistance of Gods grace: where
he censures the contrary opinion by the Scriptures and Fathers, and by the
authority of King James. For this he speaks. King James, upon the Lords prayer,
affirms it to be blasphemy to say, that any of Christ's precepts are
impossible because this is to give him the lie, who, out of his own mouth told
us, that his yoke is easy, and his burden light. And his inward disciple S. ^n
says, his Commandments are not grievous. from whence S. Basil the great
averreth. Impious it is to say the precepts of Gods Spirit are impossible. Thus
he. Behold, Bas. hom. 3.
what the Presbyterians do esteem a principal article of their faith, how a
learned Protestant, (whose book came forth in the year 1635. with great
applause in Cambridge) and King James (who was head of the Church of England)
do condemn as blasphemy and impiety, and a giving the lie to God. I hear
also, that some of the new Independent Congregations in England, do no less
sharply condemn the same Presbyterian opinion.

But, besides all these pressing authorities, I found also some convincing
reasons against the Presbyterians; which I will briefly collect. 1. It cannot
stand with the goodness and justice of a lawgiver, such as God is, to impose
upon people laws, which are impossible to be kept, and then to punish them
with loss of goods and life, for not observing these impossible laws. The
greatest Tyrant on earth did never arrive to that hight of impiety and cruelty.
Therefore it is impossible, that God, who is good and just, should commit such
cruelty and injustice. To this accords S. Augustine, in his words above cited
when he says. Aug. ser. 61. de temp.
God could not command any thing impossible, because he is just, neither will
he damn a man for that, which he could not avoid, because he is merciful. Yea
these absurdities of injustice and cruelty would follow, against the goodness
of God, in a high degree; in how much the punishment he inflicts is greater*
then can be inflicted by man, although the greatest Tyrant on earth. For what
is the lo^^ of temporal goods and life, in comparison of the loss of heaven,
and of the death both of Soul and body, in the eternal pains of Hell?
Therefore it is no wonder, that the holy Fathers, and some Protestants do detest
the Presbyterian doctrine, as extreme blasphemy. 2. It does not only incroach
upon the goodness and justice of God; but also upon his wisdom. For as it is
certain, that God made these laws; so it is no less evident in the
Scriptures, that God uses admonitions and exhortations, propounds rewards and
threatens punishements, to induce men to observe his laws. Now what Magistrate
would be esteemed to be in his right wits, who would not only make laws
impossible to be kept, but also spend time in making exhortations, and
propounding rewards, to persuade men, to do impossibilities? But the
Presbyterian doctrine makes God, who is not only wise, but wisdom it self,
subject to both these follies, which are most gross absurdities. And
therefore, since his laws, admonitions, and exhortations cannot be but prudent
and reasonable: they do ever suppose the possibility of that, which they
enjoin, and whereunto they exhort. 3. The Presbyterian doctrine is not only
injurious to God, but also it is very prejudicial to man: for it would rob him
of the most excelcellent of all virtues, to wit, the love of God. For none can
love another, unless he be good and just, or at least appear to be so. But
how can God appear to be so, who is described by the Presbyterians, as if he
were the most cruel Tyrant in the world, to command impossibilities, and then
to punish man eternally for not doing them? Therefore, if the Prerbyterian
doctrine were true, no man could love God, as good and gracious: but rather
would hate him, as unjust and Tyrannous. 4. The Presbyterian opinion is a great
enemy to piety, and virtue. For, if the Commandments be impossible, none will
strive to keep them: and, by this means, a wide gate is opened to all impiety.
This is acknowledged, by the forementioned Minister M. Shelford, who says:
Were the law impossible to be kept, then all the exhortations, and threatenings
in Gods word should be idle: then all men's labors would wax lazy, and then,
good life, which is after the rule, would be exiled: for that no man will
strive against the stream. Wherefore, great enemies are they to Christian
growth, and reward in the way of Godliness, who are against this doctrine, to
wit, of the possibility to keep the Commandments. Lastly, if the law were
impossible, then all men would be freed from subjection and obedience to it:
for who can be reasonably tied to things merely impossible? And this was the
use, that Islebius, one of Luthers Scholars, made of his doctrine; whereupon
he began the sect of the Anti-nomians: as Sleidan does testify in the 12. book
of his history.

Having therefore found such clear testimonies of Scriptures and Fathers, and
such weight of right reason, for the ancient Catholic doctrine; I could not,
either in reason, or conscience, reject all these, and follow the Presbyterians
groundless fancies, which are against the very ground of faith, to wit, the
holy Scriptures. For the Presbyterians do teach, that the commandments are
impossible, even with Gods grace; And the Scripture says they are easy, light
and not heavy, which is more then if it had affirmed, that they were merely
possible. Again, the Presbyterians, by affirming the commandments are
impossible, do aver that never any did keep them, does, or shall keep them.
The Scripture shows, in express terms, that Abraham, Zachary and Elizabeth,
and others did keep them, and that God has promised many should keep them. S.
John affirms: that he who says, he knows God and keeps not his
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. The Presbyterians do
profess, that they know God, and that they neither do, nor can keep his
commandments; and yet they will not be esteemed liars, but rather true
Professors. For my part, I am not able to reconcile such manifest
contradictions, as are in this matter, betwixt the Scriptures and the
Presbyterians. And therefore, seeing I cannot adhere to both, I choosed rather
to abandon the Presbyterians, in thi^ matter, then to forsake the Scriptures. I
was much confirmed in this resolution, when I saw the Catholic doctrine and
sense of the Scriptures, to be so clearly in the holy Fathers, that, by no
shifts, their testimonies can be shunned. But I will add to these testimonies
already brought, one or two more; which seemed to me very clear and efficacious
How, I pray you, says Saint Augustine, is it impossible unto man, to love;
Aug. ser. 47. de Sanc*
to love, I say, a bountiful Creator, and a most loving father, and then also
to love his own flesh in his brethren? but he, who loves, has fulfilled the
law, as the Apostle teaches. Wherefore, the same holy Father admiring the
great goodness and bounty of God, Romans 3.
who requires nothing of us, but to love him; who is so good in himself, and so
gracious to us; he speaks thus unto him. What is man, that thou will have thy
self to be beloved by him? Aug. lib. 1. Confess. c. 5.
and if he do not love thee, thou threatens him with great punisments? But is
not this punishment great enough, if I do not love thee? S. Chrysostom to the
like purpose, says: God commanded nothing impossible, in so much, Chry. hom.
19. in Heb. and hom. 18. de Poenit.
that many go beyond the very commandments. And then he shows, who these
were, to wit S. Paul, S. Peter, even all the quire of Saints. Lastly, the holy
Fathers do not only prove the Catholic doctrine, by the Scriptures, and most
solid reason founded upon the goodness and justice of God; but they condemn
also the contrary opinion, as a flat blasphemy against God. Which censure is
approved likewise by some Protestants. Truly, I cannot resist these reasons and
authorities, and follow the Presbyterians, to make a doctrine, which is against
the Scriptures, and is condemned, as blasphemy by the holy Fathers, and by some
Protestants, a principal article of my faith.

CHAP. XIV. A Consideration of the Presbyterians principal grounds, against
the Possibility, of keeping the Divine Commandments.
HAVING received abundant satifaction, in this matter, concerning the
Catholic doctrine, I will briefly run through the Presbyterians principal
grounds against it; which in this search, I did not leave unconsidered. 1. I
found they acknowledged the Novelty of their doctrine. 2. They brought no pure
Scripture to prove it; notwithstanding they pretend to believe nothing, but
Scripture. 3. The Scriptures they bring, are privately expounded by them,
against the holy Fathers and ancient Church, and against the Scriptures
themselves, in other places. 4. They lay down some false Maxims and weak
reasons, whereon they build their imaginary faith, or rather most dangerous
error.

Calvin acknowledges the novelty and singularity of his doctrine, Call. lib. 2.
Instit, cap. 7, sect. 5.
in these words. That we said the observation of the law to be impossible, is
briefly to be explained and confirmed, for it was wont commonly to be esteemed,
a most absurd opinion; in so much as Hierome did not doubt to denounce a curse
to it; but I care nothing what Hierome thought. Cent. 2. ^. cap. 4.
The Centuriators also of Magdeburg do acknowledge the same, that the most
ancient Fathers, as S. Justin Martyr, Tertullian, S. Cyprian and many more did
affirm, that the law was possible to be kept. This Confession of Calvin and
the Centurists, did manifest sufficiently unto me the antiquity of this
Catholic doctrine; and that it was no late invention of the Popes, as the
Ministers were wont to pretend falsely of the whole Catholic religion.

Then for Scripture, they cannot bring so much as one place, which contains
expressly the article of their belief, to wit: That the Commandments are
impossible to be kept, even with all the grace that Goh gives in this life.
Calvin brings these words of our Savior. Call lib. 2. Instit. cap. 8. sect. 8.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy strenth
etc. Whereupon he and his followers do scance, after this manner. To love God
with all our heart, requires all the faculties of out Soul, to be always
applied unto the love of God, which none can do. From which they infer, that
we are so far from being able to keep all the Commandments, that we cannot so
much as keep the first. In answer to which, a Catholic show me, that he did
acknowledge the words of Scripture; but that Calvin's private interpretation and
inference upon them, is no Scripture. 2. he said, that besides that Calvin's
glosses and consequences were no Scripture, they were not to be much regarded;
since they were against the holy Fathers, who will be preferred to him, in the
judgment of all wise men. 3. They are less to be regarded, or rather much to
be detested, seeing they are expressly against the Scriptures themselves, in
other places. For Calvin says, that none can love God with all his heart; and
David says in the Scripture, Psalm. 118.10.
speaking to God. I have sought thee in my whole heart. And God himself
approves this testimony to be true, when he gave order to the Prophet to say to
Jeroboam: 3. Kings 14.8.
Thou have not been, as my servant David: who kept my Commandments and
followed me with his whole heart. 4. Reg. 23.25.
The Scripture says also of Josias That, he turned unto the Lord in all his
heart, in all his Soul, and in all his might, according to all the law of
Moses. Therefore it is false against Scriptures themselves, what Calvin says;
that it is impossible for any to love God with all his heart, and consequently,
his interpretation of the love of God, Shel. p. 142.
is also false. M. Shelford a Protestant Minister says, we love God with all
our heart, when we prefer him above all the world, and above our lives, as
the Martyrs did: when we will not offend God, not part from his love, for the
love or fear of no Creature. This is the love of God with all our heart, which
is here commanded, whereunto we are obliged, and which by Gods grace, may be by
us fulfilled, as it was done by Abraham, Zachary and Elyzabeth. For how could
the Scripture say, that they kept all the Commandments, and walked in them
blameless; if they had not kept the first and greatest of all the
Commandments? The absolute and highest perfection of loving God, is neither
commanded nor can be exercised in this life, but can only be attayn'd to in the
heavens; where the fulfilling of it (as S. Augustine speaks) is not obedience,
but happiness. Thus spoke the Catholic with more words, whereby I received
good satisfaction.

2. The Presbyterians pretend, it is impossible to keep this other Commandment:
Thou shall not covet. Because they say that here is forbidden all motion of
concupiscence, although involuntary, and albeit we resist unto it: Whereof none
in this life can be free. Shel. p. 143.
To which I find the same M. Shelford answer, saying; that the consent of the
will is only forbidden here, and the cherishing of the first motion to sin,
according to the Scripture every where: Romans 6.12.
let not sin reign in your mortel bodies and, Go not after thy concupiscences
to fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans 14. Aug. ad Julian. lib. 2. prope finem.
Touching which matter, S. Augustine says most clearly: As for us we would ever
be without sin, till this evil (of concupiscence) were healed, if we did not
consent unto it to evil. Therefore, not to consent unto concupiscence, is no
sin, and by the grace of God we may not consent; and therefore we may keep that
Commandment. Thou shall not Covet.

3. They bring these words of S. John. 1. John. 1.8. Prover. 24.16.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth is not in us.
Moreover, Solomon says the just man falls 7. times a day. From which they
infer, that it is impossible to keep the Commendemens so much as one day. I
remember that a Catholic answered me, obiecting these places to him against
the possibility of the Commandments, and said: that there was this difference
between the Catholics and the Protestants, that the Protestants make the
Scripture to contradict it self, neither have they any probable way, nor care
they much how to reconcile these contradictions, but think it sufficient to lay
hold on that, which they imagine makes for them. As here, because. S. John
says: if we say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, they conclude
that it is impossible to keep the Commandments, whereas the Scripture shows
that Abraham, Zachary and Elizabeth kept the Commandments, and therefore they
make the Scripture say as much, as if it said they kept the Commandments, and
they kept not the Commandments, which are flat contradictions. But Catholics
clearly show, that one may keep the Commandments, as Abraham and others did,
and yet not be free of sin: because the Scripture affirms both. These two
truths are not contrary one to another, as the Presbyterians do imagine. For
one does keep the Commandments, who does nothing against charity, or the love
of God, which is the end of the Commandments, as S. Paul affirms: and that
only is properly a breach of the Commandments, which breaks love and
friendship with God. But that is only done by mortal or grievous sins, and not
by light or venial faults, such as an idle inoffensive word, a little
immoderate laughter, Aug. de not. and gra cap. 38.
and such like, as S. Augustine reckons out, in his book of Nature and grace.
For such lights faults do not break friendship with God, since they do it not
reasonably with men. Now, by the grace of God, men may be free of mortal sins,
although not of venial imperfections, and therefore they may keep the
Commandments, and yet not be free of sin. This truth is clearly delivered by S.
Augustine. Aug. sermon. 56. de temp.
As no man, says he, ever has been, or ever shall be without small offenses;
so we, by Gods help and aid, may and ought to be without any manner of Capital
crimes. And again he shows, that, albeit Zachary kept all the Commandments,
yet he was not without sin: for being a Priest he was to offer up Sacrifice,
not only for the sins of others, but also for his own sins, as S. Paul
affirms: whereas Christ Jesus was the only priest, who being free of all sin,
did offer up Sacrifice only, for the sins of others. Et elsewhere he says:
Because sin does often steal upon us in light matters, Id. lib. de not. and gr.
cap. 38.
and sometimes unawares, they were both just and not without sin. So that by
the distinction of mortal and venial sin (which is sufficiently expressed by
our Savior, when he said: Math. 5.22.
Who is angry with his brother, shall be in danger of Judgment. Who shall say
Raca, shall be in danger of a Council. And who shall say, Thou fool, shall be
guilty of Hellfire. Which is also clearly contained, in the holy Fathers, and
is consonant to right reason) these places of Scripture, which show that some
kept the Comma^dments, and the others which teach, that the just are not
always without sin, are both true, and easily reconciled. But the
Presbyterians quite the first, and to maintain their error, adhere only to
the last, which they also falsely expound, against the sense of the holy
Fathers, and the very words of the other Scriptures.

After these Principal Scriptures, which they bring, Luth. tom. 1. fol. 196.
Call. lib. 3. Instit. c. 14. sect. 9. Shel. p. 146.
I considered next their chief Maxims and reasons. Luther and Calvin do
teach, that all the best actions, even of the greatest Saints, are mortal sins:
and the Presbyterians do generally insist in the same doctrine. From which
indeed it follows very clearly, if it were true, that the Commandments are
impossible to be kept. I will bring a Protestant Minister giving his Iudgmens
of this doctrine, which was taught by his two first Apostles. It may be
objected, says M. Shelford in his foresaid treatise, that the very best works
of the Saints are unclean, impure, menstruous and mortal sins; therefore it is
impossible, for any man, to keep the law. I answer, says he, They that say so,
cannot in my judgment, be excused from extreme blasphemy: Yet, seeing it is out
of ignorance, they may happily obtain pardon, as the Jews did, who crucified
our Savior. Can the works and the fruits of the holy Ghost be impure? Has
Christ purchased to himself nothing but a filthy and impure generation, which
can do nothing but sin, and that mortally? How can this but derogate from the
grace and wisdom of God? from grace, that it cannot purify the heart from
filthiness: from his wisdom and justice, to reward menstruous rags (for so
they term them) with heaven? Thus he. So that in his iudgemens, this maxim of
M. Luther and Calvin, is not only false but also blasphemous against the merits
of Christ, and the power of his grace. 1. Cor. 7.2^.
It is likewise clearly against the Scripture. For S. Paul says: If a Virgin
marry, she sins not: but if we believe the Presbyterians, she sins,
whether she marie or marie not. Christ says of S, Mary Magdalene: Marc. c. 4.6.
she has wrought a good work on me. But if these men speak true, she wrought
an evil work. In a word: I found their words to be against Christ's words, and
the holy Scriptures.

I found also that their reasons were very vnsolid, as for example when they
say: none does keep the Commandments; therefore none can keep them. For
although the antecedent were true, the consequence is very false. And it is
just as you would say, Adam did not keept Gods Commandment in paradise;
Therefore he was not able by Gods grace to keep it: Which is most ridiculous
and a false kind of reasoning; for we can do many things, with the help of
Gods grace, which we do not. S. Hierome clears this matter, when writing
against the Pelagians he says: God has commanded things possible, Hier. lib.
3. cont Pelag. c. 1.
of this no man doubts: but because men do not these things that are possible;
therefore all the world has need of the mercy of God.

Then, when express Scripture is produced, showing, that diverse have actually
kept the Commandments; I have heard some Presbyterians say, that no such men
are living now a days. This they do, judging all men by themselves, Of such
persons S. Hierome says: Hier. in cap. 5. Math.
Many judging the Commandments of God by their own weakness, and not by the
strenth of the Saints, think all the Commandment; of God to be impossible. But
if diverse kept the Commandments in the law of nature, and under the law of
Moses; how much more may it be justly thought, that many have kept them in the
law of grace* when the law of the Spirit reigns, and when the motives of the
love of God, as the death and passion of Christ, and the like, are much more
efficacious, then they were before his coming: when these things were known,
but very obscurely? At least this confession of theirs, (to wit that diverse
are recorded in the Scriptures to have kept the Commandments) shows, that they
are not absolutely impossible.

For this cause (as would seem) the Presbyterians, being pressed also with the
weight of other reasons, have begun to say of late: that the Commandments are
not absolutely impossible, but only that they are impossible to be kept
perfectly. But this being an ambiguous expression and very apt to deceive; I
was desirous to know, in what sense it was true, and in what not; and in what
sense the Presbyterians intend it. Whereupon a Catholic, who did much assist
me in this trial, show me: that in this matter concerning the observation of
the Commandments, there may be distinguished two kinds of perfection, to wit:
perfection in parts, and perfection in degrees. The first is, when one having
the love of God; endeavors to keep not a part only, but the whole law of
God; as Josias did, who turned unto God, according to all the law of Moses To
this perfection, all men are obliged: for he, who offends in one, is guilty of
all, as S. James teaches. And as all are obliged to this perfection of keeping
the whole law; so by Gods grace, they may perform it. Perfection in degrees is,
when the commandments are kept in the highest degree of perfection; as the
Angels and Saints in heaven do love and obey God, most perfectly. Now, as the
commandments cannot be kept here in this life, according to that highest degree
of perfection; so neither are they required to be kept so perfectly of us. But
they may be kept in an inferior degree of perfection, which God does justly
exact of us. For clearing of which matter, the same Catholic show me, that
there are three states of perfection containd in Scripture. 1. They are called
perfect, who always actually love God, and refer all actually to his glory.
This state of perfection, is only proper to the blessed Saints in heaven; and
as it cannot be attaind to in this life; so neither is it commanded. Of this
perfection, S, Paul speaks, when he says: Philip. 1.12. Et ver. 15.
Not that I have now received, or now am perfect; but I pursue, if I may
comprehend. And yet, immediately thereafter, he calls himself and others
perfect, in another inferior degree of perfection. Let us therefore, says he,
as many as are perfect, be thus minded. 2. They are called perfect, who,
although they do not always actually love God, and think upon him; yet they
consecrate themselves totally to Gods service, and leave willingly all worldly
things, to please him; according to that of our Savior, If thou will be
perfect, go and sell all thou have, and give to the poor etc. This perfection
is not commanded, but only counseled, as the holy Fathers constantly teach;
and albeit it be not commanded; yet many, by Gods grace, do attain unto it.
Lastly, they are called perfect, who are ready to foresake and loose all,
before they loose the love and friendship of God. This last kind of perfection
is required of all men: as God said to Abraham: Genes. 17.1. Math. 5. Genes. 6.
1. Cor. 2.6.
walk before me and be thou perfect: and Christ said to his disciples: be ye
perfect. The Sripture calls some perfect in this sense, for it says, that Noe
was a just and a perfect man; And S. Paul says, we speak wisdom among the
perfect. To this state, a proportionable degree of perfection, in keeping the
commandments, is required: which by Gods grace may be performed. Of this
perfection S. Augustine speaks, when he says: that the justice, by which the
just man lives, Aug. cont. duas epist. Pelag. lib. 3. c. 7.
albeit, for the capacity of this life, it be not vndeservedly called perfect,
yet it is little in regard of that great justice, which the equality of Angels
does contain.

Hence it may easily appear, in what sense, the Commandments of God ought, and
may be kept perfectly, and in what not. To wit: they may be kept perfectly in
all the parts, not one excepted, and in some degree of perfection, although
they cannot be kept perfectly, during this life, in the highest degree, which
is not commanded, nor required of us. If the Presbyterians followed this sense,
they were not to be reproved, but they have a quite contrary meaning. For they
deny all possibility of keeping the Commandments any wise perfectly, either in
parts, or the lowest degree of perfection: as may be seen in their new
Catechism: where they say that no man is able, by any grace received in this
life* to keep the Commandments perfectly, but every one breaks them daily in
thought, word and deed etc. So that their sense of the impossibility to keep
the Commandments perfectly, is most false, if not blasphemous. For either God
commands that perfection, which they say is above their force and power, or
he commands it not. If he commands it not; then they may fulfill the law
perfectly; because it is a law no further, then it commands: and if so far it
may be fulfilled; then may it be fulfilled perfectly. Therefore it is false,
which they say, that it cannot be fulfilled perfectly. If they say, that
overplus of perfection, which is above their power, is commanded, as they do
ordinarily; then they make God to be a Prince unreasonable, in commanding us to
do that which is not in our power to do; and to be Tyrannous and cruel, in
punishing us eternally, for not doing that, which was above our reach to
perform. All which do make against the wisdom, goodness and justice of God:
and therefore these opinions are condemned by the holy Fathers, and by some
Protestants, as blasphemous. Thus spoke the Catholic.

Moreover, I remember he show me, that there was a notable difference, in this
matter, between the Catholics and the Presbyterians. For the last, said he, do
free themselves, and put the blame of all their wickedness and sluggishnesse
upon God; alleging that he has given them a law impossible to be kept, even
with all the help and grace that he gives them. But the Catholics do free God
of all blame, and impute justly their breaking of the law, to their own
wickedness alone. S. Hierome shows the humor of the Presbyterians, in these
words: Hier. epist. ad Celant.
We cry against God, and we say, that we are oppressed with the difficulty or
impossibility of his Commandments. Neither is it sufficient, that we do not
keep his Commandments; unless We pronounce the Commander to be unjust: whilst
we complain, that the Author of equity, has Commanded not only hard things,
but also impossibilities. The Church of Christ, said the same Catholic, has
been troubled in this matter, with two opposite heresies, to wit: of the
Pelagians and the Calvinists. The first taught of old, that the Commandments
were possible to be kept, without the grace of God: and the others of late
teach, that the Commandments are impossible to be kept, even with the grace of
God. The Church of Christ keeps the medium of truth, between these opposite
errors. Against the first she teaches, that the Commandments may be kept, but
not without Gods grace: and against the second, that they may be kept with Gods
grace. And therefore, against both these enemies, as well to one another, as to
grace; she defends the grace of God. Against the first, she shows the
necessity of grace; and against the second, she maintains the power and
efficacy of it. But there is this notable difference, between Pelagius and
Calvin, in their opposition of grace; that the first is an open enemy to it,
and the second is a great friend in words, but no less enemy in deeds. For,
whilst he vndervalues all the faculties and natural powers of man, he would
seem to cry up grace, and to give all the glory to God. But when he teaches
again, that grace is not able to purify our souls, or make us able to walk in
the Commandments of God; he quite overthrowes grace. God, who of his mercy
delivered this Island from the first heresy; may also, in his own time, deliver
it from the second. Thus he.

But I did oppose unto him that, which I heard some Ministers say, that God
might justly command things impossible to man fallen: because it is sufficient,
that they were possible to man, before his fall; and seeing, by his own fault,
they became impossible, God may justly exact them, without the least imputation
either to his justice or goodness.

To this he answered: that the authorities of the Scriptures and holy Fathers,
are for the possibility of the law, after the fall: And the Fathers show by
most solid reasons, that God could neither with his justice, or goodness
impose impossible laws, after the fall, and punish the transgressors of them
with eternal pains. Therefore this reason or rather pretense of the Ministers,
being no Scripture, but rather against Scripture, and the holy Fathers, who
knew found reason, as well as the Ministers, is not to be regarded. 2. As a man
who was rich, and had misspent his estate, cannot be justly commanded by any new
law, to pay as much tribute as when he had his estate; nor be punished for not
paying it thereafter, for such a law would be both unjust and ridiculous,
commanding impossibilities: and so would be no law, and the makers of it, would
be both unreasonable and cruel. So man, after the fall of Adam, could not, by
any new law, be justly commanded by God, to do that, which was impossible unto
him, unless we would make that new law unjust and ridiculous, and God him self
unreasonable and Tyrannous. Therefore, since God made and promulgated his law,
long after the fall of man, used, exhortations, propounded rewards, and
threatened punishments, to induce men to keep it, and all his actions are just
and wise; they presuppose necessarly the possibility of keeping that law with
the assistance of his grace; or else such things, would not be only against
Gods goodness, and justice; but also against ordinary prudence.

Moreover, the same Catholic show me, that the Presbyterians, who accuse the
Catholics falsy, for taking away the second commandment, as they call it (of
which matter we shall have occasion to speak more fitly hereafter) may be
justly accused, for taking away, in reality, not one, but all the
commandments: For their error of the impossibility of them, destroys the end,
for which they and all just laws are made, to wi t, that they may be kept; and
so they destroy the Whole divine commandments, and make them of no effect, yea
this error destroies also the end of Christ's Incarnation and Passion, if we
will believe S. Augustine, For, having brougt many passages of Scripture, to
this purpose, he subioyns, Quibus appaparet D. Iesum Christum nullam aliam ob
causam in carnem venisse etc. Aug. lib 1 de pecc. mer and rem. c. 26.
where he shows very largely, that Christ, for no other cause, came unto the
world, and became obedient unto the death of the Cross* but that he might
reconcile sinners to God, destroy the power of sin, obtain grace from God, to
make us walk in newness of life, and in obedience of his holy commandments.
Whereby it may be seen, what a dangerous fundamental error this is, which is
against such principal and fundamental points of the Christian religion.
Therefore the Presbyteria^s, would de well to make use of the same holy Fathers
sound advice, when he says. Let him, to whom the commandments are heavy,
know, Aug. lib. de perfect* institue c. 10.
that he has not got the gift, to wit of the love of God, by which, they are
made not heavy, but yet, though he find them heavy let him not, be broke with
despair, but let him be enforced and stirred up, to seek, to beg, and to
knock. But the Presbyterians, (who hereby may know, that they want the love of
God) cannot make immediate use of this wholesome counsel, to seek and beg that
love of God, by which his commandments are made easy; till they first correct
or rather quite their erroneous faith, whereof they make this a chief article,
that it is impossible to love God, or keep his commandments. Therefore they must
first beg true faith, that they may believe Gods commandments to be possible,
with help of his grace; and then they may beg and obtain the second, to wit,
the love of God, by which they may find grace to fulfill them. This article of
the Presbyterians faith gave occasion to a Catholic Gentleman of my
acquentance, to say to the Presbyterians, who were much pressing him to
subscrib the Covenant: that he would never be of their religion: who professed
they did not love God; yea and made it an article of their faith, that they
could not love him. Thus he.

Having therefore diligently considered all these grounds, I could no longer
believe the impossibility of keeping Gods commandments, even with the help of
his grace, as an article of my faith reveald in Scripture; which I found to be
against Scripture, and against the goodness, justice and wisdom of God; Which
the holy Fathers and some Protestants do call extreme blasphemy; which
destroys the virtue and power of Gods grace; which puts the blame of our
negligence and sluggishnesse, from our selves, and lays all upon God: which is
against the end of Christ's Incarnation, and merit of his Passsion; which
hinders the growth of piety, and opens a gate to all wickedness, and makes all
the divine commandments of no effect. But, upon the contrary, I resolved by
Gods grace, to embrace and believe the ancient Catholic doctrine, concerning
the possibility of keeping the commandments with the help of Gods grace; Which
I found to be so clearly expressed in Scriptures, so strongly maintaind by the
holy Fathers, so consonant to right reason, justice and piety, and which did
make so much for the glory of Gods grace, and the merits of Christ's death and
passion.

CHAP. XV. Of Justification by Faith only, maintained by the Presbyterians and
their first Reformers, as the principal article of their Religion.
AFTER the trial of our doctrine, concerning the Commandments; I considered,
in the next place, our doctrine of Justification, not only because this has
connection with the former, but also for the importance of the matter. For I
have read, and heard this article of Justification by faith only, called by
many Protestants, the soul and life of their religion, and of all articles the
principal and greatest; on the contrary, they call Justification by works, the
life of Popery: so that M. Fox says, that Luther, Fox Acts. Man. p. 402.
by opening a certain vein which lay long hid, to wit, our Justification by
faith only, did overturne the foundation of Popery. Moreover, I have heard it
affirmed, that Justification by faith only was so certain a truth, and so
evidently contained in the Scriptures, that some of the learned Papists, after
they had much oppposed it, were at lenth overcome by the strenth of it, and
made to acknowledge it: and there was no point of Popery, esteemed to be more
absurd, nor more against the Scriptures, then Justification by works: in so
much that M, Knox, in his first sermon at S. Andrews, did make instance
principally in it: Knox Chron. page 76. 77.
for thus speaks his history of him: He plainly proved the Papists doctrine and
laws, to repugne directly to the laws of God the Father, and of Christ Jesus
his Son. This he proved, by conferring the doctrine of Justification expressed
in the Scriptures: which teach that man is justified by faith only etc. and the
doctrine of the Papists, which attributes justification to the works of the
law. And, upon several occasions, I have heard the Ministers pretend great
advantage in this point, which they ordinarily urge very much.

Having then no small expectation, to find such express and convincing
Scripture, for this point of Justification by faith only; that any impudent
front cowld hardly deny it: I begun to consider these passages, which they do
ordinarily bring, and cote on the margent of their Confession; and I found, that
not one of them contains in express words, the Presbyterian article,
contradictory to the Papists; as may appear to any man, who will read the
words. These passages are three, and the first is in S. John, who says: As
many as received him, he gave them power to become the Sons of God, who believe
in his name. The two others are in S. Paul: John chapter 1. v. 12. Romans 3.28. Romans
5.1.
who says; We conclude, (or as it is in the Catholic translation) We account
a man to be justified by faith without the works of the law. And again, being
justified therefore by faith: let us have peace toward God. Now, in none of
these places, can I find it written, that man is justified by faith only, or,
as it is in their new Confession, faith is the alone instrument of
Justification. I find indeed, that the Scripture says there, that man is
justified by faith; but I can not find, where it says by faith only, that word
only or alone, which is the maine point in this matter, cannot be found in the
Scripture: albeit M. Knox, in his foresaid sermon, falsely pretends, that it is
expressed in Scripture.

I admired to see both our first and last Reformers, after such huge pretenses,
to want express Scripture, for this maine article of their religion: but I
admired much more, when I found the Catholic article, which is flatly
contradictory to the Protestants, to be expressly in the Scriptures. S. James
says; James 2.21. and 24.
Abraham our father was he not justified by works, offering Isaac his Son upon
the altar? And again. Do you see, that by works a man is justified, and not by
faith only? Where S. James directly contradicts the doctrine of the
Protestants: for they say, A man is not justified by works, but by faith only:
and S. James says: a man is justified by works and not by faith only. I
wondered how we could brag so much, that we had always the Scripture for us,
against the Papists; and yet, when I tried the matter, I found ever hitherto
the contrary, as may be found by any man, who will not renounce his senses of
hearing and seeing. But to find this in other points, I did not think it so
strange, as in the present, which is called the principal point of the
Protestant religion, and wherein we did so much glory against the Papists, who
have much the better of us, if we will acknowledge the express words of
Scripture, and stand to them.

But the Presbyterians pretend, that, although their article be not, word by
word, in Scripture; yet the equivalent is there, when S. Paul says: a man is
justified by faith, without the works of the law; which they say is all one, as
if he had said, by faith only. I found many weighty reasons against this
Ministerial gloss. 1. At the beginning of their Reformation, they promised us
the pure word of God; and now they give us, for it, their gesses, or the word
of man; which is a weak ground of faith. 2. which is yet worse. Their words and
interpretations are in express terms against the word of God in another
place, to wit in S. James, as we have seen. 3. They affirm that all points
necessary to Salvation are clearly contained in Scripture. How comes it then,
that this most necessary and substantial point, which they call the life of
Christianity, is not there? yea, how comes it to pass that not only it is not
in Scripture, but the quite contrary is word by word in Scripture: and that not
simply affirmed, but proved by many reasons and examples; and these who affirm
the contrary are compared to Devils? 4. The holy Fathers and primitive Church
did never understand the Scriptures, in that sense; but in the contrary. How
then could I, in sense considering these things, make the Ministers words and
interpretation, which are not Scripture, yea which are against Scripture, and
against the holy Fathers, and the belief of the primitive Church, to be the
principal article of my faith?

S. Augustine shows, that some men, in the Apostles own time, did misinterpret
the same words of S. Paul, as the Presbyterians do now, and made it the ground
of the same error. Aug. de gr. and lib. arb. cap. 7.
But men, says he, not understanding what the Apostle says: we account a man
justified by faith without works, thought, that he said, faith would suffice a
man, albeit he live ill, and have no good works. Which God forbid, that the
vessel of election should think etc. Secondly, the same holy Father shows,
that to root out the error of those, who by misconstruing S. Paul's words, did
gather from them, justification by faith only, the other Apostles did
principally direct the intentions of their Epistles. S. Peter, says he, Aug.
lib. de fide and oper. c. 14.
knowing that some wicked men took occasion from some obscure sentences of S.
Paul, as being secure of their salvation, which is in faith, had no care to
live well, gave advertisment, that there were some things, in his epistle, hard
to be understood, which men perverted (as they do the other Scriptures) to
their own perdition. See, upon what a dangerous ground, the principal article
of our Reformation is founded, and how dangerous also it self is. But S. James,
Aug. ibid.
says S. Augustine, is so highly offended with these men, who think that faith
without works can avail unto salvation, that he compares them even to Devils.
And then hauings brought these words of the Apostle: Thou believe that there
is one God, thou do well: the Devils also believe and tremble, he subioyns,
Quid verius, brevius, vehementius dici potuit? what could be said more truly,
more briefly and efficaciously? Thus S. Augustine. And that he alone did not
condemn this error, and maintained the Catholic doctrine opposite to it,
Cent. Mag. cent. 23. 4. 5. cap. 4. Aug haeres. 54.
is manifest, by the Confession of the Centurists, who, for this cause, tax
the most ancient fathers, as S. Clement, Origin, S. Cyprian, S. Hierome, S.
Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostom, and many more. Moreover, the same S. Augustine
shows, that this error of justification by faith only, was the ancient heresy
of Eunomius; Iren. cont. haeres. c. 20.
and S. Ireneus ascribes it also to Simon Magus. And yet this ancient heresy
against the Scripture, and the holy Fathers, is obtruded upon us, as the
principal article of our faith, by our Reformers: who yet pretend to believe
nothing, but pure Scripture. Therefore I resolved by Gods grace not to believe
any longer such a wicked opinion, as the principal article of my religion: but,
upon the contrary, I intended to embrace and follow the Catholic doctrine,
opposite to it: which I found to be, in express terms, in the Scriptures,
which were so understood and believed by the holy Fathers.

I vas much confirmed in this resolution, when I vnderslood, how Luther and
Calvin, having no Scripture for them, but against them, have grossly abused it
to maintain their error. For Luther, the first Apostle, in this last age, of
this new doctrine, did two notable injuries to the word of God. For, Seeing
that this prime article of his faith, was not expressly contained, in the
Scripture, by an unparalleled presumption, he added the word sola or Alone to
the Scripture, in his German translation of the Bible And whereas S. Paul
says: we account a man justified by faith, without the works of the law; he
makes him say, by faith alone And when this high temerity, of adding to the
word of God, was objected to him: Luth. tom. 5. Germ. fol. 141. and d^m.
he defended it with most insolent words, saying: that a Papist and an ass was
the same thing: and that the word sola should remain in his Bible, although
all the Papists in the world, shoud go mad, and be transformed to in Asses. The
second injury, that he did to the Scripture, was not by Addition, but by
Diminution, wherein he was much more liberal, then in the first: for he added
only one word, but he took away many hundreds. Because, finding that the words
above cited of S. James epistle, were clearly and expressly against his doctrine,
he expunged the whole epistle, out of the Canon of the holy Scriptures, Luth in
praef. in novu n Test. Luth in cap. 22. Genes.
calling it an epistle of straw, unworthy the Spirit of an Apostle. Yea, he
arrived to that impudency, that he said the Author of that epistle delirat,
that is dotes, or raves. By these two practices, I was moved to think, that
Luther could not be the second Elias, the Restorer of purity and true religion,
who would not only reform the Church, but also the Scriptures: yea, in such a
manner, as he has incurred not one, but both the curses threatened by S. John,
for adding to, and pareing from the Scriptures. And by this, I perceived also,
what little esteem, they make of the Scripture, when it makes against their
errors.

Calvin went more subtly to work; for although he followed Luthers doctrine of
Justification; yet he neither added the word Sola, to the letter of the
Scripture, neither did he deny S. James epistle, to be Canonical: But, what
Luther added to the letter, Calvin added to the sense; and what Luther denied,
the other corrupted. For Calvin would have Justification by faith only, to be
as firmly believed, as if the word only were there in Scripture, which indeed,
is all one, as if he had added, with Luther, that word to the Scripture. Then
the words of S. James, which are clearly opposite to his error, and for which,
Luther did reject the whole epistle, he does so corrupt with new senses, which
Luthers more gross head could not invent, that they pass many men's senses and
understandings too, and are against the words of Scripture, and clearly against
the sense of the holy Fathers. For he says, faith alone does justify, but not
alone. Some others of his Scholars explain it thus: fides sola iustificat,
sed non solitaria. Others say: faith does justify, and not works; but yet faith
not without works; or a man is justified with works, but not by works; and
works are the means, but not the causes of Justification. But all these
inventions, are directly contrary to the words of S. James. For he says, man
is justified by works, and not by faith only. He does not say, man is justified
with works; but by works: he does not say, he is justified by faith only; but
not by faith only. And after the same manner and expression, that he ascribes
our justification to faith, he ascribs it also unto works. He neither speaks of
causes, nor means: these are the Ministers words, and not the word of God;
which is not cleared, but rendered more obscure by them. It was made appear to
me, that the question at first between the Catholics and Luther, was; whether
good works were in any respect necessary to our justification: and not, whether
they were required as causes or conditions. Luther said, they were in no wise
necessary, or else none could be justified; since the best works of the
greatest Saints are mortal sins. And in this, he spoke consequentially to his
principles. But Calvin, finding that the Catholics by innumerable Scriptures,
and particularly by that place of S. James, proved the necessity of good works
unto Justification; he invented a distinction, not to clear, but to confound
the matter, that good works were necessary, but not as causes, and faith was
the only cause of Justification. And this he did also very unreasonably against
the principle, which he holds common with Luther, to wit, that all our best
actions are deadly sins. For, if good works be in any manner necessary, how can
any be justified, according to Calvin, who maintains there can be no good
works, but that all are mortal sins? For, if a condition be necessary to any
effect; then if the condition be not fulfilled, the effect cannot be produced.
As approximation of wood unto the fire, is ordinarily called the condition,
without which the wood could not take fire. Therefore as the wood, if it were
not put near the fire; would not conceive fire, so also, if good works be a
necessary condition unto justification, (as Calvin pretends) no man can be
justified: since according to him, there can be no good works. Therefore Calvin
speaks very inconsequentially, if not also falsely.

Moreover, it was showen me: that the Lutherans were so highly offended with
these new glosses of Calvin and his Scholars, that they call them the doctrins
of the new Papists, more pernicious, then these of the old: and Illyricus,
Illyr in praef. ep ad Romans
a famous Lutheran, does not stand to call these Calvinists, Seducers, who by
diverse way, says he, would elude the proposition of S. Paul etc. For this
cause the Lutherans deny all necessity of good works unto Salvation, either as
means, or causes. For this, they professed at the conference of Altenberg,
Coll. Al ten. col. 4 f. 75.
We conclude, say they, with that worthy saying of Luther: If works be
necessary unto Salvation; then none can be saved without works: and then we
would not be saved by faith only. So I found at length, that this prime article
of our religion, to wit; that man is justified by faith only, after so many
great brags, is not in Scripture, but against Scripture, as the Lutherans
understand it: and as Calvin takes it, its not only against Scripture, but also
against his own principle, who makes the whole matter, to end in Philosophical
terms, for the most part, neither understood by speakers nor hearers. Of which
matter, I had not long ago, a notable experience. For being in a Gentleman's
house in the country, where there chanced to be a Minister of esteemed
learning, two Roman Catholics, and diverse Protestants: as the ordinary
discourse now a days, is concerning religion, so I heard one at that time. For
the Minister, taking occasion by hearing Cardinal Bellarmin named, spoke at
first, much in his praise, saying: that none of all the Popish Authors, did
relate so faithfully the Protestant Tenets, nor argumented more clearly, then
he did. Yet at length, said the Minister, after the Cardinal has showed the
strength of his wit, at the issue of the matter, being convinced by the force
of truth; he concludes, for the most part, with the Protestants. Whereupon; one
of the Catholics present said, that he admired very much, how Bellarmin, who
had written so much for Popry, should be esteemed a Protestant: and merrily
subioyn'd* that himself was just a Protestant, as Bellarmin was. After there
had passed a little laughter, occasioned by these words; the other Catholic
did gravely desire the Minister, to show; wherein Bellarmin was a Protestant.
Whereupon, the Minister instanced in this same matter of Justification, and
said: that after Bellarmin had wearied himself, by produceing many testimonies
of Scriptures and Fathers, to prove, that we are justified by works and not by
faith only: he in end yields the victory to tthe Proestants: for he concludes:
That it is most safe to rely upon the merits of Christ. And so, in one
sentence, he destroys, what he had been building a long time. To which the
Catholic replied: that if Bellarmin was a Protestant for that, then all
Catholics were Protestants: for they all professed the same. Neither was the
Catholics relying on Christ merits, any way against justification by good
works; more then the Protestants relying on the same merits, was against their
supposed Justification by faith only. But said he: I admire very much, how you
ordinarily pretend so great advantage, in your doctrine of Justification by faith
only, which you esteem the principal article of your religion; and yet it
cannot be found in all the Scripture, the only pretended ground of all your
faith: And how you can cry so much against the Catholics, for believing that
we are justified by works, and not by faith only; which is expressly, and word
by word, in the Scripture. For does not S. James clearly say: Ye see, that man
is justified by works, and not by faith only. The Minister finding himself thus
engaged, passed presently from the Scripture, and enquired of the Catholic,
whom he knew well enough not to be a professed Scholar; If he had any Logique.
Who answered, he had not much: but he had sufficient for this purpose. That
there was not much Logique required, to see what was contained in Scripture. He
would trust his own eyes, in that matter. It was sufficient for him, that he
had on his side the express Scripture, which is better then Logique. But the
Minister told him; that, although these words are in Scripture; yet they must
be understood in a sound sense. For works, said he, although they be necessary
to justification; yet they are not the causes of it, but in a very improper
sense. For you must understand, that there are diverse kinds of causes; there
is causa efficiens, causa formalis, and causa sine qua non, which is not a
cause properly. Now works are not the efficient, nor formal cause; but only
causa sine qua non. They are via regni; and not causa regnandi. And so, after
this manner, he made a long discourse, involving the matter in great
obscurities, passing the reach of the hearers; if not also overpassing his own
understanding. But the Catholic holding him still by his grounds, told the
Minister that his Logique was no Scripture; and that the Protestants, are
brought to a low ebb, when they are enforced to acknowledge that this prime
article of their faith, is not expressly in Scripture, as they at first
pretended: And now, when the quite opposite doctrine, maintaind by the
Catholics, (against which the Ministers did so much rail) is showe^ to be
expressly in Scripture: they are enforced to run from Scripture, to their
Logique: which indeed, is to yield the cause to the Catholics, and to quite
ground. For at first they pretended nothing but Scripture: and now they fly to
Aristotle's Logique, and that against the express words of Scripture, making
the whole matter end in a Logomachy: which is so much the worse, on the
Protestants side; seeing they will not use the very phrase of Scripture, which
the Catholics keep. And upon this follows also another evil, that the
people, being made to believe, that they are justified by faith only, and not
by works; makes by natural Logique, this inference, (which all the Ministers in
the world with all their artificial Logique, will not put out of their heads)
that good works are not necessary; and so they altogether neglect them. Thus
ended that conference (the Minister replying something; but little to purpose)
with small satisfaction of some Protestants present; who imagined, that this
prime article of their faith, had been better grounded: and that this Minister,
whom they much esteemed, could have said more, then to acknowledge that his
faith was against the words of Scripture: and in end, to run to his
Philosophical distinctions, which were not by them intelligible.

But, albeit I was sufficiently satisfied, by what has been said, of the truth
of the Catholic doctrine, concerning Justification; yet being desirous, that I
might be able to discern more fully, the deceits and obscurities, which the
Ministers invent, to elude the clear Scriptures: a Catholic, whose assistance
I required, show me, that for this end, it was necessary, I should first know
the nature of Justification, according to the doctrine of the Catholic Church.
For, as a Rule, said he, is a measure to discern both what is right, and what
is crooked; so truth, is a manifestation both of it self, and of falsehood.
Whereupon, he had several discourses with me, on this matter; the sum of
which, I will briefly collect.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Nature of Justification, according to the Catholic
doctrine.
ALBEIT you have seen evidently, said the Catholic unto me, that according to
the express Scriptures, man is justified by works* and not by faith only; yet,
that you may know how this is done, and what works are excluded from
justification, according to S. Paul; and what these works are, by which we are
justified, according to S. James; you must know the nature of Justification of
a sinner: which, according to the Catholic Church, is thus described.
Justification of a sinner, is the translation of one, from the state of sin,
into the state of grace; a changing of one, from being an enemy, to make him
become the friend of God. There is the misery, from which a sinner is
delivered; and the happiness, to which he is brought. Now, that he may come
from such a miserable condition, to such a happy estate, there are some
preparations and dispositions required to go before, in the soul of a sinner,
that is come to age; of which kind only we here speak. First God of his mere
mercy, by his preveening and helping grace, does excite and call a sinner,
without any of his preceding merits, as it were, out of the sleep of sin; that
he may convert himself unto God. 2. A sinner being thus awakned, and assisted
by the Divine grace, conceiving faith by hearing, does believe all things to be
true, which are revealed and promised by God; and particularly, that a sinner
is justified by the free mercy of God, through the redemption, which is in
Christ Jesus. 3. This faith representing God to be a severe punisher of sins,
there arises in a sinner, thus disposed by faith, a fear of Gods judgments,
with which the Soul is profitably shaken and terrifyed. Prou. ^.7.
For as Solomon says: the fear of our Lord, is the beginning of wisdom. 4.
The soul of a sinner being thus terrifyed, it is raised up again to hope, by
the same faith; which represents God to be most bountiful and merciful, in
forgiveing sins. For which cause, he sent his son into the world, to deliver us
from sin, by his death. 5. Upon this hope and confidence in the divine mercy,
there arises the love of God, who is so bountiful and merciful; and likewise
a hatred and detestation of sin, which God hates, a sorrow and grief for what
is past; and a firm resolution of a better life in time to come: a purpose of
observing the divine Commandments, and of receiving the holy Sacraments. Now
all these dispositions of fa th, fear, love, hope, and the rest, being placed
in the soul of man, by Gods preveening grace; Justification, or the infusion
of justifying grace, does follow, as we shall see shortly.

That these preparations and difpositions are necessary before justification,
the Scripture shows. Our Savior show the necessity of preveening grace, when
he said: John. 6.44. Heb. 11.6. Eccles. 1.28. and ibid, v. 17.
No man can come unto me, unless my Father draw him. Of faith, S. Paul says:
that without faith it is impossible to please God: for he that comes to God,
must believe that he is; and that he is a Rewarder of those who seek him. Of
fear, beside the former testimony of Solomon, it is said; that, who is without
fear, cannot be justified. And again: the fear of our Lord chaseth away sin. S.
Paul says of hope, that we are saved by it. Romans 8.24. Luke 7.47.
Of love our Savior says: Many sins are forgiven her; for she loved much. And
that repentance is also necessary, there is nothing more clear, in the
Scriptures. By all which testimonies, it remains evident, that although faith
be the first disposition of the soul to justification; yet the others
abovementioned are also requisite. Neither can there be any difficulty in this
matter, since it is as clear as the Sun, that no man, of a sinner, can become
the friend of God: unless he have not only faith, but also the fear and love
of God, with hope in his mercy, and repentance for sins. To this purpose S.
Augustine says: Aug de predest. sanct. cap. 7 Idem sermon. 22. de Verb. Dom*
fides prima datur, ex qua caetera impetrantur. That is: faith is first given,
by which the rest are obtained. And again: the house of God is founded by
Faith, raised up hy hope, and perfected by Charity. And as in this sense, it is
truly said that faith does justify, to wit as a fundamental and radical
disposition to Justification; so it is no less true, that fear, hope, love,
and repentance, do also justify, to wit as secondary dispositions proceeding
from faith: because these likewise dispose the soul fitly, to receive the form
of justice, and to become the friend of God; and the Scripture ascribes
forgiveness of sins, Salvation or Justification to them, as it does unto
faith. For as our Savior told S. Mary Magdalen, that her faith had saved her;
Luke 7. Romans 8. Iam. 2.
so he said: that many sins were forgiven her, because she loved much, and S.
Paul says, we are saved by hope; and S. James expressly, that we are justified
by works, and not by faith only. By which consideration it may be easily
understood, what works S. Paul excludes from Justification, when he says, that
a man is justified by faith without the works of the law. For he does not
exclude, the works of grace, but only the works of the law, which are done by
the strength of nature, without the grace of God, and do not proceed from
faith, but go before it. Now it is certain that such works, as not proceeding
from faith, do not properly dispose and prepare the soul unto Salvation.
Council. T r d sess. 6. c^p. 8.
For, as the Council of Trent teaches, faith is the foundation, root, and
beginning of all Salvation and Justification, and is the first effect of Gods
free grace, in the Soul of man. But the Apostle does not exclude from
justification, the works of grace, which follow faith: for they do justify,
that is, dispose the Soul unto Justification, as faith it self does: and they
proce d also from grace, as faith proceeds from it; and therefore are not the
works of the law, but the works of grace. After this manner, does that great
Doctor S. Augustine clearly reconcile these two places of S. Paul and S. James.
Aug. lib. 83. quaest. 76.
The sentences, says he, of S. Paul and S. James be not contrary one to
another, when one affirms, that a man is justified by faith without works:
and the other says, that faith is vain without works: for S. Paul speaks of
works, that go before faith; and S. James of works that do follow faith.

These preparations and disposi^ions being placed in the soul, Justification
it self does follow; which is not only remission of sins, but also
sanctification and renovation of the inward man, by the voluntary reception of
the divine grace and gifts. But, albeit Justification follows these
dispositions, of faith, love, repentance, and and the rest, yet it is
altogether free, proceeding from the mercy and bounty of God, without the
desert of man. For the Catholic Church professes openly, notwitstanding the
Ministers strong calumnies to the contrary, that no man by any faith, or works,
can merit the grace of Justification, Council. Trid. sess. 6. cap. 8.
as the Council of Trent teaches in these words. We are said to be freely
justified, because none of those things, which preceed Justification, whether
faith or works, does merit the grace of Justification. Now this grace
consists in two thing,s to wit: in Remission of sins, and inward
sanctification: by the first, the soul is changed and purged from sin, which
is the filthiness of the Soul; and by the second, it is adorned and
beautifyed with grace; which is the beauty of it: and made to die unto sin, and
live unto justice. But it must be diligently observed: that the Catholics do
teach, according to the Scriptures, that in Justification, our sins are not so
forgiven, that they remain in the Soul; but they are quite taken away. For S.
John says of Christ: Behold the Lamb of God, John. 1.29. Acts. 3.19. Mich.
7.19. Heb. 9.28.
that takes away the sins of the world: And the spots of our Souls are said
to be washed and cleanged, and our sins to be thrown into the bottom of the
sea, and to be blotted out and exhausted. Therefore in justification, sins do
not remain, but they are really taken away.

As the soul, in Justification is purged and cleanged from the filthiness of
sins, which are so forgiven, that they are really taken away; so it is also
beautifyed with inward grace, and inherent justice, by which, he who was before
a sinner, is renewed in the Spirit of his mind, and has the love of God powered
forth in his heart, by the holy Ghost. This the Apostle shows, 1. Cor. 6.11.
when writing to the Corinthians, he says: These things you were: (to wit:
fornicators, adulterers etc.) but you are washed, but you are sanctified, but
you are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Spirit of
our God: Ephesians. 4.24.
And elsewhere, be renewed in the Spirit of your mind: and put on the new man,
which according to God, is created in justice, and holiness of truth. And
writing to the Romans, he says: Rom 5.5
The Charity of God is powered forth in our hearts by the holy Ghost, which is
given us. I forbear to cite more testimonies. Aug. de g^^^ia
S. Augustine shows, that this inherent justice, is the love of God, The
grace, whereby we are justified, that is, Christ cap. 30. Idem de not. and gra.
c. 70.
says he, the love of God, poured into our hearts. And elsewhere: Charity
begun, is justice begun; Charity increased, is justice increased; great charity
is great justice; and most perfect charity is most perfect justice. If
therefore charity or the love of God, which is powered into our Souls, and
consequently is inherent and intrinsecal in them, be the justice, by which we
are made formally just; then our justice is also inherent and intrinsecal. And
hereby, all the causes of our Justification, according to the doctrine of the
Catholic Church, may be clearly understood. Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 7.
For the efficient cause, is our merciful God: the meritorious, our Lord Jesus
Christ: the final cause, the glory of God, and of Christ, and life everlasting:
and the formal cause, is the Justice of God, not that, by which he himself is
just; but that, by which he makes us just: and with which, we being endowed,
are renewed in the Spirit of our mind, and are not only reputed, but truly are
just.

But, said the Catholic to me, that you may understand more fully, how we are
made formally just, not by that justice, which is in God, but by that justice,
which proceeding from God, is in us; I will illustrate the matter, a little more
unto you. As sin is the death of the soul; so grace and justice is the life of
it. Wherefore, as the natural life of man, is the formal cause of his living
naturally; so his spiritual life, which is grace and justice, is the formal
cause of his living spiritually. As then the natural life or soul of man, by
which he lives naturally, albeit it be from God, yet it is not that life by
which God lives, but it is that life, communicated by God to man, by which man
lives; and therefore cannot be any thing external, but must be internal in man:
So the Spiritual life of the soul, which is grace and justice, by which man
lives Spiritually, is not the justice, which is in God, or by which God is
just; but that iuftice, which is communicated by God to man, whereby man is
rendered just, and lives Spiritually: and therefore must be internal in him:
since nothing can live; either naturally, or Spiritually, by any thing which is
external unto it. The example of the raising Lazarus from the the dead, will
yet more clear this matter. For if Christ, calling Lazarus from the grave, had
not given him inward life; Lazarus could not have risen again, and lived by the
life of Christ, which was without him. But it was necessary, for the
resurection of Lazarus, that his own life should be inwardly restored to him by
Christ. It is so in our case: for a man, who is raised by Christ from the death
of sin unto the life of righteousness, must have grace or justice, which is
the Spiritual life of the soul, inwardly communicated to him by Christ, the
fountain and meritorious cause of all justice, and the source of all Spiritual
life; or else man could not be raised from the death of sin, and live
spiritually. S. Augustine proves, by the holy Scriptures, that Christ came into
the world, Aug. ^ib. de peccat. mer. and remis. cap. 26. and seq,
to give us that Spiritual life. I shall heep together, says he, many
testimonies, which shall suffice: by which it may appear, that for no other
cause, Christ came into the flesh; but that by the disposition of grace, he
might quicken, save and illuminate all those, to whom as members appointed in
his body, he is head, who before were placed in the death, sickness and
darkness of sin. I shall only bring two or three of the many testimonies of
Scripture, which the holy Father heapeth up there. S. Paul says: Ephesians. 2.4.
God (who is rich in mercy) for his exceeding charity, wherewith he loved us,
even when we were dead by sins, quickened us together in Christ (by whose grace
you are saved) and raised us up with him etc. Ibid. c. 4 v. 24.
And again be renewed in the Spirit of your mind, and put on the new man,
which, according to God, is created in Justice and holiness of the truth, The
same Apostle, writing to the Colossians, says: And you, Coloss. 2.13.
when you were dead in the offenses and uncircumcision of the flesh, did he
quicken together with him, pardoning you all offenses. And to Titus he says:
Titus. 3. v. 5.
that we are justified by his grace. Whence it is evident, that these, who have
been sinners, and become just, are said to rise again, to be quickneed by
Christ, to be renewed inwardly, and to be justified by his grace. But they
could not rise from the death of sin, nor be quickened, and renewed inwardly,
and be justified by his grace; unless they had spiritual life, which is grace
or justice, inwardly communicated unto the^. Therefore these, who rise from the
death of sin, and are justified, quickened and inwardly renewed, have the
spiritual life of justice flowing from the merits and justice of Christ,
inwardly remaining in them. And hence does appear clearly the truth of that,
which the Catholic Church teaches, to wit: that we are made just, by the
justice of God, not by that, whereby he himself is just, but by which he makes
us just. For, as nothing can make an man just, but justice; So it is not the
external justice of Christ; but it must be internal justice, flowing from, his
merits and justice, that can quicken us.

This raising of one, from the death of sin, to the life of Justice, is called
by the Catholiliques, the first Justification; by which one, of a sinner, is
made the friend of God. And it is altogether free, proceeding merely from the
grace and favor of God, without all works and merits of man. Of this, S. Paul
speaks to the Romans, Aug. de Spir. and lit. c 4-
when he says: We conclude that man is justified by faith, without the works
of the law. Where S. Augustine understands by the works of the law, not only the
works of the Ceremonial and Judicial law, but also of the Moral law, which are
done by the force of nature, or by the insight of the law, without the help of
grace in Christ; which help is not given except one have first faith in Christ:
which is the root of salvation, and first effect of the divin grace, in our
souls. Therefore if man could not be justified by these works of the law,
albeit he did them: much less can he be justified by these works, when he
breaks the law, as S. Paul proves, in the same epistle: that both Jews and
Gentiles have sinned; and therefore stand in need of the mercy of God; and
consequently must be justified, by the faith and grace of Christ. Besides this
first Justification, there is another, which the Catholics call the second
Justification; by which one, is not of impious made just, but of just, he is
made more just, and of a friend made yet more intimate with God; according to
that in the Apocalypse: Apocal. 22.1. Eccles. 18.22.
He that is just, let him be justified even unto death. Of this Justification,
are understood the words of S. James, when he says: That a man is justified by
works, and not by faith only. That is; by works following after faith, and
flowing from it: for such works are not the works of the law; that is; they are
not works done merely by the force of nature, or by the only knowledge of the
law; but they are the works of grace, as faith it self is: and by these works
we are justified, and not by faith only. This second Justification is acquired
by doing all works of justice and piety, by which, a man being in the state of
grace, purchases a further augmentation of it. S. Augustine brings S. Paul, Aug
lib. de gra. and lib. ae^b. c 6.
as an example of both these Iustifications. For, before his conversion he was
found with no good merits; but rather with many evil merits, who was
persecuting the Church: and yet he obtained mercy. Therefore he was not
justified by his works, or by the deeds of the law, but by the faith or grace
of Christ. But after his conversion and first Justification, the same Apostle
reckons out the good works he had done, 2. Timoth. 4.6.
by which he had advanced in piety and justice. I am even now, says he, to be
sacrificed: and the time of my resolution is at hand. I have fought a good
fight, I have consummate my course, I have kept the faith. Concerning the rest,
there is laid up for me a crown of justice, which our Lord will render to me,
in that day, a just judge; Upon which S. Augustine says: He reckons out now his
good merits, that after his good merits, he might obtain the crown; who after
evil merits, did obtain grace. Take heed what follows. There remains to me a
crown of justice etc. To whom could the just judge render the crown: if he had
not first, as a merciful father, given him grace? And how had that been a crown
of justice: if grace had not gone before, which iustifyes the impious? How
could that have been rendered as due, Aug. ibid vt supra.
if the first had not been freely bestowed? Thus S. Augustine. By these reasons,
and many other testimonies, which were showen unto me: I was brought to
understand the Catholic, doctrine, concerning the nature of Justification: and
thereby I was made more sensible of the errous, which are against it.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Presbyterians three principal Errors, concerning
Justification.
HAVING thus seen the truth of the ancient and Catholic doctrine, I was moved
to take special notice, of three principal and most gross errors, maintained
by the Presbyterians, against it. The first is: that they do not only place the
whole nature of Justification, in remission of sins; but they likewise teach,
that, although our sins be forgiven in Justification: yet they are not taken
away, but that they really remain in the person iystified: and are only
covered, and not imputed. The second error is, that a man justified has no
internal nor inherent justice in him, as being altogether defiled inwardly with
sin: but that he is only just, by the external justice of Christ, with which he
is covered, and which is imputed unto him. The third and last error consists
in this, that they teach, this external justice of Christ, is applied unto man,
by faith only: and that not by a Christian or Catholic faith, whereby one
believes the articles of the Creed, or such things as God has revealed in
Scripture: but by a special faith, as they call it, whereby every one believes
for certain, that his sins are forgiven him, and that he is one of the
predestinate.

The first error, to wit: that sins remain, and are not taken away from the
person justified, maintained by Calvin and the Presbyterians; I found to be
against cripture, the virtue of Christ's passion, and the efficacy of Baptism.
S. John Baptist calls Christ, the lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world. John 1.29. Heb. 9.28. 1 John. 1. chapter 1. v 7. Acts 22.16.
S. Paul says: that Christ was offered up once to exhaust the sins of many.
And S. John affirms that the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sins.
Ananias said to S. Paul: Arise and be baptized and wash away thy sins. If our
sins be taken away, as S. John affirms: how do they remain as the
Presbyterians believe? If our sins be washed away, and cleansed by the blood of
Christ, and by baptism; how can the filthiness and blots of them remain?
David says to God: Psalm. 31.1.
Wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow. But, according to the Presbyterians,
he behoved to remain as black as pitch, and as filthy as the puddle; even
with all the washing, that God would bestow upon him. Therefore this
Presbyterian doctrine is against the Scriptures, the virtue of Christ's passion,
and the efficacy of baptism: and it is also clearly against the holy Fathers,
as we shall see shortly in the Trial of the Sacraments.

Against these clear authorities the Calvinists bring principally one place of
Scripture, whereon they found their error: and that is in the 31. Psalm,
where David says: Blessed are they, whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose
sins are covered. I admired, that for this one testimony, which says that our
sins are covered, they should deny so many, which show that sins are taken
away; and will not rather confess with the Scripture, that they are both
covered and taken away. S. Augustine shows excellently on this place how God
does both. For, comparing him to a Surgeon or Physician, Aug. ^narr. in Ps. 31.
he says: that God does so cover the wound with a plaster; that he cures it,
and takes it away. Calvin and his followers make Christ to be a very imperfect
Spiritual Physician; who can neither heal the sick, nor cure the wounded
souls, but only can cast a cover upon them. Such a Physician of the body, who
could do nothing, but throw his cloak upon the sick or wounded; and neither be
able, to take away the sickness or wounds, would be in small esteem, and
little employed.

The second gross error of Calvin, which denies inherent justice, is
sufficiently above refuted. Where it was showed out of the Scriptures, and
Fathers, that we are quickened by Christ, and that justice or grace proceeding
from the justice of Christ, the meritorious cause of our justice, is the
spiritual life of the Soul, which quickens it; and therefore must be internal,
and inherent within us. For as one cannot live naturally, unless he have
internal life within him; so neither can one live Spiritually, by any thing
that is without him; but he must necessarly, have the life of grace or justice
within him. This truth is so strong, that Calvin did sometime acknowledge it:
for he says, Call. lib. de refrom. Eccl. p. 316.
that we are never reconciled to God, but we are also gifted with inherent
justice. But at other times he frequently opposes it, affirming, that the most
holy and just persons are nothing inwardly, but filthy sinners: and that all
their justice consists only in the external justice of Christ, which is imputed
to them, and with which their sins and filthynesse are covered. Math. 23.27.
So that Calvin's just men are not unfitly by some compared to whited Sepulchers
(to which our Savior compared the Pharisees) that outwardly appear unto men
beautifvll, but within are full of dead men's bones and all filthiness. So the
Presbyterians would appear beautiful outwardly, by the justice of Christ; but
inwardly they are full of filthiness and iniquity. They are also like Wolves
in sheeps clothing, who have an external show of meekness and justice: but
inwardly are ravenous creatures. But as sheeps clothing does not make a wolf,
to become a lamb; so neither will the external justice of Christ, that innocent
lamb, with which a sinner would cloth himself outwardly, and yet remain still
in his sins, make him a Saint. John. e is it. 1 ^hap 3. v. 7.
S. John gives a serious warning to this purpose; Little children, says he,
let no man seduce you. He that does justice is just, even as he also, (that is,
Christ) is just. Therefore, they are seduced, who think to be just; and yet
will do no justice, as Christ did,

The third error, to wit: that faith alone does justify, is also above
refuted. For 1. it has been showed not to be in Scripture; And therefore the
Presbytetians make it very unreasonably and against their own principles, the
principal article of their religion. 2. It is not only not to be found in
Scripture, but it is expressly word by word against Scripture, as has been seen
out of S. James. Therefore, the Presbyterians brags of great advantage, in this
point, are very false and groundless. 3. It is also against the holy Fathers,
who condemned it, as we have seen, in some ancient heretics. Yea S. Augustine
does affirm, that because it had risen in the very time of the Apostles, by
misinterpreting the words of S. Paul, the other Apostles as S. Peter, S. James,
and S. John did direct the intention of their epistles, and wrote most
earnestly, to root out that error, from the minds of men And S. Paul also did
express himself sufficiently against this error, when he said: that albeit he
had all faith, so that he could remove mountains: if he had not charity, 1.
Cor. 13.13.
which he calls greater, and more excellent, then faith and hope, he would be
nothing, and his faith would profit him nothing. Whence S. Augustine says:
that it is charity, Aug. lib. 15. de Trin. cap. 27. Leo sermon. de collect. Shel.
p. 108. 108.
which makes all virtues profitable; and that faith may be present, but it
cannot profit without charity, and S. Leo says: that charity quickens faith
it self, by which the just man lives. Yea M. Shelford the Protestant Minister
above cited says expressly: that Charity is the most precious grace of God; and
is the greatest mean and instrument of our Justification. And that he (meaning
Calvin) who prefers faith before charity in our Justification, would elude
S. Paul's demonstration.

But, there is another part or branch of this third error, much more dangerous
then the former. For, as they teach that faith alone does justify, and yet they
require with it charity and other virtues, which makes the difference to be
more nominal then real; so they teach that this justifying faith is nothing
else, but a sure persuasion, that every one ought to have of the forgiveness
of his sins, for the merits of Christ; and that he is just in the sight of God.
This is the special faith, which they say is only given to the elect; and
these, who once have it, can never fall from it; and they are sure of their
election and predestination. In this matter, the Presbyterians differ
substantially from the Catholics; who require also faith to Justification,
but of a far different nature from this of Calvin; which they esteem not to be
faith, but rather a phanatical fancy, and high presumption. Against which, I
found some solid reasons which I will briefly touch. 1. No man ought to believe
any thing, as an article of faith, but that which God has revealed. But God
has not revealed, that every ma^s sins are forgiven him. Therefore he ought
not to believe it, and much less: although he believe it, is he justified by
it. 2. There is neither precept nor example in the whole Scripture, of such a
special justifying faith. Therefore it is not to be admitted. 3. It is far
different from the faith of Abraham, the father of the faithful, by which he
was justified; which faith, the Apostle in the same epistle to the Romans, does
highly extol. For he was justified, by believing the promise of God, which was
revealed to him, to wit: that he should be the Father of many nations, and
that his seed should be as the stars of the heaven, and the sand of the sea.
This is the faith which the Christians of all ages, ever required, before
Luther and Calvin arose, to believe what God had revealed, to wit: the
articles of our Creed, and the other matters contaynd in Scripture: accorording
to that of the Apostle: If thou confess with thy mouth our Lord Jesus, Romans
10.9.
and in thy heart believe, that God raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved. S. John says also: These things are written, John. 20.31.
that ye may believe Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and believing, ye may have
everlasting life: Here is not a word of Calvin's special faith; and yet we see
how Abraham and others were justified without it; by believing these things,
which God had revealed. Romans 11.33.
4. S. Paul esteemed Predestination one of the most deep secrets of God, crying
out: O the depth, of the riches, of the wisdom, and knowledge of God etc. And
yet, every Calvinist will know this secret, in relation to himself; as if he
were one of Gods privy Counselors; or God had particularly reveald it to him
S. Augustine says to the same purpose: Aug. lib. de corraept. and gr. c. 13.
who of all the campany of the faithful, so long as he lives in this
mortality, can presume, that he is in the number of the predestinate? What
would S. Augustine have said of the Presbyterians, who do not only so presume;
but make it also the principal article of their faith, and the very ground of
their Justification. 5. This belief of the assurance of election, is against
the Scripture, which shows that man knows not whether he be worthy love or
hatred; Eccles. 9.1. Phil p. 2.12.
and exhorts us to work out our Salvation in fear and trembling; and
advertiseth him, who stands, to take head, least he fall. Lastly, as this
presumptuous belief opens a wide gate to all sort of vice, and banisheth the
exercise of virtue and true piety, which might be easily showed; so the seeking
this faith, has made diverse loose all hope; and it has proved pernicious to
them, both in soul and body. For experience has proved, that it has made
diverse to be troubled in Spirit, and loose their wits: and some to fall into
despair, by putting violent hands in themselves; as it did not long ago, to a
famous Covenanter in Aberdeen, M. T. Mercer.
who drowned himself, when he was esteemed by the Ministers there, to have been
at the very point, of getting assurance of his election. So that I have heard
some of the old Protestant Ministers condemn much this justifying faith of the
Puritans. Shel. p. 36.38.
And M. Shelford does not stand, to call it, a private Fancy, and a false
faith; and an enemy to all true virtue and piety. Therefore, by Gods grace, I
do not intend to believe it, much less to found my Salvation upon it. All the
assurance that we can have here, without Gods particular revelation, is by hope
in the divine goodness, and mercy: which hope is not only fufficient to
comfort us in this life, but also, it will not confound us in the next; if we
strive here to do our duty: and have the love of God, powered forth in our
hearts. Therefore, it belongs to the virtue of hope, and not to faith, to apply
the divine promises; as the same M. Shelford does acknowledge.

Besides all these authorities and reasons: a Catholic show me that this
doctrine of Justification by faith only, destroys it self. For if we cannot be
justified by any works, then we could not be justified by faith, since faith it
self is a work, according to these words of our Savior: This is the work of
God, that you believe in him, whom he has sent. Therefore, said he, since we
are justified by faith, which is not against the divine grace, nor our free
justification; because faith it self is a work of grace: so we may be also
Justified by love, hope, and other works of grace; without any derogation from
the divine grace. He did further urge and said: either the faith, by which the
Calvinists say, that men are justified, is a mortal sin, or not? If it be a
deadly sin; then they are justified by sin: which is impious to say. If it be
not a mortal sin: then all our actions are not sins, as Luther and Calvin
falsely teach. The same Catholic show me, that, to shun these inconveniences,
to which the doctrine of the Calvinists drives them; they affirm, that faith,
albeit it be a work, yet it does not justify, as a work of virtue: but only as
an Instrument, to apprehend the justice of Christ. Calvin says: that Faith,
Call. ib. 3. Instit. cap. 11. sect. 7. Mel. in locis tit. de bon. oper.
although it be of no dignity nor price, iustifyes us, bringing Christ, as a
pot filled with money enricheth a man. Melanchton says: that justifying faith,
is like a poor man's hand, which he stretches forth, to receive alms, from a
rich man. And so at length, this justifying faith, which the Presbyterians so
much cry up, by the confession of Calvin, is of no price nor dignity; so that
by him it is compared to a pot and by another great light, to a scabbed mans'
hand: and by both there principles, it is a sinful instrument, by which they
will have all men to be justified. Whereby (said the Catholic) it may
appear, that these men are no less enemies to faith, then to works, and that
they destroy the goodness and virtue of both. Whereas the Catholics do
esteem faith, to be an excellent virtue, and the very root and foundation of
our Justification.

There was an other difficulty, arising clearly from the Presbyterian doctrine;
with which the same Catholic did much press me, and some other Protestants,
who were present. Either, said he, the Presbyterians, who pretend to be assured
of their election, are purged and cleansed from the filthiness of their sins,
before they can enter into heaven: or they are not purged at all from them? If
they be not purged from them: Then they cannot enter into that heavenly city.
For S. John says: There shall not enter into it any polluted thing. That city
is described to be of pure gold, and the foundations of it, to be adorned with
every precious stone. Therefore the Citizens of it, must also be pure and
without spot. And consequently: if the Presbyterians, be not purged from the
filthiness and sores of their sins; which must not be only covered; but really
taken away, cured, and cleansed: they cannot enter into heaven. If they say,
that they must be purged from their sins, and all filthiness and blots taken
from them, before they can enter into heaven; then they are either purged from
their sins, in this life, or in the life to come. Not in this: because they
teach, that their sins are not taken away in this life; but are only covered,
and the filthiness of them remains; and as they live, so they di^ in sins.
Not after this life: for then, they behoved to acknowledge a Purgatory; which
is against a principal article of their negative faith. If they say; their sins
are taken away by death, in the very instant of it: Then since death is common
to all men; if death had that power, all men would be cleansed from sin; and so
all would be saved; which is false. If they say, It is not death simply, but
death joined with faith, that has this power. Why shall not also, faith and
life have the same power? How can the Presbyterians, without any ground in
Scripture, assign that power to faith, and death; which they deny, against
Scripture, to faith, and the holy Sacraments, and to the blood of Christ? Death
indeed, may put an end to sin; that one sin no more: but it cannot take away
sins already done: or else death would be more powerful, according to that
tenet, then the blood of Christ, and the holy Sacraments; which is not only a
groundless fancy, but also a great absurdity. Out of which, it follows that
either the Presbyterians must grant, that they do not go to heaven; which is
very much against the assurance of their election: or that they are purged from
their sins, after this life, since they are not purged in it: which is against
their negative confession. And so these, who deny a a Purgatory for venial
sins, must grant a new and most dangerous Purgatory, for mortal sins. For my
part: I could never find a solid answer to this reason; and therefore I leave
it to the Presbyteries consideration.

But, because this Catholic did trouble us, with this difficulty; I thought
to have entangled him as much, with the words of Bellarmin; whereof I had heard
some Ministera often boast. Did not Bellarmin, said I, after he had much
labored, to prove Justification by works, in end conclude: That, it was most
safe to put all our confidence, in the only mercy of God. What will become then
of all your works and merits; which such a great Champion, of your Church, does
renounce? To which he answered: that Bellarmins words fully related, do clear
the whole matter: Bellar. lib. 5. de Iustif. cap. 7. prop. 3.
and show the vanity of the Ministers pretenses. For thus he speaks. By reason
of the uncertainty of our proper Justice, and of the danger of our vain glory,
it is most safe, to put all our confidence in the only mercy and favor of God.
Where he does not deny, neither good works nor merits: but only, affirms,
that for two reasons, which he there touches, that it is most safe, not to
rely upon them: but upon the alone mercy of God. Out of which, the Ministers
would make this false collection: therefore we are not justified by works.
Which is as ridiculous, as if you would say. The Protestants teach: that it is
most safe, to rely upon the mercy of God: Therefore they are not justified by
faith. If then the Protestants relying upon the mercy of God, takes not away
Justification by faith: why should not also the Catholics relying on the same
mercy, not take away Justification by works? Bellarmin speaks so clearly in
this matter, that his meaning cannot be wrested without malice. For he shows,
in the same place, that David, and other Saints, had some confidence in their
justice and good works: according to that in the 17. Psalm: The Lord will
render to me according to my justice: because I have kept his ways. The like
he shows of Nehemias, Ezechias, and Ester. And this they did, with great
humility. But, because such co^fide^ce is dangerous to many, by reason of pride
and vain glory, that may arise: and beside there are few, who have such
merits, or are sure to have them: Therefore Bellarmin says: it is most safe,
to rely on the mercy of God: whereof he gives this reason. Either a man has
good works: or he has none, but evil works. If he has no good, but evil
works; then he is perniciously deceived, who trusts in evil works: for these
are deceitful riches. as S. Bernard calls them. If he has good works: he
loses nothing by not looking on them, and by putting his trust in the mercy
of God alone: for God looks on them, and knows them well, and will not suffer
them to pass, without their due reward. Thus Bellarmin. Yea, Council. Trid.
sess. 6. cap. 16.
the Council of Trent makes the like profession, when it says: Although much
be given to good works, in the holy Scriptures: etc. Yet God forbid, that a
Christian should trust or glory in himself, and not in our Lord: whose
goodness is so great, that he wills these things, to be our merits, which
are his own gifts. The Ministers may collect, out of these words, by their
Logique, that the Council of Trent, yea and that all Papists are Protestants*
But they will not distinguish, between the necessity of good works; and
confiding in them: which are very different. At least, all moderat Protestants
may know by this open profession, the falsehood of that calumny, which is often
beaten into their ears, to wit, that all Papists presume in their merits. S.
Augustine shows, that there are two gulfs in this matter, one upon either
hand: and that the truth is a direct way in the middle. Presumption of justice,
or good works, is the gulf, upon the one hand: and negligence of good works, is
the precipice on the other. But the earnest care of good works and piety,
accompanied with humility, is the safe way in the middle. Thus ended the
Catholic, to the good satisfaction of some Protestants, who were present.

To conclude this matter, (wherein I have stayed longer, by reason of the
Ministers specious pretenses of great advantage in it) I can not believe any
more, Justification by faith only, as the principal article of my religion:
because it is not in Sctipture: because it is expressly against Scripture, and
against the holy Fathers: because it is an ancient heresy, condemned in Simon
Magus, and Eunomius: because the Presbyteria^s justifying faith, is not a true
Catholic faith, having the divin revealed truth for its object, as these he
retiques required: but is a private fancy and a false faith, Shelf. above.
(as it is acknowledged by some Protestants) having for its object, humane
presumption. Because it makes Christ a most imperfect Physician: and either
debarreth man, from the kingdom of heaven, into which he cannot enter with the
filthiness of his sins; or exposes him, after this life, to a most dangerous
purgation. Because it breeds neglect of all piety, and good works: and opens a
wide gate to all sort of vice. In a word: albeit the Ministers bragged much of
this article: yet I found they had never less reason: if we will stand to the
judgment of the Scriptures and Fathers: which, God willing, I ever intend to
prefer to their fancies, and to their Philosophical distinctions, or rather
confusions: to which, they are forced to run: that they may lurk in their
obscurities, when they are beaten out of the Scriptures: in which, at first,
they pretended, to be impregnably settled. It is sufficient for me, that the
Scripture expressly says: that a man is justified by works, and not by faith
only; Which is the contradiction of the Presbyterians faith: and that
themselves do acknowledge in end, the necessity of good works. But to know how
they are necessary; either as causes, or conditions, is not a necessary
curiosity; whereof few are capable, and without which many have gone to heaven.
And so now, I proceed to the Trial of our doctrine, concerning the Sacraments.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Excellency of the Christian Sacraments: and particularly,
how they confer Grace: which is denied by the Presbyterians.
AS I knew the Christian religion, to be the most excellent, of all true
religions, that ever have been: whether we consider that, which was under the
law of nature, or the other which was under the law of Moses: so I justly
conceived, that it was most agreeable to Gods goodness and wisdom, to adorn
and enrich it, with most excellent Sacraments. For, since no religion, whether
true or false, can be without some sensible signs, Aug. lib. 19. cont. Faust.
cap. 22.
as S. Augustine has observed; the Christian religion, (which is not only the
true, but also the most perfect religion, to which the former two served as
preparations) must also have, the most perfect and efficacious Sacraments. And
so I found, the same S. Augustine, extolling the perfection of the Christian
Sacraments, above these of the ancient law. Aug. lib. 3. de doct. Christ c. 19.
Aug. cont. Faust lib. 19. c. 13.
Our Lord, says he, and the Apostolical discipline have delivered some few
Sacraments, for many; and these most easy to be done, most magnificent for
signification, and most pure to be observed. And elsewhere, he says: the
Sacramenss are changed, they are made easier, fewer holsommer, happier. Now the
principal perfection of the Christian Sacraments, was generally believed to
consist in this; that God, by them, did confer grace unto our souls. Which
truth is so engrafted in the hearts of Christians, that I knew diverse
Protestants, could not be at first persuaded, that Luther, or Calvin, or that
their Church, taught the contrary: and. when that was sufficiently manifested
to them; they were much scandalized at it: In so much, that some of them did
say: If the Sacraments do not confer grace, and baptism does not take away
original sin; for what use serve the Sacraments: for what end were they
ordained?

Wherefore, being thus stirred up to try this question, I found in end, that
the Catholic doctrine, which taught that the Sacraments of the new Law do
confer grace, is conformable to the divine Scriptures; that it was expressly
believed by the holy Fathers; and does duly exalt the perfection of the
Christian Sacraments: Whereas the Presbyterians doctrine; which denies the
Sacraments to confer grace, is not only false against the Scriptures; but was
also condemned, as an ancient heresy, by the holy Fathers; that it vndervalues
the virtue of the Christian Sacraments: and is so absurd, that diverse famous
Protestants have abandoned that opinion, albeit it was taught both by Luther
and Calvin; and in this point do agree with the Catholics. All which things,
for brevities sake, I will only touch.

Of Baptism, S. John said to the Jews: 3.11. Math.
I indeed baptize you in water; but he, who comes after me, shall baptize you
in the holy Ghost and fire. Ananias said to S. Paul: be baptized and wash away
thy sins. Acts 22.16. Titus 3.5. Ephesians s. 5.26.
S. Paul calls also Baptism, the Lauer of regeneration, by which we are
saved. The same Apostle says, that Christ has sanctified his Church, by the
lauer of water; in the word of life. By which testimonies, albeit we speak
nothing of many others, it appeared sufficiently clear to me: since we are
said, to have our sins washed away by baptism; to be sanctified: to be born of
new again: that by it we receive also grace, without which, these things could
not be verified, and performed. The like is also affirmed of the Eucharist, of
which our Savior says: If any man eat of this bread, John. 6.51.54.
he shall live for ever. And again He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, has everlasting life. Now this everlasting life, is no otherwise had
here, but by receiving Grace, which is the seed of Glory, and of eternal life
and happiness. Therefore these two Sacraments, which are all, that the
Presbyterians admit, do confer grace by the virtue and institution of Christ,

What was the belief of the holy Fathers, and of the whole Church, in this
point, it is so clear; that Calvin himself, and other chief Protestants do
acknowledge it to be the same, which is now believed by the Catholics,
against their doctrine. Call. lib. 4. Instit. cap. 14. sect. 14. and 26.
For. Calvin confesses, that with great consent, it was taught and believed
for many ages; That the Sacraments of the new Law do confer grace, if they were
not hindered by mortal sin; which, albeit he calls a pernicious and
pestilentious opinion, and alleges, that it draws men from God, to rest in
the sight of corporal things, and not in God himself; yet he confesses also,
that it was taught by S. Augustine, and the holy Fathers: whom he striveth to
excuse, by saying, that in their immoderat praises of the Sacraments, Cent. 2.
c. 4. and cent. 3. c 4. Muscul. in loc. com. p. 299.
they used hyperbolical speeches. The Lutheran Centurists do ascribe the same
doctrine, as an error, to the most ancient Fathers: as to S. Clement, Justin,
Cyprian, and others. Musculus says plainly: that Augustine did rashly affirm,
that the Sacraments of the new law conferred grace. These open confessions
shall save our pains, of citing the Fathers testimonies. And that this doctrine
of the Catholics does manifest the perfection of the Christian Sacraments, it
is so clear of it self, that it needs no illustration. Upon this
consideration, S. Augustine, Aug. tract. 80. in Joan.
admiring the wonderful effects of the Sacraments, cried out: Vnde tanta
virtus aquae, vt corpus tangat, and cor abluat? Whence comes, says he, so
great virtue to the water, that it touches the body, and cleanses the soul?
Where he ascribes this wonderful effect, to the goodness and omnipotency of
God: which shows also, that his speeches are not hyperbolicall, as Calvin
falsely pretends. Thus much briefly, to show that I found the Catholic doctrine
to be conform to the Scriptures and holy Fathers, and to manifest the
perfection of the Christian Sacraments. And therefore Calvin's opinion, which is
just contrary, must needs be against all these. He himself confesses that it
is against the holy Fathers, and consequently it cannot be conform to the
Scriptures, whereon they founded their faith, and not upon humane imaginations.
That it takes away a great perfection from the Sacraments, denying them to
confer grace, is so evident, that it needs no proof. Calvin saw this so
clearly, that he pretended, the Farhers used immoderate praises of the
Sacraments, and that this virtue, which the Catholics do ascribe to the
Sacraments, makes people to trust more in creatures, them in God himself. But
as I found Calvin's doctrine to be false; so I soon perceived, that his pretense
of preserving Gods honor, was very frivolous. For how can the virtue of the
Sacraments derogate from the power and honor of Christ; since all power and
virtue, that they have, is acknowledged to be from Christ, who is the
principal Agent and Author of grace, they being only the instruments, by which
he produces it? How can the virtue of the Sacraments draw people from God, and
make them rely more on corporal things then on God: since it, being so
spiritual and supernatural, rather draws people from corporal things to God,
and makes them to admire more his power and to love his goodness? This was the
effect, that the virtue of the Sacraments produced in S. Augustine; when with
admiration he cried out: Whence has the water that virtue, that it touches
the body and cleanses the soul. A Catholic did further illustrate this
matter to me, by an example. Who can be so void of reason (said he) as to
think, that the virtue, which proceeded from the hemme of our Saviors garment,
by touching whereof, Luke 8.44.
the woman in the Gospel was cured, did derogate from the honor of Christ; or
would make the women to rely, or fix her ey's more on the garmen, then on
Christ himself: But rather is not the contrary most evident, that thereby the
power and virtue of Christ was mvch illustrated, who, by such a small
instrument, had produced so wonderful an effect? And was not the woman and all
the people present, drawn thereby more closely to Christ, and made to love his
goodness, and admire his power? It is just so in the Sacraments. As that
virtue, which proceeded from the hemne of our Saviors garment, cured
supernaturally the desease of the body; so the virtue, which proceeds from the
Sacraments, cures the deseases and infirmities of the soul. And, as that
tended to the honor of Christ; so does this much more. Thus he.

Moreover, I found this Presbyterian opinion, which robs the Sacraments of all
virtue, to be an ancient heresy condemned by the holy Fathers, Epiph. her. 80.
Aug. haeres. 57. Damas. lib. de heres^b.
in some heretics called Messalians, who taught, that sins were purged
without the divine Sacraments, as S. Epiphanius S. Augustine and Damascen do
testify. There is indeed this difference, between them and the Calvinists:
that they ascribed that power of purging sins to prayer: which these do, in
their own manner, to Faith. Lastly, this opinion of Luther and Calvin is so
false and absurd, Prot. Apol. tract. 3. sect. 4. in marg ad 111. Mont. Orig.
page 72.
that diverse famous Protestants, as Osiander, Whitaker, Hooker, Bilson, and
others cited in the Protestants Apology, besides some more late Doctors of the
late English Church, have rejected it, and believe with the Catholics, that
the Sacraments of the new law do not only signify, but also confer grace:
and acknowledge the difference, which the holy Fathers have put between the
Sacraments of the old law, and these of the Euangel. All which considerations
gave me sufficient ground, not to make any longer such a gross error, an
article of my faith.

But, because the first and chief Protestants deny the Sacraments to confer
grace, I was curious to know, for what end they thought the Sacraments were
ordained, Melanch in locis com. c. de signis Zuing. de vera and fall. relig c.
de Sacram. Luth. de capt. Bab. cap. vltimo. also Call. lib. 4. Inst. c. 14.
and for what use they served: and, in this matter, I found a diversity among
them. Melanchton said, that they serve as badges, to distinguish us from
infidels. Zuinglius makes Sacraments no better then Soldiers marks, by which
they are distinguished. Luther says, that they are external signs ordained to
stir up our faith. Calvin is of the same opinion; but he adds: that they
are seals of Gods promises, ordained to uphold our faith, to wit, his special
and justifying faith. When it was objected to Luther by the Catholics, that
the Sacrament of baptism could not stir up faith in infants baptized, who
have no use of reason: he was brought to that straight, that he said infants
did actually believe whilst they were baptized: which is so false, that, as S.
Augustine speaks, they, Aug. epist. 57. ad Dardan. Call. lib. 4. Instit. cap. 16.
sect. 19.
who affirm such things, do an injury to humane senses. Calvin, not relying
fully upon Luthers vnreasonnable opinion, says, that the baptism of infants
stirs up their faith, when they come to the use of reason. Which doctrine
gives great advantage to the Anabaptists, and shows, that the baptism of
infants is not profitable, before they attain to the use of reason. So that,
according to the chieff Protestant Reformers, the Sacraments are nothing but
badges, or bare signs and tokens, or seals of Gods promises, without any
inward effect of grace. And therefore, they are made by them to serve to
little, or no purpose. By which, I saw what uncertainty is among these
Reformers, even in the principal points of our faith: and how abiectly they
speak and think of the Christian Sacraments: Whereas the Catholic Church and
holy Fathers speak most reverently, and esteem highly of them: showing, that
they were ordained principally for our sanctification, according to that famous
definition of a Sacrament, Aug. lib. 10. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 5. Idem quaest. 84.
in Leuit. Et lib. 19. con^. Faust. cap. 11.
collected out of S. Augustine. A Sacrament, is a visible sign of invisible
grace, instituted by Christ, for our Sanctificat^on. To which purpose, the same
holy Father says, Without the grace of invisible Sanctification, to what would
the visible Sacraments serve? And again the virtue of the Sacraments
unspeakably avails much. Therefore, the Presbyterians Sacraments, being
without invisible Sanctification, serve to little use, according to S. Augustine.

There was one doubt, which I had in this matter, concerning that which the
Catholics teach, that the Sacraments do confer grace, ex opere operato, or
by the work wrought. For I have heard some Ministers affirm* that the Papists
intended thereby to show, that the Sacraments produced grace, as well in those,
who were evil disposed, and came without due preparation, as in those who were
well disposed, and came well prepared to receive them: which I justly esteemed
to be most false and impious. Therefore, having proposed this difficulty to a
Catholic; I was informed by him, that this was a mere calumny of the
Ministers; Luther. de capt. Basil. cap. de Bapt. Call. in Antid. sess. 7. can.
5. and 8.
wherein they followed their Predecessors, Luther and Calvin, who said; that to
confer grace, by the work wrought, according to the Catholics, was nothing
else, but to confer grace to a sinner, without faith and repentance. But the
Catholics, said he, have no such false and absurd meaning. They only, by that
phrase do show, that the grace, which Christ produces by the Sacraments, as by
his instruments, does not depend either upon the the holiness of the Minister,
or upon worthiness of the receiver, but upon the work wrought, that is, on the
Sacramental action, which is instituted by Christ, for that end. As for
example; the Sacrament of baptism confers the grace of Sanctification to
infants, washing away their original sin, and making them the children of God;
and this effect it undoubtedly produces in infants, in whom no dispositions
are required: so that, if they die, before they commit any actual sin: all of
them would infallibly go to heaven. Here it is evident, that baptism confers
grace, by the work wrought, or by the Sacramental action and institution of
Christ, and not, for any worthiness of the infants. Again, although the
dispositions of faith, love, repentance and the rest, be required in these
persons, who, being come to age, are to be baptized; yet baptism does produce
their Sanctification, not by virtue, or for the merit of these dispositions,
(although, without them, justifying grace would not be produced) but for the
institution of Christ, to whom, and not to the merit of the receaver, all the
grace is attributed. Thus he show me, how the Catholic Doctors did explain
the matter, and that it never entered into any of their heads, that the
Sacraments would produce grace in those, who were ill disposed, or received
the^ without due preparation; since the Scripture shows, that these, 1. Cor.
11. v. 9.
who receeive the Eucharist unworthily, receive unto themselves damnation.

Upon these considerations, I thought it no wonder, that the Presbyterians, who
esteem their Sacraments to be of so little value, have also made them to be of
so little use. For they have abrogated and condemned all private baptism and
Communion; so, that these two Sacraments, which are all they have, cannot be
any more used in private, although upon never so great necessity. And, for
their Communion, as they never give it in private, for the comfort of the sick
so they give it very seldom in public, for the devotion of the whole: for in
some remarkable Towns, and other parts of the Country, it has not been once
administrated these 8. or 9. years. By all which, I saw clearly enough, that
the doctrines and practices of the Presbyterians, were not only against the
excellency, but also against the necessity of the Christian Sacraments; which
were thereby rendered altogether graceless, and almost vselesse. Therefore I
intended Godwilling, to follow no longer such wicked opinions and practices:
which destroy the nature, end, and use of the Christian Sacraments.

CHAP. XIX. That Baptism takes away Original sin: which is denied by the
Presbyterians.
UPON the determination of the former question, this other was soon decyded.
For, if Baptism conferres grace, as has been proved generally, of all the
Christian Sacraments, in the former chapter; then it also takes away sin,
which cannot stay with grace, in the same place. And so accordingly, the
Catholics teach, Council. Trid. sess. 5, can, 5.
that Original sin is taken away by Baptism; as the Council of Trent has
defined, in these words: If any man shall deny, that, by grace conserred in the
Sacrament of Baptism, the guilt of original sin is taken away: or says also,
that all, that is properly sin, is not taken away, but only razed, and not
imputed; be he accursed. The chieff Protestants and Presbyterians hold the
contrary, as an article of their faith. Luther says: to deny sin to be
remaining in a child, after baptism; Luth. art. 1. damnat. a Leone. X. Call.
lib. 4. Instit. cap. 15. sect. 10. Confess. Vvestmin. chapter 6.
is to tread both Paul and Christ under foot. Calvin accords to him. It is
false, says he, that by baptism, we are loosed and exempted from original
sin. The Presbyterian confession of Westminster says: that, by original sin,
we are wholly defiled, in all the faculties and parts of soul and body. And
that this corruption of nature, during this life, does remain in those, that
are regenerated, and that it self, and all the motions of it, are truly and
properly sin.

I found the Catholic doctrine to be firmly founded in the Scriptures, to have
been zealously defended by the holy fathers, who account them infidels, who
deny it; and to be agreeable to the very instinct of almost all Christians. And
consequently the Presbyterian belief, which is just opposite, must be against
all these; as also I found it to have been an ancient heresy, and that it is so
false and absurd; that diverse Protestants have been scandalized at it and
abandonned it: and some have condemned it as blasphemy. All which I shall
briefly touch.

That baptism takes away original, yea and all sin, the Scripture
sufficiently shows. Ananias said to S. Paul. Acts 22.17. Acts 2.38. Ephesians.
5.26. Titus. 1. v. 5.1. Pet. 3.21.
Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins. S. Peter gave this advice to
the Jews: be every one of you baptized, for the remission of your sins. S.
Paul says, that Christ has loved his Church, and delivered, himself for it;
that he might sanctify it, cleansing it by the lauer of water, in the word.
Again: He has saved us by the lauer of regeneration. S. Peter says: Baptism
saves you also. If then Baptism washes away our sins, how are they not taken
away? if we be cleansed from sin: how can the filthiness of sin remain? If we
be borne of new again, in the lauer of regeneration, how can the old man, or
death of sin abide in us? Christ is called, in the Scripture, the Lamb of God,
that takes away the sins of the world. But how could he be said, to take away
the sins of the world; if he did not take away Original sin, which is the sin
of the whole world? And how is that sin taken away, but by Baptism? These
places of Scripture appear so clear, for this truth; that, without great
violence, they cannot be wrested to an other sense. But now, let us hear the
judgment of the holy Fathers, and of the primitive Church.

S. Augustine shows the doctrine of the ancient Church, against the Pelagians,
who falsely alleged, that the Catholics maintaind, Baptism did not take
away all sins, but did only shave them: for which supposed doctrine, they
branded the Catholics, with the name of Manichees. He puts down their calumny
in these words: Aug. lib. 1. cont. duas epist. Pelag. c. 13.
These Manichees do teach, that baptism does not give remission of sins, nor
takes away crimes, but only shaves them. To which calumny S. Augustine answer's
thus. Who affirms this against the Pelagians, unless he be some infidel. For
we teach, that baptism gives remission of all sins, and takes away crimes, and
not shaveth them. Where may be observed, not only what was the doctrine of the
ancient Church, but also that the contrary, is a point of the Manichean
heresy; and that these, who maintain it, are infidels, in S. Augustins
judgment. Again, the same holy Father shows the great virtue of baptism, when
he says: Aug. lib 1. de peccat. mer. and rcmis. c. 5.
by the begetting flesh, original sin is only contracted: but by the
regenerating Spirit, remission is made not only of original, but also the of
voluntary sins. S. Chrysostom does more largely illustrate this matter,
showing, that baptism does not only take away sin, but also brings many
graces, and privileges to the persons baptized. They are, Chrysostom, in homil. ad
Neophitos.
says he, not only made free, but holy: not only holy, but just: not only
just, but children: not only children, but heirs: not only heirs, but
brethren of Christ: not only brethren of Christ, but coheires: not only
coheires, but memhers: not only the temple, but the members of the Spirit. You
see how many are the privileges of baptism. Many indeed think, that the
heavenly grace consists only in the remissien of sins: but we have reckoned ten
privileges. For this cause we baptize infants etc. Idem in homil. ad
baptizandos.
Thus S. Chrysostom. Again, the same holy Father shows, that albeit a sinner
were defiled with all sort of iniquity, and tied with the bands of all
wickedness; yet when he comes unto this Bath, he rises more pure, then the
beams of the Sun. And as a little spark of fire cast into the deep sea, is not
leasurely, but instantly extinguished by the abundance of waters, and
forthwith it is showed to be nothing: so all humane malice, when it comes to
the waters of these heavenly fountains, is more easily put out, then the heat
of that little spark. And least this should be thought, to be said out of
ambition or exaggeration; he proves all from these words of S. Paul. 1. Cor.
9.10.11.
Do not err. Neither fornicators, nor Idolaters; nor Adulterers etc. shall
possess the kingdom of God. And these things indeed you were: but you are
washed, but you are sanctified; but you are justified. Then, after an excellent
discourse on the virtue of baptism, he shows, why it is not called the lauer
of remission of sins, nor the lauer of purification, but the lauer of
regenerion: because says he, it does not only forgive our ssns, nor simply
purify us, who were wrapped up in wickedness, but it makes us, as if we were
borne from heaven. More testimonies need not to be added; since the Centurists
do confess, that the most ancient Fathers as S. Clement, Cent. 2. cap. 4. and
cent. 3. c. 4.
S. Justin, Cyprian, and many others, maintained the same doctrine. Yea they
maintained this so eagerly, that some of them do brand those, who believe the
contrary, with the note of infidelity: as we have seen lately out of S.
Augustine. Greg. lib. 9. regist. ep. 39.
To whom also accords S. Gregory the great, who says: that nothing can be
more unfaithful, then to, teach, that sins are only superficially, or not
fully, taken away in baptism.

Moreover: this truth is so engrafted in the hearts of Christians, that the
most part of Protestants believes it, albeit it be against the faith of their
Church, and albeit it be also true, that few of them know so much. Hence it
came to pass, that diverse Presbyterians were scandalized at some words, which
a great Apostle of the Covenant spoke lately, against this truth. For when one,
striving to clear himself, before the Presbytery, of some imputation,
wherewith he was charged, had said, that he was as innocent of that, whereof he
was accused, as he was free of original sin, by baptism: the said Apostle
presently took him up sharply, and told him; that he was speaking flat Popery,
and that neither he, nor any man whosoever would be freed from original sin, so
long as they lived. Whereupon, many, to whose ears this discourse came, took
great offense, as if this had been the private opinion of that Minister, not
knowing that it was also the belief of the Presbyterian Church, and of their
first Reformers. Hence it may appear, that this article of the Presbyterian
faith, is not only against the Scriptures, and holy Fathers: but also against
the very instinct of almost all Christians And besides all these absurdities, I
found it to have been a most ancient heresy, defended by the Origenists: who
thought, as S. Epiphanius witnesses, Epiph. haer. 64.
that sins were not taken away by baptism, but only covered, and were at length
purged by death. So that we have, for the most part, ancient and condemned
heresies, for the articles of the Presbyterian faith. Yea a famous Protestant
of Germany condemns this opinion, in the name of his Lutheran brethren, as a
blasphemy against the holy Scriptures. This blasphemy, Shlusselburg. lib. 1.
Theol. art. 18
says he, of the Calvinists (that baptism does not purge sins) the holy Ghost
in in many places refuteth. All which, besides many other considerations, were
more then sufficient to hinder me, from making such a pernicious error, (which
indeed makes baptism of no effect) an article of my faith.

I will conclude this matter with the testimonies of two most renowned Fathers,
who found by experience, the wonderful effects of baptism. Aug. lib 4.
Confess cap. 4.
S. Augustine does relate, how a dear Camer^d of his, whom he had infected with
the errors and heresies, which himself followed before his conversion, falling
extremely sick, being without understanding or sense, was in that condition
baptized. And how thereafter he coming to his senses, S. Augustine began to jest
him, with the baptism, which he had received without understanding. But, says
the father, he found that he had received it, and abhorred me as an enemy;
admonishing me, with a wonderful liberty, that I would leave off to speak
such things, if I would remain a friend. Whereat. S. Augustine professes, that
he much admired, to see such a change, wrought in the mind, by that, which was
done in the body of him, who at that time, knew not what they did. Cypr. epist.
2. ad Donat.
S. Cyprian also ingenuously confesses, what a vicious man himself was before
baptism; and how suddenly he was changed, and became an other man, by the grace
which he received in that Sacrament: and acknowledging thankfully the many
benefits which Christianity conferred upon him, he calls it truly, The death
of sins, and the life of virtues. The like admirable change was also wrought by
baptism, in the soul of S. Augustine. By all which may be known, that baptism
not only purges the soul from sin, and adorneth it with grace; but also it
changes admirably the mind of man.

The false supposition of the Presbyterians, that original sin, is nothing else
but concupiscence, shall be hereafter refuted in the trial of the Covenant.

CHAP. XX. That Baptism is necessary for the Salvation of Infants* which is
denied by the Presbyterians.
I took notice of a^ other dangerous error, which was taught by our first
Reformers, and is yet maintained by the Presbyterians, against the necessity of
baptism. For as they teach that baptism takes not a way original sin, so they
believe, that it is not necessary for salvation, and that children, dying
without that Sacrament, may be saved. Upon this dangerous doctrine, follows a
most dangerous practice. Fot they, believing baptism not to be necessary,
suffer many children to die without it: and they have also made a law,
abrogating all private baptism. Our first Reformers show their mind clearly,
The Scoti^h Confession etc. of baptism. Confess. Vvestminst. chap. 28. n. 5
Call. in Antido. to Council. ad sess. 6. c. 5. and lib. 4. instit c. 16. sect.
24. and 25. and cont. art. Parisiens. p. 307. F or. R^yon. de ^ortu and
progressu haeres. lib. 8. c. 11.
when they say, in their first Confession, That baptism isnoto of such
necessity, that the want of it, can be hurtful to the Salvation of children.
And they deny also the profitt of it, when they subioyn: that many have been
baptized, and yet were never inwardly purged. The same is almost repeated by
our new Presbyterian Reformers, in their late confession at Westminster: where
they say; that grace and salvation are not so necessarly annexed unto baptism,
that no person can be saved or regenerated without; it or, that all that are
baptized, are undoubtedly regenerated. These doctrines and practices are
d^rived from Calvin, the first Foundator of Presbytery, who taught, that the
children of the faithful are holy, from their mothers womb, are already
sanctified, and have remission of their sins; and that they have need of
baptism, not as of a help necessary, but as of seal, ordained by God, to seal
in them the grace of adoption. And if they die, they may be saved without
baptism. And, according to this doctrine, he made a law in Geneva, that the
children to be baptized, should expect sermon; and he suffered a child to dye
without baptism; because it was brought, a little late, to the Church; as
Florimond Reymond testifyeth.

Now, I found the opposite doctrine, to wit, that baptism is necessary for the
salvation of infants, to be most firmly founded in Gods word, to have been
strongly and zealously defended by the holy Fathers, and the ancient Church,
and to be conform to the general instinct of Christians. Therefore, the
Presbyrian doctrine which is contrary, must be against all those. And besides, I
found it to be an ancient heresy, and to be so dangerous and pernicious an
error, that diverse famous Protestants have abandonned it. All which points I
shall briefly touch.

1. Our Savior says clearly, in the Scripture unless a man be borne again, of
water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. John. v. 5.
Which place, the holy Fathers and the ancient Church understood of baptism.
Aug. lib. 1. de pecc. mer. and remiss. c. 30.
S. Augustine shows that this place was so express and convincing, that it
confounded the Pelagians, who denied original sin, and made them acknowledge
the necessity of baptism, although not for the remission of original sin, which
they denied; yet, for the attayning of the kingdom of heaven. But yet to
maintain their error, they foolishly imagined that children might be saved
without baptism, although without it, Vrb. Reg. 1. part oper. in Caetechismo
minori fol. 104. 105. 107.
they could not enter into heaven. Vrbanus Regius a famous Protestant in
Germany, says: that the right believing Fathers and Christians understood this
place, of baptism. And to believe (says he) that none, either man, or child
can be saved, without baptism, both the Scripture, and the authority of the
ancient Church compels us.

For the Fathers, we shall bring S. Augustine, who writes thus to S. Hierome.
Aug. epist. 20. ad Hier.
Whosoever says, that such children shall have life in Christ, who depart this
life without participatien of the Sacrament of baptism, that man questionless
gainsayeth the preaching of the Apostles, and condemns the whole Church;
where such have is made to run with children, because it is believed, without
doubt, that otherwise they cannot at all be quickened in Christ. And, in another
place he says most earnestly: Aug. lib. 3. de origin an^mae cap.
Do not believe, do not say, do not tea h, that children, preveened by death,
before they receive baptism, can attayn remission of their original sin, if you
desire to be a Catholic. And that this was not only the belief of S.
Augustine, but also of the other holy Fathers, as of S. Cyprian, Nazianzen, S.
Hierom, C^nt. 3. c. 4. and Cent. 4. c. 4 Aug. epist. 90 and 92.
S. Ambrose, S. Hilarious, etc. the Centurists themselves do acknowledge: yea
the Carthaginian and Milevitan Councels, as S. Augustine testifies, professed
the same, and condemned their opinion, who think that children can be saved,
without baptism. And that the necessity of baptism, is conform to the general
instinct of Christians, may appear by the former testimony of S. Augustine:
where he shows, that Christians make such haste, and are so earnest, to have
their children baptized; because they believe, that otherwise they cannot be
quickened in Christ. Therefore the Presbyterian doctrine, which denies the
necessity of baptism, gainsayeth the Scriptures, and Fathers, and ^s against
the common belief of Christians.

Moreover, it was condemned, Aug. lib de haeres. c. 69.
as an old heresy in the Pelagians. For they denied also, that baptism was
necessary for the remission of original sin. There is indeed this difference
between them, and the Presbyterians: that they, denying original sin, thought
it not necessary for the remission of it; albeit they esteemed it necessary,
for the attayning the kingdom of heaven. But the Presbyterians, granting
original sin, believe, that baptism is neither necessary for the remission of
it; nor for obtaining of heaven: and so their error, in this point is greater,
then that of the Pelagians. For they promise the kingdom of heaven to children
dying without baptism: which the Pelagians presumed not to do: it being so
clearly against the Scriptures.

That diverse famous Protestants have abandonned this error, and do hold, that
Salvation is not promised to the children of the faithful, dying without
baptism, Breirly shows in the Protestants Apology: Prot, Apol. trac. 3. sect.
4. n. 11.
where he cites for this purpose, the Confession of Auxburg, Vrbanus Regius,
Hosmanus, Bilson Bishop of Winchester, and others. King James also, in the
conference at Hampton Court, maintained that baptism was necessary, by the
necessity of command; albeit he did not think it necessary, by the necessity
of means. All which considerations, were more then sufficient motives, to make
me abandon the Presbyterian opinion, and to embrace the Catholic belief
concerning the necessity of haptism, for the Salvation of infants.

But, finding that the Presbyterians have principally two exceptions, against
the ancient Catholic doctrine, I proposed them to a Catholic, for my greater
satisfaction. First, said I, the Presbyterians do allege, that the necessity
of baptism is against the power of God* by tying him to the ordinary means. 2.
They affirm that it is against his mercy, to exclude so many children from the
kingdom of heaven. And therefore, in their Covenant, they accuse you, who are
Catholics, of cruel judgment, against children, dying without baptism. To
which the Catholic answered, that these pretenses were frivolous. For first,
said he, that cannot be against Gods power, which is according to his divine
will, by which his power is in some kind limited. Now, God, whose power is
infinite, and who might save children by many other means, then by baptism, has
declared his will; th t, unless a man be borne again, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of heaven; and therefore, so much as we know by his revealed will, he
has appointed no other remedy for original sin, but baptism; which, being
determinated by Gods proper will, cannot be against his power. Neither is God
hereby tied to any ordinary means; but to such, whereunto he has freely
determinated himself, according to his will. Upon which only will of God, and
his divin institution, and not upon the fancy and speculation of man, do depend
the remedies, which are necessary, for the Salvation of infants. Now, Gods
will and institution cannot be known, but by the divin revelation: and God
has revealed no other remedy, but baptism. Therefore, as the Catholics do
well, by grounding their faith, on the divin revelation; and by vseing all
diligence, to apply the remedy, which is appointed by Christ for the Salvation
of infants; so the Presbyterians do ill, by founding their faith, in this
point, not upon the Scriptures, but upon uncertain conjectures, which are also
against the Scriptures: and they do also ill, by neglecting the remedy
ordained by God, to expose the Salvation of infants to mere uncertainties. S.
Augustine says excellently to this purpose: Let not according to our fancy,
Aug. lib. de pec. mer. and remis. c. 32.
eternal salvation be promised to infants, dying without the baptism of Christ,
which the divin Scriptures, preferable to all humane ingines, do not promise.
Secondly, the Catholic said that the Presbyterians speak not consequentially,
when they say, that Gods power should not be tied to the ordinary means. For,
by this phrase, they would make people believe: that they esteemed baptism the
ordinary mean of taking away, or of pardoninng original sin: which indeed they
do not. For they teach with Calvin, that original sin is taken away before
baptism, which does not, according to them, purge or forgive sin: but is only a
scale of sin already forgiven. And therefore, the Presbyterians, in this
matter, both contradict themselves, and would deceive others.

Next, the same Catholic show me, that the Presbyterians, by their other
pretense, would seem to plead for the mercy of God, as they did by the first,
for his power; but with a like bad success; and that they, very unreasonably,
accuse the Catholics judgment. For it is no cruelty to conform our judgments
to the judgment of God, which we know by his own revelation. Gods judgments,
although they be sometimes so secret, that we cannot always penetrate into the
true causes of them; yet it is most certain, that they are ever just; and
therefore, not cruel. But, as in this matter, Gods judgment is clearly
revealed; so it is very easy to find the cause of it; to wit, original sin:
which, as it was contracted by generation from Adam; so it must be purged, and
taken away by regeneration in Christ; or else he, who is truth it self, says,
that none can enter into the kingdom of heaven. Besides: the Catholics
judgment against infants, dying, without baptism, is not so cruel, as the
Presbyterians judgment is cruel against many children, dying with baptism. For
the more common sentence of Catholic Divines is, that children dying without
baptism are not troubled with any sensible pain, but that they are only
excluded, for want of it, from the supernatural happiness, which the baptized
enjoy in heaven; and that otherwise, they lead a happy life But the
Presbyterians, in their new confession, teach that all children baptized, are
not undoubtedly regenerated: to which is consequent, that many infants baptized
are not saved, as not belonging to the Covenant of grace: which Bucer did
express more clearly, Bucer in cap. ^3. Math.
when he says, that children predestinate are saved without baptism; and the
not predestinate are damned even with baptism. Now, I enquire which of these
two judgments is more cruel? To say: that children, dying without baptism, do
not enter into heaven, but yet they suffer no sensible pain: or to say that
many children, dying with baptism, are not only excluded from heaven, but are
also eternally tormented in hell, with sensible pains? Without all doubt the
last; which is the judgment of the Presbyterians, is incomparably more cruel.
Moreover, it is more rigorous, then the judgment of these other Catholics
Divines, who teach, that infants dying without baptism, are not only excluded
from heaven, but are condemned to hell, and to some sensible pains therein,
for the same reason. For it is more rigorous, without doubt, to condemn, to
hells sensible pains, some infants that are baptized, and some that are not;
then to judge, that the only not baptized children are liable to that pain. By
this it may be seen, that the Presbyrians, who accuse others falsely of cruel
judgment, against children dying without baptism, are guilty themselves of more
cruel judgment against children, dying with baptism.

But, albeit, said he, the Catholics judgment in this matter were false or
cruel, as the Presbyterians do allege; yet there follows no cruelty nor
inconvenience upon it, to children, who are thereby, with the greater care and
commiseration, carried in all haste to baptism. So that this pretended cruelty
in judgment, produces true mercy and compassion in action. But if the
Presbyterians doctrine be false, as it must be, if the criptures* Fathers and
Councels be true, great evils and cruelties follow upon it to the children. Fot
thereby, many of them are suffered to die without baptism, and so are cruelly
deprived of their Salvation. These men's pretended mercy in Iudment, produces
real cruelty in their actions. Thus he, in answer to my doubts.

Moreover, the same Catholic show me, that according to the Catholic
Doctors, the baptism of infants may be supplied by Martyrdom, which is also
called baptism in the Scripture, as when our Savior said to the children of
Zebedee: Mark. 10 38.
Can you be baptized with the baptism, wherewith I am baptized. And so the
Church did of old, and does still, honor the Innocent children murdered by
Herod, as Martyrs. The same is also verifyed of those, who are come to age, as
S. Augustine testifies. Whosoever also, Aug. de civitate* Dei lib. 13. c. 7
says he, not having teceived the lawer of regeneration, dies for the
confession of Christ, it avails as much to him for remission of his sins, as
if they had been washed away in the sacred font of ba^tism. The baptism of
water may be supplied also, by a true conversion to God, when the baptism of
water is not contemned, but rather desired, and yet, through some necessity,
men die without it, as S. Ambrose testifies of Valentinian the yonger^ I have
lost him, Ambr. orat. de obit^^ Val. ent. iunioris. Mark. 1.4. Luke 3.3.
says he, whom I was to regenerate: but he has not lost the grace which he
hoped for. This true conversion and penance is also called baptism in the
Scriptures; for it is said, that S. John preached baptism of penance, unto
remission of sins. And, according to this doctrine, the ancients did handsomely
distinguish three kinds of baptism, which they called Sanguinis, flaminis, and
fluminis: that is, the baptism of blood, of the Spirit, and of water.

Lastly, he said, that although baptism were not a necessary mean, ordained by
God, for Salvation of Infants; yet it has the necessity of a command to
Pastors, Mat. 28.19.
as is evident by our Saviors words to the Apostles: Go and teach all
nations, baptizeing them etc. Therefore, although it were supposed, that no
hurt come to the children, dying without baptism; yet they, who by their office
are obliged to baptize, commit a great sin, when they wilfully neglect to obey
Christ's command: which the Presbyterian Pastors manifestly do, suffering so
many children, notwithstanding the many tears and cries of their parents, to
die without baptism. And, according to this observation, King James answered
well a Minister in Scotland, who enquired of him, if he thought baptism so
necessary, that, if it were omitted, the child would be damned. No said the
King, but I verily believe, if you, being called to baptize a child in danger
of death, would refuse to do it, that you would be damned. This answer may be
seen, in the first days conference at Hampton Court. Where it is also showed,
that such a neglect of, baptism is not only a damnable sin, in the Minister,
but likewise that it is very dangerous for the child. For who, says the Bishop
of London, has any car^ of religion, and would not by all means be careful,
that his child receive baptism? Who would not rather assure his action, upon
the promises of Jesus Christ; then the omission of it, upon the secret judgment
of God? Then, whereas the Ministers do allege that Christ's command extends
only to public, and not to private baptism, this is a mere fancy without any
ground in Scripture, where no such distinction is made: yea it is against
Scripture. For do we not read, that S. Paul was baptized privately by Ananias,
and the Eunuch by S. Philip. Acts. 9.18 and Acts. 8.38.
But they who teach that Gods commandments are impossible to be kept, and make
daily profession to break them, may let this pass with the rest. These, and
diverse other inconsequentiall errors of the Presbyterians concerning baptim,
he did manifest unto me; which, for brevities sake, I omit.

Therefore, to conclude this point: I cannot believe the Presbyterian doctrine
against the necessity ob baptism, because i^ is against our Saviors express
words, against the holy Fathers and whole ancient Church; because it is an
ancient heresy condemned in the Pelagians; because it is against the common
instinct of Christians, and is condemned by diverse famous Protestants; so that
King James, the head of a famous Protestant Church, judged it damnable in the
Ministers; and his Prelates esteemed it most dangerous to the infants. For which
dangerous doctrine, and the cruel practice flowing from it, I can find no other
ground, but Ministerial tradition from Geneva, and that against the Scriptures
and all the former authorities. Florimond above cited, shows, Flor. Reym. de
orta haeres. lib. 8. c. 11. etc.
how this tradition descended from Calvin, and that Musculus Superintendent of
Berne deposed a Minister named, Samuel Hueber, for having baptized a child in
the night, when it was in danger of death; and Beza did assist to that censure.
Moreover, he shows, how in a Protestant Synod, at Figear, it was ordained,
that the Ministers should comfort the parents of children dying without baptism
But all in vain: so that the Ministers of Poictou, in an aslembly at
Chastelrauld in the year 1599. were enforced to give way to Ministers, to
baptize in private houses, that they might avoid the cries of tender hearted
mothers. I have heard of some pitiful accidents that have fallen forth in our
Country, upon this same occasion: so that some mothers have almost gone out of
their wits, when the Ministers suffered their children to die without baptism.
And I knew a Protestant father, who, for this same reason, took great
indignation at all Presbyterian Ministers. Such a strong impression has God
made of this truth in the hearts of the simple people, who, in many other
things, have suffered themselves to be too simply misled, to abandon the truth.
By all which, it may be f^en how the Presbyterians, make void, and destroy the
Sacrament of baptism.

CHAP. XXI. Of the real presence of Christ's body in the holy Sacrament: which
is denied by the Presbyterians.
AS the Presbyterians, by denying both the effect and nec^ssity of bapism, do
in effect quite take away that so holy and necessary a Sacrament; so I
conceived, if it be true that Christ's body be really present in the Eucharist
(as the Catholics believe) that the Presbyterians, who deny the real
presence, and do give us nothing, but signs and tokens of Christ's body, do
also destroy this other most excellent Sacrament. The Catholics belief in
this point, Council. Triden. sessio 13 c. 1.
is clearly set down by the Council of Trent, where it is said: The holy Synod
does openly and simply profess, that, in the hol^ Sacrament of the Eucharist,
after the consecration of bread and wine, our Lord Jesus Christ, true od and
true man, is truly, really and suhstantially contained, etc. Our first Scott sh
Confession speaks not so clearly. For, after some ambiguity of words, by which
it would seem to grant the real presence, it acknowledged that hrists body is
only in the heavens. For it says, that the holy Ghost, by true faith, 1.
Scottish. confess. art. 21.
carries us above all things, that are visible etc, and makes us to feed upon
the body and blood of Christ Jesus, which is in the heavens. And yet
notwithstanding the far distance of place, which is betwixt his body, now
grorifyed in the heavens, and us now mortal in this earth: yet we assuredly
believe etc. The late Gonfession of Westminster, albeit it uses also some
ambiguous expressions yet it affirms that Christ's body is not corporally or
carnally in, with, or under the bread and wine. Confess. West. chap. 29. n. 7.
And its known also that the Presbyterians do zealously maintain, that
Christ's body is only in the heavens, and that it is impossible even to the
omnipotency of God, to make a body to be present in two places at once. And
therefore, according to them, Christ's body cannot be really present in the
Sacrament.

Although this be a most important question, and is much agitated by the
curiosity of carnal reason; yet I was soon satisfied in it; because I was
resolved by Gods grace, to found my faith upon no other ground, but upon the
divine Scriptures, as they were understood by the ancient Church and holy
Fathers. And therefore, after a little diligence and some conference with a
Catholic, on this matter; I found, that the real presence of Christ's body in
the Sacrament was conform to the clear words of the Scriptures, which were so
understood by the holy Fathers, and which, in right reason, cannot be otherwise
understood; and that God has approved this truth by famous miracles. And, upon
the other part, I found, that the Presbyerian doctrine is against Scriptures,
Fathers, Councels and right reason, that it is an ancient heresy, and so false,
that many Protestants do eagerly oppose it: and lastly, that such great
confusion was in this matter, among the first Apostles of this new religion;
that it is no wonder to see it so much multiplied among their children. All
which points I will briefly touch.

1. The Catholics bring express Scripture for the real presence, to wit
the words of Institution of this holy Sacrament, related by three Evangelists
and one Apostle: where our Savior always says, This is my body. This is my
blood. And to know that he mean'd of his true and real body, he adioyneth my
body, which shall be given for you, and my blood which shall be shed for you.
Now it was his real body, which was given for them, and his real blood which
was shed for them. S. John. chapter 6.
Therefore it was his real body, and real blood, which they received in the
Sacrament. Moreover, S. John relates along discourse, which our Savior had to
the Jews, in which he affirms, that he was the bread of life, that came down
from heaven. And the bread, which he was to give, was his flesh, for the life
of the world: and unless they eat his flesh, and drink his blood, they should
have no life in them. And, notwitstanding that the Jews murmured at all these
things, saying: How can this man give us his flesh to eat! and this is a hard
saying, who can hear it? Yet our Savior did with many asseverations affirm
it, over and over again: yea and the suffered them to depart from him, because
they would not believe this divine mystery. Now Christ is not a mocker or
deceiver of men, to speak one thing, yea and to aver it with asseverations,
which are equivalent to oaths: and to intend the contrary. Christ is not
ignorant of the usual manner of speech: Therefore, since he tells the Apostles
plainly, that the Eucharist is his body delivered for them, it must be his
body, (as the Catholics believe) and cannot be not his body, as the
Presbyterians imagine. If the Scripture be Judge of controversies, then this
controversy is decyded: for that Judge, to which Protestants make ordinarily
their appeals, has so determined the cause against them, that they dare not
stand to the clear words of their Judge; in so much, that some learned
Protestants do confess, that the Scripture taken in the native, proper and
literal sense, is plainly for the Catholics, against themselves; and namely
Morton, when he speaks thus to the Catholics. If the words he certainly true
in a proper and literal sense; Morton deinstit, Sacrament. lib. 2. c. 1.
then we are to yield to you the whole cause. And therefore, they are enforced
to run to their tropes and figures.

But I found the holy Fathers making no such glosses, on our Saviors clear
words, and taking them in their proper sense. S. Augustine, citing these words
of our Savior, this is my body, Aug. in ps. 33.
speaks thus: A man may be carried by the hands of others, no man is carried in
his own hands: but Christ was carried in his own hands, when recome^ding his
body, he himself said: this is my body. For he carried himself in his own
hands. And again, We receive with a faithful heart and month, Idem contr.
adversar. legis lib. 2. c. 9. Ambros. lib. 4. de Sacram. cap. 4. Chrysostom. lib. 2.
de Sacerdotio. Cypr. de Coena Domini.
the Mediator of God and man, the man Jesus Christ, who gives us his flesh to
eat. S. Ambrose says clearly. Before consecration, it is bread: but when the
words of consecration come, it is the body of Christ. Hear him saying, take
eat. This is my body etc. S. Chrysostom says; He, who sits above with the
father, in that same instant of time (O miracle! O the bounty of God!) is
touched by the hands of all, and he gives himself, to those, who will receive
and embrace him. S. Cyprian. The bread, which our Lord gave to his Disciples,
being changed not in shape, but in nature, by the omnipotency of the word, is
made flesh. Many more testimonies of these, and of the other holy Fathers, in
all the first ages, even until the time of the Apostles, Council. Nicen. apud
Bellar. lib. 2 de Euch. aristi. c. 10. Council. Ephesians. apud eund. lib. 2. cap.
25.
may be seen collected by Coccius and Gualterus. So that I found both the
Scriptures and Fathers, giving sentence against the Presbyterians. The first
for the letter, and the other for the sense.

This same truth is also confirmed by the testimony and authority of the
universal Church, in general Councels: as the first Nicen Council, whose words
Bellarmin cites. The third general Council of Ephesus, to which S. Cyrill of
Alexandria did preside, by which Synod the epistle of S. Cyrill to Nestorius,
where the real presence of Christ's body in the Eucharist is contained, was
approved, as it was thereafter, by the fourth and fifth general Councels. to
speak nothing of other more late Councels.

Besides all these authorities, it was also made evident unto me, by the light
of reason, that our Saviors words, concerning the institution of this
Sacrament, cannot be but literally understood. For 1. the principal articles,
or points of our faith, are not delivered in the Scriptures, but in proper and
clear words. But this, by all men's Confession, is a principal mystery of our
faith. Therefore it is delivered in clear and plain terms. 2. That cannot be
ascrybed to Christ without blasphemy, which no reasonable or prudent man would
do. But no reasonable or prudent man would make his testament in obscure and
figurative words: for that were the high way to deceive his children and
heirs, and put them at variance. Therefore since Christ, at the institution of
this Sacrament, a little before his death, was making his Testament, as is
manifest by his words, when he calls the Chalice, Luke 20.22.
the new Testament in his blood, by which, he left unto his children the most
precious legacy of his body, for their comfort and nourishment, he spoke
properly and clearly, and not figuratively. 3. Christ promised the Jews a more
excellent food then Manna, John. 6.33.
to wit, the bread of life, his own flesh, But, if the Sacrament were mere
bread, and not Christ's body, it would not be more excellent then Manna, which
was called the bread of Angels, but much inferior to it: as is evident. 4.
Christ, who is goodness and wisdom it self, would not, for tropes and figures,
have used so many asseverations, as are set down in the 6. chapter of S. John.
Neither would he have suffered so many of his disciples and others to go away
from him, after so many doubts proposed by them: but he would have cleared the
matter vnro them. Lastly. If this liberty be once granted to expound the
Scripture figuratively, when we are not forced to it, by any other Scripture or
article of our faith; then, nothing will remain, but uncertain opinions, of
divine things; and so, by this means, the whole mysteries of the Christian
religion may be denied, or overturned. For there is no more requisite
(according to this licentious rule) but that some few Novelists think a mystery
impossible, albeit all the holy Fathers and ancient Church did ever esteem it
not only possible, but also a truth revealed by God, and an article of their
faith. And so diverse heretics have imagined the mystery of the Incarnation,
of the holy Trinity, and such like principal articles of the Christian religion
to be impossible, and therefore have expounded all the Scriptures, which speak
of them, figuratively: as the Presbyterians do here. For these reasons, besides
the authority of the holy Fathers, it appeared sufficiently evident to me, that
the words of Christ, concerning the holy Sacrament, ought to be literally and
plainly understood, and not figuratively.

This truth also of the real presence was showed to me, to betestifyed and
confirmed from heaven, by miracles: both ancient and modern; which are related
by famous and faithful Authors. For either some singular benefits have been
obtained by the faith of this holy Sacrament, as expulsion of Devils,
deliverance from shipwreck, and the like: or some punishments have fallen upon
those, who either did not believe the real presence, or used the Sacrament
irreverently: or some visions and apparitions of Christ, in the form of a
child, or flesh, have been seen to confirm those, who were doubtful of the
real presence. Of the first sort, Prosp. de promissi and Praed. Dei etc. cap.
6.
S. Prosper brings an example, which fell out at Carthage, how a young
Arabian maid, who by a certain sin, made her self an habitation to the Devil,
by whom she was so miserably vexed some days, that her throat being stopped,
she could receive no meat or drink, was at length delivered, by the Communion
of the sacred body of our Lord. But most famous is that miracle, which. S.
Bernard, by the holy Sacrament, did at Milan, before innumerable people. For he
cured a woman, who had been possessed many years by the Devil, and was rather
a monster then a woman, In vita S. Bernardi. lib. 2. cap. 3.
by holding the holy Sacrament above her head, and saying? O wicked Spirit,
here is present thy Judge. Here is the highest power; resist now if thou can.
Now, said he, the Prince of this world shall be cast forth. This is that body,
which was taken of the body of the Virgin, which was stretched on the tree of
the cross, which lay in the sepulcher, which, in the sight of his disciples,
ascended unto heaven. I command thee, O wicked Spirit, in the terrible power of
this Majesty, that, going out of this hand maid of our Lord, thou presume to
touch her no more. God approved the truth of S. Bernards faith (which was
always the faith of the Catholic Church) by granting his desire. Flor. Reym.
de ortu haeres lib. 2. cap. 12.
The like miracle was done, in this last age, at Laon in Picardie, on the
person of a young woman named Nicolas Obry, as is related, with many admirable
circumstances, by an eye witness, Florimond Reymond, Counselor of the
Parliament of Bordeaux, by which miracle, he professes himself to have been
drawn out of the gulf of heresy. Ambros. in Orat. funeb de obitu Satyri.
S. Ambrose does also relate: how his brother Satyrus, by the great faith he
had of this holy Sacrament, was miraculously delivered from shipwreck.

How God has punished those, who have abused or blasphemed this holy
Sacrament, both ancient and modern histories do show. S. Cyprian relates many
of these miracvlous punishments, Ott Mile^it. cont. Parmen. lib. 2. For. de
ortu haer^s. lib. 4. c. 10.
which fell out in his time, so that some were filled with unclean Spirits, and
others were turned into madness. S. Optatus does show, that the Donatists, who
threw the holy Sacrament of the Catholics unto dogs, immediately thereafter
felt the divine judgment: for the dogs, becoming enraged did set upon their
own Masters, and tore them in pieces. The above named Florimond does relate,
how an Arian woman of Cracovie, in the year 1579. looking out at her window,
and seeing the holy Sacrament carried in procession, cried out: Behold the bear
which the Papists carry, and adore. But immediately, she was punished: For the
Devil, seazing on her, did so torment her, that blaspheming she expired in her
husbands arms. Moreover, Idem lib. 4. cap. 6.
the same-Author shows, that a Jew, having made himself Christian, did
steal, out of a Catholic Church, three consecrated hosties, with which he
fled to Hungary, where he sold one of them to a Jew, in Presburg; and with the
other two, he went to another town, called Nickesburg: where he assembled
diverse of his companions, to show their outrage against the Sacrament. Whence
it came to pass, that, one of the company, taking a knife, did stob the sacred
hostie, which was lying on a table, saying; if thou be the God of the
Christians, show it by some miracle. The blow was no sooner given, but the
blood did spring up, by which, they were astonished, and, in the same hour,
thunder came from heaven, which destroyed that house, and consumed into ashes
that wicked company, except only three, who half burnt, were left to be
witnesses of their wickedness, and having escaped the fire of heaven, were
severly punished by the hand of man: as the Author recounts. This miracle was
so much the more famous, that the table and the two hosties, of which one was
pierced by a knife, were found entire among the midst of these ashes, and
were collected, at the sight of innumerable people. This miracle fell out in
the year 1580. I pass by many more, which were showen me, to this purpose.

Paul. Diac. in v^ta S. Greg. Ioann. Eiar. in vita eiusd. Greg. lib. 2. c. 41.
Lastly: for the comfort of the faithful, or for confirmation of the doubtful,
some visions have appeared in the holy Sacrament. That which is recounted in
the life of S. Grego- the great, is very remarkable. The history is briefly
this. When S. Gregory was giving the Sacrament to the people, he came to a
woman, who smiled, when he said to her, the body of our Lord Jesus Christ
preserve thy soul, whereupon the Pope did withdraw his hand, and laid the
Sacrament on the altar. After the holy solemnities were ended, he enquired at
the woman, why she had laughed in so dreadful an action. She in end confessed,
that she could not acknowledge that bread, which she had made with her own
hands, to be the body of Christ. Then S. Gregory prayed God earnestly for her,
and obtained, that the bread, even in external form, should be turned into
flesh: by which miracle; he both reduced the woman unto the faith, and
confirmed the people in it. The faith of S. Lowis King of France, Bosius li 14
de signis Eccles. p. 145. ex Villanaeo an. 1258.
concerning this Sacrament, is much celebrated. For, when he, being advertised,
that a most beavtifull child had appeard in the holy Sacrament, was desired to
come and see this miracle, he refused to go saying: that these miracles were
done for these, who doubted; but for himself, he was most certain that Christ
Jesus was truly present in the Eucharist. An other such apparition was seen at
Doway in the year 1254. and continueda good time, Spond. suppl. anno 1254. n.
16.
so that great numbers of people came from diverse parts to see it, and the
memory of it is every year celebrated, in that town, with great solemnity.

By all which considerations, I was sufficiently satisfied of the Catholic
belief, concerning the real presence, which I found to be containd in the holy
Scriptures, believed by the holy Fathers. and by general Councels, and to be
confirmed by miracles. And therefore I could not any longer believe the
Presbyterian doctrine, which, against all these authorities, makes the body of
Christ to be as far distant from the Sacrament, as the heavens are from the
earth.

1. I perceived, that they scarcely pretend to have Scripture for them: but are
enforced to run from the clear words of it, to their tropes and figures: Aug.
lib. 3. de doct. Christ. c. 10.
which S. Augustine observed long ago to be the custom of erroneous persons, So
soon, says he, as the opinion of any error has once prepossessed their
minds: they esteem all to be figures. which the Scripture says to the
contrary. And therefore, albeit the Scripture says not once, but four times,
that the Eucharist is the body and blood of Jesus Christ, without ever saying,
in any one place, that it is not his body, but only a figure of it: they
believe the one, which it says not, and not the other, which it affirms.
Against them, S. John Damascen says efficaciously, Damas. lib. 4. Orthodo.
fidei
The bread and wine is not a figure of the body and blood of Christ; God forbid
it were that: but it is the divine body of our Lord: he himself saying: this is
my body. 2. They pass from the Scriptures and Fathers, and found their
negative faith upon their senses, and some carnal reasons. Chrysostom. homil. 60. ad
popul, Antioch.
Against which vain pretenses, S. Chrysostom says well. Let us believe God
every where, let us not oppose him; although that which he says, seem absurd
to our sense and understanding. Let his speech overcome our sense and reason:
which, in all things, we ought to do and chiefly in the mysteries: not only
looking to that, which lies before us, but also holding fast his words. For we
cannot be deceived by his words: our sense may be easily deceived: these cannot
be false: this is often deceived. Because therefore he has said, this is my
body: let us not be holden by any doubt, but let us believe and comprehend it,
wi^h the ey's of of our understanding. Cyrill. Alex. lib. 4. in Joan c. 13.
S. Cyrill speaks no less efficaciously against those, who pretend this
mystery to be against reason, and impossible; compareing them to incredulous
Jews. A malignant mind, says he, does presently reject, as frivolous and
false, what it does not understand; yielding to none, nor thinking any thing to
be above it self: as we shall find the Jews to have been. For when it became
them, who had seen the divine virtue and the miracles of our Savior, to
receive his speech willingly, and, if any thing seemed difficult, to have asked
the resolution of him; they did the quit contrary, and cried out together
against God, not without great impiety. How can this man give us his flesh?
neither did it come into their mind, that there is nothing impossible with
God: for, since they were sensual (as S. Paul speaks) they could not understand
spiritual things, and so great a mystery seemed to them to be folly. But let
us make great profit by other men's sins. Let us have a firm faith in these
mysteries: Let us never speak nor think that word (How). That Is merely
Iudaical, and the cause of great punishment. Thus S. Cyrill. 3. The
Presbyterians do wrest our Saviors words, by a figurative interpretation,
against all reason, as has been showed.

Then, I found this Presbyterian doctrine: Apud Bellar. lib. 1. de Euch. cap. 1.
Gualt. Chronolog. saecul. 1. cap. 1. Elien resp. ad Apolog. Bellar. c. 1.
Casaub ans. to Card. Peron. 1. instance fol. 32. English
to have been an ancient heresy of Simon Magus, and Menander, and thereafter
of Berengarius, who, at his death, did recant; of the Albigenses, and of
diverse others. Yea Gualterus brings some testimonies of the holy Fathers to
show, that Judas the traitor, denied the real presence, and did not believe
our Saviors words, in the 6. chapter of S. John. Lastly diverse famous
Protestants have abandoned that doctrine of Calvin. As Bishop Andrews, who
writes thus against Bellarmin. We agree, faith he, with you, of the matter; all
the contention is about the manner: a presence, I say, we believe, not less
real then you. Casaubon made the like profession, in name of King James, and
of the whole Church of England.

And, whereas I heard so much cried out against Transubstantiation, as a thing
impossible, and a noveltie lately introduced into the Church; I found both
these allegations to be false. For the holy Fathers do show both the
possibility, and the verity of it, out of the Scriptures. Cyrill. Hieros.
Catech. 4. Mystag. Ambros. l. 4. de Sacram c. 4. and lib. de mysterijs
initiand. cap. 9.
S. Cyrill says: Christ changed once water into wine, which is near unto
blood, and is he not worthy to be believed of us, that he has changed wine
into blood. S. Ambrose, having showed the power of Christ's speech, how, by it,
he gave a being to the world, which had no being before, says: How much more
then operative is it, that these things which were, might have a being and be
converted into another. Again, the same holy Father calls this change, a
conversion of nature and substance, bringing examples out of the old testament,
of Moses rod turned into a serpent, of water turned into blood. You see then,
says he, that by prophetical grace, nature was twice changed: what shall we
then say of the divine consecration it self, where the words of our Savior do
operate? if the speech of Elias was so prevalent, that it brought down fire
from heaven, shall not the speech of Christ prevail to change the species or
nature of the elements? Cypr. sermon. de de coena Domini Greg. Nys. Orat. Catech.
cap. 37. Damasc. l. 4. Ortho. fidei.
S. Cyprian above cited, says: that the bread is changed, not in shape, but in
nature, and, by the omnipotency, of the wotd, is made flesh. S. Gregory Nyssen
affirms that the bread and wine are transelemented. And S. John Damascen
averreth, that the elements are transchanged, ascribing also that change to the
omnipotency of God; albeit we cannot know the manner how it is done. Neither is
that much to be admired; for the same Father says, we can hardly tell how
bread and wine, or water, by eating and drinking, are turned into the substance
of our body and blood. If we can hardly know the manner of that change, which
is made every day by nature; how can we think to comprehend the manner of this
supernatural change, which is made in the divine mysteries, by the omnipotent
power of the God of nature? These testimonies, besides others, show me
sufficiently both the possibility and antiquity of the thing, signified by
transubstantiation, to wit, a conversion of the whole substance of the bread
and wine, into the substance of Christ's body and blood, the outward forms or
accidents of bread and wine remaining. Therefore the Presbyterians do affirm
very rashly, in their new Confession, that this change is not only repugnant to
Scripture, but also to common sense and reason: seeing the holy Fathers, who
cannot with any modesty be denied, to have common sense and reason, did
believe and prove it, both by the Scriptures and reason. At least, I resolved
to prefer always the common sense of the Fathers, to the private sense of
the Presbyterians. Then, when the thing it self is clear, it is great folly in
some, to make out cries against the word transubstantiation; which they may do,
as well upon the same ground, against the words Trinity, Consubstantial. If
they receive these, upon the authority of the Church, and a General Council;
why not the other also, upon the same authority? If the change of our Saviors
figure or Countenance upon mount Thabour, be fitly called Transfiguration;
Math. 17. v. 2.
why may not also this substantial change of the elements into his body and
blood, be justly called Transubstantiation? yea Beza plainly confesses, that
if the letter of the Scripture be followed, Papistical transubstantiation is
established. Beza vt infra.
And we have seen, that the letter must be followed.

As I saw great unity among the Catholics in their belief, concerning the
holy Sacrament; so I admired to find such dissension and confusion among
Protestants, in so substantial a point of the Christian religion: and that this
confusion should have risen eVen among their chief Apostles, and the first
builders of their high tower of Reformation. Luth. in lib. de Capt. Babyl. cap
de Eucha. Zuing. in lib. de vera and falsa relig. ca. de Euc. Call lib. 4.
Instit. cap. 18.
For Luther teaches, that Christ's body is truly and really in the Sacrament,
but that the substance of the bread is not changed into it, and that they
remain both together. Zuinglius opposed his Master, and taught, that the
Sacrament is only a bare sign of Christ's body, which is not in, or with the
elements; but only really int he heavens. Then Calvin, the third Apostle came
in with pretense of a third light, wherewith he would illuminate the world, and
reform these Reformers. First, he taught with Zuinglius, against Luther, that
Christ's body is only really in the heavens, and not in the elements. Then,
against Zuinglius, he says, that the elements are not bare signs, but they
exhibit unto us the true body and blood of Christ, which we eat by the mouth
of faith. And because it seems impossible to eat any thing, remaining at so
great a distance, he tells you, that this mystery is vnperceptible, as
indeed it is, in his opinion, which is more hard to conceive, then the belief
of the Catholics, because it is impossible, and has no ground, neither in
Scriptures nor Fathers. But, as some grave Authors have' observed, Calvin's
opinion of the Sacrament' differs nothing in reality, from the opinion of
Zuinglius; except only in obscurity of words, which are trimmed up to deceive
men, putting them in hopes of realities, but indeed giving them nothing but
bare figures. For which cause, Luther and his Disciples, do brand both
Zuinglius and Calvin, and their successors, with the infamous name of
Sacramentarian heretics. We do seriously censure, says he, Luth. cont artic.
Louan. Thesi 27. Idem. tom. 7. Wit f. 381. ibid fol. 382. Luther. in lib de
Missa priuata and vnct sacerd. com. 7. wit om. Zuingl. in lib, da subsidi^
Encharsstia. Tigurini tract. 3. cont. confess. Luth. p. 61.
Zuinglians and all Sacramentaries, as heretics and strangers from the Church
of God. Again: I take God to witness and the whole world, that I do not agree
with them, nor shall ever agree with them so long as the world endures, but I
shall keep my hands free from the blood of those, whom these heretics draw
from Christ, whom they deceive and murder. He leaves also a perpetual curse to
all those, who will make peace with them: which curse his disciples have
diligently shunned. Yea, he professes, that amongst other things, the Devil
counseled himself, to deny the real presence: to which he did not give
consent, by reason of Christ's clear words to the contrary. But what the Devil
could not do, in this point, with the Master, he performed by his Scholar
Zuinglius; who, by his own confession, learned this opinion of a Spirit, in the
night: for which cause Luther says, that the Devil does now and ever, dwell in
the Zuinglians, that their blasphemous breasts, are insatanized,
supersatanized, and persatanized, with many other horrible expressions, of
which the Zuinglians, say: did ever a man hear such words proceed from a
furious and infernal Devil. Luthers Scholars do continue their Masters zeal:
for one of them very famous, Schlussel de Theologia Cavin. lib. 1. c. 20.
writes, that as of old, Averroes the Arabian, the Pagans, and Jews railed at
the Christians, for their belief of Christ's real presence; so do now, hosts
abiurati testamenti filij Dei Calvinistae blaspbemi, the blasphemous
Calvinists, the foresworne enemies of Christ's t^stament: and with the ancient
Pagans, they take great pleasure, with poisoned and Devilish blasphemies, to
deface and inveigh against the receiving of Christ's true body; which we by
Christ's words defend. And, having showed by all circumstances, that the words
of Christ's institution, ought to be literally understood, he concludes in
these words. Ibidem. fol. 90.
Horrible therefore and detestable is the malice of the Sacramentaries, that
this so clear a word they do perversely interpret, and change into
significations, tropes and figures. Melanch. in lib de verit. corp. Christi in
Sacram.
Melanchton also says, that these words of Christ, This is my body, fulmina
erunt, they shall be thunderbolts against those, who deny the belief of Christ
true body in the Sacrament. Thus we have seen what judgment Luther and his
followers have of the Zuinglians and Calvinists, for their negative belief of
the real presence.

Neither is the judgment of the Zuinglians and Calvinists, much better of the
others, for their belief of the real presence by Consubstantiation. Zuinglius,
speaking to this purpose of Luther, says: Zuingl. tom 2. respons. ad Confess.
Lutheri f. 478. Tigurini tract. 3. cont. Confess. Luth. p. 61. Call in admonit
vlt. ad Vvestphal. tom. 7. p. 829. Idem cont. Hes. husium
Behold how Satan endeavoures to possess wholly that man. And his Tigurin
Scholars speak yet more clearly. Luther calls us (say they) a damned and
execrable sect: but let him take heed, least he show himself as an heretic,
who will not, or cannot communicate with these, who do profess Christ. How
clearly does Luther here show himself to have a Devil? How many filthy things,
breathing all the Devils of hell does he belsh forth? etc. Calvin says, We
affirm that they, (to wit the Lutherans) do speak and think more grossly of the
corporal presence, then the Papists. And, in another place, he says, speaking
of the Eucharist; I have showed, a long time ago; that the Papists are a little
more modest and sober, in their raveries, then they. Beza affirms, that we
cannot insist upon the letter of these words of Christ, this is my body; but
Papistical Transubstantiation is established: And again: Either
transubstantiation is to be established, tom, 7. p. 844. Beza de Coena Domini
cont. Vvestph^ p. 215. and p. 216 and 217.
or a figure. Thus we see, how these first Apostles of Protestants, like the
builders of Babylon, are divided, in so important an article of the Christian
faith. The belief of Zinglius and Calvin in this matter, is heresy and
blasphemy to Luther and his Scholars. And Luthers faith, to Calvin, is a mere
raverie, more insuportable, then the Popish transubstantiation. If this
dissenssion was so great, at the beginning; how great must it be now, in the
progress? How can these men be true Apostles, who disagreed so manifestly and
bitterly, in such a necessary and princicipal point of the Christian religion?
Or what assurance can any man have, who follows such unsure Guides?

To conclude this point: I could hardly desire greater satifaction for the
Catholic belief of the real presence, then by Gods grace I found: to wit,
express Scriptures, the holy Fathers, universal Church, famous miracles, and
the light of reason, grounded upon the goodness and wisdom of Christ: whereas
for the Presbyterian opinion, which is an ancient heresy, and is condemned by
the Lutherans as a blasphemy, I found we had no Scriptures, but were enforced
to fly, from the clear words of it, to tropes and figures, and to some shallow
carnal reasons, against the Scripture and omnipotency of God: which reasons I
saw clearly answered in the Catholic writers: and, as a Catholic show me,
more strong reasons have been brought by Pagans and some heretics, against
the mystery of the Trinity and Incarnation. I perceived also, that the
Presbyterians involved their opinion in such obscurities, that, by their words,
one might collect they believed both a real presence and a real absence, and
they made use of either, as the time required; and that the most part of them
did not know, and could not tell what they believed. But at length, when the
best of them were well sifted; all ended in this, that Christ's body was only in
the heavens; neither was it possible to be in the Sacrament, nor in two places,
at once. And so their pretended real presence proved indeed to be a real
absence. In a word, I found that the Presbyterians, by taking away the real
body of Christ from this Sacrament, and giving us an empty figure, do really
take away the substance of this Sacrament, and so destroy it: as they had done
before to baptism, by denying both the virtue and necessity of it. And
therefore in effect, they have destroyed both these Sacraments, which they
would seem to have left. Their doctrine, which denies the Sacraments to confer
grace, shows, that they esteem them graclesse, and their seldom vseing of
them, especially of the Eucharist, manifests, that they think them vselesse or
fruiltlesse. Both which errors S. Augustine refuteth, by these two excellent
sentences? Aug. qu 84. in Leuit. Idem lib. 19. cont. Faust. c. 11.
Without the grace says he, of invisible Sanctification, for what use serve
the visible Sacraments. And again. The virtue of the Sacraments, unspeakably
avails much, and therefore it being contemned, makes men sacrilegious. For
that is impiously contemned, without which piety is not perfited.

CHAP. XXII. Some Reflections, upon both the pretended Scottish Reformations.
HAVING found abundant satisfaction for the truth of the Catholic doctrine,
in the points lately tried, I did freely acknowledge to the Catholic, by
whose advice and assistance, I had made this last Trial of our first
Reformation; that I did not only see the truth to be upon the Catholics side;
but also that I perceived a notable difference, between the sublimity of the
Catholic doctrine, and the lowness of Presbyterian opinions, especially
concerning the holy Sacraments, and particularly the Eucharist. Whereupon, he
took occasion to show me, that there is indeed such a notable difference,
between the doctrines of the true Church, and all heretical opinions;s that as
some of the ancient Fathers compare justly heretics, to the prodigal child,
who left his Fathers house; so they fitly parallel their doctrines, to the
husks where with he was fed. For thus speaks S. Gregory Nyssen. A fugitive
from the faith, went into a far Country, and divided his Fathers goods into
two halfes; Greg* Nyss orat. in suam ordinat
whilst he threw down sublime doctrines, to base and Swinish opinions, and
wasted his riches with whoorish heresies. For heresy is a harlot, which with
pleasures, as with deceits, draws many unto her. So one, who leaves the
Catholic Church, that rich house of his heavenly father, leaves also the
heavenly bread of Christ's precious body, wherewith his children are nourished
and feasted, and going astray unto Calvin's Congregation, finds nothing but an
empty dry Calvinistical supper, having nothing divine, no juice in it, but
bare signs and figures; which contayn less then Manna, or the show bread of
the ancient table. He leaves also the other sublime doctrines, concerning the
Sacraments, as how they confer sanctifying, grace, purge the soul from sin
etc. and is turned unto vain opinions, in which nothing is solid, nothing
stable that can satisfy the mind. Therefore he striveth to satiat himself
daily, with new opinions and idle inventions: but all in vain: for these are
nothing but husks, which leave the belly empty. There is no remedy for him,
but to return with the prodigal child unto his fathers house, where he will be
received with joy, and feasted with the bread of Angels.

But, said the Catholic, to make a general reflection, upon all that has
past under this Trial: Do you not now clearly see, how falsely these Reformers
pretend always the Scriptures to be for them, when you have found the
Scriptures so expressly against them, in all these principal points of the
Christian religion, already examined? And which is very considerable; have you
not seen these Scriptures to be so understood by the holy Fathers, in the pure
and primitive times; as they are now understood by the Roman Catholics? Do y
not now perceive, how Heresy, like a strumpet, fardeth her self with the
colors of the divin Scriptures; by which feigned and false beauty, she allures
and deceives many: but so soon as she is brought near the fire of Trial, how
her fardings melt and fall away, and her own ugliness appears? Among
heretics, says S. Augustine, Aug. cont. epist. fu^d c. 1. Joseph. lib. 5 de
bello Iudaico c. 5.
there is nothing but the promise of truth, a mere show or pretext of it, no
performance. Their doctrines are like the fruits of Sodom and Gomorrha, which,
as Josephus testifyeth, have a specious show, and appear pleasant unto the eye;
but so soon as they are touched, fall into ashes. So truly are all heretical
opinions; they are given out for the fruits of pure Scriptures, they appear
very specious and pleasant: but so soon as they are tried diligently according
to the Scriptures, and are touched, as it were, by the fingers of the holy
Fathers, they presently evanish; and nothing remains but the flammes of
heretical dissentions, like the smoke of Sodom and Gomorrha, as a testimony of
the divin judgment, upon them. Have you not now seen, that these two pretended
Scottish Reformations, have between them completed the hydious work of
desolation, and destroyed the 4 principal pillars of the Christian religion:
and that, as the later has taken away two, to wit: the Lords prayer and the
Apostles Creed: so the first has taken away in effect the other two, to wit:
the divin Commandments, and the holy Sacraments: and so the Presbyterians hay
overturned what their Predecessors left untouched? In a word, they may be
briefly described thus.

They have a Creed from the Apostles, which they do not believe: they have a
prayer from Christ, which they do not say: they have Commandments from God
which they profess they will not keep: and the two Sacraments of the law of
grace, which they had only left to themselves, they have made altogether
graceless, and almost vselesse. And besides all this, they have robbed the holy
Trinity of Glory, and the Church of the Apostolic government, together with
all order and decency: to speak nothing of their other smaller pranks.
Therefore, I am now confident, that you have found what I promised, at the
beginning, to wit: that the first pretended Reformation was no better
grounded, then the last; and that the end of both has been total desolation,
and the destruction of the chief Pillars af the Christian religion: whereas,
upon the contrary, you have seen the Catholic religion (which you had heard
so often calumniated with strong and shameless cries) to be, in all these
principal points: conform to the Scriptures and holy Fathers, and to the
primitive Church. Thus he.

As I was so clearly convinced in all these particulars, that I behoved to
renounce both knowledge, and conscience, if I would deny them; so I did
ingenuosly confess to him my satisfaction: and withal, I promised, if I could
find the like evidence for the Catholics, in all the other controversies,
that I would, by Gods grace, render my self a Roman Catholic. To which he
answered, that the trial of all the particular doctrines in controversy,
after the former manner, was a long, laborious, md needless way, and that God
had appoint^d more easy and shorter means, to come unto the knowledge of the
truth: or else, what would become of those, who are not capable to make such
trials? Therefore, he would undertake to prove shortly, by a clear undeniable
Principle, and granted by all Protestants, the Protestant Religion and their
whole Church to be false: and by the same principle, to show clearly, the
present Catholic Church in Communion with the sea of Rome, to be the ancient
Catholic Church established by Christ and his Apostles; and to have continued
still in their doctrine, without any variation. And so with some confidence,
arising from my former experience, I prepared my self to receive this new
instruction.

CHAP. XXIII. That the true Church of Christ must be perpetual, and must
endure without interruption, unto the end of the world.
THE principle, said my Catholic friend, whereby I will demonstrate the
Protestant Church not to be the true Church of Christ, shall be so evident and
convincent; that, as nothing is more expressly in Scriptures, so nothing is more
freely granted by Luther and Calvin, and generally by all learned Protestants.
And this principle is the perpetuity of Christ's Church, or that Christ must
have a Church, which has endured from his ascension, until this time: and
shall endure from this, until the end of the world. Before I proceed further,
I will first manifest unto you the strength of this truth by the Scriptures,
Fathers, by Protestants, and their reasons. The passages of Scripture for this
truth, are many, but I shall content my self with some few, which may serve
for your satisfaction. The first do concern the eternal kingdom of Christ, by
which, all men understand his Church. Of this the prophet Daniel says. In the
days of these Kings, Daniel. 2.44.
the God of heaven shall set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed,
etc. It shall break in pieces all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.
The Angel Gabriel, speaking of the same kingdom of Christ, to the blessed
Virgin, said: And of his kingdom there shall be no end. Luke 1.33.
Calvin proves by these places and others, which speak of the kingdom of
Christ, the perpetuity of of his Church against Servetus. So does also Beza and
the Confession of Holland. If then the kingdom of Christ be perpetual, there
must always be some to acknowledge him to be their King. The second passages
of Scripture contain Christ's promises to his Church, Math. 16.18.
and the Governors of it. Upon this rock, says he, will I build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. By this place S. Augustine
proves, both the perpetuity, Auge lib. 1. de Symb. ad Catech. c. 8
and inuincibility of the Church. The Catholic Church, says he, fighting
against all heresies may be opposed, but cannot be overcome: all heresies have
gone out of her, as unprofitable twigges cut off from the vine, but she
remains in her root, in her vine, in her charity, the gates of hell cannot
pervaile against her. Christ promised also his perpetu l assistance unto the
Pastors of his Church, Math. 28. ver. vlt.
Behold, said he, I am with you always, even unto the consummation of the world.
Which place both S. Augustine and S. Hierome do bring to prove the same truth.
The first introduces the Church speaking thus to Christ. Show unto me the
fewness of my days, ug. conc. 2. in psalm. 101.
how long shall I be in this world. Show this unto me, for those who say, she
was, but now is not: the Church has made Apostasy and perished from all
nations. And he declared unto me. Behold I am with you always even unto
consummation of the world. S. Hierome says, that Christ, Hier. in cap. vlt.
Matthew.
by these words, shows there should be always some faithful people in this
world, and that he should never separate himself from them. I pass by many
more places of Scripture, which is so evident for the perpetuity of Christ's
Church, that S. Augustine said against the Donatists, who denied it, Avg. pref.
in 2. expos. psa. 21.
and affirmed the Church had perished: They mock Christ in a matter, which is
evident, in a matter, where no man can say, I did not understand.

This truth is not only evident in Scriptures and Fathers, but it is also
acknowledged by all Protestants, whose minds are best known by their
Confessions of faith, which ought to be of more authority amongst them, then
the testimonies of their private writers. Conf. Augu. c. 7. Saxoni ca c. 12.
Helvetic. c. 17
The confessions of Ausburg, of Saxony, and of the Suizers do not only affirm,
that the Church must still continue unto the end of the world: but they prove
it, by the express Scriptures above cited. The Authors of our first Scottish
Confession profess, that they believe as firmly the perpetuity of the Church,
as they believe the mystery of the Trinity: 1. Scottish. Conf. article. 16.
Confess. West. chapter 25. n. 5.
for thus they speak. As we believe in God the Father, Son and holy Ghost; so
we do most earnestly believe that from the beginning, there has been, now is,
and to the end of the world shall be a Church. The new Confession at
Westminster professes the same truth. And so do also Luther, and Calvin; as we
shall see presently.

Now the contrary doctrine, to wit, that the Church of Christ did perish, or
can perish, is censured, both by Catholics and Protestants as a most damnable
error, injurious to God, and against the clear Scriptures. S. Aug. testimony
shall suffice for the First. For against the Donatists, who defended the like
error, and said, But that Church, which was of all Nations, is no more, Aug. in
ps. 101.
she has perished; he subioyneth this censure: This they say, who are not in
her. O impudent speech? And after ward; This voice so damnable, so detestable,
so full of presumption and falsehood, which is sustained with no truth,
enlightened with no wisdom, seasoned with no salt, vain, rash, heady,
pernicious. the holy Ghost foresaw. By the great severity of this censure, may
be known the abominable falsehood of that opinion. Neither is the judgment of
Calvin against that error, less severe. For writing against Servetus, who
defended it, and who was burnt by his order, at Geneva; he says: I did not
touch that long banishment of the Church from the earth, Call. tract. Theolin
refvtatione errorum Serveti p. 762.
which he faineth; wherein he plainly accuses God of a lie. And afterward he
makes this profession. But we indeed confess that the Church was put in
glorious places: otherwise God would have lied, who promised that he should
always have some people, so long as the Sun and Moon shall shine in the
firmament. We know what the prophets do every where teftifie of the eternal
kingdom of Christ.

The reason of these great censures is very evident. For 1. there is nothing so
often and so clearly promised in the Scriptures, as the perpetuity of the
Church of Christ. If then, notwithstanding these clear promises, the Church
might perish; then all the other mysteries revealed in Scripture might be
denied; then it would follow, that God were a liar, as Calvin reasons against
Servetus. 2. If the Church could perish, then that article of the Apostles
Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Church, would be false, and therefore none
could believe truly that to be, which had no being. This reason is brought by
Luther. 3. It would follow that men could not be saved: Luth. tom. 7. de votis
verae Ecclesiae f. 148. Conf. West, cap. 25. n. 2.
for out of the true Church there is no ordinary possibility of Salvation; as
our new Confession of faith acknowledges. Now what could be more against the
goodness and mercy of God? what more injurious to the merits of Christ's
passion, then to take away the means of Salvation, which would be clearly taken
away, if the Church did perish? By all which, may be seen, that the perpetuity
of Christ's Church is not only clearly contayn'd in the Scriptures, and holy
Fathers; but also, that it is granted by Protestants and proved by their
reasons: and that the contrary opinion, to wit, that the Church can perish,
is censured both by Catholics and Protestants, as a most pernicious and
damnable Error. Thus spoke the Catholic.

I was so satisfied of the truth of this principle, that I desired no more for
the evidence of it: and I professed, if, by it, the Protestant Church were
proved not to be the true Church; that it could not be denied, but Protestants
were convinced, not only by a clear truth, but also by their own principles.

But, to perform this the better, the same Catholic show me, that it was
necessary to lay down an other principle, to wit, the definition or
description of a Protestant Church. And although, said he, this be difficult,
by reason that Protestants are very inconstant and changeable in their doctrine,
which is the essence of a Church; so that, the definition which will serve them
this year, may perhaps not fit them the next; for which cause some have
affirmed, that it is as hard to find out a definition, which will always agree
to them, as to paint Proteus, or make a fit coat for the Moon; yet,
notwithstanding these difficulties; a general notion may be had of them, and
the best appears to be that, which is taken from their Confessions of faith.
So that the Protestant Church of Scotland may be described, to be a Society of
people, believing the whole articles of the Scottish Confession. And other
Protestant Churches, as of England, France, etc. may be described after the
same manner by their several Confessions. For these Confessions distinguish
them, from all other Societies, and they require no more of any, to be esteemed
a Protestant of their respective Churches, then to subscrive and swear their
Confessions. But it is to be observed, that these Confessions must be believed
wholly and entirely, and not only a part of them: otherwise all heretics
might be esteemed Protestants. For Arius, Sabellius and the rest believed some
of these articles; and yet were not Protestants. These two grounds being
settled, he proceeded to his proof.

CHAP. XXIV. That the Protestant Church has not been perpetual; yea was not at
all before Luther, and therefore is not the true Church.
FROM the former two principles which I granted, and conceive no Protestant can
deny, this argument was made unto me. The true Church of Christ has still
continued without interruption, since the ascension of Christ. But the
Protestant Church has only continued since the apostasy of Luther. Therefore
the Protestant Church is not the true Church of Christ. The mayor is evident by
the first principle of the perpetuity of the Church The Minor is proved, by the
second principle, after this manner. The Protestant Church, for example of
Scotland, is a Church believing all the articles of the Scottish Confession
(and the same may be proportionally said of all other Protestant Churches, and
their Confessions). But before Luther, there was no Church, which believed that
Confession, or any other of the Protestant Confessions. Therefore there was no
Protestant Church before Luther: and consequently it has only continued since
the fall of Luther. The Mayor is evident by the second principle. The Minor, to
wit, that there was no Church before Luther, which believed any Protestant
Confession, is proved thus. If th^re had been any Church before Luther,
believing any Protestant Confession, it was either visible or invisible: there
is no medium. But there was no Church either visible or invisible, which
believed any Protestant Confession. Therefore there was no Church at all
believing any Protestant Confession, before Luther. If you will affirm, said
he, that there was such a Church visible: I ask where it was to be seen before
Luther appeared? Which can never be showen If you say there was a Church,
believing some Protestant Confession, but invisible: I demand only for the
present, how the true Church can be invisible? How can the true Church be
without doctrine and Sacraments: neither of which can be had in an invisible
Church? But I shall prove he after, that the Scriptures, Fathers, and right
reason are as evident for the visibility, as they are for the perpetuity of the
Church. Yea, I shall show, that, albeit the true Church could be invisible, the
Protestant Church was not so much as invisible, before Luther: and therefore
was not at all. Visibility and invisibility are indeed the two starting holes,
by which your Authors think to escape, when they are pressed by this argument:
and therefore they must be both diligently watched. For there is a custom, as S.
Augustine observes, common to foxes and heretics. Aug. in psa. 80. Cant. 2
As foxes have two entries to their hole, to the end they may save themselves
by the one, when they are pursued by the other; so heretics, whom the
Scripture ressembles to foxes, have a double issue in their answers; that they
may escape by the one, when they find themselves assaulted and pres't by the
other. This custom many Protestants observe well in this same matter. For,
when they are pres't to show their Church before Luther, they say often it was
invisible, and therefore could neither be known nor shown. But when it is
proved by the Scriptures and right reason, that the true Church must be
visible; then they make many shifts to show it was visible; and when all these
fail, they run back again unto their hole of invisibility, and so think to
escape that way. Thus he.

But I esteeming visibility a more honorable and natural property of the
Church of Christ, then invisibility, since Christ, says Tell the Church, which
were impossible to be done, if the Church were not visible; and knowing that
diverse famous Protestants do affirm, that their Church was visible before
Luther: I willed him, if he would gain his point, to show me first that the
Protestant Church was not visible before Luther. Whereupon he toul dme that he
would prove that very particularly: but first, he would show me in general,
that even these Protestants, who pretend their Church to have been visible,
cannot endure to be asked that fatal question; where was your Church before
Luther? For, knowing the hardness of this question, and the insufficiency of
their answers, they endeavor to shift it, calling it an unjust, impertinent
demand, an old, but unnecessary question, a question of history, which would
require twenty years study. But, said he, if this demand be unjust, Tertul.
de prescrip. c. 31. Optat. l. 1. ad Parmen p. 48. Aug. in collat. 3. diei cap.
6. Theologi Heidel praef in Protocoll. Frankentalen. Beza ep, 16.
then the Fathers were unjust, who made the same demand to the heretics of
their time, and required them to show the origin of their Churches, and to
tell what they were, and whence they came. Yea, if this demand be unjust, some
chief Protestants are unjust, who made the same to diverse sectaries, who have
gone out from them. For the Theologs of Heydelberg speak thus to the
Anabaptists: If you be the Church of God, it follows that God has been
without people, and without a Church, etc. And the reason, which they subioyn,
is very remarkable: for it is directly according to the second principle above
settled. For if you (say they) would read over all histories, you shall find no
people. from the beginning of the world, that has made a Confession of faith
like yours Beza has also been unjust, who presses the new Arians with the
like question: If their doctrine, says he, be true, we require them to show us
at length, in what place their Church has been. These testimonies, to pass by
many others, do show, that this question is neither unjust, nor impertinent;
and that these Protestants, who urge it so hardly against others, do know the
great strength and evidence of it: which they cunningly dissemble, or
maliciously deny, when it is urged against themselves.

But, that this question is not unjust, may be showed also by reason. For, if
the Protestant Church has been visible, it must have been in some place
visible. Since then we cannot see, nor hear of it, before Luther arose,
although all histories have been searched, all records perused, which do inform
us, of things less considerable; as sometimes of one single man, when, and
where he arose, and opposed the Church, and yet not so much as one word can be
found of a whole, visible, continual society of Protestants: and besides, that
they cannot be found in histories, they have left no Monuments behind them, by
which they may be known to have been in the world, before Luther: although they
have left many ruinous Monuments behind them, since Luther: seeing, I say, after
all this diligence, we cannot find out this visible Protestant Church, and yet
these Protestants affirm that it was visible, we most justly require them to
help and tell us, where their Church was, in what kingdom, province, or city;
and, if they cannot do this, we may justly conclude, that their allegation is a
groundless imagination, invented to deceive men, against their sense and
understanding, in a matter of greatest importance. But wc do not as yet make
any such conclusion: we only require them to show, what we cannot see by our
selves, to point unto us, where their Church was, that we may fix our ey's
toward that place; and for satisfaction, we are answered, that the demand is
unjust, and we impertinent, if we do not believe, upon their bare word, that
their Church was visible; albeit neither we can find, nor they can tell, where
it was. But all prudent and indifferent men would think it much more injustice
and impertinencie, both in them to require, and in us to believe, that their
Church was visible, before it can be showed where it was; then in us to require
where it was, before we believe, that it was. Who gives credit quickly
Ecclesi. 19.4.
says the wise man. is light of heart. Any heretics, albeit never so gross,
may pretend the same, upon as good ground: and yet no reasonable man can think
it unreasonable, to demand where their Church was, before we believe them.

Moreover this is not only a just and pertinent, but also a most necessary and
important question. For thereby, all false Churches are clearly and sensibly
discovered, even to the meanest capacities. Because, if the Church of Christ
must be perpetual, as has been evidently demonstrated, and if it must be also
perpetually visible, as these Protestants, of whom we now speak, do grant: then
it follows, when ever a new Church or Congregation arises, with a new
Confession of faith, which was not see nor known before, that that Church is
not the true Church of Christ, which ought to be always both perpetual and
visibie. For this cause, the holy Fathers did urge this question so hardly, by
which they confounded all heretical and new vpstart Churches.

And, whereas some Protestants do allege, du Mou lin in his Nouueaute cont.
Card. Peron. c. 12.
that this question is a curiosity of history, an old question, which would
require tventie years study: it is such a curiosiry of hyst^ry, that it can
be found in none, or else the laborious Centurists had not omitted it. It is
indeed an old question, but was never well answered, and will yet require a new
answer, as shall appear, by the insufficiency of all the old answers. And if
it require twenty years study, they cannot complain, who have got now a
hundred years to find out an answer to it.

But, to speak no more of these shifts, I shall show how diverse Protestants
being urged by that fata question, make many essaies to answer it, and yet
cannot make appear the visibility of their Church, before Luther, They run
almost all the world over, to find their Church. They begin their journey in
France striveing to prove it in the Waldenses and Albigenses. 2. From France,
they go over to England, to prove it in the Wicleffists. 3. From England they
pass to Boheme, to find it among the Hussists. 4. From Boheme they trava^le to
Greece, and from that, to Aethiopia and Armenia, pretending that th^se Nations
were Protestants. 5. Having thus wearied themselves all in vain, the most
learned are glad to come back again to the Papists, saying that their Church
before Luther, was in the very heart of Popery. 6. Finding that their new
coined distinction of fundamental points, involves them in great labyrinths,
and that the Papists will not acknowledge them, for their Associats: they pass
from the later, unto the purer times before S. Gregory, alleging that the
primitive Church and holy Fathers were Protestants. 7. After they have made
this monstrous leap of 900. years, and there find both Pastors and people, at
the sacrifice of the Mass, which the Protestants abhor, as Idolatry; they
run to their last shift, which is to get out of the sight of the world, and
hide themselves in the hole of invisibiliy. These many different answers show,
that the Protestant Church has no great certainty of its pedigree, I shall
briefly show you the insufficiency of every one of these answers, by which it
shall be proved, that the Protestant Church was not visible before Luther; and
hereby their first starting hole shall be either so stopped, or laid, that they
cannot escape this way.

CHAP. XXV. That the Protestant Church was not visible before Luther: neither
in the Waldenses, Albigenses, VViclifists, nor Husits.
THAT the Protestant Church may be continued in the Waldenses (and the same is
to be observed of the Albigenses and the rest) two things are to be proved by
Protestants. 1. That the Waldenses have ever continued since the time of the
Apostles. And this is clear by the first undeniable principle of the perpetuity
of the Church. 2. That the Waldenses were entirely of that faith, which the
Protestants do now, or did profess; that is believed any of their Confessions
of faith. For, without this whole agreement, the Waldenses could not be a
Protestant Church, as is evident, by the second principle above settled. Now it
is impossible for them, to show either of these two.

For first, concerning the continuance of the Waldenses, all histories do
affirm, that they began in the twelfth age, and that their Author was one Waldo
a merchant of Lions; about the year 1160. whom the Centurists place in the 12.
Century. How can it be then proved, Cent. 12. c. 8.
that the Waldenses had continued since the Apostles time; seeing their Author,
who was before a Catholic, and a Laique, lived near 12. hundred years after
the Apostles; supposeing then, that Waldo became a Protestant, after he had
been before a Catholic; the question remains, where was the Protestant
Church before Waldo? The true Church must be perpetual.

Secondly, as the Waldenses did not continue since the Apostles, so neither did
they agree intirly with Protestants, Luth. in Colloq. c de Sacr. Calvin epist.
224.
in the principal articles of their religion, to wit, in Justification by
faith only, if we believe Luthers testimony. And if we will trust Calvin, they
held also the real presence, in the Popish sense, of Transubstantiation.
Therefore, such men could not be Protestants.

Protest. Apol. Tract. 2. c. 2. sect 3. sub. 3.
Thirdly, they agreed with the Catholics in diverse other points, as about the
number and nature of the Sacraments, the vow of chastity, the necessity of
childrens baptism. They began a kind of religious order, for which they were
called, the poor men of Lions, and sought confirmation of it from Pope
Innocent the third, but could not obtayn it.

Lastly they maintaind diverse gross errors, which are condemned, both by
Catholics and Protestants. Ibidem subdivis. 4.
As 1. that Churchmen, by mortal sin, lost all spiritual authority. 2. That the
Civil Magistrates, by mortal sin, fell also from their dignity. 3. That
Churchmen should possess nothing in property. 4. That it was lawful to
dissemble in religion; and their practice was conform to their doctrine: for
they went to Mass, confessed and communicated. For which dissimulation, the
Protestants, at the beginnining, would not acknowledge them for their brethren.
These, and other gross errors they maintained, as may be seen in the
Protestants Apology, where the Authors are at large cited.

But, as these differences do show the Waldenses not to be good Protestants; so
I will bring some few, to prove, that they were ill Presbyterians. Gualte.
Chron. saeculo 12. c. de Walden. er- 2^. and 32. 3. error. 38. ibid.
1. They admitted no other form of prayer, except our Lords prayer: the
Presbyterians admit many others, but not that. 2. They allowed only three
orders in the Church, to wit of Deacons, Priests, and Bishops. The
Presbyterians have abiured Episcopacy, and the whole hierarchy of the Church
3. The Waldenses affirmed that all oaths were unlawful. The Presbyterians have
tak n, and enforced others to take many unlawful oaths in the Covenant. 4. The
Waldenses maintained, 4. error 40. ibi.
that it was not lawful to put any man to death, hy the sentence of a Judge:
and therefore they abolished all Iudicatories, in the cause of blood. The
Covenanters have shed much blood, under pretense of Justice, spareing none of
their opposers, who came in their reverence. 5. error 31. ibid.
5. They consecrated ordinarily their Sacrament, upon that day only, whereon our
Savior was betrayed, and they kept it thus consecrated, all the year long, to
be given to the sick. The Presbyterians do not profess to consecrate at all;
they give their Sacrament very seldom to the whole; and they have made an act,
never to give it to the sick. I can find hardly any thing, wherein the
Waldenses agreed more with the Presbyterians, then with other Protestants,
Error 37.
except in this alone, that they contemned the Apostles Creed: which the
Presbyterians have more then probably done, by denying it to be Apostolical. By
all which it is evident, that the Waldenses did not continue, since the time of
the Apostles, and from the time they arose, they were not Protestants, much
less Presbyterians, and so are deficient in both the principles. Fox Acts.
page 41. Illyric. in Catalog. test. p. 730.
Therefore, M Fox, Illyricus, and other Protestants have their recourse, very
groundlesly, to the Waldenses, to prove the continual visibility of their
Church, by them. And for this cause we must leave them, and pass to the
Albigenses.

ALBIGENSES.
These men had their name from the town of Albingia in France, where the
greatest part of them remained. They began in the same age with the Waldenses,
and was a branch of their sect, Osiand Cent. 13- l. 1. c. 4. Fulk de success.
Eccles pa. 332.
as Osiander and Fulk do confess. Their late riseing shows, that they had
not continued since the time of the Apostles, and therefore could not be the
true Church, as is evident, by the first principle, and consequently, albeit
they had been Protestants, the Protestant Church could not be showed
continually visible in them. They are also deficient in the second principle,
because they did not believe any Protestant Confession. For they held the same
doctrine with the Waldenses, Baron. anno. 1176. 1. Prateol. Sander. ap. Gualter.
error. 2. 2. error 28. ibid. 3. error 10. apud Gualt.
except some few things, which they added of their own. As 1. they maintained
with the Manichees, that there were two beginnings, to wit, God and the Devil.
2. With the Saducees, they denied the resurrection of the body. 3. With the
Manichees, Seleucians, and other ancient heretics, they rejected baptism. And
maintained many other errors, which are condemned both by Catholics and
Protestants; and they committed some abominable and profane villainies, in the
Church of Tolouse. Hence it is, that, albeit some Protestants do seek to
perpetual their Church by them; yet others do clearly reject them. Jewel says
plainly, Jewel. in defenfione Apol. p. 48.
non sunt nostri: they are not ours. And Osiander reiects them more clearly.
Their doctrine, says he, was absurd, impious, heretical: they remained
obstinatly in their errors, and impiety: whence men think that they have been
possessed with Anabaptistical fury. And yet, notwithstanding these gross
errors, which they maintained, and their great differences from Protestants M.
Fox reckons the Albigenses in the number of Protestant Martyrs: and some other
Protestants, Spark. in respons. ad Joan. de Albins. page 58. Fulk. p. 332. vt
supra.
as M. Spark and Fulk, do very gtoundlesly pretend, to show the visibility of
their Church by them. But, seeing the Protestant Church cannot be continued,
neither in the Waldenses nor Albigenses in France, we must pass next to the
Wiclefists in England.

WICLEFISTS.
Fox Acts and Monum p. 85.
John Wicleff, an English man, was a Roman Priest, and a Curate in England. He
lived in the year 1371. as M. Fox testifies: and from him, began the Church
of the Wiclefists, for there was none or that religion, before himself. All the
world, says M. Fox, was covered with thick darkness, when Wicleff, like the
morning flarre, did shine out in the midst of a cloud. Therefore, the Church
of the Wiclefists, which began so long after the Apostles, cannot be the
perpetual Church, which we are seeking. 2. The Wiclefists were not Protestants,
because they did not believe any Protestant Confession of faith, yea, they did
not believe the principal point of the Protestant faith, to wit, Justification
by faith only. For Melanchton says of Wiclef; Melanc. epist. ad Miconium.
Truly he neither understood nor held the justice of faith. 3. He agreed with
the Catholics in many other points against Protestants, as in the
intercession of Saints, Veneration of Images, the rites and ceremonies of
Mass, Extreme Unction, and all the 7. Sacraments: Protest. Apol. Tract. 2. c.
sect. 4. Council. Consta. cap. 8.
as Breirly shows, out of his own works. Lastly, he maintained diverse gross
errors, condemned both by Catholics and Protestants, as that all things fall
out by an absolute and fatal necessity; that God ought to obey the Devil, as
the Council of Constance does testify. Upon which words his disciples made
many violent and intricate glosses, which may be seen examined in D. Stratfords
disputation of the Church. D. S. Disp. of the Church l. 1. c. 1. sect 3.
He held also that Church men, in mortal sin, did not baptize nor confer
orders. That Princes and Magistrates fell from their dignity and power, by
mortal sin. That Churchmen ought not to enjoy any temporal things, but should
beg, and many other seditious errors he taught. All which show, that Wiclefs
Church, which raise so lately and decayed so quickly, is not the true Church of
Christ, founded by his Apostles, which must endure for ever: and that neither
he, nor his Associats, for the short time they endured, were Protestants.
Therefore, Fox vt sup. Huniph. in vita Iuelli p. 263.
the Protestant Church cannot be continued visible in them: albeit M. Fox, D.
Humphrey, and others falsely so pretend.

HVSSITS.
From England we must follow some Protestants to Bohemia, where they undertake
to prove their Church visible, in the Hussits. These men had their origin from
I. Husse, who lived in the year 1405. That is some few years after Wiclef. He
was first a Catholic, and a Priest, before he became Author of his sect.
Therefore the Protestants cannot, by this new-vpstart, and his Congregation
(although they were granted to be Protestants) continue the visibility of their
Church unto the Apostles. 2. Husse held not the Protestant Confession of faith,
For M. Fox gives this testimony of him What did the Popish faith define of
Transubstantiation, Fox in Apocal. cap. 11.
which he did not confirm? Who said Mass more religiously, then he; who kep't
more chastely the vows of Priestly single life? Yea he affirms also, that
Husse maintained also, free will, justification by works, merits, veneration of
images, and other points of the Roman faith, which show, that Husse was no good
Protestant. Luth. in collo. cap de Anti Christo Fox Acts and Mon. p. 190. and
p. 258.
Therefore Luther says, that the Papists burnt Husse, when he did not go so
much as a finger breadth from Popery. And last of all, he maintaind almost all
the same errors with Wiclef, which are condemned both by Protestants and
Catholics. And yet it is a wonder, how M Fox calls him a most holy Martyr
and his disciples, Defenders of the Gospel.

CHAP. XXVI. That the Protestant Church has not continued visible, in the
Grecians, Armenians, nor Aethiopians.
ALBEIT the Grecians were granted now to be Protestants, yet they were not
always so: and therefore Protestants cannot continue the visibility of their
Church by them. For they were at least seven or 8, hundred years, in the
Communion of the Roman Church, as witness the first eight General Councels,
all held in Greece and approved by the Popes of Rome. The first revolt was made
by the Grecians, denying the procession of the holy Ghost from the Son. They
were united again diverse times to the Church of Rome, and lastly in the
Council of Florence. Council. Florent sess. vlt.
This shows, that the Grecians have not always remained in the same doctrine,
and therefore, they are not the perpetual Church, which we are now seeking. 2.
Since the tim, that they began their Schism, they were not Protestants, for
they have rejected the Protestants Communion, and disproved their Co fession:
Censura Orietal. Eccles. c. 7.10.12.13. etc.
as is well known by the Censure, which they have published against it, where
they maintayn Mass, Transubstantiation, 7. Sacraments, invocation of ^aints
and diverse other points of the Roman faith. Lastly, they hold an error
condemned both by Catholics and Protestants, to wit, that the holy Ghost
proceeds only from the Father, and not from the Son. Therefore, the Protestants
cannot continue their visible Church, by the Grecians, who were, for many ages,
Catholics, who never were, nor yet are Protestants, and are known to this
day, for a great part, to be Roman Catholics.

The like may be said of the Armenians. For first, supposing they were now
Protestants, they were not always of that religion, for they remaind
Catholics, Baro^nius an. 685.
ever till about the 7. age. Therefore the Protestant Church cannot be
continued in them 2. They never held the Protestant Confession of faith. For
they maintayn the real presence, the unbloody sacrifice, prayer for the dead,
invocation of Saints, 3. They were united to the Roman Church, with the
Grecians, Council. Flor. de instruct A menor.
in he Council of Florence. And lastly since their falling away, they hold
errors which are condemned, both by Catholics and Protestants. For they deny
the Procession of the holy Ghost from the Son: they confound the two natures in
Christ, and reiterate baptism, All which do show that they neither were, nor
are Protestants.

From Greece and Armenia, we must now at length go to Aethiopia, where M. du
Moulin affirms the Protestant Church was, Du Moulin Contr Card. Peron. e. 12.
before Luther. But, supposing they were now Protestants, they were not always
so. For, near the space of 5. hundred years, they were Catholics, at which
time, they began to be corrupted with the heresy of Eutiches. Therefore, the
Protestant Church for 5. Hundred years, was not visible in them. 2. since
their Schism, they never believed intirly any Protestant Confession, and never
held justification by faith only. Godingus l 1. de reb Abyssi nor.
3. They agree with the Catholics against Protestants, in the 7. Sacraments,
invocation of Saints, prayer for the dead, Mass, Transubstantiation etc. as D.
Stratford shows out of their own Authors. They call the Pope head of all
Bishops, as is evident, by the letters of their Emperor to Pope Clement the 7.
Whereof a part is recited in the upplement of Spondan^s, Sponda. in Clement. 7.
^uno 1524.
and they have offered diverse times obedience to the Pope. Lastly, they held
diverse errors, which Protestants cannot approve. For they deny the procession
of the holy Ghost from the Son, Godingus lib. 1. ^e rebus Abyssinor. c. 18.
with the Grecians: they acknowledge one only will in Christ, with the Mono
helities, and one only nature in him with the Eutichians, and with the Jews,
they abstain from certain meats and observe Circumcision. Therefore the
Protestants cannot continue their Church, by the Aethiopians, nor by any of
their for^er pretenses: which serve for nothing, but to make it visibly
appear, that there was no visible Protestant Church, in any part of the world,
for no age or time, before Luther: how much less, for the whole time, between
the Apostles and Luther? Yea; albeit the Wa^denses, and all the rest above
named, to whom the Protestants do pretend, were granted to have believed the
Protestant Confession (as it is evident, they believed it not) yet the
Protestant Church could not be continued by any, or all of them, because they
did not continue from the Apostles, and the most part of them lived at diverse
times, without any Society or lineal descent, hanging often assunder whole ages
one from an other, and the first being long decayed before the others did
appear. For this cause, some learned Protestants, seeing the impossibility of
continuing the visibility of their Church, by such broken and vanishing
troops, and being ashamed to claim, as members of their Church, such
erroneous persons, or notorious heretics, have undertaken, by two other
ways, to show their Church to be visible, before Luther: which we shall
shortly run over.

CHAP. XXVII. That the Protestant Church was not visible in the primitive
Church, or the holy Fathers; nor thereafter, in the Roman Church.
IT was very ordinary for the old Protestants, of the late English Church, to
allege, that the ancient Fathers were of their religion, and that their
Church was conform to the primitive Church. In which matter M. Jewels appeal
to the Fathers of the first 6. hundred years, is very famous. But that
pretense is idle, in regard of our present question. 2. it is false. First it is
idle: because, were it true (as we shall see it to be, most false) that these
Fathers of the first 5. or 6. hundred years, were Protestants; yet, could not
that suffice to prove them a continued succession of 1600. years. For I enquire
what became of the Protestant Church after the Fathers, to the time of Luther?
Did it perish, or not? If it perished: then it is not the true Church, which
must be perpetual, according to the first undeniable principle above settled. If
the Protestant Church did not perish, but remained visible for 900. years,
between the Fathers and Luther: then the question remains, where was it, in
what kingdom, Province, or City? which-can never be showed. Yea, some famous
Protestants do acknowledge, Pe^kins expos. symbol. p. 266. whit,
that all that time the Protestant Church was not to be seen. Therefore,
although the Fathers were granted to have been Protestants, the Protestant
Church cannot be continued, by them, after their time.

Secondly, its most false that the Fathers were Protestants. 1. Because the
Christians of the sixth age must needs know better, what was the religion and
tenets of them, who lived in the fifth age, by whom they were instructed, and
with whom they conversed, th n Protestants can do now. But these Christians
have protested on their salvation, that it was the very same with theirs,
received from them, by word of mouth. Therefore, if the Christians of the sixth
age were not Protestants, neither were the Fathers and Christians of the 5. age
Protestants, and so you may go upward, even to the Apostles. This reason shall
be more cleared hereafter. 2. It may be known, that the Fathers were not
Protestants by the points already examined. For they did not believe
Justification by faith only, the impossibility of keeping the Commandments:
They did not deny the necessity and effect of baptism, they did not deny the
real presence: which are principal articles of the Protestant religion: but
taught the quite contrary; as has been seen. Therefore, according to the
second principle above settled, they were not Protestants. 3. Not to descend to
particular doctrines, this same truth may be showed, by the little account
Protestants make of the Fathers, whom they would highly esteem, if they made
for them; and in a word, by the open Confession of the chief Protestants, that
the Fathers were against them, in many things. Luther, as if he were a little
after cups, speaks very intemperatly of the Fathers. In the writing (says he)
of Hierome there is not a word of true faith, Luth. in colloq c. de patrib.
or sound religion: of Chrysostom I make do account: Basil is of no worth, he
is wholly a Monk: I weigh him not a hair: Cyprian is a weak Divine etc. Idom
de seruo. arbitr. cap. 2,
And generally he affirms, that the authority of the Fathers is not to be
regarded. If the Fathers had been P^otestants, Luther had not so vnderva ved
them, nor disclaimed their authority. Calvin also ingenuously confesses, that
the Fathers are against him, in many points. Call inst lib. 3. cap 5 sect. 10.
It was a custom, says he, about 1300, years ago to pray for the dead, but all
of that time, I confess, were carried away into error, He grante^h also, that
the Fathers taught satisfaction, free will, merit, fasting in Lent, etc. All
which Whitaker confirms. Whit cont. 2, q. 5 c. 7. and li. 6. e^nt. Durieum.
P. Mar. de voto
It Is true, says he, what Calvin and the Centurists have written that the
ancient Church did err in many things, as touching limb, free will, merit of
works, etc. And again, he says: The Popish religion is patched up of the
Fathers errors. Peter Martyr accords to him. So long, says he, as we stand to
the Councels and Fathers we shall remain always in the same Errors. An other
famous Protestant said more clearly, If that be true, Duditius ap. Bezam Epist.
1.
which the Fathers have professed by mutual consent, it is altogether on the
Papists side. This open Confession of the Protestants chief Reformers, and best
Scholars, shows evidently, that the holy Fathers were not Protestants. And
therefore the Presbyterians, who disclaim the holy Fathers and yield them to
the Papists, are much more sincere and ingenuous in this matter, then the late
English Protestants: who laid claim to the Fathers, and deceitfully made the
people believe, that they were Protestants; which they were enforced to deny,
when they were dealing with Scholars, as may appear by the former
testimonies. By all which, it is more then evident; that the holy Fathers and
primitive Church were not Protestants; and therefore, the Protestant Church
cannot be showed to be visible in the^: much less can the visibility of it be
continued after them. Wherefore we must go and seek out this visible Protestant
Church else where: for here it cannot be seen.

The last valiant attempt was made by some famous Protestants, who, after they
had seen that all their neighbors and Predecessors had wearied themselves in
vain, by travailing all the world over, to find out a visible Protestant
Church, before Luther, which could not be found; had in end their recourse unto
the Popish Church, as unto a City of refuge, in this great straight. They
taught two things. 1. That the Roman and Protestant Churches are all one
Church, as agreing in all fundamental points of faith, although they dis^gree
in not fundamentals; and by this distinction, they think to answer easily that
hard question, where was your Church before Luther? To wit: they say, it was
the ve y same with the Roman, which they acknowledge to be a true Church,
keeping all the fundamental points of religion, which are necessary to
salvation; albeit she had some errors not fundame^tal, which do not destroy the
nature of the Church, but only make it si k and weak. And so by this means they
think to avoid all the inconveniences, into which other Protestants do fall.
For hereby; it is showed, that the Church did not perish, nor was invisible,
nor was only visible for a time, but was perpetually visible. 2. They deny,
that the Protestant Church made any real substantial separa ion from the Roman:
and affirm, that all, which they did, was only to free themselves of some
errors, which as sicknesses (though not in themselves mortal) had crep't in,
upon the Roman Church, which being often advertised of her maladies, and
desired to cure them, would admit no medicine: which the Protestants, taking at
length, in a cup of Reformation, did purge themselves of all infirmities, and
thereby their Church was rendered whole and sound. So that there is no more
difference between the Roman and Protestant Church, then between the same man,
whole and sick, who by health and sickness is not substantially different, but
remains still the same man. The Protestants, who followed this course, were
famous in their own generations, and much cried up for learning and prudence,
as Hooker, the Bishop of Spalato, Field, Bunny, Potter, Chilingworth and
diverse others, as may be seen, in the B. of Calcedons treatise of fundamental
points, and in the Protestants Apology. I shall content my self with the
testimony of M. Bunny, who writes thus: Bunny Tract. de Pacification. sect. 18.
p. 108.
No question ought to be made for our separation from the Church. For we make
not a distinct Church from them, nor they from us. There was therefore no
separation made from the Church; neither did any of us go out from them. The
only question may be, which of us are to be esteemed the more wholesome members
of the Church, we, or they? Neither is there any other question approved by us.
Yea, he acknowledges, that, unless this answer be made; the Papists have
great advantage, in their old question; seeing the Protestants cannot show a
Church distinct, from the Roman, before Luther.

But this answer of these late Authors is as false and insufficient, as any of
the former. First it directly contradicts the d ctrine and practice of their
Reformers, who are supposed to have been heavenly Apostles. For they accused
the Roman Church of Idolatry, superstition, and diverse gross fundamental
errors, which make not a Church to be only sick, but also kill and destroy it,
and as the Presbyterians speak, make it of the Church of Christ, become the
Synagogue of Satan and Antichrist. Then for separation: (...) first Reformers
were so far from denying it, that they invited all persons to separate
themselves from the Roman Church, which they called spiritu^l Babylon, And
according to this doctrine, their practice followed. Therefore it is evident,
that the first Reformers did not think the Roman and Protestant Church all one,
in fundamentals, neither did they deny separation from the Roman Church, but
rather the quite contrary is most clear and certain.

Secondly, Diverse other famous Protestants condemn this new opinion, as im
ious. For M. Perkins writes thus. Perk. in c. 8. ad Galat. v. 9. Whita. cont.
2. quaest. 6. c. 3.
The Politician, who is of no religion, says, hat we and the Papists differ
not in substance. And Whiteker says plainly, that the Roman Church has taken
away many fundamental articles of faith, and corrupted faith in the principal
parts. All the other late Protestants, and especially the Presbyterians
condemn the same opinion. For nothing almost can incense them m re, then to
say, that the Church of Rome is a true Church, and that the Protestants made no
separation from her. Hence it came to pass, that M. Hooker was sharply
reproved, for this device, by the Puritans, in their Christian letters.

Thirdly, besides all these confusions and contradictions among themselves, the
answer in it self is false and insufficient. For, when we are seeking a
Protestant visible Church before Luther, these men show us the Popish Church:
and albeit all the world knows, that Papists are not Protestants; yet they
affirm, that the Popish and Protestant Church are all one, and differ not
substantially: which is a double deceit, first ^o show one thing very different
for another; and then to affirm, that they are both one. But I conceive, it can
hardly enter into a man's imagination, unless it be troubled, to think, that
these Churches are substantially one, which differ and are clearly opposite, in
the principal, substantial points of religion, as in Sacrifice, Sacraments, the
observation of the divine Commandments, justifying faith, good works and many
others particulars. The one Church approves External Sacrifice, as a most
acceptable service and worship due to God, and offers up the Christian
sacrifice, as the most excellent of all sacrifices and adores it as God. The
other has no sacrifice at all, but condemns that, as great abomination and
gross Idolatry, which the first makes the greatest object and exercise of its
piety. This difference alone, albeit we speak of no more, is so great; that M.
Dally, a renowned Min ster in France does affirm, in his Apology which he
wrote lately for the reformed Churches, and is approved by his Colleagues the
Ministers of Charenton, that it was sufficient to justify the Protestants
separation from the Roman Church, and to hinder their union again with it, as
being a most substantial and fundamental difference. By which, it is evident,
that the ground, whereon this answer is founded, to wit, that there are no
fundamental differences, between the Catholic and Protestant Church, is
false; both in it felt, and in the judgment of the first Reformers, and of many
other famous Protestants.

But, whither there be fundamental differences, or not; the answer is not
sufficient: For the q^estion still remains, where was the Protestant Church
before Luther? that is a Church believing all the articles of a Protestant
Confession, whither some of them b called fundamental, or not fundamental; or
(if they please) of men holding all these articles, and esteeming some of them
fundamental and some not. For we are now seeking a Protestant Church, before
Luther, and according to the definition above settled, such a Church is a
society, believing all the articles of their Confession. Therefore, they must
show us such a Confession, or else they do not show us a Protestant Church.
Yea, the points, which they call not fundame^tal, wherein they disagree from
the Papists, are these, which make them properly Protestants. If then they
confess (as they must do) that no society can be had before Luther, which
believed all these points, which they call not fundamental; they must also
grant, that there was no visible Protestant Church before Luther: which is
directly to succumb and fail in that, which they undertook to show. So that,
albeit this distinction of fundamentals, etc. were admitted, as good and true,
whereas indeed, in their sense, it is false and deceitful, as we shall see more
clearly hereafter; yet, in relation to the present question, it would serve
them to no purpose.

These reasons are, more then sufficient, to show, that this new answer is
false and insufficient and is nothing but a mere shift, devised to elude the
question: And that it cannot be satisfactorie to any man, who is searching for
the truth; which is condemned by famous Protestants as f^lse and impious, and
which is contrary to the doctrine and practice of the first Reformers. This
shows clearly the great straight and necessity: whereunto such learned and
prudent men were reduced, in answering this hard question, which required an
account of the Protestant Church before Luther. For they could not say, the
Church had perished, which had been a blasphemous falsehood against the most
clear Scriptures: they saw also, that all the other pretenses to the Waldenses,
and the rest, were false and frivolous, seeing none of these agreed entirely
with Protestants, neither had any of them perpetual continuance: and being
ashamed of the Puritans invisible Church, which we shall see to be a mere
Chimera, they had no other refuge, but to fly unto the Roman Church, which
they were therefore enforced to acknowledge, to be the true Church, which had
always remained, albeit their first Reformers had abandonned it, as a false
Church, accusing it of superstition and Idolatry, as the most part of all
visible Protestants yet continue to do. But this refuge has been showed to
serve them to no purpose. These men do in a part resemble the prodigal child,
who never thought of returning to his Fathers house, till he had spent all h^s
means, and till great misery and necessity compelled him: so these learned
Protestants, after they had fare travailed, wearied themselv's much, and spent
all their brains, in seeking out their Church, before Luther, and not finding
it any where; at length, by mere necessity, had their last refuge unto their
Fathers, house, the Catholic Church, which they had before left. But there
was this deplorable difference, between the prodigal child and them: that he,
being truly penitent and confessing his fault with great humility, was by his
Father most lovingly met, embraced and kissed, clothed and feasted whereas
they returning, not with humility and repentance for their separation, but with
idle excuses, and vain accusations, without any other intention, save only to
get their nakedness covered, and their other urgent necessities supplied, were
neither met, nor received, clothed, nor feasted: but have perished for famine
and cold, and are now almost all, with the decay of their late ill founded
Church, exstirpared out of the world. They called the Roman, a sick Church, and
their own, a whole Church; yet it is verifyed, that their whole Church is dead,
and has decayed before the sick Church. And as their Church, according to
them, was only visible in the Roman Church, before Luther: so it is now
invisible in it self, and only visible, as it was in the beginning, and like to
continue so, unto the end.

By all which considerations, it is evident, that no visible Protestant Church
can be found before Luther, and much less, a continual succession of it from
the time of the Apostles. We have travailed almost all the world over, seeking
this Church and we have followed diverse Protestant Guides, who undertook to
show it unto us; but ever in the end, they fail of their promises. Therefore
we must pass now from the Protestant visible Church, which cannot be seen,
before Luther, to their invisible Church, which we shall see cannot be found
before him.

CHAP. XXVIII. That the Church of Christ ought to be alway's visible: and
therefore an invisible Church cannot be the true Church.
HAVING gone hitherto along with diverse Protestants, who promised to show us
their Church visible, before Luther; we must now leave them, as falling short
of their promises, and quit all further search of this Church in the light: and
follow these other Protestant Guides, who undertake to find out their Church to
us in the dark. For unto that old demand, where was your Church before Luther?
They answer that it was, although invisible. And in this answer of
invisibility, the most part of all visible Protestants, and especially
Presbyterians do now acquiesce, thinking this last refuge such a strong and
retired hold for them, and so well guarded by the Scriptures, in that answer,
which God gave to the complaint of Elias, that they cannot be smoaked out of
it. But notwith ^anding these pretenses, the same Catholic show me, that the
Church of Christ ought to be alway's visible: and that the invisible Protestant
Church is a mere Chimerical invention, against the Scriptures, Fathers, famous
Protestants, against the ends, for which the Church was instituted, against
Protestants own principles, and that many gross absurdities follow upon it, to
the disparagment of the Christian religion and advancement of Atheism.

The Scripture, which affirms so clearly, as we have seen above, that the
Church must be perpetual, affirms no less evidently, that it must be manifest
and visible. For this cause the Prophet Esaias compares the Church to a
Mountain. Esaias. 2.2.
The Mountain of the Lords house, says he, shall be established in the top of
Mountains, and shall be exalted above the hill es, and all Nations shall flow
unto it. Again, the same prophet, speaking of the Church, says: Upon thy
walls, Esaias. 62.6.
o Jerusalem, I have appointed w^tchmen, all the day and all the night, they
shall not hold their peace for ever. Conform to this first prophecy, our
Savior compares his Church unto a City, seated on a hill, which he says
cannot be hid, Math. 5.14.
and unto a light shining in the world. Conform to the second prophecy. S.
Paul shows, that Christ has established Pastors to remain continually in the
Church, for the consummation of the Saints. Now, Ephesians 4.11.12.
what is more manifest then a Mountain, a City built upon a hill? what more
visible then light shining, and Pastors continually teaching? Therefore,
according to the Scriptures, the Church of Christ which must be perpetual, must
be also visible, and cannot be hid or invisible.

For the Fathers, we shall bring S. Augustine, who produces the same places,
which he calls clear and evident, to prove the same truth against the
Donatists. There is nothing, Aug. tract. 1. ^n epist. Joan.
says he, more manifest, then a Mountain; but yet there are some Mountains
unknown, because they are placed in one part of the earth: The Mountain of the
Church not so: it must be known, because it has filled the whole face of the
earth. And elsewhere, bringing our Saviors words, Idem de unit. Eccles. c. 14.
he says, The Church is not hid, because it is not under a bushel, but upon a
candlestick, that it may shine to all, who are in the house. A City seated on a
hill cannot be hid, etc. But it is as it were hid unto the Donatists, because
they hear such clear and manifest testimonies, which show her to be in the
whole earth, and they choose rather with shut ey's to dash against that
Mountain then to go up to it. And further he says. Cont. Petil. li. 2. c. 104
Chrysostom. hom. 4. in 6. Esaias.
The Church has this most certain mark, that she cannot be hid. To the same
purpose S. Chrysostom affirms, That it is easier for the Sun to be
extinguished, then that the Church shall be obscured. So that it is all one,
both in it self, and with the holy Fathers, to say the Church had perished, and
that it is hid or invisible. And therefore, if the one be so abominable, the
other is no less detestable. S. Augustine, who censured so heavily the opinion
of the Donatists, who taught that the Church had perished, every where, except
only among themselves, as if he had foreseen this Presbyterian shift, which
pretends the Church had not perrished, but was invisible, writes thus against
it. Aug. de pastor. c. 16.
Some one may say: It may be God has other sheep, but I know not where, of
which he takes care, but I know them not. O how absurd is he unto humane
sense, who imagines such things. We have seen, how this opinion is against the
Scriptures and Fathers, and now, in S. Augustins judgment, it is against sense:
we shall see presently, how it is against reason, and famous Protestants.

All men ordinarily agree in this general notion of the Church, that it is a
society of people instructed in the faith of Christ, governed by lawful
Pastors, and having Communion together in the Christian Sacraments. But, if the
Church were invisible, there could be no instruction, no government, no
administration of Sacraments. And hence will appear, that an invisible Church
is against all the ends, for which God had established a Church upon earth. The
first was to instruct and guide the members of the Church, unto the port of
Salvation. And for this end are necessary, instruction in the faith and
administration of Sacraments, which require visibility, both in the P^stors,
and in the people. For invisible Pastors cannot instruct, nor administrate
Sacraments: and therefore the Church, which consists of Pastors and people,
must be visible. For as D. Humphrey says: Whilst the Ministers teach, Humph
Jesuit. part. 2 rat. 3.
others learn, they administrate the Sacraments these receive them etc. who
sees not these things, is more blind then a M^odiwarp, But, if the Church were
invisible, there could be no instruction, and consequently no faith, no
Sacraments, and so none could be directed in this invisible Church, unto the
port of Salvation. This shows, that the Church must be visible, at least to
the members of it. The second and, for which the Church was ordained, was to
receive the Gentiles, and to afford to all persons, who are astray, the means of
salvation, by entering into the Church. This the Prophet Esaias, speaking of the
Church, foretold. Esaias 60.11
Thy gates shall be open continually day and night, they shall not be shut,
that the strength of the Gentiles may be brought unto thee. But, if the Church
had been invisible, her gates had been worse then shut: for they could never
have been found, to be knokt at, and so the Gentiles and heretics, albeit
never so desirous, could never have entered: which is against the Scriptures
and goodness of God. This reason proves, that the Church must be visible even
to strangers. The third end was to compose diff^rences, which might arise among
Christians, according to that of our Savior, Math. 18.17.
Tell the Church. But, had the Church been invisible, she could neither have
been told, nor found. Invisible Judges cannot compose differences: The fourth
end was to oppose all errors and heresies. Ephesians. 4.11.
For which cause God established Pastors in the Church, to conserve the people
in the true doctrine, from the circu^vention of error. But, had the Church been
invisible, she could not have opposed heresies, they had prevailed without
co^troul. It there had been no Church to oppose heresies, before the
Protestants peep't up, what had become of the Christian religion? Surely it had
been a puddle of errors, or a Mass of Confusion. So that this invisible Church
is against all the cheef ends, for which God established a Church upon earth.

It is also against famous Protestants, who sharply censure it. Melanchton,
whom Luther equaleth to the Fathers, Melan. in Council. Theol p. 393.394.
calls it Monstrous. It is necessary, says he, to confess the Church to be
visible. Whereunto tends this monstrous speech, which denies the visible
Church? It abolisheth all testimonies of Antiquity, it causes an endless
confusion and induces a Commonwealth of unruly Ruffians or Atheists, where no
one cares for another. Humph Ies. par. 2. rat. 3. Enoch. Claph. in Antid. schi
p. ^7.
D. Humphrey says, It is a manifest Conclusion, that the Church ought to be
conspicuous. Another Protestant says of the Puritans: They affirm, against the
Scripture, that the Church, for some ages, was not visible. This cannot be a
sound article of the Protestant religion, which such Protestants so sharply
censure.

Now we shall see, how it is against Protestants principles, yea and destroys
it self. For they ordinarily assign two necessary marks of the Church, to wit:
the right preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments. To which
the Presbyterians add their discipline, as a third mark. I inquire then, if this
Church, which some of them make invisible, for 900. some for 1000. and others
for 12. hundred years, had preaching and Sacraments, during that time; or not?
If it had: then it could not be invisible: for invisible people can neither be
instructed, nor baptized. If it had no preaching, nor Sacraments; then it has
been a miserable Church, or rather no Church at all, which wanted these two
things, which are necessary to constitute a Church. If a famous Presbyterian
Minister took occasion lately, whilst he was baptizing a child, on a cold
winter day, to say against the Anabaptists: It is cold dipping to day: I love
not Summer Sacraments: May not any one say more justly, against the
Presbyterians? In many days an invisible Church cannot be found out. I love
not a Church, wherein, for a thousand years and above, there were neither
summer nor winter Sacraments. Moreover, either this invisible Church had some
government, or it had none? If it had any, it could not be invisible, as is
evident: and, if that government was Presbyt^rian discipline, that Church had
not been only visible, to these, who obeyed it, but also very sensible to
those, who did not willingjy stoop to it: or else it has been very far
different from the nature of our Scottish Presbytery. If that invisible Church
had no government, then it wanted that, which no society can want, and without
which, there is no order but confusion. Yea, this invisible Church is such a
rare device, that it destroies it self. For no Church, albeit never so
invisible, can be imagined without internal faith at least. Now faith coms by,
hearing, Romans 10.17.
according to S. Paul, and how shall they hear, says the same Apostle,
without a preacher? But, in an invisible Church, there could be no preaching or
instruction, and so no faith: and no faith, no Church. Not so much as an
invisible one. In a word, this invisible Church, which wanted preaching, faith,
Sacraments, and government, has been a miserable, or rather a Chimerical
Church.

Lastly, this invisible Church does highly disparage the Christian religion.
For it makes the Church of Christ (of whose glory above the Synagogue of the
Jews, so much is recorded in the Scriptures) not equal in glory; but more
inglorious, then the Jewish Synagogue has been, even since the coming of
Christ. For, ever since that time, the Jews have professed their religion, and
had visible Synagogues, in diverse famous nations: whereas the Presbyterians
make the Church of Christ to be invisible, for many ages of that time, in which
not one could be found, who had the courage, or devotion, to profess the true
religion. Now, what can be more against the Sriptures, and the honor of
Christ, then this wicked device? what more opprobrious to all the Christians of
these times? God speaking of the Church, Aggai. 2.9.
says by the Prophet Aggai. The Glory of this later house shall be greater
then of the former. But, if the Christian Church had been so many ages
invisible, it had been more inglorious then the Synagogue of the Jews. which
was all that time visible. Christ is called, by S Paul, Heb. 8.6.
the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon better promises.
But, by the Presbyterians invisible Church, he is made Mediator of a worse
Covenant, and to have failed of his promises. S Hierom says: Hieron. cont.
Lucifer. cap. 6.
Nimium prophani sunt etc. They are too profane, who affirm the Jews had more
Synagogues, then the Christians had Churches Therefore they may be called most
profane, who affirm the Jews had many Synagogues, and deny the Christians to
have had so much as one Church, throughout the whole world. Whence this opinion
gives great advantage to the Jews and infidels, against the Christian
religion. For they may justly pretend, that the Christian Church, if it was so
many ages invisible, could not be the true Church and kingdom of the Messiah,
which the Prophets foretold clearly should be eternal, conspicuous and
glorious: and that Christ could not be the true Messiah, who had failed so
palpably of his promises. Yea, this opinion is very dangerous to Protestants,
so that it has made some to stumble at the Christian religion, and it has
drawn others into flat Atheism. Sebastian Castalio Professor of Basil, having
cited some clear testimonies of Scripture, for the perpetuity of the Church,
and the conversion of Kings and Nations, writes very perplexedly unto Edward
the 6. King of England. Sebast. Cast in praef. Biblior. lat.
Truly, says he, We must confess, that, either these things will be, or that
they have been, or God is to be accused of a^ lie. If any man say they have
been, I inquire of him, when? I inquire how the knowledge of God and piety
which was promised to be eternal, and more abundant, then the waters of the
sea, was not altogether perf ct, Osiand in epitom. cont. 16. part 2. p. 647.
and could so soon decay? By which words he shows what stuck in his stomach.
David George, a Protestant of Holand, proceeded further, and, upon this ground
of the visible decay of the Church, blasphemed against Christ, saying: If the
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles had been true, the Church, which they
planted, had endured. Idem p. 818.
And here upon he became an impure Apostat, from the Christian religion. Adam
Neuserus, the chief Pastor of Heydelberg, of a Minister, became a Turk, and was
circumcised at Constantinople. Prot. Apolog. tract. 2. cap. 1. sect. 5.
These, and some other examples may be seen in the Protestants Apology. By all
which may be seen, how false, dangerous and pernicious this opinion of the
invisible Church is: against a most clear truth, to wit: that the Church
cannot be hid. Therefore, as S. Augustine did conclude against the Donatists,
Aug. li. 2. cont. p^til. c. 104.
in these words. The Church has this most certain mark, that she cannot be
hid; she is then known to all Nations: the sect of Donatus is unknown to all
Nations: that then cannot be she. So we may conclude more forcibly, against the
Presbyterians. The Church of Christ has this most certain mark, that she
cannot be hid, or invisible. She is then known, or visible to all Nations. The
Protestant Church, before Luther, was invisible, and unknown to all Nations: as
the Presbyterians do confess; Therefore the Protestant Church cannot be she.

CHAP. XXIX. That albeit the true Church might be invisible, yet the
Protestants had no invisible Church, before Luther.
IT has been already proved, that, albeit the Protestants had had an invisible
Church before Luther; yet it could not be the true Church, which must be
alway's visible. Now remains to be showed the second thing which was
undertaken above, to wit; that, albeit an invisible Church were sufficient,
yet the Protestants had not so much as one of that nature, before Luther; and
so they succumb, as well de facto, as they have done de iure; and consequently
this device of an invisible Church, for two reasons, will serve them to no
purpose: Which is showed thus. An inv^sible Protestant Church, is a Church,
which believed the Protestant faith in their heart, albeit they made no
external profession of it. But de facto there was no Church before Luther,
which believed the Protestant confession of faith. Therefore there was no
visible Protestant Church, before Luth r. The Mayor is evident: because there
is this difference between a visible, and an invisible Church: that the first
professes the faith, the other professes it not: but they both agree in this,
to have inwardly the faith: Without which, there cannot be any Church.
Therefore an invisible Protestant Church is a Church, which believed inwardly
the Protestant faith. The Minor is proved of the time immediately preceding
Luthers preaching. For either Luther himself, before he began to oppose the
Pope, was a member of this lurking Protestan Church, believing the Protest^nt
Confession, or these, who adhered to him, were members of it, or some others,
who did nor join with him; and besides these no others can be found or
imagined. But none of these can be said. For Luther is avowedly confessed by
himself and all men, in ad lat
to have been a Roman Catholic, a Priest, a friar of S. Augustins order, and,
as himself acknowledges, said Mass devoutly, and honored the Pope in his
heart. Therefore Luther, before he opposed the Pope, did not believe inwardly
the Protestant faith, and was not a member of the Prot^stants lurking invisible
Church, but was a member of the Roman visible Church. But so were Melanchton,
Carolstadius, the Saxons and all the rest, who followed him, Papists, or
Priests, professing the Roman religion, and knowing nothing of the Protestant,
till Luther taught them. Therefore all these, who adhered to Luthers new
doctrine, were before that time, not lurking Protestants; but profes't Papists.
Neither were there any other members of that supposed lurking Protestant
Church, who did not ioyn with Luther. For, if there had been any, they should
and would have come out of their lurking holes, so soon as Luther began to
preach, and got the protection of secular Princ^s. For then there was no more
fear of persecution, which was the only reason, why these men did not profess
their religion. And therefore, that being taken away, if there had been any
such invisible Protestants, they would have showen themselves visible,
acknowledged their brethren, run and joined hands with them, and said: Behold
this is the faith, which we alway's believed, although we did not, or durst not
profess it. But no such persons did appear when they might safely, and ought
in all duty to have appeared. Therefore there was no lurking Protestant Church
before Luther: and consequently, the Protestants had no Church at all before
him, neither visible, nor invisible.

This may be yet further illustrated and confirmed. For there may be conceived
two kinds of invisible Protestant Churches. The first is a Church, which
believed in their hearts the Protestant faith; and yet made profession of the
contrary religion, to wit of Popery. The second is a company of people,
believing also internally the same faith, but making no profession of a
contrary religion. And between these two extremes there is no medium. But the
Protestants had neither of these two invisible Churches before Luther.
Therefore they had none at all. Not the first [which, although they had, could
not have been the true Church of Christ, or a society of faithful Christians,
but rather was a miserable crew of dissembled Sycophants; for so they behoved
to be, who believed one thing, and professed the contrary, which they thought
gross superstition and Idolatry] Not the first, I say. For such a dissembled
Church behoved to believe the Protestants faith in their heart, and profess
the contrary, against their consciences. But there were none before Luther, who
believed the Protestant faith in their hearts, etc. because Luther himself
believed the Roman Catholic faith in his heart, and of this, there can be no
greater evidence, then his own testimony against himself. For he professes,
that he honored the Pope for conscience sake, and thought, that he would have
been severed from God, if he had been separated from the Pope; and much more to
this purpose. Therefore Luther was not a dissembled Protestant, but rather a
sincere Papist, before he began to oppose the Pope. Neither were there any
other before him, who believed the Protestant faith, and professed the
contrary: because his followers were ignorant of the Protestant religion, till
Luther taught it, and show them the light. This is witnessed by prime
Protestants, who say: It Is ridiculous to think, Cont. Shlus. in Theol. Call. l.
2. f. 131.
that any man before Luther, did attayn unto the true doctrine, or that he
received it from others, and not others from him. That all the world was
overwhelmed, with more then Cimmerian darkness; that Luther was sent to
dispell it, and to restore the light of true doctrine. Besides, that chief
article of Justification by faith only, was altogether unknown before Luther,
Fox Acts. p. 402.
so that M. Fox affirms, that, Luther, by opening that vein, which lay a
long time hid, overturned the foundation of Popery. M. Wotton averres, that
Luther may truly glory, that he was the first, who taught Christ especially
concerning that principal Euangel^cal doctrine of Justification by faith alone.
VVotson in Exam. tit. Romans
Therefore says he, It was a great honor to Luther, to have been a Son,
without a Father, and a Disciple, without a Master. All which testimonies do
evince, that there was not so much as a dissembled Protestant Church before
Luther: Neither as I conceive will any judicious Protestant plead much for such
a Church, which although it had been, could not be the Church of Christ, but
rather the Synaguogue of Satan, and so not the true Church, which we are now
searching after.

Neither had the Protestants that other kind of invisible Church, before
Luther; which believed the Protestant faith in their hearts, and made no
profession of the contrary. For first, Luther and his followers did not believe
it, till he opposed the Pope as has been presently proved. Secondly, they
professed themselves, both by words and actions, to be Roman Catholics, and
so made profession of a religion, contrary to the Protestant, Therefore, in
both these conditions, this invisible Protestant Church is visibly deficient,
and consequently, there was no kind of an invisible Church before Luther,
neither a sincere, nor a dissembled Church, if we will judge of it, by the
persons, who m^de it visible. Neither were there any other lurking Prot^stants:
for they would have shown themselves, when there was no more danger for them,
as has been said, which they d^d not: or if they were lurking, they are still
lurking, and will ever lurk unto the day of Ivdgment. For there is no more
reason, that they shall appear at any time hereafter, then now, or in the time
of Luther. Therefore this invisible Protestant Church is a mere Chime^a and
fiction, without all ground, and against sense and experience. The
Independents, who aros^ within these twelve years, or thereabout, and who
before had been, for the most part, violent Presbyterians, may pretend upon the
same groundless fancy, that their Church had alway's endured, invisibly. The
same might also pretend the Quakers, who are more lately sprung up. But if any
of these Congregations were so unreasonable, as to make that pretext, which
they may as lawfully do, as any other Protest^nts: who would be so unreasonable
as to believe them, or who could be so simple, as to be decived by them, the
beginning and progress of those Congregations being so well known, and so late
and fresh in all men's memories? In the Presbyterian sense, any person, although
never so great a liar, might take upon him to be a Prophet. For, albeit he
foretold things never so false, which never came to pass, yea that fell out
quite contrary, he might say with the Presbyterians, they were all fulfilled,
but invisibly. Now what is more foolish then this device? What would be more
ridiculous in the iudgm^nt of Jews and Pagans, and more injurious to the truth
of the Christian religion? For, if they would demand how are the prophesies,
concerning the perpetuity of Christ's Church, fulfilled? How are his clear
promises to his Church kep't? And if it were an swered, as the Presbyterians
do, that they were all fulfilled and kept, but invisibly. What could more
confirm these men in their infidelity, then this answer? What could make the
Christian religion appear to them, to be more false and ridiculous? S.
Augustine did far otherwise understand the pro^hesies of the Scripture,
concerning the Church. For, writing against the Donatists, on this same subject
of the Church, he says. Let us hear some few things out of the Psalms, so
long ago sung and foretold, and let us now with joy see them fulfilled. Again:
Aug Unit Eccl.
Hear this out of the Divine book, how it was foretold, and see now in the
world how it is at complish'd. Therefore, as there is no other way to make a
prophesy true, but by fulfilling it: so there is no other way to know it to be
fulfilled, but by visible and sensible performance of it.

By what is said, may be easily seen, that the complaint of Elias, which is
alway's in the Puritans mouth, makes nothing for their invisible Church, before
Luther. For first Elias was only speaking of Israel, as a famous Protestant
confesses, Enoch. Cleopham. in Antidot. Schism. p. 17.
in these words. Our unskillful Reformers say, that the Church was invisible in
the time of Elias, but the holy Spirit testifyeth, that he spoke this of
Israel, and not of Judah: for he knew that good Iosaphat was reigning in Judah,
and that the Church was not only visible there, but also floorishing in great
piety. Wherefore it is an evil parity, to say: the Jewish Synagogue was
invisible a short time, in one province, albeit it was visible at the same time
in another. Therefore the Christian Church may be, or was invisible throughout
the whole world; for a thousand years and above. 2. These, who were lurking in
the time of Elias, bowed not their knees to Baal; which if they had done, they
had not belonged to the invisible Church of God. But all the supposed
invisible. Protestants, as Luther and his followers, bowed their knees to the
Mass, (which they esteem Idolatry) as has been showed. Therefore they could
not be the invisible Church of God. 3. Although these good Israelits were
invisible to Elias, at such a distance, when he fled; yet he knew many of them
to be visible; both to others, 3. Kings 18.13.
and among themselves. For Abdias told him a little before, that he had hid
100. Prophets of the Lord in two Caves, where he fed them. But all Protestants
before Luther were invisible: both to others, and themselves. For not so much
as one person knew himself to be a Protestant, before Luther taught that
religion, as has been proved. 4. Although the whole Jewish Synagogue had been
invisible, which is most false; yet it follows not, the whole Christian Church
may be, or was so too: For this, as S. Paul testifyeth: is founded upon better
promises. 5. Heb. 8.6.
Salvation was not altogether tied, before Christ, to the Jewish Synagogue, for
there were some faithful Gentiles, as Melchisedeck, Job, etc. But the
Presbyterians, by making the whole Christian Church to be invisible for many
ages; take away all the ordinary means of salvation, which only can be had in
the visible Church. Lastly. Albeit all the faithful, both Jews and Gentiles,
had been invisible, in the time of Elias; yet this would make nothing for
Protestants: unless they had been also invisible, before Luther. But de facto,
there were no lurking Protestants before him, as has been clearly proved.
Therefore, although the Church could be invisible, yet the Protestants had no
invisible Church, before Luther. And besides the reasons brought above against
this invisible Church, it may seem truly strange, that, for so many ages, not
so much as one person of it, was heard of, or known; never so much as one false
brother could be found among them, to reveal them. And, which is most strange,
when this invisible Church became visible, not so much as one person did
appear, who had been a lurking member of it. Such groundless conceits
require strong imaginations to fancy them, but much more credulous hearts to
believe them. Wherefore Elias complaint, for many reasons, makes nothing for
Protestants; but is cleary against them.

So is also their other refuge to the Church of the predestinate, which they
say was invisible, before Luther. For 1. there is no such Church, because
Christ's Church is a Congregation of all true believers; as well reprobate, as
predestinate; Math. chapter 3. and chapter 13.
There is in his floor both wheat and chafe: and in his field both corn and
tares. 2. The Predestinate are as visible, as the reprobate; S. Peter was as
visible, as Judas. 3. Although it were granted, there had been some invisible
Predestinate, before Luther; yet none of them could be Protestants, because
none believed the Protestant faith, till Luther taught it; as has been proved.
4. Either these supposed Protestants before Luther, professed their faith, or
not? If they professed it, then they were not invisible. Romans 10.10.
If they professed it not, then they were not predestinate. For with our heart,
says S. Paul, we believe unto justice, and with our mouth Confession is made
to salvation. 5. It is at least requisite, that the predestinate should not
deny their faith, if they will not confess it; or else they cannot be
predestinate. But all the supposed invisible Protestants, before Luther, denied
their faith, by professing Popery, as has been showed. 1. Cor. 11.19.
Therefore they could not be predestinate. Lastly, heresies and persecution
make the predestinate more conspicuous. Heresies, says S. Paul, must be, that
these, who are approved, be made manifest among you. Who are more approved
before God then the predestinate? Who are made more manifest before men, then
they, especially when heresy and persecution do arise? For then, by their close
adhereing to the true faith, and their profession of it [whereas others, either
through error or fear fall from it) they are rendered more conspicuous, as the
Scripture shows; and therefore they are not made hid and invisible, as the
Puritans do allege. Hence it is, that the Church is so far from being
invisible in the predestinate, more then in others; that, upon the contrary,
when that might happen in others, either by error, infirmity, or fear of
persecution, then the true Church shall be most manifest in the predestinate,
Aug. epist. 48. ad Vincent.
and is principally conserved in them. For then, as S. Augustine speaks In suis
firmissimis eminet: she shines in her most steadfast members. Predestination
indeed is invisible, and so is reprobation: but the predestinate are as
visible, as the reprobate; yea, Mel. in locis com. cap. de Eccles.
they are the most eminent members of the visible Church, out of which they
cannot be found, as Melanchton confesses. Let us not dream, says he, that
the elect can be found any where, but in the visible Society of the Church. But
the Protestants had no visible Church before Luther: therefore they had no
predestinate; and so many ways this Babel is overturned. The Apostles, and all
the ancient Christians, who were predestinate, were members of the visible
Church, and professed their faith in the time of the Heathen persecutions,
which were more cruel and universal, then any, that has happened since. They had
not Giges ring, to make themselves invisible; not the black art of dissembling
in religion, as the invisible Protestants (if there were any) behoved to have:
which are qualities very unbeseeming the predestinate.

By all which, it remains sufficiently proved, that the Protestant Church
cannot be the true Church. For to resume briefly the argument. The true Church
must have still continued since the ascension of Christ to this time. But the
Protestant Church has only continued since the revolt of Luther. Therefore the
Protestant Church is not the true Church. There is nothing more certain then
the Mayor. The Minor has been proved; because, if there had been any
Protestant Church, before Luther; it had been either visible or invisible. But
there was neither. Not the first: because there was no Church nor person,
before Luther, that professed entirely any Protestant Confession, for any
little time, much less for the whole time, between, the Apostles and Luther.
Not the second: because, if there had been any invisible Protestant Church
before Luther, it had become visible, when Luther appeared, and the fear of
persecution was taken away. But no such invisible Church did then appear. And
moreover, it has been showed, that, although the Protestants had had an
invisible Church before Luther; yet it could not be the true Church, which
ought to be always visible; and that an invisible Church is against
Scriptures, Fathers, reason, Protestants own principles, disparageth the
Christian religion; gives great advantage to Jews and infidels; and leads men
into Apostasy and Atheism. And so both the holes of Visibility and
Invisibility, by which these foxes were accustomed to escape, are now laid, or
stopped. The diverse essaies, which many Protestants make to find their Church,
show the difficulty of the question: so that they see, what they ought not to
say, but cannot see what to say, that has any probability of truth. They have
travailed much to find out their Church, before Luther; they have been above
these 100. years in seeking it, and we have followed the most famous Guides
among them. But both they and we have labored in vain, to find that, which
cannot be found. Yet we make much profit of our labor, if we have discovered,
that the Protestant Church before Luther, cannot be found, not because it was
hid, but because it was not, as has been proved: and therefore leave off any
further search of it; following S. Augustins advice, who writes thus to the
Donatists, about the like purpose. Some thing, says he, may be, Aug cap. 16.
de vnitate Eccles.
and yet not found out: but that, which has no being, cannot be found. Let
them therefore leave off to seek that, which they could not find, not because
it was hid, but because it was not.

To this purpose spoke the Catholic; who, upon my desire, delivered me
thereafter these things, more fully in writing: which, after serious
consideration of them, gave me such satisfaction, that I desired him to proceed
to the proof of his own Church; which he did in the manner following.

CHAP. XXX. That the Church in Communion with the sea of Rome, and she alone,
is the true Church.
HAVING already proved, to your satisfaction, (said my Catholic friend to me)
your Church not to be the true Church, and that, by the undeniable principle of
the perpetuity of the Church; I will now endeavor, with the assistance of Gods
grace, to prove no less clearly, by the same principle, laying aside other
proofs, the Church in Communion with the sea of Rome, and her alone, to be the
true Church. Which I briefly do, after this manner.

That is the only true Church, which has had a continued succession from Christ
and his Apostles, to this time.

But the Church in Communion with the ea of Rome, and she alone has had a
continued succession from Christ and his Apostles to this time.

Therefore the Church in Communion with the sea of Rome, and no other, is the
true Church.

The Mayor is clear. For to have a continued succession, and to be perpetual,
is the same thing. Now, as we have seen above, that the true Church must be
perpetual, or must have continually endured from Christ and his Apostles to
this time; so it is no less evident, that that is only the true Church, which
has been perpetual, or has still endured. This the holy Fathers do testify:
this the light of reason does evince. S. Hierom says: Hieron. Dial. cont.
Lucifer.
I will bring a short and clear declaration of my mind, that we ought to remain
in that Church, which, being founded by the Apostles, endures even unto this
day. And the reason is, because we ought to remain in the true Church: and
that, according to S. Hierom, is the true Church, which has still endured from
the Apostles. Tertull. lib. 4. contr. Marcion. c. 5.
To the like purpose Tertullian says: That is true, which is first: that is
first, which was from the beginning: that is from the beginning, which was from
the Apostles. And therefore that is the true Church, which has continued from
the Apostles.

This same truth is also cleared by the light of reason. For the true Church
was first founded by Christ and his Apostles, before any heresies or false
Churches, which carry the name of Christian, were, or could be raised by
heretics. Because truth is alway's before falsehood, the body is before the
shadow, and the good seed is sow'n in the field, before the tares. Therefore,
that is the true Church, which was first and from the beginning: and
consequently that is the only true Church, which has been perpetual; for that
only could be first and from the beginning. Moreover, this truth is confirmed.
For it is certain, that de facto no heresies or false Churches have continued
from the primitive times: because these, which arose of old, have long ago
evanished; and these, which remain to this day, have but for a short time
endured. Therefore, if it be most certain, that the true Church must be
perpetual: then it is also certain, that that only is the true Church, which
has been perpetual; since one only Christian Church has been perpetual. Yea,
albeit any heresy had continued even from the ancient and primitive times (as
never any of them, by Gods special providence, can see so many days) yet it
could not be perpetual; because it could not be first, and from the beginning,
which only the true Church can be (as we have seen) but it behoved to be raised
thereafter by heretics, and therefore could not be so ancient as the true
Church: and consequently had not perpetually endured. By all which, the Mayor
of our argument is sufficiently cleared.

The Minor, to wit, that the Church now in Communion with the sea of Rome, and
she alone has still endured, or has had a continued succession from Christ and
his Apostles to this time, is proved by all the evidences, whereby such a
proposition can be proved, and whereby the holy Fathers proved it in their
times. For all histories, all Monuments and records, public fame, the Consent
of people and Nations, and, as S. Augustine speaks, the Confession of mankind
bear witness, that this Church, and she alone, has had a continued succession.
For this was the Church, which in the primitive times suffered and overcame all
the cruel persecutions of the Jews and Pagans; this is the Church, which has
converted Kings and Nation from infidelity to Christianity: which has had her
gates continually open, day and night, in all generations, to receive the
strength of the Gentiles: and, in a word, which has made the world Christian.
This is the Church, which alone in all^ges has opposed all the heresies, which
did arise in their diverse ages, from the beginning of Christianity; and albeit
they all have shut out their horns against this Church, and both by slight and
might have endeavored to destroy her; yet she alone has fought against them
all, and gloriously triumphed over them all. This is the Church, which has held
all the General Councels; which has condemned all errors and heresies; which
has had Pastors and people professing the faith in all ages, without
interruption, and in which all the Saints, Martyrs and Doctors have lived.
These things might be shown, by a particular Catalogue of this Churches chief
Pastors, Councils, Nations converted, and public Professors in every age; if
it were not too longsome: and besides it is so clear, that it is not here
necessary, especially seeing the Lutheran Centurists, who have raked together
all they can, both for themselves, and against the Roman Church, yet can show
the succession and continuance of no other, but only of this Church. And the
reason of this is clear: because this Church, and she alone, has so clearly
this succession, that no other Churches, which carry the name of Christian, can
so much as pretend to have it, in the least degree of probability. For it is
evidently certain, that all other Churches, which are separated from this
Church, were once of her faith and Communion, and went undeniably out of her,
and therefore, they cannot be so ancient as she; and consequently they have not
always had a continued succession from the Apostles; and, if they pretended
it, they would be most ridiculous, making an evident lie against sense.
Therefore the Protestants wisely pretend no such thing. Yea their whole
Reformation is grounded upon a contrary pretext: that the whole Church had
fallen into desolation, gross Errors, Heresy and Idolatry, which is inindeed
to pretend, that the succession of the Church had failed, and that they were
now sent, to set her up again. By all which, it is seen that the Church in
Communion with the sea of Rome, and she alone, has had a continued succession
from Christ and his Apostles: and that so clearly, that no other Church can
pretend to have it.

This same truth was testified by the holy Fathers, in their time. S. Hierom
(...), said above, that he would bring a clear declaration of his mind, that
that is the true Church, that has still endured, to wit, the Church in
Communion with the sea of Rome; which he esteem's so much to be the true
Church, that he affirms those, who have no Communion with her, to belong not
to Christ, but to Antichrist. For thus he writes to S. Damasus Bishop of Rome:
With the successor of the Fisher, and with the disciple of the Cross I speak.
I, Hior. epist. ad Damas.
following none chief but Christ, hold the fellowship of Communion with thy
Holiness, that is with Peter's chair. Upon that rock I know the Church to be
built. Whosoever shall eat the lamb without that house, is a profane person
etc. He that gathers not with thee, scatters: that is, says he, who is not
Christ's, is Antichrists. This old doctrine is far different from the
Presbyterians new opinions. S. Cyprian says.: Cyp. tract de simplicitate
Pr^tator.
who leaves the Chair of Peter, upon whom the Church was built, does he think
to be in the Church? But let us hear S. Augustine, the most glorious Doctor of
the Church, showing this same truth. For, after he had spoken much of the
sincere wisdom, great holiness and fruits of piety, of the Church, and of the
great authority which God has conferred on her: he subioyns these remarkable
words to his friend Honoratus. Aug. de vtilite creed c. 17.
Seeing therefore we see so great help and assistance from God, shall we make
any doubt or question at all, of retiriing into the bosom of that Church,
which, to the Confession of mankind, from the sea Apostolic by the succession
of Bishops, has obtained the Soveraignity, and principal authority, Heretics
in vain barking round about it: being condemned partly by the gravity of
Councels, partly also by the Majesty and splendor of Miracles? unto which, not
to grant the chief place, is either indeed an extreme impiety, or a very rash
and dangerous arrogance. Thus he. Here we see, what Church in the time of the
holy Fathers had this continued succession: and the same is no less evident to
this day. In the Scriptures we read the prophesies and Christ's promises of his
Church; and in this Church alone, we see no less clearly the performances.
What the Scripture had foretold, Aug. de vnitate Eccl. c. 8. and in ps. 149.
here with joy, as S. Augustine speaks, we may see fulfilled. The Church before
was only read in books, and now it is seen in Nations.

By all which authorities and evidences, both the Mayor and the Minor of the
argument proposed are sufficiently proved to be manifest truths, to wit: That
that is only the true Church, which has had a continued succession from the
Apostles to this time. And that the Church in Communion with the sea of Rome,
and she alone, has had a continued succession. From which the Conclusion
follows clearly. Therefore the Church in Communion with the sea of Rome is the
only true Church of Christ. You see this reason is neither new, nor obscure:
For it was used by the holy Fathers, as a most clear, short and convincing way,
whereby the true Church may be known. If it was so easy and strong then, it is
no less, but rather more evident and forcible now. If the succession of the
Church for 3. or 4. hundred years, and of 30. or 40. Roman Bishops was esteemed
so strong by the Fathers, to prove the true Church: how much more forcible is
the succession of the Church, for above 1600. years, and above 2. hundred
Bishops of the sea Apostolic, to prove the same truth? Nothing could be said
by the Ancient Fathers, in confirmation of this truth, which may not as justly
be said now: and nothing can be pretended now by the present Enemies of the
Roman Church, against it, which might not have been as justly pretended by her
ancient enemies, the old heretics. Neither is there any way to shun the force
of this Demonstration, but either by affirming, that the true Church had
perished (which is detestable blasphemy) or by saying she became invisible,
which we have shown above to be a gross falsehood, and desperate folly.

This whole matter may be further illustrated and confirmed. There is nothing
more clear in the Scripture, then that the Church of Christ must still endure,
or have a continued succession of people, professing the same faith, which was
taught by the Apostles. Now, it is no less clear, and it is granted by all
Christians, that the Church in Communion with Rome had once this succession,
and professed the true faith, at least for some years, after the Apostles.
Therefore, either she holds still the same true faith, and so has a continued
succession from the Apostles; or else, if she has failed, some other Church
has succeeded, and kept the true faith in all generations thereafter. But no
other Church can be assigned, which has still succeeded. Therefore, either the
Church in Communion with the sea of Rome, which was once vndenyably the true
Church, is still the true Church, and has ever professed the same true faith,
or else the true Church of Christ, which ought to be perpetual and visible,
has perished out of the earth, for many ages: which no Christian can affirm.
Moreover, as the true Church is clearly and easily known, by her continued
succession; so all false Churches are evidently discoverd, by their new rising.
S. Irenaeus. li. 3. c. 3.
The most ancient Father, S. Irenaeus, having reckoned out the succession of
the Roman Bishops, by which he shows the succession of the true Church, from
the Apostles, says: Haec est plenissima ostensio, etc. This is a most full
demonstration, that the same lively faith, taugth by the Apostles, is still,
even unto this day, conserved in the Church, and truly delivered. And by this,
says he, Confundimus omnes, etc. We confound all Novelists, who cannot show
such a succession. S. Hierom says, that any new Church, which has not still
endured from the Apostles, is not the Church of Christ, Hier. dial. cont.
Lucifer. vt sup. Tertull. de praescrip. c. 34. Idem li. advers. Hermonem c. 1.
but the Synagogue of Antichrist. For, by this same very thing, that they are
afterward established, they show themselves to be those, whom the Apostle
foretold were to arise. Tertullian affirms, that Heretics are discovered by
their age alone. Again: To cut short all disputes with Heretics, we use to
prescribe them by their posteriority or after rising.

But it is worth the observation, and much illustrates this matter, to
consider, what two contrary things the Scripture foretells of the true Church,
and of heresies. Of the Church, it shows, that it has no later beginning then
Christ, who founded it; and can end no sooner, then the consummation of the
world. Both these truths are contained in that one sentence of Christ, to speak
of no more. Math. 16.19.
Upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. Of sects and heresies it shows just the contrary. 1. They are not
so ancient as Christ, but arise afterward, as S. Paul foretold the Ephesians,
saying: I know, Acts 20.29.30.
that after my departure, there will ravening Wolves enter in among you etc.
and of your selves shall arise men, speaking perverse things. 1. John. 2.19.
S. John says: They went out from us. 2. As they rise lately, so they quickly
decay, S. Paul says: 2. Tim. 3.9.
They shall prosper no further. The first two are verifyed clearly in the
Catholic Church, which, being founded by Christ, has continued to this day
without interruption, and so shall continue unto the end of the world. For
this, being the work of God, cannot be dissolved, as Gamaliel wisely or rather
divinly foretold. The other two are no less verifyed of all false Churches.
For they began of late in several ages, after the Apostles: and, albeit they
seemed sometimes firmly established, yet, being the works and devices of men,
they were ever at length dissolved. The first point, to wit late rising, is
verifyd of the Protestant Churches, which were not known before Luther; and
their dissensions, changes, divisions and subdivisions, which every day
increase, and for which there is no remedy, show, that they cannot endure for
ever. Is it not then truly admirable, that the heresies, which have risen
against the Church, being so many in number (for two hundred Heresiarchs, are
reckoned to have been before Luther and some of the^ vpheld by great earthly
power, and maintained by diverse svbtile and crafty wits, covered with the mask
of truth, and promoved with furious zeal) yet never one of them has endured?
And upon the other part, the Catholic Church, being all alone, so ancient, so
much hated, so much calumniated and persecuted by them all, has stood out
against them all, and endures unto this day? Is it not very considerable, that
all heretics, having intended by slight and might the destruction of the
Catholic Church, which some of them have most cruelly persecuted, and the
building of their own new respective Churches; yet they could never get either
of these two designs accomplished. For the Catholic Church, being founded by
Christ upon a rock, cannot be shaken. Whereas these new Churches, albeit
sometimes they seem to be brought near unto some settling and perfection; yet
before they can get on the Capestone (for which the Presbyterians did often in
vain cry) fall ever into ruin and confusion. Who will consider these things,
and may not see the finger of God in protection of his Church, and the clear
performance of all his promises unto her? And upon the other part, who may not
see an evident curse fall upon all heresies, which like Babels, can never be
perfited, and being built upon the sand, cannot long stand, or being like
adulterous plants, cannot take deep roots?

But, that you may discern the better, how the true Church is so easily known,
by her continued succession; and all false Churches are so clearly discovered
by their new rising; I pray you conceive in your mind these following
representations, which are grounded in the Scriptures and holy Fathers. 1.
Represent unto your self the true Church as a great River, passing from one end
of the earth to the other, running continually from the time of Christ and his
Apostles, through all generations. And such is the Church in Communion with the
sea of Rome, having succession of Pastors and people in all ages, like a river
ever running, in which all the Saints, as living waters, have flowed unto
paradise. But heretical Churches are like little brooks, or rainfloods, not
alway's running, but rising at several times, after storms and tempests, not
compassing the earth, but overflowing some petty corners of it, making for a
short space a great noise, thereafter, running more calmly, and in end clean
dried up. S. Augustine makes this comparison, for on these words of the psalm.
Aug. in psalm. 57.
They shall come to nothing as water running down, he says: Let not, my
brethren, some floods which are called Torrents affright you: the water runs
down for a time, it makes a great noise, it shall soon cease, they cannot
endure long Many heresies are now dead they have run in their streams, as much
as they could, they have run out, their waters are dried up, scarcely the
memory of them is to be found etc. Thus he. You know that the Covenant did not
always run, and after it began how furiously it ran, what great noise it made,
how it carried down almost all with it. Now you see it runs more calmly: it is
almost run out and the great noise of it, is past.

Again, the true Church is like the Sun, ever shining in all generations,
according to that of the Psalmist, He has put his tabernacle in the Sun: Psalm
18.6.
which S. Augustine expounds thus: He has placed his Church in manifestation.
And such has been the Church in Communion with the sea of Rome, always visible
and ever shining, since the time of Christ. But all heresies are like Comets,
which arise at certain times, and being made up of terrestrial vapors, make a
great blaze so long as their gross matter lasts; but so soo^ as that fails,
they quickly evanish. So indeed are heresies made up for the most part of
te^porary interests, which make the^, for a short time, give a great glister;
but so soon as the gross matter of these interests fails, as it cannot last
long, then they begin to shine dimnly: then they languish, and in end evanish.
How great a light was the Covenant esteemed? What a great luster did it make in
great Britain, so long as the interests concurred? But these soon failing, new
lights have risen, which have discocovered the former to be merely humane, have
made it to languish, and in a word have shown it to be a Comet.

Moreover, the Church of Christ is frequently compared by the holy Fathers, to
a ship strongly built, and wisely governed by Christ; which ever since his time
has sailed through the seas of this world; and notwithstanding the many
tempests, which the Devil and wicked men have raisd against her; yet she riding
out them all, has carried in her all these, who have been saved, unto the port
of Salvation. She has been many ways tossed, but could never be overwhelmed.
For, Ambros lib. de Salomone c. 4.
as S. Ambrose says excellently: She cannot suffer ship shipwrak, because
Christ is exalted on the mast, that is on the Cross, the Father sits pilot in
the stern, and the holy Ghost preserves the fore-Castle. Such is the Church in
Communion with the sea of Rome, as we have seen. But heretical Churches are
like little boats, neither made, nor governed by Christ, but by new
Sect-Masters, who foolishly abandoned the ship of the Church. Who promise a
safe and more easy passage to heaven, whereby many are rashly drawn, to entrust
their souls to them. But within a short space, the storms arising, these new
vnskifull Pilots, being of contrary judgments, fall into horrible dissensions,
and their passingers into bloody factions, to the destruction of one another.
So that in end, these boats, which came but lately upon the sea of this world,
which intended fondly to sink the Church, are das't against rocks and split in
pieces: and all these miserable souls, which remained in them, are overwhelmed
with waters. Hieron. epist. ad Damaum.
For whosoever, says S. Hierom, is not in the ark of Noah shall perish by the
raging deluge. And thus all false Churches, after a little time, have perished.

Lastly the Church is compared by Christ unto a house built by himself, as by a
wise Master Builder, upon ^ rock, which must stand for ever. And such is the
Church in Communion with the sea of Rome, which has stood unto this day. But
heresies are new houses, built, by foolish sect^ masters; not founded upon a
rock, but upon the sand; which are soon shaken and overthrown.

Wherefore to conclude, I hope now through Gods goodness, that you, having
seen such evidence for the truth of the Roman Catholic Church, will make your
self a domestique of this heavenly house, which can never be shaken: that you
will enter into this ship, which can suffer no shipwreck: that you will walk in
this light, that can never be eclipsed; and that you will runn this channel,
wherein all the Saints have pas't unto paradise. To this purpose spoke the
Catholic.

After I had considered diligently all these things, which were given me
thereafter in writing, and had seen, that this reason was so well grounded in
the Scriptures, and was used by the holy Fathers, as a most clear and
convincing way to prove the true Church; I was much satisfied therewith. But
yet I desired the Catholic, if he would fully satisfy me, to show, that the
Roman Catholic Church had never changed her doctrine, and had still kept that
same which she had received from the Apostles. For I doubt not, said I, but you
know, that the Ministers accuse her to have fallen from the Apostolic
doctrine, in many points, and to have brought in many corruptions. Whereunto he
answered, that, by proving the Church in Communion with the sea of Rome, and
her alone to have had a continued succession, he had proved clearly, her to be
the true Church: and so consequently to have still retained the same doctrine,
which was taught by Christ and the Apostles: for change of doctrine changes the
Church, and so the doctrine being changed, the Church had not continued. But,
said he, for your more full satisfaction, to take away all doubts, and to
dispell the mists of these calumnies, I will prove the same truth by another
special way.

CHAP. XXXI. That the Church in communion with the sea of Rome, holds now, and
has still held the same doctrine, which was taught first by Christ and his
Apostles.
ALBEIT this truth has been sufficiently proved, by the continued succession
of the Church; yet now, it shall be demonstrated by the special manner, whereby
this Church has received and still conveyed all her doctrine: and, for more
clearness, I frame my reason thus.

That Church, which in all ages believed nothing, as the doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles, but what she received from her immediate Ancestors, as their
doctrine; holds, and has still held the true doctrine of Christ and his Apostles.

But the Church in Communion with the sea of Rome, and she alone, has in all
ages received all her doctrine after that manner.

Therefore she alone holds, and has still held the true doctrine, which was
first taught by Christ and his Apostles: and consequently she has never changed
the doctrine, which she first received.

The Mayor is proved after this manner. That Church, which in all ages believes
the same doctrine, which Christ and his Apostles taught in the first age, has
ever held the true doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. But that Church which
believes nothing, as Christ's doctrine, but what she received as such, from her
immediate Ancestors, believes, in all ages, the same doctrine, which Christ and
his Apostles taught in the first age. Therefore that Church, which receives so
her doctrine, has ever held the same doctrine, which was taught at first by
Christ and his Apostles. The reason of this uniformity of doctrine in all ages,
is, because that principle of receiving no doctrine, as the doctrine of Christ
and his Apostles, but what was delivered immediately by the Christians of the
preceding age, makes the doctrine of every following age, the same, with the
doctrine of the preceding age; and so makes the doctrine of all after ages, the
same with the doctrine of the first age. For, suppose that the Church, now in
this age relies upon that principle, to believe nothing as Christ's doctrine, but
what her predecessors of the 15. age taught her, to be his doctrine: it is
evident, that the doctrine of these two ages will be the same. And the Church of
the 15. age, relying upon the same principle, must hold the same doctrine, which
the Church of the 14. age held; and so upward, the doctrine of the third age
will be the same, with that of the second, and the doctrine of the second, will
be the same, with that of the first; and so, if this principle has been
carefully observed in all ages, the doctrine of all ages will be the same, with
the doctrine of the first age, which is the doctrine of Christ and of his
Apostles. The Mayor then is evident.

The Minor is proved thus. The Church now in Communion with the Roman sea,
holds in this age, that principle. For she professes to believe nothing
contrary to the doctrine of her immediate Ancestors, and presumes to add nothing
as Christ's doctrine, unto the doctrine of her Ancestors. Therefore she professes
to believe nothing, as Christ's doctrine, but what she received as such, from her
immediate Ancestors. If the Church of the present age professes so, as it is
evident she does; then the Church of the fifteenth age behoved to make the like
profession, or else the Church of this age could not make it. For so many
persons, as are now in Communion with the Roman Church, cannot concur, to
make so notorious and sensible a lie, as to say they profess nothing, but what
was profes't and taught by their immediate Ancestors; if these, of the 15. age,
had not made truly such a profession of the same doctrines. And, for the same
reason, these of the 15. age could not make that profession, and teach it unto
this age, unless the 14. age had done the same, and so you may ascend upward
even unto the first age. Therefore the Church professing, to observe this
principle, now in this age, has profes't it always. If she has profes't it
always, she has also observed it always, for the same reason: because so many
Nations, as are in Commmunion of the Roman Church, cannnot make so notorious a
lie, as to say they believe nothing, but what they received from their immediate
Ancestors, if they believed any thing else, as Christ's doctrine, which they had
not received. Therefore, seeing they affirm, in all ages, even unto the first,
that they received all their doctrine, from their Ancestors, it must be true
that they did receive it all, and it must be also true, that, with the other
doctrine, they received and observed this principle: To believe nothing, but
what has been delivered by their immediate Ancestors: For this is, as it were,
the rule and ground of all particular doctrines So that, by proving, that the
present Church in Communion with the sea of Rome, professes to observe this
principle; it is proved she profes't it always, and by proving, that she
professed it always it is shown, she has observed it always: and this principle
been always profes't and observed, it has been ever delivered, with the rest
of the doctrine, as the main ground, whereon the Church has relied; by which
men may come unto the sure knowledge and possession of the true doctrine, which
was taught by Christ and his Apostles. So that, if the whole Church has not
made a notorious, sensible lie, in one age, to damn themselves and their whole
posterity, she has ever received all her doctrine from her immediate Ancestors,
and so it will be true, that the doctrine of all ages is the same with the
doctrine of the first age, which is the true doctrine of Christ and his Apostles.
Now it rests to be shown, that this Church alone observes the former principle:
which is easily done. For, if there had been any other society of Christians,
which had constantly kept that principle, it had also kep't the same doctrine,
which the Roman Church keeps, as is evident, by what has been said. Secondly,
No other Churches, and especially the Protestant, can so much as pretend to
keep this principle. For they are so far from professing, to receive all their
doctrines, from their immediate Ancestors; that, at their first rising, they
accuse their Ancestors, and the Church, in their time, of Errors; whereof they
profess themselves to be Reformers, and that not by doctrine, which they had
received immediately from others; but what they had received, or picked out from
the Scriptures, by their private collections; which has been the ordinary
custom of all heretics. And this is evident in Protestants, who do
acknowledge, that they have their doctrine, not by the testimony of the age
immediately preceding Luther; but from him, who opposed the whole Church, in
his time, and for many ages before him; which he pretended to reform, by the
Scriptures.

The whole strength of this proof is grounded upon this manifest truth, that a
full report, from whole worlds of fathers, to whole worlds of Sons, of such
things, as they heard and saw, is altogether infallible; since sensible
evidence, in a world of eye witnesses, unanimously concurring, is altogether
infallible. And such is the test money of the whole Church in every age, for her
doctrine: that it is the very same which was delivered by Christ and his,
Apostles; and therefore it was truly delivered by them. For neither can the
Church be mistaken, in this testimony: since whole Nations cannot be deceived,
in what is told them, not once, or twice, but what is daily beaten into their
ears, what they are bred with, and what they see daily with their eyes, or else
we may say the whole world erres, in judging white from black. Neither can all
the Christians in the world, dispersed through so many Nations, maliciously
conspire to make so notorious a lie, as to say they heard this taught, and saw
it practiced, if they had not seen and heard it: For that were to testify a
lie, in a matter, subject to sense, against their greatest interest, to wit
the Salvation of themselves and of their posterity. If it be impossible that all
the persons of a great City, and much more of a whole Nation should think and
affirm, that they saw and heard such things, which truly they neither saw nor
heard. How much more is it impossible, that all Christians, Cities and Nations
should think and affirm, they were instructed in such doctrines, and saw such
practices: if it were not really true, that they had received these doctrines,
and seen these practices?

Hence it remains evident, that this continued testimony of so many Christian,
in every generation, is a most sure and infallible way, to attayn unto the
certain knowledge of what doctrine Christ and his Apostles taught: and that the
Catholic Church, by her constant treading this way, has still held the same
true doctrine, which she first received, and consequently has never changed her
doctrine nor brought in corruption, as the Ministers do caluminate. And
therefore their pretended Reformation, having no other ground but this
calumny, is a groundless imagination, and a destruction of Christ's true
doctrine.

But, that the truth of this whole matter may yet more fully appear, I will
show you briefly, that this constant testimony is the only sure and infallible
way, to attayn unto the certain knowledge and possession of our Saviors true
doctrine: that it is also most easy and universal, for all sorts of persons:
that the holy Fathers and primitive Church did follow it: and that all Errors
and heresies have been clearly confuted by it.

We have already show'n, that this testimony is a sure and infallible means:
now, that it is only sure and infallible, Aug. cont. ep. fond. c. 5.
is showed. For, if there were any other, it would be the Scripture, as
Protestants pretend. But that cannot be. 1. Because we cannot believe the
Scripture, without the testimony of the Church, as S. Augustine clearly
avoucheth. 2. Albeit we could know it without that testimony, yet, by the
Scripture, we cannot know the whole doctrine of Christ, especially since the
Scripture it self says: 2. Thessal. 2.15.
Hold fast the Tradition. Thirdly and principally, Albeit the Scripture
contained the whole doctrine of Christ; yet, how shall I know assuredly, by the
letter of the Scripture, the true sense of it, without which I have not the
true doctrine of Christ. Yea, I may corrupt the Scripture, or follow those, who
corrupt it; as S. Peter shows many do, unto their own perdition. Here many, if
not all Protestants are perplexed, to show, how by the Scripture, the true
sense of it may be had. Some say that the Scripture is clear in all things
necessary to Salvation, so that every man may easily understand them. Others
think that the Scripture is not so clear, but an Interpreter is necessary. But
they are divyded in assigning this Interpreter. Some say the Scripture, in one
place, expounds it self, in another: Others assign the private Spirit; and last
of all, some assign for an Interpreter, every man's natural reason. But all
these are false and frivolous pretenses. For first, they could never show, what
these necessary points are. Besides, this is an open confession, that, by the
Scripture, we cannot know assuredly our Saviors doctrine in these points, which
they call, not necessary. Then, is not the true belief of the Sacrament
necessary for the Church? and yet we see, what contrary glosses the Lutherans
and Calvinists make, on our Saviors clear words. Lastly, if there needed no
Interpreter, for things necessary; every one although unlearned, who could but
read, might pick out what are necessary, which troubles the most learned heads
among them to find out; and these, who could not read, behoved to pin their
implicit faith at at other men's sleeves. Now, what confusion would this make?
what uncertainty would there be, in this case, of our Saviors doctrine? And how
contrary are these things to truth and experience, to Protestants principles
and practices? So it is evident, that by the Scripture alone, we cannot come to
the sure and infallible knowledge of our Saviors doctrine. Neither can we
attayn to it, by the Scripture, assisted by any Interpreter, which Protestants
assign. For it is false, that the Scripture expounds it self, it being obscure
in many places, which are not interpreted by others more plain, as may appear,
besides other reasons, by the Protestants dissenssions in many points. The
conference of places, study, and the like, which some require to be joined with
the Scripture, are but humane helps, subject to error, and not infallible. Then
for the private Spirit, it can give us as little assurance of the sense, as it
can of the letter of the Scripture. We see what contrariety is among those, who
all equally lay claim to it. Neither is the last Interpreter, to wit every
man's reason [assigned by M. Chilingworth, the last peaceable Refiner of the
English Church) any white better, but rather worse. For, besides that this
opinion makes humane reason, and not the divine authority, the main ground of
our faith, which is a dangerous error; it is so far from bringing men unto the
sure knowledge of what our Savior taught, that it professes no more but a
moral certainty, for the truth of the whole Christian religion; and leaves all
particular doctrines, to be picked out of the Scriptures, according to the
diversity of men's particular reasons. And so, diverse men, according to the
diversity of their reasons, collect from the Scriptures, opposite doctrines.
For what some think reasonable and accept, others esteem unreasonable, and
reject as is evident in the Socinians, who deny the divinity of Christ
principally upon this ground, because it chokes their reason: as the Calvinists
also chiefly for the same reason, deny the real presence. So that this
Interpreter brings as great uncertainty, to know our Saviors doctrine, as any
other. And therefore, it remains evident, that the Scripture even assisted by
any Interpreter which Protestants can assign, and much more the Scripture
alone, is not a sure and infallible means for this end; and consequently the
testimony of the Church is the only sure and infallible means.

But here I did enquire of the Catholic. If the Scriptures were as clear
every where, as S. Augustine affirms, they are concerning the Church, where he
says: they need no Interpreter, might they not then give us undoubted
assurance of our Saviors doctrine? To which he answered: That although the
Scripture were never so clear, and as evident in every sentence, as words can
be written; Yet, because these words may be diversely understood, and taken
indifferent senses, they cannot be so sure and infallible away to certify us,
what was our Saviors doctrine, as the living words and testimony of the whole
Church, which received the true doctrine and the sense, together with the letter
of the Scriptures, which she has constantly transmitted unto posterity. This
is evident in a very principal point of the Christian religion to wit, the
holy Sacrament. What words can be more clear then these of our Savior: This is
my body which shall be given for you, etc And yet, upon these clear words,
there are reckoned about two hundred diverse interpretations, since Protestants
arose? How then should a man, among such variety of senses come unto the true
sense and be sure, that he has attayn'd unto it, in which only Christ's true
doctrine consists? Therefore it is evident, in this case, that the written word
cannot do it, and this only the Church can perform, which has conserved, both
the letter and sense of the Scriptures, from corruptions. If then the
Scriptures, although they were written in most clear words, cannot certify us
fully of the true sense of our Saviors doctrine: how much less can they, as
they are now, being in many places hard and obscure? These Protestants, who
reject all but Scripture, would make Christ to have been the most imprudent
Lawgiver, that ever was in ths world, to have left us only a written law, or a
book in many things very obscure, and expose it to every man, to scance upon,
without assigning an Interpreter, who could give us full assurance of the true
sense of it. That way would never bring men to the sure knowledge of Christ's
doctrine, and the true sense of his law: but would make all things uncertain,
and bring in a confusion more worthy of Babel, then of the house of God. But
his divine wisdom has otherwise provided.

We have seen then, said the Catholic, that the testimony of all Christians
in every generation, is the only sure and infallible way: Now we shall see that
it is the most easy and universal way, to attayn unto the certain knowledge of
what Christ and his Apostles taught. For what is more easy, then to hear a
continued testimony of Pastors and people, who constantly depose, that this is
the doctrine, which they have received from their Forefathers? what can be more
easy, then to open our eyes and see the practice of all Christians? No man of
sense will deny, if the true doctrine can be surely known hereby, but it is a
much mor easy way, then by the Scriptures, which are so hard and obscure; or by
any written word, although never so clear. And it is also evident, that it is
more universal: for the Scriptures are only for those, who can read, and
understand them: but this serves for all sorts of persons: learned, or
unlearned, these, who can read, or cannot, and even for the meanest capacities.
This was certainly the meaning of God, when he promised under the Gospel a
direct way, so that fools cannot err by it. Therefore, this being so sure,
Esaias 35.8.
so easy, so universal a way, the wisdom and goodness of God, who disposes
all things wisely and sweetly, has made use of it. This may be yet further
illustrated and confirmed, by the manner how the Christian religion was
planted. First the Apostles stayed long in one place, that they might diligently
inculcate the Christian doctrine, as S. Paul said to the Ephesians: Acts 20
27.31.
I have not spared to declare unto you all the Counsel of God etc. For three
years, night and day, I ceased not with tears to warn every one, etc.
Secondly, the Apostles earnestly exhorted their disciples, to keep carefully,
what they had received: 2. Timoth. 2.2. Galat. 1.9.
to entrust it unto faithful witnesses, and not to admit any doctrine contrary
to that, which they had received, not although an Angel from heaven should
preach otherwise. Thirdly, The mysteries of the Christian religion were not
only sensibly taught to the ear; but they were rendered visible to the sight by
the ^ractise and devotion of the Christian people. Fourthly, The Christian
religion was planted at once, in many diverse nations.

Therefore, it was easy for the primitive Christians to know, what was the
Apostles doctrine, which they had heard so often beaten into their ears, which
they saw practiced with their eyes, and which was professed through out the whole
word: and great reason had they not to receive any doctrine contrary to it. It
was also easy for them to discern and hold out all new and false doctrins. For,
although some would pretend never so much the Scriptures against the public
doctrine of the Church; yet the ancient Christians knowing certainly, that the
Scriptures are not contrary to the doctrine, which the Apostles had clearly
delivered by lively voice, and publicly established in the Church: they
understood the Scriptures, according to the clear rule of faith left by the
Apostles. They did not, upon pretext of contrariety between the doctrine of the
Church and the Scriptures, abandon the Apostles clear, lively doctrine,
universally established; and follow a new gloss of their writings contrary to
it; which had been indeed gross folly, and directly against the Apostles
command in the Scriptures, as has been shown. And, as this was an easy way, in
the first ages, to know the truth and to discern error; so it has been, in the
succeeding ages. For the rule of faith ought to be immovable, as the faith it
self is.

God himself promises the continuance of this easy way, when he said by Esaias:
Esaias 59.21.
My Spirit, which is in thee, and my words, which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, for ever.
And again. Upon thy walls, o Jerusalem, Esaias 62.6.
I have appointed watchmen, all the day and all the night, etc. The Scripture
directs us to this way. Deuter. 32.7.
Remember the days of old, says Moses, Consider every Generation, ask thy
Father, and he will show thee, thy Elders and they will tell thee. God himself
says in Jeremy; Jeremy 6.16.
stand you in the ways, and see, and ask for the old Paths, where is the good
way, and walk therein: and you shall find Rest to your souls. Because many
leave this old and good way, we see they change many ways, and can find no
rest, and never will, until they return again to the old and good way, which
they foolishly abandoned. Christ directs us to this way, Math. 18.17.
when he says; Tell the Church, and who hears you, hears me, etc.

The holy Fathers followed this way. S. Augustine shows, that this is the way,
to put an end to all doubts, to attayn unto the truth, and to be at rest: which
he knew by his own experience. Aug. de vtilitate cred. cap. 8.
If thou seem to thy self, says he, to have been already sufficiently tossed,
and would make an end of these labors and pains. Follow the way of the
Catholic Discipline, which has proceeded from Christ, by his Apostles, even
unto us; and from hence shall descend, and be conveyed unto posterity.
Tertullian affirms, there is no other way to know the Apostles doctrine.
Tertull. de praescrip. c. 21.
What the Apostles taught, says he, I will prescribe, ought no otherwise to be
proved, then by these Churches, which the Apostles founded. And that we must
begin with the testimony of the Church, in the time wherein we live, to ascend
by every generation, unto the ancient Church; and so to the very mouth of
Christ and his Apostles, the same Tertullian shows, who makes this ladder of
belief, Tert. de praes. c. 21.
What I believe, I received from the present Church, the present Church from
the Primitive, the Primitive from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ, etc.
According to this tradition, the holy Fathers did understand the Scriptures.
Vincent. Lyr. cont. here is. c. 1.
S. Vincentius Lyrinensis shows the necessity of this rule, to avoid the
turnings and windings of diverse errors, where he cites and commends the
following words of S. Ambrose. Let us therefore keep the precepts of our
Elders, and not with temerity of rude presumption violate those seals,
descending to us by inheritance. To the same purpose Origin writes. In our
understanding, says he, of the Scriptures, Orig. tract. 27. (...)
we must not depart from the first Ecclesiastical Tradition, nor believe
otherwise, but as the Church of God has, by succession, delivered unto us.

By this way also all heresies have been clearly discovered and condemned.
Theodoret. l. 1. hist. c. 8.
Theodoret expressly witnesses, that the heresy of Arius was condemned by the
doctrine not written, which had been always professed in the Church. For there was
no end by Scripture, the Arians pretending that, as well as the Catholics.
Tertullian says, There is no good got by disputing, out of the texts of
Scripture. But, either to make a man sick, or mad. And the reason is, because,
albeit you would bring never so clear Scriptures, the heretics will expound
all according to their pleasures, and they never fail also to bring Scriptures
for themselves: so that the victory is uncertain, or not so evident: but by the
constant belief of the Church, all heretics are clearly confounded. S.
Athanasius by this means confounds the Arians. Behold, says he, we have proved
the succession of our doctrine, delivered from hand to hand, from father to son:
But as for you, o new Jews and Sons of Caiphas; Athanas. lib. 1. de decret.
Niceni Co^.
what progenitors can you name for your selves? By this means also, the Error of
rebaptizing those, who had been baptized by heretics, was refuted; and the
custom of the Church, to the contrary, prevailed over all S. Cyprians reasons,
and many authorities collected from the Scriptures. Aug. lib. 2 de bapt. c. 9.
As yet, says S. Augustine, there had been no General Council assembled, in
that behalf: but the world was held in, by the strength of Custom, which was
opposed to those, who would bring in that novelty. S. Stephen Pope and Martyr
wrote to S. Cyprian in these words: Nihil innovetur, nisi quod traditum est,
Let nothing be changed, nothing received, but what has been delivered.

Hereupon, I proposed this difficulty, that some things were believed, after
the definition of a General Council, which were not believed before. Therefore,
it would seem, that the Church has not always relied on that principle, to
believe nothing, but what was delivered by the constant testimony of their
immediate Ancestors. To which the Catholic answered, that the clearing of this
difficulty would manifest the strength and evidence of the former proof. First,
said he, it is evident, that the principal, if not all the points maintained by
Catholics, and now questioned by Protestants, did ever appear externally in
the profession and practice of the whole Church, and were not defined by
anterior Councils. Therefore, according to S. Augustins rule, they are
Apostolical. Aug. lib. 4. de baptis. c. 24.
For that, says he, which the universal Church does hold, and was not
instituted by Councels, but has been still retayn'd in the Church, is most
justly believed to have descended from no other authority, than from the
Apostles. Therefore, this objection makes nothing for the benefit of
Protestants, who condemn many things, which were publicly and universally
professed and practiced in the Church, before they were by any Councils
authorized. Secondly, These points of faith, which were determined by General
Councels, were not defined as new doctrines. For either they were generally and
constantly believed by the whole Church, till some heretics began violently
to oppose them: or there were some points not so generally believed and
practiced, throughout the whole Church: but some Catholics did, with
submission to the judgment of the Church, doubt of them. Now, it is evident,
that the Church, in the points of the first kind, believed the same thing,
after the definition of a General Council, which she believed before; as we
have seen out of S. Athanasius, concerning the Divinity of Christ, which was
believed; as well before the great Council of Nice, as after it. Neither were
these other points, of which some Catholics doubted, defined as new
doctrines: but the whole Church assembled, in a General Council, after due
examination, having found these points to have descended, by sufficient and
approved testimony, or tradition; and being assisted by Christ, the head of his
body, which is the Church, and the holy Ghost, the Guide of it (according to
our Saviors promise, and special necessary providence over his Church)
proposes them to be universally believed, without any more doubt. And
whosoever, after this definition of the universal Church, and of her supreme
authority, call these things any more in question, become heretics, and are
cast out of the Church. But all good Christians, who had any doubt before, for
want of the Churches proposeall, having now got that, do acquiesce, and are put
out of all doubt: for to oppose the whole Church, Aug. epist. 118. ad ^anuar.
as S. Augustine observes, would be most insolent madness. This whole matter is
clear, in the question of rebaptization. For it was decided by a General
Council, according to the custom or Tradition, which was opposed before the
Council to S. Cyprian. Therefore, the same thing was a matter of faith, and was
believed before the Council; although some did not know it to be such, till the
Church did interpose her supreme authority, and declare it to be so. S.
Augustine shows how much himself relies on this judgment, and that S. Cyprian
would have yielded to it, if in his time it had been interposed. Aug lib. ^. de
bapt. c. 4.
Neither durst we, says he, affirm any such thing, if we were not well
grounded upon the most uniform authority of the universal Church; unto which
undoubtedly S. Cyprian also would have yielded; if in his time the truth of the
question had been cleared, and declared, and by a General Council established.
Upon the other part, these, who after the determination of the Council,
maintaynd the same error of rebaptization, were esteemed Heretics: Vincent.
cont. he es. c. 9.
which made S. Vincentius cry out thus. O admirable change, the Authors of one
self opinion are called Catholics, and the followers of it, Heretics! And
the reason of the difference is; because, as S. Augustine observes, An erring
disputer may be suffered, in other questions not diligently tried, not as yet
strengthened by the full authority of the Church: Aug. sermon. 14 de verbis
Apostol.
in these matters, an error may be suffered. But, after the judgment of the
Universal Church, which is the highest authority on earth, has past, and
condemned any error: then it is no more to be suffered: then these, who will
not hear the Church, are, by our Saviors command, to be esteemed as Heathens
and Publicans. By which, the difficulty proposed is clearly answered, and the
proof stands good: That the Church has always believed that, which from father
to son has been delivered; and amongst all doctrines which have been delivered,
there is none descended more clearly, then the irrefragable testimony of the
Catholic Church: either as she is dilated throughout the whole world, or as
she is assembled in a General Council: whereof, the continual practice of the
Church from the beginning, is a superabvndant evidence.

From this truth, we will briefly deduce some Corollaries. 1. Since we neither
ought, nor can arrive unto the certain knowledge of our Saviors and his
Apostles doctrine; but by the testimony of the Catholic Church: this Testimony
is not only necessary, for the knowledge of the doctrines not written; but also
of these, which are written: because the true sense of these cannot be
infallibly known, but by this lively rule of faith. 2. The doctrines not
written, which have been still believed and professed in the Church, are truly
Apostolical and divine; as well as these doctrines, which are contained in
Scripture: because we have the same infallible assurance for them, that we have
for these. 3. Since the Testimony and authority of the Universal Church is the
only means, by which we can be fully assured, what was the doctrine of Christ,
and therefore is the formal motive of our belief: it follows, that, what ever
the Church testifies to be revealed by God, has been truly revealed, and ought
to be believed; whither the matters themselves be great, or small. And hereby,
the Protestants distinction of points fundamental and not fundamental is quite
overturned, and showed to be impertinent. Because neither of these points are
believed for themselv's, but for the divine authority, revealing them; and this
cannot be known, but by the testimony of the Church, and by her authority
proposing them. Therefore, the formal motive being the same for all points, they
are all alike to be believed, when they are by the same authority of the Church
sufficiently proposed: and in that case, to deny any thing, albeit never so
small for the matter, is a fundamental error, and clearly opposite to the
formal motive of our faith; for which all the points of faith are believed: and
whosoever disbeleeves any thing at all so proposed, denies faith to God, and
reiects his authority. 4. He, who contemnes, or neglects the testimony of the
Catholic Church, in the time, wherein he lives, (which is a testimony beyond
all exception, and most worthy of credit) can never come to the full and
certain knowledge of our Saviors doctrine. For that is, as it were, the first
step of the ladder, upon which, if one set not first his foot, he cannot
arrive unto the top, that is unto the first age, wherein Christ and his
Apostles lived. 5. From this principle flow all the notes of the Church. As
first her Unity in all points of faith. For, if she has alway's believed
nothing, but what was received from hand to hand, from father, to son, by the
testimony of the Christian world: and all persons within her submit to the same
supreme authority of one chief Pastor, and of General Councels; the Church
cannot but have Unity in all points of faith. Secondly, the holiness of the
Church flows also from the foresaid principle. For, if the doctrine of the
Church was holy at the beginning (as all Christians must confess, and the
doctrine by this continual testimony, remains ever the same, as has been
proved) Then the Church is still holy, in all her doctrines, which all tend to
holiness. Thirdly, the Church is also Catholic. For, it is by the testimony
of Christians in all Nations, that the doctrine of Christ is infallibly
conueighed unto us. Lastly, the Church is Apostolic. For it is by her
continued testimony, that the doctrine of Christ is known in all generations;
and therefore she must have a continued succession from the Apostles.

Wherefore, to conclude; I hope; that I have proved now sufficiently the Church
in Communion with the Sea of Rome, by receiving all her doctrines in all ages,
from her forefathers, has ever kept the same doctrine, which she first received
from Christ and his Apostles, and never changed it: and therefore, as she was;
so she still is the spouse of Christ, being a fruitful Mother, and yet a
chaste Virgin, never parting from Christ: for she could never be drawn from the
doctrine, which she once received from him, neither by the bloody persecutions
of the Pagans, nor by the deceitful pretexts and allurements of heretics:
yea, she never did dissemble the least Error in her dearest children, Jude v. 3.
but, as S. Jude exhorts, has ever contended earnestly for the faith once
delivered to the Saints. She has indeed been ever falsely accused, as an
Adulteress, by all heresies, which are themselves, as we have seen before,
harlots and strumpets: But she remains pure and chaste. Adulterari non potest,
Cypr. in tract. de simplicitate Prelator. Osee 2.19.
says S. Cyprian Sponsa Christi, etc. The Spouse of Christ cannot become an
adulteress, she is chaste and incorrupt. What she once knew of Christ, she
still holds, and never at all parts from him; as he never parts from his
Church, to which he said: I will espouse thee to my self for ever. S. Paul
speaking of the great love of Christ to his Church, says: that he delivered
himself for it, Ephesians. 5.25. etc.
that he might sanctify it, and present it unto himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing etc. And of the indissolvible
conjunction between Christ and his Church, he says: This is a great Sacrament,
Ibid. v. 32.
but I say in Christ and his Church. As the Jews did laden our Savior with
lies and calumnies; so all heretics strive to defame and oppress his Spouse,
by the same means: but all in Vain. For, as the innocence of Christ did appear,
and the whole earth was filled with his praises; whereas his enemies, were
clothed with shame and confusion, were scattered through the earth, had their
Temple destroyed, and their Nation ruined. So within a short time, the
unspotted innocence and purity of his spouse is manifested, to the shame and
confusion of all heresies; which being accursed by the Church, with all their
lies and calumnies, are ever at length destroyed from the face of the earth:
for, as the Wiseman has observed, Ecclesiastic. c. 3. v. 11
the Mothers curse rooteth up the foundation. If it was a great sin in the
Jews, that they not only refused to hear and obey Christ; but also falsely
accused him, and many ways lied and blasphemed against him. It cannot be a
small sin in heretics, that they do not only refuse to hear the Church (for
which crime alone, they are by Christ's command to be holden, as Heathens and
Publicans) but also they falsely accuse his Spouse, which he loves so deerly,
for an Adulteress, and charge her with Idolatry, Superstition and all sorts of
abomination. These calumnies, if not blasphemies, are the ground of all their
new doctrines and pretended Reformations: By which we may know the rare
fabric, which is erected upon it. But all these lies, calumnies, false
accusations and railings can prevail nothing against the Church; which may say
truly, as the Prophet David foretold of her, Psalm. 128.1. and seq.
How often have they impugned me from my youth, How often have they impugned
me? But they have not prevailed against me. Sinners have built upon my back:
they have prolonged their iniquity. Our just Lord will cut the necks of
sinners: Let them all be confounded and turned back, which hate Sion: S.
Chrysostom, writing on these words of the psalm; The Queen stood at thy right
hand, said truly and excellently of her. The Church is opposed, Chrysostom. ver.
10. Psalm. 44.
and overcomes: being pursued by snaires she gets the upper hand, being
provoked with wrongs and reproaches, she is made more illustrious. She is hurt,
but yields not to the print of the wounds: how ever she be tossed, she is not
overwhelmed. She endures great tempests, and yet for all that suffers no
shipwreck; she wrestles, but is not thrown down. Thus he. Thererefore this
cloud of the Ministers calumny, to wit: that the Catholic Church had
changed the doctrine of Christ, and brought in corruptions (which is the very
same, which all heretics have used, and the new Arians use to this day) being
dispelled: I am confident, that by Gods grace, you see now the admirable light
of the Catholic Church, and therefore, abandoning the darkness of all error,
will walk in this light, by which all the Saints have attained unto the light
of heaven. To this effect, with many more words spoke the Catholic.

After I had diligently considered all these things, the heads of which were
given me in writing; I did not only by Gods grace see with my understanding,
the truth of the Catholic Church; but also I was bent with my will to follow,
and embrace it, laying aside many worldly difficulties, which only stood in my
way. And having heartily thanked my Catholic friend, by whose pains and
charity, I had received so much help, I earnestly desired, that, for the
accomplishment of the work, he would assist me to consider, how the true Church
may be known by these 4. notes, which are contained in the Nicen Creed, and
which he briefly touched above: to which he willingly condescended, showing me,
that any man, who believes the Scripture, may find the true Church so
manifestly there described, by these properties, that he may easily find her
out, or rather clearly see her: so that S. Augustine says, Aug. conc. 2. in
psalm. 30. de unite Eccl c. 5. lib. 1. ad Cres. c. 33.
The Scriptures speak more obscurly of Christ, then of the Church; that they
are so clear for the Church, that, by no shift of false interpretation, they
can be avoided: that the impudence of any forehead, that will stand against
such evidence, is confounded; and that it is prodigious blindness, not to see,
which is the true Church. I shall collect briefly the sum of our conferences
in this matter.

CHAP. XXXII. The true Church proved from the Scriptures, and first by her
Unity.
AS the great dissensions of our Ministers furnished to me the first occasions
of my doubting, that their Church could not be the true Church; so the very
light of Nature did show me, that the true Church, being the work of God, must
have Unity. For what more belongs to the house of God, which ought to be a
house of Order, then Unity? what more fitting for his Kingdom, which must
endure for ever, then Unity, which tends to preservation? what more unbeseeming
them, then disorder and division, which at length produces ruin and
destruction? The Scripture is full of clear testimonies to this purpose, as
where it is said of the Church, My Dove is one my beloved is one, Cant. 6.
and it is called by our Savior one sheepfold. John. 10 16.
S. Paul does also excellently show the unity of the Church, in which are
diverse functions, by the Unity of man's body, in which are diverse members, but
all animated with one Spirit, as the whole Church is quickened by one faith. For
else where he says: There is one Lord, Ephesians. 4.5.
one faith and one baptism. But of these and other passages of Scripture, which
were brought, there was one, which had a special influence upon me, and that
was our Saviors prayer, in the 17. of S. John: where, after he had prayed most
earnestly for the Unity of his Apostles, he prays also for the Unity of the
whole Church, John 17 20.
saying Neither pray I for those alone, but for them also, who shall believe in
me, through their word: That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and
I in thee, that they also may be One, that the world may believe, that thou
have sent me. I did seriously ponder this reason, which our Savior brings, to
obtain his desire, which was much urged also by the Catholic: who show me,
that our Savior declared thereby, the unity of his Church should be so
admirable, that the world should be moved thereby, to believe, that he was the
Son of God, and a true Prophet sent from heaven, as some Fathers have also
observed. Therefore, it is evident by the Scripture that the true Church must
have Unity, Apud Maldonat in hunc locum.
and that that cannot be the true Church of Christ, which wants it. And, if we
shall speak of the holy Fathers, they are so much for this Unity of the Church;
that some of them have written whole Treatises concerning it.

Now it is no less evident both to sense and reason, that this Unity agrees
better to the Church in Communion with the Sea of Rome, then to the Protestant
Churches; or rather, it agrees fully to the one, and not at all to the other.
For who may not see, by the manifold Schisms and Divisions, which are now
among Protestants and all other Sectaries; as well in Doctrine, as Government,
(which we have touched above, and which do daily augment) that the Protestant
Churches have no Unity? Shortly after Luthers rising, the Protestant Church was
divided into three principal sects, to wit: the Lutherans, Calvinists and
Zuinglians; that we may speak nothing of the Anabaptists, and Libertins. But
now their divisions have so multiplied, that they can hardly be numbered. And
these divisions are not only great, for the matter, being in some principal
points of doctrine; but also have been very great for the manner. For thereby
diverse Protestants have killed and destroyed one another, made bloody wars,
and overturned kingdom and Commonwealths. So that, if there were no other
Christian Church, but the Protestant; the world could not be moved, by the
Unity thereof, to believe that Christ was sent from heaven, or had been a
divine Architect, who had built such a Babel of Confusion.

But, if laying aside rancour and prejudice we will cast our eyes upon the
Church in Communion with the sea of Rome: this Unity appears wonderfully in
her. For how can it be but wonderful, to consider, that this Church, being
dilated throughout the world, in so many diverse, and remote Kingdoms,
Provinces and Countries, of different languages, Customs and worldly interests;
and some of these being enemies to others, in worldly affairs, should all
agree in the Unity of the same Catholic faith, as if they were one man:
Whereas all other Churches, which go out from this, under pretext of greater
purity (although they do not fill the earth, but are comprised in small bounds)
fall into such horrible dissensions and divisions, that they never rest, till,
like generations of vipers, they destroy one an other, and oftentimes the later
destroies the former, as we have seen in our time? The Church in Communion with
the sea of Rome may be known to be the true Church, by this admirable Unity,
for which Christ prayed; and Christ by it may be known, to have been sent from
heaven, who had established upon earth so large a Kingdom of such admirable
Unity. If the Unity of the Catholic Church were not a special blissing of
God, how could it fall out to her alone? How could it have continued so long,
among such great multitudes of people, as have been, and are of her Communion?
How comes it to pass, that Unity could never be conserved among heretics,
who, although but few, and new, could never shun the curse of Division; which
ever destruction follows at the heels? For my part, I cannot resist unto this
clear reason.

As this Unity in the Catholic Church proceeds principally, from the blissing
of God; so secondarly it flows from the ordinary means, which his divine
wisdom has appointed, and whereof all false Churches are destitute. As first
from this principle, that she believes nothing, but what has descended unto
her, by the constant testimony of her forefathers in all ages, from the time of
Christ and his Apostles. By which means, it has been shown, that she cannot but
keep Unity in faith. Secondly, She receives the Decrees of all General
Councils, which, in all reason, ought to be believed, to preserve that, which
was delivered by the Apostles: and, if any doubt arise, about the sense of the
Scriptures, are more able to interpret them, then any other persons. To which
therefore, all the members of the Catholic Church do modestly and wisey
submit their judgments: they never ransack any matter of faith once defined;
but it remains ever inviolable. And lastly, All Catholics submit themselves
to one Supreme Pastor, whom they acknowledge to be established by Christ over
the whole Church: From whom, the holy Fathers do affirm, that the Unity of the
Church does much depend. This person appointed by Christ, they show out of the
Scriptures, to have been S. Peter, to whom Christ said: Math. 16.19. John 21
16.18. Cypr. in tract. de simplicite Praelator.
I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven etc. and again; Feed my
sheep, feed my Lambs. Upon which S. Cyprian says: That Christ might show
Unity, he established one Chair; and he disposed, by his authority, the Origin
of that Unity to proceed from One, etc. The Primacy is given to Peter, that one
Church of Christ and one Chair might be shown. S. Hierom, seeing the necessity
of One head, Hieron. lib. 1. cont. Iovinian.
for keeping Unity, says excellently: One is chosen, that a head being
appointed, Occasion of schism might be taken away. And that the Bishop of Rome
is successor to S. Peter, in that same Dignity and Primacy, and that the Unity
of the Church depends upon his authority, all the holy Fathers do affirm. The
same S. Hierom, writing to S. Damasus Bishop of Rome, says: Hier ep. ad
Damasum.
With the Successor of the Fisher, and with the Disciple of the Cross I speak
etc. I am joined in Communion with thy Holiness, that is with the Chair of
Peter: upon that rock, I know the Church is built, who gathers not with thee,
scatters. S. Augustine affirms, Aug. cont. epist. fundament. c. 4.
that the Succession of Priests from the seat of Peter, to whom our Lord, after
his resurrection, commended his sheep to be fed, until the present Bishop,
held him within the lap of the Church. There is nothing more ordinary with the
Fathers, then to reckon out the succession of the Roman Bishops from S. Peter,
unto their time. Aug. epist. 166. Cypr. epist. 73. and 45.
S. Augustine terms the sea of their residence, the Chair of Unity, and S.
Cyprian calls it the beginning of Unity, and the root of the Catholic Church.

As, by these means, the Unity of the true Church is preserved; so, for want of
them, there can be no constant Unity in false Churches. For they all, rejecting
the infallible testimony and authority of the Catholic Church, by which we
are certified of our Saviors doctrine, as has been showed, put their own
election and private judgment in place of it: and their judgments being
diverse, they make diverse faiths, having no Compass to steer by, but the
Scriptures, which they diversely interpret, according to their pleasures.
Neither do they submit themselv's to the sentence of any Church, for they
believe, that all Churches may err: neither is their own Church constant in
her sentence; for one Assembly ransacks and condemns, as heresy and
Antichristian, what another has defined and approved, as Christian truths.
Neither have they any supreme Pastor, to whom they obey. And, in a word, they
have no bond to ty them together, except sometimes worldly interest, or the
hatred of another religion. And, when these interests fail, when by mutual
assistance and ioyn't forces, they have subdued or overturned that Church,
which they esteem their Common adversary: then they instantly begin, to be
miserably scattered and divided; as fresh experience shows, how after the
destruction of the late English Church, the brethren of Scotland and England
became hugely divided, notwithstanding the solemn League and Covenant which
had before so straightly tied them together. Yea, it is impossible for the wit of
man, to make it otherwise. For, besides that it is impossible, that many men
can a long time adhere to the same falsehoods (as we suppose all heresies to be)
the nature of man being so strongly bent upon truth, this confusion and
division follows from the nature of their principal doctrine, which is the
ground work of all the rest, to wit: that every one should have liberty, of
reading and interpreting Scripture, and judging the Preachers doctrine thereby.
From which ground, there must needs arise variety of sects in religion,
according to the various conceits and apprehensions of people. Moreover, God,
in his just judgment, sends ever the curse of division among heretics; for,
according to their sin, so are they punished. They endeavored to divide the
Church, and themselves are divided, and so at length destroyed. This God
promised by the Prophet Esaias, when he said; Esaias 19.2.
I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians, and they shall fight every
one against his brother, and every one against his neighbor: city against
city, and Kingdom against Kingdom. S. Augustine says: it is the just
judgment of God, Aug lib. de agone Christi c 29. and lib 1. de bapt. c 6.
that those, who seek nothing else, but to divide the Church, should themselves
be miserably divided. And so he shows, how the Donatists were cut into small
threads. S. Chrysostom affirms, that the sin of dividing the Church is so
great, that nothing does so provoke the anger of God. So that, when we have
done all other manner of good, Chrys^st. hom 11. in ep. ad Ephesians.
we deserve no less severe punishment, for dividing the Unity and fullness of
the Church, then those, who pierced and divided Christ's own body. Solomon
says: that there are six things, which our Lord hates, Proverb 6.16.19
and the seventh is abomination to him; which is, He who sows discord among
brethren. How much then must he hate and abhor those, who sow discord in his
Church, which is his body, and his spouse, for which he died, and for the Unity
whereof he so ardently prayed? And therefore it is no wonder, to see the curse
of division fall ever among them. And, as this division and contrariety arises
naturally from their principal doctrine, and the ground of all the rest,
besides Gods judgment on them; so they have no way to take it away when it does
arise. For albeit they pretend the word of God to be their Iugde of
Controversies, to which they promise all obedience; yet this Judge could never
hitherto end any controversy among them: and indeed it is not the word, but the
sword, which decides all their Controversies. The just contrary is in the
Catholic Church. For, albeit all heresies and sects do first arise out from
her, 1. Cor. 11.19.
as the Apostle says: There must be heresies, and S. John affirms, They went
out from us but were not of us: yet, they do not arise from the nature of the
Churches doctrine, or from her principles, which are constant and immovable,
all tending to Unity; but from the malice of the Devil. And, when they arise,
the Church loses not her Unity thereby. For, if these coyners, or followers of
new doctrines, do not submit themselves to the judgment of the Church; they are
iudicially cut off from that body; from which they first cut themselves by
misbeleef; and by this means, the rest of the body, is preserved entire, and at
Unity within it self. So that, when any question arises, the Church has a
solid way to take away all Controversy, and to preserve Unity. But the
Protestants principles tend to division, and they have no means to take it
away, as has been showed.

Since then, it is so evident by the Scripture, that the Church of Christ must
have Unity; it is no less evident, that that cannot be the true Church, which
wants Unity, and is full of Dissensions and Divisions: as the Protestant Church
appears now evidently to be, even to the weakest understandings, by her great
Schisms and divisions, both in doctrine and government. And therefore he, who
believes a Church of so great division or confusion, to be the true Church,
cannot be said to follow the Scriptures; but rather to control them, and to
follow his own fancies. Whereas the Church in Communion with the Sea of Rome,
by her admirable Unity, both in doctrine and discipline, all the world over, even
to the least article or point of faith, may be easily seen to be the true
Church of Christ, which was founded by him; and he, by the same Unity, may be
known to be the true Messiah, who was sent from heaven.

CHAP. XXXIII. The true Church proved by her holiness.
THE second mark, whereby the true Church is described, in the Nicen Creed, is
Holiness, I believe One, holy etc. Church: which property is also assigned to
her, in the Apostles Creed. I believe the holy Catholic Church. Besides these
authorities, the very light of Nature and the Scripture show, that the true
Church ought to be holy. For this, being a society of people, ordained by God,
for a most holy end, to wit, to enjoy himself, who is the Holy of Holies, for
all eternity, must have holiness of doctrine to direct them, and holiness of
life, to bring them to so holy an end. This the Prophet David shows, Psalm 92
verse. vlt
saying: Holiness becomes thine house, O Lord, for ever. S. Paul says, that
Christ delivered himself f^r his Church, that he might sanctify it, etc. that
he might present it to himself, Ephesians. 5.26.27.
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it
may be holy and unspotted. It is evident then, by the ^reed, by the light of
Nature, and by the Scriptures, that the true Church must be Holy. And the
holiness of it, for our present purpose, consists principally; in two things,
to wit, in holiness of doctrine, and holiness of life. Therefore that Church,
which teaches impious doctrine, and wherein there is little, or no holiness of
life, cannot be the true Church. Let us then briefly see to which Church;
whither to the Protestant, or to the Church in Communion with the sea of Rome,
this mark of Holiness does best agree

First, concerning doctrine, I find that the first Apostles of Protestants teach
doctrine directly repugnant to the goodness of God, to the Nature of man, to
the holiness of the Christian Sacraments, and to the observation of Gods
commandments, besides many other particulars. Calvin, the great Foundatour of
Pressbytery, teaches, that God is the Author of sin: for thus he writes. Call
lib. 1. instit. cap. 18 par. 3.
Now I have clearly enough showed, that God is called the Author of all these
things, which these Controwlers (to wit the Papists) will have to fall forth,
by his idle permission only. And such things, which according to Catholics,
God wills not, but only permits, are sins; of which Calvin there speaks, as
of the blindness and tyranny of Achab: of the incest of Absalon, and the like:
of which he calls God the Author. Again he says: Man, by the just impulsion of
God, Ibid par 4.
does that, which is not lawful for him to do. And of Pharao, he says: Deus
voluit vtique illum iussui suo non obtemperare, immo vt ei repugnaret, In Romans
pc 454.
ipse in eo effecit. God willed him not to obey his Commandment, yea he himself
wrought that in him, that he might disobey it. Many more places are collected
by Becan, in a Treatise, which he wrote on this subject de Authore peccati.
Where he cites diverse testimonies of Beza and other Protestant Authors, to the
same purpose. Now, that this is an impious opinion, and against the very clear
light of nature, is evident. For all men conceive by natural instinct, that God
is not only good in himself, but also goodness it self, the Author and
fountain of all goodness. But how can he be goodness itself, and the Author
of goodness, if he be the Author of wickedness? A holy Father says: Basil.
quod Deus noe sit auctor malor.
It Is the same madness to deny God, and to say he is the Author of sin. For,
if he be the Author of sin, he is not good: if he be not good, he is not God.
The Manicheans taught the same impiety, but with this difference, that they
made not the good, but the evil God the Author of evil. Moreover, it is evident,
that God cannot be the Author of that, whereof he is the punisher. But he is
the punisher of sin. Therefore he cannot be the Author of it. I know some
Protestants strive to make a fair face, upon this doctrine of Calvin, but all
in vain; for it is so black and ugly of it self, in the terms which he uses,
that, as it is in the proverb, these, who would blanch it, undertake to wash a
black-Moore. The text is so bad, that it can admit no good Commentary.
Feuardentius lib. 2. Theomachiae Calvinisticae cap. 12.
So that the Lutherans in Germany have condemned it, as contumelious against
God, and pernicious to mankind: and the Zuinglians of Berne caused Calvin's
books, wherein these black errors were contained, to be burnt publicly, by the
common Executioner. He teaches also some doctrine no less pernicious, in the
judgment of many, concerning predestination: as that God by his only will has
ordaind many, without any consideration of their merits, to damnation. Call.
lib. 3. Inst. c. 22. par. 2.
His words are these? By his only will, and without any consideration of their
merits, they are predestined to eternal death. Such doctrine which transformes
God into the Devil, and represents him as the greatest Tyrant imaginable,
cannot be holy, no more then he, who taught it, can be heavenly: albeit he be
much esteemed by the Presbyterians, who keep still this doctrine lying at their
hearts, though, upon some occasions, they are ashamd to profess it.

Secondly. As he robs God of his goodness, so does he also spoil man of his
free will: which is not only false, against common experience, and the
confession of mankind: for as S. Augustine says: no fewness of the learned,
Aug. lib. de vera relig. c. 14.
no company of the unlearned do deny it: but also in the judgment of many
Protestants, it makes all exhortations, admonitions and threats, which are so
frequent in the Scriptures, both vselesse and ridiculous; it hinders all
exercise, yea, and attempt of virtue and holiness; and, with the opinion of
Gods absolute decree of reprobation, it brings men to despair. Thirdly, their
doctrine of the impossibility to keep the divine commandments, even with the
assistance of Gods grace, we have seen above to be injurious to the goodness,
wisdom, and justice of God; to be a great hindrance of the growth of piety, and
of the care of a good life; from which wicked doctrine, flowed the impious sect
of the Anti-Nomians. To which, if we shall add that doctrine, which they call
the life of their religion, to wit, their justification by a special faith
only, whereby they believe, that all their sins are forgiven them: what a wid
gate is opened to all licentious liberty, to the neglect of piety and of all
good works? Their doctrine also concerning the Sacraments is not holy, which
robs them of all grace, and virtue of sanctification. In a word, if the proper
doctrines of the Presbyterians be impartially considered: there is almost
nothing amongst them, which has appearance of holiness, or any invitation to
it. For they do not esteem their Churches holy, they have no holy ornaments, no
holy Vessels, no holy rites or Ceremonies, no holy days or festivities, no
holy form of public worship, or service of God; and nothing, that sets
forth the Majesty and magnificence of God, or that can breed respect or
revere^ce in man. Yea, their principles, if they be followed, lead to
profaneness or Atheism: whereof I will bring some few instances. The first is
of one named Godefridus a Valle, who wrote a book, Becan. opusc. disp. An Deus
sit Auctor. peccati cap. 17.
which he entitled, Of the art of believing nothing: In which he said, all
other things false, and one only thing true: as Becan relates, to wit: that
he, who would become an Atheist, should first be a Calvinist, as himself had
been. For, from that doctrine of Calvin, that God is the Author of sin, and
that, by his absolute decree of Reprobation, he had preordain'd the most part
of men unto damnation, without any regard of their works, but only for his own
pleasure, he collected, that such a God was a most cruel Tyrant. Therefore, he
would rather deny there was a God, then acknowledge such a God. And thereupon
he became a professed Atheist, and was burnt publicly in Paris, in the year
1572. Another instance fell out, not long ago, in our own Country on another
subject. For, as the Presbyterian Ministers generally teach, that the Church is
no more holy, then any other place; nor no more reverence due unto it, except
only, when the Minister is preaching: so a great Apostle of the Covenant taught
that doctrine very eagerly, in Aberdeen: the fruit whereof did shortly
thereafter appear. For a covenanting soldier of the Saints army, was found,
within few days, in the College Church of that town, in uncivil conversation
with a woman, and being brought before the same Minister, (as I was credibly
informed) who did exaggerate the grievousnesse of the crime, from the holiness
of the place; he answered; that there was neither preaching nor praying in the
Church, at that time By which he confounded the Minister. Now of a long time,
they keep their Churches shut both night and day, except only at such times, as
the Minister is to preach. I knew also a young Lady, who took great scandal at
a Ministers sermon, wherein he undertook to prove, against the Papists, the
impossibility of living chastely: which doctrine she truly said was very
dangerous to young people, and loosed the reins to all lasciviousness. So
that in many points both concerning God and man, the Sacraments and the
Commandments, we see the Presbyterian Church is not holy in doctrine.

But, on the other part, the Church in Communion with the Sea of Rome teaches
most holy doctrine, in all these points. For first, concerning God, she teaches
that in him there are all perfections, in an infinite degree: that he is not
only good in himself, but the fountain of all goodness, and that no evil can
proceed from him. That he is neither the cause, Author or approver of sin. That
he is so good, that he would not permit sin to be, unless he could draw good
from it. That he has predestinate no man to damnation, but only for sins, which
they willingly and freely commit. This is the doctrine of the Catholic Church,
and of the holy Fathers. Aug. in Enchir. c. 100.
S. Augustine says. God, who is good, would not permit evil, unless he being
omnipotent could also do good of evil. The Arausican Council says: Council.
Arausican. c. 25.
We do not only, not believe, that some are predestinate unto evil, by the
divine power; but, if there be any, who believe so great a wickedness, we
accurse them with all detestation. The same holiness might be showed of the
Catholic doctrine, concerning free will, and the possibility of keeping the
commandments, with the assistance of Gods grace, of Justification, of the
Sacraments, which all tend to holiness, to the exaltation of Gods goodness,
to the killing of sin, to the advancement of piety and of all good works, as
the holy Fathers have shown, of all the points of the Catholic Church: and
particularly S. Augustine, who says truly, in the Churches of her Communion,
Aug. lib. 2. de Civit. Dei c. 8.
nothing filthy and wicked is proposed to be seen or followed. Where, either
the Commandments of the true God are explained, or his Miracles related, or his
gifts praised, or his benefits desired. Besides, in the Catholic Church are
many holy houses dedicated and consecrated to Gods service, holy altars,
Ornaments, holy vessels, holy solemn worship and service, with many holy rites
and ceremonies, manifesting the Majesty and magnificence of God, and breeding
respect and reverence in man. And, in a word, this Church Militant here on
earth is a true representation of the Church Triumphant in heaven, still
adoring, praising and magnifying God. Therefore holiness of doctrine belongs
rather to this Catholic Church, than to the Protestant.

Then, for holiness of life. I never knew any Judicious Protestant, but
acknowledged that the Catholics had too much the better of them. Luther the
first Apostle professes, that whilst he lived, among the religious of S.
Augustins order, he observed chastity, Luth. in cap. 1. ad Galat.
obedience and poverty: that he did all things with a single heart, for the
glory of God, fearing the last judgment, etc. But after his fall from the
Catholic Church, he changed not only miserably his faith, but also his life.
For thus he proclaims his own shame. Luth. tom. 5. wit. ser. de Matrim. f.
119. Et tom. 1. epis. fol. 334. Zuingl. tom. 2. in resp. ad confess. Lutheri f.
878.
As it is not in my power, to be no man, so it is not in my power, to be
without a woman. I am burned with the great flammes of my untamed lust, etc.
And, to make himself more infamous, he, having vowed his chastity to God,
married a professed Nun, named Katherin Bore, who had made the like vow. He is
charged also by his fellow Protestants, with arrogance, insolency and
intolerable pride, which he exercised against persons of greatest quality; as
against the Emperor, Charles the fifth, and Henry the eight, King of England.
His bitter railings, his foul and filthy expressions have bred such a stench
in all his writings, that they purchased to him the Title of Propheta
Stercorarius, or the Dunghill Prophet. Shlus. in Theo. Calvin lib. 2. fol. 72.
These qualities are very far different from Saints virtues. Concerning Calvin,
it is affirmed by Conradus shlusselburg, a famous Lutheran, that he was guilty
of Sodomie, and other abominable vices, for which he was branded on the
shoulder, by the Magistrate of Noyon with a hot iron. That he was stricken,
also a little before his death, by the hand of God, with Herod's desease, and
that he dyed in despair, cursing and blaspheming. No less vices also are laid
to Beza his charge, who did celebrate his own shame and filthy lusts, with most
lascivious Epigrammes. All which are not alleadgeances of Catholics, but
testimonies of Protestants, against themselves. Neither are these Reformers
commonly, even by Protestants, esteemd Saints. As for the common multitude,
which followed the Reformers, Luther himself confesses, that the world is
become seven times worse, Luth. in postill sup. Euang. Domin pae Adventus.
then it was before, in the Papacy: yea it is generally observed, that
Catholics, who become Protestants, change their life into worse. And, albeit
the Presbyterians, during the late troubles, did vsurp to themselves very
ridiculously, the name of Saints; yet, both in the judgment of other
Protestants, and in the truth of the matter, they were very far from deserving
that title. For, if we will believe the old Protestants, avarice, pride,
tyranny, cruelty, impudent railing, sedition, perjury, and many such other
vices are the Presbyterians greatest virtues: and, who are most exorbitant in
these enormities, are their greatest Saints; as they instance in some chief
Apostles of the Covenant, in whom they affirm these vices to be palpably
evident. Neither have the Presbyterians any better opinion of the old
Protestants, whom they call Malignants, as appeared by their Excommunication,
thundered out against the Bishops, at the Assembly of Glasgow, for very
horrible crimes. And, albeit the Bishops, at least some of them, were not
guilty of these crimes; yet there was no wise man even amongst those, who loved
them most, that thought any of them a Saint, or eminent for holiness. Neither
can the Presbyterians be Saints, even in their own principles, unless they
would make their lives not only better then their belief, but also contrary to
it. For they, teaching that the Commandments are impossible to be kept, even
with Gods grace; how can they pretend to keep them? And, if they keep them not,
how can they pretend to be Saints? These are poor Saints, who break every day
Gods Commandments; and much more, who commit a mortal sin in all their actions:
as the Presbyterians commonly teach. Their actions also, which need not to be
here recounted, and ought to be better believed, than their words, show, that
they were not Saints. A late Author, who had occasion to know well both sorts
of Protestants, gives this verdict of them. Lost sheep p. 192.
Amongst the legal Protestants, there are many stored with moral goodness, but
the devotion and zeal is amongst the Puritans: but it has eaten up almost all
moral honesty among them. So the qualities, which were too evident and
sensible in the Presbyterians, even of the greatest estimation, show clearly,
that they fell so far short of Saints perfections; that they had not so much as
Moral virtues. Neither did God ever testify, either the holiness of any of
their lives, or of their doctrine, by any miracle.

Upon the other part, I find the lives of Roman Catholics, especially of
those, who were Converters of Nations and Foundators of religious Orders,
Calvin. Instit. c. 10. par. 17.
to be highly extolled. To speak nothing of more ancient Saints. S. Bernard,
whom all the world knows to have been most addicted to the Pope, and Roman
faith, is called and esteemed a Saint by Calvin, and by diverse other
Protestants. The holiness of S. Dominick, Cent. Magd. cent. 13. col. 11. 79.
Hacluite 2. part 2. volum. p, 81. Luther. cont. Anabaptistas. Breirly Pro^.
S. Francis and others is confessed by the Centurists. The approved sanctity of
S. Francis Xaverius, a Jesuit, who in the last age converted sundry Nations of
the east Indies, is testified by Hacluite, a Minister, in his book of
Navigations, where he does highly praise him. Luther confesses, that in the
Papacy is the very kernel of piety. Breirly cites the words of diverse
Protestants, who acknowledge, that there are many holy men and women in the
Roman Church, that Protestants are not to be compared unto them, in the least
degree; and that the Catholic Church has many excellent orders, and holy
institutions, Apol. tract. 2. c. 3. sect. 9. subd. 1. post F.
for curbing of sin, and advancing of piety, whereof Protestants are destitute.
This must be a strong truth, which extorts confession from Adversaries: and
this Confession is a most convincent proof against themselves. Moreover,
amongst many of the Catholic Church, there is found not an ordinary, but a
sublime degree of holiness. For many persons in all ages, of the greatest
quality, honor and riches, have renounced the world, and all its pleasures,
that they might serve and enjoy God more freely; so that they have not only, by
Gods grace, kept, but also gone beyond the commandments, as S. Chrysostom
speaks. S. Augustine describing the manners of the Catholic Church, in his
time, after an excellent apostraphe, concerning the holiness of her doctrine,
says unto her, concerning holiness of life: Aug. lib. de morib Eccl Cat. c.
30.
Deservedly with thee the divine Commandments are kept, far and near. By good
right with thee, are many given to hospitality, many dutiful, many merciful,
many learned, many chaste, many holy, many so burning with the love of God,
that, in highest abstinence from all worldly pleasures, and incredible contempt
of the world, they delight only in the desert. And thereafter, showing the
diverse degrees of holy persons in the Catholic Church, as of the Anachorits,
who lived in the wilderness; of the Monks, who lived a part by themselves; and
of others, who were gathered together into Communities; of religious women, who
separating themselves from the company of men, served God chastely and
diligently; and having described their diverse manner of living, their divin
contemplations, fervent prayers, frequent fastings, and the rest of their holy
exercises, he says of the Anachorits, not without admiration. Aug. ibid. cap.
31.
What is it, I beseech you, that these men, who cannot but love man, do see;
and yet can be without the sight of man? Truly whatever it be, it must be more
excellent, then all humane things: since, for the contemplation of it, a man
can live without man. And a little after. To whom this excellent hight of
holiness does not appear, of it is own accord, worthy of admiration, how can it
appear to him, by our words? Then, of them all, he professes himself unable to
praise sufficiently these holy manners, these holy orders and institutions;
and, if he would undertake to do it, he would be affrayed, lest he seemed to
detract from them: as if they would not please men, by the simple relation of
the^. In end, as this were an undeniable truth, appealing to the heretics own
judgment, he says: These things, O M^nichaeans, reprove, if you can. But, if
there had been any Presbyterians in his time, he had found them not only
reproving these most holy things, but also renouncing, abiuring and accursing
them; as may by known, by their Covenant, and practice, at the beginning of
their Reformation. In this indeed, the Presbyterians go beyond the Manicheans.
S. Augustine proceeds to the praise of the holiness of the Clergy, the Bishops,
Priests and Deacons, whose virtue, he says, is so much the more wonderful,
how much it is more hard to keep it, in such a kind of troublesome life, amongst
so great a multitude of persons, with whom, for their spiritual goods they do
converse. And yet he says: that he knew many holy persons in all these
vocations, as also many of the laytie, of all ranks and qualities, living
holyly in the world, as if they did not use the world, and who would willingly
forsake all wordly things, before they forsook the love and service of God.
This Description of the ancient Catholic Church, which the Catholic show
unto me, did represent very clearly to my sight how fitly the present
Catholic Church does agree with it, in all these holy orders and
Institutions: and it did no less evidently manifest unto me, how monstruously
the present Protestant Church is different from it. Lastly, diverse histories,
as well of Enemies, as of friends, have recorded many famous miracles, wrought
in the Catholic Church, for confirmation of her doctrine, and for
manifestation of the holiness of some persons, who have lived and dyed, in her
Communion. The Magdeburgian Centurists, although Protestants have recorded many
great miracles, done by Catholics, in the 13. chapter of every Century, for
1300. years together, after Christ.

Therefore, since holiness of life and doctrine, testified by Miracles from
heaven, has in all ages from Christ, been found eminently in the Roman
Catholic Church, and in no other, we may most justly conclude, That she, and
no other, is the true Church and lawful spouse of Christ. Aug. epist. 50. ad
Bonifacium.
S. Augustine says: The Catholic Church alone is the body of Christ, etc. out
of this body, the Holy Ghost quickens no man. And a little before. For, as a
member, if it be cut off from the body of a living man, cannot retain the
Spirit of life, so a man, who is cut off from the body of Christ the Just,
cannot retain the Spirit of Justice.

CHAP. XXXIV. The true Church demonstrated by her Universality: for which she
is called Catholic.
AS the true Church is designed, in the Apostles Creed, by her holiness, so is
she also by her Universality. I believe the holy Catholic Church. She is
clearly also described, by the same universality, Genes 12.17.
in the Scripture. God said to Abraham: In thy seed, all the Nations of the
earth shall be blessed. The Prophet Esaias foretold the same, when he said of
the Church: All Nations shall flow unto it. Esaias 2.2. Psalm. 2.
God promised this to Christ. I will give thee the Gentiles, for thine
inheritance, and the utmost bounds of the earth, for thy possessions. Christ
himself declared it, Luke 24.47.
when he said; that repentance and remission of sins should be preached, in his
name, unto all Nations, beginning from Jerusalem. S. Paul said to the
Colossians, Coloss. 1.6.
that the Gospel was in all the world and fructifyed. Therefore, to forbear
from citing more testimonies, it is evident by the Creed, by the Law and the
Prophets, by the Psalms, and the holy Apostles, and by Christ himself the most
true describer of his own body, that his Church must be Catholic or Universal
for place, having the Communion of all Nations. She must be also Universal for
time, that is, she must endure from the time of Christ, unto the end of the
world; as we have seen above, in the perpetuity of the Church. For of Christ's
kingdom, Luke 1.33. Mat. 16.19.
there shall be no end, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against his
Church.

These places of Scripture are so clear, for the Universality of the Church;
that S. Augustine, having produced them against the Donatists, for the same
purpose, affirms: Aug. de Vnitate Eccl. c. 11.
no man how blunt so ever he be, and slow of heart, can say, I did not
understand them. That none but heretics, with headstrong frowardness and
blind fury, can bark against them. And that no excuse is left for those, who do
not believe them, because they contradict Christ's clear words. The next thing
then, that we are to do is to see, to what company of Christians: whither to
Protestants or to those Christians, who keep Communion with the Sea of Rome,
this property of Universality, by which the true Church is so clearly
described, does best agree.

We need not make great search, in this matter. For, if we will speak of the
time, before Luther, the Church in Communion with the Sea of Rome, was so much
Catholic, in regard of Protestants; that there was no little company, yea nor
one person at all, of the Protestant religion, to be seen or found, to contest
with her, for this glorious title of Catholic. Whereas, from Luther upward,
in every generation, she may be proved, by the most famous testimonies,
histories, records and Monuments in the world, to have been always Catholic,
that is, to have been a most ample Society, keeping the Communion of Nations,
and to have been most eminent, above all other religions, sects and heresies,
that went out from her; which being condemned by this Church, were, as
unprofitable boughs, cut off from the vine; and so remaining, where they fell,
in petty corners of the world, did soon wither and decay. Again, if we will
make now the comparison between the Church in Communion with the Roman sea, and
the Protestants Churches since Luther arose: we shall find the last come very
short of the other, for Universality: and that for the same very reason, which
S. Augustine brought against the Donatists. Aug. de Unit. Eccl c. 3.
These sects, says he, are not found in many Nations, where this (to wit, the
Catholic Church) is: and this, which is every where, is found also even where
these sects are. So it may be said, Protestants are not to be found in many
Nations, where the Catholic religion is professed, and Catholics may be
found, where ever Protestants are. For all the diverse sorts of Protestants are
comprised, within Europe, and possess only the Northern parts thereof, there
being some most famous and large kingdoms and provinces, even within Europe,
where they are not to be seen, or found, as in all Spain, Italy, Sicily: and
in others, they are but scantly sown, as in France, Poland, Germany, where
they are not a handful to the Catholics. And in these Northern places, which
they possess, out of which they banished by force the public exercice of the
Catholic religion, and still persecute the professors of it, there are not
deficient Catholics, who in the midst of the enemies of their religion, have
alway's professed their faith. But in other parts of the world, where the
Catholic religion does wonderfully flourish, the name of Protestants is not
so much as known. For the Catholic religion is not only publicly professed,
in the most famous Kingdoms and Provinces of Europe, but also it is to be
found in Africa, Asia, and America. And, albeit in diverse Countries, the
public profession be Heretical, Mahometical, or Heathnih; yet, even there, the
Catholic Roman Church has Fathers and children, professing her faith: and,
what she lost by the falling away of Protestants in Europe, she has gained with
much increase, by the propagation of the Catholic faith, in the East and West
Indies, and now of late in the great Kingdom of China, where many thowsands
have e^braced the faith.

If then the Society of Christians in Communion with the Roman Church remains
still Catholic, notwithstanding that the Protestants have fallen away from
her, and albeit they would muster together all their forces against her: how
much more is she Catholic in regard of Protestants, if they be taken a part
by their diverse sects and scattered troops, as in all reason they ought to be?
For none should be esteemed of one religion, but these, who are of one
Communion; and therefore, since Universality does necessarly include Unity, no
Protestant Church can be further Universal, then her Communion is spread, which
will be found to be so little a way, that every one of those Protestant
Churches, especially being compared with the Roman Catholic, will deserve
rather the title of particular, then of Universal.

Moreover, the holy Fathers have observed, that as the Church in Communion with
the sea of Rome has ever had the thing signified by the word Catholic: so she
alone has ever possessed the glorious title of Catholic, whereof heretics
have been very ambitious; but could never obtain it. S. Augustine did esteem the
title of Catholic so plain an evidence of the true Church, Aug. cont. epist.
fund. c. 4.
that he said: In the bosom of the Church, the very name of Catholic holds
me, which not without cause amongst so many heresies, that Church alone has so
obtayn'd; that, although all heretics would have themselves called
Catholics; yet, when a stranger enquires any of them, where the Catholics
do assemble, no heretic is so bold as to show him his own meeting place.
Again he says: Idem lib. de vera relig. c. 6.
We must hold the Communion of that Church, which is called Catholic, both by
her own, and by strangers.

This name of Catholic the true Church received from the Apostles, to make
her be known from all heretical Congregations: which she has ever carried as a
badge of truth, and a title of great honor. S. Cyril, expounding the Apostles
Creed, says: Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. 15.
For this end thy faith has given to thee this article, the holy Catholic
Church, that thou may avoid the polluted Conventicles of heretics. And a
little after: When thou come into a Town, enquire not simply where the
Temple of our Lord is, for heretics also call their dens, Temples. Neither
ask simply, where the Church is; but ask, where is the Catholic Church: For
that is the proper Name of this holy Church. Upon the other part: as no
heresies could ever be Universal, for time or place, (for he, who has
prescribed bounds to the Sea, has also ordained that no heresy can cover the
earth) so by the divine Providence they could never obtain the title of
Catholic but were ever denominated from their Authors: as Arians, Pelagians,
Lutherans, Calvinists; or from some accident; as Protestants, for protesting
against the Emperors Edicts: Hierom. cont. Luciferianos.
which sorts of names, S. Hierom affirms to be evide^t marks of the Synagogue
of Antichrist. Neither indeed can any new sects, with any probability, call
themselves Catholics. For what would be more ridiculous; then, if the
Independents, or Quakers, who are of so late standing, and of so little
extension, would style themselves Catholics: this word signifying
Universality, both of time and place, which they evidently want? The same may
be as justly said of the Presbyterians, or of any other Protestant
Congregation. And, if any of these sects were so unwise as to call themselves
so, they would not be understood, but taken for Papists.

I remember, that my Catholic friend show me, that it has been an ordinary
custom of those, who separat themselv's from the Catholic Church; when they
see, that they neither have the thing signified by the word Catholic; nor can
obtain the title of it, to show themselves enemies to both. This the old
Donatists did, who pretended that it was not necessary, Aug. cont. Crescon. l.
3. c. 66.
the true Church should have communion of Nations or be Universal; that truth
is often among a few, and that it was the fault of many to err. This same some
Protestants do pretend. Against which may be opposed the words of S. Augustine,
Aug. epist. 48
who says: As he shall be Anathema or accursed, who preaches, that neither
Christ suffered, nor rose again; because we learned by the Gospel, that it
behoved Christ to suffer and to rise again the third day: so he shall also be
anathema, whosoever preaches the Church to be elsewhere, then in the Communion
of all Nations: because, by the self same Gospel, we learn in the words next
following, penance to be preached in his name, and remission of sins,
throughout all Nations. Then, for the word Catholic, Luther was so great an
enemy to it, that he took it out of the Apostles Creed, putting the word
Christian in place of it. Our Presbyterians ordinarily abstain from the word
Catholic, turning it Universal. Beza in praefat. novi Testam.
Beza calls it the vain term Catholic. A great Apostle of the Covenant,
show both his envy and anger, at this word. For when a Gentleman in the North,
who had been summoned not long ago, to give an account of his faith, before the
Presbytery of Aberdeen, had professed himself to be a Catholic; the said
Apostle was offended with that title, and willed him to call himself a Papist:
which he neglecting to do, the Min^ister the^ enquired of him: If the women of
his religion called themselves Catholics also? Which question had such an
uncivil sense, (as he proposed it) that some of his more modest brethren,
sitting in judgment with him, show, both by their Countenance and words, their
dislike of his vncivility. S. Augustine relates, how the Donatists also were
great Enemies to the word Catholic, calling it a humane forgerie, or fiction,
Aug. lib. 1. cont. Gaudent. c. 33.
which the holy Father calls words of blasphemy.

To conclude therefore this point. As it is evident, both by the Creed, and by
the Scripture that the true Church must be Catholic; so it is very clear and
certain, that the Protestant Church, before Luther, was not Catholic; that as
yet, it is not Catholic, and, by all appearance, never will be. For,
according to the nature of heresy, it got all what it possesses, at the
first hurl; and these 80. years, it has made no progress, but rather by its
own divisions has gone backward, and has been still on the loosing hand.
Therefore, the Protestant Church, not being Catholic, cannot be the true
Church. Upon the other part, it is no less evident, that, of all Christian
societies, the Church in Communion with the sea of Rome was the Catholic
Church, in the time of the Apostles, as it was also, in the time of S. Augustine
and of the holy Fathers; and ever since, it has had the Communion of Nations,
kept all General Councels, made decrees, condemned all Errors and heresies:
And, in a word, what the holy Scriptures have so clearly fore-tould of the
Universality of Christ's Church, and of the conversion of Gentiles from
infidelity to Christianity, has been accomplished in this Church alone, and
performed by her members. Therefore, this Church, and no other, is the holy
Catholic and true Church of Christ.

CHAP. XXXV. The true Church proved by her continued succession, and lawful
vocation of her Pastors: for which, she is called Apostolic.
BY this note or property of Apostolic, the holy Fathers and ancient
Councels would have the true Church clearly known and distinguished, from all
new sects and heresies. The Church is called Apostolic, principally for two
reasons. First, because it was founded by the Apostles, and from their time
must continue unto the end of the world. Secondly, because the Pastors thereof
derive their Mission from the Apostles, by ordinary calling and personal
succession. In the first sense, the true Church is clearly distinguished, from
all sects and false Churches: because they were not founded by the Apostles,
but by some new pretended Reformers, who arose after the Apostles, in their
several generations; and therefore, these new Churches, founded and erected by
them, are not called Apostolic; but have their denomination, from their
founders: such as the Arians, Pelagians, Lutherans, Calvinists. In the second
sense, she is also clearly distinguished from false Churches: because they have
not lawful Pastors, deriving their vocation from the Apostles, by a continued
and uninterrupted succession; but intrude themselves into the office of Pastors,
without any lawful calling. Of the first sense of the word Apostolic, we
have spoken sufficiently above, when we proved the true Church, by her
perpetuity and continued succession; and disproved all false Churches, for want
of it; which proofs need not to be here repeated. Of the second sense of the
word Apostolic, we shall here briefly speak.

Besides the authority of the Creed, it is evident by the Scriptures, that there
must be always Pastors in the Church, lawfully called to that charge. God
says by the Prophet Esaias: upon thy walls, Esaias 62.6.
o Jerusalem, I have appointed watchmen, all the day and all the night. They
shall not hold their peace for ever. Ephesians. 4.11.
The Apostle S. Paul shows, how our Savior performed this promise, by
appoynting Pastors and Teachers, To the consummation of the Saints, for the
work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all
meet in the Unity of faith. Our Savior also has promised his continual
assistance unto the Pastors of his Church: Behold, Math. vlt.
I am with you always, even unto the consummation of the world. As there must
be always Pastors in the Church, so they must be lawfully called to that
charge; or else, they are not Pastors, but Thieves and Robbers. S. Paul says:
Heb. 5.4. Romans 10 15.
no man takes upon him that honor, but he, who is called of God, as Aaron. And
again: how shall they preach, unless they be sent^ God, in the old Testament,
reproved those, who went without mission, saying: I had not sent these
Prophets, yet they ran, Jeremy 23.21. and 27.15. John. 10.1.
and prophesied falsely in my name. Christ says: who enters not by the door
into the shee^fold, but climbeth another way, is a thief and a robber.
Moreover, our Savior has put a strict obligation, upon all people, to hear and
obey their lawful Pastors, and has forewarned them earnestly, to beware of
false Prophets. Of the first, he says: Who hears you, hears me, Luke 10.16.
Math. 10.15.
and who contemns you, contemns me. And, whosoever shall not receive you, nor
hear your words, etc. Verily, I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for
the land of the Sodomits and Gomorrhaeans in the day of Judgment, then for that
City. Of false Teachers, he says: Beware, Math. 24 5. Math 7.15.
that no man seduce you: for many shall come in my name. And again: Take great
heed of false Prophets. S. Paul, to the like purpose, forewarneth the
Ephesians, saying: Take heed to your selves; I know, that after my departure,
Act. 20.28.30.
there will ravening Wolves enter in among you, etc. For the which cause, be
Vigilant. Seeing then we know evidently, by the Scriptures, that there must
remain always true and Lawful Pastors in the Church; and that false Prophets
will also arise: That we are obliged under pain of damnation, to hear the
first, and under no less danger, to beware of the last: It is most certain,
that the goodness of God, (who promised such a clear way, under the Gospel,
that fools should not err in it) has ordaind an easy and sensible way, for
all men, to discern, between true and false Pastors; that they may be preserved
from error, in so great danger: or else, no^ only fools, but also wisemen
might be miserably mistaken, and misled to their own perdition.

Now, the same Scripture points out this easy and direct way, if men would walk
in it. For it shows, that all true Pastors must have sensible vocation and
Mission; and these, who want them, cannot be true and Lawful Pastors First it is
evident, that our Savior did sensibly call 12. Apostles, and sent them with
commission, to feed and govern his Church. Secondly, the Apostles did also
sensibly call and ordain other Pastors, as is evident, in the election and
ordination of S. Mathias. Thirdly, the chief Pastors, that is Bishops, received
also power from the Apostles, to choose and ordain others, as is evident, in
what the Scripture records of Titus and Timothee. This was so evident and
sensible a way, that fools might not err in it. And, if this order was always
observed, that none could be esteemed lawful Pastors, but who were thus called
and ordained by others, who had received that power: then it was as easy to
know a true Pastor, from a false Apostle; as it is easy to know, who is called
to be a Judge, in the State, from an usurper: for they are both discernable, by
easy and sensible signs. This is the door, of which our Savior speaks; by
which all these, who are lawful Pastors, enter into the government of the
Church; and all these, who enter not by this door, and yet vsurp that honor
to be Pastors of the Church, are thieves, who climb up another way, and so may
be easily known. The ancient Jews had also an easy way to know their ordinary
Priests and Pastors, from usurpers: For, among them, none were Priests; but
these, who were descended from Levi by Aaron, by natural generation. But, in
the Law of grace, it is more easy; where none are to be esteemed Bishops and
Lawful Pastors, but these, who are descended from the holy Apostles, by
visible ordination and personal succession.

The holy Fathers did use this succession and Vocation of Pastors, as a most
evident argument, to demonstrat the true Church; and by want of these, they
discovered also as clearly all false Churches. For it is certain, the true
Church cannot be without lawful Pastors, and lawful Pastors cannot be without
lawful Vocation and ordination; and, where there are no true Pastors, lawfully
called and ordaind, there can be no true Church. S. Ireneus proves the true
Church, by the Succession of Pastors; Irena^us lib. 3. c. 3
which he calls a clear demonstration, by which all heretics are confounded.
Tertullian requires the heretics, to bring forth the origin of their
Churches, to recite the order of their Bishops, Tert. lib. de praescrip
by succession from the Apostles. As it is evident then, that vocation and
succession of Pastors, by lawful ordination, is an inseparable property of
the true Church: So We shall now briefly see, to which Church it best agrees,
whither to the Protestant, or to the Church in Communion with the Sea of Rome.

I find, that the Protestant Pastors are as much perplexed, to show the
lawfulness of their Vocation, after Luther, as they were vexed, to show, where
their Church was before him. For they run from one shift to another; and, what
some say, others control and severly censure. As there were three principal
sorts of Protestants, to wit: the Lutherans, Calvinists and these of the late
English Church; so, I find, they bring three different answers, to the question
of their Ministers vocation. Some say, the Lutherian Ministers have an ordinary
vocation, because Luther was made a Priest in the Roman Church But this answer
is frivolous. For first, Luther, by that Vocation, got only commission to
preach the doctrine of that Church, and not to preach against it. Secondly, it
is monstruously absurd for the Lutherians, to derive their Vocation from that
Church, which their first Apostle esteemed Antichristian. Thirdly, Although
Luthers own vocation were supposed to be good, how could he, being only a
simple Priest, ordain others; since, from the beginning of Christianity, it was
never known, that a Priest could be ordaind by any, but by a Bishop? Fourthly,
Luther succeeded to none, neither Bishop or Priest, who professed his doctrine;
and therefore, the Lutherans are, in their first source, destitute of
succession, and in their progress, of lawful ordination; and so neither
Luther, nor his successors, have any lawful Vocation.

Calvin and most of his Scholars renounce the way of ordinary, and run to an
extraordinary vocation: for they are ashamed, to derive their vocation from the
Roman Church, which they imagine to be Antichristian: neither can they do it,
because Calvin was never ordained a Priest. By the tyranny^ says he, of the
Pope, Call. lib. 4. Instit. c. 3. par. 4.
the true line of ordination was interrupted: now, there is need of a new
suppl^e. And truly this was an extraordinary charge, which the Lord imposed on
us. To him accords his Scholar Beza, who says: that, at the beginning of
their Church, ordinary vocation appeared no where. And, Beza in epist. ad
Alemannum.
in the Conference at Poysie, being enquired of his Vocation, he said it was
extraordinary. Against this pretext of extraordinary vocation, which is
followed by all the Puritians, other Protestants do sharply inveigh. Saravia
says; that it is a doctrine full of danger, Saravia in defen. cont. Bez. p. 73.
Prot. Apol. tract. ^. c. 2. sect. 3. subd. 2
of a new and evil example, and vpholden by no testimony of the Scripture.
Diverse other Protestants, cited in the Protestants Apology, reject this
extraordinary vocation, as fanatical, and opening a way to all seducers, who
may make the same pretext. And now, the Presbyterians find by sad experience,
that the Independents, Anabaptists and others make use of it, against themselves.

But, that Calvin and his followers had no extraordinary vocation, may be
easily shown. For, unto that, there are two things requisite, according to the
examples, recorded in the Scriptures. First, that God speak sensibly unto one,
whom he is to call extraordinarly: as he did to Moses, Elias, S. Paul
Secondly, That he make that appear by some miracle. The first is not
sufficient, without the second: To which may be joined a third condition, to
wit, holiness of life and doctrine, which becomes Gods extraordinary
Ambassadors; without which, even their miracles ought to be suspected. Now,
not only one, but all these conditions were visibly deficient in Calvin and the
other pretended Reformers. For never any of them was so impudent, as to say,
that God spoke sensibly to them: albeit Luther confesses, that the Devil
conferred oftener then once, with him. Erasm. in diatrib^ de lib. arb.
Then they were so impote^t of working miracles, that Erasmus objects to them,
They were never as yet able, so much as to cure a lame horse. Lastly, their
lives were not extraordinary for holiness, befitting an extraordinary
Vocation: as we have seen above. Luthers sentence against Mu^ster, Luth ^^
Senate M ^us.
makes also against Calvin. If he pretend, says Luther, that he is sent by
God, as the Apostles: let him prove that, by doing signs and miracles: for,
where ever God will change the ordinary way, there always he works miracles.

Lastly, the late Church of England pretended a succession and lawful Vocation
of her Pastors, Mason of the consecration epist de dicatorie.
above all other Protestants. For so, Mr Mason praises and admireth the sweet
and singular providence of God, toward the new Church of England; that, when
other reformed Church as were enforced through necessity, to admit
extraordinary Fathers, or Ordainers; that is, to receive ordination from
inferior Ministers or Priests: yet, the Church of England had always Bishops,
who, according to the ordinary and most secure custom of the Church, had
conferred holy Orders. But this pretense is also false and frivolous. For
either, the first Protestant Bishops, in Queen Elizabeth time, were ordaind by
the Catholic Bishops; or had their Vocation from some others; Sander de
schis. Angl. Champ. de Voca^ Ministrorum
as from the Queen and Parliament. The first cannot be said. For both Sanderus,
and Dr. Champn^y show, that the Catholic Bishops choosed rather to die in
prison (as they did) then to impose their hands upon the Queens new designed
Protestant Bishops. Besides, M. Whitaker and Fulk renounce the Catholic
ordination, as unlawful; albeit all the more late Divines of the English
Church had their recourse unto it; in so much, that Fulk expresses himself
very passionatly, thus; We, with our whole heart, Fulk in re^ent. a pud
Brairlie tr. 2. c. 2 sect. 6. ad D^
renounce, abhor, detest and spit at your filthy Antichristian Orders. So
full of confusion are they in this matter; that, what some of their greatest
Divins esteem their greatest glory, others, no less famous among them, think
their greatest shame. Moreover, albeit the Catholic Bishops were granted to
have imposed their hands on the first Protestant Bishops: yet, by that
ordination, they made them only Catholic and not Protestant Bishops: for the
Church in all reason, and common sense, cannot give a lawful Vocation to any
Pastors, to preach and act against her self. Therefore, if these first Bishops
of the late English Church were Protestants, when they were ordained; they were
not lawfully ordaind: and, if they became thereafter Protestants, they lost all
lawful exercice of their power of ordination: when they used it against that
Church, from which they pretend to derive their lawful vocation. Lastly, the
first Protestant Bishops, in King Edward the sixth or Queen Elizabeth's time,
succeeded to no other Protestant Bishops, much less, can they show their
succession unto the Apostles: as is requisite to make them lawful and
Apostolical Bishops.

If it be said, that the first Protestant Bishops were made by virtue of the
King or Queens supremacy, and by act of parliament: This is not the way
prescryved in the Scripture, which has been always observed in the Church. And,
if these English Bishops and Pastors had no more sure ground, for their
vocation, then the Royal Supremacy; it is no wonder, that they are both fallen
together, and that one Parliament has ransacted, what others had enacted So we
see, that the late English Church, has been resolved into the same principles,
of which it was first composed: as by the same just judgment, the
Presbyterians, who pretend an extraordinary vocation, are almost subverted by
the Independents and Anabaptists upon the same pretext.

It rests, that I speak now a word of our Scottish Ministers Vocation, which I
found as groundless, and more ridiculous, then any of the rest. For, besides,
that the most part of them, at the beginning, were unlettered men, and had no
other Vocation to be Ministers, then that which the Presbyterians blame now in
the Independents; the Vocation of M. Xnox our great Reformer seems very
strange, as it is described in his own Chronicle. In one thing indeed he show
himself more Scrupulous, then Luther: for although he had been ordained a Roman
Priest; yet, he thought (not without reason) that his Popish orders gave him no
lawful Vocation to be a Protestant Minister: and therefore, he expected
another call, which was given him, after this manner. Some discontented
Protestants, having conspired together, had cruelly killed, Spots woods in his
history etc.
(as a Protestant Author speaks) Cardinal Beaton, within his own house, the
castle of S. Andrews, possessing themselves of all the Cardinals riches; and
thereafter kept out the Castle in rebellion against the State. To this place of
security M. Knox had his refuge, carrying along with him some Gentlemen's
children, whom he instructed in the Grammar and new Catechism. Knox Chron. p.
74. 75
His book says, that, when these within the Castle perceived the manner of his
doctrine; they dealt earnestly with him, to take upon him the function of a
Preacher. But he refused, alleging he would not run, where God had not sent
him; meaning, that he would do nothing without a lawful calling. Whereupon
they, going to a private Council, resolve or give a charge publicly to M.
Knox, by the mouth of their preacher John Rough: which was done, at the next
Sermon, as it is there at more length described. So by this means, M. Knox got
his Vocation to be a Minister, from the call of that holy Congregation, which
was guilty of murder and robbery, and was then in actual rebellion, by the
mouth of their Preacher, who could have no lawful vocation himself; but being
an unlettered man, had taken up, by all appearance, that calling at his own
hand; as many others did. For it is said of him, in the 74. page. Albeit he was
not the most learned, yet was his doctrine without corruption, etc. I was much
astonished, when this history of our first Reformer his Vocation was first
shown me, in his own book, by a Catholic, who did not fail, to manifest the
ridiculousnesse of it, by all the circumstances.

Now these are all the different Vocations of the Protestant Ministers, and all
and every one of them are so insufficient, that they are disproved not only by
Catholics, but also by most famous Protestants, who are brought to such
confusion, in this matter, that they hardly know what to say. For they can
neither pretend ordinary nor extraordinary Vocation: not the first; because
they evidently want succession, as also ordination: both which are requisite to
an ordinary calling. Not the second: because they want the power of working
miracles, and have no extraordinary holiness, which are qualities very
requisite and usual for all Gods extraordinary Ambassadors. And albeit neither
of these qualities were required; yet, these who pretend this extraordinary
Vocation, do fall into such contradictions, that they are evidently known
thereby, not to be Gods extraordinary Ambassadors: whom he never uses to send
with contrary Commissions: So that, to the Protestant Ministers or Bishops,
agree well the words of S. Cyprian. Cypr. de simplicit. Pra^lator.
These are men, says he, who without any divin disposition, prefer themselves
among rash people, who make themselves Prelates, without any lawful ordination:
who, none giving to them a Bishops office, take the name of Bishops upon them.
Therefore, the Protestant Pastors, wanting clearly succession from the
Apostles, are not Apostolic, and so are not true Pastors but Usurpers: and
consequently the Protestant Church is not the true Church; for that cannot be
the true Church, which has no lawful Pastors.

Upon the other part, this succession of Bishops from the Apostles, has been
ever so evidently in the Church of the Roman Communion, that the holy Fathers
did bring it, as a most evident argument, to show the true Church: and
therefore, they reckon out ordinarily the succession of the Roman Bishops. Aug.
cont. epist. fund. c. 4.
S. Augustine says, The Succession of Priests from the Seat of Peter the
Apostle, unto the present Bishoprique, holds me in the Church. And elsewhere,
showing the continuance of the same succession, he says: The continuance of
the true Church, by most certain succession of Bishops, Aug. lib. con^ advers.
leg and prophet, c. 20.
does persevere from the Apostles time, unto ours, and to the times after us
again. And this succession does to this day continue in the Roman Church, as
evidently, as it did in the time of the holy Fathers; neither can any thing be
said now against it, which might not have been said as justly by the ancient
heretics. Therefore, as the Church in Communion with the Sea of Rome has been
showed to be one holy and Catholic Church; so it is no less evident, that it
is Apostolic, having lawful Pastors (as it has ever had) deriving their
Vocation from the holy Apostles, by lawful ordination and personal succession:
and consequently, this is the true Church and lawful spouse of Jesus Christ.

This matter of Vocation is of great importance: because doctrine depends upon
it; and because it is easily discerned, so that, it is compared by our Savior,
John 10.1.
to a Gate. As then, it is more easy to hold a thief at the gate, then to
thrust him out, being once let in; so all heretics are more easily
confounded, for lack of Vocation, which is to hold them at the door of the
Church, then by the falsehood of their doctrine, which is to expel them, after
they are once admitted. For, if they cannot bring evident testimonies of their
Vocation and ordination, from a known Pastor of the Church: they are presently
known to be Wolves, who run, when they were not sent; who enter not by the
door, but climb up another way. Therefore, it is great deceit in some
Ministers, to undertake to prove the lawfulness of their Vocation, by the
truth of their doctrine: which is a preposterous and ridiculous way. Numer 16.
Core and his accomplices taught no other doctrine, but that, which was taught by
Moses; and yet, because they usurped the Priests office, we know how fearfully
they were punished. What would be more ridiculous, then, if one would vsurp the
Office of a Judge in the state: and then would prove himself to be a lawful
Judge, by the justice of his decisions? This question then of Vocation, being
so important and easy, a Catholic gave me this advice, which I resolve, God
willing, to follow, never to admit a Minister to dispute of religion, till he
first show the lawfulness of his Vocation, and to make ever that the first
question.

Wherefore, having now seen such evidence for the truth of the Roman Catholic
Church, to which alone, the marks and properties of the true Church, recorded
in Scripture, do so clearly agree, I will draw to an end, by this subsequent
Conclusion.

CHAP. XXXVI. The Conclusion.
AS light is more pleasant, after darkness; so is the invention of truth more
delightful, after errors. I have now, by Gods grace, and by the former Trial,
seen, both our pretended Reformations (which were called such great engyring
Lights) to be nothing, but thick Egyptian darkness, obscuring the chief and
most clear truths of the Christian Religion: both in doctrine, and discipline. I
have now found amongst the Protestants, what S. Augustine observed amongst the
Manichees, Aug. cont. epist. fund, c. 4.
that they have nothing, but a mere promise of truth, a pretext of following
only the Scriptures, when indeed they follow their own Errors: That their
doctrine is nothing, but counterfeit Metal, which cannot endure the fire of
Trial. Yea, I have clearly seen, that their Church, which is the ground work
of all, has not the least resemblance of the Church of Christ; as she is
without ambiguity described, in the Scriptures. For, according to them, the
Church of Christ must endure, for ever: But the Protestant Church has only
endured, since the time of Luther. According to the Scriptures, the Church
cannot be hid, but must ever shine, like a light, set upon a Candlestick: But
the Protestant Church has lain many hundred years hid and invisible, under a
bushel. The Church of Christ must have Unity, as becomes the house of God: But
the Protestant Church is full of division and confusion, both in doctrine, and
discipline. The true Church must be holy, in all her doctrine, and fruitful in
produceing Saints: But the Protestant Church teaches doctrines, which tend to
profaneness and to the neglect of piety and of all good works: and she is so
barren, in produceing Saints, that she professes to bring forth none, but
those who continually, or daily, break mortally Gods Commandments. The true
Church, according to the Scriptures, must be Catholic or Universal, and must
convert all Nations from infidelity to Christianity: But the Protestant Church
is only in parts and petty corners of the earth: and has never, as yet,
converted any Nation of Infidels; but, according to the nature of heresy, has
only perverted some ill Catholics. The true Church must ever have true
Pastors, lawfully called and ordained, deriving their Succession, by an
uninterrupted line, from the holy Apostles: But the Protestant Churches first
Pastors succeeded to none; and, without any lawful Vocation and ordination,
did intrude themselves by Usurpation, into the Pastoral office, as all their
successors have done. The true Church adheres so closly to the truth, that she
is called in the Scriptures, The pillar and ground of truth: 1. Timoth. 3.15.
But the Protestant Church is so inconstant, passing from one falsehood into
another; that she may be called the Pillar and ground of Error. The true
Church, according to Christ's promise, is ever directed by the Spirit of truth,
into all truth: But the Protestant Church is misgoverned, by the Spirit of
giddiness; as is known by fresh experience. These considerations, besides
others, make me see the great darkness, wherein I lay, and have made me to
admire of my former blindness; that I, reading so frequently the Scriptures,
did not see the monstrous difference, which is between the Church of Christ,
there so clearly described, and the Protestant Church, to which not one
property of the true Church contained in the Scriptures does agree. This show
me, how necessary it is to read the Scriptures with attention, and to implore
the Divine Majesty for spiritual illumination; without which darkness will
seem light, and light darkness.

But in the holy Catholic Church, I found not only promise, but also
perforformance of truth. I found her faith to be more precious then gold, which
is tried by the fire, as S. Peter speaks; 1. Pet. 1.7.
which, after greatest opposition and trial, does ever shine more brightly. I
found, in this Church, clearly fulfilled, all the Prophesies, and that to her
do agree all the properties of the true Church, described in the Scriptures.
For this is the Church, which alone has endured, since the time of the
Apostles. This is the Church, which, as a City seated on a hill, could never
be hid: but, as a Candle set upon a Candlestick, has enlightened the whole
world. This is the Church, which has been admirable for its Unity, and eminent
for its sanctity: replenishing the heaven with innumerable Saints, who have all
lived and died, in the bosom of her Communion. This is the Church, which is
Universal for time and place, which has had her gates continually open night
and day, to receive the strength of the Gentiles, which she alone has converted,
from infidelity to Christianity. This is the Church, which has had a continued
succession of Pastors, descending, without interruption, from the holy
Apostles. This is the Church, which adheres so closely to the faith she once
received, that she would never part from it, nor yield in one syllabe or
letter, neither to Heathnish cruelty, nor to heretical impiety, and which
neither force, nor flattery could ever shake: so that, she may be justly
called the Pillar and ground of Verity. This Church is the chaste Virgin and
Spouse of Christ, which has been ever falsely accused, as an Adulteress, by all
Heretical Strumpets, and has been even overloaden with their Calumnies: but she
has always adhered unto her heavenly spouse, who, in his own time, has
manifested her innocence, and brought confusion on her Enemies: And, in a
word, this is the Church, which is admirable for its order and government; for
its supreme authority, and invincible strength, for its heavenly doctrine, and
great holiness, and lastly for her power of working miracles. What then can I
do more fitly, then, after so great darkness, to embrace so clear a light?
after so many dangerous errors and wanderings, to put my self in the direct way
of Salvation, and incorporat my self without delay into this one, holy,
Catholic and Apostolic Church: wherein all the holy Fathers and all the
Saints have lived and dyed? What can I use more properly, then the words of S.
Augustine, who says to this purpose: since we see so great help of God, Aug. dt
v^il. credendi c. 17.
so great profit and fruit, shall we make any doubt at all, to retire unto the
bosom of that Church, which, from the Apostolic Sea, by succession of
Bishops, has obtaind the Sovereign authority, heretics in vain barking round
about it? etc. To which, not to yield the Primacy, is either a matter of
greatest impiety, or of precipitat arrogance. The same Motives, which held S.
Augustine within the Catholic Church, have drawn me unto it: To wit: Idem
cont. epist. fund. c. 4.
the Consent of People and Nations, Authority begun by Miracles, nourished by
Hope, enlarged by Charity, and Confirmed by Antiquity: The Succession of
Priests, from the Seat of Peter, unto the present Bishopric: And last of all,
the very name Catholic, which, not without cause, this Church has only
obtaind, among so many Heresies.

John 1.41. John 4.29.
As then S. Andrew, and the Woman of Samaria were glad, when they found the
Messiah foretold by the Prophets; because they were sure, to find with him,
all truth: So am I no less overioyed, to have found the true Church, foretold
and clearly described by the Messiah: for, with her, I am sure to find all
truth: since she is the Pillar and ground of Truth; and Christ has promised to
her the Spirit of truth, to remain with her for ever, to lead her into all
truth. As the Apostles believed Christ: for the voice of God the Father, who
said; Mark. 9.7. Luke 10.16.
This is my beloved Son: hear him; so I believe the Church, for the voice of
God the Son, who said: Who hears you, hears me, and who despises you,
despises me, Math. 18.19.
and who will not hear the Church, let him be to thee, as a Heathen and a
Publican. And, as the holy Apostles did believe Christ, in all things; because
he received all, from his father: so I believe the Catholic Church, in all
points, because she has received all her doctrines, from Christ and his
Apostles, and has faithfully retaind them. This Catholic Church is she alone,
which, Lactan. lib. 4. divinar. Instit. c. vlt.
as an ancient Father writes, retains the true worship. This is the fountain
of truth, and House of Faith. This is the Temple of God: into which, if one do
not enter, or from which, if one go astray, he is a stranger from the hope of
life and eternal Salvation. Here, in this house of faith, is found the the true
Catholic and invariable faith, of which S. Augustine truly says: That no
riches, Aug. sermon. 1. de verbis Apost
no treasures, no honors, no substance of this world are comparable unto it:
Therefore, in end, I will offer up my thanksgiving unto God, in the words of
that glorious Doctor, for the same benefit. Truly, O Lord, Aug. Soliloq. c. 33.
thou art my God, who have drawn me out of darkness, and out of the shadow of
death: and thou have called me, into thy admirable light, and behold I see.
Thanks be given to thee, O thou, who art the illuminator of my soul. I looked
back, and saw the darkness, wherein I had been, and that profound black pit
wherein I had lain: and I was sore afraid, and said Woe, Woe be to that darkness,
wherein I lay. Woe, Woe be to that blindness, wherein, I was not able to see the
light of Heaven. Woe Woe to that former ignorance of mine, when I had no
knowledge of thee, O Lord. But I give thee thanks, O my Illuminator, and
deliverer; because thou have illuminated me, and I have known thee. Yet still
am I come too late to thee, O thou ancient Truth: too late am I come to know
thee, O thou eternal Truth. And, because I cannot praise thee sufficiently, I
humbly desire the blessed Virgin, and all the Angels and Saints of heaven, to
bliss and magnify thy glorious name; and to offer up their holy prayers for
me, that, as by thy grace, I have acquired the true faith: So I may also attayn
unto sincere piety: and so may have the happiness to praise thee, in their
holy society, for all Eternity. Amen.

FINIS.
A LITTLE TOVCH-STONE OF THE SCOTTISH COVENANT.
BEING desirous, after the Trial of Presbytery, to take a serious view of the
late famous, but now unfortunate Scottish Covenant, Presbyteries principal
Chartour: I required the accustomed assistance of my above mentioned Catholic
friend; which he willingly vouchsafed to me. Whereupon, we had diverse
Conferences, and he was also pleased to write some papers on this matter, for
my contentment; out of which, I will make a brief Collection of some principal
observations: whereby, as by a little Touchstone, the Covenant, which
glistered so much for a time, and which was sold for the pure gold of divine
truth, may be seen, to be nothing but base, and Counterfeit Metal.

SECTION I. Of the great esteem, and high Titles of the Covenant; and that it
was unjustly called, Gods Covenant.
THE respect, which the Covenanters gave to the Covenant, was so great, that
perhaps it may seem incredible unto posterity. For they esteemd it as much, as
if God had sent it from heaven, or had given express order for making it. They
were not content, to esteem it so much themselves, but they would have all
persons, within their power, to do the same; They were not satisfied with men's
simple profession to believe it: but they enforced all persons, to swear and
subscribe it, yea, and to take their Sacrament upon it, and were resolved by
furious zeal, to propagate it by force, throughout the world. They gave it also
high Titles: calling it ordinarily Gods Covenant, or the Covenant between God
and the Kirk of Scotland: The Confession of faith: The holy Covenant, etc. All
which show their great esteem of it.

At the very first serious view, and once reading over of the Covenant, we
presently saw, that it did not deserve these high Titles, and especially of
Gods Covenant: because it containd some most gross and palpable lies, of
which, we observed three most obvious.

The first is containd in the very first words of the Covenant, which begin
thus. We all, and every one of us underwritten, protest, that, after long and
due examination of our own Consciences, in matters of true and false religion,
etc. where they profess to have used long and due examination of their
Consciences, before they swore and subscribed the Covenant. Now this is a
falsehood so manifest, that men need not to examine their consciensces: but only
to recollect their senses, and consider, what their eyes saw done, to discover
it. For, when the Covenant was subscrived, at the beginning of the Troubles,
anno 1638. in the Grayfriers Church of Edinburgh: all the long examination then
used, was to hear it once read over, accompanied with a Panegyric, made by
the Lord Lowdon, and a prayer by M. Henderson: and immediately thereafter, all
almost, who were present, ran contentiously to it. Throughout the rest of the
Country, the Ministers commendation of it was made to serve, for all the
peoples long and due examination, and presently followed their subscription,
with an implicit faith upon the Ministers bare word: which is no sure ground to
rely upon. The Puritans ran to it every where, with little knowledge and
furious Zeal, that they might pull down the Bishops: and the old Protestants,
being awakned by their false Alarmes, did swear and subscribe it
inconfideratly; that they might oppose the entrance of Popery, which, they were
made believe, to be at the door. So that, it is evident, even to sense, that
few of the Covenanters used any diligence, most of them used none at all, and
none of them used long and due examination of their Consciences: but their
Subscriptions and oaths went before their knowledge, and their knowledge before
due Trial and diligence. Whereof this is an evident sign, that, as yet, after
19. years agitation, few of their chief heads know all the points abiured in
the Covenant, as opus operatum, works of Supererogation, Stations, and the
like. Therefore, the first words of the Covenant are manifestly false.

The second gross untruth is a little after the Middle of the Covenant, in
these words. And, seeing many are stirred up by Satan and the Roman Antichrist,
to promise, swear and subscribe, and for a time use the holy Sacraments of the
Kirk deceitfully, against their own Consciences: minding thereby, first, under
the external Cloak of religion, to corrupt and subvert secretly Gods true
religion, within the Kirk: and afterward, when time may serve, to become open
Enemies and Persecutors of the same: under Vain hopes of the Popes
dispensation, devised against Gods word, to his greater Confusion, and to their
double condemnation, in the day of the Lord Jesus, etc. Here, said the
Catholic, are linked together diverse lies, and not only lies, but calumnies:
and both so evidently false and impudent; that the Father of lies, if he had
any shame, might be ashamed of them. For what can be more false, and malicious,
then to say, that the Pope stirs up Catholics, to swear and subscrybe the
Protestant, and to abjure the Catholic Religion, against their Consciences?
That he stirs them up, to use the Protestants Sacraments, and that of
purpose, to subvert their religion, under hope of his dispensation? First, the
Catholic Church has ever constantly taught, with S. Paul, that no evil is to
be done, Romans 3. v. 8.
that good may come of it, and therefore, much less is the greatest of evils
to be done, such as is, the renouncing of the Catholic faith, and swearing of
a contrary Religion, against the light of a man's conscience. Secondly, she
condemned the Helchesits, in the primitive times, Eusebius. lib 6. cap. 31.
as Heretics; for affirming, that it was lawful to Christians, to deny
Christ externally, in the time of torments and persecution. Thirdly, the Popes,
of whom, the Puritans think no sin to lie, are so far from stirring up
Catholics, to do the forsaid abominations, that they earnestly dehort them
from approaching to the least degree of such impiety. Which, to p^sse by other
Instances, may be known by the Breviat of Pope Paul the fifth, directed to the
English Catholics, in October, 1606. Where he says: We have understood, that
you are compelled by the threatenings of most grievous pains, to go unto the
Temples of Heretics, to frequent their Meetings, to be present at their
Sermons: Truly we undoubtedly believe, that those, who, with so great Constancy
and courage have suffered most fierce persecutions, and almost infinite
miseries, will never trespass so, as to be defiled with the society of the
desertors of the Divine Law. Nevertheless, We, being stirred up by the zeal of
our Pastoral charge, and out of the Fatherly care we have, of the Salvation of
your souls, are forced to admonish and earnestly beseech you: that, by no
means, you would go unto the Temples of Heretics, or hear their Sermons, or
communicate with them in Rites: least you incur the wrath of God. For it is
not lawful for you, to do these things, without the damage of the Divin
worship, and of your own Salvation. If the Pope dehorts so earnestly the
Catholics, from going to the heretics Temples; how much more does he dehort
them, from abiuring the Catholic faith, and from receiving the Puritans
Sacraments? If the Pope only connived at such actions, it would be a lie and
calumny great enough, to say, he stirred up Catholics to do them. But it is
a monstrous lie and calumny, to say, he stirs up men to do such
abominations, when he stirs them up to the contrary. Neither can the
Covenanters ever show, that any Pope did otherwise, since ever the Protestant
religion began. The Catholics believe, that God has such a care of his
Church, that it needs not, by periuries, dissimulations, or any false ways, to
be advanced: and they know also, that all heretical Churches need not, by such
unjust means, to be by them subverted. For, by their own divisions, they are
sufficient to subvert themselves; as long experience has showed. Lastly, it is
false, that these Catholics, who, against their consciences, renounce their
religion; do it upon hopes of the Popes Dispensation: For all Catholics know,
that the Pope, as he himself professes, cannot dispense in any thing, that is
intrinsecally evil, and against the eternal Law of God; as that action is, in
the highest degree. All which may be known to moderate Protest^nts, even by the
Confession of Apostat Catholics.

Therefore, these being so groundless lies, and malicious calumnies, the
Covenant did well to begin them with the Father of lies; for thus it speaks:
And, seeing many are stirred up by Satan and the Roman Antichrist, etc. But it
had been no lie, if the Ministers had been yoaked with the Devil in that work:
For they have concurred oftentimes with him, to draw and force diverse
Catholics, to renounce their faith, against their consciences: as has been
known by many late experiences, since the Covenant began.

But it is strange, to see famous Protestants, yea, and the very same Accusers,
guilty of the same Crimes, which they falsely lay to the charge of others, which
may be showed by their own Monuments. Who is esteemed a more famous Protestant,
then Queen Elizabeth, the Foundresse of the Late English Church? And yet she is
taxed by M. Knox, for faigning her self to have been a Papist, for bowing to
Idolatry, Knox Chron. page 226
and going to Mass, all the time of her Sister Queen Mary's reign. It is
known also, how shortly, after her sisters death, she subverted, all that in
her lay, the Catholic religion; albeit she swear to maintain it, at her
Coronation. Who gave her Dispensation to use such dissimulation in religion?
Surely it was not the Pope; but rather she, as head of her own Church, which is
now also subverted, did dispense with her self. It is yet fresh in all men's
memory, how many of the Puritans did swear obedience to their Bishops, and
conformity to the late English Churches orders: and yet, when time served, they
subverted both. who gave them Dispensations for such hypocrisies and periuries?
That is one of their rare privileges, that they all, and every one of them, by
more then Papal power, can dispense with themselves: as Becan shows, in a
special Treatise of their Privileges.

The third gross untruth of the Covenant, follows, in these words. We
therefore, willing to take away all suspicion of hypocrisy, and of such double
dealing with God and his Kirk, protest, and call the Searcher of all hearts to
witness, that our Minds and hearts do fully agree, with this our Confession,
oath, and subscription: so that we are not moved, for any worldly respect, but
are persuaded only in our Consciences, etc. As the^ the foundation was false,
so is this fabrique which is raised on it. For the most rigid Covenanters know,
that many thousand Protestants were made to put their hands to the Covenant,
whose hearts were far from it: and when they could, show both their hearts and
hands against it. And they were so far, from being moved, without worldly
respects; that for these only, they were induced to take the Covenant; and, so
soon as these failed, they abandoned it.

By all which, it is evident, that this Covenant, which contains so many
gross lies and Calumnies, against very sense and experience, cannot be the
Covenant of God; who Loves truth, and hates lies.

SECTION II. That the Covenant is not a Confession, but a Denial of the Faith.
THE Covenant carries this Title in print. The National Covenant, or Confession
of Faith, etc. But it appeared very soon to us, not to deserve that Title; but
rather that it ought to be called; a Confossion, or Denial of the faith, which
it deny's not simply, but with many horrible execrations and blasphemies.

All heresies are of a Malignant Nature, consisting in denial of some points of
the Catholic faith: But there are some, which deny fewer, and others more
points of it. In the primitive times, some heresies were cast out of the
Church, for one word only against the faith: But the Covenant and Presbyterian
religion deny almost all the points of the Catholic faith. For they run
through heaven and earth, the Church Triumphant and Militant, they leave
neither God nor man, the Angels nor the Saints, the living nor the dead
untouched: but they rob every one of them, of some excellent privilege. For
they spoil God of his goodness, by making him the Author of sin: Christ of
his merits, by denying he dyed for all; and the holy Trinity of Glory. They
spoil the Angels and the Saints of their felicity, and of all respect and
reverence from men They rob the Church of the continual assistance of the Holy
Ghost; Man of his free will, the living of the prayers of the Saints, and the
faithful departed of the suffrages of the living. They rob the Sacraments of
Grace, and the Commandments of obedience. Yea, what have they left untouched,
in the Church? They have taken away many books of the Scriptures, almost all
the Sacraments, all Traditions, Priesthood, Sacrifice Vows, set Fasts,
Festival Days, Altars, Relics, Holy Images, all Monuments of Piety, all the
ancient Ecclesiastical Laws, all Order and Discipline, all Comeliness and
beauty from the House of God. They have abolished the Apostolic Government,
denied the Apostles Creed, subverted the Divine Commandments, and abiured all
the Evangelical Counsels, and many more points have they destroyed, as we shall
see, in the progress of the Covenant; so, that never any heresy deserved more
the title of Destroyer, never any heretical Confession of Faith deserved so
much the Title of the Negation of Faith, as the Covenant. For never any heresy,
or negative Confession denied so many points of the Catholic faith; and so
overturned the Christian Religion, both in doctrine and discipline, and in all
the Monuments and helps of Piety.

As the matter of the Covenant is very large, containing so many points of the
Catholic Faith, which it deny's; so the manner, how it does renounce them
(which is as it were the life and form of the Covenant) is very considerable.
For it does not only deny these articles: but it detests and abiures them, yea
and blasphemes them, adding a blasphemous Epithet, almost to every point. For
thus it speaks: We renounce and detest the Usurped authority of the Roman
Antichrist, his wicked Hierarchy, his Devilish Mass, Blasphemous Priesthood,
Profane Sacrifice, Bastard Sacraments, Doubtsome Faith, Desperate Repentance,
etc.

Behold, said the Catholic to me, what a Rapsodie of lies and calumnies,
against manifest sense and experience, against the ancient faith and true
religion was fathered upon God the Author of truth, and was called his
Covenant! Behold, what a blasphemous Negation of the Faith, was entitled the
Confession of Faith! Behold, what a monstrous Idol of lies, execrations and
blasphemies, the Covenanters did so highly honor and reverence, as if it had
been Gods undoubted truth: and not only did Idolatrize it themselv's: but, with
furious zeal and rigor, enforced others, to adore, it against their
Consciences, S. Cyptian affirms, that the Devil, Cypr. de sim^l. Praelator.
Hieron in Esaia^ c. 21.
in place of the old Pagan Idols, has invented the deceits of Errors and
Heresies: and S. Hierom says: that all Heretics are Idolaters, adoring their
own fictions, and imaginatio s, as divin truths. According to this doctrine, if
the Covenant contain heresies (as we shall see it contains not a few) the
Covenanters have been great idolaters. The old Pagans did indeed adore false
Gods and the works of their own hands: but never any, carrying the name o Christians, did more Idolatrize the fancies of their own brains, then the
Covenanters have done. The prosperity of the Covenant for a time, did blind
many: but now, the Visitation, which God has sent upon it, has opened the ey's
of a great part; so that the Covenant, which was before the object of their
greatest reverence and respect, is now become the subject of their laughter and
sport. The Prophet Jeremy foretells, that these miseries should befalls to all
Idols. They are vain things, Jeremy 10.15. Hieron. ^u hunc lo^um.
says he, and a work worthy to be laughed at: in time of their Visitation they
shall perish. Which words S. Hierom applies excellently to Heresies. Who would
not laugh, says he, when he considers the Idols of Heretics? etc. Heresies
prevail only, for a time, that these, who are chosen, may be made manifest,
and be approved. But, when the Visitation of God comes, and his eyes do behold
their fooleries, then all are quiet and si^e it. And so now is the Covenant,
silent, and fallen asleep.

But enough, for our intended brevity, of the false Titles of the Covenant, and
of the gross untruths in it, against sense. We shall now run briefl^ through
the Spiritual untruths of it against Faith.

SECTION III. Of the Covenantes vain pretext of the word and Spirit of God: and
of the marks, by which they describe their Religion.
THAT this matter may proceed more clearly, we shall set down in order the
words of the Covenant; and then subioyn the Observations we made upon them. The
Preface then of it goes thus.

Covenant. We all, and every one of us underwritten protest, that, after long
and due examination of our Consciences, in matters of true and false religion.
We are now, thoroughly resolved of the truth, by the word and Spirit of God:
And therefore, we believe, with our hearts, confess with our mouths, subscribe
with our hands, and constantly affirm, before God and the whole world, that
this only is the true Christian faith and Religion, pleasing God, and bringing
salvation to man, which now is, by tho mercy of God, revealed to the world, by
the preaching of the blessed Evangel, and received, believed, and defended by
many and sundry notable Kirks and Realms: but chiefly by the Kirk of Scotland,
the Kings Majesty, and the three Estates of this Realm as Gods eternal Truth,
and only ground of our Salvation: as more particularl^ is confessed in the
Confession of our faith established, and publicly confirmed by Sundry Acts of
Parliament: and now, of a long time, has been openly professed by the Kings
Majesty, and whole body of this Realm, both in Burgh and Land. To the which
Confession and form of Religion, we willingly agree in our Consciences, in all
points, as unto Gods undoubted Truth, and Verity grounded only upon his written
word.

To pass by the first sensible untruth, about the long and due examination of
their consciences, which was lately touched; they pretend next, that they are
fully persuaded of the truth of their Religion, by the word and Spirit of God.
But this is no new song, neither is it only peculiar to them. All sects,
although never so monstrous, which received the Scriptures, have made, and do
make the same pretexts: And this they must all do, or else they would get few
followers. But that the Covenanters make this pretext as falsely, as any other
sects, is very evident. For first, they falsely pretend to be persuaded of the
truth of their Religion, by the word of God, seeing they believe diverse points,
as principal articles of their religion, which are expressly against the word of
God. Which may be shown by many Instances: but we shall be content with two or
three. The Covenanters believe, as the principal article of their religion,
that man is justified by faith only, which is clearly against the word of God,
which says in express terms: Man is not justified by faith only. James 2.24.
They believe, that the Commandments are impossible to be kept: Which is
against the word of God, which affirms that Gods Commandments are not
grievous, 1. John. 5.3.
and that Zachary and Elizabeth did keep them. They believe, that the Eucharist
is not the body and blood of Jesus Christ: Luke 1 6.
which is directly against the Scripture, which affirms: It is his body and
blood: and that, with such words, as design the true body and true blood.
Therefore, it is evident, that they cannot be persuaded of the truth of their
religion, by the Word of God, seeing the principal articles of their religion
are so clearly against the word of God. Yea, before their religion can be true,
the most clear truth in all the Scriptures must be false, to wit: the
perpetuity of the Church of Christ. For their whole religion is founded upon
that supposition, that the whole Church of Christ had become Antichristian,
and had perished, for a long time, before Luther: Then which, nothing can be
more against the word of God, as we have seen above. Neither have the
Covenanters any other refuge, to shun these contradictions, between their
belief and the Scriptures, but to fly unto tropes and figures, and pretend,
that these places of Scripture must be understood figuratively: which is the
very fraud, that was used by the ancient heretics. So soon, Aug. lib 3. de
doct. Christian. 6.10.
says S. Augustine, as any Error does prepossesse their mynds: they esteem all
to be figures, which the Scripture says to the contrary. Yea, they must bring
senses, just contrary unto the words of the Scriptures: as for example, the
Scripture says: Man is not justified by faith only, which, according to their
belief, must be understood, as if the Scripture said, Man is justified by faith
only: which it nowhere says. Therefore, if men can be persuaded by the
Scripture, to believe such things, as are contrary to the express words of
Scripture; the Covenanters are persuaded by the Scripture, of the truth of
their religion: otherwise they are not; but rather persuaded to the contrary.

Secondly, they come as small speed of their pretext, of the Spirit of God. For
first they can bring no more ground for it, then all sects do, that is their
own bare words: and therefore, they ought not to be believed more, then others.
Secondly, They cannot be persuaded, by the Spirit of God, who oppose the
Catholic Church, which, according to Christ's promise, is ever directed by the
Spirit of Truth. S. John, who advises us wisely, not to believe every Spirit;
but to prove the Spirits, if they be of God, gives this Touchstone, by which
they may be tried. He that knows God, 1. John c. 4. v. 6.
says he, knows us, and he that is not of God, knows us not. In this, we
know the Spirit of Truth and of Error. This same Touchstone has held in all
succeding generations. For these, who would not believe the Catholic Church,
and the Pastors thereof, succeeding unto the Apostles: although they bragged
never so much, of the Spirit of God, were instantly seen to be misled by the
Spirit of Error, and were condemned as heretics; who, with insolent folly,
would appropriat the Spirit of God unto every one of their own giddie heads,
and yet deny it to the whole Catholic Church, against the clear Scriptures
The same holds against Calvin and his descendents, the Presbyterian
Covenanters. Thirdly, They cannot have the Spirit of God, which is the Spirit
of Unity, who have mingled among them, the Spirit of giddiness, and
Contrariety: by which their Erroneous Spirit is discovered now, even to the
most simple among the people. Lastly, the Covenanters falsely pretend that they
are fully persuaded, of the truth of their religion. For, if they had full
assurance of it, they would not make so many changes in it: and besides, their
Director is very unconstant: for what is more changeable, then the private
Spirit?

Having seen now, said the Catholic, the Covenanters vain and false pretense
of the word and Spirit of God, we will briefly run through the description of
their religion: and, to spare pains of often repeating their names, we will
turn our speech to them. First, you say: that your faith and religion is the
only true faith, and religion pleasing God, and bringing Salvation to man. If
this were true, the world, for many ages had been in a pitiful condition.
For, about the space of a thousand, or 12. hundred years, your faith and
religion were not known; and so all that time, there had been no means of
salvation. By which device, you not only control the clear Scriptures: but
also show your selves enemies to the Glory of Christ, to the riches of his
Grace, and to the perpetuity of his Kingdom, yea and to the very good of Man.
And lastly you oppose most famous Protestants, who acknowledge, Salvation was
had in the Roman Church, before Luther; and may be had now after him; in so
much, that King James, in his speech to the Parliament, 1605. sharply censures
you, for this cruel opinion. We confess, says he, that many Papists,
(especially our Ancestors,) etc. may be saved: and often are saved: detesting,
in this part, and judging worthy of fire the cruelty of Puritans, who yield
Salvation to no Papist. Secondly, you describe your religion further, saying
that it is now reveald to the world, by the preaching of the Evangel. But that
is rather a mark of the false, then of the true religion. For the true
Christian faith was reveald of old, by Christ and his holy Apostles; and from
that time, could never be hid: But your Presbyterian faith has just two
contrary qualities, to wit: it is now revealed, and has lain long hid. S.
Vincentius Lyrinensis shows the nature of your faith, by describing the
doctrine of the ancient Heretics. What do they propose, says he, Vincent
Lyr. cont. haeres. c. 12.
but new and unheard doctrines. For you shall hear some of them say. Come o
you unwise and miserable men, (who are commonly called Catholics) and learn
the true faith, which, besides us, none knows; which has lain hidd many ages,
but now is lately revealed and manifested. Neither does it a white avail you,
that you call your faith the Gospel; and the revealing of your faith, the
preaching of the Gospel. For so, all heretics call their greatest Errors, the
Gospel of Christ. S. Hierom says wisely, that the Gospel of God, Hieron. 1. ad
Galat.
by a false interpretation, becames the Evangel of man: or, which is wo^se, the
Evangel of the Devil. So there still remains a great question about the truth
of your preaching; which is nothing but your private interpretation.

Thirdly, to make your faith more commendable, you pretend, that it is both
ancient and Universal. You pretend Universality, when you say, that your faith
is believed, received, and defended, by many Notable Kirks and Realms, but
chiefly by the Kirk of Scotland. Next you lay claim to a certain kind of
Antiquity, when you say, that it has been of a long time openly professed.
Such is the evidence of Truth, that Enemies to it are sometimes enforced, to
make use, or rather a show of it.

But to speak first of the universality of your faith: where are all these many
notable Realms and Kirks, which you affirm do profess your religion? In
Europe no such Kingdoms can be found. For Swedland and Denmark are known to be
Lutherians, who have neither Unity of faith with you, nor Communion in
Sacraments, and abhor the very name of Calvin, and of all Sacramentaries. The
Realm and late Church of England maintaind the Hierarchy of the Church,
abhorring very much the Anarchy of your Presbytery: and now, since England
became a Commonwealth, it hates nothing more then the Soule-Tyranny, as it is
commonly called there, of your Presbytery. The other famous Kingdoms of Europe
are either totally, or for the much greater part, Roman Catholics: So that,
the many Notable Realms of your religion, are as yet invisible, unless you
would count all those to be of your religion, who are not Papists, or who go
under the general name of Protestants. But that cannot be done; for the
Universality of a Church requires Unity in faith, and Communion in Sacraments,
which you evidently want, with a great part of Protestant Churches. And
therefore, knowing that you want this Unity; you wisely pretend, that this
faith, which you so much praise, is chiefly professed by the Kirk of Scotland.
For every one of you pretends to be chief, and will not yield to another.

Then you come as little speed of your Antiquity. For all the long time, that
your faith was professed, from the beginning of your Reformation, to the first
making of the Covenant, is but about 20. years, and as yet to this day, it has
not past the bounds of one Age. If you had the Universality and Antiquity of
the Catholic Church, how would you glory; when you make such a stir, with
your fewness and Novelty? For your one Kingdom, and your one hundred years,
in which your religion has been professed: we can show you the same Kingdom,
professing the Catholic religion, above 14. hundred years; and all the famous
Christian Kingdoms and Countries of the world, making the same profession,
even to the first time of their Conversion, from Infidelity to Christianity.
And for your one King, mentioned in your Covenant, which he took in his younger
years; disproveing it, when he became more ripe: as appears in the Conference,
at Hampton Court; we can show you 80. Kings of the same Nation, diverse of
which are glorious Saints in heaven, who lived and dyed in the Catholic
Profession; To whom we may add, all the famous Christian Kings and Emperors,
that have been in the world.

But, albeit you were more spread, then you are: you would find no great
advantage by it: S. Augustine compareing you, with good reason, to smoke, Aug.
sermon. 2. in. Psalm. 36.
which does vanish so much the sooner, by how much it is greater, and more
dilated abroad. This we have seen verifyed, in our time. For the late Church of
England, intending to dilate her self in Scotland, did shortly thereafter
vanish like smoke in England. Again, the Scottish Presbytery, endeavoring
with great zeal, to propagate it self in England, lost soon much of its fyrie
force in Scotland. Secondly, Antiquity of your religion would tend no less to
your ruin: for, as S. Hierom has observed, all heresies please only men for a
time, and when they grow old, they wear out of request as may be known, by the
many alterations of religion, that have happened in Scotland; but especially in
England, since their public fall from the Catholic religion.

Then, for Acts of Parliament, whereby you say your faith is confirmed; they
cannot be very many, seeing the religion is so late: neither can they give great
confirmation to a religion: because they are very changeable. We see one
Protestant Parliament has ransacted the Kings Su^remacy, which many Protestant
Parliaments had enacted: and that, which was before declared Heresy, if not
Treason, to deny, is now judged both great folly and Treason to affirm. The
true religion is warranted by a higher authority, then by earthly Courts: But
the Protestant religions are made, and unmade, by Protestant Parliaments.

The last point here proposed contains three untruths linked together; as
where you say, that you all willingly agree in all points: All the Horologes of
the world will sooner agree, then your wills. When coercive power is now taken
out of your hands, you see, how many do willingly and freely disagree from you.
Then you call all the points of your faith, Gods undoubted truth, which they
cannot be, besides other reasons; because many Protestants doubt of diverse of
them, yea they think them undoubted falsehoods: and besides, yourselves are
often changeing them: which shows, that many articles of your faith are
doubtsome; and your faith of them is nothing, but mere opinion.

Lastly, it is most false, that all your faith is grounded only upon the
written word: because you believe some things, without the word of God, as the
changeing of the Sabbath into Sunday, the baptizing of infants; and, which is
more, you believe some points against the express word of God; as your article
of Justification by faith only, to speak nothing of diverse others. And
moreover, you lay down a false ground, when you profess to believe nothing, 2.
These. 2.15.
but what is containd in the Scriptures, whereas they expressly bid you: Hold
fast the Traditions.

Thus we have seen all your pretenses; as about the word and Spirit of God, the
Universality and Antiquity, of your faith (by which you would make it more
commendable) to be false and groundless. Now we shall see, how bitterly you
renounce and accurse the Catholic faith.

SECTION IV. Of the Popes Supremacy: where it is showed, that the Pope is not
Antichrist, nor an Usurper: as the Covenanters do calumniate.
AFTER the former Preface, follow these words of the

Covenant. And therefore, we abhor and detest all contrary Religion and
Doctrine; but chiefly all kind of Papistry, in general and particular heads,
even, as they are now damned and confuted, by the word of God, and Kirk of
Scotland. But in special, we detest and refuse the Usurped Authority of the
Roman Anti Christ, upon the Scriptures of God, upon the kirk, the Civil
Magistrate, and Consciences of men, etc.

Here you ingenuously confess your selves, to have one quality, which all
heretics have ever had; to hate and detest most the Catholic religion. And
your practice shows, this your Confession to be true. For, albeit any person
become a Socinian, Anabaptist, or Atheist; you take no great notice of him;
but, if you hear of any, that is become a Papist, he is sure to get no more
rest. Next, as you falsely pretended your faith to be contained in the word of
God: so now, as groundlesly, you pretend, the Catholic faith to be condemned
by the same word, which, as yet, you could never make good, in any one point.
It is true indeed, that the Catholic Church is condemned by the Church of
Scotland: But it is as true, that the Church of Scotland is condemned by the
Catholic Church, which is of far greater authority, and which has judged and
condemned all former Heresies, and Triumphed over them.

Now follows your dismal song, with your abiurations and detestations of the
Faith, Order, and Discipline of the Catholic Church; and first, you strick at
the Visible head and Governor of it, under Christ, whom you call Antichrist:
detesting his Authority, which you call usurped. The principal reason, for
which you believe this strange article of your faith, to wit, that the Pope is
Antichrist, is, because he claims Primacy over other Bishops, and extends his
care over the whole Church, which he affirms to be committed to his charge, as
unto S. Peter's Successor. If your reason were good, then S. Peter himself had
been the first Antichrist: For both the Scriptures and Fathers show, that he
received from Christ, the primacy over the other Apostles, and that the care of
the whole Church was entrusted to him. S. Matthew shows, that Peter was the
first of the Apostles. The names, says he, Math. 10, 2.
of the Apostles are these: the first S^mon, who is called Peter. Now Peter was
not first in calling, but in preeminence. For (as S. Ambrose says in 2. Cor.
12.) Andrew first followed our Savior, before Peter: and yet the Primacy
Andrew received not, but Peter. The same is showed by the change of his name,
which Christ promised in the 1. of S. John, and thereafter performed, Math. 16.
in S Matthew: where he said: Thou art Peter, or a Rock, and upon this Rock,
will I build my Church etc. And I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom
of heaven, etc. This change of the name of Simon into Peter, foretold by
Christ, and thereafter performed by him, is not without great mystery: and
these excellent privileges, which our Savior promised to him, of the keys of
the Kingdom of heaven, and of binding and loosing, do show, that he was
particularly to grace and advance him, above others, which he performed after
his resurrection; when he said to him: Feed my sheep, feed my Lambs; giving him
thereby the charge of his whole flock. 5. John 21.16.
The same Supremacy of S. Peter may be showed, by many other preeminences,
recorded in Scripture; as how Christ prayed particularly for him, that his
faith might not fail, and paid Tribut for him: but for brevities sake, they
are omitted.

Now, we shall briefly see, how the holy Fathers understood these Scriptures.
S. Gregory the great says: Greg. lib ^. ^p^st 7 ^
It is manifest to all persons, who know the Gospel; that, from our Lords own
mouth, the ^^re of the whole Church was (...) to S. Peter, the Prince of the
Apostles: for to For what end, says he, did Christ shed his blood; Chrysostom.
lib. 2. de Sacerdotio. Aug. epist. 86.
but that he might purchase these sheep, the care of which he committed to S.
Peter, and his successors. S. Augustine calls S. Peter, the Head of the
Apostles, the Gate-keeper of heaven, and the Foundation of the Church. S.
Cyprian says: Cypr. epist. ad Julian.
We hold Peter, the Head and Root of the Church. And, in a word, all the holy
Fathers affirm the same. They do likewise acknowledge, that the Bishops of Rome
are S. Peter successors, in that supreme Authority. S. Athanasius, writing to
Pope Liberius, says: Athanas epist ad liber. and Ep. ad Felicem.
For this cause, the Universal Church is committed to you by our Lord Jesus,
that you should labor for all men. And again, writing to Pope Felix, he says:
Thou art Peter, and upon thy foundation, the Pillars of the Church, that is,
the Bishops are fortified. S. Augustine says: Aug. ep. 165.
in the Roman Church, the Principality of the Apostolic Chair did ever
flourish. And elsewhere: Number the Priests from the Sea of Peter, Aug. in psalm.
cont. part. Donati.
and in that order of Fathers, see, who succeeded to another. This is the Rock,
which the proud gates of hell do not overcome. To which we shall only add the
testimony of S. Bernard, who writes thus to Eugenius. Thou art he, to whom the
keys of heaven are delivered, ^ern. l. 2. de consid. c. 8.
and to whom the sheep are committed: there be other Porters of heaven, and
other Pastor of flocks but thou ^^st ^^^erited, in more glorious and different
sort: For they have every (...) their particular s^ock: but to thee all
Vniver-^^^ (...) of all the Pastors themselves. But thou will ask me, how I
prove that? even by our Lords word. For, to whom of all, I say, not only
Bishops, but Apostles were the sheep so absolutely, and without limitation
committed? If thou love me, Peter, feed my sheep. He says not the people of
this kingdom, or that City; but my sheep, without all distinction. So S.
Bernard. By which Authorities and Testimonies, both of the Scriptures and
Fathers, you see, what solid ground the Popes authority has, that it was
conferred by Christ on S. Peter; and that it has been acknowledged by the holy
Fathers and Christian world, in the Bishops of Rome his Successors. Therefore
you very rashly have rejected this authority, which has been established and
confirmed, by Christ's special providence, unto this day; but more wickedly do
you call it an usurped Tyranny, and believe the Pope (for vindicating and
exercising the same authority) to be the great Antichrist; whereas you ought
to acknowledge him, to be the Vicar of Christ. These, who honor and reverence
the Authority of the Bishops of Rome, and of the Apostolic Sea, follow the
example of all the holy Fathers and ancient good Christians: but these, who
now a days endeavor to dishonor and revile them, have the Heretics for
their Predecessors, who never carried good will to them. S. Augustine shows,
that the Donatists called the Apostolic Sea, the Chair of Pestilence: but
that is nothing, to the Epithets of the Covenanting Ministers. Who ex^eed, in
railings and blasphemies, all that ever spoke: when they fall upon this point;
making thereby the simple people believe, that Antichristian article of their
faith, that the Pope is Antichrist. But the holy Fathers took it for an
undoubted mark, that these, who did not acknowledge the Popes authority, and
were not of his Communion, belonged not to Christ, but to Antichrist. S.
Hierom, writing to S, Damasus, says: who gathers not with thee, scatters:
that is, who it not Christ's, is Antichrists.

Having now seen, that the Pope (whom the Covenanters call maliciously
Antichrist) is the Vicar of Christ: it remains evident, that his Authority is
lawful, and not usurped. For he, who is a just Possessor, is no Usurper. Yea
he has been so far, from usurping over the Scriptures, the Church, etc. that he
has chiefly preserved them, from the Usurpations and corruptions of Heretics.
And first, it is showed, that he does not vsurp over the Scriptures, as the
Covenanters do calumniate: For he neither Vsurps over the letter, nor the sense
of them. Not the first. For both the Pope and whole Catholic Church profess,
that they only declare, that to be Scripture, which they received for such,
from the holy Apostles: and it is by their care and diligence, that the letter
of the Scripture has descended pure, and free from corruptions, unto our hands:
whereas, it might have been altogether corrupted, or totally perished, for
Protestants. Neither do the Pope, or Catholic Church vsurp over the sense of
the Scriptures: but they preserve that sense, which is conform to the Vanimous
consent of the ancient fathers, and of the Primitive Church. Secondly, the
Pope does not vsurp over the Church: because the care and charge of it was
committed by Christ, to S. Peter, and to his Successors: as we have seen: and
he preserves the Church, from the Usurpation of Heretics. Thirdly, He does
not vsurp over the Civil Magistrate. The experience of many ages, in all
Christians Kingdoms and Commonwealths, is more then sufficient, to make this
good: and to manifest the impudent falsehood of the Presbyterian calumny, to
the contrary. Fourthly, The Pope does not vsurp over the Consciences of men,
but as chief Governor of the Church, has lawful authority to make
Ecclesiastical Laws, which bind in Conscience; as also all the just Laws of
Kings and other Civil Magistrates do bind in Conscience, to which their subjects
ought to obey, according to that of S. Paul: Be subject, not only for wrath,
but also for Conscience sake. Romans 13.5.
And the contrary doctrine of Protestants, which affirms, that neither the
Laws of Church, Kings, or other Magistrates do bind in conscience, is much
detested by the Catholic Church, and opens a broad way to all disobedience.

But now, it will not be amiss to show, how you are destitute of all lawful
authority and deeply guilty of the same Usurpations, which you falsely impose on
others. First, all heretics, who go out of the Church, and having no lawful
calling, or authority, take upon them to be Pastors, and impose their new
doctrines and Laws, upon the Church, are truly Usurpers, and are called
Thieves by our Savior; who enter not by the door, but climb up another way.
So S. Optatus speaks to the Donatists: How comes it to pass, Opt. lib. 2.
cont. Parmen.
says he, that you, who are fighting against the Chair of Peter, by your
presumptions and Sacrilegious boldness, contend to Vsurp the keys of the
Kingdom to your selves. Thus Luther and Calvin, the two chief. Apostles of
Protestants, were Usurpers; who, being private men, without any lawful
calling, or authority, would bring in new doctrines, and prescribe laws to the
whole Catholic Church. And in this, the Covenanting Ministers do imitate
them. Secondly, they usurped in particular, over both the letter and sense of
the Scriptures. For Luther added the word Only to them, in the matter of
Justification, and took the whole Epistle of S. James, and the Apocalypse from
them. Calvin also, by his private Spirit, made up a new Canon, not known before
his time: expunging many books avnciently received, out of the Scriptures:
which new Rule the Covenanters follow. Then, for the sense, they transgressed
the bounds set by the Fathers, rejecting the ancient sense preserved by the
Catholic Church, and invented new senses of their own imaginations, which
they enforced upon others, as divine Truths. In this also, you Covenanting
Ministers, have followed closely their footsteps. For you have been no less
fertile, in inventing such new senses; then active, in enforceing them upon
others. Thirdly, your pretended Reformers were Usurpers over the Church, who,
having no lawful calling, nor authority, took upon them to be Reformers of
the Church: who would impose their own fancies, as laws and divine Oracles on
the Church: who insolently* would take upon them, to judge and condemn the
whole Catholic Church; and who, under pretext of Reformation, have destroyed
almost all that is sacred* in the Church; barbarously destroying many excellent
Churches, and Sacrilegiously usurping and plundering the riches and Ornaments
of them. This Luther and Calvin did, at the beginning, and this you have
completed in a great measure, above all their progeny. Fourthly, you are also
very guilty of Usurpation, over the Civil Magistrate. The late riseing of your
religion cannot furnish us old histories: but for your short time, you have
been pretty bussie, and afford us a good store. For, in our Country, there
have been only 3. or 4. Princes, since your religion Began, and none of them
has been exempt from your Usurpation. First, The Queen Regent was deposed by
you, from her Regency, and died shortly thereafter, for grief. Secondly, How
you used her daughter, Queen Mary Stewart, it is notoriously known to the
world: For, after you had imprisonned her, and enforced her to renounce her
Crown; you never desisted; till, by persecuting of her unto death, you made
her purchase a more glorious Crown, and yet, by your calumnies, after her
death, augment her glory in heaven. Thirdly, Basili. con. Doron.
How you Usurped over King James her Son, he himself has registered, to your no
small infamy. And albeit you did not prevail against him; yet, you have paid
home that deficiency with Usury, to his Son the late King Charles. By this may
be seen, whither the Pope or you do Vsurp more, over the Civil Magistrate.
Lastly, you have been great Usurpers over men's Consciences, as may be known (to
pass by all other instances) by your furious vrgeing this same Covenant, upon
many Protestants, against their Consciences: for which, they give you the Title
of Soule-Tyrants.

By all which, may be seen, that you are very guilty of the same Usurpations,
which you falsely object to others.

SECTION V. That the Laws of the Catholic Church are not Tyrannous, nor her
doctrine, concerning the Scriptures, and office of Christ, erroneous.
AFTER you have renounced the Popes authority, as unlawful, then you renounce
his Laws as Tyrannous, and the doctrine of the Catholic Church, concerning
the Scriptures and the office of Christ, as Erroneous. For thus you speak in
your Covenant:

We detest all his Tyrannous Laws, made upon indifferent things, against our
Christian liberty. His Erroneous doctrine, against the sufficiency of the
written word, the perfection of the Law, the office of Christ, and his blessed
Evangel.

If you renounce all laws, made upon indifferent things, pretending, that they
are against your Christian liberty: then you renounce the most part of all
Laws, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, (which are ordinarily, upon such matters)
and, in a certain manner, restrain liberty. Then you may renounce also the
Laws of the Apostles: Acts 15.
for they made some, upon indifferent things; as to abstain from things
strangled, and from blood; giving them out in the name of the holy Ghost, and
commanding them to be kept by the first Christians: which Laws, albeit they
restrained liberty; yet they were not against Christian liberty, which
co^sists principally in three things, to wit, in freedom from the slavery of
sin: in freedom from the fear and servitude of the Moral Law, by receiving the
gift of Charity, through Christ's grace, whereby we willingly and
ioyfully-fullfill the Law: and lastly, in freedom from the bondage of the
Jewish Ceremonial Law, which S. Peter calls a heavy yoke. These are the
liberties, wherewith Christ has made us free (as was shown me, at more length)
and are not, as the Covenanters do imagine, a liberty to do, what every man
lists, or to be under no obedience of Spiritual, or Temporal Laws. Against
which licentious liberty S. Peter gives warning, in these words: Be subject
unto every humane Creature, for God, 1. Pet. 2.13.
etc. as free, and not as having freedom, for a cloak of malice. And S. Paul
to the Galatians: You are called brethren into liberty: Gal. 5.13.
only make not this liberty an occasion to the flesh, etc. Now all the Laws
of the Catholic Church, against which the Ministers make heaviest complaints,
as about lentfasting, abstinence from flesh on frydayes, the single life of
Church men, and the like, may be easily shown to have been observed, in the
primitive times, to be most just, nowayes Tyrannous, or against our Christian
liberty; but that they rather tend unto Christian perfection, which is the
greatest liberty of a Christian: and that the Ministers, who speak so much
against these holy Laws, make their liberty [as S. Paul speaks] an occasion
to the flesh, or as S. Peter says, a cloak of malice.

But it would indeed seem very strange, if it were not so ordinary among you,
that yourselves do such things, without all authority, which you blame in the
Catholic Church, unto which Christ has given so great authority. For have not
you, dureing the space of some few years, heaped up more Laws and decrees in
your Assemblies, then exceed all the body of the Canon Law? And yet you cannot
deny, but the most part of these Laws is made upon indifferent things, and
some of them, in the Judgment of many Protestants, upon false things: as your
Laws for swearing and subscribing the Covenant. You pretend much Christian
liberty, which you promised to the people; but indeed you kept them in more
then Jewish slaverie. For, to pass by many other instances, you would not
suffer the people, upon Sundays, after they had been much wearied, hearing
both your long some Sermons and prayers, to be seen on the streets, or to go
and recreat themselves in the fields: which truly was greater then a Iudaical
servitude. The Catholics find the yoke of Christ sweet, and the Laws of his
Church, their loving Mother, not heavy. But many Protestants find the yoke of
your Presbytery, which they esteem a cruel stepmother, to be very bitter, and
think your Laws, not only against their Christian liberty, but also
insupportable.

Now, we come to your other heavy accusations against the Catholic Church,
which, for brevities sake, we must only touch. You accuse her doctrine, as
Erroneous, against the sufficiency of the written word. But without all reason.
For she teaches, that the written word is sufficient in this sense, that it
contains immediately the substance of our faith, all the articles necessary
necessitate medij, for man's Salvation: and also it contains mediatly, all,
that we are to believe, in that it remits us to the Church, which it assures
us, is governed by the holy Ghost in all truth, Whence it evidently follows,
that we draw that truth out of the scriptures, which we draw out of the mouth
of the Church: for, whosoever deputes an other to speak for him, speaks
mediatly by his mouth. So S. Augustine reasons; Aug. lib. 1. cont. Cres. c. 33.
Albeit says he, we can produce no example of Scripture, concerning this
matter, yet hold we the truth of the same Scripture, seeing we do that, which is
conformable to the Universal Church, which the authority of the same Scripture
commends unto us. And in this sense, the written word is most sufficient. But
it is not sufficient in the common sense of heretics, who will have the dead
letter of the Scripture, to be sufficient, without having recourse to the
Catholic Church for the true sense of it: and who will have nothing to be
believed, but what is formally and expressly containd in it. For that is
directly against the Scriptures themselves, which refer us to the Church, and
bid us stand fast, and hold the Traditions: That is also against the doctrine of
the ancient Fathers. S. Chrysostom says: Chrysostom. on 2 Thessalonians. 2.
It is evident, that the Apostles did not deliver all things by writing, but
many things without; and those be as worthy credit, as the others. Epiphanius
says to the same purpose: We must use Traditions: Epiph. hares. 61.
for the Scriptures have not all things. That is contrary to the practice of
the Covenanters, who believe somethings without Scripture, and diverse points
against it: as we have seen above.

And lastly, it has furnished weapons to the Socinians and Anabaptists, to
fight against the Presbyterians, who now by experience, are become more wise,
then at the beginning. For in their new Confession of faith, at Westminster,
Confess. West. 6.1. art. 6.
they say: That the whole Counsel of God, concerning all things necessary to
Salvation, is either expressly set down in Scripture, or, by good and necessary
consequence, may be deduced from Scripture. So that the Scripture, which was
before sufficient, without Church and Traditions, is now not sufficient to
Salvation, without Logique and Consequences: which doctrine makes them fall into
another gross folly, to quite the Church, the pillar and ground of Truth, and
have recourse to Philosophy and fallible consequences; wherein these new sects
are not behind with them, but by the same principle, do undermine them.

You next accuse the Catholic Church of erroneous doctrine, against the
perfection of the Law, the office of Christ and of his Evangel: But you do not
make good your accusations: neither show you, wherein these pretended Errors do
consist. Yet it may be easily shown, that your accusations are false, and that
your selves are guilty of the same crimes. For the Catholic Church teaches,
that the Law of Christ is most perfect, and that the very substance of
perfection consists in keeping it, and that none can be perfect, without
fulfilling it. And albeit it be true, that she teaches, there be some
Evangelical Counsels, which make a man more perfect, then the precise keeping
of the Law: yet that doctrine is nothing against the perfection of the Law. For
this, was the doctrine of Christ, of S. Paul, and of the holy Fathers. Our
Savior, having said to the young man in the Gospel. If thou will enter into
life, Math. 19 18.21. 1 Cor. 7.38.
keep the Commandments: and receiving answer, that he had kept them all,
adioynd: if thou will be perfect, sell that thou have, and give it to the
poor. S. Paul also says: Who mary's, does well, but who mary's not does
better. S. Augustine upon our Saviors former words says: Our good Master
distinguished the Commandments of the Law, Aug. epist. 89. ad Hila.
from this more excellent perfection: For there he said: If thou will enter
into life, keep the Commandments: and here: if thou will be perfect, sell all.
By which, it may appear, that the doctrine of the Catholic Church in this
matter, being the same that Christ, his blessed Apostle, and the holy Fathers
taught, is not against the perfection of the Law. And the same may be made good
also by the light of reason. For every thing is perfect, when it has perfection
in its own degree: and so the Catholic Church teaches, that the Law of Christ
is most perfect in the nature of a Law, that no Law can be more perfect; and
that perfection consists essentially in keeping it. Which nowayes hinders, but
that there may be some works not commanded, but Counseled, which may be
preferred in perfection, to some works commanded, and so some Counsels may be
called more perfect, then the Commandments, which are about the same matter. As
for example: it is more perfect to sell all for the Love of God, which is only
a Counsel, then not to steal, which is a precept: As it is also more perfect,
to keep chastity, then to marie, and not commit adultery. Again, there are
some Counsels more perfect, then any of the Commandments, not in regard of the
external work, but of the internal charity, which they presuppose, and to which
they lead. For it presupposes a greater degree of perfection and charity, to
renounce all riches and pleasures, which are otherwise lawful, for the Love of
God; then to equal and prefer nothing to God, which is commanded. Therefore, as
the Catholic Church is free of Erroneous doctrine, against the perfection of
the Law; so we may justly infer, that your doctrine, which teaches, the Law
is impossible to be kept, is most erroneous against the very end, and
perfection of the Law; since it was made for that end to be kept: and it robs
men also of all perfection, which cannot be had without keeping the Law.

Then, for your other accusations about the office of Christ and the Evangel;
albeit you strive by such words, to affright the people: making them believe,
that the Pope and the Catholic Church are sworn Enemies to Christ and his
Gospel; yet it is well enough known, that Christ and his Gospel are more
honored in the Catholic Church, then among all the sects of the world. For
it is by her means, the Gospel has been preserved, and Christ's name has been
honored among all Nations, all which she alone has converted to the faith. But
you are enemies to all Christ's offices. For you would destroy his Kirgly
office, by making him a king many hundred years, without a kingdom, and, by
destroying the spirituel government thereof; bringing in place of it, the
Anarchy and confusion of your Pressbytery. You are Enemies also to his Priestly
office, by abolishing the daily Sacrifice; for the continuance of which, he is
called a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech. You are Enemies
likewise to his Prophetical office: For whereas he had Prophesied so clearly of
the perpetuity of his Church, that it cannot be hid, that it should be ever
governed by the Spirit of truth into all truth: You would make him a false
Prophet, by teaching that the Church had failed, had been many hundred years
invisible, and was fallen into Antichristian Errors. Lastly, albeit you
pretend to honor the Gospel, and make it the only rule of your faith; yet you
do just the contrary: because you deny what it affirms, and believe the
contrary to what it teaches in express terms, and you make it such a Rule,
that you frequently oppose your Judgments to it, as has been more then once
shown.

SECTION VI. That the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, concerning Original
Sin, Justification, and sanctification, is not corrupted: But that the
Prebyterian Doctrine is corrupted in all these points.
Covenant. WE detest his corrupted doctrine concerning Original sin, our
natural inhability and rebellion to Gods Law: our Justification by faith only,
our imperfect Sanctification and obedience to the Law.

As it is ordinary, for all those who are tainted with corrupt Errors, to call
these Catholics doctrines corrupted, which oppose their corruptions. So the
Covenanters here call the Catholic doctrine, concerning Original sin,
corrupted, which indeed is most pure, and op^oseth the most poisoned source of
almost all their corruptions. The Catholic Church teaches principally three
things in this matter, against the Errors of the Calvinists. First, that all
Children, as well of faithful, as of infidel parents, descending from Adam by
natural generation, do contract Original sin, and are borne in it: which is
against a corrupt doctrine of Calvin, who affirms, that the Children of the
faithful are borne Saints. Secondly, the Catholics teach, that Original sin
is quite taken away and purged in the Sacrament of Baptism: which is against
an other corruption of Calvin and his followers, who affirm, that Original sin
still remains in us, even after Baptism. Thirdly, the Catholic Doctors
ordinarily teach, that Original sin is nothing else; but a privation of original
justice or justifying grace, which was in the Superior part of the soul, which
is restored to us by the merits of Christ in the Sacrament of Baptism: which
is against a most corrupt Error of all Calvinists, who affirm, that Original
sin is nothing else, but concupiscence, or a pravitie of Nature, by which the
Image of God is utterly defaced in man, and by which Adam and his posterity
became Enemies to God, slaves to Satan, servants to sin. So do our Scottish
Ministers speak in their first Confession, article 3. Of the first two points,
something has been said above; and they are both evidently true by the
Scriptures and Fathers. For the Apostle S. Paul says, that all sin ^^d in Adam
and were borne the children of wrath. Ephesians. 2.3. Aug. lib. 2. de peccator.
remiss. c. 40. Hier. ep 7. ad Latam.
S. Augustine affirms, that holy Parents do not beget regenerated Children,
which is seconded by S. Hierom, who says: Christiani non nascuntur, sed fiunt.
We are not borne but made Christians. And that Baptism takes away Original
sin, has been so clearly above showed, that nothing shall be here repeated;
except only what S. Augustine said; None, except an Infidel, can deny it. The
third point also was fully cleared to me by the Catholic, who show, that as
all sin is evil, and evil is nothing else, but the privation of good; so
original sin being evil, can be nothing else, but the privation of some good;
and that can be of no other good, but of Original Justice. And as Original
Justice, albeit it comprehended many supernatural perfections, both in the
soul and body, consisted principally and properly, in that Justifying grace,
by which the soul was adorned, and United unto God the Sovereign good; so
original sin, is the privation only of that Justifying grace, in the Superior
part of the soul; the want of which makes the soul deformed and averted from
God. And seeing this want is taken away by Baptism, and the whole grace, as it
beautifyed the soul, is entirly restored: the whole guilt of original sin is
taken away, and the whole essence of Original Justice is recovered again, by
the merits of Christ. Then for Concupiscence, which is left after Baptism, it
is not truly any sin, but a weakness and imperfection of Nature, proceeding
from the former Original sin, as all sicknesses, miseries and death it self
are. All which are left in us, even after the sin it self is taken away, to put
us in mind from what happy Estate we had fallen, and to stir us up to labor
more diligently, and to call more earnestly, for the help of Gods grace.
Neither is the grace, which we receive from Christ, the smaller or weaker, that
it does not take away concupiscence, and restore us to the whole rectitude,
which Adam enieyed: but it is rather more strong, since many by it do stand
even with all that weakness of nature; which Adam did not with all the grace
he had, even in the strength and rectitude of his nature. All which things were
confirmed to me by diverse authorities and reasons, which were too longsome
here to insert. It shall be sufficient to bring one testimony of S. Augustine
against Calvin's opinion and the fundament of it. Concupiscence, August. lib. 1.
de nuptijs and concupis. c. 23.
says he, is called sin, because it was made by sin: whereas now, in the
regenerate, it is not sin etc. Yea, he shows, that concupiscence is so far
from being sin, when it is resisted, that it becomes rather the matter of
Victory, and of a Crown unto us. Sometimes, says he, Aug de Genesi cont.
Manich c. 4. Call. lib. 3. Inst. c. 3. par. 10.
reason does stoutly resist and bridle Concupiscence, even when it is stirred
up, which when it is performed, we fall not into sin; but after some
wrestlings, we are crowned. Calvin ingenuously confesses, that his opinion in
this matter, is against S. Augustine and all Antiquity; which is sufficient to
make it to be suspected, if not also rejected.

As then, the Catholic doctrine, concerning Original sin, is the same holy
and pure doctrine of the Primitive Church; so your doctrine, o Covenanters, is
full of corruptions. For, besides that it corrupts the Catholic Faith; it
corrupts both your souls and bodies. This your selves do confess: for in your
new Confession you say: that man by Original sin; became wholly defilled, Conf.
westminst. chapter 6.
in all the faculties and parts of Soul and body: and that this corruption of
nature, dureing this life, does remain in those, who are regenerated: and, that
both it self, and the motions of it, are truly and properly sin. Moreover, it
corrupts all your best thoughts, words, and actions. For so you profess, that
by it, you are utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite to all good, and
wholly inclined to all evil. This also M. Calvin did teach, Call in Antid. Con.
Trid. sess 6. c. 16. Shells. p. 146.
saying: The vitiousnesse (of original sin) which remains in us, defiles,
before God, what ever works proceed from us. Of which doctrine M. Shelford a
Protestant gives his opinion, thus: These, who say so, cannot, in my Judgment,
be excused from extreme blasphemy. Thirdly, it corrupts Grace; for it makes
the Grace of Christ so weak and imperfect, that it cannot free us from the
corruption of Original sin. And lastly, it is the source of many corrupt
errors; as of your Justification by faith only, the impossibility of keeping
Gods commandments, the denial of all good works, of inherent Justice, and many
more. From which it is evident, that your doctrine is very much corrupted,
which is the cause of so many corruptions.

Hence also may be easily seen, that the Catholic doctrine, concerning our
natural inhability and rebellion to Gods Law, is not corrupted; because as it
teaches, against the Pelagians, that we are unable, by the power of nature, to
keep Gods Law: so it affirms also, against the Presbyterians, what is
impossible to be done by nature, is possible by Gods grace: and what we cannot
do of our selves, we can perform by the strength of him, who comforts us.
Which might be easily shown to be S. Paul's doctrine; Romans 8.3.4 Philip. 4.13.
and therefore to be free of corruption. But your doctrine is very corrupt,
which so grants a natural inhability, that it denis all supernatural ability,
even with the assistance of Gods grace, to keep his Law. You profess
yourselves to be so naturally rebels to God; that all his grace cannot make you
good subjects: which shows, that both your doctrine and your selves are very
much corrupted. The same may be showed of Sanctification. For the Catholics
teach: that no man is so perfectly holy here in this pilgrinage, but he may
every day advance in holiness, and be renewed daily in the inward man: and
that no person, even the holiest, is free of venial sins and imperfections: and
then only we shall be perfect, when this corruption shall put on immortality.
In this sense, they grant, that sanctification in this life is imperfect:
whereas in an other sense, they teach, that there may be, even in this life, a
certain perfection of holiness, in some degree svitable to the observation of
the divine Commandments, as has been showed above, chap. 14. p. 145. But your
doctrine is very corrupt, which maks your sanctification so imperfect, that you
cannot, by it, think so much as a good thought, or do any thing, but sin
mortally. And your obedience to the Law is so imperfect, that you break it, at
every minut; So that such sanctification may be rather called profanation; and
such imperfect obedience to Gods Law, may be justly termed Disobedience.

Lastly, if the Catholic doctrine, which affirms; that man is not justified
by faith only, be corrupted: then the Scripture is corrupted, which teaches
the same, not only in substance, but in express words; proving it by diverse
arguments and examples, and comparcing those, who believe the contrary, to
Devils; as we have seen above, chap. 15. page 157. But your doctrine, in this
principal article of your faith, is very much corrupted which corrupts the
pure fountain of Gods word.

By all which, may be seen, not only, how falsely you accuse the Catholic
doctrine of corruptions, in all the former points; but also how truly your own
doctrine is full of corruptions.

SECTION VII. Of the Holy Sacraments, of Ceremonies, Divorces, and of
Dispensations.
NEXT follow these words of the Covenant.

We detest his corrupted doctrine, concerning the nature, number and use of the
holy Sacraments. His five bastard Sacraments, with all his Rites, Ceremonies,
and false doctrines, added to the Ministration of the true Sacraments, without
the word of God: His cruel Judgment against Infants departing without the
Sacraments: His absolute necessity of Baptism: His blasphemous opinion of
Transubstantiation, or real presence of Christ's body in the Elements, and
receiving of the same, by the wicked, or bodies of men: His dispensations of
Solemn Oaths, periuries, and degrees of Marriage, forbidden by the word: His
cruelty against the Innocent divorced.

As an impudent strumpet, said my Catholic friend, is accustomed, when she
contends with a Chaste Matrone, to object such crimes to her, whereof herself is
notoriously guilty; So here the Covenanters do accuse the holy Catholic
Church, the Immaculate Spouse of Jesus Christ, of Errors and corruptions, in
the nature, number and use of the holy Sacraments, whereas themselves are
miserably corrupted, in all these points. Which shall be briefly shown.

First, you accuse the Catholic Church of corrupted doctrine, concerning the
Nature of the Sacraments: which must be, because she teaches, that the
Sacraments of the new law do confer grace. But we have seen above, that this
is most true doctrine, conform to the Scriptures and holy Fathers, and that
this is a perfection, most suitable to the excellency of the Christian
Sacraments. Whereas your doctrine, which robs the Sacraments of all power to
confer Grace, and makes them only simple tokens, signs, and seals, without
all efficacy, and which equals the Sacraments of the old Law in excellency
unto them, corrupts indeed the nature of the Christian Sacraments, and abaseth
the power of them; which cannot be done, without perverting and corrupting the
Scriptures and holy Fathers: which are so clear for the Catholic doctrine,
that they have moved many famous Protestants, to abandon your Calvinistical
opinion. All which may be seen in the 18. Chapter of the former Treatise.

Next, you accuse the Catholic doctrine of corruption, concerning the Number
of the Christian Sacraments, whereas indeed, your doctrine, if we will judge of
it by your first Reformers, is not only full of corruption, but also of
confusion in this matter. The Catholics do constantly teach, that there be 7.
Sacraments of the Law of grace, instituted by Jesus Christ; to wit: Baptism,
Confirmation, Eucharist, Penance, Order, Extream-Vnction, and Matrimony. Which
precise number has, from the ancient Fathers and Primitive Church, by
continual practice, been delivered and received in both Churches, Greek and
Latin; as may appear by the Council of Florence. For all which Sacraments, the
Catholics do bring express Scriptures and Testimonies of the holy Fathers,
some of which we shall briefly touch. To speak then nothing of Baptism and the
Eucharist, which are out of question, Confirmation is showed 2. Cor. 1. and 1^.
verse, where it is said: He that Confirms us with you in Christ, and has
anointed us, God, who also has fealed us, and given the pledge of the Spirit
in our hearts. And Acts 8. verse 14. when Philip the Deacon had converted
Samaria, Peter, and John, were sent to confirm them, who, when they were come,
says the Scripture, prayed for them, that they might receive the holy Ghost
etc. Then did they impose their hands upon them, and they received the Holy
Ghost. Of which S. Augustine says: August. lib. 2 cont. lit. Petil. c. 104.
The Sacrament of Chrisme, in the kind of Visible seals, is sacred and holy,
even as Baptism it self.

Penance, is showed, John 20. verse 2. where our Savior said to his Apostles;
Receive you the Holy Ghost, whose sins you forgive, they are forgiven, and
whose sins you retain, they are retained. Of this power, which Christ has given
to Priests, follows the necessity of Confession. For, if the sins retaynd on
earth be retayn'd, and not remitted in heaven: and on the other part, the
Priest cannot remit the sin, unless he know it, as it is manifest he cannot:
nor can he know it, unless it be told him: it follows necessarly, that he,
who will have his sins remitted, must by his own Confession, open them to whom
God has given power, to remit them. Confession was also used in the Apostles
times, Acts 19. v. 18.
as appears in the Acts, where it is said: Many of them, that believed, came
Confessing and declareing their deeds. Of this Sacrament S. Ambrose gives
testimony, Amb. lib. de poenit. c. 7.
who refelleth thus the Novatians. Why do ye baptize, if sins cannot be
remitted by a Man? For in Baptism, is the remission of all sins; nor is it
material, whether Priests challenge to themselves this power by Penance, or by
Baptism. S. Chrysostom says: Chrysostom. lib. 3. de Sacerdotio.
That Christ has given that power to Priests, which he would not to be given,
neither to Angels, nor Archangels. The earthly Princes have also power to bind,
but the bodies only: but the bond of Priests touches the very soul it self,
and reaches even to the heavens, etc. what power I beseech you, Aug. lib. 50.
homiliar.
can be greater then this? S. Augustine also speaks to the same purpose in his
49. homily, and in the second book of Visitation of the sick.

Of holy Orders the Scripture bears testimony. S. Paul writing to Timothee
says: Impose hands on no man lightly 1. Tim. 5.22. And again: Neglect not the
grace, that is in thee, which is given thee by Prophecy, with the imposition
of the hands of Priesthood. Our Savior said to his Apostles: Receive the Holy
Ghost etc. John 20. S. Augustine calls Holy Order a Sacrament, compareing it
with Baptism. Aug lib. 2. cont. Parmen c. 13.
Let them explicate, says he, how the Sacrament of the Baptized, cannot be
lost, and the Sacrament of one Ordained can?

Extreme Unction is clearly in Scripture. Is any man sick among you, says S.
James, James 5.13. etc.
let him bring in the Priests of the Church, and let them pray over him,
anointing him with oil, in the name of our Lord; and the prayer of faith shall
save the sick man, and our Lord will lift him up; and if he be in sins, his
sins shall be forgiven him. Upon which S. Chrysostom says: Chrysostom. lib. 3. de
Sacerdotio.
The Priests have authority to forgive sins; not only, when they regenerate us,
but afterward also. For is any sick among you, says the Apostle, let him
bring in the Priests, etc.

Of Matrimony it is said: They shall be two in one flesh: this is a great
Sacrament, but I say in Christ and the Church. Ephesians. 5.31.32. Upon which, S.
Augustine says: That, Aug. tract. 9. in Joan.
which in Christ and the Church is a great Sacrament, this in all men and wives
whatsoever, is the least Sacrament, but notwithstanding an inseparable
Sacrament of conjunction. And again: lib. de fide and operibus c. 7.
In the Church not only the bond, but also the Sacrament of Marriage is
commended.

By which few Testimonies, these 5. Sacraments which you reject, are as clearly
proved out of the Scripture, as these two which you admit. Yea, although they
had not been mentioned in the Scripture; yet they are all, with reverence to be
received, seeing they are demonstrated by divine Tradition, which is of no less
infallible authority, then the Scripture it self, as has been proved above; and
this Tradition is evident, both by the consent of the holy Fathers, and by the
constant belief and practice of the whole Church, which has used these
Sacraments in all ages, according to the ends for which they were instituted.
And thefore, the Catholic doctrine concerning the number of the Sacraments,
which flows from such pure fountains, is pure and true, and not corrupted, as
you do calumniate. Whereas indeed, your doctrine, and that of your first
Reformers in this matter, is not only full of corruption, but also of
confusion. For Luthers followers admit three Sacraments, to wit: Ap. Becan. in
Man. lib. 1. c. 8.
Baptism, Eucharist and Penance, as may be seen in their Catechismes. Zuinglius
receives also three, but not all the same: for in place of Penance, he puts
Matrimony. And Calvin reckons also three; for, to Baptism and the Supper, Call.
lib. 4. Instit c. 19. par. 32.
he adds Order. So full of confusion, even at the beginning, were these
builders of Babylon, following, neither Scriptures nor Fathers, but their own
fancies. Wherein you are not behind with them, swarving from the doctrine of
your Master Calvin; and, according to your own imaginations, admitting only 2.
Sacraments; which two also in effect you destroy, by robbing them of all virtue
and efficacy, as has been showed above, chap. 21. in fine.

You accuse next the Catholic Church of corruptions, concerning the use of
the Sacraments. But it is sufficient against your accusations, that these uses
of the Sacraments, which you most blame: as private Baptism, private Communion,
etc. are known to have been observed by the holy Primitive Church; are in
themselves laudable; and tend much to the devotion and comfort of the faithful;
and are also approved by diverse learned and moderate Protestants. Whereas your
doctrines and practices make your Sacraments altogether graceless, and almost
Vselesse and Comfortless; for which you are blamed by diverse Protestants.

Moreover, you are enemies also to the very Ceremonies, with which the
Sacraments are administrated in the Catholic Church. It is not sufficient for
you, to have taken away the fruit of Grace from these heavenly Trees, planted
by God in the Garden of his Church, as in a heavenly Paradise; unless you pull
away also the Ceremonies, which serve, as leaves and Ornaments to them. You
detest all Ceremonies not contained in the word of God: By which you lay down a
most false and deceitful principle, as if no Ceremonies were to be used, which
were not expressly there. For first, the Scriptures contains not expressly all
doctrines, but referres us to the Church and to Traditions, as we have seen
above. How much less then does it contain all Ceremonies? Secondly, As our
Savior, when he did institute the Sacraments, did not prescribe the particular
form, by which they should be celebrated, but left that to the wisdom of his
Apostles; so his Apostles did not set down that manner in writing S. Augustine
expressly affirms the first part, Aug. ep. 118. ad Ianuar.
saying: Christ did not command in what order thereafter, the Sacrament should
be taken, that he might leave that place to the Apostles, by whom hs was to
order his Church. The second part is also evident. For we never read, where S.
Paul, (who writing to the Corinthians, concerning the holy Eucharist, said: 1.
Cor. 11. ver. vlt.
The rest I will dispose, when I come) did express that manner or order in the
Scripture. And the same may be said of the other Apostles. Thirdly, Some Rites
and Ceremonies used by Christ himself, and recorded in Scripture, were changed
by the holy Apostles, according to the instinct of the holy Ghost, for the
greater honor of the blessed Sacrament; and have been from the Apostles times
observed, throughout the whole Church, without Scripture. Aug. ep. 118. c. 6.
This S. Augustine does testify. Neither says he, because Christ gave the
Sacrament after meat, ought we, having dyn'd or sup't, assemble to receive that
Sacrament; or as these, whom the Apostle reproves and corrects, mingle it with
their Tables, etc. For it seemed good to the holy Ghost, that, for the honor
of so great a Sacrament, our Lords body, before all other meat, should first
enter into the mouth of a Christian: and therefore this custom is observed
throughout the whole world. Fourthly, the Church can institute ceremonies for
greater decency and Order, and for the more honor of God. For, if Jacob a
private man used a new Ceremony, by erecting a stone, by pouring oil upon it,
and giving it the title of Bethel: Genes. 28.
If the Synagogue of the Jews made a new feast, by the advice of Mardocheus:
Ester. 9.
why not also shall the Church of Christ have the same authority? If such was
the power of a private man, and of the Handmaid; How much more ought the power
be of the Freewoman, the holy Church the immaculate Spouse of Jesus Christ? Or
what can be more ridiculous and profane, then to grant that power to these, and
deny it to this. Or to think, that the Catholic Church which is governed by
the Holy Ghost, in all truth, according to Christ's promise, should not have so
much wisdom, as to ordain aright some few Ceremonies?

Therefore, your former principle is very false, for many reasons; yea, it is
so false, that yourselves do not observe it. For, where have you Scripture for
the Godfathers and Godmothers, which you require at Baptism? Where have you
scripture, for taking your Communion fasting, from the hands of one another,
and not from the hands of your Minister, and for many such rites and customs,
besides your stool of Repentance? When did your Ministers observe that
ceremony of washing the feet of others, which was used by Christ, John. 13.5.
before the celebration of the Eucharist? When did either they, or their Elders
anoint the sick, according to S. James precept. Whereby it is evident, that you
observe some Rites, which are not contained in the scriptures; and others you
neglect, which are there particularly recommended.

As then it is clear, that the Church of Christ may use ceremonies, which are
not expressed in Scripture; so these Ceremonies, which she observes, are most
commendable: because they are most ancient, and were used in the primitive
times, as Coccius shows by the testimonies of the holy Fathers: they are most
observeable: because they were instituted by the holy Apostles and Pastors of
the Church, who had both authority and wisdom, to institute those, which are
most convenient; And lastly they have been confirmed, by the long practice of
the whole Church, against whose custom to dispute, as S. Augustine affirms, is
most insolent madness. Therefore, without, or rather against all reason, do
you detest the Ceremonies of the Catholic Church. No religion can be without
Ceremonies, and we see in the Scripture, that all great mysteries are
accompanied with sublime and significative Ceremonies, as our Saviors
Nativity, Baptism, Transfiguration, Resurrection, Ascension, the Descent of the
holy Ghost etc. Our savior also, at all great and solemn actions, used many
Ceremonies, as at the raising of Lazarus, the cureing of the man, who was both
deaf and dumb, Mark 7.33. and upon many other occasions: all which Ceremonies
serve as Ornaments of religion, presenting an external Majesty to the senses,
and making the spiritual mysteries to be more clearly understood, to be
received with greater reverence, and to be more deeply imprinted in the hearts
of the beholders. The same might be easily verifyed of the Catholic
Ceremonies. Therefore, you, who under pretext of spirituality, are professed
Enemies to all Ceremonies, do not take heed, that you take all order and
decency from the Church and service of God, that you oppose the practice of
Christ and his Apostles, and of the whole Primitive Church; and do render the
sublime mysteries of the Christian religion contemptible.

You renounce also (to use your words) the Popes 5. bastard Sacraments. But
that is only proper to adulteress Churches, to have bastard Sacraments. The
Catholic Church has none but lawful Sacraments, instituted by her heavenly
Spouse Jesus Christ, of admirable virtue and grace: as we have seen all these
5. to be. But indeed you have made even those two, which you keep, bastard
Sacraments, by robbing them of all virtue and grace.

We shall only speak a word of your other Detestations which follow, in this
Section; because some of them have been touched above. First, under the name of
the Pope, you detest, the judgment of the Catholic Church, as cruel, against
infants dying without Baptism; and for the absolute necessity of Baptism. But
this was also the judgment of the Primitive Church, yea of Christ himself, who
has said: John. 3.5.
unless one be borne again of water and the Spirit, he shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. And therefore is not cruel, as has been showed above,
at more length. Whereas your judgment is both false and cruel against many
children dying with Baptism, excluding them from heaven. Yea not only your
Judgment is cruel, but also your practice, suffering many children to dye
without Baptism: Confer. Hampton Court.
for which cruelty, King James affirmed that your Ministers, who were guilty of
it, would be damned.

You accuse next the Catholic Church of blasphemy, for believing the Real
Presence or Transubstantiation, (which you wisely make all one question,) and
for teaching, that the wicked receive the body of Christ. But they are not
blasphemous, who do believe Christ's words expressed, by 3. Evangelists and one
Apostle, and who follow the constant doctrine of the holy Fathers and of the
ancient Church, as the Catholics do in this matter; as has been showed above.

And, if the wicked did not receive the body of Christ, how could they be
guilty of it, as the Apostles affirms the unworthy receivers of it to be? But
you are rather guilty of blasphemy, (even in the judgment of Protestants,) who
will not believe Christ's clear words; and deny thereby his Omnipotency. Luther,
your first Apostles gives this Judgment of you: We censure as heretics and
aliens from the Church of God, the Zuinglians and all Sacramentaries, Luth.
cont. Lovanien. These. 27.
who deny the body and blood of Christ to be received with the Carnal Mouth, in
the Eucharist. And a famous Doctor of his Church continues the same opinion of
you; for, speaking of this same matter, he says: the sect of the Calvinists is
grown to such blasphemy and madness, Conrad. Shlussel. Theol. Calvin l. 1. c.
3.
that they dare call in question Gods omnipotency.

Then you accuse the Pope and Catholic Church, for Dispensations in solemn
Oaths and Periuries. But these are either vain or false allegations. For it is
certain that the Church may dispense sometimes with the bond of oaths, as she
may loose from punishments, and free men from the bonds of sins, according to
that power, which Christ gave to her, saying: whatsoever thou shall loose on
earth, Math. 16,
shall be loosed in heaven, etc. But it must be for a just cause, and without
the just prejudice of others, as Becan shows, Becan de ur. and iustitia quest.
88. q. 11
or else the dispensation is not valid. Periuries or false oaths need no
Dispensations, as you mistake or calumniate; but must be only taken away by
true Repentance, as other sins are purged. It is strange, that you should deny
the lawful power of dispensing to the whole Catholic Church, such as S. Paul
used with the incestuous Corinthian; and yet appropriate it to every one of
your selves: and should object that falsely, as a crime to others, whereof
yourselves are so deeply guilty. For it is known, how many oaths and vows your
first Reformers did either break, or dispense with, at their own hands; and if
we will believe King James, Basilicon Doron p. 41.
you are not behind with any, in these enormities.

You accuse also falsely the Pope and Catholic Church, for dispensing in
degrees of Marriage, forbidden by the word of God; that is by the Law of Christ;
unless you will have the Ceremonial Law of the Jews, to be the Law of Christ,
and to oblige all Christians: whence it would follow, that, if a man died
without issue, Deuter. 25.5.
his brother should marie the Widow, which yourselves do not observe, but deny,
that it ought to be done. The Church is so far from dispensing in degrees
forbidden by the eternal Law of God, that she has made Laws, forbidding and
dissolving Marriages, in degrees not prohibited by the Eternal Law of God, which
serve, as outworks, to guard the divin Law. She dispenses indeed sometimes,
upon good reason, in her own laws, but never in the eternal Law of God, which
she professes to be altogether indispensable.

Neither is the Pope and Catholic Church guilty of cruelty, against the
innocent divorced, by forbidding them to marie; unless Christ himself, and S.
Paul be cruel, and the Primitive Church, which taught the same doctrine. Luke
16.8.
Our Savior says: every one, that puts away his wife, and marieth another,
commits adultery, and he, that marieth her, commits adultery. 1. Cor.
7.10.
S Paul says: not I give commandment, but our Lord, that the wife depart not
from her husband, and if she depart, to remain unmarried, or to be reconciled
to her husband. Whence it is clear, that neither of the parties can marie, so
long, as the other lives. This was the doctrine of the holy Fathers, and of the
ancient Church. S. Augustine proves this in his books de adulterinis
coniugijs, Aug. lib. 50. hom liar. hom. 49.
and elsewhere, he says: It Is lawful for the cause of fornication, to put away
an adulteress wife: but dure ng her life, it is not lawful to marie another,
etc. These are Adulteries, not Marriages. Is Augustine contemned? let Christ be
feared. Two Ancient Councels do also confirm the same doctrine Therefore,
Council. Elibert. c. 9. and Milerit. c. 17.
the Catholic Church in denying Marriage to the innocent party divorced, is
not cruel, as you calumniate; but observes the just Law of Christ, the
commandment of the Apostle, and the practice of the holy ancient Church. And if
any think it hard, they have a remedy prescribed by the Apostle; to reconcile
themselves to the guilty party. But indeed you are cruel, who, under pretext
of mercy, do allow men, to Violate the just Law of God: and, under the name of
Marriages, authorize people to commit Adulteries, to the destruction of their
souls. So that, it is truly verifyed of you, that your mercies are cruel. But
let us proceed now to your other abiurations.

SECTION VIII. Of the Christian Sacrifice, and of Priesthood.
AFTER you had robbed Christians, of almost all the Sacraments, and of our
Saviors legacy, to wit, his precious body; now you would rob the Church, of
the Christian Sacrifice, and would spoil God of the greatest external honor,
that can be rendered to him, and is due to him alone. And with the Sacrifice,
you would also destroy the sacred Order of Priesthood, by which it is offered:
For you renounce them, in these most virulent terms of your Covenant.

We detest his Devilish Mass: His blasphemous Priesthood: His profane
Sacrifice for the sins of the dead and the quick.

As never any Religion, neither under the Law of Nature, nor under the Law of
Moses, wanted Sacrifice, which is a Sup^^m worship due to God alone: so the
Chris^^^n Religion, which excells all Religions tha^ (...) have been, is not
destitute of that perfec^^^n, but has a most excellent Sacrifice, far
exceeding all the ancient Sacrifices. The Prophets did foretell of it, Christ
did institute it, the holy Apostles and their Successors did offer it, and the
whole Christian world has in all ages frequented it: which points we shall
briefly touch.

The Prophet David, speaking of Christ, says: The Lord has sworn, Psalm. 109.4.
Thou art a Priest for ever, according to the Order of Melchisedech Which words
have relation to these of Moses: Genes. 14.18.
Melchisedech King of Salem brought forth bread and wine, for he was Priest of
the most high God. The holy Fathers understand that Prophecy, of the Christian
Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, under the forms of bread and wine. So S.
Cyprian: who is more Priest, Cypr. epist 63. ad Cecil.
says he, of the most high God, then our Lord Jesus Christ, who offered a
Sacrifice to God his father, and offered the same, which Melchisedech had
offered, that is bread and wine; to wit his own body and blood. S. Augustine
also to the same purpose, says: Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 17. c. 17.
No where now is the Priesthood and Sacrifice, according to the order of Aaron:
and every where under Christ the Priest, is offered up that, which Melchisedech
brought forth, when he blessed Abraham. And again, speaking of Melchisedechs
Sacrifice, he says: There did first appear the Sacrifice, which is now
offered up to God by Christians, in the whole world.

The second Prophecy is in Malachie, where God says to the Jews, Malachie
chapter 1. v. 10.
I have no pleasure in you, neither will I accept any offering at your hands.
For, from the riseing of the Sun, to the going down of the same, my name shall
be great among the Gentiles, and there is offered and Sacrificed to my name, in
every place, a pure oblation. The holy Fathers understood this, as a most clear
Prophecy, of the Christian Sacrifice. So S. Ireneus: Among the 12. Prophets,
says he, Malachie did so f^retell of it. Ireneus lib. 4 c. 33.
I have no pleasure in ^u, etc. most clearly signifying by these words, that
the first people should leave off to offer unto God: and, in every place a
Sacrifice, and that pure, should be offered unto him. So also S. Augustine did
understand it. Aug de (...) it. l. 18. c. 26.
Malachie, says he, prophesying of the Chvrch, which we see now propagated,
says most ^learly unto the Jews, in the person of God. I have no pleasure in
you, etc. since then we see the sacrifice, by the Priesthood of Christ,
according to the Order of Melchisedech offered up in every place, etc and they
cannot deny, but the sacrifice of the Jews is ceased: why do they yet look for
another Christ, seeing that, which they read Prophesied, and see fulfilled,
could not be accomplished, but by him? If this Prophecy be so strong against
the Jews, it is no less forcible against the Covenanters.

As the Prophets foretold so Christ fulfilled, by instituting this Sacrifice:
by offering it up himself; and by ordaining it to be offered up unto the end of
the world. This he performed, when, taking bread, he blessed it, saying: This
is my body, which is given for you, and after the same manner of the Chalice.
He ordaind the same oblation to be continued, when he said to his Apostles: Do
this in remembrance of me. So the holy Fathers expressly teach. S. Ireneus, who
lived in the second age, speaking of Christ's words of Institution, says:
Christ taught the new oblation of the new Testament, Iren. lib 4 c. 33.
which the Church, receiving from the Apostles, offers up to God, throughout
the whole world. S. Cyprian affirms clearly the same truth, saying Our Lord
and God Jesus Christ, Cypr, lib 2. epist. 3.
is the high Priest of God the Father. He offered up himself a Sacrifice to his
Father: and the same he commanded to be done in his remembrance. To which two
we shall only adioyn S. Augustine, who says: Aug. in psalm. 33. sermon. 2.
Christ did Institute the Sacrifice of his body and blood, according to the
Order of Melchisedech. And last of all may be added the practice of the whole
Christian world, which in all ages, from the death of Christ, did render unto
God supreme honor and worship; testifying his Soveraignity, and power of life
and death, by this most excellent Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, which
the holy Fathers called the Sacrifice of the Mass: The Virtue also of which
God has manifested, by many Miracles, one of which I will recount, out of S.
Augustine, to our purpose. Aug. lib. 22, de Civit. c. 8.
Which is briefly thus. The house of a certain Tribune in the Country, near to
Hippo the City of S. Augustins residence, being vexed with evil Spirits, to the
great loss of his cattle and affliction of his Servants, he came and desired
that one of our Priests (says the holy Father) I being then absent, would go
and pray, that the Devil might be chased away. Whereupon one went, and offered
up, says he, there the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, to the end
that the vexation might cease: and by Gods mercy it did cease immediately.

As therefore it is evident, by what has been briefly said, from the Scriptures
and holy Fathers that there is nothing more holy and divine in the whole
Christian religion, then the Christian Sacrifice of Christ's precious body and
blood, under the forms of bread and wine, which was foretold by the Prophets,
instituted and offered up by Christ himself, and was thereafter offered up by
the holy Apostles and their Successors; so you very wickedly call it Devilish:
For that cannot be Devilish, which was ordained by God himself, and whereby he
is most honored; that cannot be Devilish, which chaseth away Devils. But your
railing against it, and abolishing it, must be Devilish; because the Devil, by
his principal instrument, the great Antichrist, is to abolish it in the later
days. Daniel 11.31. and Luther your first Reformer, Luth. de Missa pri. tom. 7.
by a strange divine Providence did confess to the world, that the Devil did
stir him up, by many arguments, to abrogat it. And as the Sacrifice is most
holy and divine; so is the office of Priesthood, by which it is offered, most
sacred and venerable. If the Aaronical Priesthood, whereby only bullocks and
beasts were Sacrificed to God, was so sacred; how much more sacred and
excellent must be the Christian Priesthood, according to the order of
Melchisedech, by which the body and blood of Christ are offered up unto God, a
pure Oblation? And therefore, you very wickedly call the office of Priesthood
blasphemous, and by dishonouring it, you dishonor God himself, who did
institute it, as S. Ignatius the Disciple of the Apostles affirms, when he
says: that Priesthood is the Top of all Honors, Ignat. epist. ad myrn.
that are amongst men: which if any man dishonors, he dishonours God and our
Lord Jesus Christ, the alone chief Priest of God, by nature. Your Ministerial
office is rather blasphemous against God, which robs him of his supreme worship
by Sacrifice, which has been given unto him, since the Creation.

That the Christian Sacrifice is offered up for sins, our Savior shows, when
he says: This is my blood, which is shed for many, to the remission of sins.
And that it is profitable also, for remission of sins, to the faithful
departed, the holy Fathers do teach, by the Scriptures, and practice of the
whole Church. Aug. l. de cura pro mortuis c. 1.
S. Augustine says: We read in the Books of the Machabees, of Sacrifice offered
for the dead: but, though it were no where read, in the old Testament; yet not
small is the authority of the Universal Church, which shines in this custom;
where the commendation of the dead has its place, in the prayers of the
Priest, which are powered out to our Lord God, at his altar. lib. 9. Con. c. 3
And in his ninth book of Confessions he tells us: His Mother Monica desired on
her deathbed, that memory should be made of her at the Altar, from whence she
knew the holy Sacrifice to be dispensed, wherewith the indictment against us
was blotted out. Where you may see also the Saints call that a Holy Sacrifice,
which you call profane.

SECTION IX. Of the Canonization of Saints; Invocation of Angels and Saints;
Worshipping of Images, Relics and Crosses; Dedicating of Churches and Altars,
etc.
NOW follow these words of the Covenant:

We detest his Canonization of men: calling upon Angels or Saints departed:
worshipping of Images, Relics and Crosses; Dedicating of Kirks, Altars, Days,
and Vows to Creatures.

We shall now, for brevities sake, run speedily through all the rest of the
Covenant. First you blame here the Catholic Church, for a most laudable
custom, which she has ever observed, of Canonizing, that is, declareing some
persons, who had been eminent for holiness, to be glorified Saints in heaven.
There have been indeed different ways, by which this Canonization has been
performed. For sometimes it was done by the voice of the people, with consent
of their Prelates, or by the Prelates, the people not controuling: But since the
year 800. none have been Canonized, but by the Sea Apostolic, according to
the decree of Pope Leo the third: Whence it is, that this action is performed
with greater diligence, and more exact trial, both of life and miracles, then
when it was done, in a popular manner. What then can you justly blame here? But
indeed you are to be blamed, who Canonize in your own manner, not Saints, but
sinners, that break mortaly every day Gods commandments? and such was your
Covenanting Army, which you ordinarily called the Army of the Saints.

You pass next, from detesting the Catholics Canonizing of Saints, to detest
the Invocation both of Angels and Saints: But indeed you cannot detest that;
unless you detest also the Scriptures, and the practice of the Saints and of
the whole Primitive Church. For did not Jacob invocat an Angel, when blessing
Joseph's children, he said: The Angel, Genes. 18 16. Osee 12.4.
which delivered me from all evil, bliss these children? Does not the Prophet
Osee testify the same, saying. Jacob prevailed agrinst the Angel, he wept and
prayed to him? Did not also Abraham, Lot, Gedeon pray to Angels, as may be seen
recorded in the Scriptures, Genes. 18.4.19.1. Judges 6.3. Therefore, in
detesting the invocation of Angels, you detest the Scriptures and practice of
the Saints. The same may be also said of the Invocation of Saints departed.
For, if it be lawful to invocat the Angels, why not also the Saints of Heaven,
whom our Savior affirms to be equal unto the Angels? Luke 20.36. Yea, if it
be lawful to invocat Saints and sinners, living upon earth, and to desire the
assistance of their prayers: why is it not lawful to invocat the Saints,
reigning in Heaven? and desire them to pray for us? To say that they do not
hear our prayers, and know not what is done here below, which may concern them,
Luke 15.10.
is most false: For our Savior shows, that there is joy among the Angels of
Heaven, at the Conversion of a sinner. Therefore, they must know it. And shall
the Angels know such things, and rejoice at them: and the glorified Saints, who
are of our own nature, be altogether ignorant of them, and have no
fellow-feeling with us? Shall some Saints living here on earth know the secrets
of others hearts, know what is done at a distance, as is recorded in Scripture
of Samuel, in relation to King Saul 1. Kings 1.19. and of Elizeus in regard of
his man Giezi, 4. Kings 5.25. to pass by other instances of Daniel and S.
Peter; shall I say these Saints have such knowledge in their exile here, on
earth: and shall the glorified Saints, in their Country, in the presence and
fruition of God, be ignorant of such things, and so be in a worse condition?
No; that cannot be: for that could not stand with the goodness of God, and
happiness of their Estate. Yea does not S. John expressly deliver, that the
Saints in heaven do not only know our prayers, Apocal. 5.8.
but also offer them up to God, when he says: that the four beasts, and the
four and twenty Elders fell before the Lamb, having every one harpes, and
golden Vials full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints? Lastly, what
was the doctrine and practice of the Primitive Church, may be known briefly, by
the testimonies of the two great lights, S. Ambrose and S. Augustine. The first
says: We must pray to the Angels, Ambros lib. de viduis.
who are given to be our defenders, we must pray to the Martyrs, etc. For they
are able to pray for our sins, who have washed away their own. The other,
having invocated the blessed Virgin, and many Angels and Saints by name,
concludes, saying: Aug. Medit. c. 40.
I beseech you interceed for me a sinner unto God, that I may be delivered from
the jaws of the Devil, and everlasting death. So you may see, how unreasonably
you detest so holy a doctrine, and so profitable a practice, which has been
used by the greatest Saints.

Now we are come to that point, to wit: the worshipping of Images, wherein you
pretend great advantage. For first you give out, that the Catholic doctrine
and practice in this matter, is directly against the Scriptures, and
particularly against the second Commandment. Secondly, you affirm with great
clamours, that the Catholics prevarication is so evident here, that to
conceal the matter from the people, they have taken away the second
commandment. And for this cause especially you accuse the Catholics, and
condemn them for Sacrilegious Idolaters. But all these were shown me to be vain
pretenses.

For first it is clear in the old Testament, that the ancient Synagogue of the
Jews had their holy Images, and that by Gods own appointment. Secondly, that
they did also reverence and honor them with competent worship. The first part
is evident Exodus 25. where God said to Moses: Two Cherubins of beaton gold
shall thou make, on both sides of the Oracle. Moses did obey this command
chap. 37. Moreover, King Solomon did adorn the famous Temple of Jerusalem with
diverse pictures, 3. Kings c. 6. v. 28. To speak nothing of the brazen serpent,
which God gave order to make. Behold here the commandment of God for making and
placeing of holy Images, in the Tabernacle, upon the Ark; notwithstanding the
Jews were most prone to Idolatry. And that these Images were also honored by
the ancient people of the Jews, is evident. For the Cherubins were the chief
part and Ornament of the Ark, and the whole Ark was honored as may appear,
first, because it was put in the Holy of Holys, as in a most honorable place,
Heb. 9.4. Secondly, it was translated with great honor to the house of
Obededom. Thirdly it was only lawful to the Priests and Levits to carry it. 3.
Kings, 5.6. Fourthly, the Philistims were punished with diverse plagues,
because they kept it beside themselves without due honor: and upon the contrary
Obededom was blissed for keeping it honorably in his house. 1. Kings 5.6. and
6.11. Yea God himself commanded by the mouth of David, Psalm. 99.
saying: Adorato scabellum pedum eius. Adore his footstool. This is understood
of the Ark, as appears by David's words. 1. Chron. 28. v. 2. And what ever it
be, it is not God; and yet the Jews were commanded to adore it, Now can any
man, of solid iugment and consideration, think, that God did prohibit all
Images, and veneration of them, by that which the Protestants call the second
commandment: to wit, Thou shall not make any graven Idol: and yet immediately
thereafter, should command Moses to make Images, and to hold them in such
Veneration? Or rather is it not evident, that the Protestants do apply very
falsely, what is spoken in Scripture, against Idols, to the holy Images of
Christ and his Saints? Therefore it is evident that, the Jews had not only
holy Images by Gods appointment, which were set in their Tabernacle, Temple,
and most holy places: but also that they did lawfully and religiously worship
and honor them: albeit with an honor infinitely inferior to that, which is
due to God.

And as the Jews had their holy Images, so with as good, if not more reason,
had the ancient Christians, theirs; which they placed in their Oratories, and
reverenced with due honor, S. Chrysostom says in his Liturgy: the Priest
bows his head unto the Image of Christ. Bas. lib. de Sp. S. c. 18.
Basil affirms, that the honor of the Image is referred to the Exemplar.
Many more testimonies were shown me from the Fathers, and Ecclesiastical
Histories, but for brevities sake I forbear to cite the^: as also it was
showed, Council. 2. Nicen.
that these who were enemies to the holy Images of Christ and his Saints, were
condemned by the ancient Church, as most furious Heretics, called the
Iconaclasts; who concurred in this impiety, against Christ and his Saints, with
the professed Enemies of Christ: as Julian the Apostat, the perfidious Jews, and
Mahumetans, destroying where ever they could, the Images of Christ and his
Saints, against whom God by many miracles has manifested the truth: as he did
once against the Jews, by making abundance of blood to flow from our Saviors
Image, which they had pierced and crucified, in the City of Berytum in Syria.
By which miracle, and by the miraculous cure of the sick, who were anointed
with that blood, the whole multitude of Jews in that place was converted,
Athan. lib. de P ssione Imag. Christi c. 4.
as S. Athanasius testifyeth. By which it is evident, (to pass by diverse
other Miracles, recorded in Ecclesiastical Histories) that holy Pictures are
capable of dishonor, and therefore also of competent honor: that Catholics,
by keeping them and giving due reverence unto them, follow the practice of the
ancient Christians, and Tradition of the Apostles; as S. Basil testifyeth,
Basil. ap. Con. Nicen. 2. act. 2.
saying: I honor the histories of the Saints Images, and I openly adore them.
For this, being delivered by the holy Apostles, is not to be forbidden; but, in
all our Churches, we erect their histories. And it is no less evident, that
you, Covenanting Ministers, who furiously break and deface all holy Pictures
and Crosses, do thereby dishonor Christ and his Saints; go against the
practice of the ancient Christians, and follow the example of furious
heretics, and of other professed Enemies of Christ. You, without all reason,
detest the Catholics worshipping of Images; but you ought rather to detest
your own profaneing of them, which indeed many Protestants do detest.

Hence, may be easily discovered the Vanity of all your former pretensions; as
first, when you say: that Images are forbidden to be made and worshipped, by
that, which you call the second Commandment. For there are only forbidden
Idols, and all divine worship to any Creatures; but not the holy Images of
Christ and his Saints; nor a competent worship due unto them. Did not God
himself, in the same book, command the holy Images of Cherubins to be made, and
due Veneration to be given unto them? Adore you his footstool, etc. Is God
contrary to himself; or will he command Idolatry? Secondly, you falsely
allege, that the Catholics take away the second Commandment, whereby you
deceive many: For they make only that, a part of the first commandment, which
you make the second: and therein they follow the authority of S. Augustine, who
expressly says; Aug. q. 71. sup. Exodus
that more conveniently three precepts of the first Table are to be reckoned,
then four, and that these words, Thou shall not make any Idol, are indeed an
explication of the former. Which division of the commandments was also shown to
me, to be most agreeable to right reason. Thirdly, you falsely calumniate the
Catholics for Idolaters: seeing they do not worship holy Images, as Gods, with
divine worship: but with a respect infinitely below that, like unto the honor,
which the people of God gave unto the Arc, and the Cherubins; and which is
given by all good Christians to the letters of the holy Scriptures. But indeed
all these accusations, which you bring falsely against others, may be justly
retorted against your selves: For, though you adore no Idols made with hands;
yet you adore many Errors and fancies of your own brains, which S. Hierom
calls the Idols of Heretics. And you have not taken away only one, but in
effect, all Gods commandments, by denying the possibility of keeping them.

What has been said of holy Images, may also be understood of Crosses. Then,
for Relics, the Scripture, Fathers, and right reason are so clear, for
dutiful respect and veneration to be given unto them, that there can be no
doubt of it. Do we not read in the Scripture, how the woman in the Gospel, by
touching respectfully the hem of our Saviors garment, was cured of her bloody
flux? Math. 9.21. How S. John Baptist did so respect and honor the latchet of
our Saviors shoe, that he esteemed himself unworthy to untie it? Mark. 1.7.
How the Napkins, that had but touched the body of S. Paul, cast out Devils, and
cured diseases? Acts 19.12. How the ancient Church did reverence Relics, Aug.
ep. 103.
S. Augustine testifyeth, saying. They bring the Relics of most blessed
Stephen the Martyr, which your Holiness is not ignorant, as we also have done,
how conveniently you ought to honor. And, in his 22. book of the City of God,
he says: At the Relics of S. Stephen only, there were, in a short space, so
many Miracles wrought, that they might fill many Volumes. It is also agreeable
to right reason, to honor Relics: For the very light of Nature teaches us,
to honor the Instruments of supernatural effects, and to carry due respect
unto the bodies of the Saints. But these, who dishonor and destroy them,
imitat the old Pagans, and the enemies of the Christian religion.

You accuse lastly, in this place, the Catholics, for dedicating Churches,
Altars, Days and Vows to Creatures. But it is sufficient against your
accusations, to know, that they observe the custom of the holy Fathers and
ancient Christians, who dedicated Churches, Altars, etc. not to Creatures, but
to God the Creator, albeit in memory of the Saints and Martyrs. So S. Augustine
says: Aug. lib. 20 cont Faust. c. 21.
The Christian people celebrateth the memories of Martyrs, with fuligious
solemnity, etc. but yet so, that we apwant Altars to none of the Martyrs, but
unto the God of Martyrs, though in memory of the Martyrs. The same he
affirms of Churches, saying: We build not Churches unto our Martyrs, Aug. lib
22. de Civ. c. 10.
as unto God, but Memories, as unto dead men, whose Spirits live with God.
Then, for Days, they are principally dedicated unto God, though in honor and
memory of the Saints. As also, Vows are properly and principally made to God,
as unto the first Principle and Author of all good; but when they are made to
the Saints, they are made in a secondary manner, as unto the Friends of God, by
whose prayers and intercession we receive benefits from him; which is a respect
infinitely inferior to that, which is given by vowing to God, as may be seen in
Bellarmin lib. 3. de cultu Sanctor. c. 11. But indeed you are justly to be
blamed, who dedicate no Churches nor Altars to God; but have destroyed and
profaned many, that were consecrated to his service; and have abolished the
festival days, not only of the Saints, but of Christ himself; and are so far
from honoring the Saints, (whom you call very simply Creatures) with Vows,
that you have taken away that worship and respect from God the Creator, which
had been always given to him; both in the Law of Moses, and in the Law of
Nature.

SECTION X. Of Purgatory, Praying for the dead, Praying in an unknown Tongue,
Processions, Litanies, Auricular Confession. etc.
YOU go on in your Covenant, saying:

We detest His Purgatory, Prayer for the dead, praying or speaking in a strange
language, with his Processions, blasphemous Litanies, and Multitude of Advocats
or Mediators: His manyfold Orders, Auricular Confession.

As you are pleased, to father all the points of the Catholic faith upon the
Popes, as if they were their Inventions; so you father this point of Purgatory
upon them, in a special manner, crying out; that it is a mere fiction, a late
invention of the Popes, for their own gain; that it was not believed by the
Primitive Church: with which vain fancies, you fill your peoples ears. But
having found you already to be so often false Accusers, we will not think it
strange, to see you here like your selves: For the holy Fathers of the
Primitive Church, not only believed, there was a Purgatory, that is, a third
place of temporal punishment, where some souls are purged and punished, after
this life, for venial sins, and for the temporal punishment due to their mortal
sins, not fully satisfied in this life; but also they proved it, by the
Scriptvres; whereof we shall bring two or three testimonies. The first is of S.
Paul 1. Cor. 3. where he says: the work of every one, of what kind it is, the
fire shall try, etc. if any man's work burn, he shall suffer detriment: but
himself shall be saved: yet so as by fire. which words S. Augustine bringing,
speaks thus: Because it is said: Aug. in psalm. 37.
He shall be safe, that fire is contemned; yet that fire shall be more
grievous, then what ever a man can suffer in this life, Purge me Lord in this
life, and make me such an one, as shall not need that mending fire. S. Ambrose
expounds it after the same manner, saying: But, whereas S. Paul says, Amb. in
cap. 3. ep. ad Cor.
Yet so as by fire, he shows indeed, that he shall be saved, but yet shall
suffer the punishment of fire, that being purged by fire, he may be saved, and
not tormented for ever, as the Infidels are with everlasting fire. The second
place is in S. Matthew, chapter 12. v. 32. where our Savior says: He, that shall
speak against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this
world, nor in the world to come. Upon which S. Augustine says: Aug lib. 21. de
Civit. c. 24.
Neither could it be truly said of some, That they are neither forgiven in this
life, nor in the life to come, unless there were some, who, though they are
not forgiven in this life, yet should be, Ber. ser. 66. sup. Cantic.
in the life to come. S. Bernard brings this same testimony, by which alone he
thinks, to have sufficiently confuted the Petro-brusian heretics, who denied
Purgatory in his time. The third place is Math. 5.26.27. where our Savior
says: Amen, I say to thee, thou shall not go out from thence, till thou pay
the last farthing. Upon which S. Hierom. This is that which he says, Hieron.
in c. 5. Math.
thou shall not go out of prison, till thou shall pay even thy little sins. By
all which, it is evident, that Purgatory was believed by the holy Fathers and
by the Primitive Church, and that it has good ground in the Scriptures. Yea the
same was also believed by the ancient Jews, as it is clear out of the 2. book
of the Machabees, 12. chapter and it is also known, that the Jews, to this day,
pray for the dead: to speak nothing, that the very Heathens of old held, and
the Mahumetans hold the same, Bellar. l. 1. de purg. c. 11.
as Bellarmin shows. Therefore, it is not only a false, but also a shameless
calumny, which you Covenanting Ministers do make, when you say, that Purgatory
is a late invention of the Popes; and they are miserably deceived, who give
credit to you. But indeed you ought not to be so great enemies to Purgatory;
seeing you must either grant a certain Purgatory, after this life, or else none
of you can go to Heaven: as has been showed above out of your own principles.
For, seeing according to your doctrine, Supra p. 188.
the filthiness of your sins always remains in you, dureing this life, it
must either be taken away and purged after this life, and so consequently you
must grant a Purgatory; or else you will not be admitted into that heavenly
City, where no unclean thing can enter.

Purgatory then being so firmly established by the the Scriptures, Fathers, and
Tradition of the whole Church, the question of Prayer for the dead, which has
such affinity with it, is soon determined. S. Augustins testimony alone shall
be sufficient, because it shows the practice of the whole ancient Church. Aug.
de Verbis Apost. ser. 34.
It is not to be doubted, says he, but the dead are eased by the prayers of
the holy Church, by the wholesome Sacrifice, and the alms, which are given for
the souls departed; so that they are more mercyfully dealt with, by our Lord,
then their sins do deserve. For this being delivered by the Fathers, the whole
Church observes. And that this was not a new doctrine or practice, Calvin
himself confesses, granting, that it was a custom to pray for the dead, 13.
hundred years, before his time. Call. l. 3. inst. c. 5. par. 10.

You detest next the custom of the Catholic Church, in offering up her
public prayers in a language not vulgaire. But you do this without solid
reason. For first the Church has introduced no Novelty in that matter; but has
still retained her Liturgies in the same Tongues, which she had used from the
first time of her founding, by the holy Apostles. Secondly, The Church has
thought more fitting, to retain her Liturgies in these ancient, sacred, and
unchangeable languages, though not commonly now known; then to subject her
Liturgies to all the inconveniences, that are occasioned by the changes of
vulgaire tongues, which are in a continual ebbing and flowing. This custom may
be confirmed by the practice of the ancient Jews, who having corrupted their
language, by the long continuance of the Babylonicall captivity, speaking
commonly Syraick, did not leave of for that, to continue their office in the
Hebrew tongue: for which our Savior did not reprehend them, which certainly he
had done, if it had been an unlawful thing. Thirdly, The command and practice
of the Church ought to be obeyed and followed, in matters of discipline, where
God has commanded nothing, as he has done nothing here, concerning the language
of the public Liturgy. Lastly, there is no necessity of vseing a vulgaire
tongue, in the public prayers of the Church; seeing they are directed to God
(who understands all languages) for the good of the people, who are
sufficiently instructed in these matters, by continual Catechizing, preaching,
and interpretation, in their vulgaire languages. And hence it comes to pass,
that the service of the Church is more venerable, being in an ancient,
unchangeable language, not known to all: and by that means also, the Communion
of the Churches service is more spread, it being in a Common language.
Therefore, we may justly conclude, that you unjustly blame the Catholic
Church, for vseing this ancient and venerable custom. But you may be justly
blamed, who, although you pray not in a strange language, yet, you oftentimes
pray ex tempore, in a strange sense, yea, you have committed a greater
absurdity: For you have put Latin, which you call a strange language, in your
Confession of faith, this same very Covenant, when you abjure opus operatum: as
we shall see presently: and, which is more, you do not interpret, and explain
it, which, experience shows, none or few of you can do. If it be amiss (as
you allege) to pray unto God in a strange language, albeit he understands all
languages: it is much more faulty in you, to put Latin in your Confession of
faith, which the people does not understand: and yet not only require them to
say, but also enforce them to swear Amen to it: as you have done with your
Covenant: Unless perhaps, you think it a sin, to pray unto God in a strange
language, but not to swear, or curse something in it.

You are Enemies also to the most laudable Ceremonies and devotions of the
Catholic Church; as unto Processions and Litanies, by which Gods glory is
manifested, and his Judgments have been often prevented. First, concerning
Processions, we read in the Scripture, how acceptable to Christ was the
procession of the children and people of Jerusalem, Math. 21.
when he entered into that City, upon Palmes-Sunday, throwing down their
garments before him, carrying branches of Palms, and singing Hosanna: in
imitation of which, the Catholic Church, upon that day, makes solemn
processions, by carrying the holy Sacrament, strawing of flowers, and bearing
of Palms. All which is done to the honor of Christ. In the old Testament
also, we read of the solemn Processions, that were made with the Ark about
Jericho, Iosue 6. And of diverse others, when the Ark was carried from place to
place, 2. Kings 6.7. and 3. Kings 8. They were used also, in the Primitive
Church, as Baronius shows, Baronius tom. 1. anno 48. Basil. ep. 63.
and mention is made of them, in the Council of Laodicea, c. 17. In these
Processions were oftentimes said Litanies or short prayers, by which God has
been often pacifyed: of which S. Basil the great says: Cum Litanias dicimus,
non humanis verbis, sed oraculis Spiritus, Deum placamus. When we say the
Litanies, we pacify God, not with humane words, but by the Oracles of the holy
Spirit. By these Processions and Litanies, Spond. an. 590. n. 4.
or public supplications, the City of Rome was miraculously delivered from a
furious plague, in the time of S. Gregory the great: and the City of Vienne in
France from horrible earthquakes, in the time of S. Mamertus Bishop of that
City: as may be seen in the Ecclesiastical history. Spond. an 475. n. 4.
Therefore, Processions and Litanies are most ancient and laudable; they tend
much to the glory of God, and stirring up of devotion. And the Litanies are so
far from being blasphemous (as you very rashly call them) that they are Oracles
of the holy Ghost, by which Gods judgments have been often prevented.

For the multitude of Mediators and Advocats, which you renounce, the
Catholic Church acknowledges but one Mediator, who has redeemd all mankind,
by the shedding of his precious blood, to wit, Jesus Christ. And for the
Saints, she acknowledges them to be only Mediators and Advocats to pray for
her, as the faithful living pray for others: which makes nothing against the
one Meditation and redemption of Jesus Christ, as is evident to any man, who
has common sense. Therefore, albeit you renounce the mediation of the Saints,
to pray for you; yet the Catholic Church will not renounce the Prayers of the
Saints.

You detest also the Manyfold Orders of the Catholic Church, which are in all
reckoned to be 7. to wit the Order of Porter, Lector, Exorcist, Acolite,
Subdeacon, Deacon, and Priest: and which may be seen explained, Catech. Romans
part 2. de Ordine.
in the Roman Catechism, out of the Scriptures, and holy Fathers. It is
sufficient to know, that they were observed in the most holy and Primitive
times: and it may be truly said, that these Manyfold Orders of the Catholic
Church are much more commendable, then the manyfold Confusions of your
Presbyterian Kirk.

Lastly, you detest here Auricular Confession: But either you detest it, as
unlawful, or unnecessary. You cannot detest it as unlawful; unless you
control both your Masters, Luther and Calvin. Luth. lib. de capt. Babyl. tit.
de penit.
For the first says: Secret Confession, which is now kept in the Church, does
mervailously please me, and is profitable, yea necessary, neither would I wish
it were not; yea I rejoice, that it is in the Church of Christ, since it is a
Sovereign, or only remedy to afflicted souls. Calvin also speaks to the
same purpose, saying: Call. lib. 3. Instit. c. 4.
When any man is troubled with his sins, he may discover them to his Pastor, to
be comforted, etc. Yea not only the late English Church did allow it, but also
your selves do sometimes practice it, confessing to your Ministers, albeit some
of them be not very good Secretaries, telling, in the pulpit, what has been
told them in their care, to the ruin and disgrace of some, as might be shown
by fresh experience. If you detest it as unnecessary, then you go against our
Saviors Commission, and the holy Fathers. For Christ, having made the Apostles
spiritual Judges, and having given them power to bind and loose from sins, it
follows necessarly, that the people must confess their sins to them, or else
their power had been given them in vain; neither could they absolve the people,
from what they knew not. But hear S. Augustine so understanding the Scripture,
and showing the practice of the Primitive Church. Do penance, says he, Aug
homil. 49. ex lib. 50. homil.
as it is done in the Church, etc. Let no man say to himself. I do it
secretly, I do it with God: God, who forgives me, knows I do it from my
heart. Therefore, without cause was it said, what you loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven: Therefore, without cause were the keys given to the Church.
Do we make void the Evangel of God? Do we make void the words of Christ? If
we promise to you that which he denis, do we not deceive you? And elsewhere, he
says: There are some, Idem lib. 2. de Visitat infirmor.
who think it sufficient to Salvation, to confess their sins to God alone: For
they will not, or they are ashamed, or disdain to show themselv's to the
Priests, etc. But I will not, that thou be deceived by that opinion, etc. For
his judgment is also to be undergone, whom our Lord does not disdain to
appoint his Vicar. I pass by more testimonies, for some, have been brought
above to this purpose, Section 7. By this alone Testimony of S. Augustine, you
may see, that your Ministers, who deny the necessity of Confession, or the
desire of it, when a Confessor cannot be had, make the power of loosing to be
given to the Church, without cause, make void the Evangel of God and the words
of Christ; and promising you remission of your sins, without Confession,
promise you that, which Christ denis; and so miserably deceive you. The
Catholic doctrine of Confession is a truth so engraffed in the hearts of
Christians, and the practice of it brings so great comfort, that even these,
who are brought up in a contrary heresy, are enforced sometimes to make use of
it, for the comfort and ease of their distressed consciences: albeit they
confess for the most part to unlawful Pastors, who have no power to absolve
them. And your Puritanical opinion against Confession, is an old damned heresy
of the Novatians, Messalians and Iacobits.

SECTION XI. Of Repentance, Faith, Satisfactions, Opus Operatum, Works of
Supererogation. Merits, Pardons, Peregrinations and Stations.
YOU say next in your Covenant.

We detest his desperate and uncertain Repentance: His general and doubtsome
faith. His Satisfactions of men, for their sins: His Justification by works,
Opus operatum: works of Supererogation, Merits, Pardons, Peregrinations, and
Stations.

Here in the first place, you follow your two Masters Luther and Calvin, by
calling the Repentance of the Catholics, desperate, and uncertain, Bellar.
lib. 1. de penit. c. 2. and 5.
which Cardinal Bellarmin reckons, not amongst their doctrines, but amongst
their deceits and calu^nies. For first, it is most false, that the Catholics
Repentance is desperate, thtough Co^trition be required to it: since there is
no more required, but that which is just, and which many have had, and by Gods
grace may be easily had: neither have any been drawn to despair by it, as the
same Bellarmin affirms against Calvin's calumnies. Secondly, it is falsely
called uncertain: For albeit the Catholics teach, that no man, without divine
revelation, can know the truth of his own repentance, by the certainty of
divine faith; yet he may know it by a moral certainty, ariseing from hope in
the divine goodness, according to that of S. Paul; Romans 8.14.
we are saved by Hope; which is sufficient, to put man's mind in peace and
tranquillity. Then you as falsely detest the Catholic faith, as general and
doubtsome: For, albeit the Catholics bele ve not only all that God has
revealed in gene^all, but also every particular point; yet you call their faith
general and doubtsome: because they will not believe that, which God never
revealed, to wit, your special faith, or rather foolish fancy, by which every
one of you believes, that your sins are forgiven, and that you are of the
number of the predestinate, and by which you think to be justified. But the
Catholics have no reason to believe such a special faith: because, (as it has
been showed above) it is nothing but mere presumption, and is condemned as a
false faith, and a private fancy, by a famous Protestant, and it is so
groundless and doubtsome, that it brings diverse among your selves, who follow
closely your principles, into great perturbation of mind, and some into
desperation. All which, as also the truth and certainty of the Catholics
justifying faith, may be seen handled above, in the matter of Justification,
and particularly in the 17. Chapter page 183. and some few pages following.

After you have detested Confession, and blamed the Catholics, for requireing
so much Contrition: now you detest Satisfaction, and so you renounce all the
three parts of the Sacrament of Penance: but you do this with as little reason;
as you have done the rest: For, by Satisfactions, the Catholics understand
some laborious works, such as Prayer, A mesdeeds, fasting, which are offered up
to God, in Satisfaction, for the temporal punishment due to our sins, after the
guilt and eternal punishment are taken away, by the Sacramental absolution:
which doctrine is most consonant to the Scrip^ures and holy Fathers. That
temporal punishment remains due to sin, after the eternal is remitted, is most
clear in the person of King David, 2. Kings chapter 12. v. 13.
who, after he had got remission of his sins from God, by the mouth of Nathan
the Prophet, was notwithstanding punished temporally, with the death of his
Son. Aug. tract 124. in Joan.
This truth S. Augustine does testify, saying: A man is forced to suffer, even
after his sins are forgiven, etc. puni^hment does hold a man temporally, whom
sin holds not guilty unto eternal damnation. That this temporal pain,
remaining after the guilt of sin is remitted, may be redeemed by good works,
which are therefore called Satisfactions, is also evident. For Daniel said to
the King, Let me Counsel thee, Daniel 4.
o King, redeem thy sins with alms, and thy iniquities with the mercies of the
poor. S. John Baptist says: Do fruits worthy of Penance. S. Augustine, upon
these words of the Psalm, Luke 3.8.
Cleanse me from my sin, desires sinners to say with David: No my Lord, Aug in
psalm. 50.
my sin shall not be unpunished, it shall not be unpunished: but therefore I
will not, that thou punish it, because I punish my own sin. I pass by more
testimonies for brevities sake. It is sufficient, to note that the Centurists
confess this was the doctrine and practice of the ancient Church: as may be
seen, Centurie 3. col. 127. Neither is it any wonder, that you, who deny all
good works, are so great Enemies to Satisfactions, or works of austerity.

You detest next the Popes Justification by works; but you might as well, with
your first Apostle Luther, renounce the Justification of S. James, who teaches
the same, in express terms, saying: Do you see, that, by works, James 2. chapter
v. 24.
a man is justified, and not by faith only? But enough of this matter has been
said above.

Then for opus operatum, which you abjure, it has bred some of your Ministers
endless work; for, being often enquired, they could never tell truly, what it
was; but brought diverse ridiculous, and oftentimes contrary glosses or rather
gesses on it, which would be too tedious here to insert. Whereby it is evident,
Jude v. 10.
that they have blasphemed things, as S. Jude speaks, whereof they are
ignorant: and have made many thowsands do the same. What the Catholic Doctors
intend by opus operatum, has been above showed, page 202. to wit that the
Sacraments of the new Law do confer grace, by the work wrought: that is by
the power of the Sacramental action, instituted by Christ to that effect; and
not by the merit of the Minister, or Receiver of the Sacraments: which is a
most certain truth, as may be seen above explained, and confirmed at more
length. This is a better work wrought, then the work of your Covenant, which
has wrought much mischief in great Britain.

You are not content to renounce all works of duty, which are commanded, by
denying the possibility of keeping the commandments; unless you renounce also
works of more perfection, not commanded, but Counseled, which the Catholics
call works of Supererogation. That there are such works most laudable and
commendable, albeit you detest them, is evident by the Scriptures and Fathers.
For Virginity is not a command, but a Counsel: and is more perfect then
Matrimony. Of this S. Paul gives testimony saying: As concerning Virgins, a
commandment of our Lord I have not, but Counsel I give, as having obtaynd mercy
of our Lord to be faithful. 1. Cor. 7.25. where he also shows, that he, who
mary's does well: but he, who mary's not, does better ver. ^8. The same also
our Savior shows, saying: that there are Eunuchs, who have gelded
themselves, for the Kingdom of Heaven. Again our Savior shows another
Counsel, Math. 19.12.
or work of perfection, when he said to the young man in the Gospel: If thou will be perfect: Go sell the things thou have, and give to the poor, and thou
shall have treasure in Heaven. Math. 19.21. To these two works of perfection is
adioyn'd voluntary obedience, as Christ himself show, by his voluntary
subjection to the blessed Virgin, and S. Joseph: He himself being the absolute
Lord of them and all things. S. Luke 2.51. The holy Fathers are most clear for
this doctrine. S. Chrysostom says: Chrysostom. in 1. ad Cor. c. 9.
Some things Christ commands, somethings he leaves to our own free will: For
he said not: sell that thou have: but if thou will be perfect, sell that thou
have, etc. And in his 18. homily of Penance, he says: Multi and ipsa superant
mandata: Aug. de Virginitate c. 30.
Many go beyond the very commandments. S. Augustine also shows the
difference, between Commands and Evangelical Counsels, affirming, that, for not
doing the first, men are condemned; but, for doing the other, they are
commended: in these things God commands a debt, in those, what you shall
supererogate (or bestow more) he will render at his return. These are the
excellent works of perfection, to which, a great treasure or reward is promised
in heaven: these are the Heroic acts of Virtue, which are only performed in
the Catholic Church, and show the admirable excellency and perfection of the
Christian religion, against which excellent works, you are so great Enemies;
that you have not so much virtue, as to approve them, when they are performed
by others. The truth is so clearly here on the Catholics side against you;
that it extorted a Confession from one of your own Coat, M. Shelford a
Protestant Minister, who, having spoken a little of the foresaid Evangelical
Counsels, and of the great rewards, that are promised to them, concludes in
these words: These are Gods Counsels, Shelf. p. 109.
which, of the Primitive Church, were put in practice, but in our times
(meaning of the Protestant Church) they are put off, with a Non placet.

You detest next the Catholic doctrine of Merits, which, you would make the
ignorant believe, to be most absurd; and indeed so it will seem to any, who
looks upon it, through your Ministerial spectacles, representing it unto them,
as if the Catholics taught, that good works, done by the force of Nature, and
not by the power of Christ's grace, were meritorious of Heaven, or that they
taught, that they were to be saved by their own merits, and not by the merits
of Christ: whereas indeed the Catholic doctrine is just contrary, as may be
seen in the Council of Trent, sess. 6. can. 1. 10. 32 33. and in the 8. Chapter
of that same Session; of which matter something has been touched above page
190. 191. and before that p. 171. where some words of the Council, to this
purpose, are cited. The true sense, then of the Catholics, concerning Merits,
is, that good works done by a person in the state of grace, and performed by
the power and strength of Christ's grace, have a reward of eternal life, by
Christ's goodness, promised unto them. The Scripture is so clear for this
truth, that it is wonder, how any person can doubt of it it Our Savior says.
Be glad, and rejoice: for great is your reward in heaven. Math. 5.12. Again:
call the workmen, and pay them their hire. chapter 20. 8. S. Paul says: God will
render to every one, according to his works, to them truly, that, according to
patience in good works, seek glory and incorruption, life eternal. Romans 2.6.7.
who sowes in the Spirit, shall reap in the Spirit life everlasting. 1. Cor.
6.8. And of himself he says: I have fought a good fight, etc. concerning the
rest, there is laid up for me a Crown of Justice, etc. 2. Tim. 4.7. And in the
Apocalypse, it is said of some Saints: They shall walk with me in whites,
because they are worthy. Whereby it is as evident, as the Sun, that life
eternal is the reward and hire of good works, and therefore, they are
meritorious: for rewards are not given, but to merits. The holy Fathers are so
much for this doctrine, that Luther and diverse Protestants do censure them
for it: Prot. Apol. tract. 1. sec. 3. sub. 6. Aug lib. 50. Homil. 4.
as may be seen in the Protestants Apology. We shall be content to cite one
only testimony of S. Augustine, who says: He (to wit Paul) says, that our
Lord a Just Judge will render to him a Crown: he therefore owes it, and as a
Just Judge will pay it; for the work being regarded, the reward cannot be
denied. But the evidence of this truth is so great, that it is acknowledged by
other Protestants, The forementioned M. Shelford says: Shelf p. 115.
The main Tenet of the Scripture is, that God will reward every man, according
to his works. And much more to this purpose. The Protestant Author of the
Christian Moderator confesses it yet more fully, saying: Christ Mother. p. 67.
I profess sincerely, I should be so far from enforceing Papists to renounce
the Doctrine of Merits, that I am resolved to suffer a thousand deaths, rather,
then abjure so manifest a truth, according to the sense, wherein they explain
themselves; or affirm so great and manifest an Error, according to the sense,
wherein we explain our selves. Thus he. But according to your principles, you
have reason, to renounce all merits; since you deny all good works: affirming,
that your best actions are mortal sins, to which indeed, not reward, but
punishment is due; and so you will be in a very hard case, if you be rewarded,
according to your works.

You renounce also Pardons or Indulgences: but, when these are known, according
to the Catholics sense, they are not such Boggles, as you would make them
appear to children: For these are only remissions of the temporal penance or
pains, which, for the most part, remain to be suffered for the Satisfaction of
sin, after the guilt thereof is taken away. That the Church has this power, is
proved by our Saviors words: Math. 16.
Whatsoever thou shall loose in earth, shall be also loosed in heaven. And by
the practice of S. Paul, who pardoned the incestuous Corinthian of the rest of
his penance. 2. Cor. 10. where he says, he pardoned him, in the person of
Christ. Neither, in this matter rightly understood, can there be any
difficulty: and therefore, we will insist no more on it: And the Ministers
themselves have been known, to give such pardons to some faulters, freeing them
from their stool of Repentance.

For Pilgrimages to holy places, which you detest, we need not also to stand
much upon them, seeing they were ordained by God himself: as may be seen,
Deuternomie 16. chapt. ver. 16. where Moses says: Three times in a year,
shall all thy male appear in the sight of our Lord thy God, in the place,
which he shall choose. The holy parents of Samuel carefully observed this
precept. 1. Kings 1. as also Christ himself and his blessed Mother. Luke 2.
John 12. The Gentiles likewise came from far Countries, to worship in Jerusalem,
as the Eunuch of Aethiopia. Acts. 8.27. And the three wisemen came from the
East, John 2.
to adore Christ at his birth. Mat. 2. The devout women went to visit our
Saviors sepulcher. Now what was the practice of the Primitive Church, is so
clear, that it needs no proof. Hier. epist. 17. ad Marcellam.
S. Hierom says it would be longsome to recount, through every age, from the
Ascension of Christ, to the present time, the number of Bishops, Martyrs and
eloquent persons, who have come to Jerusalem, to adore Christ in these holy
places, etc. And again. The Jews of old did worship the Holy of Holyes:
because there were the Cherubins, the propitiatory and Ark of the Testament,
Manna, the Rod of Aaron and the golden Altar. But does not the Sepulcher of
Christ seem more Venerable unto thee, the glory of whose Sepulcher was
foretold by Esaias. And his Sepulcher shall be glorious. etc. The peregrinations
also to visit the Sepulchers of S. Peter and S. Paul, and of other Saints, were
very frequent in the Primitive Church, and are not blamed by some Protestants.
These devout Pilgrimages, to visit holy places and Saints relics, by which
God and his Saints are much honored, devotion augmented, and many benefits
often obtaind, are much more commendable, then your intended warlik
peregrinations, with your Covenanting Armies, to destroy these holy places and
Monuments of piety. But you have come far short of your reckoning. How much are
you degenerated from the piety of your Ancestors, who built diverse Hospitals
in the way to Rome, enriching them with revenues to receive the Pilgrins, who
were going to visit the bodies of the holy Apostles, Baron. ad an number 845. ex
Concilio Meldensi c. 15.
as Cardinal Baronius testifyeth?

Then, for Stations, which you have made the people abjure with implicit faith,
they have put many of your best Ministerial heads to a stand; not being able to
show, what they are as is known by many experiences. But, albeit you ignorantly
abjure them; yet they are most ancient and commendable. Tertullian makes
mention of them, Tert. in lib. de fug^ in persecutione.
when he says: that the Church in time of persecution, disciplinaticr est in
ieiunijs, Stationibus, and Orationibus, that is; more exercised in Fastings,
Stations, and Prayers. And in many other places he speaks of them. They were
nothing else, but Vigils or daily watches of people, continually praying in the
time of Solemn fasts. Which were called Stations by a Similitude drawn from an
Army, wherein there are always some appointed to keep watch, when others are
at rest. So in the Catholic Church, which is the Army of the living God,
there are some ordained to stand watching and praying for the rest. What evil
is in this, or rather is there not great good in it? But thereafter, the
Stations were not only used upon fasting days, but also upon Sundays and
Feasts, as may be seen more amply in Cardinal Bellarmin. lib. 2. de bonis
operibus. c. 22. And it is related in the life of S. Columbanus, a great
Apostle of our Nation, that, in the famous Monastery which he founded at
Luxovium in Burgundy, there were so many religious persons, that there were
ever some in the Quire, night and day, praying and praising God. Such holy
Stations are much better, then your Kirk-Sessions: and therefore you very
inconsideratly abjure them.

SECTION XII. Of holy Water, Consecration of Bells, solemn Vows, the sign of
the Cross and the rest of the Covenant.
YOU subioyn next in your Covenant, these words:

We detest his holy water, Baptizing of Bells; coniuring of Spirits, crossing,
saving, anointing, coniuring, hallowing of Gods good Creatures, with the
Superstitious opinions joined therewith. His worldly Monar^hie, and wicked
Hierarchy. His three solemn Vows with all his shavelings of sundry sorts. His
corrupted and bloody decrees, made at Trent, with all the subscribers and
approvers of that cruel and bloody Band, coniured against the Kirk of God. And
finally, we detest all his Vain Allegories, Rites, Signs and Traditions,
brought in the Kirk, without, or against the word of God, and Doctrine of this
true Reformed Kirk. etc.

To make now an end of your Covenant, a little word shall be spoken of the
particulars, which you here abjure. First, you detest Holy water, which the
Devil also hates: because he has found often the power and virtue of it.
Mention is made of holy water, Numb. 5. and 17. S. Clement shows, that S.
Matthew did ordain the manner of consecrating it. And S. Basil the great reckons
it among the Apostolical Traditions. As for the effects of it, Cleme^s lib. 8.
Apostolicarum instit. c. 35. Basil. lib. de Spiritu S. c. 27. Epiph. haeres.
30. Hieron. in vita Hilarionis. Bernard in vita Malachia.
S. Epiphanius shows, that Joseph did dissolve incantations, by holy water;
and S. Hierom does testify the same, of S. Hilarion. Besides, S. Bernard
witnesses, that S. Malachias by holy water, did cure a phrenetique man, and a
woman who was much vexed with a Cancer. This is sufficient, to show, that the
use of holy water is most ancient, and profitable; which might be shown also
for other effects, as of taking away venial sins. But we proceed to the rest.

After your detesting of holy water, you detest the Catholics consecration of
Bells to Gods service: which is done, by sprinkling of holy water upon them,
and by vseing some other Ceremonies, for which you call it baptizing of Bells,
whereby some are brought to think, that the Catholics do really baptize them:
So that M. Sutcliff accuses them, for abuseing thereby, the Sacrament of
Baptism. To which D. Kellison answers; that the said M. Sutcliff is very
ridiculous; if he think, that the Catholic Church baptizeth Belles, as she
does little Infants: or that she says to the Bell: I Baptize thee in name of
the Father, etc. And therefore, if he look into the Pontiflcal, he shall find,
that this blessing of belles consists only in sprinkling holy water, prayers
and other ceremonies, by which the Bell is dedicated to Gods service. And,
although the people, in some places (as in France) call it baptizing of Bells;
yet this baptizing is only a Benediction, or Dedication of the Bell. kellisons
Reply to Sutcliff
Thus the Doctor, with much more to this purpose: as may be seen in his Reply,
p. 348 This blessing and hallowing of Bells is much better, then your Reformers
unhallowing, and selling of them: which Sacrilege God did visibly punish, when,
at the beginning of your pretended Reformation, he caused a ship laden with
the lead, Bells, and other Ornaments of some Churches, which they were sending
beyond seas, to be sold, to plump down suddenly, on a very fair day, in the
road of Aberdeen, whereby all the persons and goods within it were lost: as is
known by the relation of some old creditable persons, yet living. That was
indeed, in some sense, Dipping of Bells!

You abjure coniuring of Spirits or Exorcismes, by which the Catholic Church,
invocating the name of Jesus Christ, and of his Saints, commands and expells
Devils out of persons possessed. But you do this so much the more without
reason, Just. Mar. Dial. cum Tryph. Cypr. l. ad Demetrian Staphylus in absoluta
Responsione.
that it was not only used efficaciously, in the Primitive Church, as S. Justin
Martyr and S. Cyprian do testify, but also, because you were never able to
cast out any. Luther indeed your first Apostle tried to cast out a Devil from a
certain woman, a Disciple of his; but that enterprise succeeded so ill with
him, that he himself was in great danger to be killed by the Devil, and left
behind him a very evil odor: as Staphylus, who was present, does relate.

You abjure also the sign of the Cross, which S. Basil reckons in the first
place, Basil. l. de Sp. S. c. 27. Aug. tract. 118, in Euang. Joan Chrysostom. iul
quod Christus sit Deus. Nazian orat 1. in Julian.
amongst the Apostolical Traditions: and which S. Augustine call the sign of
Christ, without which no benediction is rightly perfected. It was so much
honored in the primitive times, that it was erected as S. Chrysostom
testifyes, upon the topes of Kings Crowns and Scepters, and imprinted upon the
front, or head of man, the most noble member of his body, as upon a living
pillar: and it is most efficacious against temptations, and the affrightfull
apparitions of Devils, whereof Julian the Apostata found experience: as S.
Gregory Nazianzen relates, with many circumstances. Therefore, you are very
rashly Enemies to this glorious sign of the Son of man; and some of you very
wickedly do call it, the sign of the beast: and it may be justly said, the
Catholics Crossings, are much better then your cursings.

By detesting the anointing of the Catholic Church, you detest S. James,
James 5 Mark 6.13.
who prescribed it, and the holy Apostles, who practiced it: as S. Mark
testifies, saying: They anointed with oil many sick; and the Primitive Church
which used it, Aug. in Pref. psalm. 26. enarr. 2
whereby S. Augustine shows the excellency of Christians, to whom all now
Unction. belongs, which was only proper before to Priests and Kings. By
detesting the hallowing of Gods good Creatures, you detest your own practice,
in blissing your meat, with long graces, and the elements of your Sacrament,
with long prayers. S. Paul shows, that Every Creature may be sanctified, 1.
Timoth. 4.4.5.
by the word of God and prayer. The hallowing of Gods Creatures to pious uses
is not superstition; but the contrary practice is profanation. The Popes
worldly Monarchy, as you call it, has agreed better with all the Monarchs of
the world, and that for many ages; then your worldly Democracy has consisted
with one or two Monarchs, in one corner of the world, for the few years you
have lasted. And the Sacred Hierarchy of the Church, which you, without all
modesty, call wicked, has not produced such wicked effects, for the space of
16. hundred years and above; as the Anarchy of your Presbytery has done in
less, then the space of twenty. You abjure also the three solemn Vows of
voluntary chastity, poverty and obedience, which have been shown above, to be
works of greater perfection. This shows that the Prophet Esaias did not mean of
you, but of the members of the true Church, when he prophesied of them, Esaias 19
21.
saying: They shall Vow Vows unto our Lord, and pay them. But your first chief
Reformers Vowed these solemn Vows, and brake them. And it may be justly said,
that these 3. Solemn Vows are much better works, then your solemn League and
Covenant.

You renounce also the Clerical Tonsure, which you call shavelings of diverse
sorts. But that this was a most ancient Ceremony, Dionys. lib. de Eccles.
Hierarchia c. 6 Athan. lib. de Virginitate. Hier. epist. ad Savinianum Beda
hist. Anglor. lib. 5. c. 22.
S. Denis, Athanasius, Hierom and others do testifie^ and Venerable Bede
affirms, that S. Peter did first of all carry a Crown of hairs, the rest of
his head being poll'd. The mysterious significations of this ceremony may be
seen in Bellarmin, lib. 2. de Monachis cap. 40. And, albeit no other reason be
brought, the very venerable antiquity of it alone is sufficient, to show, that
these shavelings of sundry sorts, are better then your new Roundheads of
sundry sects. Then you detest, according to your phrase, the Popes corrupted
and bloody decrees, made at Trenf. But that is ordinary for all Novelists to
carry hatred to, and calumniate these Sacred General Councels, by whose
authority, their corrupted errors are condemned: so did the Arians to the great
Council of Nice. That which you speak of a cruel and bloody Band, subscrybed
there, is a mere calumny; for no such thing was done there. But indeed it is
no calumny, to call your Covenant, which was approved and subscrybed at your
Assembly of Glasgow, a cruel and bloody Band: as the effects have proved. It is
by such cruel and bloody Bands, that false religions must be propagated, or
rather enforced against men's Consciences; But the Catholic Church, trusting
in the promise of Christ's assistance, and being armed with the force of truth,
goes on upon other principles. You are pleased also not only to detest the
Decrees of the Council of Trent; but likewise the subscrybers and Approvers
thereof, whom you call Conspirators against the Kirk of God. But albeit your
passion leads you to detest their doctrines; yet civility should oblige you not
to detest their persons; especially since some Approvers thereof are the most
Eminent Princes of the world, to whom you ought to carry respect. And whereas,
you take upon you, the name and authority of the Church of God; it has been
showed above, that your Kirk has lain too long hid, to be the Kirk of God. You
call your Kirk a Reformed Kirk; but it ought rather to be called a new formed
Kirk, because it is substantially different from the old: and it is so far from
being truly Reformed, that it is deformed in the principal points of the
Christian religion, as we have seen, concerning the Apostles Creed, our Lords
prayer, the Commandments and Sacraments; besides many other substantial
articles above touched. That, which you say of the Popes Vain Allegories, Rites
and Signs, is frivolous. It is known that these Allegories, which you blame,
were used by the holy Fathers, and particularly by S. Augustine, who excelled in
the Allegorical sense of the Scriptures: whose Allegories are not vain, but
most grave, and will be preferred by all sound judgments; to your Ministers
vain Tropes and figures, against the clear Scriptures; as we have seen in the
matter of the holy Sacrament. Of Traditions, we have spoke sufficiently above.
All the rest that follows in your Covenant, (excepting the two untruths
touched above in the first section, and your Oath for maintaining the Kings
authority) is nothing, but a concatenation of most fearful and horrible Oaths
whereby you tie yourselves, under highest curses, and pains, to maintain
these your gross errors and Heresies; which ought rather to be deplored, then
confuted; especially since you are begun to find the effects of these
enormities.

Thus I have briefly collected the principal observations, which my Catholic
Friend and I made upon the Covenant, although I have passed by many things,
that were in his papers; that this book might not exceed the just bigness. But
by what has been said, may be in some measure seen, what counterfeit metal the
Covenant is, and what a mass of Errors and old condemned heresies it
contains, joined with blasphemous Execrations of the principal points of the
holy Catholic faith; and what an Idol the simple people was made to adore. It
is truly to be regrated, that our Nation, which for the space of 14. hundred
years did profess the Catholic faith, with so great piety; and did propagate
it abroad, with so great glory and zeal, of which many Monuments are extant in
foreign Nations, should be now so blinded with Error, and miscarried by
passion, against the truth; that, for the most part, if it were in their power,
they are no less Zealous to extirpate it. Baron. tom. 5. in supplem. ad annum
429.
The most famous Cardinal Baronius gives this excellent testimony of the
ancient Scottish Christians. These, says he, who received the Gospel first
from Pope Victor, and their first Bishop from Pope Celestin, by whom they were
all made Christians, did profitt so much through the grace of Christ, that they
became the most excellent of all Christians: and practicing the Christian
faith, with great diligence, by an Apostolical function, did propagate it
largely and gloriously, among foreign and remote Nations, as we shall see in
due place. Thus Baronius. It may please God, in his own time, to dispell the
clouds of darkness, and Ministerial calumnies, and make the light of truth
appear again unto this Nation; and turn their hearts unto the right way, from
which they have gone very far astray. And that this may be granted, all ought
to pray, especially these, whom God has called lately in this Nation, unto the
knowledge of the truth. With the concurrence of which desire, I would make an
end, if the Renounciation of the Covenant, shown by my Catholic friend, to
me, and some other new Converted Catholics, wherein there is an Antithesis
almost in every point, between the Catholic and Presbyterian doctrine, were
not thought fitting, to be here subioynd; with which we shall conclude.

A RENOVNCIAtion of the Scottish Presbyterian Covenant, or Confession of Faith.
WE, whom it has pleased God of late, to call mercyfully, from the darkness
of Heresy, unto the admirable light of the holy Catholic faith, do profess,
that, after The Catholics long and dilligent search may appear, by the former
Trial: whereas the Covenanters used neither long nor due examination of their
consciences, as may be seen above page 411.
LONG and serious search for the Truth, we are now Catholics, who rely upon
the immovable Pillar and ground of Truth, to Wit, the holy Catholic Church,
which never changes, are fully satisfied, and assured of the Truth: But
Heretics, who quite this solid ground, and follow the Private Spirit, which
is very inconstant, let them pretend what they please, can never have full
assurance; which evidently appears, by their continual changes and new
pretended lights. See above, pa. 425.
FVLLY satisfied thereof, by the Christ promised that the Spirit of Truth
should remain in his Church for ever, and teach her all Truth. John 14.16.
John 16.13. And yet, it is strange, that every new heretic, without
Scripture, appropriats this Spirit to himself; and, against Scripture, and
Christ's clear promise, denis the holy Spirit to the whole Church. The same may
be said also of their vain pretext of the word of God. See above page 423. 424.
WORD and Spirit of God, RESIDING constantly in the holy Catholic Church. And
therefore, we believe and profess, that this only is the true Religion,
without which, it is impossible to please God; which was of The true faith was
revealed of old, and, from that time, can never be hid: But the Presbyterian
faith has two contra^y qualities, to wit, it is now revealed, and has lain
long hid: as may be seen above p. 426. See also Math. 5.16.17.
OLD mercyfully revealed by our blissed Savior Jesus Christ; and by his holy
Apostles, through the preaching of the blessed Evangel: which, since that time,
has never lye^ HID, but has ever shynd, like a light set upon a Candlestick;
And has been professed, through All Ages, in The true Church must be in all
Nations, as Esaias foretells saying: All Nations shall flow unto it. Esaias, 2.2.
and Christ show, that repentance should be preached in his name, unto all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Luke, 24.47. For this cause the true Church
is called Catholic, as being dispersed through All Nations: as she is also
Catholic for Time, endureing in All Ages. But Heresys are only in some few
Nations or corners of the world: and in these also, they are not the same, but
full of diversity and contrariety, which is manifestly verifyed of the
Presbyterians and Protestants. See above chapter 32. 34.
All Christian Nations, and particularly in the ancient Kingdom of Scotland,
as Gods As Gods Truth is Eternal, so it cannot be hid. Esaias 62.6. But the
Presbyterians pretended Eternal Truth has been too long hid
Eternal and MOST KNOWN TRVTH, the only ground of our Salvation; as may be seen
in the Catholic Confession of Faith, approved and authorized, by the The
approbations of all General Councels, which are governed by the holy Ghost, and
which do never revoke their determinations, by which the Catholic faith is
approved, and confirmed, are a much more solid authority, to confirm the
Catholic religion; then are the earthly courts of changeing Parliaments, to
establish any sort of the Protestant Religion. We know by experience, that
there are nothing more changeable, then Acts of Parliament. See page 430.
Universal consent, and irrevocable Determinations, of all the General Councels
of the Christian world. And has been, not for the short space of 20. or
hundred, but for the The Scottish Nation was converted to the faith an. Christi
203. Leslaeus de Reb. gestis, Scot. l. 1. p. 114. which is above 1400. years
ago, during which time, it remaind co^sta^t in the Catholic faith, except a
little of late. This indeed may be called a long time: but the Presbyterians
long time is only 20 years, as may be known by calculation, and as yet it is
not a hundred.
LONG time of 14. hundred years, and above, professed publicly, not by one or
two, but by above Since the conversion of King Donald the first Christian King,
there are reckoned above 80. Catholic Kings of this Nation, as may be seen in
our Histories; whereas the Presbyterians had only one King, to wit, King James
the 6. who subscrybed their Covenant, in his younger years: which he also
disproved thereafter, in the Conference at Hampton Court.
80. KINGS of this Nation, diverse of which are There were diverse of the
Scottish Catholic Kings, eminent for holiness, as S. william, S. David, S.
Malcom, and many more: as may be seen in Camerarius lib. 3. de Scotorum pietate
c. 4. where he reckons out also many great Saints of the Royal race; as S.
Rumoldus, S. Fiacre, S. Mathildis, etc.
GLORIOUS SAINTS in Heaven; and by the whole body of this Kingdom, For the
ancient piety and zeal of the Scottish Nation, to propagate the Kingdom of
Christ, Baronius testimony cited, at the latter end of the last section is
sufficient: where the Scots are said to have become praesta^tissimi omniu^
Christiani, etc.
which had filled the Christian world, with the fame of their piety and zeal,
for propagating the eternal Kingdom of Christ.

To the which Confession, and ancient UNIFORM Religion; We, without any
constraint of men, but merely for the love of Truth, in Hope of Eternal Reward,
though with imminent danger of Temporal losses, do most As it is evident that
these, who embrace the Catholic faith in Scotland, where it is persecuted,
do it willingly; so it is manifestly known, that many were constrained to take
the Covenant: and so did not willingly agree to it. See above chapter 4. p. 26. and
sect. 1. p. 417.
WILLINGLY agree in our whole hearrs, as unto Gods The Catholic faith is so
undoubted Truth, that it is altogether unalterable, with the Catholics: But
ths Protestant Faith cannot be undoubted Truth, seeing it is so often altered by
Protestants, see p. 430. in fine.
UNALTERABLE Truth, grounded only upon his The Catholics believe all Gods
revealed word; whether unwritten, or written, according to the express command
of the written word: Hold the Traditions 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. But the Presbyterians,
against the written word, reject all Traditions.
REVEALED word.

And therefore, we renounce all sects and Heresies, contrary unto it; But
especially the PRESBYTERIAN sect, and all the points thereof; as they are now,
and have been anciently condemned, by the How the Presbyterian sect albeit it
prete^ds the word of God (as all Heretics do ordinarily pretend) is
notwithstanding condemned by the word of God, and by the holy Catholic
Church, which is of far greater Authority, then the Presbyterian Kirk of
^cotland, may be seen almost every where, in the former Treatises.
word of God, and by the HOLY CATHOLIQVE CHVRCH. But particularly we reject the
UNPARALLELED INSOLENCY of that Calvinistical As it has been showed above, sect.
4. p. 432. that the Pope is the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and therefore not Anti
Christ; so also all, who do not belong to him, belong not to Christ, but to
Anti Christ; and therefore are Anti Christian. So S. Hierom expressly affirms
ibid. p. 437.
ANTICHRISTIAN Sect, upon both the Calvin usurped ove^ the letter of the
Scriptures, by making up a new Canon, never known before; And he usurped over
the sense, of them, by rejecting the ancient sense of the holy Fathers, and by
inventing new senses, according to his private fancies. So do also his
Disciples, the Presbyterian Ministers. So did likewise Luther most grossly, see
p. 439.
LETTER and SENSE of the holy Scriptures, upon the Calvin did vsurp over the
holy Catholic Church, who, having no lawful authority, would take upon him
to reform the Church, to judge and condemn her, to prescribe his own fancies,
as divine Rules unto her: So do also the Presbyterians See p. 440.
HOLY CATHOLIQVE CHVRCH, upon their own The Presbyterians in Scotland have had
but 4. Princes, since their religion began, and they have vndenyably usurped
highly over them all: as may be seen. p. 440. and 41.
LAWFVLL PRINCES and Superiors, and their Tyrannizing over the How they
Tyrannized over the consciences of their fellow subjects, is notoriously known:
and may be seen. chap. 4. p. 26.
CONSCIENCES of their fellow-subiects These, who under pretense of Christian
liberty, disobey just Laws, such as are the Laws of the Catholic Church,
(which were also observed in the primitive times, as these, about lent fasting,
the single life of Church men etc.) make their freedom a cloak of malice,
against S. Peter's advice 1. Pet. 2.13. and an occasion to the flesh. Gal. 5.13.
see above p. 454. 455.
All their LICENTIOVS Exemptions from obedience to just Laws, under pretense
of Christian liberty, to cloak INIQVITIE, and give occasion to the FLESH.
Their DESTVCTIVE Doctrine against the necessity of the The Presbyterians destroy
all Traditions, against the express Scripture. See above p. 445. and 6.
UNWRITTEN word, expressly commended by the written word: They teach, that it is
impossible, even with Gods grace, to keep his Law, in observation whereof all
perfection substantially consists; and so indeed they destroy the end and
perfection of the Law, see above chapter 13. 14. and sect. 5. p. 448.
against the FVLFILLING of the Law, without which there is no PERFECTION:
against the Triple They destroy the office of Christ, as King, by spoiling him
of the Kingdom of his Church, for many ages: They destroy his Priestly office,
by abrogating the daily sacrifice: and his Prophetical, by denying the
accomplishment of his Prophesies, concerning his Churches continuance and
Visibility. see above p. 449.
OFFICE of Christ, as he is KING, PRIEST and PROPHET: which is a manifest
corruption of the blessed Evangel.

Their corrupted Doctrine of Calvin teaches that Original sin still remains
in us, even after Baptism: and that it defiles before God, what ever works
proceed from us; and so makes the^ mortal sins, which doctrine, the
Presbyterians follow, as may be seen above, with more to this purpose p. 451.
454.
ORIGINAL sin: which makes their BEST actions MORTAL sins. Our The
Presbyterians grant such a natural inhability, that they deny all supernatural
ability in man, to keep Gods Law, even with the assistance of all his Grace:
which is a most dangerous corrupted doctrine: as may be seen above, p. 454. and
more fully chapter 13. 14. of Presb. Trial.
SVPERNATVRAL ABILITY, and dutiefull SVBIECTION to Gods Law. Our Justification
by They make Justification by faith only, the principal article of their
Reformation, and deny Justification by works; expressly against the Scripture,
James 2.124. and the holy Fathers. See above chapter 14. p. 157.
WORKS. Our They make our sanctification so imperfect, that we cannot by it
think so much as a good thought, or do any thing but sin mortally; and still
disobey Gods Commandments, so that such sanctification is rather profanation,
and such Obedience is Disobedience. See above p. 455.
PERFECT Sanctification, and Obedience, through Christ's Grace, unto the Law.

The They have corrupted the Nature of the Sacraments, by denying, that they
were ordaind to confer Grace, and by making them only signs and Tokens. They
have corrupted the number, by taking away 5. Sacraments: and the use, by
abrogating both private Baptism and Communion, besides both the public and
private use of others. See above p. 458. and seq. and before chapter 18. Presb.
Trial.
NATVRE, NVMBER, and USE of the Holy Sacraments. Their two By denying the two
Sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist (which they admit,) to confer
Grace, They make them Graceless and so indeed Bastard Sacraments; since the
Sacraments of the Law of Grace, were instituted to confer Grace. Above. p.
467. and before that chapter 18 Pres. Trial p. 194.
GRACELESS SACRAMENTS, administrated without all holy They not only not
practice the Venerable Rites and Ceremonies of the Catholic Church which were
used in the Primitive times, as may be seen in Coccius. tom. 2. Thesau. Cathol.
but also they condemn them. See p. 464.
RITES, and CEREMONIES, Venerable for Antiquity, Commanded by lawful
Authority, and not contrary to the true Doctrine and word of God. Their They
teach that children dying with baptism, if they do not belong to the Covenant
of grace, are not saved: whereby they suppose, that all children dying with
baptism, do not belong unto it: which is a most cruel judgment. See p. 218.
219. And besides, they suffer cruelly diverse children to die without Baptism:
for which cruelty K. James affirmed their Ministers would be damned. See p.
221. 222.
UNCHRISTIAN Judgment, against many children, dying WITH the Sacrament:
together with their most CRVEL. PRACTICE of suffering many children to die
WITHOUT the Sacrament. Their They make Baptism not to be necessary to the
Salvation of Infants, against the Scripture and holy Fathers: as may be seen
above. chap. 20. per totum.
CONDITIONAL necessity, or rather INDIFFERENCY of the most NECESSARY Sacrament
of Baptism. Their more then CHIMERICAL IMAGINATION of the REAL ABSENCE of
Christ's body FROM the Elements, together with the REAL PRESENCE of the same, to
the souls of their faithful RECEIVERS.

Their Their first Reformers brake their Solemn Oaths and Vows without all
Dispensations p. 469. And the Presbyterians have made many to periure
themselves, by enforceing them to take the Covenant, against their Consciences.
They allow also Marriages in degrees forbidden by the Catholic Church: for
the people often marries among them, in the second, third, and 4. degree,
without all Dispensations See also above, that it is a false calumny, that the
Catholic Church dispenses in degrees forbidden by the Law of Christ. p. 470.
VIOLATIONS of Solemn Oaths WITHOUT DISPENSATIONS: Vrgeing of PERIVRIES upon
men against their CONSCIENCES. Their allowing of Marriages in degrees FORBIDDEN
by the CHVRCH OF GOD. Their They cruelly allow Marriages to the divorced,
against the doctrine of Christ, his Apostles and the holy Fathers: which S.
Augustine says are not Marriages but Adulteries. see above p. 470. 471.
IMPIETY of allowing ADVLTERIES, under the name of MARRIAGES to the divorced,
against the word of God. Their The holy Mass which chaseth away Devils, as S.
Augustine testifies above p. 475 cannot be Devilish: but the abrogation of it is
Devilish, (besides other reasons) because Luther confessed that the Devil did
instigate him to it. See above p. 476. and the whole 8. section.
DEVILISH ABROGATION of the DIVINE Mass. Their If it be blasphemy to rail
against the sacred order of Priesthood, of which order Christ himself is the
High eternal Priest; And against the holy Sacrifice offered up by that holy
order; besides other points of the Catholic faith revealed by Christ, then our
Presbyterian Ministry is deeply guilty of blasphemy. See p. 477. 4. See above,
how S. Augustine calls this a holy Sacrifice, profitable not only for the sins
of the living, but also of the faithful departed: of which the Presbyterians
do rob both the quick and dead p. 447.
BLASPHEMING MINISTRY. q Their SACRILEGE of robbing the HOLY Sacrifice, both
from the quick and the dead: Their They detest the Catholic Church, for
Canonizing of Saints; and yet themselves did Saint Covenanting sinners, above p.
479
SAINTING of COVENANTING SINNERS. Their calling upon They think it justly no
sin, to call upon men, and desire their prayers: and yet, against all reason,
they would make the people believe, that it is a sin, to call upon Angels, and
desire their prayers, whereby, they condemn the practice of Jacob, and other
Saints recorded in the Scriptures: as may be seen p. 479. as also the practice
of the holy Fathers, and Primitive Church ibidem. Where the same is also
showed, concerning the Invocation of the Saints of Heaven.
MEN, and not upon Angels: and their MISCALLING of Glorious Saints, by
opprobrious Titles. Their IDOLATRIZING of their own fancies, and Errors: and
PROFANING of Holy Images, Relics and Crosses. Their Barbarous DESTROYING of
Churches, and Altars: with their Violating of Holy Days, and Vows, made and
CONSECRATED to the CREATOR Seeing they commonly teach, that their sins are not
taken away in this life, they must either be taken away in the next life, and
so they grant a Purgatory; or else they cannot enter into Heaven. And seeing,
that Purgatory is for mortal sins (for they acknowledge no Venial) it can never
purge them, and never have an end. See above page 491. and more fully p. 188.
Their ENDLESS VNPVRGEING Purgatory. See the charitable custom of praying for
the faithful departed, observed by the Primitive Church p. 491. which charity
the Presbyterians want.
Their mercylesse NOT PITYING the pains of the dead, The prayers of the
Presbyterians being all Extemporary, it is no wonder, some of them be void of
sense: as frequent experience has showed.
Praying in a STRANGE SENSE. How they have fallen backward into grosser Errors,
then their first Reformers, by denying the Apostles Creed, neglecting to say
our Lords-prayer, abolishing Glory to the father, etc. may be seen above cha.
12. These backslidings are the Presbyterian Processions
BACKSLIDINGS into grosser Errors. They blaspheme the holy Litanies, which S
Basil calls the Oracles of the holy Spirit: as may be seen above p. 494.
BLASPHEMING the holy Litanies: and preferring a multitude of They very
unreasonably renounce the Mediation or intercession of Angels and Saints to
pray for them: and yet give that same charge or office to the multitude of
their Ministers. p. 945.
MINISTERS, to the Angels and Saints, in the OFFICE of Mediators and Advocats.
Their confusions and dissensions are very notorious, and may be seen above chapter
3.
Their Manyfold Confusions and DISORDERS. They abjure Auricular Confession, and
yet sometimes practice it. But the Ministers wanting the strict obligation of
secrecy, they do sometimes reveal publicly without punishment, what has
been confessed to them privately.
Public REVELATION of private Confessions. Their Their Repentance, if it be
according ^o their principles, is presumptuous: for it is a full assurance of
the remission of their sins, or conioynd with it: and so it is also vain; for
in vain do they seek remission of their sins, which they are assured by faith
are already forgiven the^. See p. 499. and chapter 17. p. 183.
PRESVMPTVOVS and vain Repentance. They believe that which God never revealed,
to wit, that every one of themselves is just and predestinate: which faith,
may be seen above, to be mere presumption, and a groundless fancy. chapter 17. p.
183. and seq.
Their SPECIAL and groundless Faith. They deny all Satisfaction or works of
Penance for sins: and so they teach, men are not to make any Satisfactions for
their sins. p. 500.
Their doctrine of sinning WITHOUT Satisfactions. They teach Justification by
faith only, against the express words of Scripture. James 2. v. 24. as may be
seen above chapter 17. p. 182.
Justification by faith ONLY. Albeit some were great sinners; yet so soon as
they took the Covenant, they were esteemed Saints, and all their sins forgiven
them, though indeed they becam no better. This is a greater Opus Operatum which
the Presbyterians ascribed to their Covenant, then that, which the Catholics
assign to the holy Sacraments: as may be seen above p. 202. 203.
The Opus Operatum of the Covenant, which SAINTED without dispositions, even
the worst Covenanters. They do not only abjure works of greater perfection, not
commanded but counseled; but also they neglect works of duty commanded:
teaching hat the Commandments are impossible to be kept. p. 502. 5^3.
Their Omission of works of DVTY, tending to EDIFICATION. They teach that all
their works are evil, and therefore are demerits: which may be justly renounced
p. 504. 505. 4. They often give and sell pardons from their stool of
Repentance: or else all the great people must be Saints, and only the poor
must be sinners. For it is very rarely seen, that any person of condition, does
sit upon their stool of Repentance. See p. 506.
Demerits, They bragged, that they should never leave off, till they went with
their Covenant, and Covenanting Army, to destroy the walls and City of Rome.
p. 507. 508.
SELLING of Pardons. 15 Their intended WARLIK peregrinations to destroy holy
places. The English Independents did call ordinarily the Presbyterian K
rk-Sessio^s Bawdy-Courts; For by them the fines were imposed upon the
fornicators. But now that power is taken from them, and given to the Civil
Magistrate. These Sessions are not so good as the Catholics Stations above p.
508.
Their Kirk SESSIONS: They do not consecrate their Communion Wine: and albeit
the Ministers say a long prayer at the beginning, by which they would seem in
some measure to hallow that which is present, which is but a small quantity;
yet the rest is brought (sometimes out of the Tavern) and used without any
benediction. See of Holy water. above p. 510. 511.
UNCONSECRATED wine See above, how at the beginning of their pretended
Reformation, they unhallowed many Bells, p. 511. 512.
Their UNHALLOWING and selling of Bells.

Their The true Church has only power to cast out Devils. Luther tried once to
do this: but it succeeded ill with him, as may be seen above p. 512.
WANT of power to conjure Spirits and cast out Devils. The Presbyterian
Ministers do much hate the sign of the Cross, calling it the badge of
Antichrist; as may be seen in Spotswoods history lib. 6. p. 324. See above p.
513. the Antiquity, and efficacy of that glorious sign of the Son of man.
Their CVRSINGS and Detestations of the SIGN of the CROSS, as also The holy
Apostles used Unctions, as may be seen above p. 514. which custom has been
ever observed in the Church, ibidem, As also the Church did ever hallow some
Creatures, for holy ends; as Water, burial places, Churches, Bells, etc. which
the Presbyterians have often made common, and turned into profanes uses.
of UNCTIONS and of benedictions of Creatures, for holy ends, together with the
PROFANATIONS of these hallowed Creatures. Their Domineering Presbyterian How
the Presbytery domineered over all sorts of persons, may be seen above, chapter 4.
and 5. of Presb. Trial. 23. Their severity and cruelty may be seen, ibid.
DEMOCRACY, and 23 cruel ANARCHY Their solemn League and Covenant, which
intended the settling of Presbytery in all the 3. Kingdoms, is not such a work
of perfection, as are the 3. Solemn Vows of chastity, poverty and Obedience,
which they here abjure, and which their first Reformers Vowed, but did not
keep. And therefore, their Solemn League may be better renounced; then the
three Solemn Vows abiured.
Their Solemn LEAGVE and Covenant, with all their ROVNDHEADS of Sundry SECTS

Their cruel Decrees, made at GLASGOW, to extirpate the Catholic Religion:
where their Covenant (which has proved a bloody Band) was confirmed, against
the holy Catholic Church.

And lastly we reject all their See above page 229. 242. how by Trops and
figures, the clear words of Christ's institution of the holy Sacrament are
perverted by them, against the sense of the holy Fathers, and of the ancient
Church.
VAIN TROPES AND FIGVRES, perverting the true literal sense of the divin
Scriptures, against the constant exposition of the holy Fathers: together with
all their Their denying of private baptism is a Presbyterian Tradition derived
from Calvin: as may be seen above, p. 212. without, or rather against the word
of God, and the practice of the ancient Church. The same may be also said of
their denying private Communion etc.
PRESBYTERIAN Traditions, brought in without, or against the word of God, and
Doctrine of the As the Catholic Church is only the true Church of Christ; so
S. Cyprian has observed, that all heretics, like Apes, do take upon them the
name, and falsely Vindicate to themselves the authority of the Church. Cypr.
Epist. ad Iubaian.
holy CATHOLIQVE Church, the Pillar and ground of Truth

To the which holy Catholic Church, we MOST WILLINGLY ioyn our selves, in
Doctrine, Discipline, and all holy RITES, as members of the same under Christ
Jesus, the Supreme invisible Head, and the Sea above, section. 4. p. 432. where
it is showed, that S. Peter was ordained by Christ, Supreme Pastor of his
Church; and that the Bishop of Rome, succeeds unto S. Peter in the same charge.
BISHOP of ROME, the Successor of S. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, the Visible
and Subordinate Head, or Governor thereof: As the Catholic Church remains
constant in her doctrine and government; so the Scottish Protestant Church has
been very inconstant, for it has changed diverse doctrines, and very sensibly,
its discipline, three or four times, since the beginning of their pretended
Reformation; so that a man cannot wisely swear constant obedience, to such an
unconstant Church. See above chapter 2. and 7. of Presb. Trial.
Promising, by the assistance of Gods Grace, to continue in the obedience, and
Communion of the same Church, all the days of our lives.

As it is a malicious calumny, to say, that any Catholic is stirred up by
the Pope, to deny and abjure the Catholic religion against his conscience,
upon hope of the Popes Dispensation, So it is a known truth, by diverse fresh
experiences, that many Catholics have been stirred up by the Presbyterian
Ministers, for fear of their Excommunications, and the Confiscation of their
Estates, which followed thereupon, to swear and subscribe the Covenant, against
the light of their Consciences; as was well known to the said Ministers, which
may be seen above p. 414. and 15.
And seeing many Catholics are solicitited by Satan, and the PRESBYTERIAN
MINISTERS. To swear subscribe and receive their Sacraments, against the clear
light of their Consciences, for JUST FEARS of the Ministerial CONFISCATIONS,
and lossing of their Estates, All these, to whom God has made the light of
Truth to shine, ought to be thankful for so great a benefit: and never commit
so great ingratitude, as to abandon it, for worldly respects: How much more
ought they to abhor from taking the Covenant, which makes even some
Protestants hearts to stand, which contains so many gross untruths; as we
have seen above: and which is not only a Denial, but an Abiuration, joined with
horrible blasphemies, of almost all the points of the Catholic faith?
We solemnly promise, by the assistance of Gods, grace that we shall never
yield unto such temptations; nor be so ingrate, after God has made the light of
his truth to shine unto us, who were living in the darkness of Error, as to
abandon the Truth against our Consciences: But rather shall continue constant
in the profession of the same, though it be with the loss of our Lives and
Estates, knowing, that God Almighty is power full, and Hoping, that his
goodness shall be willing to render unto us a hundred fold, and life
everlasting. To which God of his infinite mercy bring us. Amen.

THE PRESBYterian Covenant, or Confession of Faith.
WE all, and every one of us underwritten, protest, that after The Catholics
long and dilligent search may appear, by the former Trial: whereas the
Covenanters used neither long nor due examination of their consciences, as may
be seen above page 411.
LONG and due examination of our own Consciences, in matters of true and false
Religion; we are now Catholics, who rely upon the immovable Pillar and
ground of Truth, to Wit, the holy Catholic Church, which never changes, are
fully satisfied, and assured of the Truth: But Heretics, who quite this solid
ground, and follow the Private Spirit, which is very inconstant, let them
pretend what they please, can never have full assurance; which evidently
appears, by their continual changes and new pretended lights. See above, pa.
425.
THROVGHLY resolved of the Truth, by the Christ promised that the Spirit of
Truth should remain in his Church for ever, and teach her all Truth. John
14.16. John 16.13. And yet, it is strange, that every new heretic, without
Scripture, appropriats this Spirit to himself; and, against Scripture, and
Christ's clear promise, denis the holy Spirit to the whole Church. The same may
be said also of their vain pretext of the word of God. See above page 423. 424.
word and Spirit of God; And therefore we believe with our hearts, confess
with our mouths, subscribe with our hands, and constantly affirm before God
and the whole world, that this only is the true Christian faith, and Religion
pleasing God, and bringing Salvation to man, which The true faith was revealed
of old, and, from that time, can never be hid: But the Presbyterian faith has
two contra^y qualities, to wit, it is now revealed, and has lain long hid: as
may be seen above p. 426. See also Math. 5.16.17.
NOW is, by the mercy of God revealed to the world, by the preaching of the
blessed Evangel, and received, believed, and defended, by The true Church must
be in all Nations, as Esaias foretells saying: All Nations shall flow unto it.
Esaias, 2.2. and Christ show, that repentance should be preached in his name,
unto all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Luke, 24.47. For this cause the true
Church is called Catholic, as being dispersed through All Nations: as she is
also Catholic for Time, endureing in All Ages. But Heresys are only in some
few Nations or corners of the world: and in these also, they are not the same,
but full of diversity and contrariety, which is manifestly verifyed of the
Presbyterians and Protestants. See above chapter 32. 34.
Many notable Kirks and Realms, but chiefly, by the Kirk of Scotland, the
Kings Majesty, and the three Estates of this Realm, as Gods As Gods Truth is
Eternal, so it cannot be hid. Esaias 62.6. But the Presbyterians pretended
Eternal Truth has been too long hid
ETERNAL Truth, and only ground of our Salvation. As more particularly is
confessed in the Confession of our Faith stablished and publicly confirmed by
sundry The approbations of all General Councels, which are governed by the holy
Ghost, and which do never revoke their determinations, by which the Catholic
faith is approved, and confirmed, are a much more solid authority, to confirm
the Catholic religion; then are the earthly courts of changeing Parliaments,
to establish any sort of the Protestant Religion. We know by experience, that
there are nothing more changeable, then Acts of Parliament. See page 430.
Acts of Parliament. And now of a The Scottish Nation was converted to the
faith an. Christi 203. Leslaeus de Reb. gestis, Scot. l. 1. p. 114. which is
above 1400. years ago, during which time, it remaind co^sta^t in the
Catholic faith, except a little of late. This indeed may be called a long
time: but the Presbyterians long time is only 20 years, as may be known by
calculation, and as yet it is not a hundred.
LONG time has been openly professed by the Since the conversion of King
Donald the first Christian King, there are reckoned above 80. Catholic Kings
of this Nation, as may be seen in our Histories; whereas the Presbyterians had
only one King, to wit, King James the 6. who subscrybed their Covenant, in his
younger years: which he also disproved thereafter, in the Conference at
Hampton Court.
Kings Majesty, and whole body of this Realm, both in Burgh and Land. To the
which Confession, and form of Religion, we As it is evident that these, who
embrace the Catholic faith in Scotland, where it is persecuted, do it
willingly; so it is manifestly known, that many were constrained to take the
Covenant: and so did not willingly agree to it. See above chapter 4. p. 26. and
sect. 1. p. 417.
WILLINGLY agree, as unto Gods The Catholic faith is so undoubted Truth,
that it is altogether unalterable, with the Catholics: But ths Protestant
Faith cannot be undoubted Truth, seeing it is so often altered by Protestants,
see p. 430. in fine.
VNDOVBTED Truth and Verity, grounded only upon his WRITTEN word.

And therefore, we abhor and detest all contrary Religion and Doctrine; But
chiefly all kind of PAPISTRY in general, and particular heads, even as they are
now damned, and confuted, by the How the Presbyterian sect albeit it prete^ds
the word of God (as all Heretics do ordinarily pretend) is notwithstanding
condemned by the word of God, and by the holy Catholic Church, which is of
far greater Authority, then the Presbyterian Kirk of cotland, may be seen
almost every where, in the former Treatises.
word of God, AND KIRK OF SCOTLAND. But in special we detest, and refuse the
VSVRPED AVTHORITY of that Roman As it has been showed above, sect. 4. p. 432.
that the Pope is the Vicar of Jesus Christ, and therefore not Anti Christ; so
also all, who do not belong to him, belong not to Christ, but to Anti Christ;
and therefore are Anti Christian. So S. Hierom expressly affirms ibid. p. 437.
ANTICHRIST, Upon the Calvin usurped ove the letter of the Scriptures, by
making up a new Canon, never known before; And he usurped over the sense, of
them, by rejecting the ancient sense of the holy Fathers, and by inventing new
senses, according to his private fancies. So do also his Disciples, the
Presbyterian Ministers. So did likewise Luther most grossly, see p. 439.
SCRIPTVRES of God, the Calvin did vsurp over the holy Catholic Church, who,
having no lawful authority, would take upon him to reform the Church, to
judge and condemn her, to prescribe his own fancies, as divine Rules unto her:
So do also the Presbyterians See p. 440.
KIRK the The Presbyterians in Scotland have had but 4. Princes, since their
religion began, and they have vndenyably usurped highly over them all: as may
be seen. p. 440. and 41.
CIVIL MAGISTRATE and How they Tyrannized over the consciences of their fellow
subjects, is notoriously known: and may be seen. chap. 4. p. 26.
CONSCIENAES of men.

All his These, who under pretense of Christian liberty, disobey just Laws,
such as are the Laws of the Catholic Church, (which were also observed in
the primitive times, as these, about lent fasting, the single life of Church
men etc.) make their freedom a cloak of malice, against S. Peter's advice 1.
Pet. 2.13. and an occasion to the flesh. Gal. 5.13. see above p. 454. 455.
TYRANNOVS Laws, made upon indifferent things against our Christian liberty.
His ERRONEOVS Doctrine against the SVFFICIENCIE of the The Presbyterians destroy
all Traditions, against the express Scripture. See above p. 445. and 6.
WRITTEN word; the PERFECTION of the Law, the OFFICE of Christ, and his
blessed Evangel.

His corrupted Doctrine concerning Calvin teaches that Original sin still
remains in us, even after Baptism: and that it defiles before God, what ever
works proceed from us; and so makes the^ mortal sins, which doctrine, the
Presbyterians follow, as may be seen above, with more to this purpose p. 451.
454.
ORIGINAL sin. Our NATURAL INHABILITY and REBELLION to Gods Law. Our
Justification by They make Justification by faith only, the principal article
of their Reformation, and deny Justification by works; expressly against the
Scripture, James 2.124. and the holy Fathers. See above chapter 14. p. 157.
FAITH ONLY Our They make our sanctification so imperfect, that we cannot by it
think so much as a good thought, or do any thing but sin mortally; and still
disobey Gods Commandments, so that such sanctification is rather profanation,
and such Obedience is Disobedience. See above p. 455.
IMPERFECT Sanctification and Obedience to the Law.

The They have corrupted the Nature of the Sacraments, by denying, that they
were ordaind to confer Grace, and by making them only signs and Tokens. They
have corrupted the number, by taking away 5. Sacraments: and the use, by
abrogating both private Baptism and Communion, besides both the public and
private use of others. See above p. 458. and seq. and before chapter 18. Presb.
Trial.
NATVRE, NVMBER and USE of the holy Sacraments. His five By denying the two
Sacraments of Baptism and the Eucharist (which they admit,) to confer
Grace, They make them Graceless and so indeed Bastard Sacraments; since the
Sacraments of the Law of Grace, were instituted to confer Grace. Above. p.
467. and before that chapter 18 Pres. Trial p. 194.
BASTARD SACRAMENTS: with all his They not only not practice the Venerable
Rites and Ceremonies of the Catholic Church which were used in the Primitive
times, as may be seen in Coccius. tom. 2. Thesau. Cathol. but also they condemn
them. See p. 464.
RITES, CEREMONIES and false Doctrines, added to the Ministration of the true
Sacraments, without the word of God: His CRVELL Judgment against Infants dying
WITHOUT the Sacrament. His absolute Necessity of Baptism:

His The opinion of Calvin, and his Disciples is, that Christ's body is only
really in the Heavens; and yet it is also really to the soul of the Receivers
by faith: which he calls justly a Mystery vnperceptible: as it is indeed a
Chimera made up of contradictions, whereas the Catholic belief of the real
presence, or Transubstantiation, is so firmly grounded in the Scriptures, that
Beza confesses, if Christ's Words be taken literally (as it has been proved
above, they must be) Popish Transubstantiation does necessarly follow. See
above page 240. 41. and 43.
BLASPHEMOVS OPINION of TRANSVBSTANTIATION, or real PRESENCE of Christ's body IN
the the Elements, and receiving of the same by the WICKED or BODIES of men. His
Their first Reformers brake their Solemn Oaths and Vows without all
Dispensations p. 469. And the Presbyterians have made many to periure
themselves, by enforceing them to take the Covenant, against their Consciences.
They allow also Marriages in degrees forbidden by the Catholic Church: for
the people often marries among them, in the second, third, and 4. degree,
without all Dispensations See also above, that it is a false calumny, that the
Catholic Church dispenses in degrees forbidden by the Law of Christ. p. 470.
DISPENSATIONS with solemn OATHS, PERIVRIES, and DEGREES of Marriage forbidden
in the word. His They cruelly allow Marriages to the divorced, against the
doctrine of Christ, his Apostles and the holy Fathers: which S. Augustine says
are not Marriages but Adulteries. see above p. 470. 471.
CRVELTIE against the innocent divorced.

His The holy Mass which chaseth away Devils, as S. Augustine testifies above
p. 475 cannot be Devilish: but the abrogation of it is Devilish, (besides other
reasons) because Luther confessed that the Devil did instigate him to it. See
above p. 476. and the whole 8. section.
DEVILISH MASS. His If it be blasphemy to rail against the sacred order of
Priesthood, of which order Christ himself is the High eternal Priest; And
against the holy Sacrifice offered up by that holy order; besides other points
of the Catholic faith revealed by Christ, then our Presbyterian Ministry is
deeply guilty of blasphemy. See p. 477. 4. See above, how S. Augustine calls
this a holy Sacrifice, profitable not only for the sins of the living, but also
of the faithful departed: of which the Presbyterians do rob both the quick and
dead p. 447.
BLASPHEMOVS PRIESTHOOD. q His PROFANE Sacrifice for the sins of the dead and
the quick. His They detest the Catholic Church, for Canonizing of Saints; and
yet themselves did Saint Covenanting sinners, above p. 479
CANONIZATION of men. They think it justly no sin, to call upon men, and desire
their prayers: and yet, against all reason, they would make the people believe,
that it is a sin, to call upon Angels, and desire their prayers, whereby, they
condemn the practice of Jacob, and other Saints recorded in the Scriptures: as
may be seen p. 479. as also the practice of the holy Fathers, and Primitive
Church ibidem. Where the same is also showed, concerning the Invocation of the
Saints of Heaven.
His CALLING upon Angels, and Calvin does honor S. Catharine and S. Christofer
with the name of Monsters; lib de vera Refor. Ecclesiae. S. George and S.
Hippolitus with the name of Masks. ib^d. and 3. Instit. c. 20. par. 24. 25.
27. S. Dominike with Hangman, lib. de reform. Eccles. S. Medard and others with
Beast. ibidem. And Luther durst affirm, that Moses his wisdom was hypocrisy:
and that S. James did deate. Luth. in Psalm, 45. and in cap. 22. Genes.
Saints departed.

WORSHIPPING of Images, Relics and Crosses.

DEDICATING of Kirks, Altars, Days, Vows, to CREATVRES. Seeing they commonly
teach, that their sins are not taken away in this life, they must either be
taken away in the next life, and so they grant a Purgatory; or else they cannot
enter into Heaven. And seeing, that Purgatory is for mortal sins (for they
acknowledge no Venial) it can never purge them, and never have an end. See
above page 491. and more fully p. 188.
His PVRGATORY: See the charitable custom of praying for the faithful
departed, observed by the Primitive Church p. 491. which charity the
Presbyterians want.
PRAYER for the dead: The prayers of the Presbyterians being all Extemporary,
it is no wonder, some of them be void of sense: as frequent experience has
showed.
Praying or speaking in a STRANGE LANGVAGE: with his How they have fallen
backward into grosser Errors, then their first Reformers, by denying the
Apostles Creed, neglecting to say our Lords-prayer, abolishing Glory to the
father, etc. may be seen above cha. 12. These backslidings are the Presbyterian
Processions
PROCESSIONS, They blaspheme the holy Litanies, which S Basil calls the Oracles
of the holy Spirit: as may be seen above p. 494.
BLASPHEMOVS Litanies, and They very unreasonably renounce the Mediation or
intercession of Angels and Saints to pray for them: and yet give that same
charge or office to the multitude of their Ministers. p. 945.
Multitude of Advocats or Mediators.

Their confusions and dissensions are very notorious, and may be seen above chapter
3.
His Manyfold ORDERS. They abjure Auricular Confession, and yet sometimes
practice it. But the Ministers wanting the strict obligation of secrecy, they
do sometimes reveal publicly without punishment, what has been confessed to
them privately.
AVRICVLAR Confession. Their Repentance, if it be according ^o their
principles, is presumptuous: for it is a full assurance of the remission of
their sins, or conioynd with it: and so it is also vain; for in vain do they
seek remission of their sins, which they are assured by faith are already
forgiven the^. See p. 499. and chapter 17. p. 183.
His DESPERATE and uncertain Repentance. They believe that which God never
revealed, to wit, that every one of themselves is just and predestinate: which
faith, may be seen above, to be mere presumption, and a groundless fancy. chapter
17. p. 183. and seq.
His GENERAL and doubtsome Faith. They deny all Satisfaction or works of
Penance for sins: and so they teach, men are not to make any Satisfactions for
their sins. p. 500.
His SATISFACTIONS of men for their sins. They teach Justification by faith
only, against the express words of Scripture. James 2. v. 24. as may be seen
above chapter 17. p. 182.
His Justification by WORKS.

How all Heretics Idolatrize their own Errors (as S. Hierom affirms) may be
seen above p. 420. and how the Presbyterians did Idolatrize their Covenant, may
be also seen there: And it is notoriously known how they break and abuse Holy
Images, Crosses and Relics.
The Barbarians or professed Enemies of Christ, could hardly have made more
havoc and destruction, then our first Scottish Reformers have made, of so many
Excellent Churches and religious houses in Scotland: which were great Monuments
and Ornaments of the Nation. And now the poor Churches, which they have built,
are not dedicated unto the Creator.
Albeit some were great sinners; yet so soon as they took the Covenant, they
were esteemed Saints, and all their sins forgiven them, though indeed they
becam no better. This is a greater Opus Operatum which the Presbyterians
ascribed to their Covenant, then that, which the Catholics assign to the holy
Sacraments: as may be seen above p. 202. 203.
OPUS OPERATVM.

They do not only abjure works of greater perfection, not commanded but
counseled; but also they neglect works of duty commanded: teaching hat the
Commandments are impossible to be kept. p. 502. 5^3.
Works of SVPEREROGATION: They teach that all their works are evil, and
therefore are demerits: which may be justly renounced p. 504. 505. 4. They
often give and sell pardons from their stool of Repentance: or else all the
great people must be Saints, and only the poor must be sinners. For it is very
rarely seen, that any person of condition, does sit upon their stool of
Repentance. See p. 506.
MERITS, They bragged, that they should never leave off, till they went with
their Covenant, and Covenanting Army, to destroy the walls and City of Rome.
p. 507. 508.
PARDONS, 15 Peregrinations, and The English Independents did call ordinarily
the Presbyterian K rk-Sessio^s Bawdy-Courts; For by them the fines were imposed
upon the fornicators. But now that power is taken from them, and given to the
Civil Magistrate. These Sessions are not so good as the Catholics Stations
above p. 508.
STATIONS.

They do not consecrate their Communion Wine: and albeit the Ministers say a
long prayer at the beginning, by which they would seem in some measure to
hallow that which is present, which is but a small quantity; yet the rest is
brought (sometimes out of the Tavern) and used without any benediction. See of
Holy water. above p. 510. 511.
His HOLY Water: See above, how at the beginning of their pretended
Reformation, they unhallowed many Bells, p. 511. 512.
Baptizing of Bells.

Coniuring of Spirits, CROSSING, saving, anointing, coniuring, HALLOVVING of
Gods good Creatures, with the superstitious opinion joined therewith:

His worldly How the Presbytery domineered over all sorts of persons, may be
seen above, chapter 4. and 5. of Presb. Trial. 23. Their severity and cruelty may
be seen, ibid.
MONARCHY, and wicked HIERARCHY: 23 His three Solemn Their solemn League and
Covenant, which intended the settling of Presbytery in all the 3. Kingdoms, is
not such a work of perfection, as are the 3. Solemn Vows of chastity, poverty
and Obedience, which they here abjure, and which their first Reformers Vowed,
but did not keep. And therefore, their Solemn League may be better renounced;
then the three Solemn Vows abiured.
VOWS with all his SHAVELINGS of Sundry sorts.

His corrupted and bloody Decrees, made at TRENT, with all the Subscribers and
Approvers of that cruel and bloody Band, coniured against the Kirk of God.

And finally, we detest all his See above page 229. 242. how by Trops and
figures, the clear words of Christ's institution of the holy Sacrament are
perverted by them, against the sense of the holy Fathers, and of the ancient
Church.
Vain Allegories, Rites Signs and Their denying of private baptism is a
Presbyterian Tradition derived from Calvin: as may be seen above, p. 212.
without, or rather against the word of God, and the practice of the ancient
Church. The same may be also said of their denying private Communion etc.
Traditions, brought in the Kirk, without, or against the word of God, and
Doctrine of this true As the Catholic Church is only the true Church of
Christ; so S. Cyprian has observed, that all heretics, like Apes, do take
upon them the name, and falsely Vindicate to themselves the authority of the
Church. Cypr. Epist. ad Iubaian.
REFORMED Kirk.

To the which, we ioyn our selves willingly, in Doctrine, Faith, Religion,
Discipline, and use of the holy Sacraments, as lively members of the same, in
Christ our Head. As the Catholic Church remains constant in her doctrine and
government; so the Scottish Protestant Church has been very inconstant, for it
has changed diverse doctrines, and very sensibly, its discipline, three or four
times, since the beginning of their pretended Reformation; so that a man cannot
wisely swear constant obedience, to such an unconstant Church. See above chapter 2.
and 7. of Presb. Trial.
Promising and swearing, by the Great Name of the Lord our God, that we shall
continue in the obedience of the Doctrine and Discipline of this Kirk; and shall
defend the same, according to our Vocation and power, all the days of our
lives; under the pains, contained in the Law, and danger both of Body and
soul, in the Day of Gods fearful judgment.

As it is a malicious calumny, to say, that any Catholic is stirred up by
the Pope, to deny and abjure the Catholic religion against his conscience,
upon hope of the Popes Dispensation, So it is a known truth, by diverse fresh
experiences, that many Catholics have been stirred up by the Presbyterian
Ministers, for fear of their Excommunications, and the Confiscation of their
Estates, which followed thereupon, to swear and subscribe the Covenant, against
the light of their Consciences; as was well known to the said Ministers, which
may be seen above p. 414. and 15.
And, seeing many are stirred up by Satan and that ROMAN ANTICHRIST, to
promise swear, subscribe, and for a time, use the holy Sacraments of the Kirk
deceitfully, against their own Consciences, minding thereby, first, under the
external cloak of Religion, to corrupt and subvert secretly Gods true Religion,
within the Kirk, and afterward, when time may serve, to become open Enemies
and Persecutors of the same, upon VAIN HOPES of the Popes DISPENSATION, devised
against the word of God, to his greater confusion, and their double
condemnation, in the day of the Lord Jesus. All these, to whom God has made the
light of Truth to shine, ought to be thankful for so great a benefit: and
never commit so great ingratitude, as to abandon it, for worldly respects: How
much more ought they to abhor from taking the Covenant, which makes even some
Protestants hearts to stand, which contains so many gross untruths; as we
have seen above: and which is not only a Denial, but an Abiuration, joined with
horrible blasphemies, of almost all the points of the Catholic faith?
we therefore, willing to take away all suspicion of Hypocrisy, and double
dealing with God and his Kirk, protest, and call the Searchers of all hearts
forwitnesse, that our minds and hearts do fully agree with this our Confession,
promise, Oath and Subscription, So that we are not moved for any See above in
the first section, this last gross untruth of the Covenant. p. 416.
worldly respect, etc.

FINIS.
Soli Deo Honor and Gloria.

