THE Indian Nectar, OR A DISCOURSE CONCERNING CHOCOLATA: WHEREIN The Nature of
the Cacao-nut, and the other Ingredients of that Composition, is examined, and
stated according to the Judgment and Experience of the Indians, and Spanish
Writers, who lived in the Indies, and others; with sundry additional
Observations made in England: The ways of compounding and preparing Chocolata
are enquired into; its Effects, as to its alimental and Venereal quality, as
well as Medicinal (especially in Hypochondriacal Melancholy) are fully debated.
Together with a Spagyrical Analysis of the Cacao-nut, performed by that
excellent Chemist, Monsieur le Febure, Chemist to His Majesty. By Henry Stubbe
formerly of Chapter Chapter in Oxon. Physician for His Majesty, and the Right
Honorable Thomas Lord Windsor in the Island of Jamaica in the West Indies.

Thomas Gage, Survey of the West Indies. chap. 15. Here [ in a certain part of
Guaxaca] grow many Trees of Cacao, and Achiote, whereof is made the Chocolatte,
and is a Commodity of much or ading in those parts, though our English and
Hollanders make little use of it, when they take a prize at Sea, as not knowing
the secret virtue and quality of it for the good of the Stomach. -- Videant,
intabescantque relicta.

London, Printed by I. C. for Andrew Crook at the Sign of the Green Dragon in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1662.

To my Learned Friend Dr. Thomas Willis Doctor of Physic, and Reader of
Natural Philosophy in the University of Oxon.
WHen I first entered upon the practice of Physic, I had the Honor of your
Testimonial: and I now publicly acknowledge as well your favors, as that
worth, which is universally known, and admired. Were I to celebrate your
Panegyric, I should not doubt to represent you as a second to Harvey: and I
should not fear the resentments of others, if I compared him to Phrynis,
whilst you are the Timotheus in Physic. But this is not my present Design;
but to tell you, I have finished the Discourse I promised you, of Chocolata:
and I have augmented it beyond my thoughts, or yours. This Writing, as well as
the Chocolata I presented to His Majesty, wants that perfection, which Time was
to give it; I wish it have so good fortune, to please, as that did. I shall
from Jamaica give you a better Book, and (I believe) better Chocolata. And it
is my resolution so to employ my self there, that I may not fail the
expectation so many Eminent Persons have of me; nor will I ever see England,
but with the satisfaction of having done something considerable.

That you may know how great Incentives I have to study, besides my own
unspeakable inclinations; There are more then ordinarily interested in me,
besides the King's Majesty; who alone is so great a promoter, and so competent
a judge of merit, that to an Ingenuous Person there needs no farther inducement
to deserve. But, besides Him, there is the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire, Dr.
Quatremain, Dr. ^rasier, Physicians to His Majesty, and several other
Honorable and Learned Personages. But, amidst so many concurring favorers,
and abettours, if I tell you, that I allow a peculiar esteem, and remembrance
for Dr. Willis, it is no more, then the real sentiments of one, who infinitely
admires you, who is

Sir, your obliged humble Servant Henry Stubbe*
London, April 12. 1662.
The Preface to the Ingenuous READER.
IT is long since, that I designed a particular enquiry into the nature of Man,
and what it is, that we call Life, and by what means it is to be so preserved,
that we may enjoy in this World an undisturbed health, and serenity of mind,
together which those other comforts, the promise whereof is peculiarly annexed
to the fifth Commandment, according to the Septuagint;

Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, that it may be well with thee, and that thy
days may be long in the Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee.

This felicity, since that God put so great a value on it, that he generally in
Scripture makes it a Type of the Celestial enjoyments hereafter, and
illustrates them hereby, as being no odious Comparisons; and since the result
of Solomon's wisdom, regulated by inspiration, and experience, amounts to this;
That he has perceived, and seen, that It is good, Eccles. chapter 2. v. 24. chapter 3.
v. 1^, 22. chapter 5. v. 17. chapter 8. v. 15.
and comely, and that There is nothing better for a man, then that he should
eat, and drink, and enjoy the good of all his labor; upon these
Considerations, I did think it merited my peculiar regards: and howbeit the
preached, but unpractised (and in many parts false, and fictitious) Doctrine of
Mortification did seem to condemn such Enquiries; and the promulgation of them
might seem to encourage, or instruct men in Sensuality, (a thing inconsistent
with Christianity, and that course of life, which I have followed so, as that
Presbytery it self, that is, Malice and Dis-ingenuity heightened with all the
circumstances imaginable in men on this side hell, could never fix the least
imputation upon me) yet I thought, I ought not too much to respect accidental
abuses; not to regulate my self by what seemed fit, or true to others, but what
was really so, and conformable to God's word, and the primitive practice: both
which (if we make not the Opinions of Monks, and men retired unwarrantably
extra seculum, to be the sole Standard of truth, and practice) did not repugn
with my designed Speculations.

The late changes in our Nation have disengaged me from my former adherencies;
and I have no longer a regard, or concern for Sr. Henry Vane, or Genesis Ludlow,
then is consistent with my sworn Allegiance. And I think, His Majesty is of so
generous a nature; and of so transcendent a Grandeur, that I shall as little
offend him by this Declaration, as I shall by the following course of my life,
wherein I shall make Him all those returns, that the most deserving, and the
most obliging person, and Prince, may exspect from an ingenuous and resentive
Servant, and Subject. It is but fitting, that so unparalled a candor, as His
Majesty has practiced, should meet with reciprocal acknowledgments: and
however it be accounted the fate of Kings, to do well, and to be ill spoken of;
I think it a very hard destiny: and, though I have a very despicable opinion of
the present age, yet I hope it will not be guilty of any such unworthiness
toward our Sovereign. I shall make it my public Profession, Never did any
(saving, that I never violated a sworn Allegiance, nor took the Covenant, nor
subscribed the Engagement) never did any ever offend, or experiment a greater
Goodness. I go not about to extenuate my Crimes by saying, Rebellion loses its
name, where Presbytery is opposed; or, that The attempt in me was but the
acknowledgment of uncommon favors received from others. I am indebted to His
Majesty for more, then an Act of Indemnity and Oblivion. His Liberality has
prevented my Services, and I already have had that Honor and Reward conferred
on me, which to deserve I must change my resolutions into actions, and be what
I intend. Were my King of a less merit, I should fear, that what I say might be
apprehended not as the dictates of Truth, but occasioned by a sense of Duty, or
Flattery: but he possesses all Heroic Virtues in so peculiar a manner, that
Envy it self must say, that it is want of Time, or deficiency of Language, not
want of a befitting Subject, which makes me to enlarge no further.

I promised my ever-Honoured and Learned Frind Dr. Willis an account of
Chocolata: and being detained beyond my expectation at London, to receive the
benefit of what His Majesty had given me by way of Advance to go into Iamaica,
the Right Honorable the Lady Windsor, a Lady, that ows her Elogy and Title not
more to her Degree, then Worth, gave me occasion to renew those intentions, and
to make some Essays in compounding Chocolata; which first found her
approbation, and then the Kings, Had I written before, I could only have given
an account what others had said, or done; now I can vouch my own experience,
and that I am not altogether unacquainted with what I write of. I know, that
Time and Opportunity might have polished the Work, and bettered my Enquiries.
If I was impatient to do nothing, I had not leisure almost to do any thing. I
have given as good an account of things, as I could either from my own little
trial, or the report of others. I have represented each Author in his own
words: and where I seem to speak concerning the modern practice in Spain, my
intelligence is not the less true, because the margin does not warrant it by
some citation. Sundry Digressions are rather attempted, then pursued; but, if I
live any time in Iamaica, I shall in a second edition correct the imperfections
of this; many whereof are unavoydable to me, because I have not seen the
Ingredients of Chocolata growing, nor made such Analyzes of them, as are
requisite to discover their nature.

I write not out of a design to advance the repute of our West-Indy
Commodities in the making Chocolata. What I say is the Assertion of others, who
did not intend by their Writings to serve the English Interest in Iamaica. The
Spanish Dr. Iuanes de Cardenas says as much as I do, viz. that Persons of a
vigorous and healthy Constitution ought not to drink the same Chocolata with
others of a more cold and phlegmatic Complexion: but to have a Composition of
their own mixed with fewer Spices, and those of West-Indy growth (which, he
says, were created for that use) and to be taken with A^olle. His words are
Los tales (sc. those of a Complexion inclined to heat) beban le con Atolle
(that being of a temperate nature) y echenle m^i poca especie, y essa antes sea
de la tierra (sc. of Iamaica, or Tabasco) que de Espanna, por que la de aca
parce, que solo fue criada para esso.

Nor have I more endeavored to serve my self, then the Island in the
subsequent Discourse: for I obtrude not on the world a bad Chocolat^, having
showed the errors and hazards in the vulgar compositions, but what his Majesty
approved It is the same, that is used in Mexico and brought from Guaxaca to the
Spanish Court, and now used there: it varies in nothing, but what is more
peculiar to the Spanish, then English gust. I call it Chocolata-Royal, because
the Spaniards do so, whom I follow; and it is usual with that Nation, to
express an excellent Manjar by the Title of Royal.
[then whom there can be no more competent Judg] and what has received the
commendation of others well-acquainted with the variety of Chocolata, sold, and
made in this Nation. I have set down the ways of Ledesma, and Zacchias, and the
way, by which the Chocolata is commonly made. And I have left in the hands of
an honest though poor man, Richard Mortimer in Sun-Alley in East-Smith-Field,
both my common- Chocolata-receipt, and that other of Chocolata-Royal; both
which are fitted for the use of such as are inhealth, or not of a very weak
stomach, being made up with mild Spices of Iamaica, and such, as may securely
be used by the most healthy. They, who would have particular Chocolatas made,
may have recourse to him, and rely upon his honesty to prepare them carefully
according to my Method: which, though infinitely laborious, he is resolved to
follow. I chose him, because I found him, of all others, tractable to observe
my directions, and to make what Experiments I pleased: he lived in Spain many
years, and is as skilful, as honest. He will attend on any Physician of note to
receive his directions, as also to inform him, (if he would vary from my ways
by any addition) what may be added, and what quantity to each proportion of
Chocolata.

I gave him the Receipts not only as a reward for the pains and trouble I put
him to; but out of a sense of public utility, there being so many frauds in
the making of it: it being so ill wrought up (whence comes the settling) besides
the mixture of several Ingredients either hurtful, or impertinent. The way I
make my Chocolata-Royal agrees almost altogether with that, which is followed
in the Court of Spain, where the mixture of Anise-seeds, Nutmeg, and Maiz is
disused, and confined only to the common Chocolata-sellers. Whilst (to give
you the words of a Learned Spaniard) This other Composition seems to have all
that perfection, which attends the last designs, and contrivances of Men, after
many foregoing trials; and which is observed to displease no body: all the
change of Ingredients for so many years past did but prepare way for this;
which he observed to continue in a very good body, the Ingredients exactly
fermenting, and having an excellent scent: and the Taste is neither hot, and
biting, nor totally insipid. I shall not vary any thing from my way here in
England, but perhaps at Iamaica I may improve it much, both in the making it
up, (which I suppose may better be done there, then here; but will give no
reason, till I see it to be true) and in the adding some Ingredients; which if
it succeed, I shall take care, that England know it, and have the benefit
thereof.

Because that Richard Mortimer lives so far of, I have appointed, that his
Chocolata of both sorts shall be to be sold at Captain Beckford's at the
Custom-house-key: the best Chocolata, called Chocolata-Royal, will cost six
shillings six pence each pound, weighing about thirteen ounces, or somewhat
more: the ordinary Chocolata, weighing about fifteen ounces each pound, will
cost three shillings and eight pence. And in the same place they may be
furnished with the best Cacao-nuts, which I could yet ever see in London; and
also with Iamaica-Pepper.

I shall conclude with this Premonition: that the ensuing Discourse was written
at a great distance from my own Library, in a place, where frequent
interruptions, and diversions scarce ever yielded me an hour's leisure entire
to my self: and, as this is a sufficient excuse for its many imperfections, so
it must particularly Apologize for several Repetitions, which will occurr; for
having not time to review what I had, written, and being willing to omit
nothing, I have, I believe, repeated several times the same thing. But, if it
please God, I arrive safely at Iamaica, and enjoy that settlement, which I
promise my self from the right Honorable the Lord Windsor, (my singular good
Friend, and Patron, and the worthy Governor of Iamaica under His Majesty; one
in whom concur those Qualities, that might justly recommend him for so
important a charge to the choice of the best and wisest of Princes, Loyalty,
Valor, Prudent Conduct, Moderation, and Affability; and under whose Government
no Man ought to entertain other despair, then what his own Worthlesness creates
in him) when I shall be safe and secure there, and amidst my own Books, as well
as the Simples mentioned here, then I will revise, and so enlarge this Work,
that nothing shall be wanting thereunto. Nunc te mar moreum pro tempore
fecimus; at, tu,
Si foetura gregem suppleverit, aureus esto.


And, as I shall endeavor wholly to oblige mankind with further Observations
and Enquiries concerning Chocolata: so, I hope, my example will stir up others
to the like performances; and that Persons of ingenuity will either publish
their Observations, or dir^ct them to me, and leave them either with the Lady
Windsor, or with Mr. Andrew Crock in St. Paul's Churchyard, Bookseller, to be
sent to me, that I may not be ignorant of what effects Chocolata, or its
particular Ingredients have here in England; what new preparations and mixture
of the Cacao-Nut, or Spirit, or Oil are successfully contrived, or ingeniously,
to inform, or otherwise benefit men: and I do here solemnly profess, that I
shall render all such Persons their due acknowledgment in public, and shall
readily serve them any way, during my being in Iamaica.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING CHOCOLATA.
CHAP. I.
Concerning the Name of Chocolata, and its being universally used*

THe drink called ordinarily Chocolata is by the Indians called Hernandez herb.
Mexic. l. ^ c. 46. Gul. Piso in Mantiss. Aromat. c. 17.
Chocolatl: and is compounded of At, as some say, or, as others, Atl, which
in the Mexican language signifies water; and from the sound, which the water
(wherein is put the Chocolata) makes, as Gage's Survey of the West Indies, c.
16.
Choco, Choco, Choco, when it is stirred in a cup by an Instrument called a
molinet, or molinillo, until it bubble, and rise into a froth. I shall not
pursue other derivations of the name, it being sufficient, It is called
Chicolate in Jacques Amproux, of the Antilles, c. 16. and Succolata, and
Chuculate by Schroder. Pharmac. l. 4.
that we understand one and the same thing by the several appellations of
Chocolatl, Chocolata, (so it is usually called) Chocolatte, as Mr. Gage names
it; or Chocholate, as Acosta Histor. not. and moral. Indiar. l. 4. c. 22
Acosta; or Succulata, asd Mynsicht terms it; or Hernandez l 2. c. 4.
Cacaotl, and Hernandez l. 3. c. 41. l. 5. c. 13.
Cacaoatl, and Hernandez. l. 5. c. 41.
Cacauatl: all which names it bears in the Mexican Herbal, as well as that of
Chocolatl aforesaid.

In America several Countries have several drinks made out of roots and fruits
variously prepared. The Northerly Gul. Piso in Mantiss. Aromat. c. 17.
tract thereof principally seems to use the drink called Chocolata, in
New-Spain, Mexico, and the neighboring Provinces. If we may believe Dr. Iuanes
de Barrios, who lived in those parts, it has been immemorially drunk in the
Province ^f Guatimala, and as particularly appertains to that Country, as Mead
to Lithuania, and Ale to England; however it may have diffused it self into
other parts. And indeed it has prodigiously spread it self not only over the
West Indies; but over Gage c. 16. Piso in Mantissa Aromat. c. 17.
Spain, Portugal, Italy, France, high and low Germany, and England, yea Turkey,
and Persia: and has been recommended by sundry learned As Hernandez, Piso,
Zacchias, Severinus, and others.
Physicians to the world. So that it may well merit our regards to enquire into
the Nature and Reason of a drink endeared unto us by so great a repute; as the
General usage of the Nobility and Populace of both Sexes, and the Authority of
the learned and most observing persons can give it.

It is so generally used in the Spanish Colonies of the West Indies, by the
Natives, and other Inhabitants: that it alone makes up both the necessary
provision for their sustenances, and their delicaci^^ for extraordinary
entertainments for pleasure. This is confirmed by the general vogue of the
Indian writers: and whosoever shall have read Mr. Gage will no longer doubt it,
when he shall find, besides the particular Chapter, in which he designs a
special account of it, (most of which is transcribed out of Anton. Colmenero de
Ledesma) how at sundry times he was treated therewith by way of a magnificent
collation: and, being to travail, he makes a store of Chocolatte to be as
important a care, as any for a journey. In Spain it is drunk all Summer, once,
or twice a day; o^^ indeed at any time, by way of entertainment: for however
Physicians there endeavor to confine the people to Rules, yet is it generally
drunk without regard to any: and it is there, as well as in the Indies, all the
year long. It is drunk, by the allowance of the Physicians, once, or twice each
day: and by the prevalence of custom, as often as there is occasion for
entertainment, or that one is tired through business, and wants speedy
refreshment. There is a controversy about the convenience of taking it in
Summer; since Anton. Colmenero disallows it beyond May. But others, as learned
and observing as he, permit it all the year: and for Experience (which he takes
notice of) they vouch the general practice of Sevil, both of the King, Court,
and City. Nobis videtur consultissimum omni aestatis tempore potionem sumere
Chocolatis. Et, si ad comprobationem valet Experientia, hoc in communi vita
civi^m Hispalensium ( cum sit haec calidissima regio) ita feliciter sentitur ab
omnibus, ut illo carere sit apud illos infelicitas major. Et huic accidit, quod
illo tempore sit hominum natura laxa maxim, and fere dissoluta: and, si verum
fari licet, neminem per haec tempora video a Chocolate abstinere, neque inter
intemperantes Proceres, neque temperatissimos Hispaniae Reges, nec mediae
fortunae cives. Et nobis certe videtur, nullo magis tempore, quam aestate
prodesse Chocolate. I think it most fit to take Chocolate all Summer long. And,
if we recurr to Experiments, this is the general practice of the Inhabitants of
Sevi^^ (which yet is a most hot country) so that they count it a great
misfortune to be deprived of it. Besides, at that time of the year, our bodies
suffer a greater exolution of Spirit, and are more relaxed in their Pores, then
at other times. And, to speak the truth, at this time of the year, I observe,
that neither the most intemperate Courtiers, nor the most temperate Kings, nor
vulgar Citizens do refrain it. And I think it never more necessary, then at
that season of the year. To evidence further the prevailing use of Chocolata,
we are to know, that in Spain, as well as the Indies, people will not refrain
it on fasting-daies; and it is become a Case of Conscience managed with more
then ordinary contests, Whether the taking of Chocolata be a violation of
Ecclesiastical Fasts? The Moralists and Physicians divide upon it: nor is there
one considerable Argument produced for the necessity of taking it on Fast-days,
and so of reconciling it to Ecclesiastical Fastings, but that of custom: which
how authentic an argument it is in this ^ase, I leave to the disputes of
others; being content to have proved the universal acception of this drink
amongst the most sober and wisest of me^.

CHAP. II.
Concer^ing the Composition of Chocolata.

BEing now to speak more particularly of Chocolata, to prevent ambiguities, I
must tell my Reader, that however I have in the foregoing Chapter spoken of
Chocolata as a drink, accordingly as it is ordinarily mentioned by Writers, and
in vulgar speech; yet now I shall speak of it as a paste, or mass, made into
cakes, lumps, rouls, lozenges, or enclosed in boxes, (as it pleases the worker
to make it up) which is to be dissolved in the water, and so makes but a part
of the potion, or drink, yet is ordinarily termed Chocolata, though not without
some impropriety of language, if we credit the already-mentioned derivation of
Chocolatl.

The Indians, as they in all things almost affect a simplicity, so in the
making of Chocolata they did not multiply Ingredients; and cared rather to
preserve their health, then to indulge their palates: of which they have been
so sollicitous, that, had not the Spanish luxury and curiosity varyed its
composition with multiplicity of mixtures, either we had never been acquainted
with this drink, or we must have been contented to be treated, as the
invincible Cortez was by Motezuma, the last and most illustrious King of
Mexico. Bernaldus del Castillo, one of Cortez his Soldiers, relating his own
exploits under that famous General, in his Chapter entitul^^, Chap. 91.
De la manera y persona del grande Motezuma, y de quan gran Sennor era, makes
report of the stately Banquets of that Prince; and adds, Trianle frutas de
todas, quantas avia en la tierra, mas no comia, si no mui poca, y de quando en
quando: trajan unas como copas de oro fino, con cierta bebida hucha del mesmo
Cacao, que dessian era para ten^r acceso con mugeres, (en este lengua se habla)
enforces no miravamos en ello mas lo que yo vi, qua trajan sobra cinguenta
jarr^s grandes hechos de buen Cacao, con su espuma, y de lo que bebia, y las
mugeres le servian al beber con gra^ ocato: ^ al tiempo del comer le assistian
algunos Indios, truanes que le desian gracias, y otros que le cantavan, y
bailavan, por que el Motezuma era mui afficionado a placer; y aquellos mandaua
dar de los relieves, y jarros de Cacao. That is,

They brought in the several sorts of fruits, which they had in their Country,
but they eat but a very little of them, and that but leasurely, and at
intervals: they brought some in cups of fine gold, with a certain drink made of
the Cacao it self, which they said was effectual to provoke lustful desires
toward women (as they told us in their language) in which we admired noth^ng
more, then that they brought in above fifty great jarrs made of good Cacao,
with its froth, and that they drank it, the women serving them with a great
deal of respect: and when he [ Motezuma] did eat, several Indians stood by him,
w^^^h gave thanks, and others, which sung to him, and danced before him,
Motezuma being much given to pleasure: and he commanded the relics of his
feast to be given away, and the jarrs of Cacao.

And a little after he says, Luego comien los de su guarda, y otros muchos sus
serviciales de casa, y me parese, que sacavan sobre mil platos de aquellos
manjares, que dicho tengo: pues jarros de Cacao, con su espuma, como enter
Mexicanos, se ^ase mas de dos mil, y fruta infinita. That is,

Afterward his Guards, and other servants did eat, and, I think, they had
above a thousand dishes of the aforesaid delicacies. After which they had
brought to them jarrs of Cacao, with its froth, according to the Mexican
fashion, to the number of two thousand at least, besides an infinity of fruit.

Here is no mention of any thing, but jarrs of Cacao together with their froth:
which could not have frothed so, had they not been preparations of Cacao nuts
made into a paste, and reserved in cakes for the sudden use of a thousand cups;
they were dissolved in water, and frothed by agitation of the molinet: for
without such agitation the Cacao would not froth, nor would it continue in a
froth, unless that some of the meal of Indian wheat, or Maiz made into Atolle,
were mixed with it. And this I find to have been the first composition of
Chocolata. Hernandez l. 3. c. 46.
In acute diseases to a^ay heat and fervor, and in hot distempers of the
liver, they gave the Cacao nut, punned, and dissolved in water, without any
other mixture. In case of the bloody flux they mixed the said nuts with a gumm
called Olli, and so cured them miraculously. Nor did they acquiesce in simple
preparations of the said Cacao nut; they took of Cacao nuts, and a grain called
I know not what this Pocholt should be, if it be not Maiz (there being as great
variety of names, as Kingdoms in the Indies) or Paniso: both which I find to
have been put into the Chocolata of old.
Pocholt, of each an equal quantity, and grinded them together in equal
proportions; and, when they used it, they took that paste, and dissolved in an
earthen vessel, and agitated it with a molenillo, till the more oily parts and
fatty did swim on top: then did they take of the said unctuous part, and put to
the rest some meal of Indian wheat, and having reduced it to a potable liquor,
they did remix the oil, or fat, taken off before, and so drunk it lukewarm.
And this is the Chocolatl, of which Hernandez speaks, and calls peculiarly by
that name in his Chapter concerning Cacaua Quahuitl, or the Cacao-tree. And
that this was the primitive Chocolata seems evident from what Benzonus l. 2.
Benzonus says, who lived there amongst the first Planters. He travailed
through the Kingdom of Nicaragua, and observed, that they made a certain
cooling-drink of the Cacao nuts: they grinded the nuts into a paste, and, when
they used it, they dissolved it (^eing powdered) and milled it, tempering it by
little and little with water in an Indian cup: and sometimes they added a
little pepper; and this was their ordinary drink; which they did drink
themselves, and ^ave to wearied travelers, as well as to the sick. This they
offered to Benzonus, and when he with an abhorrency refused such a drench, they
admired, and laughed at him. But certainly it was not improved to any
deliciousness of taste, since he says it was bitterish, and that it was more
fit to be hogs-wash, then drink for rational men. The same may be collected
from Histor. Ind. l. 4. c. 22.
Acosta, who says, that The chiefest use the Indians make of Cacao is in a
drink, which they call Chocholate, whereof they make great account in that
country, foolishly, and without reason: for it is loathsome to such, Mr. Gage,
speaking of the ordinary Indians of Guatemala, says ( chapter 19.) that they drink
of their poor simple Chocolatte, without Sugar, or any compounds, or of Atolle,
until their bellies be ready to burst. And in the same Chapter, a little
before, he says, they call their neighbors to Chocolatte, and finish an house
without any charges, more then of help them, which they minister in great cups
of above a pint, not putting in any costly materials, as do the Spaniards, but
only a little Anise-seed, and Chile, or Indian pepper: or else they half fill
the cup with Atolle, and pour thereon as much Chocolatte, as will fill the cup,
and color it.
as are not acquainted with it, having a skum, or froth, that is very
unpleasant to taste, if they be not very well conceited thereof; yet it is a
drink very much esteemed amongst the Indians, wherewith they feast Noblemen as
they pass thorough their country.

This is that original Chocolata, to the use whereof the Indians were brought,
not by any delicacy of the taste, but evident testimonies and ^^nse of its great
utility. Hujus potionis long a experientia satiati, utilibus admoniti; so says
Dr. Iuanes de Barrios, who lived there immediately after the conquest; as also
did Hernandez, and Benzonus, and Acosta.

It is then clear, that the Indian ordinary Chocolata was made of the Cacao
nut, and meal of Indian wheat, and water, and Pocholt, and now and then some
Pepper called Chille, which was put in, more, or less, according to the
necessity of the Patient's stomach, or other circumstances: So that they made
diverse sorts of it, some hot, some cold, some temperate, and put therein much
of that Chili, or Chille. So says Acosta in the place abovementioned. And I
observe, that Hernandez, though in the making up of Chocolatl, where he speaks
of the composition of it, (which is to be supposed the ordinary one, because
absolutely and indefinitely mentioned there) he add no more Ingredients, then I
have already mentioned, yet in other places he tells us that for weak, Hernan.
l. 2.
phlegmatique, and windy stomachs, they added Xochinacaztli, or your Gage calls
them Orejuelas
Orichelas: so they added Tlilxochitl, or the Id. l. 2. c. 17.
Vaynillas for the like ends, and to strengthen the brain, and womb. To give it
an adstringency, and to strengthen a stomach debilitated, and prone to a flux,
or diarrhaea, they added Id. l. 3. c. 41.
Achiotl, or Achiote. So, in case of cold Stomachs, and Phlegmatiqu^
Obstructions, they added Id. l. 5. c. 13.
Mecaxochitl; which Anton. de Ledesma and Gage call Mecasuchill: and Paulus
Zacchias, Mecacu^e. And, in case of Coughs, they added Id l. 5. c. 41.
T^peyantli. But, besides these drinks, confessedly owned by Hernandez under
the name of Chocolata, there is another, which however it be not reckoned as a
sort of Chocolatl, but distinct from it, yet was it made of Cacao nuts, and
seems ^o have been a leading drink to the Chocolata now in use: and it is
called by Hernandez the Id. I 3. c. 46.
compounded Atatexi. The simple potion of Atatexli is made of one hundred Cacao
nuts, crude, or prepared, and beaten well, and so mixed with as much prepared
Maiz, as can be taken up betwixt both hands joined together. Compounded
Atatexli was made by the addition of Mecaxochitl, or Mecasuchill,
Xochinacatzli, or Orichelas, and Tlixcochitl, or Vaynillas. These were
powdered, and mixed with the rest aforementioned Ingredients of simple
Atatexli, and being well milled, they powered them out of one vessel into
another, lifting it up on high, that so it might richly froth, and the more fat
and oily parts swim on the top, and render it more pleasant. This Potion was
not used for sustenance alone, or as a drink invented by an enforcing
necessity, but, out of a luxurious design, to provoke lust: whereas the simple
Atatexli did refrigerate.

I must beg pardon of my Reader for representing so i^ perfectly the aforesaid
Indian drinks; for the Mexican Herbal is so defective, as it is pub^^shed in
Latin (for the Spanish is incomparably better, if I may judge thereof by some
citations, I have seen) that I have the satisfaction by omitting nothing that
is material in that book; that whosoever, with no greater helps then I have,
should engage in the same affair, would not discharge the employment better
then I have done.

When I consider the aforesaid compounded Atatexli, and compare it with the
present compositions of Chocolata at this day recorded, I cannot think, but
what we use at present is the descendent of that Atatexli, and not of
Chocolatl: for the Ingredients are Cacao-nuts, Mecaxochitl, Orichelas, and
Vaynillas, are the same; the manner of useing it the same: and, at this day,
the Indians and Black-moors Gage c. 16^
do mix Maiz with their Cacao-nuts in the grinding, putting in withal Achiote,
Anise-seeds, and a few Chiles, or red Pepper.

And, now I come to speak of the present ways of making Chocolata, I shall
represent those ways, which are authenticated by Physicians; and among these
that of Antonio Colmenero de Ledesma first occurs.

Gage c. 16. Piso in Mant. Ar. c. 17.
To every hundred nuts of Cacao he put two cods of Chile called long red
Pepper, one handful of Anise-seeds, and Orichelas, or Orejaelas, and two of the
flo^ers called Mecasuchill, one Vaynilla^, or instead thereof (if the party
were costi^e) ^ix Alexandrian Roses beaten to powder, two drams of Cinnamom,
twelve Almonds, and as many Hasel-nuts, half a pound of Sugar, and as much
Achiote as would color it.

Paulus Zacchius in his Italian Discourse about Hypochondriacal Melancholy does
propose this way.

Piso in Mant. Aromat. c. 17.
Take twelve pound of Cacao nuts finely powdered, of Cinnamom finely powdered
one pound, half a pound of Anise-seeds, six Vaynillas finely powdered, four
handfulls of the flowers of Mecacuce, or Mecaxochitl, of Maiz three pound, one
pound of Ai^nzoli (or half a pound of sweet Almonds) bruised and well beaten,
of Achiote half an ounce, of Sugar four pound, or as you please.

Instead of Mecaxochitl, and the Vaynillas, he allows to substitute one Nut^eg,
and twelve Cloves. Out of these he bids us frame a mass.

Besides these Prescripts, other Receipts put in other Ingredients with a great
variety, and difference one from the other: some put in a proportion of black
Pepper; some of long Pepper; some retain that of Chilli, or long red Pepper;
Cinna^mom, Cloves, Almonds, Hasel-nuts, Orejuela, Vaynillas, Musk,
Amber-grease, Orange-flower-water, are things usually put in, or omitted; as
also Nutmeg^^*imon and Citron-pill, Cardamoms, Fennel-seeds, Chemical oils of
Nutmeg and Cinnamom, and the most delicate Spice called Iamaica-pepper; nay and
Achiote too is sometimes left out, or changed for Santals, according to the
devise of the Chocolata-maker, or particular exigency of the Patient's disease.

In the common Chocolata sold so cheap there is not any thing, but eight ounces
of the Nuts They are but pitifully prepared, for they cannot afford to pick or
hull their nuts, nor to searce them: for they sell it in the Chocolata-seller
for two shillings, or half a crown, each pound; the Dutch for eighteen, nay
twelve pence: nor do they know the difference betwixt one sort of nut, and
another.
prepared, and powdered, seven ounces of Sugar, and one ounce of Spice; viz.
half an ounce of Cinnamom, two drams of Iamaica-pepper, or other Pepper, and as
much of Cloves, Nutmeg, and Limon-pill, some color it with Achiote; some
decline to do so, some put into each pound, to make it extraordinary, six
grains of red Pepper, or Chiles. The Jews at Amsterdam put in Bean-flower
usually, instead of Maiz.

In the making of it up these Directions are given by Mr. Gage.

The Cacao and other Ingredients must be beaten in a mortar of stone, or (as
the Iadians use) ground upon a broad stone, which they call Metal, and is only
made for that use: but first the Ingredients are all dried, except the Achiote,
with care, that they may be beaten to powder, keeping them still in stirring,
that they be not burnt, or become black: for, (...) they be over-dryed, they
will be bitter, and lose their virtue. The Cinnamom, and the long red Pepper
are to be first beaten, with the Anise-seed, and then the Cacao, which must be
beaten by little and little, till it be all powdered: and in the beating it
must be turned round, that it may mix the better. Every one of these
Ingredients must be beaten by it self, and then all be put into the vessel
where the Cacao is, which you must stir together with a spoon, and then take
out that paste, and put it into a Mortar, under which there must be a little
fire, after the Confection is made: but if more fire be put under it, then will
warm it, then the unctuous part will dry away. The Achiote must also be put in
in the beating, that it may the better take the color. All the Ingredients
must be searced, except the Cacao: and, if from the Cacao the dry shell be
taken, it will be the better, where it is well-beaten, and incorporated (which
will be known by the shortness of it) then with a spoon (so in the Indies it is
used) is taken up some of the paste, which will be almost liquid, and made into
Tablets, or else without a spoon put into Boxes, and when it is cold it will be
hard. Those, that make it into Tablets, put a spoonful of the paste upon a
piece of paper, (the Indians put it on the leaf of the plant in the tree) where
being put into the shade, (for in the ^un it melts, and dissolves) it grows
hard: and then bowing the leaf, or paper, the Tablet falls of, by reason of the
fatness of the paste; but, if it be put into any thing of earth, or wood, it
sticks fast, and comes not off without scraping, or breaking.

I never saw any Chocolata made up in a mortar, my self; nor do I understand
how the mixture can be accurately made therein. Some beat the Spices severally
in a mortar, and searce them curiously: but, as the vehement agitation of the
pestle does dissipate the more subtle parts, (and it is long in doing) so it
does not equally break them into small particles, notwithstanding their passing
the searce: I conceive it a much better wa^, to beat the greater Spice grossly,
and afterward to mix the Vaynillas, cut into pieces, and dried, and so to
grind them on a stone-table (such as are made on purpose to make up Chocolata)
and so with less trouble, and less dissipation of Spirits, and subtle parts, (a
gentle fire being under) will they grind to an impalpabl^ Powder, (each acting
upon other in the grinding, as well as being pressed by the iron rowler) and,
besides that, mix most accurately. The Spicery being thus prepared, the Cacao
nuts are dried either on a digesting furnace, or in a kettle over the fire,
stirring and turning them carefully, that the nuts may so dry as to shell, but
not to burn: for then the Chocolata will be bitter. Being pill'd, or shell'd,
the nuts, being cold, will beat to a powder, which you may searce, (as you do
the Spice) which is the best way, and practiced by the best Chocolata-makers in
Spain, and by my self always. The hulls also, many of them* are beat by
themselves, and mixed afterward with the nut, and Spice, to compound Chocolata
ordinarily in Spain, and by many in England, to make the common Chocolata. And
Mr. Gage, and Piso, whilst they say it is better to leave out the hulls, leave
us to conjecture, that many put them in all. Having thus prepared the Spicery,
and Nuts, they are to be mixed, and g^inded on a table, with a gentle fire
under it. In the working, if the fire be too hot, the Nuts will run into too
great an oyliness, or dissolution of the fatty parts, and the Chocolata will
not keep any time. If it be too cold, it will not work, but stick to the
rowler. From whence we may judge of the controversy, whether an iron, or
stone-table be best: It does also work blacker on an iron-table: but who
prefers a stone-rowle^, before an iron one, must never have undergone the
trouble of working with the former: which is much greater then with an iron
one; as far as I could see: nor was the Chocolata better.
for on a thin iron-table it is impossible to preserve an equal heat, and
consequently some parts of the Cacao nut will be reduced to too great a
dissolution and unctuousness, and others to too little: and this inequality
must needs occasion an unequal mixture of parts, and consequently a propensity
to corrupt: besides that they are enforced to make it up too soon (it growing
too oily) before the parts are equally mixed. But under a thick stone-table
each degree of increasing heat is soon observed, and remedied. I must also add,
that an iron-table works the Chocolata blacker, then does a stone.

CHAP. III.
An enquiry into the nature of the particular Ingredients, whereof Chocolata is
made.

THe Cacao nut, as it is the principal and constant Ingredient in the
composition of Chocolata, so it merits an exact enquiry into its nature: for it
is by it, that we are mainly to give an estimate of the nature and effects of
the whole Composition.

The Cacao nut (if I may so call it, and not rather the seed of a greater, but
disregarded fruit) is a Nut bigger (or as big) as a great Almond, which grows
upon the Cacao-tree, and ripens in a great husk, wherein sometimes are found
more, sometimes less Cacaos; sometimes twenty, sometimes thirty, nay forty,
and above. The tree is called by the Indians Cacaua Quahuitl, it grows (wild
in the moist grounds of Guatimala, and Nicaragua; and by plantation elsewhere)
to an indifferent height, equal to our largest Plum-trees in bigness; ^t
abounds in foliage, and the leaves are sharp-pointed, compared by so^^ to the
leaves of By Antoniu Herrera.
Chestnuts, and by others to the leaves of an Piso, and Hernandez.
Orange. It be^rs a great Flower, of a Saffron-colour; which fading way, there
succeeds a large fruit called Cacauacentli: when it is ripe, it is as big
Benzonus compares them to Cucumbers for size: fructus Amygdalorum speciem
referens, siliquis quibusdam veluti cu^urbitis includitur, crassitudine and
latitudine cucumeris.
as a Musk-million, as thick, and as weighty; if we may believe Piso, and
Hernandez: though others think the comparison too large, since (in Iamaica)
they are not observed to exceed the bigness of a large Pear. But there are
several sorts of Cacao-trees, (and their Nuts differ more or less in faculty)
so that difference of trees and soils may occasion the discrepancy of Authors.
Within this putaminous husk, or large fruit, ly the Cacahuatl, or (as the
Ludovicus Lopes t. 2. Instruct. consc. c. 112. calls it Checa And ^iso in
Latin Cacacius. Benzonus says, it is usually called by the Indians Cacauate.
Spaniards corruptly call them) the Cacao nuts, being about the bigness of
Almonds, each of them enveloped in a slimy substance, and film, of a
Phlegmatique complexion, but of a most relishing taste: which the women love to
suck of from the Cacao, finding it cool, and in the mouth dissolving into
water. Under which is another shell* which, when baked in the Sun, somewhat
resembles the color and substance of a Ch^snut-hull. Under that hull is lodged
that nut, which is the most precious commodity in the Indies, as Acosta, and
others tell us, and which makes up C^iefly our Chocolata. It is of a color
like to the outside of a Chestnut, and divided into several scissures* and
pieces, as is a This is the comparison used by Piso, but the resemblance is not
very great, especially in some sorts of Nuts.
cow's-kidney, but yet joined together, and in those small divisions (after
d^ying) there seems to remain some little relics of a Phlegmatique moisture,
which often degenerates into an hoa^iness, and at last ends in the final
corruption of the Nut. It is of such a substance, that being dried on a
digesting furnace, or pan, it will beat to a fine powder: being laid on a
stone, or table, the least warmth makes the said powder dissolve into an
oyliness, or fattyness instantly; and it will alone work into a paste, without
any intermixture, and keep a year. Which paste well made up alone (or with
Pocholt) was, I presume, all the Chocolata, that Motezuma, and the ancient
Indians had, then dissolving it in Atolle. It will beat into a Powder, and so
may be remix'd with new Ingredients of spicery, and sugar, to make the more
delicious Chocolata. I took a quantity of it (being exquisitely ground) and
dissolved it in hot water, and having ^et it stand a while by the fire to
dissolve, I milled it, (without the mixture of any thing, but pure Cacao paste,
and water) it frothed moderately, but the froth was but of little continuance,
and, being suffered to cool, it gathered like fat (both in color, and
substance) on the top of the most fat broths, or pottage, to a great
thickness: but when it came to be cold, however it had before a resemblance
rather of fat, then oil, it gathered into a resemblance of cr^^m; and indeed it
had just such a consistence, but the color was yellowish. To the bottom there
did settle a great quantity, which I took, and tasted of: and I found it to
taste just as Almond butter exactly, as to its unctuousnesse; but it had the
bitterness, which is proper to the Cacao nut. The water it self beneath the
cream was reddish, and after I had purely taken of the cream, it had not only a
fatty taft, but taking some out, and bathing my hands in it, I found it extreme
fatty. I took that Settling, and heated it in fresh water ^ill it began to boil,
then I milled it again, and let it stand to cool: it was at first extraordinary
fatty; then, being cold, it yielded its cream, and a red shining Cacao-butter
(as I may call it by an allusion to Almond^butter) and a colored fatty water,
as before; only with this difference, that the Cacao butter seemed a little
less unctuous, and not so perfectly to dissolve, and glide off the tongue, as
before. Which put me upon another Experiment of decocting, and milling it, till
I might extract all the fat out of it, and discover the nature of this settling;
if it might be so terrestrial, and obstructive, as some imagine. I hea^ed the
aforesaid settling in fresh water, and milled it well; and instead of cr^am
(though the water, as it cooled, showed signs of a great fattinesse) there did
gather on the top a thin covering or (...) (if I may so call it) of fat, such
as will rise on mutton pottage not too fat. The wat^^ proved unctuous to my
hand, as before, but the se^ling had no longer the fineness, and mel^ing ta^t
of Almond butter, but seemed as if it were not finely powdered, and besides its
bitterishnesse, to have an evident piercing adstringency. From whence I
concluded, that it could not be obstructive, but opening, and that when the
fatty alimentous parts were distributed for nourishment, the others (as before
they seemed to corroborate the stomach, and promote digestion; which things
moderately bitter and adstringent do: so now they) open the obstructions,
promote concoction in the several guts, and go away in stool: which is the
excellency of bread corn, that the bran does promote the appetite, and
digestion, and keeps the body open, and is more healthy then Manchet, and it is
mixed by many with success in Diet-drinks to this end.

And it is further observable, that in this Experiment, whereas the Nut it
self, and the paste of Cacao, and the Cream, and the two first Setlings (yea,
and the Fatty water) did by their burning give more or less visible
testimonies of their unctuous nature in their flames, the last greety and
incoherent Settling would not burn at all in flames. Besides, during the
reiteration of these Experiments, (which was a fortnight) there never appeared
any augmentation of the cream by standing beyond a few hours; nor no alteration
in it by standing s^^dry days: the cream, the water, the Settling were still
the same, as to consist^nce, color, and taste: it never, as to any part of it,
sowred in a fortnight's keeping, nor gave any sign of corruption, though,
during that time, I boiled, and milled the same decoction several ^^mes, and
upon any fire to heat it I observed that Settling to arise, and incorporate with
the rest, the cream dissolving; as Urine, when turned at the fire: and when it
cooled, it did resetle before; as the said Urines do in like case. At the same
time, as I tried sundry Experiments with paste of the one lump, I observed,
that, having boiled the water, and dissolved the Cacao paste in it, and milled
it but a little: though upon cooling it seemed very fat, yet did it yield but
little cream. Another part, that was well milled, and yielded as much cream, as
covered the pipkin all over to a moderate thickness, being skimmed, and
milled, and cooled, and creamed again, I took it, and heated it till it began
to boil, and then poured it out of the pipkin instantly, and it came out so
clearly, and without any relics of water in the pipkin, as water does usually
glide off oyled cloth, or other vessels, when cold water is powered on cold
grease. And this happened upon three trials, the water being thoroughly
unctuous by being twice or thrice heated, and milled (for else it succeeds
not:) and to make it more conspicuous, in several parts off the pipkin I could
observe some little remainders of the water slide off in round globes, or
corpuscles, as it will do off oyled cloth, or greased vessels.

From whence I thoug^t I might collect a reason, why the farrynesse of the Nut
does not annoy the stomach, being taken in drink, as other fat, or oil will:
for it exactly commixs with the liquor, and swims not on the top: (in these
last Experiments it was never milled; but, having been milled some days
before, and cooled in the pipkin, it was again heated, and stirred with a spoon
a little, and powered out) and if, as it cools, part of it seem to ascend, yet
does not that all condense into cream: but the water under is fatty; and as it
is hot, and boils, it is still so (as appears by this Experiment:) which
happens not so in other fat broths. Thus, the unctuous parts not floating (as
in fat, or butter, dissolved in posset drink to provoke, or help vomits) on the
top, and the bitterish and adstringent parts by a little heat commixing with
the other, it must be a very great repletion can make Cacao paste offensive to
the stomach, and its orifice.

I took also Cacao paste, and dissolved, and milled it well in cold water; and
it did froth, and upon standing yield a cream in as great a proportion, as that
did, which had been dissolved in hot water, and well milled: the cream was
yellowish* and inflammable; the settling was just as to ^^lour, and taste like
to the other: saving that, drinking of it before it settled, I found it to be
nauseous to the stomach; so as I, who hitherto never distasted any thing I had
a mind to take, could not much relish the drinking of it: not that it was
vehemently cold to the stomach, but that the fattinesse of it made the water
unpleasant being cold: and it had also a rawishnesse in it, as if the fat
required boiling, or further Cookery; which yet I felt not upon eating either
the nuts, or paste of Cacao. Or else it was because that the warmth of the
water causes a more absolute commixture of the parts, which may prevent, as
well as of those, which may cause nauseousnesse. Or it was because that many
things may be taken hot without offense, or distaste, which cannot be so, when
cold: the heat of the vehicle either correcting the potion, or corroborating
the stomach.

I took also some simple Cacao paste, and put it into cold water, and set it on
a gentle fire, stirring it with a spoon till it was dissolved: I suffered it to
boil gently, and kept it all day in such a posture, that it did either boil, or
continued boiling hot, but rather the latter. After it had stood seven or eight
hours (during which time I observed the Decoction to grow extraordinary oily,
and to fill the spoon with a water so thick, that I thought it was transformed
all into fat, and oil ^ it appeared all full of globous corpuscles, (...) if it
had been oil broken into parcels: but these Corpus^les did never embody into
greater quantities, nor commix upon agitation; yet by long digestion I observed
they grew to a larger size, yet would not commix: there being besides them a
distinct fattinesse to be seen. And in the end, I perceived a new body to
discover it self in great quantities; it was not globous, but flattish; and for
color, and taste, and nature participated more of mutton fat, then any thing
else. It was of color yellowish, inclining to white: and had little taste of
the Cacao's bitterness, or adstringency. These fatty Particles I could not get
to embody into one, or more bigger bodies: though I could agi^^te them with a
spoon (for I never milled them) into less; yet did I perceive, that some of
them were bigger then others, and at last some of them did enlarge themselves
into a size as broad as a Groat, and of an indifferent depth, or thickness:
yet could I not stir these into one or more bigger masses. Whereupon I set it
to cool: and it was long before these bodies of oil, and fat, did harden, and
disappear out of their former shape: so that I thought I had resolved it into
Oil, since no Cream was to be seen. But being called away by business (which
permitted me not the leisure to observe the minute ^^anges in this reiterated
Experiment) at my return I found several whiti^^ or pale-yellowish bodies like
to Fat swimming on the top, there being no Cream, nor other body to overcast
the top, and hinder their free floating: some were bigger, thicker, and
broader, and longer then others, and of no determinate Figure. They were very
solid, and melted on the tongue totally, as Fat, or Butter would, or Clarified
Deer's-suet, to which they were equal in hardness: they had (as I and others
judged) a farewell or relish of the Cacao at last upon the tongue. So that I
observed, that no dissolution could totally separate its bitterishnesse, and
little piercing adstringency, which is peculiar to the Nut: and consequently it
could never easily become offensive, or obstructing. The Water or Decoction was
fatty, and had a deep red tincture* and the Settling as it was deeply red, so it
had little of Oilinesse, or resemblance of Almond butter; but it was attended
with a roughn^sse, or sensible inequality of parts, the unctuousnesse being
almost as much extracted from this Settling, as from that, which had been
Decocted, and Milled in several Waters; of which I already spoke. I could see
no tokens of what carried, whilst it was hot, the appearance of Oil. Having
showed it for several days to diverse persons, I heated it again, and instantly
the said hard Fat dissolved, the Settling did remix with the rest of the Liquor:
and I had a Decoction of a most deep red, and swimming with larg^ Fatty ^^d
Oily Particles: I caused it to be well m^^led, and setting it to cool, the said
large innatant bodies, resembling a Solution of Fat in Water, and parcels of
Oil, were dissipated, and broken, or so incorporated with other Corpuscles,
that I could get very few, and those very very small pieces of solid Fat: (the
same happened in compound Chocolata) though I had before had lumps, that might
weigh ten or twelve grains. But there did gather on the top a skin, or cuticle
(very thin) though the body of the water and top did shine with a visible
Fattishnesse; and powered out of the pipkin with such an unctuousness^, or
oylinesse, being scalding hot, that nothing did, or would stick, or otherwise,
then glide off, as from oiled cloth, which it does not, when powered out cold.
Of fat, it was not hard, but having an affinity with the usual cream already
mentioned in other trials, but improportionate to the fat dissolved: and the
settling seemed to me more unctuous, then before, and like Almond butter.

I have not time to multiply reflections hereon, but whosoever shall set
himself to observe the dissolution of Cacao paste, or Chocolata cakes,
according as they are milled in water, or not milled; and according as they
boil, and not boil therein; and according as they gradually dissolve on a quick
or leasurely fire, will find a great diversity of parts, occasioned by the
different texture of ^^em: and shall find both color and taste to vary
several times (especially in the Compound Chocolata) to his amazement. I shall
conclude with one trial more; The powder of Cacao paste tastes very fatty, yet
(according to variety of nuts) it dissolves with the least heat on a stone like
butter: but a great heat dries it, and leaves a red, bitterish, and astringent
powder behind. I took also of the said paste, and heated it on a fire shovel;
and if at first it melted with a gentle heat, it did evaporate away its oily
parts by a more violent one: and* smelling to the smoke arising from it, I had
my smell affected with such a nidor, as issues from fat, when broiled on the
coals, but milder.

These circumstances of its fattinesse, and oilin^sse, and of its nidorous
exhalations being burned, do very much recommend the Nut for a very nutritive
thing. Its dissolving by the least fire, or warmth, argues its facile
digestiblenesse. Its easy concretion evidenceth its promptitude to be
assimilated into nourishment of the parts. And its nidorous vapor, being
burnt, proves, that it carries with it (if any can doubt this, that sees the
Oil, or Fat, swimming in the pure Cacao decoction) at least a potential fat,
and is a greater ^logy of its symbolizing with our bodies, then it is for
Bread, that by Chemical digestion it should in time be converted into blood, as
some tell us.

But to improve this Argument from reason a little, it is the general ^^gue of
the Indians, and Indian writers, wh^^h is no less, then the testimony of
uncontroverted Experience, that this Cacao nut is very nourishing: that it is
multi nutrimenti, is the assertion of Hernandez, Herb. Mexic. lib. 3. c. 46.
Hernandez: that it does fatten (being made into Chocolatl by the sole mixture
of ^ocholt grains) by frequent using it, is likewise avowed by him. Chocolatl
paratum ex granis Pocholt, and Cacauatl, aequa mensura, quod magnopere traditur
corpora impinguare, si frequentius ea uti contingat. And Dr. Iuanes de Barrios
Dr. Iuanes de Barrios de Chocolata.
tells us, that, when they used in Guatemala the plain and simple Chocolata,
they found it very nourishing. Es comoda pues ella sola suple el almuerso, y
algunas otras comidas, por que con ella no es menester, pan, ni corn, ni
bebida, y en un momento se hace y sacona, lo que no ai en las otras.

In fine Io. de Laet, I. de Lae^ Hist. Ind. Occid. l. 7. c. 2.
tells us, that it is very nourishing ( praeclare nutrit) and that the Indians
by the help of Cacao nuts alone do subsist all day, notwithstanding their great
labor, and heat. Which is a truth well known to our Seamen, and Land soldiers,
in, and about Iamaica, that by the help of the Cacao nut made into paste with
Sugar, and dissolved in water, neither having, nor wanting other food, they
usually sustain themselves, sometimes for a long season; and I have been
assured, that the Indian women do so feed on it, (eating it often) that they
scarce eat any solid meat ^wice in a w^ek; yet feel no deca^ of heat, or
strength. All which is purely to be ascribed to the nourishing nature of ^^e
Cacao nut, and not to the other Ingredients; since few of them are found
endowed with any such quality, nor is there intermixture with the Cacao nut of
any long date, the latter of which has been already evidenced in the beginning
of my discourse: and I shall demonstrate the former, before I conclude.

But however that the Cacao nut, being grinded into a paste, and dissolved in
hot water, be so nourishing, yet have the Indians and Spaniards an ill opinion
of the Nut, to eat it whole, and not in the usual manner of drink. Which, as it
is told me by that ingenious Gentleman, Major Fairfax (who lived long in
Iamaica, and is newly returned) so it is confirmed by the authority of Mr.
Gage. Gage Survey of the West Indies c. 16.
The Cacao, if it be not stirred, grinded, and compounded to make the
Chocolatta; but be eaten, as it is in the fruit, (as many Criolian and Indian
women eat it) it does notably obstruct, and cause stoppings, and make them look
of a broken, pale, and earthy color, as do those, that eat earthen ware, as
pots, or pieces of lime walls; which is much used amongst the Spanish women,
thinking, that pale and earthy color, though with obstructions, and stoppings,
well becomes them. Which Observation, if it be true, makes no more to the
prejudice of the Cacao nut, then it pr^judiceth Wheat, Oat-meal, or the like,
that being eaten unmasticated, or raw, they do create, or increase the
Green-sicknesse in maids. I say, if it be true: for here in England the
honorable Robert Boil can bear me witness, that several honorable Relations
of his have eaten them for several years, and continue to do so; in the beauty
of whose faces the world, as much as it is interested therein, can observe no
diminution: yea, they profess it as a real and experienced truth, that, if at
any time their heads ache, to eat twelve of those nuts is a present remedy.
Another Lady protested to me, that by the eating of those Nuts, she feels
Hypochondriacal vapors (with which she is much troubled) to be instantly
allayed, or appeased. So far are they from participating of the usual
Malignancy of Nuts, to beget shortness of breath, Obstructions, and Headaches.
To the former Experiencies I must add, that they are observed to be more
laxative, then binding; and that neither Mr. Boil, nor my self (who did eat
two pound once, and great quantities since on purpose) ever felt any heavyness,
or annoyance in the stomach, Head, or elsewhere. Nor have I (as neither do the
others) been curious to choose particular times to eat them in: Here I desire
to observe, that, though I have my self many times eaten great quantities of
the Cacao nuts unreduced to paste (as also of the simple and compound paste)
yet did I never find (...) Stomach to be filled by them (as i^ ^hey had
dissolved instantly therein) but ^ather satiated, though not cloyed; which
happens not in other solid food taken so: nor could I ever perceive they did
that way much nourish me; though I did eat at one time beyond any proportion,
that I drank at another; and yet was fed and sensibly refreshed by the latter
course.
but at all hours, and seasons, Morning, and Evening, before, and after meals:
all day, as opportunity, or other circumstances invited us thereto. It may be
then, that the obstructions, and discolou^ed complexion of the Women in the
Indies eith^r is fabulous; or to be attributed to their eating the Cacao Nuts,
whilst yet they are not sufficiently cured from their excrementitious moisture,
and humidity: or that they eat another sort of Cacao Nuts, then should be used
in Chocolata: (for it is a great caution in the making Chocolata, not only,
that the Nuts be well cured, and dried; the older being accounted the best, if
not corrupted, and decayed: and that they come from Caracas, and Soconusco, not
Guaiachil, or the like; but that they be of the sort called Hernandez I. 3. c.
46. Gul. Piso in Mant. Arom. cap. 18.
Clalcacahuatl especially: whereas they they make Confects of Hernandez ibid.
Quauhpatlathli, (or Patlaxt, which Gage Surv. c. 16.
is not so useful as the ordinary, yet is used by the meaner sort.) Or, if it
must be understood of the right Cacao (which they often eat Piso in Mant. Ar.
c. 18. and Anton. de Herrera cap. 10. Hist. Ind. Occid.
roasted, and made into Confects, and their Women fall into Hysterical and
Hypochon^riacal Distempers, very difficult to cure; which is avowed by Piso, as
an usual accident there, as well as by Mr. Gage) I can only say, that it has
not yet happened so here: and that however, we ought to remember that old
Arabian Maxim (...) Physic, Qui non been masticat, odit animam suam; He, that
does not chew his food well, is an enemy to his own life. Of so great
Consequence is either that salival ferment in the mouth, which inchoates
digestion, being impressed into the thing chewed; or the due comminution, and
subtiliation o^ food: it being well known, that the eating of any meat in great
morsels, and without chewing, occasioneth the inconveniences attributed to the
eating of the Nuts not reduced into a paste by Grinding. For it is observable,
that the Paste of the nut will melt in the mouth perfectly, if it be well made:
but the nut will not (that I could observe) though well chewed. And therefore
it may seem a just caution, to weak stomachs especially, that their Chocolata
be made with a Paste exquisitely made, the Nut being first powdered, then
searced finely, and then carefully grinded. And then there will be little or no
inconvenience from the eating the Cacao Nut so ordered, either in Pastills, or
Cakes; provided the other Ingredients be not noxious.

I shall now speak of the qualities and temperament of the Cacao Nut. And
indeed in Taste it is none of the most pleasant, to those that are not used to
it: which made Clusius say, that, besides its adstringent Taste, it had so
unplea^ant an one, that it was no wonder, if such* as first taste the primitive
Chocolata, care ^ot for it. Of the same judgment was Benzonus: for which he was
laughed at by the Nicaraguans, and necessity made him to comply at last with
them in drinking it in that original and simple manner. It has a Taste
somewhat bitterish, and sub-adstringent: and has such a mixture of parts, that
Authors no way agree in Charactering its temper. If we look on the Nut, and
taste it without any other preparation, then that of taking off the hull, one
would accord with De plant. Ind. Occid. c. 54.
Roblez; El Cacao es frio y seco de su templansa, y per esto tienen parts
astringentes, con que opila: The Cacao nut is by temperament cold, and dry, and
therefore has adstringent parts, with which it begets Obstructions. Truly
that it is dry, seems then sensible: and that it is cold, the universal
experience of all, who say it Hernandez lib. 3. cap. 46. Acuta ^gritudine
laborantibus exhiberi solet ex ^o semine parata potio, ^ui nihil praeterea
commixtum sit, contemperando aestui, and fervori placando, and eis, quos calida
intemperies hepatis, al^eriusve partis vexat.

Benzonus lib. 2. Ex nucleo Cacao fiunt sorbitiunculae refrigeranies: eam ob
causam adeo expetitae, ut cum iis quidvis vel pretio, vel usu earum commutent.

Jo. de Laet lib. 6. cap. 2. H^^t. Ind Occid. Simplex enim potio (sc. fructus
Cacao) refrigerat, and nutrit insigni^er.


allays thirst incredibly, and cools the Liver, or any other inflamed part,
seems seems a pregnant Argument. And of the same judgment with Roblez (who
lived in Peru) was Dr. Iuanes de Cardenas, who lived in the Indies, and
practiced Physic there, and made use of his ^wn judgment, as well as the
Narrations of the Natives. He thinks the Cacao nut to be cold and dry in a
degree betwixt the first and second. Because he is an eminent Writer, and his
Assertions may perhaps suit best with the generality of Physicians inured to
old Hypotheses, I shall set down the substance of his judgment as to the Cacao
nut.

Dr. Iuanes de Cardenas lib. 7. De propr. Chocolatis.
He acknowledges a triple distinction of parts in the Cacao nut; from whence
arises a ternary of distinct Qualities in it, The first is a cold, dry,
earthy, and melancholy substance: which if it prevail above the rest, it
produces Obstructions, and Melancholy, and destroies concoction. The second is
airy, hot, and proportionate to butter, which by agitation, and milling, rises
in froth. This he reputes to be hot and moist, and of a lenifying nature,
which, whilst it prevails, begets a quite contrary effect: for it nouri^heth
much, and multiplies Blood, and vital Spirits, and enables men to labor. This
butyrous substance does principally manifest it self in the Cacao nut, when it
is indifferent aged, and has been kept a good while: and is not a little
helped in the showing it self, by being roasted, or heated in a drying pan, or
kettle, before the oil be drawn, or it be made into a paste. The third sort of
parts, which he professes to be in it, is hot, and dry, which carries w^^h it a
faint resemblance of adustion, which makes it to seem bitterish to the taste.
By reason of the latter parts, it becomes penetrating, and conveys the other
alimentous parts into the body; it provokes sweat, and monthly evacuations in
women, it opens all Obstructions; and these guide the more oily and butyrous
parts into the entrails, whereby the body is preserved soluble. This
multiplicity of parts produces several effects in the persons using Chocolate,
according as they are healthy, or sick, of a weak or strong stomach, troubled
with Obstructions, or free from them. And much depends on the individual
constitution of persons: as also on the Artificial mixture of it into
Chocolata, whereby the several parts are actuated, and vigorated, the butyrous
parts set at liberty from the confinement they were under by reason of the
styptick* Particles; which more appear to sense in the nut, then in the mass:
for the former dissolve not on the tongue, (no, not when chewed) as does the
latter: nor has the latter that sensible astringency, and bitterness (joined
with its unctuousness, and aptitude to melt on the tongue) as the former.

Hernandez (who was principal Physician in the Kingdom of Mexico, and was
appointed by Philip II. to wri^e Medicinal and Natural Observations in that
Province) is at a great loss, what nature and Temperament to ascribe to this
Nut. It is (says he Hernan Herb. Mexic. l 3. c. 46 and Io. de Laet Hist. Ind.
occid. l. 6. c. 2. says of it out of Fr. Ximenes, Cacao fructus teneri sunt
nutrimenti, saporis inter dulcem and amarum medii, temperie nonnihil frigida
and humida.
) made up of different Particles, but very well embodyed, and mixed; it is
something bitter, something sweet; and either of a temperate Nature, or a
little inclined to coldness, and moisture.

Others are of opinion, that this Cacao nut is of a temperament inclining to
heat, and moisture: and they consider not the nut, as it is entire, or under no
greater comminution, then what the teeth infer: but as it is grinded into a
paste, and (sometimes as) mixed with water, and agitated into forth by a
Molinet. And their reasons are; first* because in the grinding it into paste,
and in the working it up, and in the dissolving it in Water again, still there
are no visible signs of any thing (if it be well done, and the nuts good) but
of parts moderately hot, moist, and unctuous, or butyrous; there being little
or no terrestrial, and heavy, gross settling whilst it is hot, and when it is
milled, it goes all almost into froth, and fat, which proceeds (say they) from
an airy, hot, and moist substance, mixing with wind. Another Argument they
bring for their opinion from the quick nourishment it gives; For, (say they,
and Galen too) that it could not so soon turn into nourishment of the Blood,
and Spirits, if it had not a proportionateness, and agreement of temper
therewith: for there would be some time requisite to assimilate and change what
ha^^ a discrepancy with our Nature, before it ^ould nourish us. But that, which
is analogous to our nature, is Balsamically hot, and moist: not cold, and dry;
which are enemies to it.

Gul. Piso resolves the controversies of the Cacao nut thus,

Veniamus ad Cacacii Q^alitates intrinsecas. Has equidem ex effectibus,
caeterisque indiciis, constat esse temperatas. Substantia ei ex crassioribus
simul and tenuioribus partibus composita est prorsus: ut in infinitis aliis
vegetabilibus observatum est, diversas omnino sub eadem forma Substantias
co^tineri. Noster autem Cacacius in pulverem redigitur primum, and sola mox,
etsi frequenti tusione pinsitur, and in massam cogitur. Quod cum fiat sine
ullius rei admistione, ratio arguit aliquid esse in eo tenacis and bituminosi
instar humoris, Aeris Elemento respondens. Multa insuper eidem, quibuscum
suapte natura miscetur, insunt ignea, quae necessario incidere atque reserare
debent corporis meatus, non vero praecludere, ut quidam voluerunt: nisi hoc
intelligant de crudo, vel tosto, vel Saccharo condito, quo mulieres in Indiis
nimium vesci amant, unde uteri, alvi, and Hypochondriorum obstructiones
incurrunt difficillimas. Verum totum hoc oritur, quod interior ejus substantia
dentium incisione non exact comminuitur, nec perfect commiscetur: requiritur
enim artificiosa molae ve^satilis contritio; atque tunc demum siquid noxiae
supersit frigiditatis, aliorum calidorum commixtione temperatur, communicata
singulis partibus ^ac intimae jus substantiae qualitate.

It is manifest by is effects, and other signs, that, as to its intrinseck
Qualities, it is of a temperate Nature. Its substance is made up of some
subtle, and some gross parts; which sort of mixture is observable in many other
products of Nature. This Cacao nut is first beaten to powder, then without any
accessional [but a gentle heat on a stone, or iron-table, or mortar] it is
worked laboriously into a mass, or paste. Which, since it is done without the
addition of any other thing, it is an evident Argument, that there is in it a
tenacious and bituminous Substance. The mixture of other Spicery corrects its
coldness; they penetrate, and open Obstructions: so that Chocolata is no way
obstructing; however others, by eating raw, or roasted Nuts, or crushed into
confects with Sugar, (much used by the Indian women) may fall into tedious
obstructions of the Spleen, Liver, Hypochondria, and Womb. For these
inconveniences happen, because it is not exactly grinded, and that the
performances of the Teeth and Stomach equal not those of the rowler in
grinding, and the molinet in actuating the Particles of the Cacao nut.

I shall reserve the particular decision of the controversy, until I have
made a greater inquiry into the nature of the Nut, and its several parts, and
^ave examined my self its several effects in Iamaica, at more leisure: but
suggest these present Considerations.

If the Nut be a right good Nut of Nicaragua (or Caracas) and Soconusco (the
Nuts of the Islands are not reputed equal to those of the main: I have eaten
and used as good Nuts of the growth of Iamaica, as any, I have yet met with.
and in Iamaica they have but newly learned to cure them; in which there is
much art) and so old, as to be at its perfection, not decayed and of a darkish
red, approaching to black, after it is pilled, it is to Taste, adstringent, and
a little bitterish; but not very unpleasant to any, who shall have eaten but a
few of them. It will be dry, and hard to taste, and not dissolve into an
unctuous liquour in the mouth: though you may easily perceive in a rich nut to
the Taste an extraordinary butyrousness, though congeled, and fixed by some
particular Principle else. I never could observe any coldness in the nut at all
neither, on the tongue, nor stomach; nor yet any sense of heat. If the sensible
bitterishness must argue heat, the effects of which are not further perceived,
because the unctuous parts implicate and dull the vigor of the other; and if
that the sensible unctuousness in the most dry nuts, maugre the stypticity,
evinces their moisture: yet will any, who eats the nut, be apt to excuse them,
who by their taste judge the nut (ungrinded) to be cold and dry in the first
and second Degre^

I have already showed, that our Experience in England in my self, and others,
(some being well, some being sickly) does not evidence the Nut eaten of it self
(not reduced to a Paste on a stone) to be obstructing, or clogging to the
Stomach: and, whereas it is attributed to the grinding, and so commixing the
parts, that it keeps the body soluble, our Experience shows, that even the Not
eaten produces the like effect; though by the taste one would conjecture
otherwise.

Whereas it is said by some, that the Nut in Paste dissolved into water is of
an hot as well as moist nature: I must propose some doubts thereto, since it is
so good in fevers, and to quench thirst at other times; and is so repugnant to
cold Stomachs (a general calamity in hot Climates) that the Indians and English
generally are enforced to mix with it either long Pepper, or Iamaica-Pepper, or
red Pepper called Chilli, to make it supportable to their Stomachs: and Men*
otherwise of unquestionable strength, and health, have assured me upon their
own experience, that this is true. Besides, it is a known Experiment both in
Spain, and the Indies, that the butyrous and oily part of the Cacao nut, being
taken of, and preserved from the Chocolata, or otherwise drawn, is a very great
remedy against Inflammations, and particularly the Erisipelas, or fire of St.
Anthony. And in such applications it is sensibly cooling.

In fine, let men debate eternally the temperament of the Nut, they, who have
ascribed to it Qualities altogether repugnant to nutriment, have never
controverted its incredible nutritive faculty. It is in this that all agree. It
is multi alimenti, yields plentious nourishment, says Hernandez; who holds it
to be temperate, or inclining to cold and moisture. Io. de Laet says of it,
refrigerat, and nutrit insigniter, it cools, and nourishes exceedingly. Dr.
Iuanes de Cardenas professes, that it yields buen sustento al cuerpo, good
nourishment for the body. And Roblez, who concurs in opinion with the other,
that it is cold, and dry, declares it to be summamente alimentoso, exceeding
nutritive. And Benzonus gives it this Character, Ea Caelia sapore aliquantum
amaro satiat, and refrigerat corpus minime tamen, inebriat: That muddy Drink,
or Ale, with its bitterish taste satisfies, and cools the body, not
intoxicating any way the Head. And it is observable, that albeit the eating of
Cullises, and Iellies continually, does so debilitate the Stomach, that,
thorough much use of the former, men become incapable to digest any grosser
meats: of the verity of which practical Observation there is a notable instance
in Sanctorius De vit and^ error.
of a Student at Padua, who, that he might have more time to study, and not be
diverted therefrom by any re^^rd of Diet, fed himself only with Iellies, and
C^llises, wherewith he expected not only to be strengthened much, but also
freed from the concerns of exercise, and other circumstances necessary for
digesting stronger meats; but he afterward falling sick, and being inured to
no other food, then that appertained to sick-folks, whilst he was well; being
sick could receive no no sustenance at all, and so dyed lamentably for want of
food, more then by the violence of his disease: I say, it is not so with the
plain Chocolata, made of the pure Cacao-Paste, and perhaps a little Sugar, and
Pepper; for the Indians, English, and Spaniards, who have lived on it several
days, sometimes weeks, without any other food, do without any inconvenience
resume a more gross Diet, and again intermit it at their pleasure.

I have been thus particular in the inquiry into the nature of the Cacao nut,
because it is the principal Ingredient in Chocolata: and it is this Nut alone
in the Composition, (if there be neither Maiz, nor Bean-meal in it, which may
be admitted in small quantities as wholesome, for ought I can imagine; or
Pistachia nuts, or Almonds; of the healthfulness of either of which, but
especially the latter, I doubt as to this Composition) which yields the
nourishment, and fatness, which is expected from the Drink, and often found.
All the other are but Spicery (under which I comprise Amber-griese, and Musk)
and serve at best but as a Vehicle to distribute the Cacao nut into the body,
and to make it agreeable to the stomach, which otherwise might, and often is
troubled with the coldness of the Cacao, o^ what other Quality it may have
(perhaps too much relaxing the stomach, or offending its o^ifice by its
unctuousness) wher^by to offend the stomach.

And since the Indians did first correct it with Chiles, or red Pepper, I shall
speak of that in the first place.

Chiles, Chilli, or red Pepper, in the language of Acosta Hist. Ind. l. 4. c.
20.
Cusco is called Vchu; in that of Mexico, Chili: or Piso hist. Not. and Med. l.
6. c. 15. ex Ximene.
Chilli by the old Inhabitants of Hispaniola (called Haitini by Hernandez. l.
5. c. 3.
Hernandez) it is called Hernandez. l. 5. c. 3.
Agies (by Roblez, los Agies) which some Acosta l. 4. c. 20. Piso ex Ximene l.
6. c. 51.
otherwise write (according to the variety of spelling) Axi. By Monardes it is
called La pimienta de las Indias. In Portugal it is called pimienta de Brasil.
In Brasil, and by Piso, Quiya. In fine, amongst almost an infinity of names,
the most usual now are long red Pepper, and American or Brasile Pepper, for no
other reason, but that the Portughese brought it first thence. Acosta ubi supra.
It was much esteemed of in old time amongst the Indians, which they carried
into places, where it grew not, as a Merchandise of consequence. Piso ubi supra.
And in all the inhabited places of America it is so frequently used, that
there is scarce any meat dressed without it. Mr. Sig^n's Descript. of Barbadas
p. 79.
This Spice the Spaniards love, and will have it in all their meat, that they
in^end to have picant: for a greater Hough-goo is not in the World; Garlic is
faint and cool to it. It is so violently strong, as, when one breaks but the
skin, it sends out such a vapor into the Lungs, as he falls to coughing, which
lasts of quarter of an hour after the fruit is removed: but, as long as it is
grabling, they never give over. To describe its several kinds, and
particularize its virtues, it would be requisite to transcribe the Treatise of
Father Gregory the Capuchine upon this Subject, which is to be found in Carolus
Clu^ius's Curae posteriores, Piso, and Hernandez. However that the Spice merits
great commendation, and that Chap. 54.
Monardes, and Histor. Not. Ind. l. 7. c. 7.
Oviedo prefer it before the East^Indy Pepper: and that many Acosta ubi supra.
repute it to be cold, and well-tempered: (as do Bontas c. 5. De cons. valet.
in Ind.
others that of the East Indies) yet it is by such, as regard the testimony of
what they taste, and feel, (before traditional Discourses) to be Acosta ubi
supra.
hot in the highest Degree. Q^artum haec caloris gradum attingunt, and tertium
fere siccitatis, so says Ubi supra.
Hernandez. And Monardes avows them to be hot, and dry, as it were in the
fourth Degree. Es caliente, y seca, ca^i en quarto grado. There is this caution
given of them, See Acosta, Hernandez, Piso, ubi supra.
that they inflame the Blood, and distemper the Eyes, the Liver, and the Reins;
that they create Fevers, Pleurisies, and Peripneumonies; that they are no way
agreeable for young folks, but for the old Flegmatique* Which Assertion is to
be understood of its unproportionate mixture with other Compositions.

Another Ingredient in the composition of Chocolata is that most delicate of
Spices, called usually in England Pepper of Iamaica, by the Spaniards Pepper of
Xamaica (so Herrera, and other Spaniards call Iamaica) Pepper of Tabasco or
Tamasco, and Pepper of Chiapa: and by the Indians X^coxochitl. It is commonly
called in Iamaica, Pimienta: which name they took from the Spaniards, some of
which I find to call it gravos de pimienta, and pimienta alone: though
otherwise that name is of a greater comprehension. This Spice has a most
delicate smell, and such, as resembles an Orange stuck with Cloves: being
swallowed whole, it amends the breath, is excellent against Wind, and helps
digestion, and yields no sign of an immoderate heat; but being broken, within
the outward husk, or shell, there are two (sometimes three) little grains,
which make the impression of a pretty violent heat, yet short of the other
Peppers: I have not met with any Writer, who utters a word to their prejudice;
a few of them, burnt with wine, recommend it for fragrancy, and taste, beyond
any Spice. Ferdinandez l. 1. sect. 1. c. 14. Vide and Herbar. Mexican. l. 2. c.
5. de Xoc^-Xochitl seu pipere Tabasc.
Es la Pimienta de suave olor, caliente, y s^ca en grado tercero, cordial,
desoppilativa, provoca mezes, y es remedio a los dolores flatuoses, corrobora
el estomago, y ajuda ^a digestion de la comida. The pimienta (of Iamaica) is
sweet-sented, hot and dry in the third Degree, opening Obstructions, Cordial,
provoking the Terms, and it is good against Wind, and flatulent pains, it
strengthens the Stomach, and Digestion, being eaten.

Roblez gives it this Character, E hecho experientia desta semilla, o granos de
Pimienta, y hallo en ella el calor, y sequedad iguales, y ser a proposito para
confortar el estomago, interiormente bebida, o exteriormente aplicada. Sufre
cossimiento medianamente, y trituracion mediocre, y subtle, como les de mas
aromaticos, y le tengo por substituto de los clavos de especies: mata las
lombrices con la part amarga, y detiene los vomitos. That is:

I have tried these Seeds, or Grains of Pepper, and I found therein an equal
siccity, and heat: and they serve for to strengthen the Stomach, being taken
inwardly, or applied outwardly. It will endure an indifferent boiling, or
punning to powder, as do other Spices, [which loose their virtue by much
beating, or boiling] and I allow it for a substitute for Cloves. It kills the
Worms with its bitterishness, and stays vomiting.

Io. de Laet, in his Description of America, speaks thus of the Province of
Tabasco, Lib. 5. cap. 3.
and its Pepper. Vnam habet [ea provincia] inprimis arborem domesticam,
quantivis pretii, quam vocant Xocox^chitl, quae est arbor grandis* foliis mali
Aurantiae, fragrantissimis, Floribus rubris instar Granati, odore item
Aurantiorum, grato juxta, ac suavi; fructibus rotundis, ac racematim pendulis,
qui initio quidem sunt virides, postea ruffi, and ad extremum nigri; acris
saporis, and mordacis; bonique odoris; calidi and sicci in tertio gradu, ita ut
Piperi substitui, and pro Carpo-balsomo in Officinis possit obtrudi. Hispani
vulgo vocant Piper Tabascense. Corroborat cor, and ventriculum; amicum est
utero; discutit flatus; aperit obstructa; movet urinam, and menses; succurrit
colicis and nephriticis doloribus; consumit humores crassos and viscosos; fugat
rigores febrium. i. e. The Province of Tabasco has one tree particular to it [
when Ximenes writ this, whom Laet follows; it was not known to grow in Jamaica,
as it does plentifully] which is called Xocoxochitl, i. e. a tree not to be
valued. It is of a very large growth, has leaves like an Orange^tree, being of
a most fragrant scent; it bears a red Flower like to that of a Pomegranate, of
a sweet and pleasing smell, and which also resembles that of Oranges. The Fruit
is round, and grows in clusters, like as Grapes do, [ so does the Amomum of
Dioscorides] at first it is green, then red, and at last blackish: it is of an
excellent smell, and biting taste. It is bot and dry in the third Degree, so as
that it may be substituted instead of ordinary Pepper [but it is s^ far short
of it in heat, and bitingness of taste, that in Pies there is no comparison
betwixt them; as I have seen,] and in the Shops it may pass [ but without any
resemblance] for Carpo-balsamus. The Spaniards usually call it Pepper of
Tabasco. It strengthens the Heart, and Stomach; it comforts the Womb, it
dispells Wind; it opens Obstructions; it provokes Urine, and the Terms in
women; it helps Colique and Nephritique pains; it consumes tough and viscid
H^mours; and d^ives away the cold fits of Agues.

I cannot pass by this delicate Spice, without putting the World in mind, that
perhaps upon Observation there where it grows, and a little constraining of
Dioscorides, It may be found to be the very Amomum of the Ancients; so famed in
all their rich Unguents for Luxury, and so commended for Medicinal uses,
instead of which we are fain to put into Mithridate, and Treacle, either
Cubebs, or Cloves, but, I hope, henceforward Amomum and Carp^-balsamus shall
find no other substitute then this Pepper of Iamaica. I am not the only person
who propose this: Hernandez (lib. 2 cap. 5.) professes, it may be used instead
o^ the Carpo-balsamus; and who shall enquire into the Amomum Clusii, will find
how others, as well as I, have ^omented this Opinion: of which I shall treat
more hereafter, when I have observed its growth. In the mean while it seems to
be that Garyophyllon of Pliny (lib. 2. cap. 7.) where, having spoken of Pepper,
he adds, Et etiamnum in India Piperis granis simile, quod vocatur Garyophyllon,
grandius fragiliusque. Tradunt in Indico loco id gigni. Advehitur odoris
gratia. There is at this day in the Indies something, that resembles Pepper,
men call it Garyophyllon; it is bigger and more brittle then Pepper. They
report it to grow in a place of the Indies: and it is brought hither ( sc. to
Roms) out of a regard to the delicacy of its scent. There is not any thing in
Pli^y, which carries repugnancy to our Pepper: its excellent smell, the name of
Garyophyllon, being the Greek, not Indian name, and signifying Cloves, or
Clove-gillow-flowers, with the smell whereof, (and taste ^f the former, but
mildly) it has a resemblance. It is more big, it is more brittle, and
consequently, till a clearer discovery be made, we are to presume, that we have
retrived after so many hundreds of years one of the most select Odours, that
Antiqui^y ever boasted of.

I shall not add any more, until I have prepared a second Edition in Iamaica.
Instead of this, there is usually put in common Black-Pepper, or White-Pepper:
concerning the virtues of which I shall not enlarge. They are well known
already, and better known then approved of either by the Vide Pison* in
Mantiss. Ar^mat. c. 9.
Natives of those Countries where they grow; or our learned Physicians in
Europe.

The next Ingredient of Chocolata is Tlilxochi^l (or, as some write it,
Tlixochil) or, as the Spaniards call it, banillas olorosas, or Vaynillas. The
former is the Indian name recorded in Hernand^z H^rb. Mexic. l. 2. ^. 15.
Hernandez; the latter is the usual Spanish Term acknowledged by P^ so in
Ma^ti^s. Aromat. c. 18.
Piso, and others. The Plant is compared to Aromatical Arach, it runs up Trees,
as does Ivy, it has a broad leaf, in length eleven inches, and in breadth six,
it resembl^s a Plantain-leaf, but is more fatty, it is of a deep green; it
bears a blackish Flower: it produces a Cod, that is about six inches long,
slender, and of a blackish color (yet are some, that I have seen, reddish, and
yet good) their smell is admirable, they, which have paralleled it with
Amber-grise, Musk, or Her^andez, and Piso, ubi supra.
Balsame, failed in their Character; for it ha^h a peculiar mildness, and
delicacy in it, not to be found in those other. If, in the Iamaica Pepper we
have found out what the Ancients lost, it is herein that we have outdone them:
it being a discovery, which, I doubt not, but a little Art will improve beyound
all the odours yet known. The Spaniards put it into their p^armicae, or
Sneezing-powders, avowing it to corroborate the Br^in infinitely: as I am
ascertained by such, as have seen this practice in Spain, and the Indies.
It is reputed hot in the third Degree, and adds to Chocolata not only a
curious scent, but taste: and moderately provokes Urine, and the monthly
evacuations in women; it strengthens the Brain, comforts the Womb, dissipates
Wind, concocts and attenuates gross and crude Humors. I cannot do this
excellent product of Iamaica the injustice, not to tender the double Character
given of it in Spanish, by two Spaniards, that lived in the Indies, and whose
Learning equalled their Curiosity.

Doctor Fernandez (lib. 1. Sect. 1. titulo De los Bainillos) speaks thus of
them: Son calientes, y secas en tercero grado, cordiales, provocatuias de
meses, y de orina, aceleran el parto, el echar las pares, cuessen y adelgason
lo crudo, y fortelesan el corason, y cerebro, y ses facultades. They are hot
and dry in the third Degree, Cordial, provoke the Terms, and Urine, and speedy
Labor, and freeing for the afterbirth, they concoct and attenuate Crudities,
they strengthen the Heart, and Brain, and its faculties.

Doctor Iuanes de Cardenas gives us this account of them. Las Bainillas
compiten con el Ambar. Son de complexion caliente, y seca en primero grado, con
que don al Chocolate mui suave olor: y se accentajan a las de mas en ser mui
cordiales amigas del corason: engendron espiritos de fuerte, y robusta mixtion,
ajudan al cossimiento del estomago, y con su calor cuessen los humores
gruessos, y crudos; y lo que es mas que todo, con las parts sutiles, y
calientes, consumen lo^terrestre del Chocolate; con que le dexan mas puro, y
sin los dannos do lo Melancholico. That is:

The Vaynillas equal Amber-grise. They are of Quality hot and dry in the first
degree, wherewith they give to the Chocolata an exceeding sweet smell: and
excel other Simples, being extraordinary strengthening for the Heart: they
beget strong Spirits, and of a firm mixture; they promote digestion in the
Stomach, and by their heat concoct crude and gross Humors, and, which is above
all, with their subtle and hot parts they consume the earthy parts of the
Chocolata, and so leave it more pure, and free from the inconveniences, with
which it might otherways threaten the Melancholy.

To conclude this Discourse of the Vaynillas: It is so called by the Spaniard,
because that it resembles the Vagnuila or sheath of a little Sword; it much
resembles the Cod of a French-bean in length, and shape; it has in it a small
Seed, which fills it from one end to the other, of a blackish color, but very
subtle parts, and scent. It is observable, that one Spanish Writer makes it to
be hot in the third Degree, and dry; another only hot and dry in the first
Degree. Such Contradictions are usual in Writers of the Indies, and not much to
be regarded further, then as the resueries of men too Methodical, or as the
intrigues of Nature to be paralleled in Opium, Camphire, Vitriol, Quicksilver,
etc* concerning which our most inquisitive and Philosophical Physicians are so
perplexed, and differing in Opinions, that we may pardon the discrepancy of the
Writers alleged here. Whosoever shall try these Vaynillas by the strength and
penetratingness of their smell, and perhaps by the vig^ur of their effects,
performing what nothing of European, or East-Indy growth, of a less Degree in
heat, and dryness, then the third, does; will rank them with those of that
sort; but here who shall consult his Senses, and observe the mild delicacy in
these American Products, and particularly in the Vaynillas, which is
inconsistent with so much heat, and dryness; and shall consider, that his
tongue feels nothing parallel to what happens upon the tasting of a grain of
Chili, or red Pepper (which yet is placed as hot in the third Degree) he will
by many degrees separate and distinguish the former from the latter. And indeed
these powerful effects are not the consequents of an excess of Heat, but of
parts moderately hot, and well subtiliated, and digested, in a Country, whose
Climate yields an uninterrupted temperature of Heat to its production: from
whence we may once for all observe, that it is impossible to provide any
succedanea, or substitutes for these kind of Commodities: for to use Cloves
instead of Vainillas is a ridiculous mockage, and hurtful to several
complexions, in Chocolota.

Chacanguarica, Pumagua, or Achiotl (as it is called by Hernandez. Herb. Mexic.
l. 3. c. 41.
Hernandez) or Achiote, as it is usually called (Mr. Gage calls it Achiotte) is
called by Oviedo, and Clusius, Bixa; by the Natives of Brasile Piso in Mar. c.
18.
Vrucu, and Roucou in the Description of the Antilles. It is a Tree, that grows
every where in the West Indies, without cultivation; ^t is regarded as well for
its use in Painting, as Physic. It is a Tree of indifferent bigness, leaved
somewhat like to an Elm, after it has flowred (which Flower has scarce any
sensible smell) the fruit grows out in a ^od containing thirty or forty
grains, which grains, before they ripen to an hardness, yield a juice of a pure
Vermilion color: out of these grains, either ripe, or unripe, is the When I am
in Iamaica, I shall inform my self of the different operation of Achiote,
according as it is differently made: of which they, who bring it, or sell it,
can give no account.
Achiote so* called made by a way, I shall not repeat; yet in the making of it
up there is so great a difference, that it is very considerable, some having
been purged to death, and others thrown into Fluxes by mixing Achiote, not
rightly prepared; in Chocolata; which has occasioned some to speak against its
being put into it. But it is not by that Character, that the good Achiote must
be censured: for, if rightly prepared, it is with very good effect mixed with
meats in the Indies to meliorate their taste, and color, and smell too. Piso
ubi supra.

Urucu, sive Achiote efficit, ne Chocolate, quantavis quantitate hausta,
noceat: illius quippe open facile digeritur sine ulla cruditate. Ita Fr. Ximenes
a^pud Burggravium in Hist. Bras. l 2. c. 3.


And in Chocolata it produces all these effects, if put in a due proportion:
and makes it to be drunk more safely, and with less nauseousness: it makes it
also to purify the Blood more, and to strengthen the inward parts. In Brasile
the Achiote grains, being duly prepared into Cakes, are mixed in an indefinite
proportion with a dish of Carima (which is made of Tipioca) and give^ against
Poisons, or other Distempers, promiscuously. Piso Hist. utr. Ind. l. 4. c. 14.
It strengthens the Stomach, stops Fluxes, and, being mixed with agreeable
Juleps, allayeth Feverish heats. Piso in Mant. Aromat. c. 18. Fructuum grana
rubri frigida sunt and sicca cum modica adstrictione: ex quibus placentulas
efformant, quae non solum medicamentis contra quosvis Sanguinis Fluxus
inordina^os, sed and cibariis immiscentur, gratumque simul saporem and colorem
iis suppeditant. Inprimis autem omnia haec beneficia praestant confectioni
nostrae Chocolatae, si certa quantitate addentur; tutius enim tunc bibitur, and
citra satietatis and nauseae incommodum: add, quod sanguinem magis purificet,
and viscera corroboret.
It is cold, and dry, and moderately adstringent.

Having given you this testimony of it from the learned Piso, who interested
not himself much in the digesting Plants into several Degrees according to
their first Qualities; but consulted unquestionable Experience: I shall now
represent the several Characters of this Achiote, given by Spaniards, and such
as lived in the Indies.

The Spanish Doctor Ferdinandez, does thus Character it in his first Book,
Sect. 1. Chap. 14. Estre se hase de la semilla de un arbol cosida. Yes frio en
tercero grado, con alguna adstriccion, Mitiga la sed: y, masclado con el agua,
templa^ lis calenturas ardientes, y cura la dysenteria de humores colericos. Da
gusto, y sabor, y ol^r al Chocolate, y le hase mas fresc^: de mas de que ajuda
a la digestion, y no solo se mescla para color al Chocolate, si no por que
engorda, y annide sustento, con la part pingue, y butirosa, que es la, que en
el praevalese: y siendo assi, ^iene parts calientes, como io son todas bas
butirosas. It is made of the grains of a Tree boiled. It is cold in the third
Degree, with some adstriction. It allaies the Thirst, and being mixed with
Water, it tempers the burning-Fever, and cures the Bloody Flux, occasioned by
Choler. It gives a taste, relish, and color to Chocolata, and makes it more
brisk; besides it helps digestion: nor is it mixed with the Chocolata for the
colour's sake alone, but also because it fattens, and increases its
nourishment with its fat and butyrous parts, which prevail in it: and, being
so, it must needs have hot parts in it, as have all butyrous things.

With this agrees the Mexican Herbal, lib. 3. cap. 41. Frigida est ordine
tertio, and nonnullam siccitatem adstrictionemque participat* -- Extinguit,
epotum, aut admotum, ^ebrientium incendia, opitulatur Dysenteriis, repellitque
tumores praeter naturam; quo fit, ut Epithematis, frigorificis Potionibus, seu
Iulapiis, and quibusvis infrigidantibus cibariis, and Medicamentis, misceri
perquam commode possit. Additur semen Chocoatl, ( id est, Chocolatae)
refrigerii gratia, commendandique saporis, atque coloris. Dentium doloris e
calida causa ort^s lenit, corroborat, evocat urinam, sitim extinguit, accroci
apud aliquas gentes gerit vicem. -- Adstringit nonnihil, ideoque, cum resina
permixtum, medetur scabiei, atque ulceribus, ventriculum corroborat, fluxum
alvi cohibet, lac auget permixtum crustis Cacaoatl ( id est, Chocolatae) quem
reddit innoxium quacunque mensura bibatur: ejus siquidem gratia, facile, ac
citra satietatis incommodum solet concoqui. (i. e) It is cold in the third
Degree, and participates of some adstriction, as well as dryness. -- Being
given inwardly, or outwardly applied, it allays Feverish distempers, it helps
the Bloody Flux, and repels praeternatural Tumors; for this cause it may be
mixed in cooling Epithemes, Julips, or any food, or Physic, used to cool. It
is mixed with Chocolata to cool, as well as to embitter the taste, and color.
It helps the Toothache ari^ing from hot causes, it strengthens the Gums, it
provokes Urine, it quenches Thirst, and with some Nat^ons it is See Pison.
Histor. Ind. utr. l. 4. c. 14.
used instead of Saffron. -- It is somewhat adstringent, and therefore, being
mixed with Rosin, it cures the Itch, and Ulcers; it strengthens the Stomach,
stops the Fluxes of the belly; it increases Milk, being mixed in Chocolata;
which last drink it renders very innocent, in how great quantity soever it be
drunk: for, by reason of the mixture of Achiote, it is drunk down easily, and
without any ensuing nauseousness of the Stomach.

Io. Lib. 5. c. 3.
de Laet in his Description of the We^t-Indies reports thus of Achiote. E
semine [sc. Achiotl] fit tinctura coccinea, qua Pictores utuntur: eadem and in
Medicina usurpatur, quum frigida sit qualitate. Cum aqua aliqua ejusdem
qualitatis hausta, aut foris applicata, mitigat aestus febriles, sistitque
Dysenteriam, denique utiliter adjungitur omnibus Potionibus refriger antibus,
unde etiam vulgo miscetur potioni Cacao ad refrigerandum, and bonum saporem and
colorem illi conciliandum. i. e. Out of the seeds [of Achiotl] there is made a
Scarlet tincture, which is used by Painters. The same is also used in Physic,
being of a cold Quality. Being mixed with a proper Vehicle, and either given
inwardly, or outwardly applied, it allayeth Feverish heats, and stops the
Bloody Flux. In fine, it is with much benefit put into cooling Drinks;
wherefore it is commonly mixed with the Cacao, to make it cooling, as well as
to amend the taste, and color.

I have showed the Opinion of such, as favor its being cold even in the third
Degree: and therein only it is matter of Opinion; for as to the Effects
attributed thereto, I believe them to be of unquestionable authority, being
grounded upon the practice of the Indies, and not established upon Conjectures.
I now come to propose the Opinion of that diligent observer Roblez, who
irreconcileably differs from the rest, as it follows. El Achiote, o Viza, assi
le llaman los Indios, le echan en las comidas por a cafran. Es caliente, y
enemigo de nuestro calor natural, offend las parts espirituales, estraga el
higado, es ventoso sobre manera, por que su calor, y humedad pasa de segundo o
tercero grado, lleuanta vapores gruessos, hincha los Hypochondrios: dicen que
es a proposito para las passiones de ornia. Todo el Chocolate, que viene de la
Nueva-Espanna, y Guatimala, viene cargado desta terrible veza, baptisado con
nombre de Achiote; y deven los Medicos a conseiar, no se use deste con ex^^sso,
por que tengo por sin duda, que el Achiote es una lima^ s^rda, que produce en
nos otros malas passiones: y assi desseara tener autoridad para moderarlo,
tengole por caliente en grado tercero, y humedo en segundo; y por sas
propriedades enemigo de nuestra naturalesa. That is,

Achiote, or Viza, as it is called by the Indians, is used by the Natives in
their meats instead of Saffron. It is hot, and destructive to our natural heat,
it offends the spiritual parts, it weakens the Liver, it is beyond measure
flatulent, and windy; because its heat and moisture equals the second or third
Degree: it raises gross Vapors, it causes a tension in the Hypochondria: they
say, it is good to ease Distempers occasioned by stoppage of Urine. All the
Chocolata, which comes from New-Spain, and Guatemala, is filled with this
horrible Ingredient, Christened with the name of Achiote, and Physicians ought
to give advice, lest people use it in too great a quantity, and with excess:
because I am undoubtedly assured that it insensibly consumesus [ the Spanish is
not to be expressed, I think, more fittingly] and creates in us many other evil
Distempers: and therefore it ought to be restrained by public Authority. I
suppose it to be hot in the third Degree, and moist in the second: for its
Quality it is repugnant to our nature.

It may seem very strange how so learned and experienced and observing a man
could run into an Opinion so contrary to the other of Hernandez, both living in
the Indies, one in Mexico, and the former in Peru. If we regard our Yet it has
so violent a pi^rcing on the tongue, that the impression cea^eth not of a long
time after.
taste, it seems to plead for Hernandez: as being evidently cooling (though not
to that Degree) and somewhat adstringent; though the coldness and adstringency
sensibly differ, according as it is better or worse prepared: I mean according
to the taste, for I have yet experimented it no further. If we consider its
Effects, such as have been related, they seem still to oppose Roblez, and
assert its cooling, and adstringency. As to that enmity, which he makes it to
have with humane Nature, the universal experience of the Indies (and of all,
that use it; supposing the Achiote rightly prepared) particularly of Brasile,
New-Spain, and Guatimala, in the latter of which Chocolata has been
immemorially drunk, and in both which places it is the general and famed Drink,
does refute him. Nor is every thing, that is hot and moist in the third Degree,
to be exterminated Physic, as destructive to our nature. What Apology then can
we make for so learned and observing a man? The principal excuse* that I can
make for him, is, first, that he relies upon One says of him in this case,
Falsa Indorum traditione errat, non exacto veritatis examine.
the Authority of the Indians, who it seems are as peremptory, that Achiote is
hot, as that Chilli, or red Pepper is cold. Secondly he observed, what is also
granted by Ferdinandez; That, however it had cooling and adstringent effects,
it had also an operation of a quite different nature: for per las parts
aereas, y delgadas tambien desopila, y provoca mezes, y sudor: by its aereal
parts it did open Obstructions, provoke the courses in Women, and cause Sweat.
And this operation of Achiote is likewise attested by two eye winesses, Dr.
Iuanes de Cardenas, and Dr. Iuanes de Barrios; and is confirmed to us by Mr.
Gage's Surv. c. 16.
Mr. Gage in these ensuing words. Achiotte has a piercing attenuating Quality,
as appears by the common practice of the Physicians in the Indies,
experienced daily in the effects of it, who do give it to their Patients, to
cut and attenuate gross Humors, which do cause shortness of breath, and
stopping of Urine: and so it is used for any kind of Oppilations, and is given
for the stoppings, which are in the breast, or in the region of the belly, or
any other part of the body. Now, since these effects are usually performed by
Medicines of such a nature, Mr. Gage in another place speaks thus of Achiote.
In Nixapa, within the country of Guaxa^a grow many Trees of Cacao, and Achiote:
whereof is made the Chocolatte, and is a commodity of much trading in those
parts; though our English and the Hollanders make little of it when they take a
prize of it at Sea, as not knowing the secret virtue, and quality of it for the
good of the Stomach. Gage chap. 3. Which Passage, whether we understand it of
compound Chocolata, or of simple Achiote, it amounts to one thing, since it
manifests the innocence of it in our Composure.
as Roblez attributes to Achiote, it is to be presumed, that he said it upon
that ground: but that operatio sequitur esse, that from a parity of Effects one
may argue a resemblance of Causes, is an error in Physic. And in that he
says, it has an opposition, and qualities destructive to the nature of Man; I
suppose, it being granted to have a diuretique and diaphoretique nature, and
that it introduces a fusion (and precipitation oftentimes) in the Blood, it
may then be granted to bear an hostility against our bodies, if taken by way of
food, what is really Physic; and what Hippocrates says of Purges, that those
in health bear them with difficulty: and that they do depredate, and dissolve,
by way of colliquation, the flesh, this is true of diuretique Medicines, if
frequently or continually used by persons in perfect health: which as it is the
course prescribed to make people lean, so it is in consistent with the intended
use of Chocolata, which is to make fat: and this might as well merit his
censure there, as the causeless taking of Smallage, and diuretique pottages
with us in Spring. He prohibits it con excesso only, in too great a quantity.

This I thought to be fit to say by way of Apology for Roblez; I shall only
add, that others do repute this Achiote to be of a very temperate quality: and
as no sense evinceth it to be hot; so its de-obstructing faculty, and its
diureticalness (it being highly commended not only to dissipate gross Humors,
but even the Stone in the kidneys) argue it not to be very cold. However, it is
certain, that the Achiote ought to be good, and that it ought to be put (...)
but in a due quantity: for as the Reasons specified render the excess of it
suspicious* so do those other, that it meliorates the color, taste, and smell
of the Chocolata; and makes it agreeable to the Stomach; these manifest the
necessity of commixing some: and for this we have the Precedents of New-Spain,
and Guatemala, and Mexico, and the general consent of such Writers, as have
recommended it to the practice of other parts of the World; as you may see in
Piso's Discourse of Chocolata.

Mecaxochitl, Mesacuchil, Mechasuchil, or Mecacuce (as Paulus Zacchias calls it
in Piso Mantis. Aro^n. c. 18.
Piso) in Spanish it is called Manojitos de olor. Id. ubi supra.
It is a peculiar sort of Pepper, growing only in Mexico, and as it resembles
long Pepper, so it may be Hernandez Herb. Mexic. lib. 5. cap. 13.
reckoned as a sort of it. It is hot in the fourth Degree, and dry in the
third; if we may credit Ubi supra.
Hernandez, and Piso: but as other Ingredients have been strangely represented
by Indian Physicians, as to their qualities, so it is with Mecasuchil, for
Franciscus Ferdinandez; (lib. 2. Sect. 1. C. 13.) gives us an Opinion of his
very discrepant from the former, viz. that it is only hot in the first Degree,
and dry in the second: his words are these; Esta especie Aromatica es caliente
en primero, seca en segundo, cordial, util a las ventosedades, y contra veneno,
echa la criatura muerta, es provocatuia de meses, y orina, que facilita los
malos partos, y abre opilaciones, y es corroborante con moderada adstriccion;
que repara el calor nativo, y alimenta el influente con nuevos espiritos, que
cria, fo^talece el higado, y es excellent en la templansa y mixtion Aromatica.

This sort of Spicery is hot in the first Degree, and dry in the second; it is
Cordial, good against Wind, and Poison; it brings away the dead child, it
provokes Urine, and the Terms; it gives quick delivery in time of an hard
labor; it opens Obstructions, and strengthens the body with a moderate
adstriction; it repairs the decay of natural heat, and fills the nourishment
passing to each part with new spirits, it strengthens the Liver, and is of an
excellent temper, and Aromatique mixture.

It is put into Chocolata not only because it gives it a good taste, but
because it opens Obstructions, cures Colds, and Distempers arising from cold
causes; it attenuates gross Humors, it strengthens the Stomach, and it amends
the Breath, and resists Poisons, and in this Character Ubi supr^.
Hernandez and e Piso differ little.

Xochinacaztlis, Xochinacatlis, Orichelas or Orejuelas, (in Spanish) and (in
Latin) flos auriculae, Hernandez and Piso ubi supra.
is a tree with long and narrow leaves, which bears somewhat large flowers, the
leaves whereof are inwardly purple-colour'd, and on the outside of a
grass-green, they somewhat resemble ears, whence they have their Spanish name:
they are of a very pleasant smell. These flowers are of great esteem in the
Indies; there (...) not any thing more valued, nor more common in their Shops.
They contribute much to the grace of the Chocolata, and improve it as far
beyond its self, as it transcends other Drinks: they give it a rich scent, and
taste, and render it very wholesome. It is said by Hernandez Herb. Mexic. lib.
2. cap. 4.
Hernandez to be hot in almost the fourth Degree, and dry in almost the third:
and Ubi supra.
Piso ascribes to it the same temperament, that he does to Mecasuchil. It is
allowed Hernandez, and Piso ubi supra: with whom agree the Dr. Iuanes de
Barrios, and Cardenas.
to strengthen the stomach, being troubled with cold, and wind; to revive the
Spirits, and beget good blood, and nourishment, and to provoke the monthly
evacuations in women. But its temperament is more controverted: for the Doctors
Iuanes de Barrios, and Cardenas repute it hot in the first Degree, and dry in
the second. I have already declared the Opinion of Hernandez: and Franciscus
Ferdinandez (lib. 1.) says, it is hot in the third Degree, and dry in the
second. His words are, Ninguna es de m^jor valor, para esta bebida per
Aromatica cordial, y de excellent olor: caliente en tercero grado, seca en
segundo, y que conforta el corason, cordial en la vitalidad, cria muchos y
robustos espiritos, y mas de los vitales, de fuerte y robusta mixtion,
indissolubiles: y es de excellent sabor. There is no Ingredient in Chocolata
of greater esteem, by reason of its Aromatical and Cordial virtue, and
excellent smell: it is hot in the third, and dry in the second Degree, it
strengthens the Heart, and Vital parts, it begets many and strong Spirits, and
especially the Vital Spirits of a strong mixture, not dissipable: and it has
an excellent taste.

Besides the forementioned Ingredients, several others are put in partly by
the Indians, as Maiz; partly by others, as Anise-seeds, Fennel-seeds, Cinnamom,
Saffron, Sugar, Cloves, Mace, Orange and Limon-pill (in a small quantity) Musk,
Amber-grise, Orange-flower water, Almonds, Filberts, Pistaches, the Chemical
oils of Cinnamom, Cloves, Nutmeg; and some leave out Achiote, and color it
with Santals: in fine every Chocolata-maker puts in what he does think good,
and cordial, or pleasant, and leaves out what he dislikes insomuch that some
reduce Chocolata almost to Ginger-bread; and put in little of the true
Cacao-nut. Nor is this variety practiced only in England; in Spain, and
Portugal there is the like; and an infinite discrepancy in the Ingredients, and
proportions In that, which I made, and which pleased His Majesty, the
proportion of the Cacao-nut was double to the other Ingredients: in that, which
I commonly use, the Cacao-nut is little more then half of the composition,
which proportion is allowed by Piso: in the vulgar Chocolata, which is made to
eat in Cakes, or Lozenges, there is hardly ^ third part of the Cacao-nut.
of them. I have not time, nor can it justly be expected, that I should give a
particular account of the mentioned Ingredients, whose Nature may be found in
every Herbal almost: I shall only give these general Observations.

CHAP. IV.
General Observations about Chocolata.

1. THat there ought to be a great care in the due choice of the Cacao nut. For
there is a great variety in the nature and taste of the Nut: some are bitterer
then others, some are more oily and nourishing then others. Thus those of
Carraca, or Nicarag^a, were chosen by me to prepare Chocolata for His Majesty,
notwithstanding that I had seen some from Iamaica, that were very well tasted,
and well cured: for there is not only a great difference in the growth and
nature of the Nuts, but in the curing of them; for, if they be not gathered in
due tim^, and well sweated after they are gathered, and that upon Mats, not
Boards, (for the Mat dries up the sweat better, then the Board, in which whilst
they soak, the Phl^gm is re-imbibed by the Nut, and the oily parts not
sufficiently exalted, and digested) the Nuts are not so good, as that we should
expect any great excellency from the Chocolata.

2. That there ought to be a great care in the Picking, Garbling, and preparing
the Nuts. It is not sufficient to choose Nuts of a good age, and growth; old,
but not decayed: (for these are most oily) nor to cast away such, as are
apparently corrupt: but having dried them (in the doing of which beware you
burn them not; and so imbitter the Composition) you must hull them, and then
pick them, casting away all the corrupt and musty ones; for, if you be not
careful herein, the Chocolata will in a little time show it self to be musty,
and decay. I had once some new Chocolata showed me, to ask my judgment of: and
it seemed to me then very pleasant, and good: within a fortnight after, I
tasted it, and it was good for nothing; so musty was it, after it had fermented
a while by standing: yet was it carefully kept. It is usual amongst the
Chocolata-makers to repute those Nuts good, and sound, which are blackish, and
not musty, nor rotten; though upon breaking of the Nut, in the several
divisions and parts there be in intercurrent hoariness, which will vanish at
their drying: but I suppose all rational Persons will grant, that that is a
tendency to corruption; and any curious Observer will distinguish those Nuts
from such, as have not the least inchoated decay, by the taste. After all this
garbling, they must be well beaten to powder, and finely searced, or else the
Paste will not be good: for, although, in the grinding, they will mix, and melt
into a Paste, yet will not that Paste consist of so small Particles, as when
searced; and consequently not dissolve so well in the Potion, as otherwise it
would.

And after it is thus prepared, in the grinding of it there is much of Art: I
have already excepted against the making it in a Mortar, or on an Iron Table;
the only way to moderate the heat, and to preserve it from discoloring (by the
iron) or running too fast into oil, whereby it is made unfit to keep; and also
some parts unequally dissolve, the Spices mix not well, and it is precipitated
in the making up before a sufficient incorporation, and never ferments right,
nor attains its perfect gust.

I have already spoken concerning the way of grinding the Spice, rather then
beating it; and that with this caution, that the Spice be not only ground
singly over, but after ground all together, that so the several parts of each
individual Spice, and Ingredient, may operate upon the subtiliating of the
other; besides that hereby each is more exquisitely commix'd, then by any other
way can be contrived.

I am of the mind, that if there be any settling at all in the Chocolata Drink,
it is either because the Nut is faulty, being ill-cured, unripe, new, or
corrupt, and so its parts dissolve not into oil, but sever themselves, or
because it is not well beaten, and searced; or made up too hot, and so hastily
dispatched, because some parts dissolve too much, and others not at all: or the
Spice is not well beaten, and incorporated; or by reason of some other Mixture:
for otherwise there will not be any Settling at all, nor any such terrestrious
parts, as some besides the Spaniards do imagine. This is to be understood of
the Chocolata being hot: for, if it cool, the pores of the water, being filled
with a sufficient proportion of Particles, do precipitate the superfluous
Corpuscles to the bottom; as do other liquors in the like case. To prevent this
discovery, the Chocolata-sellers mix an egg or two or more with it, that so the
indissolved, or indissoluble parts may be supported by the grossness of the
Liquor. The like is to be seen, when it is prepared with Milk; which is a
thicker body, and will bear more and greater parts innatant, then water: yet it
is to be noted, that let the best Chocolata be prepared milled, and unmilled,
and there will be a great discrepancy in the innatant, supernatant, and
subsiding bodies; but in good Chocolata either there is no settling, or
remanence in the bottom of the Cup you drink* if it be indifferent warm: or, if
there be, it is not black, but reddish and oily, and easy to be digested; the
contrary whereof is observable in the ordinary, and Spanish, as well as Dutch
Chocolata.

Since that the effect of Chocolata, as to its nourishing nature depends upon
the Cac^o nut, that Chocolata is best, which has most of it; all things else
corresponding: and that worst, as to the aforesaid end, which has least of it;
though that be endeavored to be supplied by Almonds, Filberts, Pistaches;
these last being more stopping, less nourishing, and not dissolving in the
Potion proportionably to the other.

Since that the Paste must be well worked, and that the excellency of Chocolata
lies in that the parts of the Cacao nut, being not too much dissolved into an
oil; for then it will not keep; nor endure the heat of your hand, or pocket
(especialy in Cakes) but melt; and yet must be kept in a box, or place
temperately hot, and free from moisture, or it will mould and decay: or, in
that the said parts of the Cacao nut be sufficiently dissolved; for otherwise
it will keep neither (in England, without care) nor ferment well, and attain
its delicate taste; but yield a settling: Upon this score it seems to follow,
that neither the putting in of Orange-flower water, nor Chemical oils, into it
at its making up, is good: for it hi^ders it in the working, to be sufficiently
dissolved; or causes it to dissolve too much: nor could I ever yet see any
with those oils in it, which would keep or carry well (especially in Cakes:)
but thsi is not the only reason against them.

For, if to Stomachs, that are in perfect health, and of a good temper, it be
prejudicial to give things too hot, and qualified rather to dissipate then
continue the vigor of the Spirits; and such are Chemical oils, and hot Spices
in a great proportion: hence we see cold distempers, as the green sickness,
rheums, and the like, to follow upon eating much thereof; as Piso in Mantiss.
Arom. c. 9.
Piso observes, that eating of Nutmeg, (however much cried up in distempers of
the Memory, and Brain) did introduce, to his knowledge, forgetfulness, dullness,
and sleepiness. The like is observed concerning Nutmeg and Mace in Iava by I.
Bontius de Med. Ind. lib. 1. cap. 5. De Aromat.
Bontius: and Rondeletius somewhere tells us, that in France the Maids drink
Ginger to make them look pale: of which I once saw the Experiment in a fair
Patient; which recovered upon the discontinuing of what she drunk by advise as
Physic for a cold Stomach. But however that I do not approve of the putting in
of those East-Indy Spices, As to the Chemical oils, you have a further
exception against them hereafter: be pleased here only to add, that such oils
being dissolved in the Stomach, as they are more dissipable (so as to
relinquish the Cacao-nut in the Stomach, whilst they diffuse themselves by the
Nerves, or Veins, into the body) and more dissipating being vigorated by the
fire, and disengaged from the gross parts, which detained them before in solid
Spices; so the use of them frequently or constantly produces the same
infirmities, that do the Spices themselves.
yet I do not any way disallow those more delicate and mild ones of America;
the defect of which I suppose is not to be supplied by any Cloves, or Nutmegs,
or Black Pepper. And although I do commend our American Spice, yet would I not
have excess of them, but a mediocrity; especially of the Chiles, or long red
Pepper, which though it be very good for weak Stomachs (which reign generally
in the Indies, and hot Countries) yet has it its faults, which I have already
recited: yet of this, that, which is brought as the richest from Spain, (and
imitated by several here) is too full; so as that I have felt the impression of
it on the glandules of my throat for a long time after I drank of that
Chocolata.

Since that it is necessary, that Chocolata be kept at least a month, before
that it can arrive to its proper Taste; which is a known thing, and I have
tried it: even that, which so pleased him above any, that Spain, or Flanders
produced, had not the advantage of time; for a month after it had a much more
excellent taste then before. It being so, we are to have regard to the
particular age of the Chocolata to be used: for, if it be new, it is not come
to its Maturity, nor attained that perfection, which is to be gained by long
Digestion, and Fermentation; it being observed, that several Compounds (which
is demonstrable in Treacle, and Mithridate) derive a particular virtue from a
long Fermentation, distinct from what the several Ingredients new put together
have: nor is this benefit of Fermentation to be denied to Chocolata (though it
can never be bad, if the Ingredients be good, and well ordered, and
proportioned) since we experience it in the good Chocolata, that it becomes
better; and in the bad, that (however it may taste well at first; if the nuts
be corrupt, and musty) it will suddenly grow worse, notwithstandi^g the
goodness of the Spicery.

Since Age and Fermentation is so requisite to the improving Chocolata (which
is avowed by the most accurate Spanish Physicians: I leave it to the
consideration of Men, if the making it up into Cakes, or Loz^nges can be so
good; since neither in so small a proportion, ^or so small a bulk do Compounds
ferment well, nor Spicy preparations keep their vigor.

Besides, if Age and time be requisite to the imbettering Chocolata, how can
any Chemical Oils, or Spirits, be properly put in, since they admit not so long
keeping, but evaporate, and so destroy the Composition intended to be enriched
by them: they carry away with them the choice parts of the Cacao Nut, and deal
by Chocolata, as hot Drinks and Spicery by our bodies, which create Apoplexies,
Palsies, and other cold Distempers.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the effects of Chocolata.

TO speak concerning the particular effects of Chocolata may to some seem a
superfluous attempt; and to others impossible. The former may ground their
Opinion upon what I have said of the Cacao Nut; whose virtues and nature being
known, we cannot ignore the nature and effects of the plain simple Chocolata,
such as alone has the commendation of the Indian Experience for so many years:
it being made up of nothing but Cacao ^ Nuts, and Pocholt-grain, (which I
suppose to be all one with the Paniso) incorporated; and in time of use it was
dissolved in Atolle, (which what it is I have already told) and that this was
refrigerating, and very alimentous, is undubitable. The Achiote, Orichelas, and
Vaynillas, were not ordinary Ingredients, but occasionally put in, as People's
Stomachs could not bear the common Composition, it being too cold, or too
Uuctuous (and so relaxing of the Stomach) to Persons of a more then ordinary
debility of Stomach: and according as they were more or less weak, so they put
in more mild Spices, as the Vaynillas, etc. or the more violent, as Agies, or
Guiny-pepper. So that I, having enlarged about the Cacao Nut, may justly seem
to decline a repetition of what I have said. And as to more elaborate
Compositions, abstracting from the already declared nature of the Cacao Nut,
and other Ingredients already related, or hinted, it seems impossible to
declare any great thing concerning those, since their Compositions are unknown,
and not established by Experience, but the conjectures of Physicians, or
ignorant Chocolata-makers, who amass whatsoever is good, or pleasant alone, to
be an Ingredient of this Composition. Which course is very vain and foolish,
since even Cordials, and hot things (however effectual in swoonings, or
distempers of cold and wind) are prejudicial to the healthy, and suit not with
all Tempers; no, nor with any as constant Diet, but as Medicinal, which is not
the real use of Chocolata. The Indians, as they used it for food, and daily
aliment, prepared it as aforesaid: upon occasion of Fevers, and other hot
Distempers, they made some little alteration of it, suitable to the disease,
and so in Fluxes, and Dysenteries, and imbecility of Stomach. They put no
Sugar in it, nor otherwise enriched it in that they ordinarily fed on; and to
this day they have not increased their way beyond Mr. Gage Chap. 16.
Cacao, Achiote, Maiz, and a few Chiles, and a little Anise-seed. Nor did the
Spaniards vary much from it, long after they had subdued the Indies. About
fifty years ago it began to be used in Spain, being sent over for a delicacy,
after that they had enriched it, and given it a pleasant gusto at Mexico. And
what is now used, if we look back to An. Colm. de Ledesma's way, is of a newer
date: and if it scarce have the credit of being experienced; much less have the
several variations created since: which have no other Original, then that a
Spanish Physician, finding his Patient used, or inclined to Chocolata,
prescribed it to him, or her, with a mixture of these Spices, or other pleasing
and rich Ingredients (and Thus Ant. Colmenero says, you may add the seeds of
Melons and Pompions of Valencia dried, and powdered, or Ceterach, Amber-grise,
and Musk; others add Trochises of Rhubarb, Madder-roots powdered, and prepared
steel, and so give it, as an alterative.
sometimes not so) to be taken to open Obstructions, and to strengthen Nature
after a general course of Physic premised: and this kind of Chocolata, being
successful in the recovery of one Grandee, or eminent Lady, must be propagated
to be the entertainment of others, whose indispositions require it not, or
whose healthy condition cannot bear it. For it is not to be thought, that
Gusman de Alfarache's Hospital of Fools is confined to England; no, in other
Countries there are those, that can be as impertinent in their Chocolatas, or
other Cordials, as our Ladies, and Gentlewomen are, who obtrude upon their
Visitants their Diet-drinks, Herb-pottage, Cordials, and Confections, with the
solemn recommendation of, It was used by such and such: -- It contains nothing,
but what is opening. -- It is good for the Spleen, or Liver. -- It dissipates
wind, -- and a thousand such like prefatory Discourses to endear to them their
mischief. This is that, which has occasioned that variety of Chocolata in
Spain, so that scarce two houses in Sevil make it alike. And amongst us the
case is worse, since that the mixture of Chemical Oils (unknown in Spain) and
several Magisteries, give scope to Chocolata makers, and Ladies to practice
with, as well as Physicians.

I thought it my duty to give public notice hereof, to the end, that
Physicians might be acquainted with the reason of the great discrepancy in
Chocolata, and that others might be cautioned against the following the
particular preparations of several persons, who have sophisticated and spoiled
one of the most excellent and healthful drinks in the world. It is true, that
Physicians say how in Alteratives there is little mistake in the dose, or
quantity: but this respects their being given once, or but for a short time:
and so these alterative Chocolatas, being taken but once, or seldom^ (if the
Ingredients be not violent, nor the body Cacochymical, nor the season sickly)
may little endammage the sound; and as little amend the sick. But, if they be
often taken, or constantly by way of repaste, it is not to be doubted, but how
little error soever be, or can be committed in the dose, a great one will be
committed in the continuance, if either the body be healthful, or possessed
with a distemper not requiring (or repugning to) the additional Ingredients in
the Chocolata. And several have experienced the consequences of this variety of
mixtures, and uncertainty of compounding Chocolata: for, having taken Chocolata
of Antwerp for Hypochondriacal distempers, by using that of Spain they have
instantly been molested with the Haemorrhoids. Some, having been troubled with
a virulent Gonorrhaea, and debilitated therewith, have took the plain
Cacao-paste with Nutmeg, Mace, Cinnamom, and Sugar, to advantage: but being
ind^fferently well, or recovered quite in a manner, by drinking of Chocolata
made up with ordinary Pepper, they have relapsed, or incurred a sharpness of
Urine, to their great astonishment; they not understanding the difference of
Chocolatas. Others, having been troubled with the apprehen^^ons of a
Consumption, and Cough; and having found benefit by the simple Chocolata used
by some ordinary sellers of it, meeting with a parcel of what has been
esteemed choice, and rich, by using it they have been damnified in their
health; their Rheums have been increased by a colliquation of the humors, the
palate of their mouths being brought down by the keenness of the Chiles acting
on the glandules about the throat; and, their blood being heated, their sleep
has forsaken them. In fine, the issue has been altogether contrary to their
expepectation, and perhaps the Physician, who recommended it, has, as well as
his Patient, entertained an ill opinion of the Drink, whereas they ought to
blame the Chocolata-makers, who inform them not of the variety of Ingredients,
wherewith it is made.

I come now to represent the virtues of the compound Chocolata, the praises
whereof I would not have understood of the several rich Compositions not
authenticated by experience, nor known to the world, nor those Authors I shall
allege: all they say is to be restrained to the plain Chocolata of the Indies
made up of the Nut, Maiz, Achiote, a few Anise-seeds, and Chiles; proportioned,
and suited to the temper of the Patient, and given in pure water, or Atolle,
(and the last more or less plain, as occasion served) or of what was not
discrepant from it by the mixture of any vehement Spices of the East Indies,
but the more mild ones of America, as the Vaynillas, Iamaica-pepper, Sugar,
and the like; which being within no unsuitable latitude, I shall report their
Characters promiscuously.

Franciscus Ferdinandez, principal Physician in the Kingdom of Mexico under
Philip II. and appointed by him to enquire diligently, and to write of the
Natural and Medicinal Rarities of that Province, says of Chocolata thus: Es
una de las mas saludables, y praeciosas bebidas, de quantas hasta oi estan
descubiertas: por que en toda esta bebida no se echa cosa, que sea mala, ni
haga danna a la salud, si no todas cordiales, y de mucho provecho, para vi eios
ninnos, mugeres praennadas, y gente ociosa: y conviene no beber tras della, ni
comer otia cosa, ni hacer exercicio despues de tomarle, si no estar se un rato
quieto. Y deve tomarse bien caliente.

It is one of the most wholesome and precious Drinks, that have been discovered
to this day: because in the whole Drink there is not one Ingredient put in,
which is either hurtful in it self, or by commixtion; but all are cordial, and
very beneficial to our bodies, whether we be old, or young, great with child,
or others accustomed to a sedentary life. And we ought not to drink, or eat
after the taking Chocolata; no nor to use any exercise after it: but to rest
for a while after it without stirring. It must be taken very hot. This is the
Character of Chocolata with Achiote in it: for Ferdinandez did much approve
thereof.

Dr. Iuanes de Barrios speaks thus of it: Digo pues, que es menester
considerar, que al principio, que esta bebida se comenso a usar, se hacia de
menos simples, y cosas, que el dia de oi se hase, por que los Indios antigos de
Guatimala no echevan en el lo que oi echa: y no es de maravillar, por que en
las comidas, y bebidas, y cosas compuestas, el uso, y el tiempo las perficiona,
hasta dar les^el punto de la salud, y de gusto, que oi tiene, y esto passa en
los usos, hasta darle su punto.

I say, it is to be considered, that in the beginning, when this Drink of
Chocolata came first to be used, it was made of fewer Ingredients, and things,
then it is now made with; because the ancient Indians of Guatimala did not put
into it them, as now: nor is that to be marvelled ar, because in meats, and
drinks, and all manner of compositions it is Natural for them not to be begun,
and perfected at once: but this must be done by time, and practice; till they
arrive at that height of healthfulness, and taste, which they get at length.
And, having said this, he adds, Es comoda pues ellae sola suple el almuerso, y
algunas otras comidas, por que con ella no es menester, pan, ni carne, ni
bebida: y en une mo mento se hase y sacona, lo que no ai en las otras. It is
good alone to make up a breakfast, and supply other victuals; because, having
it, you need no further meat, bread, or drink: and in a moment it is prepared,
which is not to be found in others.

Dr. Iuanes de Cardenas concludes thus of it: Y digo, que usado con esta
advertencia, (...) de mucho provecho para la salud, y es bastante a alar gar
los dias de la vida; por que fuera de que da buen sustento al cuerpo, ajuda
agestar el mal humor, vacuandole por sudor hieses, y urina: y digo otra ves,
que entierra ninguna es mas necessario, que en las Indias, por que como es
humida, y dexativa, andan los cuerpos, y estomagos llenos de flemas, y de
superflua humidad, laqual con el calor del Chocolate, se cuesse, y convierte en
sangre, lo que no hace el vino: por que realmente antes se azeda, con la flema,
y suele ahitar mas.

And I say, whosoever takes it with the cautions, and directions aforesaid,
takes it with much benefit, and it conduces much to the lengthening of his
life; and the reason is, because it yields good nourishment to the body, it
helps to digest ill humors, voiding the excrements by sweat, and urine: and I
say, it is no wh^^e more necessary then in the Indies, which are moist, and apt
to create lassitudes, their bodies there being, together with their Stomachs,
full of Phlegm, and superfluous moisture, which are concocted by the heat of
Chocolata into good Blood; which is an effect beyond what Wine produces: for
the Wine does degenerate into sowreness, and corrupts together with the Phlegm,
and multiplies indigestion.

John de Laet, Secretary of the West-Indycompany in Holland, a Man accurate
both in the Geography, and natural History of the Indies, represents it thus:
Chocolate variis modis componitur pro cujusque appetitu: de qua hoc tantum
dicemus, quod praeclare nutriat; verum si nimis crebro and immoderate sumatur,
debilitat, and alia praeterea adfert detrimenta. -- (...). immodicus usus
potionis e Cacao confectae plurimarum infirmitatum and morborum causa est: quia
generat Obstructiones, corrumpit colorem, and inducit Cacochymiam, and similes
pravos effectus.

Chocolata is made (...) ways according to each Man's fan^^^: concerning which
we shall only say, that it nourishes very well; but, if it be used too much,
and too often, it begets weaknesses, and other indispositions: s^* the
immoderate use of it multiplies Obstructions, spoils the Complexion, and
introduces a Cacochymy.

Jacques Amproux in his Natural and Moral History of the A^^lles of America,
(chapter 16.) gives us this Intelligence. Le Cacao croist en la province de
Guatimala, pres la Neuue-Espagn, qui est aussi un fruit tres-reuomme en toute
l' Amerique, pour estre le principal Ingredient, qui enter en la composition de
la Chicolate, ou Chocolate, d'ont on fait un bruvage souverain pour fortifier
la poitrine, dissiper toutes les humeurs malignes, qui s'y attachent, chasser
la gravelle, y tenir le corpse frais, y dispos, pour veu qu'on le prene
moderement.

The Cacao grows in the Province of Guatimala, in New-Spain: it is the most
renowned Fruit in all America; because it is the principal Ingredient in
Chicolate, or Chocolate, which makes a sovereign Beverage to strengthen the
Stomach, to dispel all evil Humors, that trouble it, to evacuate the gravel,
and to preserve the body fresh, and in full vigor, if it be taken moderately.

Gul Piso quotes this Passage as from the experience of Ant. de Ledesma, whom
he recommends as a credible Author. Motus enim iis, inquit Ant. de Ledesma,
quae in Indiis fieri solent, cum illuc pervenissem, aegrotantiumque domos,
aeris calore ferventes percurrerem, aliquando haustum aquae petere solitus,
vitales restinguendi faces gratia, Indorum suasu Chocolatam fiti compescendae
convenientiorem bibi: saepiusque id factum, leniebatur exinde ardens bibendi
desiderium: etiamsi jejunus assumpsissem, Stomachi tamen vires refectas
sentiebam. Ex (...) potionis continuato usu alii mecum impinguefacti sunt: cum
tamen pleraque Ingredientia, excepto Cacacio, and Maizio, quod calida and sicca
sint ordine tertio, ad extenuationem corporis facere videantur: sed constat
ratio; butyrosae enim Cacacii parts pingue reddunt corpus; calidae vero, quae
confectionem ingrediuntur, pro vehiculo inserviunt, quo pinguis ista substantia
ad jecur deferatur, and inde in caeteras dimanet parts, tandemque ad carneas
demum derivetur. Having a curiosity to see to acquaint my self with the
Rarities of the Indies, at my being there, I went to visit my Patients, and
being thirsty I used to call for some water to allay my drought, and defect of
vital Spirits; at length by the persuasion of the Indians I drank Chocolata, as
being more convenient to allay my thirst. And indeed upon the drinking of it I
found my vehement desire of drink to leave me; and, if I took Chocolata in a
morning, I found it did much corroborate and refresh my Stomach. By the
continual use of which drink I, and several with me, became fat;
notwithstanding that most of the Ingredients, except Cacae-nuts, and Maiz, be
hot and dry in the third Degree, and seem more ready to extenuate. But the
reason is, for that the unctuous and butyrous parts of the Cacao-nut do fatten,
whileft the other Ingredients serve only as vehicles, to distribute those other
to the Liver, and thence to the whole body. This is the account he gives from
Anton. de Ledesma: his own Observation in Holland is as follows; Quia maxima
pars Ingredientium, excepto Cacacio, in Europam non deferuntur, substitui
possunt; and solent vel vulgaria illa Indiae Orientalis Aromata, vel alia
aliqua semina, aut flores cuique regioni and individuo convenientia. Quod and
fieri saepe in Belgio vidi, and ipse cum voluptate viriumque refectione hic
confectam gustavi. Porro non memini aliquem nostratium (modo non ferverent illi
Hypochondria) ex quotidiano usu ejus potus male habuisse. Multis contra
morbosis medelam attulisse scio, praesertim Hecticis, Catarrhosis, Asthmaticis,
quibusque praecordia languerent. Because that
few of the Ingredients of Chocolata, except the Cacao-nut, are brought into
Europe, instead of them there are, and may be substituted either those common
Spices of the East Indies, or other Seeds, and Flowers, suitable to the
particular condition of each Climate, or individual Person. Which I have often
seen done in Holland, and I my self have drunk of it with great pleasure, and
refreshment of my Spirits. Nor do I remember, that any of our Countrymen [
Hollanders] was ill, or any thing the worse for drinking of Chocolata daily;
except he were troubled with Hypochondriacal heats. But, on the other side, I
am sure on my own knowledge, that it has done much good to many, who were very
sickly, and in particular to several troubled with Hectic Fevers, Catarrhs,
Asthmas, and imbecility of the Stomach, and Vitals.

Besides the virtues attributed to Chocolata, I desire it may be observed what
he tells is done in the compounding of it; how, instead of the true American
Ingredients, other succedaneous ones are employed, viz. the Spicery of the
East Indies; betwixt which and those of the West Indies there is no
resemblance, the one being mild, the other violent: and against the use of
which (even to the total exterminating them) Gul* Piso Hist. utr. Ind. in Mant.
Arom. cap. 9.
this Author has writ a Discourse, however that he allow them to be
substituted for the other in Chocolata. Nor is the commutation of Spice for
Spice only; even other Flowers and Seeds are substituted, and this he knows to
be done in Holland: which being so, how can any recommend the use of Chocolata,
not knowing what Ingredients are in it, In Spain, to make it purging, or
lenitive, they put in Alexandrian Roses, as Ledesma, and others acknowledge: and
what if one should meet with a parcel of such Chocolata, who is already too
soluble, or to whom it may be pernicious to be so? They who sell Chocolata
understand not any distinction.
or knowing that comes from Holland, where other Ingredients then ought to be,
are put in for certain; though it be as uncertain what they are, or whereunto
effectual? It is further to be observed out of his words, that such Ingredients
are to be put in, as suit with each particular Climate, and individual
Constitution. Wherefore the same Chocolata is not to be promiscuously used by
men in health, of all tempers, nor by men sick of different diseases. Which was
observed before by me in this Discourse, and I take notice of it here again
occasionally, to show, that I am not singular in my opinion.

Mr. Gage chap. 16, tells us of it: That where it is so much used, the most, if
not all of them, as well in the Indies, as in Spain, Italy, Flanders, (which is
a cold Country) find, that it agrees well with them. True it is, that it is
used more in the Indies, then in the European parts, because there their
Stomachs are more apt to faint then here, and a cup of Chocolatte well
confectioned comforts and strengthens the Stomach. For my self, I must say, I
used it twelve years constantly, drinking one cup in the Morning, another yet
before Diner, between nine and ten of the Clock; another within an hour or two
after Diner, and another between four and five in the afternoon, and when I was
purposed to ^it up late to Study, I would take another cup about seven or eight
at night, which would keep me waking till midnight. And, if by chance I did
neglect any of these accustomed hours, I presently found my Stomach fainty. And
with this custom I lived twelve years in those parts healthy, without any
Obstructions, or Oppilations, not knowing what either Ague or Fever was. Yet I
will not dare to regulate by mine own the Bodies of others, nor take upon m^
the skill of a Physician, to appoint, and define, at what time, and by what
Persons it may be used. Only I say, I have known some, that have been the worse
for it, either for drinking it with too much Sugar, which has relaxed their
Stomachs, or for drinking it too often: for certainly, if it be drunk beyond
measure, not only this Chocolatte, but all other Drinks, how innocent soever,
may be hurtful. And if some have found it oppilative, it has come by the too
too much use of it. As when one drinks overmuch Wine, instead of comforting and
warming himself, he breeds and nourishes cold Diseases; because Nature cannot
overcome it, nor turn so great a quantity into good nourishment. So he, that
drinks much Chocolatte, which has fat parts, cannot make distribution of so
great a quantity to all the parts: and that part, which remains in the slender
Veins of the Liver, must needs cause Oppilations, and Obstructions. But lastly,
to conclude with this Indian drink, I will add what I have heard Physicians of
the Indies say of it, and have seen it by experience in others (though never
could I find it in my self) that those, that use this Chocolatte much, grow
fat, and corpulent by it: which indeed may seem hard to believe; for
considering, that all the Ingredients, except the Cacao, do rather extenuate,
then make fat, because they are hot in the third Degree. And we have already
said, that the Qualities, which do predominate in the Cacao, are cold, and dry,
which are very unfit to add any substance to the body. Nevertheless it may be
answered, that the many unctuous parts, which have been proved to be in the
Cacao, are those, which pinguefie, and make fat: and the hotter Ingredients of
this Composition serve for a guide, or Vehicle, to pass to the Liver, and the
other parts, until they come to the fleshy parts: and there finding a like
substance, which is hot, and moist, as is the unctuous part, converting it self
into the same substance, it does augment, and pinguefie. Hereupon he recommends
it to the English, to be drunk by them: I shall not instance many Testimonies
out of him, to evince its general use among the Indians; besides what he says
in the Chapter already cited, in his Relations of Guatemala, and Chiapa, the
mentions their use of it, more then once: and speaking of Chiapa (chap. 15.)
he has this following Story, which because it evidenceth the Opinion the
Spanish Dames have of Chocolatte, I shall insert at large.

The Women of Chiapa pretend much weakness and squeamishness of Stomach, which
they say is so great, that they are not able to continue in the Church, whilst
a Mass is briefly hudled over, much less whilst a Solemn high-Mass is sung, and
a Sermon preached, unless they drink a cup of hot Chocolatte, and eat a bit of
Sweat-meats to strengthen their Stomachs. For this purpose it was much used by
them to make their Maids bring them to Church in the middle of Mass, or Sermon,
a cup of Chocolatte, which could not be done to all, or most of them, without a
great confusion, and interrupting both of Mass, and Sermon. The Bishop,
perceiving this abuse, and having given fair warning for the omitting of it,
but all without an amendment, thought fit to fix in writing an Excommunication
upon the Church-doors against all such, as should presume at the time of
Service to eat or drink within the Church. This Excommunication was taken ill
by all, but especially the Gentle-women much to heart, who protested, if they
might not eat or drink in the Church, they could not continue in it to hear
what otherwise they were bound unto. The chief of them knowing what great
friendship there was between the Bishop, and the Prior, and my self, came to
the Prior, and me, desiring us to use all means we could with the Bishop for
revoking that his Excommunication so heavily laid upon them, and threatening
their Souls with damning judgment for the violation of it. The good Prior and
my self labored all we could, alleging the custom of the Country, the
weakness of the Sex, whom it most concerned, and also the weakness of their
Stomachs, the contempt, that might ensue from them unto his person, and many
inconveniences, which might follow, to the breeding of an uproa^ in the
Church, and in the City, whereof we had some probable conjecture from what
already we had heard from some. But none of these would move the Bishop; to
which he answered, that he preferred the honor of God, and of his house,
before his own life. The women, seeing him so hard to be entreated, began to
stomach him the more, and to slight him with scornful and reproachful words;
others slighted his Excommunication, drinking in iniquity in the Church, as
the Fish does Water, which caused one day such an uproar in the Cathedral, that
many Swords were drawn against the Priests, and Prebends, who attempted to take
away from the Maids the cups of Chocolatte, which they brought to their
Mistresses: who at last seeing, that neither fair nor foul means would prevail
with the Bishop, resolved to forsake the Cathedral, where the Bishop's own, and
the Prebends eyes must needs be watching over them; and so from that time most
of the City betook themselves to the Cloyster-Churches, where by the Nuns and
Friars they were not troubled, nor resisted, though fairly counseled to obey
the command of the Bishop; whose name now they could not brook, and to whose
Prebends they denied now all such relief and stipend for Masses, which formerly
they had used to bestow upon them, conferring them all upon the Friars, who
grew rich by the poor impoverished Cathedral. This lasted not long, but the
Bishop began to stomach the Friars, and set up another Excommunication, binding
all the City to resort unto their own Cathedral Church, which the Women would
not obey, but kept their houses for a whole month: in which time the Bishop
fell dangerously sick, and desired to retire himself to the Cloister of the
Dominicans, for the great confidence he had in the Prior, that he would take
care of him in his sickness, Physicians were sent for far and near, who all
with a joint opinion agreed, that the Bishop was poisoned, and he himself
doubted not of it at his death, praying unto God to forgive those, that had
been the cause of it, and to accept of that Sacrifice of his life, which he was
willing to offer for the zeal of God's house, and honor. He lay not above a
week in the Cloister, and as soon as he was dead, all his body, face, and head
did swell, that the least touch upon any part of him caused the skin to break,
and cast out white matter, which had corrupted, and overflown all his body. A
Gentlewoman, with whom I was well acquainted in the City, who was noted to be
somewhat too familiar with one of the Bishop's Pages, was commonly censured to
have prescribed such a Cup of Chocolatte to be ministered by the Page, which
poisoned him, who so rigorously had forbidden Chocolatte to be drunk in the
Church. My self heard this Gentlewoman say of the Deceased Bishop, that she
thought few grieved for his Death; and that the Women had no reason to grieve
for him, and that she judged he being such an Enemy to Chocolatte in the
Church, that, which he had drunk at home in his house, had not agreed with his
Body. And it became afterward a Proverb in that Country, Beware of the
Chocolatte of Chiapa. Which made me so cautious, that I would not drink
afterward in any house, where I had not very great satisfaction of the whole
Family.

A certain Spanish Physician of Sevil, who made it his peculiar inquiry to
search into the nature of Chocolata, as he does on every occasion show himself
extraordinarily learned, and to have consulted all the public Discourses and
private Manuscripts about it, so he manifests a great regard to the Testimony
of Experience, which he avows to be so favorable for Chocolata, that there is
not one, who does drink it, and does not feel himself to be manifestly
refreshed, and strengthened, as well as delighted by it: and that, whereas none
has been known to live above seven days by drinking Wine alone, one may live
months, and years, using nothing but Chocolata. In fine, he himself saw a
Child weaned, which could not be brought by any Artifice to take any food, and
for four months space he was preserved alive by giving him Chocolata only,
mixing now and then some crumbs of bread therewith. So powerful a virtue has
it to nourish, and strengthen. Nor does he allow it for food alone, and the
preservation of Life, but medicinally, as a thing, that is advantageous to
health; for he gives this Character to a preparation of Chocolata, which is
almost the same with what I made for His Majesty. Antiquam compositionem
Chocolatis Indiae and Hispaniae enarrare, hoc tempore nullius fructus erit;
quoniam illud habuit, ut ad ultimam perfectionem ^^veniret. (i.e.) It is not
worth while to recount the ancient ways of compounding Chocolata; because this
proposed is arrived at its height, and last degree of perfection. Haec est
omnium potionum pretiosior potio: haec in commodis salutis omnes superat,
illarum nempe, quae in hodiernam diem aut voluptas invexit, aut decurrentium
saeculorum series alternata conspexit; quia nec in ea, dum in actum potionis
reducitur, nec aliquo simplicium, ante ejus ingressum, vi^ae defuit
necessarium, neque voluptati, quod non valeat illecebra appetitum allicere:
sunt enim alia alimento gratissima, alia Aromatica virtute roborantia, alia
cordi auxiliantia, dum Nectar vivificum instaurant, seu spiritus dissipant
malignos, aut naturales robustae mixtionis producunt: sunt and omnia vitae
longius producendae aptissima: quoniam Chocolate ultima qualitate, quae
resultat ex fermentatione, ut theriaca, calorem nativum roborat, and prompta
instauratione influentem (ob facilem conversionem) multum and laudabilem
sanguinem gignit. Ob substantiae tenuitatem, and fermentationis efficaciam,
indissolubiles and robustos spiritus, immortali labori and studiorum
collimationi aptissimos, facultates praecipuas, and tempera^enti mixtio^e, and
Aromatica virtute in vigore conservat: moderato calore dum concoquitur, flatus
turgentes dissipat, ac penetratione ap^rienti obstructiones aperit, menses
provocat, and inter alia ventrem plerisque lenit; and super omnia cibaria vires
praesentanee and promptissime reficit, quod res aliae essentia potabiles non
ita prompte agunt: quo videtur singulari differentia ob aliis differ. This is
the most precious Drink of Drinks; this excells all others in advantages for
our health, which either Time by a long succession of years, or increase of
Luxury and Pleasure to this day has acquainted us with: because neither in the
Chocolata it self being made into a Drink, no nor in This is to be understood
not of the ordinary Spanish Chocolata, against which my Author protests; but
of what is made up, as I prepared that for His Majesty, which varyed little
from his way.
any Ingredient thereof, is there any thing wanting, that is necessary for the
Life, or delight of Man, and so to invite him to use it. Some things in it are
most pleasant nourishment; others strengthen by their Aromatical virtue; others
are Cordial, and revive the vital Balsame, or Nectar, either dissipating evil
and burdensome Spirits, or producing new ones of a durable nature. In fine,
all are transcendently qualified to prolong life; because Chocolata by a To
obtain this then, it must be kept, and fermented; and consequently neither what
is made into Cakes, (which will not keep, nor ferment in so small quantities)
nor what is made in Power, and mixed with Spicery, as it is prepared to drink;
nor what is made alone into Paste, and kept, and spiced in the time it is to be
used; can be approved of, since the latter wants the benefit of fermenting with
the Spicery, and the Paste alone grows effaete, and insipid.
new quality arising to the Composition through fermentation (as happens in
Treacle) strengthens the natural heat in each part, and increases that, which
continually inflows, and influenceth it, begetting by a speedy and easy
transmutation much and good Blood: by the tenuity of its parts, and efficacious
fermentation, it begets strong and indissipable Spirits, and so enables Men
vigorously to prosecute their Studies, and tedious exercises of the Brain, it
strengthens and preserves in full vigor the principal faculties in men by the
exquisiteness of its temperament, and Aromatical power: being digested, with
its moderate heat it dispells Wind; and by its penetrancy, and opening
quality, it removes Obstructions, provokes the monthly evacuations in Women,
and, amongst other qualities, it generally preserves the body This is to be
understood only of such Chocolata, as his was, being rich of the Cacao, and
moderately spiced, and that with mild Spices: yet did he put in a good
quantity of Cinnamom.
soluble: and it does more speedily and readily refresh and invigorate the
bodily strength, then any other sustenance whatever, no other potable liquours
[which yet do most quickly nourish] producing so speedy and sensible an effect:
whereby it seems to be peculiarly differenced from all other Viands.

CHAP. VI.
How to make use of the Chocolata by preparing it into Drink.

I Think I have sufficiently (at least according to my present leisure, and the
unsupplyable want of my own Library, and Collections) manifested the effects of
Chocolata: I shall now treat of the way of preparing it into Drink, when any
has occasion to use it. And because that the Composition it self is of the
Indian discovery, as I have hitherto still directed my inquiries by searching
into their Usages and Opinions concerning the several Ingredients, so I shall
now begin with a recital of the several ways they use to prepare it into Drink:
and for this I have the most accurate account from Chap. 16.
Mr. Gage, (who yet seems to transcribe Ledesma) whom I shall therefore
transcribe, with such Animadversions, as may seem pertinent.

The manner of Drinking it is diverse. The one ( being the way, which is used in
Mexico) is to take it hot with Atolle, dissolving a Tablet in hot Water, and
then stirring it, and beating it in the Cup, where it is to be drunk, with a
Molinet, and, when it is well stirred to a scum, or froth, then to fill the Cup
with hot Atolle, and so drink it sup by sup.

This way of preparing it may seem (since it is the way of Mexico) to have been
the way, that Motezuma treated Bernaldus del Castillo with, when he caused to
be brought forth jarros grandes hechos de buen Cacao, con su espuma, great
jarrs made with good Cacao, with its froth. It is not to be questioned, but
that the pure Cacao-paste, well dissolved in hot water, and long, and violently
agitated with a Molinet, will raise a considerable (but not lasting) Froth, not
inferior to what, with less agitation, is seen where Eggs entire, or Yolks
alone, are put in: much more perhaps it may froth, if that Paste had Pochol or
Paniso grains mixed with it; or, if being well milled before, it were a second
time milled upon the commixture of the Atolle: for the Maiz flower would make
it froth much; and it is from the commixture of Maiz, or Bean-flower, (or
perhaps some other substitute) that some Chocolata does now froth more then
others; though the difference in the milling likewise produce a variety. I have
already explicated what Atolle is, in the beginning, and so shall not repeat
it; but only add, that, from this way of the Indians using it, our Physicians
may order it to be drunk with streined Water Gruel, Almond-milk, or cremore
ptisanae, or any other mixture they please, that is more, or less nourishing,
as they please; ordering the Chocolata according to the aforesaid Method:
concerning which Dr. Iuanes de Barrios gives this admonition, Para hombres y
mugeres Sanguineos no se tome con Atole, por que aumenta la sangre; sino con
aqua, poco anis, Chile, y acucar, y mingunas especies Aromaticas, ni cosas de
olor. Y para los Flegmaticos se haga con todos los Ingredientes, que avemos
dicho, o con mas especies de lo ordinario, y se tome mui caliente. Y en los
Melancholicos, que se haga sin Chile, poco anis, y con coras de buen olor, y
que se tome tibio.

For men and women of a Sanguine Complexion, it is not to be taken with A^olle,
because it multiplyeth Blood in the body; but with Water, a little Anise-seeds,
Chiles, and Sugar, but no Spicery is to be put in, nor sweet scented things,
for such persons. But, for the Phlegmatic, let it be made with all the
Ingredients used in the Indies, or with a greater quantity of Spices, then is
ordinary, and let it be taken very hot. And, for the Melancholy persons, see it
be made without Chiles, with a few Anisefeeds, and with Ingredients of a sweet
smell, and taking it lukewarm.

Which Caution may not only direct us as to Atolle, which is not to be made, or
used in England; but illustrates and confirms an Animadversion of mine formerly
laid down: viz. that according to the several tempers and distempers of persons
there ought to be framed variety of Chocolata; and that to be given variously,
as the discreet Physician shall propose; and this is agreeable (you see) to the
procedure of the Indies.

Another way of drinking Chocolatte is, that the Chocolatte, being dissolved
with cold water, and stirred with the Molinet, and the scum taken of, and put
into another vessel, the remainder be set on the fire, with as much Sugar, as
will sweeten it, and when it is warm, then to pour it on the scum, which was
taken of before* and so drink it.

I understand not the reason of this procedure; unless it be for ornament sake:
it looking more pleasantly being thus ordered, then if the water were hot, and
milled to a froth with Chocolata, and so drunk. It is certain, yet strange,
that the Cacao-paste, being milled well with cold water, will froth as much,
and yield as plentiful a scum, or cream upon settling, as it will do if it were
milled in hot water: and I have showed how that cream is fat, and the water
also is fatty (though cold) in which it is milled, but it comes not to that red
color, which the other has, which is prepared hot. This s^eum being taken of,
and the rest heated, and put to it (pouring it on high) makes it look more
pleasantly on the top, then if it were a bare solution of the Cacao-paste,
(which* will dissolve in it, so as not to precipitate any settling almost,
whilst it is hot) and the Cacao-paste which remains (after the froth is taken
of) to be heated dissolves sufficiently in the water by mere heating, without
milling.

Besides these ways, there is another way (which is much used in the Island of
Santo Domingo) which is to put the Chocolatte into a Pipkin with a little
water, and to let it boil well, till it be dissolved, and then to put in
sufficient Water, and Sugar, according to the quantity of the Chocolatte, and
then to boil it again until there comes an oily scum on it, and then to drink
it.

This way I was at first much pleased with, Since the writing hereof I did try
it in some of my own Chocolata, and it was very pleasing, and more rightly fat
then any other way; but I observed, that the Spice had a more vehement heat,
and taste, then otherwise: which happened either because the boiling added a
sharpness to them; or that the compages or body of the Composition was more
laxed, then otherwise: for not being milled, it did not seem so well commix'd,
as otherwise.
and upon trial I found, that it did more perfectly dissolve the Nut then any,
and reduced it into a perfect fatty broth, which did not at all offend my
Stomach: but notwithstanding that it did not offend mine, yet I fear, that
neither the adstringent bitterness of the Cacao-paste (which alone I drunk) nor
the aid of Achiote, Sugar, and Spices (which may loose their virtue by boiling,
and are not used by the Indians) will render it supportable to tender Stomachs;
so exceeding unctuous is the broth, or Drink.

But the most ordinary way is, to warm the water very hot, and then to pour
out half the cup-full, that you mean to drink; and to put into it a Tablet, or
two, or as much, as will thicken reasonably the water, and then grind it well
with a Molinet, and when it is well ground, and risen well to a scum, to fill
up the cup with hot water, and so drink it by sups (having sweetened it with
Sugar) and to eat it with a little Conserve, or Maplebread, steeped into the
Chocolatte.

Of this last way Mr. Gage says not only, that it is the most used, but that
certainly it does no harm, and he recommends it to the practice of the English:
he gives no reason why the Chocolata may not be milled with all, but a part of
the hot water; nor do I apprehend any, except that the vessel, in which it is
made, may be so little, as that it may not be able to contain the whole liquour
to be milled, and prepared: for it must be done in a pretty deep vessel, that
it may have room to dash about the sides, without flying out, or running over,
as it is milled* Otherwise I think no man will believe, that there can be so
equal and due commixture in the Chocolata-drink, if one half only be milled,
and the other half of water poured to it; as if the whole were milled together:
and consequently, it cannot be so good.

Wherefore the way now used at Sevil seems more rational, whereby it is thus
made. The Chocolata-cake in a due proportion (that is, in my Chocolata, one
ounce of Paste, two ounces of Sugar, and eight of Water) is dissolved in hot
water; it never boiling at the fire after the Chocolata is put in; because (say
they) it will by boiling grow I am sure, that the simple Cacaopaste sowres not
by boiling long, and several times; no not my compound Chocolata: but it is
possible, that the Vaynillas, Alexandrian Roses, or some other Ingredient in
Spain may upon boiling give the drink a sowrish taste. Or it may subvert the
Stomach by becoming too oily, or unctuous, as I observed before.
sowrish, or be so depraved as to subvert the Stomach. Then it is well milled,
that it may grow frothy, and fatty: then it is powered out into Xicharas, or
Cups, and so drunk hot. They give a special Caution, that after it has been
once milled, if it cool again, it is not to be heated and milled a second time,
and so drunk. Because, they say, it corrupts, and sowres: and herein they
avouch their Experience, and desire no reason may be urged against it. This
Caution, being given concerning the best Spanish Chocolata, and which most
resembles mine, I could not omit: and I am sure either it is not true, (though
we find a difference in broths, when twice heated) or it must arise from some
Ingredient (I suppose the Vaynillas) and not from the Cacao, the simple paste
whereof I took and milled, and kept it several days, and heated it again; and
it was neither sour, nor offensive to my Stomach: and I kept it three days
longer, and then heated it, milled it, and tasted it, and it varyed not its
relish, but was inoffensive, and free from sowrishness. I boiled some of mine,
and drunk it cold, unmilled, without annoyance: and I know a Lady, that with
success boiled it twice. Here in England we are not content with the plain
Spanish way of mixing Chocolata with water: but they either use milk alone; or
half milk, and half conduit-water; or else thicken the water (if they mix no
milk with it) with one or more eggs put in entire, or yolks only into the
water, or where milk is mingled with the water. In which way, as it is sold in
the Chocolata-houses, there are these inconveniences: if it be done with milk,
it is natural for milk, being hot, and standing so, to cast up a Scum; and, if
it cool, it creams: so that, if the Chocolata be kept after it is milled, and
not immediately drunk, either upon your second milling it you must cast away the
scum (or cream, if it stand cold) or mill it into the D^ink. the former course
we^^ens it, by casting away also the flower, (...) cream of the Chocolata; and
the latter renders it unpleasant. And as to the mixture of eggs, if they be put
in with the yolks* and white^, and suffered to stand, the white^ will harden,
and disgrace the Chocolata^ but if only the yolks be put in, and well milled, I
have tried them so, by not only letting the Chocolata stand hot before the
fire, but even to boil it again, and mill it, and let it again stand for
several hours before the fire, and I have not perceived it to vary the taste,
or to embody into any thicker consistence then before it had; only I observed,
that it did not yield so much cream, (or scarce any) on the top, nor such
visible discoveries of fattiness, as it would have done otherwis^: and the
settling at the bottom (which upon refrigeration seemed as great, as if no egg
had been mixed with it, though the decoction or water were thicker much by
reason of the additional yolk) did not carry so much unctuousness, being
tasted, as did those other setlings, which I had tried, without commixing any
egg with them, either only once milling, or boiling them also. From whence I
leave it to the more mature consideration of others to determine, whether the
commixture of an egg be good, since it seems to hinder the dissolution of the
Cacao into oily or unctuous parts; and whether it may not produce a like effect
in the (...), as it does in the Pipkin, (Concoction being but a sort of
Elixation) and so impede the nourishment expected from the Chocolata: it being
oftentimes as true, Quae prodesse queant singula, juncta nocent: as that other
Saying, Et quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvant. But these Experiments were
made with the simple paste of the Cacao-nut, and not with compound Chocolata.

In Spain to Choleric constitutions, and where there is any extraordinary
heat, or inflammation of the Liver, or Kidni^^, I find, that there is a more
mild and temperate way of Chocolata, then is usual, prepared: or else the
usual one is diluted with Endive or Scorsonera water: and where Phlegm and
Crudities abound, there it is prescribed with the water of Radishes, Fennel, or
Carduus Benedictus, which (say they, though some in England protest against it)
vary not the taste, but increase its virtue. It is given thus by way of
alteration, as are other alteratives, general Medicines being premised; and
every sixth day there is either another gentle purge given, or the Chocolata is
then dissolved in an infusion of Mechoacan, or the like. In the Winter it is
drunk hot (being given to open Obstructions) and in the Spring it is drunk in a
more moderate temper: after it they prescribe Exercise for an hour, or half an
hour, which must be moderate: and this course is continued thirty, or at least
twenty days, or indefinitely till they be well: which they will soon know, the
pale recovering their color, and the short-breathed their wind; the Urine
amending its color, and consistence: and all Symptoms either mitigating, or
ceasing. But, if the Obstructions be inveterate, and too difficult to be
overcome by this method, then they prescribe every day half a dram of Rhubarb
trochiscated to be mixed with the Chocolata, or of Madder-root, or a dram of
Steel prepared. And this is the Spanish practice, and from which Anton.
Colmenero de Ledesma varyeth not much; as he, that shall compare him with my
Intelligence, will easily see.

There is another way of drinking Chocolatte cold, which the Indians use at
Feasts, to refresh themselves, as it is made after this manner. The Chocolatte
(which is made with none, or very few Ingredients) being dissolved in cold
water with the Molinet, they take off the Scum, or ^rassie part, which rises
in great quantity, especially when the Cacao is older, and more putrefied: the
Scum they lay aside in a little dish by it self, and then put Sugar into that
part, whence the Scum was taken, and then pour it from on high into the Scum,
and so drink it cold. And this Drink is so cold, that it agrees not with all
Men's Stomachs: for by Experience it has been found, that it does hurt, by
causing pains in the Stomach, especially to Women.

I should except against this way, not for the bare coldness only, (though Gul.
Piso in Mant. Aromat. cap. 18.
Piso and A^ton. Colmenero de Ledesma agree with Mr. Gage in the noxious
effects of Chocolata drunk thus cold) but because of its nauseousness: for I
found it to offend my Stomach with its coldness, more then if it had been pure
water; and the nauseousness was insupportable, which did arise from the fat of
the Nut dissolving in the water, and rendering it as odious, as would be fat
Mutton-broth drunk cold. The Spaniards drink not the simple Cacao-paste
dissolved in cold water, as do the Indians: but as that Nation is inclined to
drink Snow, Snow-water, and Drinks refrigerated in Snow (which are more
authenticated by custom, and iodisyncra^ie, then reason) so they refrigerate
and freeze their solution of Chocolata, richly Aromatised, with Snow: and so
the Gallants, especially the Ladies, drink it; reputing the Spice a sufficient
corrective of the coldness, I caused some Chocolata of my ordinary sort to be
boiled, and some I milled, the other part I did not; and drinking both of them
cold, I did not find any disagreement, but a pleasingness to my taste: yet was
that unmilled very fatty.
and nauseousness of it. I do believe, that it is not this way so nauseous, as
the Indian way: but I cannot believe it wholesome, since so cold Drinks (before
the heat of the Spice be actuated by the Stomach) do often make a fatal and
irrecoverable impression upon the Stomach it self, and Lungs, and Heart,
and Womb; and is generally (not universally) condemned even as poison by the
Spanish Physicians, however that their authority is suspended by a contrary
practice received in Madrid, and Sevil.

As to the time of taking it, it is held (by the Spaniards) the most fit time
to take it in the Morning, and Supper being digested, and the Body fresh, and
the Stomach empty to receive it; (or else it may be taken in the morning not
upon the first stirring, and before any repaste, but after the taking of some
other sustenance in a moderate quantity: (for then it seems most acceptable to
the Stomach, and most necessary for the undergoing the employments of the
subsequent day. Besides crude, and indigested, or depraved relics of the last
night's meal are hereby either It is an indubitable Truth, that after
digestion, and descent of the Chyle into the guts, there are still some
remainders in the Stomach, which by long fasting, or particular indisposition,
do corrupt, and grow acid: such, continuing so, are not to be wrought on; but,
if they be diluted by the mixture of warm Chocolata, Nature will then concoct
it, as it does Spirit of Vitriol, or the like with Julep.
reduced under a second concoction for the use of the body, or outed the
Stomach for its ease. The Chocolata it self also is much more easily concocted,
and distributed, whilst there is not any thing else in the Stomach to delay, or
retard its progress into the Veins, and vasa chylifera: its influence is then
more sensible to dissipate any noxious Vapors. Which Effects are to be
supposed to follow, if it be taken with moderation; being neither of too thick
If it be too thick, they say, it will obstruct: if it be too thin, it yields
neither delight, nor nourishment considerable.
a consistence, nor too large a quantity. Some there are, who have taken it
usually, instead of Wine [ which is their table-drink in Spain] at Diner, and
Supper: but this has not been sufficiently experimented, that it may be
vulgarly permitted; since perhaps custom, or individual constitution, or a
moderation in Diet, ( which helps all errors, but is not vulgarly to be
presumed on) may render it only innoxious to them. But it is certain, that it
may freely be taken four or five hours after Diner, Concoction being then
finished, and the meat not only dissolved in, but distributed in great part out
of the Stomach. And so it will enable them to persist till night, or ( if they
eat no suppers) the day following. Nor need any fear, that being taken at such
a time as four or five a clock, it will prejudice his sleep the night
following: for such accidents befall only those, who take it Mr. Gage (Chapter 16.)
says, that, when he purposed to sit up late to study, he would take a cup
about seven or eight a clock at night, which would keep him waking till
midnight. I took it my self twice at ten a clock at night, and I think it did
render me less sleepy then ordinary; though I am usually one of little sleep.
late at night, and not so early, as it is here recommended: or where the
Chocolata is too hot of Spices, so as that it begets too great an agitation and
servour in the blood; which may befall any body: or where the body is of so hot
and Choleric a temper, that it cannot bear Chocolata moderately spiced, or
compounded with mild Spices. But in Phlegmatique Persons, and such as are
aged, it is observed, that it causes them to rest excellently well.

They further caution us, If we be dry, or in Summer, not to drink Chocolata
till we have first drunk some cold water, [which is instead of Beer to them in
Spain, when they drink not Wine] lest Chocolata [as it is now compounded with
Spices, and Sugar] should produce, or augment our thirst. And, after we have
drunk Chocolata, they strictly prohibit all manner of Drink; for, whether Water
or Wine be drunk after it, there do frequently ensue very dangerous Diseases,
and Symptoms. A very observing Spanish Physician assures us upon his own
knowledge, some have been thereby immediately seized with a vertiginous
indisposition, and giddiness; I have been ascertained also of these accidents
by one, who lived many years in Portugal, and made Chocolata there.
others with a Cholera; very many have fallen speechless. It is also prohibited
by them as hurtful in Fevers, [because prepared otherwise then by the Indians]
as augmenting the Disease. So they prohibit it in Fluxes, by reason of its
lubricity to increase the already excessive laxity of the guts: yet they
confess it has sometimes been beneficial in Lienteries.

But, in conclusion, my Author tells us, that It is a certain thing, that
however these Cautions may seem rational, yet it is not observable, how the
drinking of Chocolata can be reduced under any certain model of Rules in the
taking it; since it is become so universally used [in Spain] that it is taken
at all hours, and times; it is the delight of the Masters, the sustenance of
Families, and the grand entertainment of Friends: quia jam sine illo vitam
nesciunt; because they know not how to live without it.

There is another way of taking it made into Lozenges, or shaped into Almonds,
with Orange-flower water, Amber-grise, Sugar, and the white of an Egg,
gum-dragant, and perhaps some other Ingredients. As to the former way of making
up Chocolata into Lozenges, or Cakes, and so eating it, my Spanish Author gives
it this Character, (which indeed extends to both sorts) mandendo, aut in
buccellis comedere, insuperabiles obstruction^^ creat, seu dum fiunt bellaria
cum saccharo, aut in pasta ^omeditur: To eat Chocolata in Cakes, or otherwise
by bits, begets insuperable Obstructions; that is, if you eat it made up into
Confects or Sweatmeats with Sugar, or in Paste. I cannot, I must confess, pass
so general a sentence on Chocolata: I suppose the Opinion of it is to be
regulated by the goodness of the Chocolata that is ea^en; and that I leave to
be examined by my precedent Discourse about the variety thereof. That the
Cacao-nut is nourishing, there is no doubt of it; that the simple paste may
innocently be eaten, I think too: but that Chocolata made up with so great a
proportion of Sugar, and with such Spices, Oils, and Essences, as are used
(all, or some of them) in the Chocolata designed for that use, I believe no
Physician will promis^uously, and without distinction of Persons, allow it, but
who has another Opinion of Sugar, and Spicery (except what I have recommended)
and Chemical Oils, and Essences, then I have in this case, or many other. It is
true, Hippocrates says, It is easier to be nourished with Drinks, then solid
meat; and that They, who have need to be quickly refreshed, must be dieted with
Drinks, or potable liquours: but these two Sayings make not for the giving of
Chocolata in Paste, or Confects, no more then his recommending in sundry cases
P^isanes of Barley does encourage us to give to weak Stomachs barley^bread: or,
because Almond-milk is good, therefore to recommend the Maccaroni of Italy so
condemned by Fienus D^flat.
Fienus. Should I say never so much for the one or other way, and evince them
to be better, then any preparations of Almonds, and Pistachias; as I beliveve
them to be: yet would they still be Sweetmeats, and consequently more used, I
must say this in favor of the Cacao, above Almond and Pistachia-sweet- meats;
that I cannot take any Sugared Drinks, or Sweetmeats without a sensible
disorder of my blood: but I never found, that Chocolata, though drunk with a
double proportion of Sugar, besides what is in the Paste, or Cake, did ever
offend me; but refresh and comfort me very much: nor did the Chocolata-Cake
eaten ever offend me, though I never found it to strengthen, or satisfy much,
no nor the Nuts when eaten dry; which is a strange effect, yet perceivable to
any that drink, and eat it, or the Nuts.
Fienus. Should I say never so much for the one or other way, and evince them
to be better, then any preparations of Almonds, and Pistachias; as I beliveve
them to be: yet would they still be Sweetmeats, and consequently more used,
then approved. And the Obstructiveness of them, how inveterate and obstinate
soever, arises not from any particular badness of the Cacao-nut, but from the
general unwholesomness of all Confects, and Sweetmeats. And this I shall not
now make out by Arguments, (though it might easily be done) but by the instance
given by Dr. Heart in his Diet of the diseased (lib. 1. cap. 22) and it is as
follows. I remember, living in Paris 1607, a young Clerk, living with a Lawyer
in the City, procured a false key for the Closet, where his Mistresses
Sweetmeats lay: and for many days together continued thus to feast with her
Sweetmeats, and loaf-sugar (whereof there was no small store) until at length
he became so pale in Color, lean in Body, and withal so feeble, that he was
scarce able to stand on his legs; insomuch that the skilfullest Physicians of
the City, with the best means they could use, ^ad much ado to restore him to
his former health again. A little time will show whether the use of these new
Cakes will be as prejudicial to health, and productive of Consumptions, and
other weaknesses of the back, or Hypochondria, in our English Women; as the
rest of Sweetmeats have been: for it is the general opinion, that the
multitude of Sweetmeats used by our Ladies is the occasion of our aforesaid
Diseases so much increasing. I I shall not now enquire into the verity of the
Opinion: for there are instances of Countries, in which Sweetmeats are much
more used then here amongst us, and yet they ^re not so molested, as we, with
those Distempers. I say then, that the ill effects of Sweetmeats do but
accidentally follow upon their use, and therefore we ought to examine those
circumstances, that occasion his variety of effects: which I have not leisure
to do, nor that opportunity, which I expect amidst the Sugar-works of the West
Indies.

CHAP. VI.
The Author's judgment concerning Chocolata summarily delivered, as to its
effects, and the ways of using it.

IT were easy to evidence the excell^ncy of warm Drinks above those, that are
taken cold, if I had leisure: for certainly, if the use of Drink be to allay
thirst, to moisten the body, and to distribute or help the digestion of the
food we take; it is not to be doubted, but hot Drinks perform all this better
then cold: and for the evincing of this to each point, both Reason and
Experience might be alleged. For the practice of the ancient Romans favors
much hot Drinks; as every man knows; and the modern trials of Campanella, and
Gassendus Phys. Sect. (...) l. 5. c. 1. Si habeatur ratio valetudinis, docet
experientiae quam saepe gelidae potus noceat, quam nunquam potus calefactae.
Gassendus, as well as Antonius Persius, does manifest, that all the aforesaid
ends may be attained by warm or hot Drinks: and particularly, as to the
quenching of thirst, it is undeniable, that hot Drink not only quenches it at
present, but prevents its return, better then cold; and yields as much delight,
maugre the assertion of Pliny, that all Animals desire cold Drink: and that
musty Definition of Aristotelian Philosophy, that Sitis est appetitus frigidi
and humidi: Thirst is a desire of cold and moisture; which is notoriously
false, disproved by the Arguments and trial of Gassendus as well as others. Yea
Drinks, that are taken hot, surpass themselves in their effects, compared to
what they do when taken cold. Thus hot water drunk daily before Diner cures the
Stone, and Gravel in the Reins, as Zecchius affirms, and Trallian. l. 9. c. 4,
5.
Trallianus: and the benefit others have found by it does manifest. Wine drunk
hot does much more corroborate a weak Stomach, then when drunk cold; as
Costaeus De puot in morb. lib. 1. cap. 52.
Costaeus avows, and has been tried by several in Consumptions, to my
knowledge. I shall not speak concerning the Decoctions of China-root,
Sarsa-Parilla, and Guajacum, of which the same Assertion may be made. I have
not leisure to insist hereon, nor the convenience of my Library to aid my
memory with citations at present. I suppose then, that, in general, Chocolata
is rather advantaged, then prejudiced, by being an hot Drink.

It is of an unquestionable nourishment: for, as it is the chief sustenance of
the Spanish Indies, this cannot be colourably denied: and though Pope Urban the
Eighth did declare it in discourse, and by a solemn Bull, that it was merely a
Drink, and so consistent with the Fasts of the Church; yet few believe him
infallible therein, who understand the Drink: and the Carmelite-Friers, by way
of Mortification, have a Statute amongst them in the Indies, that they will
drink no Chocolata. You will not find Mr. Gage to take a journey, but he makes
it an important care to provide Chocolata: nor is he singular therein; but
follows the general example of the Spaniards. Whether he is treated publicly
by Towns, or privately by particular Persons, his entertainment and refection
is Chocolata* agreeable to what Acosta says, Lib. 4. cap. 22.
It is a Drink very much esteemed among the Indians, wherewith they feast
Noblemen, as they pass thorough their Country. The Spaniards, both Men, and
Women, that are accustomed to the Country, are very greedy of it. The Nut is
one of the richest commodities of the Acosta lib. 4. cap 22. Gage chap. 16.
Benzon. lib. 2.
West Indies: and however some disallow the use of it raw, or roasted, others
do repute it less obstructive, and more wholesome then they judge it to be. The
Nut is of an exceeding fatty substance, being viewed in a Microscope: in a
Iamaica-nut I could observe large and spreading Veins or streaks of white fat,
which I suppose to make the fat, which appears upon digesting, or boiling it
without milling it. Examining the Caraca-nut by a Microscope I could observe
nothing of fatty veins, or streaks; yet is not that Nut leaner, then the other:
I know not whether I ought to call it oil, or fat; and for either appellation I
may be questioned: but, give it what name you please, I dare avow, that one
ounce of Cacao-paste well digested will yield more fat, then a pound of fat
Beef, or Mutton, even when stewed. Besides the fat, which never so separates
from the other parts, as to lose totally its bitterness, whereby it is
preserved agreeable, and not nauseous to the Stomach, there is a red part,
which principally contains the bitter parts: it has been generally reputed as
an earthy and obstructive thing; but, without doubt, it is as necessary, as any
part of the Nut, and as little to be rejected: for it is that part, which
fortifies the Stomach, and enables it to bear the oyliness or fattishness of
the rest of the Chocolata-potion: it preserves the taste in its vigor, and the
appetite, which would otherwise be dulled by the fatty potion: and as it helps
digestion in the Stomach; so in the Guts, it promotes Concoction there; and
corroborates them: all which is not to be denied to parts of that relish, as we
experiment daily in herbs of a bitterish taste: nor need we to fear its
costiveness; for, as none ever experimented such an inconvenience by taking
good Chocolata, so I think it impossible, it should bind; since it is
fermentation, that we owe each stool to; and it is impossible what promotes
that in the Guts, can ever create a prejudice by too great an adstringency. It
is strange, that all Ages and Countries find it to agree with them, and the
effects of it are such every where, that it alone may seem to supply all food
and Physic. I have heard and read Discourses of Panaceas, and Universal
Medicines: and truly I think Chocolata may as justly at least pretend to that
Title, as any. For indubitably Health is nothing else but an ability to
discharge the several ends, to which Nature has designed us: and this depends
upon the preserving each individual person in the individual constitution,
which Nature has given him. For howbeit, that we propose to our selves the
Idea (conformable to what Polycletus did in another case) of a man exactly
tempered; yet it is not the intent of a Physician to reduce every Patient
thereunto: to the Choleric it is his nature, not disease to be so; and so for
the other complexions: and to subvert the particular temperament, is to
destroy, not to cure: and the attempt will not succeed. To preserve a Man
herein, it is necessary, that his food be such, as digests well, begets good
Blood and Spirits: and that this Blood (in which according to the Scripture is
the life of Animals) be depurated so by the several emunctories, as that it may
qualify the party to exercise those acts, the performance whereof is an
evidence of life; and the well-performance of them, Health. It is natural for
the Blood to purge it self by several ways; and, if that be done, all the
Operations of Life, and the intermissions of any of them, will be according to
Nature. To imagine, that this can be performed by Medicines, is an impertinent
folly: the Blood is more naturally purged by transpiration, and sweat; by
urine, and siege duly discharged; by spittle, and snot; then by any Purges, or
Vomits, or Electuaries, or Phlebotomy. It is not to be done much less by one
Medicine; for though such an Arcanum were in being, as would depurate the
Blood, and revive the decayed ferments of Nature: yet would it require other
circumstances to effect this, as a moderation of Diet, and the six things
non-natural, etc. without which it can do no more on the blood, then the
mixture of barm does to wort; it may be ready to produce a fermentation, but it
will not open a bung-hole, or create vents for the Drink. Frequent Phlebotomy
hastens old Age, besides other inconveniences: frequent Purges are much worse;
for it is usual with Nature, when taught one course to pursue that to the
discontinuing of other evacuations: so that, to teach Nature to disburthen her
self into the Guts, and Stomach, (neither of which are designed for Vehicles or
receptacles of Excrements remaining after digestion, or cast in there by
Nature, but for a continued Concoction, prosecuted by Nature from first to
last) is to teach her to omit her other evacuations, which are as necessary as
going to stool, and (which is more) to accustom her to disburthen her ill
Humors into those parts, the right Tone whereof is that, whereon principally
Health depends.

Let us consider, how our Palate and Taste is disordered by the defluxion or
redundancy of an insipid Salt, or sharp and Vitrioline Humor: let us examine
the like inconveniences, when they befall the Stomach, and by this Analogy
conjecture at the effects, which arise in the Guts upon the like accidents. And
can we think it prudence to use Nature to discharge it self into that Chanel,
so often as we do? View the World, and you will see, that not one of those,
that constantly take purging and opening Diet-drinks; that deal so much in
Pills of Scammony, and other such like Purges; not one of them, but is more or
less Hypochondriacal: whereas those Country People, which sweat, and labor,
enjoy an undisturbed health, strength, and fresh color.

To apply all this, since the nature of Health is such, as I have described it
to be; and that it depends upon such means, as I have specified; it is
undeniable, that there is not any thing hitherto extant in Physic, that may
compare with Chocolata, which is not only money in the Indies, but food, and
Medicine too every where* It yields good nourishment, with this advantage,
(wherein it surpasses all Wines, and Cordial Spirits) that its nourishment is
not only quick, but less dissipable then theirs. It begets such Blood, as
fitly depurates it self by Stool, Urine, Spittle, and Sweat; as ^ have observed
in my self: and consequently there cannot be any thing more apt to preserve
Health, and vigor of Spirit. ^ must profess it to be the Assertion of the
Indian Writers, that it opens Obstructions, provokes Urine, and Sweat. I
dispute not its temperament, be it hot, or cold, or impervestigable: but I
shall tell my own Experiments, consonant to the Indian Discourses. I never
could find any such effects, when I took it mixed with eggs, or milk: and
indeed I like not much either of those ways, since the Nut there seems to
differ much from it self, when prepared alone; as I observed in the dressing of
it with the Yolk: and the same I have observed with the white, when commix'd
the ordinary way; though I must needs say, that I have so put in, and milled
the whole egg, that the whites have never curdled, though it has been heated
twice. But, to pursue my inquiry into the truth of the Indian assertion, I
prepared it the Indian and Spanish way, and walking upon it, I felt my self to
be seized with a gentle sweat, or moisture, and moderately to purge by Urine,
and to expectorate: and this I find constantly to befall me, if I take it so:
and it less offends the Stomach, and refreshes more* then any other way. Having
been lately at a Fish-diner, I found my self not well after it; Coffee gave me
no ease: but rather increased the Distemper; till I forced my self to vomit
several times: having done so, I went to bed (it being night) and drunk a large
draught of hot Chocolata, prepared the Indian and Spanish way, and I suddenly
fell into a sleep, and sweat: and so continued all night-long, and found my
self perfectly well in the Morning. This effect seemed more strange, because
many think Chocolata to oppose sleep, but I found my repose then very sudden,
and lengthened at least three hours beyond what I usually take. Since that, I
have sundry times taken it that way, going to bed, and I have found it no way
to prevent sleep: nay, I never sleep better, then when I take it: and therefore
I am ready to give this Reason for Mr. Gage's taking it, as often as he was to
fit up; not to keep him awake, but to preserve his Spirits, which in the Indies
need a frequent supply of food. Or it may be said, Since sleepiness, and
natural sleep are tow things, that Chocolata may allay splenetique fumes, and
drowsiness, and yet promote natural sleep.

And as Chocolata provokes other Evacuations thorough the several Emunctories
of the body, so it does that of Seed, and becomes provocative to lust upon no
other account, then that it begets good Blood; that nourishes much, and, as it
nourishes, separates the already inexistent superfluities; or varies, and
degenerates into new Excrements, which are to be discharged out of the body by
their several passages, one whereof are the Spermatick vessels. If I do call
the Seed an excrement, I am sure I have Aristotle's authority for it: which
will make it the less a Paradox to the vulgar; whilst others Vide Prosper.
Alpin. Medic. method. lib. 11. cap. 13.
concur with me herein, who by Excrement understand nothing, but quod Nature a
excernere decreverat, what Nature intended to excern: and that the Seed is such
a thing, is undeniable, I think. The use of Venery is as natural, as for a Man
to blow his nose: though not so lawful every way; since even simple
Fornication is prohibited the Act. 15. 29.
Gentiles with as strict necessity, as the eating of blood, and things
strangled: And however aftertimes have absolved themselves from the necessity,
which prohibited the latter, by eating strangled Rabbets, and black-Puddings:
yet have few or no Divines attempted the former, or alleviated it: howbeit that
***

Petron. De vict. Romans lib. 5. cap. 1. Prosper. Alpin. Med. method. lib. 3.
cap. 6.
And it is an unquestionable Experiment, that moderate Venery eases the Chest,
revives the Brain, impinguates the Body, and cures or contributes much to the
cure of many Diseases in both Sexes: it is admirably effectual in hot
Distempers, and madness of the Brain in young unmarried folks; as I have seen,
both in Maniacks, and Melancholicks, whose Cure has been more facilitated
hereby, if not totally effected, then by repeated Phlebotomy, and extenuating
Diet, and Potions, or Electuaries. Yea, I have known a Chronical Tertian break
in the Spring by a Critical solution of this nature: which, however it may seem
incredible, is I am sure true; nor had the Party ever before experimented those
pollutions; but he did instantly recover, and was so far from being debilitated
with a large Critical eruption, that he was beyond belief at that very time
refreshed, and strengthened in his Spirits. I shall not insist upon the benefit
Women receive ^hereby: though I could recite an infinity of Cases out of the
Physicians for Nunneries, that might be considerable herein; their Hysterical
fits, Hypochondriacal-melancholy, Love-melancholy, Atrophy, their Spermatical
Fevers (related by Sinibaldus in his Geneanthropia) are instances of the
necessity hereof: and then the great prudence of Moses, who, if he severely
prohibited, that there should be no Whore amongst the Daughters of Israel, he
took great care for their timely marriage. As for Men, I have known many, who,
being absent from their Wives but a few days, would be troubled with a smelling
of the Testicles, or an unusual paleness, and stupi^^^^ of Brain seizing on
them, who would find a constant and infallible Cure again in the embraces of
their Wives. Nor is this passage designed by Nature alone for the evacuation of
the Seed: I have showed how a Chronical Tertian critically did break that way;
and many other eruptions happen that way, then are Seminal. I mention not the
virulent Gonorrhaea; but intend other Pollutions, and Ejections, which are
recorded in the books of the Roman Casuists, especially^ Gerson de pollutione
nocturna. And, if I be thought immodest in this Discourse, I am sure the
Chancellor of Paris is never named (no not by Protestants) but with honor,
notwithstanding what he has writ; and there are Passages in the Bible, that
retrench, as much upon Civility, as any thing, that has fallen from my pen:
and I treat of nothing, but what is as much included within my Profession, as
within the Subject of Casuists; and why should I be more blamed? Is it not one
of the ends of Marriage to prevent burning? yea, is not this the principal
Argument insisted on by the Protestants in the behalf of a married Clergy?****

Let us then take it for a certain Position, that What yields the best Blood,
and promotes all natural expurgations, is the best of Food, and Physic. And
that Chocolata is such, appears by what I have already said. I cannot allow it
to be Provocative upon any other account: (if it be prepared without any
lust-full Ingredients) and it has this advantage above the most substantial
Butcher's meat (the taking whereof with cheerfulness, and manly exercises, is
the best Venereal preparation) that it allays, with its mild and vegetable
Oiliness, the sharpness of the Blood, and Nervous Liquour, which the animal
Sulphureousness of the other does not. There can be no Universal Prescript for
the promoting seminal Excretions: yet, since it is a part of Physical
Institutions, and treated on by every Englished Institutionist, I shall enlarge
thereon, for the benefit of the married: which is a justification always
sufficient for these kind of Discourses.

I take it for granted, that there is a particular ferment implanted in the
Testicles, and Seminal parts adjacent, whose Nature it is, after that it has
lain digesting, and maturing for so many years ( viz. twelve in Females, and
fourteen in Males; more, or less, according to the individual temperament) then
to exert it self, and to vigorate the Blood, so as the whole body, as well as
voice, suffers a great change: the Aspect becomes more lively, and cheerful,
their Wits more ripe, their Carriage more debonair, their Nerves more agile: in
fine, I may here accommodate, as to the age beginning to be qualified for
thoughts of Love* what the Comedian said concerning Love it self, Ade^ne ex
amore quenquam immutarier,
Vt non cognosces eundem esse?


This Seminal ferment in i^s first operations does only impregnate the Blood,
and nervous liquour, circulating, and passing through those places, in which it
resides, with a new and unspeakable vigor, and sprightliness, without
occasioning any excretion, or seminal congestion in the Testicles, or prostate,
but inclining to erect: for the operation of each ferment has its time, and
requires a determinate Subject to operate on. Thus Lads have Venereal
prol^sions* yet without emission; because the Seminal ferment does enlive^
their Blood, without any separating of seed thence: for the Blood, and
proportionably the Liquor of the Nerves, is not of the same nature in
Striplings, as it is in men of fuller growth; there being in the former a great
deal of Phlegm with a small quantity of Spirit, and vol^til Salt, whereas the
latter is of a much different nature: and consequently, the effects of the
Ferment are not so powerful in the former, as in the latter.

From this Consideration it is easy to find out a reason, why Striplings are
longer before they eject, then others, and yield not so much pleasure to the
Female they embrace. Their Seed being without doubt clogged with Phlegm, which
does more slowly issue out, and, for want of Salt, and Spirit, does not so
affect the Womb, that receives it, as does that of a grown man: and this is the
reason, that one man differs from another in the pleasure arising from his
embraces* and a Woman, accustomed to the Society of one Husband, may either not
love him, or prefer another, with more excuse, then the vulgar allow, or
apprehend: there being a very great resemblance betwixt the Womb, and the
Stomach, and as great a possibility, that the one is capable of loathing some
-- as well as the other may do some Meats: and of this, as to the variety and
difference betwixt Woman and Woman, or betwixt the same Woman at one time, and
at another, I have been assured by Men of great Experience, as also by sundry
eminent Writers, as Vlmus, Campanella, and Sinibaldus: and Martial many times
insinuates it.

Whilst it is not natural for this Seminal ferment to act, so long the Blood
needs no such evacuation; and the attempts of it are prejudicial to the Health,
untimely Venery hastening old age: but, when the Blood and Nervous Liquor
becomes acrimoniou^ thorough the abundance of Spirit, and Salt, and that it is
impregnated by the Seminal ferment, as water passing thorough Minerals: then it
is natural for it to depurate it self by a separation of Seed in and about the
Testicles: and that, being separated there, is not reimbibed into the Vessels
again usually, (for in some Cases I believe it to be) but it will force its way
out in nocturnal pollutions, or create perpetual inclinations to lust; or, in
part remixing with the Blood, after it has been long extravasated, it begets
redness and Pimples in the face, acrimony of Blood, Sputation, Oppressions of
the Chest, Palpitations of the Heart, furliness of Humor, disturbed Sleeps,
Headaches, a peculiar Distemper in the Brain, as (together with its Cure) is
more evident to Vide Prosper. Alpin. lib. 3. Med. Method. cap. 6.
sense, then to be expressed by language.

This is the nature of Man, who in Paradise was to increase, and multiply; and
by the fall his Nature was d^bilitated, not lost* In his book Aug. de civit.
Dei lib. 4. cap. 23. and 24. The whole Passage, being too large to insert here,
is put in at the end of the book; to illustrate the effects of Adam's fall; and
as an Apology for this Discourse against severe Censurers.
concerning the City of God it is avowed by St. Austin, that Adam in Paradise,
before the fall, could have erected at pleasure, and that the motions of the
flesh were so perfectly subordinate to his will, that he could as easily have
moved his -- as his hand; a constant vigor and immortality of spirits
attending him, and being entailed on him, whilst he continued in that
condition: but, since the fall of Adam, those amorous inclinations are less
constant to men, and depend upon other circumstances, then the dictates of his
Will. The effects of Grace bestowed on Adam are endeavored to be supplied
(where youth, or Nature fails; the efforts whereof are infinitely short of the
pleasures of Paradise) by Salt, or Spiced meats, Cullises, and Iellies. But
neither A^choves, or Bononia-sawsages; no Preparations of Cock or Lamb-stones,
or Diasatyrion equal that primitive condition: nor do the Fruits in Iamaica
called Cushu equal the feeding of the tree of Life, as to this point. Some are
provocative only by producing a strong and well-digested nourishment. Thus
solid and substantial Butcher's meat, and the like, are the only lustful
sustenance to a good constitution, and strong body, inured to vigorous
Exercises: for the performances of the bed are not created therein. Ease and
soft-lying do but effeminate the body, and they become unable to concoct strong
meats: and the Seed becomes worse-digested, and, as I may call it,
worse-relished for the Gusto of the Womb; I hope the Presbyterians will
consider this, and no longer condemn the Chocolata drinkers for Luxury, and
Venereal inclinations: since it seems manifest, that there is no Venereal
projects like to your constant Diet: viz. a Cawdle in a morning, mild, but
hearty* a diner of solid meats, a good Sack-posset with Eggs and mild Spice,
at night; and all day a moderation in drink, and exercise.
the erection is less vigorous, and the spirituascency of the seed little; and
the ejaculation too sudden, weak and improportionate to the ardours, and
desires, and expectation too of the Female Paramour. The Nourishment, that
arises from substantial meats, and of full growth, is less dissipable, and
more impregnated with animal Salt, then the young, tender flesh, or liquid
sups: they require and preserve a strong Stomach; which lighter meats do not:
and exercise depurates the Blood, separating out the several excrements by
distinct emunctories, whereby the Blood is better concocted, and capable to
yield a more vigorous Seed, and to bear its ejection more easily, then
otherwise it would. The Nerves and Muscles are more tense and strong; the Pulse
is more full and strong after waking, then in the sleep: and every Man
experiments the truth hereof in himself. To a good Constitution if you give
Wine, Spiced-drinks, or other Delicacies, or Luxurious provocations, you
destroy his Stomach, and debilitate him. These Incentives are only for the
Phlegmatic. The others (especially the more hot) are more provoked by cooling
things, and what fixes rather, then heightens the Spirits. Thus Rachel purchase
Mandrakes for Jacob. Thus the amorous and Martial Turk drinks Opium, and
Shirbet, to continue his lust, as well as strength: and however the generality
prefer the yolks of Eggs, the most observing Vide Petron. De vict. Roman. lib.
3. cap. 19. De ovis, and lib. 5. cap. 16. Qui etiam ad sobolem procreandam
majore irritamento, plurique semine indigent, hos and efficacius and suavius
concubituros, si prius, quam uxorem ineant, ferculum ex lacte ^v^rum, quae
tremula nuncupantur, cum pane recenti, quemadmodum lac ipsum comeditur, ^riduum
quatriduumve mane and vesperi ante cibum assumpserint. Neque in hoc casu
praesidium aliud ullum huic par esse, sive pipiones cum vino rubro, cum
Aromatibus, sive Diasatyrion in medium adduxreis.
Petronaus, and others, who have tried it, bid me say, there is not any thing
in Art, that equals the white of an Egg mixed with some temperate Cordial
emulsion, or beaten with Rose Water, and mixed cautelously (to prevent
Curdling) with some streined water gruel, or the like, and sweetened with
Sugar. And being prepared this last way (or with Rose-mary-Posset-drink) it is
an excellent thing for any Cold, or for a weary Traveller, causing him to rest
well, and reliveing his strength, so as to diminish or take away all
wearisomness occasioned by hard travail. Others will be the more inclined to
this Opinion not by trial, but common reason: it being the White, out of which
the Chick is shaped; the Yolk being entire, when the Chick is almost ready to
hatch. It is an albugineo^s substance, out of which we are created, and fed in
the Womb: and the Seed ejected has a more then ordinary resemblance, in its
color, consistence, and spirituascency, to the white of an Egg. Besides, it is
the white of an Egg, which makes the bread, cakes, etc. to be light; your Yolks
commix'd make them heavy: the one allays all acrimony of Humors; the other
increases Choler, and augments the evil Humors in the Stomach by being easily
depraved. In sum, I think it can hardly be imagined, that the Yolks of Eggs be
good food; since the taste of them upon the Stomach, after the eating of other
meat, is a sign of ill-digestion. And indeed the taking of the aforesaid
Preparation of Whites of Eggs is never more necessary, then after those amorous
conflicts; when the Nerves and Blood are weakened by the late effusion, and the
vigorous performance of those Venereal Exercises, in which the whole body
suffers a very great agitation, and the Sinews a tension answerable to the
stretching of a chord; the whole Blood boils, and the Brain labors
proportionable to the passion of the Inamorato: who, if he be not of too hot a
Complexion, exchangeth those transports, and pleasing languours, which conclude
these dalliances, for a delightful slumber; but, if he be of a more Choleric,
or hot constitution, the disorders of his Blood survive his delights, and
diminish them much by rendering him Melancholy, or peevish, and either
immediately, or not long after creating him an head-ac^, which is not allayed
but by the next night's repose. To prevent this, our wise forefathers in
England made it a custom each Wedding-night to provide a Sack-posset with Eggs
for the Bridegroom to eat of, going to bed; and also to stand by him all
night, that he might eat of it, as often as he pleased, to recruit his Spirits.
I should recommend the like practice (either mixing his whites of Eggs with
gruel, or Sack, or Sack-posset-drink; and omitting, or lessening the yolks) to
every Lover, as often as he is engaged, taking of it immediately after he has
ended his sport: whereby he will (provided it be not too thick) prevent the
inconveniences of the past conflict, and be enabled for another. I cannot rely
upon my own experience in any part of these amorous Discourses, and
Observations: but I owe it all to the acquaintance I have had with Persons, the
vigor of whose Spirits, as it made them learned and eminent Philosophers, so
it did incline them to render to love. It being observed by the Marquess
Malvezzi, that Men of great parts are not chaste by Nature, but Grace or
Prudence makes them to be so. But, as to the taking of the white of an Egg in
gruel at night, I have for some years scarce used any other Suppe^: and I find
it to refresh my Spirits, which are taken up with perpetual contemplations, and
to allay all ardours of the Blood, and vapors, whose acrimony might disturb my
rest, and to remove all weariness occasioned by study, or travail.
As for Chocolata, how effectual it may be herein, I understand not by
experience: but, since the most amorous Nations in the World drink it, it is
very possible, it may conduce thereunto much. If it be the design of Physic to
preserve Nature, and free her from superfluous collections of Humors; and
nothing does that better then Chocolata, as far as Venery is but the Collection
and ^jection of a superfluity gathered in, and about the Testicles: without
doubt Physicians cannot decline to recommend it. It chears the Spirits, begets
good Blood, and opens all the Emunctories of the body, and passages, by which
Nature designs the ejectment of some particular Humor. And this is to be
understood of the Cacao-paste, and mild Compositions of Chocolata, in which
there is nothing, that does beget a particular fusion in the Blood, and a
titillation inclining a man to Venery beyond the natural disposition of the
Person.

What I have hitherto spoken had no further intent, then the support of that
Nature, which God gave us, and which, as I have showed out of St. Austin, has
been much impaired by the fall. I know many will be apt to censure this
Discourse, as tending to sensuality, and the upholding carnal lusts and
desires: but I suppose the more prudent will acquit me from any such
imputation; since that is not the use, but abuse of Chocolata, and is common to
it with all other meats of good nourishment: against which I do not hear them
so to declaim, as to interdict them totally. I am not ignorant, that there is a
Doctrine of Mortification, and that we ought to suppress carnal lusts: but I am
to learn, that this is to be understood literally; and that we must geld our
selves like Origin, or Chastise our selves with the Papists, and not understand
all those Doctrines spiritually, and like good Protestants, defying the
exercises falsely called Spiritual by the Popish Friars, and Jesuits, who
practice this literal Mortification: whilst we imagine that carnality may be
subdued by other means, captivating the Understanding into the obedience of
Faith, and subduing our wills, not breaking our backs; and denying our lusts,
whilst we preserve a Nature and temperament given us by God. I expect the
greatest censure from those, who disclaim Fasting-days, and Ember-weeks; who
keep Lent with Capon, Sack and roast Beef; which is their Luxury: and what they
condemn in others is but a different and less solid Luxury, then what they
pursue.

I am not any way disposed to instruct Men in evil, and would not seem to
encourage them therein: and, to evidence this, I shall now speak concerning the
more compound Chocolatas, which are made, or used on purpose to augment
Venereous inclinations. The things usually designed to exstimulate Nature to
excessive Venery are very hot, and Aromatical, and which also carry with them
an acrimony, or saltness, wherewith they continually excite Nature; which being
incessantly provoked thereby casts out whatever is next, whether it be well or
ill-concocted Seed, or Phlegm, or Blood impregnated with a saliness. It is not
heat alone in meats, that does it: for the effect of Cloves, Cinnamom, and
Nutmegs, or Mace is not equivalent to that of Pepper, or Salt, and Saltmeats.
These last operate by introducing a momentany or lasting saltness, or acrimony
in the Blood, which, as it circulates thorough each part, makes different
impressions, according to the different Nature, or indisposition of the part.
And, if any disease introduce any acrimony or Saltness into the Blood, the same
Persons will be much inclined to Venery, thus those, who have the Itch, and
Leprosy, as also the Melancholic Persons are exceeding amorous; however the
last bear those evacuations very ill; and the lying long, and on soft beds, and
living idly, does render Men lascivious; but these are not natural, but morbid
inclinations, and therefore are neither executed with that activity, nor has
their seed that relish, or gusto in the Womb of the Feminine consort, that
attends vigorous and active Men. For ease and idleness retard transpiration:
and those Humors, which should issue out according to the several intents, and
passages of Nature, being retained, or resumed into the Blood again, introduce
an acrimony into it, whereby Nature is exstimulated to an ineffectual Venery.
Thus, after long Agues, or the recovery out of Chronical Diseases, a salacity
possesses the Patient, which as it arises from no other cause, then I have
already specified; so it is prejudicial to the Person he embraces, for hereby
Diseases are transplanted oftentimes, as the Pocks, and Consumptions: or new
ones introduced, of which the poor woman is not apprehensive, being ignorant of
this cause lying in the constitution of the seed of her Husband newly
recovered, or newly having filled his Veins with acrimony, or saline humor,
occasioned by some late entertainment. And when I consider seriously the
multiplicity of Distempers, which affect our English Ladies, so as that such as
were very healthy Virgins, become very sickly and infirm Wives, and some
recover again as soon as they are Widows, I cannot but think that many of their
Diseases may arise from the seed, which their Husbands inject, and are fomented
so thereby, that all Physic becomes unsuccesfull, because they do not totally
refrain each other's Bed. I am very confident of this Opinion of mine, that it
is true: because several have assured me of a great discrepancy they could feel
in the seed of their Husbands at several times, and that they were variously
affected thereupon.

I shall evidence this by a notable History of Laurentius Hofmannus, De usu and
abusu Medic. Chym. page 124. Et ego ipse nobile par conjugum mirabili morbo
afflictum vidi, quos hoc ipso [sc. Mercurio vitae] feliciter curavi. Casum
itaque hunc mirabilem, and vix auditum, lubet apponere. Quotiescunque maritus
rem cum uxore juvencula formosissima habere cuperet, maxim haec trepidabat,
concubitumque illius reformidabat, pr^ pterea quod plerumque, post seminis
masculini, calidissimi, and foetidissimi, effusionem, exanimis in thoro
j^ceret: foetor enim seminis adeo abominabilis fuit, ut fere semper post coitum
in animi deliquium inciderit. Interim tamen quinque annorum spatio decies
concepit, and molas, vel (...) peperit. In consilium itaque vocatus, Mercurium
vitae marito, uxori vero alia convenientia exhibui remedia; quibus Deus ita
benedixerat, ut non tantum magna cum dulcedine nobilissimi conjuges deinceps
amoris poma^ decerperent, sed etiam anno sequenti parents audirent. That is, I
knew a noble married couple troubled with a strange sort of Indisposition, whom
I successfully cured with Mercurius vitae. I shall report the Case, it being
rare, and unheard of. As often as ever the Husband conjugally embraced his
Wife, which was a Person of extraordinary beauty, and youth, she used to
shiver, and tremble, and feared nothing so much as his amors: because that for
the most part, after that she had received into her womb the seed of her
Husband, which was very hot, and of a most stinking scent, she used to swoon
away: for so abominably noysom was the seed of her Husband, that it was no
sooner injected, but it caused faintings and swoonings in her: yet did she
conceive, and miscarry ten times in the space of five years. Being demanded my
advice, I gave the Husband Mercurius vitae, and to the Wife other suitable
remedies, which had so great an effect, by God's blessing, that the two Noble
Personages did enjoy each other with a great deal of pleasure, and she brought
forth a living child the following year.

Nor is this repugnant to what we daily observe in uterine injections, which
differently operate according to the different Ingredients, and Qualities. And
if it be so herein, how much more ought we to allow the truth hereof in Seminal
injections, which as they are injected, as are the former, so they are received
with much more ardour, the conflux of Spirits thither occasioning a greater
tension and heat there at that time, so that the contagion pierces deeper; as
Infection is sooner caught by the hot, and sweating (the pores being open) then
by the cold, and chill.

Lest the Women hereby should upbraid the Men, and boast the hazards they run
by Marriage: I must crave leave to tell you, that there is as great variety in
their Sex, as in ours; and that every one, that wears a Petticoat, is not
capable, nor merits the affection of a Man, how beautiful soever she may be:
nay, commonly it may be said, that the fairest Persons (where a mixture of
white and red accomplishes the face) and the best shaped are fitter for
Mistresses, then Wives, and yield a more pleasing entertainment in a Balcony,
or Coach, then Bed. I shall not allege the Reasons, though they are
irrefragable: but only add, that it were easy to write an Apology for those,
who, having married such, continue not their affections beyond the first
month, or year. It is for such that the Proverb of Hony-moon was designed: and
if any can continue a long affection for such, either the Man is extraordinary
good, or cautious, or the Woman extraordinary cunning; or else he is a Novice,
who, having no experience of the Sex, imagines all to be as his Wife is; as
that Roman Dame supposed all Men's breath to stink (she having never kissed
any else) because her Husband's did so. I could here enlarge upon the Reasons,
why a Man may love eagerly and constantly a deformed Person to the prejudice of
a beauteous Lady, and assert the commendation of Ronsard to Pasithea, or the
Queen of Navarre, whom he represents to be Of Complexion rather brown, then
fair. With which agrees the choice of Solomon in the Canticles: I am black, but
lovely. But I shall only add, that it is an undeniable thing, That there is not
that Variety, or certainty of Accidents, that befall a Man, so as to render his
Embraces distasteful, or fatal (excepting the French Pox) to any Woman, that
there is in most Women, to render them unfitting, or unworthy the Embraces of a
Man: so great an alteration does Age, Childbearing, Sickness, and the like,
introduce into the Womb, as to its Natural Make, or Original Ferment. Nor are
Men either to be separated for the reality of their applications, and
professions, before marriage; because they live not up to them, after it: or to
be censured so bitterly for inconstancy; because they persist not in their
first Affection, and Declarations: for perhaps the beautiful Lady is changed;
or did by Surrender acquaint him with Discoveries he knew not before, nor could
make: and therefore, if he proceeded by that Rule, which his sight and utmost
enquiry gave him, he acted as well as Man could; but he still might be deceived
in the Conclusion: but that, being deceived, and knowing himself to be so, he
should act, and comport himself as if he were not so, is a constraint every
Man's Spirit cannot submit to: and therefore it is to be excused, as well as
the principal frailties, whereunto Humane Nature is liable.

The truth of what has been already said being granted, I shall suggest two
Conclusions therefrom, which I think inevitably do follow: viz.

1. If it be true, that the collection and ejection of Seed in Man, (or Woman)
is a natural act, arising from the Blood depurating it self, and the Ferment of
the generative parts particularly operating upon the Blood; then ought they no
more to be forced, then those other natural Exreetions are, of Snot, Spittle,
Urine, etc. which we do not promote, but when their deficiency is, or may be
troublesome: nor do we evacuate, but when we are sensible of their redundancy.

2. If it be true, that there is a great discrepancy not only betwixt the Seed
of one Man and another, but betwixt the Seed of the same Man at one time, and
another; which is occasioned as well by the Food, and Physic he takes, as by
alteration of Age, or Sickness: it is then very considerable what Provocatives
a Man takes, or a Woman gives to provoke lust, or conjugal desires, lest the
Nature of the Seed be depraved, and the Woman incurr harm thereby.

It likewise concerns the Woman to have a particular regard to her self, that
she may with equal ardours meet the embraces of her Husband: she must know,
that to retain his affection more is necessary then solemn promises, and
joining of hands in the Church, or the continuing of her beautiful aspect and
shape; these may acquire, and fix a Servant, but not an Husband: she must
therefore take care, that her Blood be every way sufficiently depurated, upon
which depends the Vigor of Body, and Mind; to the effecting whereof more is
requisite, then I can now propose.

Active Complexions are only to be preserved what they are: all forcing
destroys them. These therefore must have a mild and temperate sort of
Chocolata; not enriched with any sort of Pepper, but that of Iamaica, nor any
other Spice, then of the West-Indy growth. They need not natural heat; and the
aforesaid Composition will sufficiently enliven them: but, if any debility of
Stomach, or accidental weakness befall them, they may vigorate the Chocolata
with a glass of good Canary, or old Malaga-Sack, when they mill it up; or take
a more rich sort, but yet short of those hot and fiery Compounds used by the
Spaniards. The Phlegmatic Tempers, if also abounding with ill Humors, must
take Chocolata cautiously at first: premising a Purge, and taking some gentle
Lenitive once in six or eight days; left it beget too great a fusion of Humors
in his body: and he must begin with mild Chocolata, and after take richer and
more effectual Compositions. Nature endures not violent and sudden changes. I
once had a Woman came to me to complain of the unactiveness of her Husband; who
was, to see to, a lusty able Man, but Phlegmatic, and of ^ muddy aspect, as if
Cacochymical: she desiring of me some powerful Electuary to add courage and
life to him: I prescribed her one agreeable to what Vanninus in his Dialogues
recommends; not doubting, but he would propose the most effectual in that kind,
Leachery being his greatest Moral vice. He had not taken it many times, but it
created in him desires altogether unusual; but, in the midst of his and his
Wive's delight, he fell into a sudden fit of an Asthma, which had almost ended
his days.

In reference to both these Considerations perhaps it is, that in Italy they
now condemn Chocolata, if we may believe Oritur Aspermia ob rerum impense
calidarum usum, quae semen, and succos, e quibus prodit exsiccant, and
exhauriunt; ut ruta, mentha, camphora, and alia id genus malefi^a naturalia:
quibus addi potest nova illa forbitio, ex calidissimis herbis ab Indis parata,
quam vocant Chocolate. Haec enim Seminalem succum arefa^it adeo, ut qui illam
frequentant, brevi tempore aspermati fiant. Sinibald. Geneanthrop. lib. 15. tr.
1. cap. 20.
Sinibaldus; because it was found so Provocative, that in a little time it
rendered the Men impotent: like those Plauts, which, if they be suffered to run
to Seed, die that year. But those Italians know no Chocolata, but what is of the
Spanish-make, and abounding with Chilli, or red Pepper.

I shall speak no more concerning the use of Chocolata, then as it is
prescribed in Hypochondriacal Melancholy: because that this does merit a
particular enquiry; for sundry do commend it therein. Paulus Zacchias in his
Italian Treatise of Hypochondriacal Melancholy mentions it, and says, It is
not to be allowed in that Distemper, but with a great deal of judgment: since
he cannot believe, but it is rather hot, then temperate. And Piso says, he
knew none in Holland to receive hurt by the use of Chocolata, but such, as were
troubled with Hypochondriacal heats: from whence we may collect, that, in his
judgment, it could not be allowed them. Yet I have known learned Men here in
England prescribe it in the Case aforesaid. I shall, with submission to better
Judgments, solve the Question by distinguishing the several Compositions of
Chocolata, and accommodating them to the Disease controverted. In
Hypochondriacal Melancholy we are to consider how there are great Obstructions
in the Mesa^aical Veins, and Chyliferous Vessels, so that no other Chyle is
distributed into the Body, but what is apt upon the least occasion to ferment,
and boil: which as it is perceivable by the Patient in the whole Body, so the
multitude of Arteries in the Spleen, and its communion with the Stomach (by
what ways I enquire not, but the Communion is undeniable) make it primarily and
most evidently perceivable there. There is also a Debility of the Stomach,
which is so relaxed, that it neither digests the Food received, well; nor emits
it, being digested: so that it corrupts by long stay in the Stomach, (the Body
being costive in the mean while) and grows sour, and so corrodes the Stomach,
and whatever is ingested, it presently begets a great conflict in the Stomach,
attended with acid vomitings oftentimes, and the whole mass of subtle and sharp
Blood is likewise affected, and put into heat and disorder, especially the
Hypochondria thereupon. Thus they ar^ never well, full, nor fasting; and pine
away, complaining of a weak Stomach: which the Italian and Spanish Galenists
considering, thought the Disease to proceed from a cold Stomach, and not from
an Aqua Stygia, or the like Menstruum in the Stomach, made up of the several
Salts, and Tartars, extracted out of the different meats eaten, and a redundant
sharp liquour issuing out of the capillary Arteries, and coats of the Stomach,
into the Stomach: for as the blood is in such very serous and sharp, so is the
Humor transuding into the Stomach heigthened in its acrimony, and augmented in
its quantity beyond measure. Now, the Question is to be understood, praemissis
generalibus, general Purgings being d^ely premised, and opening Physic
administered. And in this Case I answer, That hot-spiced Chocolata (and
especially what has black, long, or red Pepper in it, whose Nature it is to
create an acrimony, as well as to heat the Blood) cannot agree with the
Stomach; because they will more heat and inflame the Blood, then is tolerable:
and this is confirmed by the experience of Piso. But, as for mild and
temperate Chocolata, I doubt not, but such a sort might be made, as would
exactly suit the Disease, and contribute much to the recovery, being given in
water, not mixed with milk, or eggs; but given the Spanish and Indian fashion:
and the water it self being such a water, as will not stay in the Stomach, but
pass immediately into the Blood, and void it self by Urine. To confirm my
Opinion, do but consider the Nature of the Cacao-nut, and paste: it is very
nourishing, it allays vapors and ebullitions of the Blood; it is not apt to
sour (as gruels, and broths of meat, or China-root instantly will) and it
keeps the Body soluble, and moderately purges by Urine. All which Indications
we are to aim at in the Cure of this Disease. It also corroborateth the Stomach
by its adstriction, it allayeth the sour Humor by its unctuousness (which
floats not on the top, but accurately commixes with the liquour) and its
bitterishness, then which there is not any thing else more grateful to a weak
Stomach. Add to these Considerations, that Chocolata is a liquour, and that the
Cure of Hypochondriacks depends upon humectation (seeing that Melancholici, si
been humectantur, been curantur) and there is not any thing can occasion a
scruple, but the addition of Sugar: which how far it may agree, is to be
determined by Experience, since otherwise it will be condemned by Reason. But,
should it not agree, the Cacao-paste may be prepared for Persons deeply
Hypochondriacal without Sugar, or Spice, except a few Anise-seeds, and powder
of Santals, or Sassafras, and dissolved, upon occasion, together with some
Bez^ar, or any other Stomachical Preparation of Antimony, or whatever will
saturate that esurive Humor upon the Stomach, and open Obstructions. Being
thus given, I cannot imagine, but it must be a very effectual contrivance for
the desperate Hypochondriacks, being regulated by a diligent Physician, and an
observant Patient: without which it is impossible to effect that Cure; which is
tedious, and requires circumspection, and variety of remedies to carry it on.
As for those, who are afflicted with that Distemper, I suppose a mild sort o^
Chocolata, with a mixture of Spice, and Sugar, may agree very well.

The other Virtues of Chocolata in Hysterical fits, and Asthmas, or
Consumptions, I I have not time to in^ist on: from what I have said, and shall
say about the way of using Chocolata, any Physician will be able to collect how
it is, or may be used in such like Cases.

Concerning the variety of Ingredients in Chocolata, and the several frauds in
making it up, I have already spoken so much, as I need not to enlarge again:
only as to the Addition of Achiote, I hear the use of it is condemned by one of
our most learned Physicians, as being prejudicial to the Head. I could never
yet hear what Motives he had for that Opinion of his: for in all the Indian
Writers I do not remember any such thing; I have already represented their
Testimony, and that is the voice of Experience in Comprobation of the use of
it. I never found any inconvenience by the use of Achiote (which is an
Ingredient in my ordinary and royal Chocolata) nor do I hear of any, that does.
I would rather adventure to recommend the use of Achiote, since, without
heating, it does powerfully attenuate all gross Humors, (and the Blood of us
Northern People is more gross, and less fusile, then that of the Spaniards, or
Indians, and we are prone to Coughs, stoppings of the Chest, and Asthmas, by
reason of our gross feeding, and the thickness of the Blood, whereby it is apt
to obstruct the Lungs) and since it does make the Chocolata to agree better
with the Stomach, then otherwise it would. I have faithfully declared already
the judgment of several Writers concerning Achiote. It is generally put into
Chocolata by the Indians, and Spaniards, and Portugheses; and that none should
ever observe in it a particular repugnancy to the Brain, or a quality, that
might give ground for such a surmise (which I cannot by my taste) is very
strange: and how probable the thing is, let others judge.

Since the writing of the aforesaid Passage I have received the complaints of a
fair Lady, who thinks, that taking of my common Chocolata with Achiote in it,
the Headache (whereunto she is Naturally, as well as by her condition of being
with Child, prone) is increased; and that it does create a more then usual
heat in her Face, and Body; and indeed I my self, taking for sundry days of the
same Chocolata, found, that, taken in Paste, or liquour, it did cause in my
Stomach and Body a greater and particular heat, which before I never felt. To
find out the cause of this Accident, I examined the Person, that made it up,
and I found, he had varyed his Achiote, and used a new parcel, (which to me
seemed not so good) which in the same weight did yield a deeper color by far,
and occasioned, as I thought, the aforesaid Case, which did not happen when I
used another sort, which to me seemed more pure, then the last used. But I did
further observe, that the Chocolata complained of did promote Expectoration
beyond any other, I ever took to eat, or drank: so that I conceive, in Case of
Asthmas, and stuffings from Phlegm, such a sort of Chocolata might agree well.
As to the heat of Achiote it self, I could not perceive any more in the last,
then in the other; nay, I must profess, I think, that five Grains of the said
Achiote, taken by it self, did not so much heat me, (nay, it did not cause in
me any sense of heat) as did half a Dram of Chocolata-paste already mentioned:
yet in sixteen Ounces thereof there was but one Scruple. And this Consideration
puts me in mind of the Indian remark, that Achiote (though destitute almost of
Taste, and Smell) does amend the Taste, and Smell, (which it may do, as well as
the heat) of the other Ingredients. And though it be not sensibly hot, yet by
its penetrancy, and the great attenuating faculty it has, it may occasion some
Distempers in the Head, where the Blood is already so attenuated, that it
admits no further Rare faction without indisposing the Head, which (according
to Mechanical Philosophy) must needs receive a greater afflux of Blood, the
thinner it is. In the choice of Achiote I can only give this Rule, that it be
solid, not soft, rather pale-red, then deep, free from seeds, or greenish hulls
within; and not musty. As to the quantity to be put in, I find it is
impossible to determine the proportion, by reason of the variety of Achiote:
but take the Indian Rule, recorded in Ledesma, to put in as much, as will
color it: (and that not deeply) and adhere not to what was prescribed me, viz.
half a Dram in each Pound: which though it proved well in the first Essay I
made for His Majesty, the Achiote being singular; it has since displeased me.

The way, in which I choose to take Chocolata, is sometimes to mix two parts of
water with one of milk, and to dissolve the Chocolate-paste therein with an
Egg: for I care not for milk alone. But most usually I take three quarters of a
pint of good [Conduit] water well-boil'd, and dissolve in it (stirring it
frequently with a Spoon) one ounce of Chocolata, and two ounces of fine Sugar:
having let it stand before a moderate fire to dissolve, when it is so
dissolved, as that the liquour seems very fatty with a yellow fat, and that
there sticks to the spoon an undescribable unctuousness, or oyliness, (however
that the Chocolata be not half dissolved, but that a great part of it still
swim in great stakes, and small parcels, up and down) I proceed to mill it very
well, and then set it to the fire again to dissolve more perfectly: and having,
let it stand a good while (even till it be ready to boil, of near upon it) I
mill it once more with great diligence: and then either drink it alone (which
is the common Indian and Spanish way) or putting in one Egg ( white and yolk)
without ever beating it before breaking it into the water, and immediately
milling it very hard, sometimes playing the molinet (and that most, at first
especially, to break the Egg, and hinder its curdling) on the top of the water,
and sometimes at the bottom. And I have observed, that by this course the
Chocolata (when taken without an Egg) becomes better tasted then otherwise it
would: and, if an Egg be put in, the Chocolata is far better dissolved, and
swims with a greater oil or fat on the top, then if the Egg were put in sooner,
and never so long milled. Nor does the Egg harden, or curdle, if dropped in
whole without beating, but dissolve better (if nimbly milled, and that toward
the top, where the Egg floats at first) then if it were beaten much, and put in
afterward by little and little.

I prepare no more at once, then I drink that time: not that I feel any
offensiveness in what has been once heated, and cold, before it be heated
again for me: but because I find an observable difference betwixt fresh and
old Chocolata-liquour: the Spice evaporating their more subtle parts. But the
discrepancy is not such, as is in Pottage, or Gruel, etc. twice heated: nor do
I know what reason the Spaniards have to prohibit so severely the use of
Chocolata twice heated. I drink it moderately hot, and dip a piece of
diet-bread, Mr. Gage Chap. 15. to begin his journey drinks Chocolatte, and eats
a Maple-bread with a little Conserve: -- and in the some Chapter, that we may
know how hot he drank it, he calls it a scalding cup of his Chocolatte.
or wig, etc. in it. I drink it without proportion, but commonly half a pint,
or more: and this I do twice or thrice in a day (nay, before Diner) with a
sensible refreshment; finding it to ke^p my body soluble enough, as I could
wish; though otherwise I am inclined to costiveness. Sometimes I put in a
spoonful of Orange flower-water; which gives it a most excellent taste, if the
water be good: sometimes (if I am faint with business) I put in a glass of good
Canary, or Malaga-Sack: in which I imitate Vide Lipsium in Elect. Stuckium lib.
3. De Conviviis Mercurialem, etc.
the ancient Romans, who did usually mix their old and well-bodyed Wines with
hot water, which in several houses, called Thermopolia, was kept always ready
for entertainment. And this practice of theirs is asserted by Campanella for
the most wholesome way of drinking Wine. And Costaeus Augen. Epist. t. 3. l. 10.
Ep. 30.
tells us, that for a weak Stomach there is not any thing more profitable, then
a draught of hot Wine; which I have known experimented in England with good
success, not only in the case mentioned, but in sundry Atrophies, and
Consumptions. And Vallesius Valles. Philos. Sacr.
tells us, that, however it be Proverbially said, that Wine is the old Man's
milk, yet is it indigestible, if it be not first heated. I have sometimes
Aromatised it with a few Sassafrass Chips, not unpleasingly. They, who would
put in emulsions, or the like, must dissolve, and mix the Chocolata with less
water, and having milled it well, then put in the emulsion, etc. and mill it
again.

As to the times, whereat I take it; I observe none particularly, besides the
taking of it in a Morning, and Evening: sometimes sooner, sometimes later, as
occasion permits. Nor do I regard the quantity, taking frequently a pint, but
usually above half a pint: eating tosted wig, or diet-bread often with it. What
it may do to others, I know not; but I never found my sleep retarded, or
distu^bed by it: it is possible, some may find it otherwise; for, if Sleep be
a relaxation of the Nerves, and vacation from sense thorough wearisomness of
the Organs, what corroborates Nature, and dispells wearisomness, may (without
its disparagement) retard sleep.

I have often wondered to hear upon how inconsiderable causes many complain;
though they have no occasion to sleep: yet, if they sleep not at certain times,
they entertain strange thoughts of their danger of sickness, and condemn the
occasion of it presently. So, if they eat not flesh at least once or twice a
day, they repute their Stomach to be lost, and imagine they must die: not
regarding, that the end of food is to repair the defects of Nature, and prevent
its decay for the future: and, when we enjoy these ends, we are not to be
solicitous of any particular means further to procure what we already possess.
To Eat, to Drink, to Sleep, were there no need thereof, were folly: and he
makes Reason submit to Custom, or Conceit, who Eats, Drinks, or Sleeps, when he
is sensible, there is no necessity of it; and incurs by a superfluity dangers,
he would avoid. Nizolius, the great Ciceronian, slept not of ten years: others
have watched longer (as you may read in Heurnius De morb* cap. cap. 17.
Heurnius) without prejudice. Several have never drunk, and others have, to
avoid a Dropsy, or the like, for a long time refrained all Drink; and done as
well, or better then others: and the case of Rabbets, Sheep, and sundry Birds,
evidence the possibility of the Ancient and Modern Relations in this case. As
for Eating, except the Maid of Confolans (recited by Citesius) I can hardly
credit any, that have subsisted without that: but without doubt a greater
temperance might be practiced therein, then is used. And, upon the
aforementioned Account, some cry out upon Chocolata, as if it destroyed their
sleep; others, that, taking it, they can eat no Diner after it, it preventing
their appetite thereunto: but, would these people be pleased to think, that
Chocolata feeds more then their Diner, of the loss of which they complain, and
that they are in no danger of dying by hunger, whilst they f^ed hereon, the
formality of eating a se^ Meal would not be insisted on. I must profess, I
never could observe in my self any alteration of my Stomach by drinking
Chocolata in a Morning: and, if any have, it is because their Stomachs are
weak, and that their Diner would not digest well with them, if they had it. Is
it not sufficient, that Chocolata offends not their Stomach? and that their
Blood depurates it self (upon the taking thereof) by Sweat, Urine, Stool, and
Expectoration? Let them but consider, how apt Meat is to corrupt on the
Stomach; how little it agrees with a weak Stomach; and how binding its
remanency, or earthy parts (as they call them) are: since that in Fluxes it is
recommended Vide Alex. Trajan. Petron. De victu Roman.
for an excellent Remedy to give the relics of the meat, out of which all the
strength is Boiled or Pressed in Jellies and Cullices:) and let them see how
much they are hurt by being put by such a Meal.

I shall conclude with this Advise; that however the Chocolata be good; and
that such, as stand i^ need of quick refection, are to be fed with Drinks;
which yield a more speedy nourishment, then others: yet is there Caution to be
used in the taking even of the best: for thus my Spaniard directs, whose
Prescript agrees with my Chocolata Royal almost.

In quantitate hujus potionis sumendae, and vicibus numero repeti^is, est
prudens certe cautio adhibenda: nam, si plus justo, and pluries quam calor
Stomachi ferat, ingeratur, tunc adhuc robusto Stomacho multum negotii facessit,
and vices repetitae onera sunt plenis, and maxim quando non ad tollendam, sed
ad irritandam famem queritur; inde enim pallor, and nervorum cruditate
madentium tremor accidit, and miserabilis ex cruditate macies; inde distentus
venture, and decolor vultus; aliquando vertigines, and capitis dolores, and
forte longa febris, and insuperabiles varicosae obstructiones, unde
Hypochondriaca Melancholia, and ex varia multiplicique cruditate affectus plane
contrarii: iis tamen malis minus erunt obnoxii, qui se non tantis deliciis
solverint; qui sibi prudenter temperantes imperabunt, and Corpora opere and
vero labor exercebunt: hos enim innoxie non tant^m Chocolate, sed cibus
excipiet, qui non nisi esurienti potest plac^re. Necesse est enim, ut ex
discordi cibo morbi contrarii etiam oriantur: and haec nobis hodie unica
videtur ratio, quare in Hypochondriaca Melancholia tam confusae and contraria,
and long inter se dissimilia observentur accidentia; and in plerisque Febribus
ex contrariis naturae partibus, quae in eandem compulsa redundant. Et hanc
propter rationem apud aliquos reor Chocolate noxii opinionem subiisse; non quod
il^ud sui ratione mereatur: quinimo, si temperata frugalitate adsumatur, magnas
utilitates omnes expertum iri, nobis est indubitata fides; neque displicet,
subhac frugalitate, post pran^ium and coenam (maxim moderata) parum de
Chocolate pitissare; ut utroque calore suam digestionem perficiat Stomachus,
and inde facultates roborentur, ac, plerisque impedientibus ablatis, melius
perficiatur coctio: quod te experientia felicius docebit, and moderatio usum
securiorem faciet. (That is,) There ought to be a great caution, and prudence,
used in the number, and quantity of those draughts, we take of Chocolatd; for,
if it be taken in too large a quantity, or too frequently, so as Nature cannot
overcome it, it becomes troublesome even to the most strong Stomachs, and often
usage makes it a burden, especially, if it be taken rather for wantonness,
then necessity, to cause, and not allay hunger: for from this cause happens
Paleness, tremblings, and Palsies of the mo^stened Nerves, and a miserable
leaness occasioned by Crudities; the Belly is distended; the Countenance is
discolored; sometimes Giddiness, and other Aches of the Head, and Chronical
Agues, and Fevers, and insuperable Obstructions in the Varices, as also
Hypochondriacal Melancholy, and Diseases of a different Nature springing of
several Crudities: but such are least obnoxious to these Distempers, as do not
debilitate themselves with Luxury, who command their Appetite, and keep their
Bodies in much exercise; for these may take not only Chocolata, but other
sustenance at any time without danger: no food being good upon a full Stomach;
for from a repugnancy in the meats arises a repugnancy and difference of
Diseases: which is in my judgment the reason, why in Hypochondriacal Melancholy
there is observed such a variety of Accidents, as also in many Fevers, by
reason of the several Heterogeneous parts commixing occasionally together. And
I suppose, that the aforesaid cause moved many to imagine Chocolata to be
somewhat hurtful; not that it really deserved that imputation: for, if it be
moderately used, it is my assured persuasion, that all will find great benefit
thereby. Nor am I against it in them, that practice such moderation, if they
take it after So did Motezuma, as I showed in the beginning out of Bernaldus
del Castillo.
Diner, or Supper (both of them being moderate) that so Nature, having her own
heat augmented by the accessional of Chocolate, may better concoct, and
strengthen the Faculties, and dissipate what might impede digestion^. And this
Experience will teach: and it is no less true, that it is moderation, that
makes it safe to take Chocolata. I shall conclude this Discourse with the
Judgment of the Learned Roblez, Physician in Peru, which is as follows.

The Judgment of Roblez a Licentiate Physician in Peru concerning Cacao, and
Chocolata.
EL Cacao es frio, y seco, de su templansa: y per esto tienen parts
astringentes, con que opila. Esta oi el mas valido de quantas mercadurias oi: y
esta tan adelante, que ai majorasgos fundados sobre sus heredades, de a dies, y
dose mil ducados de orenta. Es el Cacao summamenta alimentoso, por don de hace
dudar de su templansa. El aceito, que sale del, quando se cuesse, es blanco, y
granujado, que mas pareoer manteca. Sacasse tostandole en casuela de barro, y
no es bueno en metal. Muelesse el Cacao en la piedra, y con mano de piedra,
estando calientes ambos, y echa masa, se pone en puchero al fuego, en las
brazas, y en tomando calor sale encima la manteca, y aceite mas rubio que la
llama, y de s^mis^o sabor: ass^ mismo se tuesta para hacer la bebida. Pero
quando le uan moliendo, o passiando por la^piedra, le mesclan, anis, canela, y
algun clavo; echando a tres libras de Cacao, dos onsas de anis, una de canela,
y media de clavo, con esto, passan por la piedra dos o tres vezes, y luego le
echan en caxitas, ole hacer paneci^los de a onsa, que as lo que adellevar una
Xicara de bebida: este es el Chocolate regalada, y mas sano, y el, que bebe la
gente regalada: otros le echan harina de mais, y en la Nueva- Espanna viscocho,
molido, pero esto de mas de hacer, el Chocolate de poca dura, es enfermo, por
que la harina, que le echan, no cosida, aun que va tostada es de mal
mantenemiento, y causa opilaciones, y otros mil achaques: tanbien le mesclan en
otras parts con Achiote, por ser a proposito para la orina: el modo de hacer
la bebida, es este. Lo cuessen ^esaziendo la pasta en proportionada cantit^d de
agua, poco mas de medio quartillo, y dos onsas de asucar, una de Chocolate, y
cuesse en una olleta uno o dos hervores al fuego, y le dan con un molinillo
hasta llevantar espuma, y quanto caliente se puede se bebe; el que se bebe
desta manera, se tiene por mas sano: no soi de parecer, se t^me muchas vezes,
por que inquieta el cossimiento, y carga el estomago de muchas crudesas. El
Cacao comido confitado, por la tarde quieta el suenno des tod^ la n^che. Solo
es bueno para los Soldados, qu^ estan de posta. La mantera del Cacao es d^
grande provecho, para las inflammaciones, y para qual quiera fuegos, y
quemaduras; y sobre todo, para el tiempo de las virvelas, y serampion, y
ampollas, y llagas, securan untandose a menudo, con a quel aceite, para el
principio, aumento, estado de la Erysipela: es gran sedante, y el major anodino
para el dolor, que causan sus costras, y postillas: para los labios abiertos, y
grietas de las manos, y en elrostro: para las enzias, que manan sangre con
dolor, se les quita effectos bien contrarios, pero mejor conocidos por la
experientia.

That is in English as follows.
THe Cacao-nut is cold and dry in its temperament: and thereby it has parts
adstringent, wherewith it obstructs. It is at this day the most rich
Merchandise in the Indies: and it is of so high an esteem, that they settle by
right of Primogeniture on their Eldest Sons Farms of Cacao, which yield
annually twelve thousand Ducats. The Cacaonut is exceeding nourishing, which
makes People doubt concerning its particular temperament. The Rather fat.
Oil, that comes from it, when it is boiled, is white, and imbodies into And
into bigger bodies too, upon long infusing, and decocting.
Grains, which seems rather to be a sort of butter: it is to be extracted by
roasting in a large earthen pot [such as we bake meat in] and it does not well
in a brass vessel. The Nut is grinded in a Stone-Mortar, with a Stone pestel,
This is better done on a Stone-table.
both of them being hot; and, being made into a paste, it is set on a
Charcoal-fire^ in a Pipkin, and, as it heats, there rises up to the top the
butter, This is true, if the Cacao-paste be long digested on the fire, and
never milled: and it is to be seen only whilst it is hot; for, being cold, you
have^ only a fatty water, and some large lumps of fat floating, whilst the
lesser grains sink, or strike against the side, all in very different and
irregular figures.
and an Oil more red then the flame or fire [of Charcoal;] both having but one
taste. In like manner it is roasted to make the Drink. And, as they grind, or
beat it up in a Mortar, they mix with the Paste some Anise-seeds, Cinnamom, and
a few Cloves; adding to three pounds of Cacao two ounces of Anise-seeds, one of
Cinnamom, and half an ounce of Cloves: with which they grind it on the Stone
two or three times: and then they put it into little boxes, or they make little
Cakes of one ounce-weight, which is the proportion of Chocolata to make one
draught. This is the Royal Chocolata, being the best, and most wholesome, and
which is drunk by the Nobility, and Persons of the best rank. Others mix with
it the flower of Maiz: and in New-Spain they mix therewith the fine Powder of
Bisket-bread: but this sort of Chocolata la^ts not long to keep, is not good,
but weak; because the flower of Maiz, which they put in, is not boiled, and
prepared; and though the Maiz be prepared by roasting, yet it yields but bad
nourishment, it begets Obstructions, and a thousand Aches, and Distempers. In
other parts they mix with the Cacao-paste some Achiote, which serves to provoke
In those hot Countries men are very apt to be troubled with retention of Urine:
which is the great reason, they still mix in their Compositions what provokes
Urine; it being usual even here for those, that sweat, and transpire much, to
make less water: wherefore we see, that in Colds the Urine is more then
ordinary.
Urine. And the way of making their Chocolata-drink is this. They scrape the
Cacao-paste, and dissolve it in a proportionate quantity of water, to a little
more then half a pint of water they put in two ounces of Sugar, and one of the
Paste of Cacao, and they let it boil in a pot one or two woulms over the fire,
and then they mill it, till it rise with a large froth; they drink it as hot,
as they can possible: and they, that drink it so, think it to be most wholesome.
And I am of the Opinion, that it ought not to be drunk too often: because it
disturbs If it be taken too soon after meals; in which it has no peculiar
inconvenience, but what is general to any Sustenance: and it hurts least,
because less apt to corrupt, then other food is.
Concoction, and loads the Stomach with many Crudities. The Cacao-nut being
made into Confects, [ as Almond-confects are made] being eaten at night, makes
Men to wake all night-long: and is therefore good for Soldiers, that are upon
the Guard. The Cacao-butter is excellently useful in case of Inflammations,
and any scalds, or burns; and especially in the Smallpox, and pustulous
Tumors, and eruptions from heat, and Bruises: they are cured by anointing
therewith in the beginning, increase, state, or declination of the Erysipelas,
or St. Antonie's-fire. It is a great cooler, and allayer of pains created by
Crusts, or Scars upon Sores, and Pimples, and in chopped Lips, and Hands, and
Face, and Gums, which bleed, and are dolorous. It produces effects very
various, and contrary one to another, which are best known by Experience.

An account of the Distillation of the Cacao-nut performed by Mr. Le Febure.
WE took eight Ounces of the Cacao-nut, and, without hulling them, beat them to
a gross powder, and put them in a Retort: we found the body so fixed, that with
an ordinary Fire there came nothing over, but a white liquour in a very small
quantity, so clear as water: which we suppose to be the Phlegm. Then we
increased the Fire to such an heat, as if we had been to draw Spirit of
Vitriol: then there came over (within the space of seventeen hours Operation)
first a Spirit, that was as white as Milk, in Vapors; and, whereas all other
Spirits usually ascend in the Recipient, these did descend, and fall to the
bottom: and after that (but with a great reverberating Fire; such as he never
put to any Vegetable) there came over the Oil, which was red as blood, but
clear; resembling any Tincture for clearness: after it was cold, it became
thick, like to the Oil or Butter of Wax for consistence.

The Caput Mortuum weighed one ounce, and seven drams; of the Spirit there was
about two ounces: and the remainder Oil, three ounces and an half; besides what
was lost in filtrating, and other contingencies* Upon Separation, the Spirit
was as red as blood, like to any exquisite Tincture of Santals; however it were
white in the first distilling: which is to be attributed to its being commix'd
in the distilling with the subsequent Oil. The Spirit was not very hot, but
exceeding penetrative, and not unpleasant as to smell, or taste, as other
Spirits drawn from blood, or flesh, are. But, however it had not any empyreuma,
nor had that odiousness, which attends Spirits drawn from flesh, yet had it an
evident affinity (but with a peculiar in mildness) with flesh. The Oil was not
very unpleasant, but miraculously piercing, (the Volatile Salt, of which there
was a great quantity, being unseparated) and had an unexpressible
Aromaticalness upon the tongue; and seemed very much to delight and refresh the
Heart, and Stomach: but with a great resemblance still of flesh.

The Caput Mortuum had no taste at all, was exceeding light, and carried with
it in smell Testimonies of an affinity with fat flesh, when broiled.

We had not time to pursue a more accurate enquiry into the several Liquours,
and Parts, into which the first appearances of this Distillation might be
further resolved: but that there may be a very great exercise for further
Curiosity in the Distilling of this Nut appears hence, that the Spirit in a
short space became not only turbid, but sour, and manifested it self to contain
a Vinegar: which is not yet examined; but the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire has
promised to make some Essays about it. I would not have any offended at the
novelty of finding a Vinegar in the Cacao; for it is an acid ferment, that we
owe our digestion to: and we ought rather to admire the Nature of this Nut,
which includes in it self not only Principles for nourishment, and food, but
even of concoction: and from hence we may observe, what it is, that makes it so
agreeable to all, even to the weakest Natures. Besides Mr. Boil told me of
several Oils, he observed in it upon Distillation, the several effects and
differences whereof are not yet, through want of time, discovered.

I have nothing more to add now, being just ready to go on Shipboard; but that
I have since met with a Person, whose long Converse and Curiosity in Spain have
enabled him to judge of Chocolata: he informed me of many things so, as to
satisfy me, that the course I make Chocolata by, is exact: and that, what I
have taught Mortimer to make, hotter then my ordinary way, is the true
Chocolata of Guaxaca, and most celebrated in the Spanish Court. And I am to
acquaint the Nation with a piece of his Intelligence, which was my own
Conjecture before, that to make Chocolata into Sweetmeats, and Almonds, it is
this Chocolata of Guaxaca (a Present of which I designed for Her Majesty, had
She arrived before my departure, and some whereof is in the hands of the Lady
Wood) wherewith the said Confects are to be made: for mild Chocolata will grow
insipid upon so great a commixture of Sugar. Any one may have it at Mortimer's
made for them, if they be-speak it by the name of the Queen's Chocolata, as the
other bears the name of Chocolata-royal, which had His Majesty's approbation.
There is a sort of Chocolata made by Sir H. Bennet, which, if I have seen the
right Prescript, is conformable to what I understand to be the practice of the
Spanish Court: yet differs a little from mine, and has a greater proportion of
red Pepper, then I allow Englishmen, however it may suit with the Female Sex
pretty well. It has Musk in it in as great a quantity, as I put Amber-grise in
mine: but I think Musk not so healthful in many; for it begers a great fusion
and fermentation in the Blood, so as that it causes it to boil, and color the
face: besides that a little Musk chewed is observed to make wounds to bleed;
with many other Instances, which I have not time to recount, but shall in the
next Edition; with Experiments of my own about it in the making of a sort of
Pies with Almonds, Pistachias, Marrow, etc. and Musk sometimes, sometimes
Amber-grise* which as it is a Dish I love sometimes, so was I pleased with
several Observations I made by putting Musk and Amber-grise in it. If any will
have any made with Musk, and those other Ingredients, which a little diversifie
it from my Chocolata-royal, or that, which I call the Queen's Chocolata, I have
told Mortimer the way: so as they may have it either mild, or as hot as Sir H.
B. makes it.

The Gentleman further informed me, that he found Chocolata to keep his body
soluble (as did my much Honored and Learned Friend Dr. Quatremaine,
Physician-in-Ordinary to His Majesty:) and if it ever failed to do so, he then
took it in bed, half an hour before he rose, and it never failed to give him a
S^ool, as soon as he was up. He told me, he used to put butter in his: and he
told me, that they used to take it in Spain after they have taken a little
conserve, biscuit, or a salt bit in a morning. He further told me upon his
Experience, that, being desperately vexed with the Piles, he took the Butter of
Cacao (which is the fat I mention, that arises from digesting the Cacao's
simple paste in water, till the Fat be drawn out) and melted it, and anointed
therewith, and it did not only cure him presently, but that he never had them
since. I have not time to enlarge on the several Experiments I have since had
account of: but I have many more Rea^ons to recommend it in case of
Hypocho^driacal Melancholy. But I must conclude, adding the Discourse of St.
Austin, which I hinted at before, because it contains some Observations not
ordinary in Physic.

The Judgment of St. Austin in his Book Of the City of God: which was too large
to be inserted before, page 136.
Lib. 14. Chapter 23. THis Contention, Fight, and altercation of Lust, and Will,
this need of Lust to the sufficiency of the Will, had not been laid upon the
wedlock in Paradise, but that disobedience should be the Plague to the Sin of
disobedience: Otherwise those Members had obeyed the will, as well as the rest.
The seed of Generation should have been sown in the Vessel, as Corn is now in
the Field. What I would say more in this kind, Modesty bids me forbear a
little, and first ask pardon of chaste ears. I need not do it, but might
proceed in any Discourse pertinent to this Theme, freely, and without fear to
be obscene, or imputation of impurity to the words, being as honesty spoken of
these, as others are of any other bodily Members. Therefore he, that reads
this with unchaste suggestions, let him accuse his own guilt, not the nature of
the Question. --

Ibid. Chapter 24. Man therefore should have sown the Seed, and Woman have received
it, as need required, without all Lust, and as their wills desired: for, as now
we are, our articulate Members do not only obey our Will, our Hands, or Fe^t,
or so; but even those also, that we move but by small Sinews, and Tendons, we
contract, and turn them as we list: as you see in the voluntary motions of the
Mouth, and Face. And the Lungs, the softest of all the Entrails, except the
Marrow, and therefore placed in the Arches of the Breast, far more safely to
take in and give out the Breath, and to proportionate the Voice, do serve a
Man's Will entirely, like a pair of Smith's or Organ's Bellows, to breathe, to
speak, to cry, or to sing. I omit, that it is natural in some Creatures, if
they feel any thing bi^e them, to move the sk^^ ther^* where i^ bites, and no
where el^e; shaking of not only Flies, but even D^rts, or Shafts, by this
motion. Man cannon do this: what then? could not God give it unto what
Creatures he listed? Even so might Man have had the Obedience of his lower
parts, which his own Disobedience debarred. For God could easily have made him
with all his Members subjected to his Will, even that, which now is not moved,
but by Lust: for we see some Men's natures far different from other-some; acting
those things strangely with their Bodies, which others cannot do, nor ha^dly
will believe. There are, that can move their Ears, one, or both, as they
please. There are, that can move all their Hair toward their forehead, and
back again, and never move their Heads. There are, that can swallow you twenty
things whole, and, contracting but their Guts a little, give you every thing up
as whole, as if they had put it into a bagg. There are, that can counterfeit
the voices of Birds, and other Men, so cunningly, that, unless you see them,
you cannot discern them for your hearts. There are, that can break wind
backward so arti^icially, Lud. Vives upon this place tells us, that there was
such an one, a German, about Maximilian's court, and his Son Philip's, that
would have rehearsed any Verse whatsoever with his tail.
that you would think they sung. I have seen one sweat (...) when he was sick
of a Tertian at Bruges, as often as the Physician told him, it was good to
sweat, he would but hold his breath a little, and cover himself over head in
the be^* and sweat presently. They, that saw it, wondered at his strange
constitution; but they would have wondered more at St. Augustine's Sweater,
that sweat as easily as one could spit.
when he listed: and it is sure, that some can weep when they list, and shed
Tears plentifully. But it is wonderful, tha^ diverse of the Brethren tried of
late in a Priest called Restitutus, of the Village of Calaman, who, when he
pleased (and they requested him to show them this rare Experiment) at the
feining of a lamentable sound drew himself into such an Extafie, that he lay as
dead, senseless of all punishing, pricking, nay even of burning, but that he
felt it sore after his waking. And this Rapture was found to be true, and not
counterfeit in him, in that he lay still without any breathing: yet he said
afterward, that, if one spoke aloud, he thought he heard him, as if he were
afar of. Seeing therefore that, in this frail state of ours, the Body serves
the Will in such extraordinary effects; why should we not believe, that, before
his disobedience, the first Man might have had his means, and Members of
Generation, without Lust? But he, taking delight in himself, was left by God
unro himself, because he would not obey God. And this proves his misery the
plainer* in that he cannot live, as he would.

FINIS.

