A SERMON CONCERNING DEATH and the RESURRECTION, Preached in St MARY'S, At
OXFORD, On Low Sunday, April the 28. 1644. Before the COMMITTEE of the Members
of the Honorable House of COMMONS. By W. Strode Dr of Divinity.

Published by Authority.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1644.

COL. 3. 3. For ye are Dead, and your Life is hid with Christ in God.
AFter the Death and Resurrection of our blessed Savior, it will not be
unseasonable, especially in these times of Danger, to meditate upon our own.
Lo therefore Life and Death, not now proposed to your Choice, but to your
Meditation. The matter of my Text is the whole Race of Man, both while he is,
and while he is not: he still Travells to and fro, betwixt two Stages; which
are ever the same, though the order be mutually inverted. For we are no sooner
enterd into Life, but we are Dead, dead and buried with Christ in Baptism; no
sooner dead to the World but newborn to God through the same means; when we
are thus borne again, (notwithstanding this spiritual Parenthesis,) we still
proceed in a natural course of Death; no sooner dead so, but our Life is hid
with Christ in God. Thus on the Cornerstone we ketch Corners, alive and dead,
dead and alive: and it is quickly done: for Life and Death, or Death and Life
are not so far disjoined as we account, none indeed so near Neighbors; they
are severed not only but by an Inch, as the Poet phansied, at Sea, Tabula
distinguimur, but on Land also they are scarce distant by a moment of Time: we
find them so close united in my Text, that they meet in the self same
Instant, nay further in the very nullity of Time. For now even now Ye are Dead,
and Then even Then after Time your Life is hid with Christ in God.

So that my Text affords a contrary Assurance in two contrary Cases; Assurance
of Death while ye Live, (...) for ye are Dead, and Assurance of Life when ye
Dye, for your Life is hid with Christ in God: the first is the Death of Life,
the second the Life of Death; that passing sure, for ye are surer of nothing on
Earth then of yourselves, and yet howsoever ye are, ye are Dead, the second
surer yet, for God is surer then your selves, your Life is hid with Christ in
God. In the first part I shall strike you Dead; ye are Dead.

How Dead? yes already; in the Aorist; (...), which we render not, ye shall
dye, but ye have died, or now are dead. Man borne of a Woman is not borne (as
you may think) into Life, but into Death. Ye that are most awake sit asleep
with your Eyes open; and when ye walk about, ye walk like Ghosts. What? shall I
tell my Hearers they are Dead? who then shall hear me? I know to whom I
speak, to the Dead, that come hither to learn the way of Life. Thrice Noble
and thrice worshipful, thrice worthy and thrice welcome, that ye may truly
know how dead ye are, I say, ye are thrice Dead; yes, three ways, Dead in Law,
Dead by the Course of Nature, Dead by the* Covenant of Grace.

First, ye are Dead in Law: the General Sentence has already passed upon all:
In the day thou eatest of the forbidden fruit thou shall surely dye. From that
Day to This, every sprig of Adam lives merely by reprieve. For which we have
nothing to plead but our Book and Childbearing; our Book which contains Gods
merciful Promise, and the Childbearing of Christ, whereby we become
Consanguineous with the Innocent and Holy One of God.

If so, let me turn the Inference of my Text to the Consequence, For to
Therefore, and so read backward, Therefore set not your Affections on things on
the Earth, as you are warned in the precedent verse. When we draw near to the
End, we mind nothing else, and only thereto we set our strength. Would you
not think the man mad, who being sentenced to death should be sollicitous for
Titles to set forth Hic jacet; if being straight to be demolished in Person, he
should seek out Surveyors to build Castles and Barnes; if being stripped for the
Axe, he should send for the Taylour; if when he should gain Peace with God by
sacrificing his Affections, he should choose to die like Zimri and Cosbi? so
vain, so mad are we: all our toil is for an Epitaph; we build Houses when we
must dwell in the Grave; we take measure for Clothes when Death takes measure
for the Coffin, we and the worms look for Provision at once, and we dye in our
Lusts. The Judge, under whose Repreive we stand, forbids Anxiety for things
that perish, yet still our wisdom teaches us to be thus foolishly Anxious:
and therefore God prevents our Projects as he did the project of that
uncertain rich man in the Parable: while he was driven into agony of thought
what he should do with his great increase, while he became extreme miserable
through much prosperity, and was ready to burst for want of a larger
Storehouse, his Repreiver says unto him, Thou Fool, this Night will I take
away thy Soul, this Night; for the Soul is always due, because we are Dead
in Law. That which Christ spoke concerning the End of the World, Let not he
that is on the house top come down to take any thing out of the house, nor he
that is in the Field return to fetch his Clothes, Mat. 24. the same may I
apply to the End of every particular Person, that promises Life to himself
for the accomplishment of remote projects; let not he that is below think of
cutting down Trees to make Ladders for his advancement, nor he that stands
above think of securing his Condition by descending lower; for we are dead in
Law. The Goard, wherein Jonas delighted, had a worm inbred to make it wither,
so have all Earthly delights: if that will not weane us from them, we have a
worm of Corruption within our selves to make us let go our hold. Abraham the
Representation of all the Faithful, had no Inheritance in the Land of Canaan,
not a Foot of his own Perpetuity, save only a place of Burial: of this we
are capable by Law. Dust thou art and to Dust thou shall return. Genesis 3. 19.
Indeed a Grave we cannot miss, because the Body will consume and bury it
self.

Secondly, we are Dead by the Course of Nature. Believe it, ye are all dead men
(as we say of those that are desperately sick) for ye cannot hold out long, ye
are Going while I speak. Ye find that the Dust flies away: are ye not made
of Dust? that the wind vanishes; is not your breath in your nostrills? that
the shadow creeps; do not your Bodies cast a Shadow? as the Element such is
the Compound; and as the Shadow, such is the substance, But more expressly Dust
ye are, Psalm. 103. 14. v. Your Life is a wind, Job. 7. 7. v. Your days a
Shadow, Job. 8. 9. v. You see the Dust Raised, not the Rising of every Atome;
the wind Past, not the Passage; the Shadow removed, not the motion; and so your
days slide away without present observation of declining. That ye are changed
ye feel, though not the changing: you perceive in your Age, a Spring, a
Summer, an Autumn, a Winter, and happily several Months of these great
quarters: for every seaven-yeare brings a sensible Change: within the number of
70 years, (which David accounted a full Pitch of Life) Solon observed ten
Changes, for ten times seven; Teeth, Youth, Beard, Ability, Wedlock,
Understanding, Wisdom, Virtue, Equity, and then Recesse; these Changes we
plainly discern at the Stages, though not in the course: the Items in their
sum, the granes in their Pounds we easily comprehend, but the little moments
in themselves pass undiscerned, and we are stolen from our selves unawares.
Sometimes merrily, for we bring our years to an end as a Tale that is told,
Psalm. 90. 9. sometimes painfully, for our days are like the days of a
Hireling, Job. 7. 1. sometimes idly, for our Life is (...) a dreaming shadow,
half of it sheere sleep; and ever we pass them swiftly; for our days are
swifter then a Weavers Shuttle, Job. 7. 6. v. and so runs our thread of Life,
just so; as that from hand to hand, so this from Morning to Evening, till we
come from the beginning of the Web to the Fag, from the Womb to the Grave.
Howsoever we move, still we move forward, we never stay; the present tense is
but a moment, that which is past is nothing, the Future is not yet. What can we
call our selves, who are changed before the word is pronounced? I am is the
Name of God, the Name of the Creature is I am not.

We are much deceived, if we think we die not till the last Gasp. The
beginning of Death is our Birth; we bring it with us; because we bring both
Flesh, and Sin, whereof one makes us capable of Death, the other ready to earne
it; and therefore as our Strength and work increases, so does our wages,
Death comes on the faster from the first day to the last. We think sometimes
we are grown younger by Recoveries; as when we proceed from Creeping to
walking, from weakness to strength: it is not so; for the year turns about,
as well in fair weather as in foul, no less in Spring then in Autumn; and
as the Time such is the Timed, our very growth leads to decay, all addition to
Life is but an Abatement. Turn your Conceit a little from Time to Motion, you
shall find the Pilgrims Life such as his Way, which by further progress,
whether up-hill or downe-hill grows ever shorter and shorter; or lay the
Voyage not by Land but by Sea; in a Ship whether we stand or sit, lie or go,
sleep or wake, play or work, on we sail, till we arrive at the Port: so is
our Life still bound for Death, through all Varieties of Posture in Rest or
Motion, through all changes of Condition by chance or purpose. They that tarry
within doors, cannot miss a significant Emblem of their own Fading; Isa. 51.
6.
All Flesh (says the Prophet Esaias) waxes old as does a Garment; which whether
it be worn, or folded in a Chest, is consumed by degrees; and as the Cloth
such is the Wearer; I may add, (since every thing far and near Preaches the
same Lecture,) as the House also, such is the Dweller; and as the Meat, such is
the Eater; and as the Thought, such is the Thinker; in the best Condition ever
vanishing: but if the Garment be neglected, the house unrepaired, the meat ill
cooked, the Thoughts destructive, if the Master too become more ruinous by Sin
then by Mortality, how swift is the decay of Nature so hastened by wast, how
headlong is the race of a precipice so impelled by Running?

To pass over Particulars, the whole Generation of men collected is like that
of leaves, (...), (...), Hom. Iliad. (...).
the blind Poet could see so much: on a Tree still furnished, while one leaf
waxes green another withers, while one is in the bud another drops off, and
every leaf by blasting, wind, or Age, successively vanishes: so follow the
Generations of men; though the World be ever full, yet they that fill it are
ever voyding the Room; so you may see the high ways filled with unabiding
Passengers, and Channells with fleeting streams.

Is it so? then what Counsel in such a case? First, be not over grieved for
the loss of a Friend by Death, considering that thy self also do lie
wounded by his side, thou dead in Fieri as he in Facto, Fish tumbling in the
same Net. Thou shall follow him, but he shall not return to Thee; and sorrow
for necessity must needs be unnecessary.

Next reckon to thy self how Death invades thee: know that every gray hair is
a summons, and that every Ach, every Swelling is a Venny or Thrust made at
thee, take it for a warning. Likewise cast thy account, how thou art changed
ever since thy birth, or within a certain distance of time; then by proportion
of declining, thou may conjecture, how near thou art to thy natural period.
But thou must further add the various contingence of possible dangers; though
the way be smooth, the Robbers may be rough and many; our escape from infinite
Casualties, if well considered, makes every day a Birth day. This multiplicity
of danger may teach us the warier provision, and by provision death may be
stav'd off. For though we always travel to it, yet our travel may be to and
fro, long in passage of a little space, as the Israelites through frequent
Meanders were traveling forty years from Egypt to Canaan.

After sufficient Provision, the next Caution must be against Anxiety and
Immoderate Pensiveness for more personal safety then belongs to our share:
when all the world totters, and so many eminent Worthies are daily sacrificed
by the Sword, now to cover a particular Exemption from danger is too much
partiality of tenderness. The only means of security is to expect none upon
Earth, but to stand armed with Patience and Resolution to endure the Lot which
God has appointed. The heart being thus settled and prepared for Death, nothing
else can seem terrible, quid ad me quam magnis moriar, ipsum mori non est
magnum.

But the best use is, daily to add to our future life as much as we loose of
the present, and as fast as we perish here, so with all speed to lay the
Foundations of Immortality in Heaven; selling both profit and pleasure for one
inestimable Jewel, and making friends of the unrighteous Mammon. Since die we
must, let us learn betimes how to die; that we may turn our necessity into
Virtue, and meet our Destiny not in Horror, but in Honor; not as a Loss* but
as an Advantage; not as a Trapdore swallowing up in Destruction, but as a Gate
opening to everlasting Life. And this is done, first by recounting our looser
days in bitterness, so shall we unlive the time we have lived amiss; then by
frequent Meditation and foretast of Death; Think thine Eyes grown dim in the
fainting twylight of life, and thou shall soon turn them aside from vanity;
think thine Ears grown deaf with sickness, and thou will soon stop them
against Idle words; think thy Tongue grown stiff with drowth, and that thought
will be a watch before thy mouth, to Examine what thou let out and what
thou let in; think on the cold sweat of Death, so thou will abhor to swim
in Lust; think how naked thou must go hence, even as bare as thou came,
only with a shroud as thou came in with a Cawle, and almost with as little
flesh, then thou will easily contemn all wordly pomp, and subdue thy carnal
Tumors. Think thou, that Death draws nearer when it is thought of, or
dares not to approach unless it be called? no such matter: this practice of
dying daily will not make us to die the sooner, but so to live as that we may
die the happier. And this or the like practice belongs to our Christian
Profession assumed in Baptism, where by the Covenant of Grace we become Dead
in a third Acception.

Dead in Quality; Dead to all Wordly and Carnal Lusts; though we may sometimes
fall upon them by Infirmity, yet to pursue them is against our Profession. The
Desire is Dead, and the Renunciation made against them is a kind of Death. The
spiritual Pharaoh with all his. Host lies drowned in the Font, representing a
Red Sea, the Blood of Christ: there Christ and We enter into Covenant, he to
free us from Sin, and we to forsake it; he to strike off the Dominion and Guilt
thereof, we the Service and Confederation. Because by nature we are born Dead
in Sin, and subject to Corruption, therefore by a second birth we are born Dead
unto Sin, the spiritual Death is a Countermine against the Natural. For by
the Power of Baptism the Old man together with his Lusts is taken and
crucified, nayl'd hand and foot to the Cross of our Savior, quite disabled
from acting what he would, and at length with much ado, with striving and
struggling; with Gall and Vinegar, with Piercing or Breaking forced to die
outright.

How then shall we that are Dead to Sin live any longer therein? it is the Use
of the Apostle, Romans 6. 2. v. Is it not strange to hear that a dead man
walks? is it not stranger to hear that he speaks and works, yes eats and
drinks abundantly, and yet dead? how is it then that the Old man so long since
crucified, dead, and buried, does yet so frequently exercise the Actions of
Life, moving the Tongue to Idle words, Lying, and Swearing, the Throat to
Excess, the Eye to Adultery, the Hands to Oppression, and all the members to
several Iniquity! how is it that the Church of God is haunted with such Evil
Spirits and Goblins! sure there is some Spell or Magic in this foul Prodigy;
otherwise without the help of the Devil it could not be. I grant, that a
rotten Tree after it is hewn down and laid in the Dirt, may put forth a Sprig,
a Leaf, or so; but they come to no Strength, they never prosper. Hair may
grow on a Carcass, but such hair is never dressed nor keemed. So may the
Relics of the Old man have a Counterfeit show of Life, but must not gather
Head, never be cherished within any Christian bosom. Death frees us from all
worldly Relations, and Bonds (as S. Paul disputes in the sixth to the Romans)
it frees the Wife from the yoke of her Husband, the Servant from the Task of
his Master: shall we then who are freed by Death forsake a fresh and lovely
Spouse who died for our Love, and be reunited to an old rotten Carcass? shall
we forgo this new Master who bought us with his blood, for an Old tyrannous
Canniball that feeds on our destruction? God forbid.

So much for this point; wherein you have heard, that we are now dead already,
and in three respects: Dead in Law, through the sentence pronounced on sin,
that therefore we ought not to be over-sollicitous for much provision where we
have no right to tarry longer. Dead by the Course of Nature, as appears by the
mutability of those elements whereof we consist, and of things appertaining; by
daily declynations, insensibly but yet continually growing into sensible
changes, in our own Persons, and by the successive defluction of all mankind:
from whence we should gather patience for the loss of others, Caution for our
selves, but without Anxiety, and above all godly Preparation for a better life.
Lastly, that we are Dead by the Covenant of Grace, Dead to sin, and sin to us,
that therefore sin ought not to rule and exercise our Members. Then if the Old
Adam Die within us while we live, we shall live in the New when we Dye; as we
were Buried in Baptism, we shall be Baptized in Burial, and return with
Bodies as clean from the Grave as we did with souls from the Font. So from the
Death of life I pass to my second General, the Life of death, Your Life is
hid with Christ in God.

Death having lost her sting cannot kill us utterly; some Life is left, else it
could not be hid. You may then observe these three degrees of Comfort, the
safety of life in the Chamber of Death, it is Hid; the ready Means of safety,
it is hid with Christ, the strong Author of the Means, it is hid with Christ in
God. The Subject is aptly disposed to a resurrection, the Means are already
prepared, the Author is All-sufficient and Infallible.

First, our Life is Hid. then it is not quite extinguished, but safe laid, as
coals raked up in Ashes, safe though unseen, alive though close covered. It
lies like Treasure under Ground, not out of Mind, though out of Sight, and
shall again be dig'd up, if not for the worth of the Mettle, yet for the Image
of God which it bears.

Death is but a longer and sounder sleep, and life is hid in sleep, as well as
in Death; for in sleep the senses are fetterd, as in Death all bodily
Faculties. Howsoever from the Captivity of one part an utter Destruction of the
whole is not concluded. When half the body is struck and possessed by a dead
palsy, there still remains a living Body, because there is life in some part.
So when the whole Body is seazd by Death, there still remains a living Man,
because there is life in the best part, the Soul. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
have being enough to preserve their Names, and our Savior proves them to be
also Living. What though the Union of parts be Actually dissolved? Yet the
Dissolution is not Total, because there still remains a possibility and a
Natural Desire of reuniting. The parts which stand separate are in want and
Imperfect, as without the whole they needs must; therefore the widowed Soul
longs for the Bodies Fellowship, to supply this want, and to gain the
fulness of Perfection: How long (cry the Saints under the Altar) O Lord Holy
and True, how long? Rev. 6. 9. v: This Natural Desire cannot ever be
frustrated. So then upon the matter, the Dead are but asleep; and if they
sleep, then (as the Apostles well answered) they shall do well: for as men,
that have slep'd soundly, arise from their Couch more fresh and lively, the
dull and cumbersome humors being well concocted; so the dead roused with a
loud summons from the Grave, will appear more Glorious and Agil, all
Imperfections being worn off by the Furnace of Corruption. In the mean time,
while the Bodies of both Sleepers lie senseless, their Souls are alike
busied; as in the living sleep they are taken up with dreams, so in the dead
sleep with heavenly Visions.

But shall we call it a Sleeping or Hiding, when the Body is turned to the
substance of the Bed, Flesh to Mold? still we may. For what think you of the
Seeds sown in your Ground? is that sowing a destruction, or only a Hiding?
say then, does our Creed, in this point extend to our Corn, and not to our
selves? Behold in a little seed there sleeps the bulk of a rising Tree: when
it is grown to a vast extent, consider in what secret crany so spacious virtue
lodged: where was the ruggedness of the bark, the solidity of the trunk, the
verdure of the Leaf, the pleasantness of the fruit? feel and examine the
Seed, it is not rough, whence this grate of the bark? it is not tough, whence in
process this hardness of the wood? it is not green, whence this tincture of
leaves? it smells not, whence this fragrance in the fruit? wherefore in Secrecy
they all at once lay dormant, though at once they do not break forth. From the
Seed is the Root produced, from the Root the Trunk and bark, from them the
Twig, from the Twig the Leaves and Fruit, and again from the Fruit the Seed.
Now man like Seed lies resuscitable in the womb of the Earth: If from a small
kernel having no distinction of parts, wood, bark, leaves and fruit be daily
raised into the massy bulk of a Tree, what more wonder, if out of dry
Homogeneous Dust, Bones, Sinews, Veins, Flesh, Skin, and Hair, be reduced
into Man. He that asks a Reason of the manner, must be cunningly answered by
asking other questions, of things continually obvious to sight, yet no way
comprehended by Reason; that since by seeing we cannot penetrate the depth of
things Visible, we may believe by hearing the Truth of the Invisible. So S.
Gregory on the twentieth of S. John's Gospel. The Philosopher may object, that
the raising of a Tree out of Seed is rather a Reparation of kind then of the
particular, and so an Instance of Generation rather then of the Resurrection;
but since this Generation is from the womb of the Earth, not from the Stock of
the Tree, we reply that it is also an Argument of the Resurrection, so urged
both by our Savior and by S. Paul.

And to make this Doctrine more familiar, the Steps of the Resurrection are
imprinted in most of the Creatures. The Phoenix waxing old fills her Nest with
billets of Spice, on her funeral pile she turns into Ashes, and after by the
dew of Heaven springs up a new Phoenix. Diverse imperfect bodies, which
yesterday lay laboring in some deep puddle, now start into Life; Bees in the
Hive, Flies in the Clefts of Walls, which lay all winter without sense or
motion, suddenly revive at the Suns approach: Day it self dies into night, and
the life of the Sun is hid with the Antipodes, yet within a few hours he
appears in his sparkling dress, to cheer the forsaken world. All things are
preserved by perishing, and are new trimmed by Dissolution. So Tertullian.
Though these Arguments seem merely Rhetorical, and far short of
demonstrating the Resurrection of man; yet upon better consideration, since
they plainly demonstrate an Aptitude of Reviction in nature, under the power
and providence of the Author, from the raising of these inferior Creatures, we
may confidently conclude, a proportional likelihood of raising that, which
bears his own Image.

Wherefore I return to the meditation of Nature, whose reparation is most
apparent at this present season: behold now the Revolution of the whole world
is an earnest of man's Restitution; now all the Emblems of mortality enjoy their
spring; Grass and Flowers rise from the sullen clod, under which their life
lay hid. Shall we borrow their names only in time Fading, and not when they
flourish? Why so? for all these things are renewed for man, and man doubts
not of their renewing: shall he for whom they are revived, despair of his own
Resurrection? What though he lie long, and wast in the earth? so he ought.
Creatures, that soon fade again, may have quick returns of their spring, but
man, who after his rising is sure to wake for ever, may well endure a long
sleep. Again, Creatures less Noble, unless they spring quickly, cannot spring
at all; but man consisting of a reasonable soul, and endued with vegetant
power in the most Excellent manner, is ripened more Deliberately, (says
Athenagoras) and must rise the last of all: he has a Privilege to rise after
many thousands of years, out of any Elements, Fire, Air, Sea, and Earth,
wheresoever he has been scatterd. Nothing springs before the due time, at the
due time Man shall also: Would you have the Harvest before all the grain be
sown? Mundi tempora homini Annus est, the end of the world is man's Harvest; and
best of all so, least again he should rise to sin: but when men have been all
sown, when the Winter of dying is past, when God the husbandman has
sufficiently purged us, and clarified the Flesh from dross, he will call us up
to an endless Summer; a Summer answerable to the past Winter. For which
purpose, we also have our peculiar Sun, and proper Dew; Sun and Dew as well as
the Creatures: our Sun is the Sun of Righteousness; when He appears, then (as
it follows after my Text) we shall appear together with him in glory: our
Dew, whether it be the Dew of Tears, it ushers in the Reaping of Joy, or
whether the Dew of God's promise, it shall not fail of performance. Awake and
sing (says he) Ye that dwell in the dust, for thy Dew is as the Dew of Herbs;
and the earth shall cast out her Dead, Esaias. 26. 19. v. When this comes to
pass (as who dares doubt it?) then it shall appear, that we lay as Flos in
Hyeme, that we Wintered in Christ our Cause, and only sunk into his Root, who
is the true Vine, and Tree of Life. This is our second degree of Comfort, that
our Life is hid with Christ.

With Christ, he is the Means: under the power of his Resurrection our life is
hid. Shall not he be able to effect for us, what the Sun can do for Flowers?
some will ask, How shall the Dead rise, or with what body shall they come?
Christ answers; With my dead Body shall they rise, Esaias. 26. at the 19. v. By
virtue of his body already risen from Death. Vbi gloria praecessit Capitis,
eosequetur and spes Corporis, (says Leo) whither the Head has gloriously gone
before, the Members hope to follow after.

At the first veiw there appears no more in Christ's Resurrection, but a man
Risen; but when we consider the Condition and Relation of that Man; that being
the Innocent and Holy one of God, he was neither worthy of Death, nor Tenable
by it, that therefore he dyed not for Himself, but for the Guilty, not as an
Offender, but Undertaker, and Laid down his Life with Power to take it up
again, for the benefit of those for whom he laid it down; that Death
unadvisedly seizing upon an unlawful prize, forfeited the Lawful hold of
sinners together with the Just; when the Gospel has yielded this Discovery,
then we find that this Son of Man is become the Everlasting Father, the Lord
and giver of Life to all Mankind; that our Resurrection is virtually included
under His; and that though power thereof, we shall rise as surely, as if we had
his power to raise our selves. For as to us a Child was borne, and for us a
Man was Crucified, so for us a Savior is risen. Whatsoever Christ did on
Earth, the same he did in our behoof, not for Himself, so that if we rise
not, in vain is Christ risen. Why is he called the Foundation, the Head, the
Root, the First fruits, but in relation to Us? If the Foundation be laid by
wisdom, it implies a rising Structure, if the Head be above Water, the Members
are safe, if the Root be quick, the Branches will sproute, if the first
Fruits be Holy, so is the whole Crop.

Christ is our Life (in the next words after my Text) this Life lay Hid in our
Grave, and therefore it is but a correspondent exchange, that our Life should
be hid with Christ; that since he lay in a sepulcher hewd out for another,
others should be quickened by his Rising. But how was Christ hid in our Grave?
himself has showed in the 12. of St. John, 24. v. Except a Corn of Wheat
fall into the Ground and dye, it abides alone, but if it dye, it brings
forth much fruit; he lay then in the Grave as a grain of Wheat in the furrow,
so purposely sown for us, that our Life might be hid with him, as increase in
the Grain which was sown. It is not to be forgotten, that as Christ at his
Passion compared Himself to a Grain of Wheat, so the Apostle in his
Resurrection has fitly compared him to the First Fruits. Cor. 15. 20. the
complete Allegory declares this Virtue in Him, this Dependence in us; that
since he lay in the Ground not like a stone, but like Corn, therefore in
springing up he rose not single, not as Jonas from the belly of the Whale,
(unless to Jonas you reckon the Ninivites raised by his Preaching) but
multiplied to more then Fifties, to more then Hundreds, to a world of Grains
besides Himself: that since at His Resurrection he likewise became the first
Fruits of them that sleep, he has consequently obtained a blessing for the
whole field.

Wherefore as the Lord Jesus (who is blessed for evermore) has returned Victor
in spite of invading Death, and all Impediments wherewith he was blocked, so
shall it be, that all his Dependants in the utmost skirts of the world shall
rise from Death, notwithstanding the drowning, burning, mangling, confounding,
scattering of Carcasses, whose disorderd destiny makes a distinct Recollection
of Parts to seem impossible. But in presence of a sufficient means, and
unresistible Power, Impossibility must Vanish. We find in the General Course
of Nature, things as much beyond our reach daily renewed; we find in Humane
nature no Reluctance, no repugnance against the Resurrection, but rather an
Aptitude and desire, if there come a sufficient cause to reduce it into Act.
Now when Christian Religion has discovered to Reason an able Means in Christ,
who for this purpose became the first fruits of them that slep'd, and has
gotten power to be judge of the Quick and Dead, that the Dead might rise and
appear before his Tribunal, now the Resurrection is more then possible, more
then fecible, it is in Virtue already performed; and when I shall show you that
the Author, who has chosen and appointed this means, is God, it will be found
to be necessary. And herein consists the third degree of comfort, our Life is
Hid with Christ in God.

In God. Where could our Life be better or safer placed* For as the Soul is
the Life of the Body, so God is the Life of our Souls, and consequently both
Souls and Bodies are in his hand; hardly to be poynted out, but safe kept in
an Invincible and Infallible Custody. The same who of his Infinite goodness
has appointed Christ to be the means of our Resurrection, he having Power and
will to produce the deserved Effect, will not fail of his Justice and Truth to
bring it to pass. If yet you can doubt, consider your own Creatures, the works
of man: when a musical Air has been played, is it quite lost, never to be
called for again? or what is become of it? is it hid in the Bowels of the
Instrument, in the pricked or conceivd Copy, or in the hand and Power of the
Musition? in all these? so when the breath of man is expired, he is hid in the
Mold as in the Matter, with Christ as with our Idea and Pattern, in God as in
the Author and harmonious Composer. Again, when a Printer dissolves his
Impression, and casts it into the first Elements or Letters, is it quite lost,
or what is become of it? is it hid in the Boxes which contain those Letters, or
in the book out of which it was copied, or in the hand of the Printer that sets
the Letters together? in all these? such is the Case of Man: though all his
quarters be divided into the quarters of the world, though his parts be
distributed like those of the Levites wife, or digested into other bodies, or
scattered into all Elements, they are still within Gods Boxes; though his
Figure be lost to the memory of men, it remains fresh with Christ, and in his
Book are all our Members written; though they cannot meet of themselves, yet
God can find them out, and will join them together after his Sons
likeness, and his particular Register. Who turned the round world, who
fashioned the parts of man at first? was not God that Carpenter, and Christ his
Son? Now which is harder, to make a Table and the Timber too, or to join the
parts taken a sunder? to create that which was not, or to new cast that which
was before? That Potentiall being, which man had within the hand of his Maker
before his Creation, the same, and more, remains after his Dissolution. Look
on Nature, the Creature is potentially couched under her Power in the Seed;
look on Art, so is the frame within the Artificers call in the wood; look up to
God, so are they that shall rise, within the Mold, before him: how gross is it
to believe Nature in her Natural Effects, Art in her Artificial, and only to
mistrust God in his works Divine? Ask not, how the Bodies confounded one with
another shall be sifted and severed; for God is the Keeper of Bodies and
Elements, he knows where every Atome lies, what belongs properly to every
Person, and how to call it forth. How vain is it, to question Gods Power in
things impossible to our scant Apprehension? yet to widen your Apprehension in
this particular, and to show you an Answer to more then ever was objected,
Though all adventitious matter should be separated, and none should remain but
that which issued from the loins of our Parents, and was also derived from our
first Parents Adam and Eve, God out of those few drops could raise distinct and
proper bodies to all mankind.

Nihil Deo Impossible nisi quod non vult, (says Tertullian) nothing is
Impossible to God but what he will not do, and what he will that is necessary.
Now God has revealed his will by appointing and using the means of Raising
us, and has past his promise by his Son Jesus; that through him he will raise
us up at the last day. This is the Fathers will which has sent me (says our
Savlour) that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should
raise it up again at the last day, Ioh. 6. 39. v. so that now Gods Justice and
Truth are deeply at stake, till there come a Resurrection. His Justice would
have stood engaged however, though no such means, no such promise had been
revealed; if we grant, there is a God, it may be evinced out of moral
principles, that of necessity there must be a Resurrection, though we knew not
how: for either there would be no difference of Virtue and Vice in respect of
Reward and Punishment, and so divine Justice would be but a Bug-beare, or else
there would be need of a Resurrection, that they who have been prosperous in
their wickedness might be called to account hereafter, and they that have here
suffered by Virtue might then shine in Glory. But since the means are
expressly revealed, since Christ has paid the price of our Resurrection, and
God has promised to make it good, since many Martyrs have died in defense of
this Hope, upon Gods word, God is further engaged both to Christ and Them, both
in his Justice and Truth, to perform his purpose and promise. And we may be
sooner induced, to yield, that there is no God, or that he was not at all our
Builder, nor Christ his Corner stone, then that he should begin to build and
not make an End, or Promise an End and not fulfill it. Wherefore without
doubting, let us here rest our Hope, that as the Glory of the Father has
raised his Son, so he will perfect his Glory in raising his Sons Attendants.

Thus you have heard the three Degrees of our Comfort; the Safety of Life in
Death, in that it is hid; the sure means of safety for that it is bid with
Christ; and the strong Author of the means, in that it is hid with Christ in
God.

It remains now on our part, that we be not affrighted with Death, because it
is no longer the Iaw of Destruction, but the Gate of Life, and a Passage into
Everlasting Happiness. Cics de contem: morte.
If those bold Spirits, that having heard of the Immortality of the Soul, or
at least her Rest from misery, presently dispatched themselves out of this
World, without any other call, or further warrant, but only this Notion; if
those undaunted Venturers had been likewise taught the Resurrection of the Body
to a better Life, and had such an occasion to spend their lives, as is now
offered to us, the defense of Religion, Laws, and Liberties; doubtless their
Courage had been so inflamed, that either through too much Valor they would
undeservedly have found their seeking, or have gotten such honor, as might
stay the desire of death by pursuing the death of others, and by taking content
in Acts of Glory. I do not wish any to run this Course unadvisedly; a sober
Expectation of Death or Victory, in useful Service, both by charging and
sustaining, is Valor sufficient, and not too much, for any Souldierly Martyr.

Further since Christ by the wood of his Cross has sweetened our bitter
waters, and died for Sin to make Death easy, since he has risen again to
lead us the way into Life Eternal, I cannot too much inculcate this other
Lesson; that we walk not disorderly in this our Pilgrimage; least we turn the
Gift of Life into double Death, the Joy of our Hearts into Horror and
Judgment, our Rising into Bottomless Falling. In it self, nothing can be so
sweet and desirable as the Appearance of the Lord Jesus in the Resurrection.
Why should we so confound the Conscience with unrepented Guiltiness, that we
should need Mountains to cover us from his Presence? Let us rather amend our
ways, and live carefully, that we may die with Comfort and Rise with Joy; that
the Hope of a Joyful Rising may remain comfortably sealed unto us in the time
of our Hiding, by Assurance of the Holy Ghost, through Christ the Means, and
God the Author. To whom be all Thanks, Praise, Dominion, and Glory, now and
for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

