Five Cases of Conscience by A Learned Hand.

London Printed for Henry Brom 1666.



FIVE CASES OF Conscience: Occasionally Determined BY A late Learned Hand.

HEB. xi. 4. He being Dead, yet speaks. LONDON: Printed by E. C. for Henry
Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane, 1666.

A LETTER from a Friend concerning the ensuing Cases.
SIR,
HAving perused the Papers you sent me, I can safely vouch them for genuine,
and not in the least Spurious, by that resemblance they wear of their Reverend
Author; and therefore you need not fear to bring them to the Public test, and
let them look the Sun in the face.

It Is true, their first Commission was but short, and long since expired, they
being designed only to visit, and respectively satisfy some private Friends;
yet I cannot see what injury you will offer to his sacred ashes, if, by
renewing that, you send them on a little farther Embassy for the common good.

Indeed the least remains of so matchless a Champion, so invincible an Advocate
in Foro Theologico, like the filings and fragments of Gold, ought not to be
lost; and pity the world was not worthy many more of his learned Labors.

But -- Praestat de Carthagine racere quam pauca dicere; far be it from me to
pinion the wings of his fame, with any rude Letters of Commendation; or, by way
of precarious Pedantry, to court any man into a belief of his worth, since that
were to attempt Iliads after Homer, and spoil a piece done already to the life
by his own Pencil, the works whereof do sufficiently praise him in the gates.

All I aim at is, to commend and promote your pious intention, to give the
World security, by making these Papers public, that they shall never
hereafter stand in need of any other hand to snatch them out of the fire, a
doom (you say) once written upon them.

Nor do I less approve your ingenuous prudence in determining to prefix no
Name, it being as laudable not to speak all the Truth sometimes, as to forbear
telling a Lie for advantage.

It Is (I confess) the mode of late to hang Jewels of Gold in a Swines snout; I
mean, to stamp every impertinent Pamphlet with* some great Name, or voluminous
Title to make it vend the better (Laudat venales qui vult extrudere merces) at
which the gul'd Reader repenting his prodigality of time and patience is forced
to cry out all along, Beaucoup de bruit, peu de fruit, and in the end sums up
its just character in a few words, Nil nisi magni nominis umbra.

But yours is the only method to deal with wise and rational men, who are not
so easily taken with Chaff, (the multitude or greatness of words and names) as
with the true weight and worth of things.

Yet let me tell you, that whoever is not a mere stranger to your learned
Authors former Tractates, must needs spell his name in every page of this
without any other Monitor.

I have no farther trouble to give you* unless I should bespeak your vigilance
over the Press, which by her daily teeming and inexpertness, or (at least)
negligence of the Midwife is went of late to spoil good births with monstrous
deformities, and unpardonable Errata; so you will avoid a double guilt
contracted by some without fear or wit* of abusing your critical Reader on the
one hand, and your most judiciously exact Writer on the other* and (if that may
contribute any thing more) very much gratify the most unworthy of his
Admirers* and

Your Friends, etc.

The Five Cases Determined.
1. Of Marrying with a Recusant, page 1 2. Of Unlawful Love, 15 3. Of a
Military Life, 57 4. Of Scandal, 109 5. Of a Bond taken in the Kings Name, 120
The CASE of Marrying with a Recusant.
SIR,
YOurs of July the 2d. I yesterday July the 6th. received. In Answer to the
Contents whereof (desiring that my Services may withal be most humbly
presented to my very much Honored Lord) I return you what my present thoughts
are concerning the particulars therein proposed. First, For Marrying a Daughter
to a Professed Papist (considered in Thesi, and as to the point of Lawfulness
only) I am so far from thinking the thing in it self to be simply, and toto
genere, unlawful; that I dare not condemn the Marriage of a Christian with a
Pagan (much less with any other Christian of how different Persuasion soever)
as simply evil and unlawful, inasmuch as there be Causes imaginable, wherein it
may seem not only Lawful but Expedient also, and (as the exigence of
Circumstances may be supposed) little less then necessary so to Intermarry. But
since things lawful in the General and in Thesi, may become (by reason of their
inexpediency) unlawful pro hic and nunc, and in Hypothesi to particular
persons; and that the expediency or inexpediency of any action to be done, is
to be measured by the Worthiness of the end, the conjuncture of present
Circumstances, and the probability of good or evil consequents and effects,
prudentially laid together, and weighed one against another; I conceive it
altogether unsafe for a Conscientious Person (especially in a business of so
great concernment, as the Marrying of a Child) to proceed upon the General
lawfulness of the thing, without due consideration of Circumstances, and other
requisits for the warranting of particular Actions. Now as for the Marriage of
a Daughter with one of so different Persuasion (in point of Religion) as, that
they cannot join together in the same way of Gods worship, which is the case of
a Protestant and a Papist, it is very rare to find such a concurrence of
Circumstances, as that a Man can thence be clearly satisfied in his Judgment
(without just cause of doubting the contrary) that it can be expedient to
conclude upon such a Marriage; and how dangerous a thing it is to do any thing
with a doubting conscience, we may learn from Romans 14. 13. For the evil
consequents probably to ensue upon such Marriages, are so many and great, that
the conveniences which men may promise to themselves from the same (if they
should answer expectation, as seldom they do to the full) laid in an equal
balance thereagainst, would not turn the scale; and in one respect the danger
is greater to marry with a Papist, then with one of a worse Religion; for that
the main principle of his Religion, (as a Papist) is more destructive of the
comfort of a Conjugal Society, then are the Principles of most Heretics; yea
then those of Pagans or Atheists; for holding that there is no Salvability but
in the Church; and that none is in the Church, but such as acknowledge
Subjection to the Sea of Rome; it is not possible, but that the Husband must
needs conclude his Wife to be in the state of Damnation, so long as she
continues Protestant: whence one of these two great inconveniences will
unavoidably follow; that either he will use all endeavors, engines, and
artifices, to draw her to the Church of Rome (as indeed who can blame him to
bring his Wife into a capacity of everlasting salvation?) the restless
importunity whereof (together with the ill advantages they of that party can
make from the sad Confusions that are amongst us in these times) it will be
very hard for one of the weaker sex perpetually to resist; or else in case she
stand firm in her Religion against all Assaults and Attempts to the contrary,
whatsoever he may be toward her in outward carriage, he cannot but in his
inmost thoughts, pass judgment upon her, as an obstinate and desperate
Heretic, and (so living and dying) an accursed and damned Creature. These are
sad things both; and it is not conceiveable how a Woman so matched should live
with any comfort, or ever hope to see a good day, wherein she shall not either
be tempted from her Religion, or censured for it; what assurance can she have
of his good affections toward her, who is bound not to permit any better
opinion of her, then of a Reprobate and Castaway? It is possible there may be
so much good nature in the Husband as to take off somewhat from that rigidness,
which otherwise the Principles of his Religion would bind him to, or so much
discretion, sweetness, and obligingness in the Wives demeanor toward him, as
to preserve a good measure of Conjugal Affection between them, notwithstanding
their different persuasions: This I say, is possible; and where it happens so
to be, it rendereth the condition of the Parties so much the less
uncomfortable; and that is the utmost of the happiness, that is to be hoped for
from such Marriages: and I think there cannot be produced many examples
thereof; yet even there, there cannot be that cordial Affection, and fullness of
Complacency (wherein yet the chiefest happiness of Conjugal Society consists)
that would be, if the same Parties (supposed to be of the same Qualifications
otherwise) were also of the same Religion. I omit other oeconomical
differences, that may and very frequently do (occasionally) arise, betwixt
Husband and Wife from this difference in Religion, as concerning the
Entertainment of Friends, the choice of Servants, the education of Children
(very considerable things all) besides sundry others perhaps of less moment;
yet such as are apt to breed Discontents and Jealousies, and sometimes break
out into great Distempers in the Family: Such Marriages therefore I should
utterly dissuade; especially in the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty, where
there is choice enough otherwise to be had of Persons of equal Degree, Estate,
and Education of the same Religion to match withal: Kings and Princes for
reasons of State, and because there is little choice of Persons of equal
Dignity with themselves, are therefore oftentimes by a kind of Necessity, put
upon such Marriages; yet even there, where they are certainly the most
excusable, it has been observed that such Marriages have proved for the most
part unfortunate.

The other Particular proposed in your Letter is concerning the Marriage of a
Daughter to one that Professes the Protestant Religion, but having had Popish
Parents, may be suspected (though he deny it) to be that way inclined. The
resolution whereof (as of most other Cases and Practical Questions) will depend
very much upon the consideration of Circumstances, whereunto being altogether a
stanger, I am less able to give Judgment in the Case with any certainty; only
in order to the resolution of the Question, these (to my understanding) seem to
be the most proper and important Enquiries.

First, Whether the Parents of the young Person be living or no, one or both?
if both be dead, the temptations from them (which in such Cases are wont to
prevail very much) are by their Death clearly superseded; and then the danger
is by so much less: but if either be living, there can be little security of
the Sons continuance in the Protestants belief, (notwithstanding his present
profession thereof) when he shall be assaulted with the whole authority of them
to whom he owes reverence.

Secondly, With what degree of confidence, and with what kind of asseverations
he professes the one, and denies the other Religion; for although they that
out of design put on a counterfeit vizor, use all the art they can to dissemble
it; yet very seldom can it be done so cunningly, waringly, and constantly, but
that at some time or other, the dissimulation will unawares bewray it self to
the eye of a curious observer.

Thirdly, What measure of understanding the young Person (who is you say of
great Abilities for his Age) has in the Fundamental Articles of the Christian
Religion; those I mean, wherein the English and Romish Churches are at
agreement, for in those the substance of Christianity consists; he that
rightly understands those Catholic Truths taught in the Catechisms of both
Churches, and concerning which all Christendom (in a manner) are at a perfect
accord; and then will but suffer himself to consider, that the Church of
England does not impose upon the judgments and consciences of her Members, any
thing to be believed, or received, as of necessity to Salvation, then what is
truly Catholic, and by her Adversaries confessed so to be; and consequently
that the difference betwixt her and the Romish Party, is wholly about those
Additionals or Superstructures, which they of the Roman faith require to be
believed, and received with like necessity as the former; but appear to us of
this Church respectively, either evidently false, or of doubtful truth* or not
of absolute necessity to be believed; I say, whosoever well considers this,
may rest satisfied in his judgment and conscience, that the Faith taught and
professed in the Church of England, is a plain and safe way to lead a Christian
Believer to Eternal Salvation, if he withal lead his life and conversation
answerable thereunto.

To the last particular in your Letter, all the return I have to make is no
more, but an humble acknowlegement and sense of his Lordships noble favors
toward me, in entertaining an opinion of me more suitable to his own goodness
and ingenuity, then to my merit: I know not, nor desire to know of any
occasions likely to draw me into those parts so distant from me (being grown
into years, and infirmities, that render me very unfit for long Journies)
unless the business of my Sons Marriage, which occasioned my late Journey to
London, require a second thither in Michaelmass Term. But I am so sensible both
of the trouble and charge of such Journies (besides some inconveniences to my
affairs at home, whilst I am long absent) that I will avoid it, unless there
be no other remedy: I shall not willingly decline any employment (within my low
and narrow sphere, both of outward condition and parts) wherein my service may
be any ways useful or but acceptable, to that noble and excellent Person; but
truly Sir, I conceive there will be little need of my further endeavors, as to
that particular expressed in yours, whether what I have written now give
satisfaction, or not; there are persons nearer hand, whom I know to be much
fitter for an employment of that nature, then myself, who have ever studied
Peace more then Controversies; and namely one at the next door to Hatton House,
whose sufficiency and readiness in that kind is well know to Mr. Geofery
Palmer: Sir, I wish you happiness, desire your prayers, and rest,

July 7. 1656. Your faithful and humble Servant.

The CASE of UNLAWFUL LOVE.
TWo Gentlemen who were very good Friends, and both of them Married, used to
converse together familiarly; one of these took a special liking in the company
and conversation of the others Wife, and she answerably in his; which
afterward proceeded to some degree of Love; which though ever restrained, and
preserved without any violation of Chastity, grew yet in the end to this issue,
that they mutually vowed either to other, that if happily either of them should
at any time be freed from the Bond of Matrimony (either he by the death of his
Wife, or she by the death of her Husband) that party so freed should continue
afterward unmarryed, and stay for the other, till the other should be freed
also, though it were during life: Now so it is, that this Gentlewomans Husband
died, and her affections and resolution so altered, that gladly she would
Marry, if she might be released of the Engagement of that Vow; or persuaded of
the unlawfulness or nullity thereof.

Concerning the present Case, as it is propounded, sundry Points are needful to
be resolved, that so we give a right judgment de praeterito, of what is already
done for the time past, in respect of the Gentlewomans former promise, and
sound direction also de futuro, which is further to be done for the time to
come, in respect of her present distresses.

Point I.
. 1. First of all, It is considerable, whether the promise made by the
Gentlewoman and her friend, were properly a Vow or no? so it is called in the
proposal of the present Case, and that agreeable to the common use of speech
with us here in England, who extend the word [Vow] very far; neither shall I
make scruple in the ensuing Discourse, sometimes to call it so; for Loquendum
ut Vulgus. But to speak properly, a Vow is a word of a narrower extent then a
Promise, every Vow being indeed a Promise, but not every Promise necessarily a
Vow; Votum soli Deo fit, sed Promissio potest fieri etiam Homini Aquit 2 2. q.
88. 5. ad. 3.
Promises may be made indifferently, either to God or Men; but Promises made to
Men are no Vows: wherefore it is usually inserted into the definition of a Vow,
as a condition Promissio Deo facta est essentia v^ti, Ibid.
essentially requisite thereunto, that it be made unto God alone, insomuch as
to make a Vow to any Creature, is interpretative to exalt the Creature into the
place of God, and so to make it an Idol, which is clear not only from the
express Psalm. 76. 11.
precept of God, and the constant Numb. 21. 2. Judge. 11. 30. 1 Samuel 11. 25.
examples of godly men, and the usual Judge. 11. 36. Psalm. 56. 12.
phrases of the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures; but also from the universal
consent of all learned men, both Divines and others, and even of Sponsio qua
^oliga^nur Deo. Cic. 2. Leg.
Heathens also: This Gentlewomans promise then being made to the Gentleman her
Friend alone, as was his also to her, and neither of both to God, is therefore
to be taken for a mere Promise; but no Vow.

. 2. If for more confirmation thereof, she bound herself also by Oath, as it is
not unlike, yet is it no more for all that but a mere promise still, and not a
Vow; for albeit the very using of an Oath be a calling in of God into a
business, and the person that takes an Oath does thereby set himself in the
presence of God; yet an Oath calls him in only to be a Iurare nihil est aliud
quam Deum Testem invocare Aquit. 2. 2. qu. 89. 1. ex, Aug. de ver. Apost. Sermon.
R. 28. quod affirmas, si D^^ Teste^^ promiseris, id tenendum est, Cic. 3. de
Offic.
witness, without any intent to make him a party to the business, whereas in a
Vow he is made a party and not only a witness; whereunto agree those forms so
frequent in holy Scripture, in Oaths both assertory, and stipulatory; Genesis 31.
50. Judge. 11. 10. Mal. 2. 14.
The Lord be witness between us: Romans 1. 9. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
God is my witness: 1 Cor. 1. 3. Phil. 1. 28.
I take God to Record, and the like: for even as when a promise is made unto
God, whereunto for the more solemnity, the presence of some men is required as
witnesses, such a Promise is to be held for a Vow; because it is made to God
alone, although in the presence of Men: So on the other side, when a Promise is
made unto some Man, whereunto for the more assurance, the presence of God is
required as a witness, such a Promise is not to be held for a Vow, because it
is made unto Man alone, although in the presence of God.

. 3. Nay further, if the Gentlewoman when she thus engaged her self, did use
these very words [I VOW TO GOD] or words to that effect, as we know is often
done in solemn Promises, between Man and Man; yet neither is that sufficient to
make it properly a Vow; for to judge rightly when Question is made, concerning
any particular promise, whether it be a Vow yea or no; we are not to be guided
so much by the forms of speech, (which are subject to change, impropriety, and
many defects) as by the true intention and purpose of the parties, especially
the Promiser. Now what was the whole intent and purpose of these Parties, when
they mutually bound themselves in such sort, as in the Case propounded is laid
down, no reasonable man can be ignorant; even this and no other, to give as
good assurance as they could devise, either to other, and to receive the like
assurance again, that the thing by them agreed on and promised, should be
faithfully performed; and if either Oaths or Protestations, were also used by
way of Confirmation, they are all in common intendment to be taken as tending
to the self same purpose, without looking at any further thing; and clearly
where the Promiser has no intention to bind himself to God, but to Man only,
the Promise so made is no Vow, whatsoever formality of words may be used in the
making of it.

. 4. Neither is the examination of this Point a curiosity either in it self
fruitless, or impertinent to the Case in hand; for albeit, in that which
seems to be the very main point of all, viz. the power of binding the
Conscience, there be no material difference between a Vow and an ordinary
Promise; a lawful Promise no less binding unto performance, than a lawful
Vow; and an unlawful Vow no more binding than an unlawful Promise: yet there
is some difference between them, and that of some importance too, in respect of
the relaxation of that Bond; for since it belongs to him to whom a bond is
made, to grant a release thereof: It belongs therefore to God alone to
release the obligation of a Vow; and no man has power so to do, because the
Vower by his Vow, binds himself to God, not to Man: whereas the obligation of
a mere Promise, wherein the Promiser binds himself but to some Man, may be
released by that Man; and a release from him is to the conscience of the
Promiser a sufficient discharge from the said obligation: which Consideration
of what use it will be in the present Case, will in the due place further
appear. In the mean time we have evidently proved, that this Gentlewoman bound
her self by Promise only, and not by Vow.

Point II.
. 5. We are next to enquire concerning the validity thereof, whether or no the
Gentlewoman Romans 7. 2.
having an (...). Husband at that time, were so disabled in that respect from
making such a promise, that the promise then made by her, without the Husbands
consent, was utterly void from the very beginning: For the Wife is under Romans
7. 2.
the Law, and 1 Cor. 7. 4.
under the power of her Husband, and so is not sui juris, nor can bind her self
by Vow, Oath, Promise, or otherwise without the privity and consent of her
Husband, which consent we may presume this Gentlewoman never had, the promise
being of that nature, that it had been not only immodesty, but even madness, at
all to have sought it. And it is certain from the Numb. 30. 3.
Law of God, by Moses (to the equity whereof Christians are still bound,
because it is founded upon right Reason, and the light of Nature) that every Vow
and Promise made by a person that of right has not power to make it, is de
jure nullum, altogether void from the first instant, and binds the Party no
more then if it never had been made.

. 6. If any Scruple shall arise from this Consideration, that albeit the
promise made by the Wife in her Husbands life time, bind her not without his
consent, so long as he lives, because she is all that while under his power;
vet after that she is loosed from the law of her Husband by his death, it shall
thenceforth bind her, because she then becomes sui juris: I say, this makes
no difference at all in the Case; for this is a general Rule, that what Quod
initio vitiosum est, non potest tractu temporis convalescere, l. 29. F. de Div.
Reg. ju.
act soever had a nullity in it at the first, when it was done, cannot by any
succeeding tract of time grow to be of force. As if a young Scholar shall be
instituted to a Benefice, being not of lawful years; or a young Heir make a
sale of his Lands during minority, the institution and the sale as they were
both void at the beginning, so they shall continue void, as well after the
Clerk is of lawful years, and the Heir at full age, as before; so that to judge
of the validity of any Vow, Promise, or Covenant, respect must be had to In
stipulationibus id tempus spectatur quo cantrabimus, L. 18. F. eodem.
that very time wherein it was made, and to the present condition of the person
at that time, and not to any time or condition before or after: If then there
were indeed, a nullity in this Gentlewomans Vow, at the time when she made it,
there is a nullity in it still; and if it were indeed of no force to bind her
then, neither is it of any force to bind her now.

. 7. But after due pondering of the matter, I rather think, that there was not
a nullity in the promise at the first, neither (supposing it had been rightly
qualified in other respects) was it void upon this ground; because although she
were not sui juris absolute, it is sufficient yet, that she was so quantum ad
hoc. For a person that is under the power of another, has yet power of
himself, (and so is sui juris) to dispose of all such things, as by the free
disposal whereof, the proper right of him, under whose power he is, is no way
prejudiced; but in whatsoever may be prejudicial to the other in any of his
Rights, he is juris alieni: neither may dispose thereof without the others
consent; and if such a person shall make a vow, or other promise concerning any
of those things, wherein he is sui juris, such vow or promise shall stand good,
and is not void (though possibly it may be vicious in other respects) from the
inability of the person that makes it: As for example, if a Servant shall
promise to his own Father to work with him a day or two in Harvest, this
promise unless his Master consent thereunto, shall be void, because the Master
has a right in the Servants work, to which right it would be prejudicial if
the Servant should dispose thereof after his own pleasure; but if such a
Servant shall promise unto his needy Father to relieve him from time to time
with a third or fourth part of all such wages as he shall receive for his
service, this promise shall be good of it self; neither shall the Masters
consent be requisite to make it so, because the Master has no Right at at all
in the Servants wages; wherein to be prejudiced by the Servants disposing
thereof according to his own mind: Now forasmuch as the Husbands right and
power over the Wife cease together with his life, (as the Apostle Romans 7. 2,
3.
expressly teaches) and so cannot be prejudiced by any act of the Wife done
after his Decease; It is manifest that the Wife is sui juris to make a vow or
promise during her Husbands life time, concerning something to be done after
his decease, in case she overlive him, because his right will be expired before
the performance of the said vow or promise be due; as to give instance in a
Case not much unlike to this in question; A Wife estated upon her Marriage in a
Iointure or Annuity for her life of an 100 l. per annum, makes a promise in
her Husbands life time to one of her younger Brothers, that has but short
Means, to allow him thence forward out of the said Estate, 10 l. yearly toward
his better Maintenance; this promise is void unless the Husband consent,
because the performance thereof would prejudice him in that right which he has
during his own life in the Revenue of all the Lands and Annuities estated upon
the Wife in Reversion; but if such a Wife shall promise to her said Brother to
allow him the said yearly sum of 10 l. after the decease of her Husband, in
case she survive him, this promise is good, though made by the Wife in her
Husbands life time, and without his consent, because the Husbands right (being
to cease before the Promise is to be performed) cannot be prejudiced by the
performance thereof: And this I find agreeable to the best Casuists, whose
peremptory opinion it is, that Vot^ uxorum vel s^rv^rum exequenda illo tempore
quo (...) sui juris, (...) vel domini non possunt (...) 65. and alios.
Husbands and Masters cannot disannul such Vows as their Wives and Servants
make concerning things to be performed at such times; as they shall be from
under their power. Which position if it be true (and I yet see no reason why it
should not) then doubtless this Gentlewomans Vow made to her friend, though in
the life time, and without the consent of her Husband, was not originally void
from the inability to make it, upon this respect; that she was not sui juris so
to do.

Point III.
. 8. But though I dare not say, neither do I think, that there was a nullity in
it, in respect of the person, to make it void that way; yet it cannot be
denied, but there was much obliquity in it, in respect of the matter, to make
it otherwise utterly unlawful: in which Point much need not be said, because
the truth thereof will soon appear; for there was in it manifestly a threefold
obliquity, and thereby also a breach of three several Commandments. The first
obliquity was in respect of the unlawful affection from which it proceeded;
which being placed upon another than the Husband, and that in such a high
degree, as to produce a promise of this kind, must needs be vicious, both for
the object and for the measure, and such inordinate affection by the Analogy of
our Saviors Mat. 5. 28.
expression of the Law, is a violation of the Chastity of the heart, and so a
breach of the Seventh Commandment. The Second obliquity was, the want of that
true conjugal love which ought to be between Husband and Wife, who ought to
have a mutual Prove. 5. 18. Eccles. 9. 9.
complacency and delight the one in the other, and to be Prove. 5. 19.
satisfied at all times with the Love, Comfort, and Society of the one of the
other; which Love if it had been so thoroughly rooted and seated in the
Gentlewomans heart, as it ought to have been, would have crushed all motions of
unlawful affection toward a Stranger in the shell, long before they could grow
to such strong Resolutions, as by the making of this vow it appears they did;
for it is: not to be imagined that such a vow as this could be made, and really
intended to be performed, but we must needs suppose in the parties so vowing, a
kind of weariness at the least, if not rather some inward loathing of the
present Yoke; which being contrary to that honor thst Married persons owe to
their yoke fellows, is so a breach of the Fifth Commandment, A Third obliquity
there was also as a breach of the Tenth Commandment, against those express
words [Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife] every Man and Woman being to
content themselves with that lot, which by Gods Providence has befallen them,
as in all other things, so especially in that which is of the greatest weight,
the lot of Marriage, without coveting or lusting after that which it has
pleased the wisdom of God already to dispose upon another; this Gentlewomans
promise then being such, as (if it should be brought to an impartial Trial
before that Tribunal which God has erected in every ones conscience, and
according to the tenor of that Divine Law, whereof no Christian should be
ignorant) could not be reasonably acquitted from any one of these sinful
Obliquities, but not possibly from them all, we may conclude to have been an
Act utterly unlawful.

Point IV.
. 9. But because a Man may contract an Obligation by an act not free from
Obliquity, as the saying in such Cases is [Fieri non debet, factum valet] and
we have a Ruled case for it in the Covenant, which the Princes of Israel made
with the Gibeonites, which though Josh. 9. 14, etc.
sinfully made at the first, was Ibid. ver. 19* 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2.
necessarily to be kept afterward: We are therefore to enquire into a Fourth
Point, Whether the Gentlewoman having de facto bound her self, by such an
unlawful promise, be still, by virtue of the said promise, bound in conscience
to the performance thereof, or not? To answer directly to the Point, I take it
she is not bound thereunto; for that saying [Fieri non debet, factum valet]
has place only there, where the obliquity that makes the act unlawful, may be
severed from the substance of the matter, about which the act is conversant; as
when a Man voweth to do something, which is not in it self, and for the
substance of the matter simply unlawful to be done; but yet voweth it, either
rashly, and without due advisement, or for some indirect and unwarrantable end,
or upon flight and insufficient inducements, or the like, any of these
Obliquities are enough to make the vow unlawful, in respect of the act of
vowing; yet because these Obliquities do not necessarily pass upon the matter
it self, or the thing Vowed, but may be severed from it; therefore though the
act of vowing were sinful, the Vow it self for all that may stand good* and
bind the Party to performance, but where the sinful obliquity passes upon the
substance of the matter, or adhereth inseperably thereunto; there not only the
act of vowing is sinful, but the performance also becomes unlowful: In which
Cases those other sayings ought rather to have place, Iuram ent^^^ non debet
esse vinculum iniquitatis in malis promissis rescinde fidem, in turpi vot^ muta
decretum, etc.

. 10. If it shall be said, that this difference being admitted, will nothing
avail the Gentlewoman in our present Case, to free her from the obligation of
her said promise; because here the matter of promise seems not to be in it
self unlawful, especially on her part; for if the Gentleman her Friend, were
presently free from the bond of Matrimony by the death of his Wife, as the
Gentlewoman now is by the death of her Husband, they might perform what they
had promised either to other, by joining themselves in Matrimony, and that
without sin, which is an argument that the sinful obliquity was only in the act
of promising; which therefore they ought to repent of: but does not cleave to
the matter of the promise, which therefore they ought not to violate. To this I
answer, what in my opinion is true, That if both the Parties were now actually
free from the Marriage bond, they not only lawfully might, but were in
conscience bound (unless some other lawful impediment should hinder) to join
themselves together in Matrimony, because none of the forementioned
Obliquities, which made the former act of promising unlawful, would fall upon
the after- act of Marriage to make it unlawful. But that Allegation is not
direct to the Point in hand, nor to the Case as it is propounded; for it may be
observed from the very from of the proposal, that the matter of the promise,
wherein the Parties interchangeably bound themselves, was not to Marry
together, when they should be both free; upon which false ground the Objection
runs; that was indeed the thing they aimed at therein; but the end is one
thing, and the matter another: but the very matter of the promise was, the
continuance of their mutual affection either to other, with a resolution to
stay the one for the other, when either Party should happen to be free from the
bond of the present Matrimony, till the other should be also free. The
continuance of which affection and resolution, will upon examination be found
subject to all, or some of the three Obliquities aforesaid; and therefore as
such an affection and resolution, could not be entertained at the first without
sin; so neither can they be now continued in without sin; for, so long as they
continue, the first of the said Obliquities remains still, both on his part
and hers; the second indeed by the death of the Husband is ceased on her part,
but remains still on his; and the third contrarily being on his part ceased,
remains still on hers, as will evidently appear to the understanding of any
Man, that shall take the pains to examine it.

. 11. Yea, and it is further to be considered, that the continuance of such an
affection and resolution may be likely to expose as well the one as the other
to the assault of more strong and dangerous temptations, now since the Husbands
death than before. The danger on the Gentleman's part, this, least by how much
he is now by the Husband death, put into a nearer possibility of enjoying his
unlawful hopes, he should grow into so much the deeper loathing of his own bed,
and and so much the earnester longing that, that which is now the only obstacle
to the fruition of his desires were removed; of which thoughts, who can tell
how fearful the issues might be? the sly Enemy being most ready at all times,
to practice upon the corruption that is in the naughty heart of Man; but
especially having a mighty advantage against him, when he has got his
conscience as it were in a snare, by the engagement of some vow, promise, or
settled resolution. And then on the Gentlewomans part, the danger, this, least
having by her own voluntary act debarred her self, of that which is the only
allowed remedy, namely Marriage; she should by the just judgment of God, be
left to the rage of the Disease of burning Lusts: for upon what sound warrant
can she be confident, or with what Reason expect, that God should either
preserve her from, or assist her against temptations in that kind, though she
should seek it of him with Fasting, and Prayers, and Tears, so long as she
tempceth Him by persisting in a wilful obstinacy, against that means of Remedy
which He has appointed? Indeed, where the hand of God himself has prevented
the use of the Remedy (as if the Husband should be long detained in a foraign
Land, or held in close Prison, or taken with a dead Palsy, or some other
bodily impotence, or the like) there the Wife might comfortably implore Gods
assistance to preserve her from being overcome by carnal temptations, and
assuredly rest upon it by faith, if she be not wanting to her self, in putting
to her own utmost endeavors, because she has a Promise to rest upon for that
purpose; and God who is faithful in all his Promises, is also faithful in this,
of not suffering his Servants to be tempted beyond their strength: but for the
Wife, by some inconsiderate act of her own, wherein she wilfully and
obstinately persisteth to refuse the appointed means, and yet to expect Gods
assistance nevertheless, for which she has no Promise, is a fear, full
tempting of God; and it is but a just thing with God, and she suffers it
worthily for her presumption, if she be left to her self, and so wrestle with
the temptation by her own strength, and so be overcome thereby: For God who
has after a sort tied himself by his free and gracious Promise to protect us
in Via Regia, so long as we walk in the ordinary known way that he has
appointed for us, has no where bound himself to vouchsafe us the like powerful
protection Extra viam Regiam, if we refuse that high way, to walk in bypath
of our own choosing, which present dangers on both sides, and the former
Reasons laid together, do sufficiently prove, that the Gentlewoman is not at
all bound to perform her said unlawful Promise.

Point V.
. 12. Hitherto we have proceeded in genere judiciali, by considering of the
nature and validity, lawfulness and obligation of the Promise for the time
past: Now we are to deal in genere deliberativo, and to consider what in
Christian wisdom is meetest to be farther done, for the better both quieting
and regulating of the Conscience for the time to come; wherein, submitting to
Men of better judgments, and experience, I give my advice as follows, viz.

First, That the Gentlewoman out of the serious consideration of the Promises,
be brought to a through feeling of the grievousness of those sins which she
has committed against God, and wherein she has so long continued, that so she
may not only be humbled in his sight with true contrition of heart, and remorse
for the same, proportionably to the greatness thereof; but also be provoked to
a proportionable measure of thankfulness unto him, for his gracious goodness in
restraining her unlawful affections from breaking out into actual uncleanness,
and preserving her when she had run out so far in an evil way, from rushing
into more desperate extremities; for, Erranti nullus terminus: as a stone that
tumbleth down a steep hill; so Man's corruption when it is once set on going,
has no stay of self till it come to the bottom of Hell, unless the Lord lay a
stop in the way: and it is to be acknowledged a blessed act of Gods
mercimerciful Providence, when we have let loose the reins to our own lusts in
any kind, if they be bridled from running headlong into tall excess of
wickedness; great sins require more then ordinary Repentance, and great mercies
more then ordinary Thankfulness.

. 13. Secondly, That having thus humbled her self before God by inward
Contrition, she also make an outward free Confession of her said sins, to him
whom God has delegated a Ministerial Power to remit sins, that she may receive
Comfort and Absolution from his mouth; I mean the Priest: and this I think
meetest to be done to the Bishop of the Diocese, with one or more of his
Presbytery, such as he shall think good to take to him to assist him; or else
to some other by his appointment: because the Bishop is the chief Pastor, to
whom the care of Souls most immediately belongs, within his own Diocese;
besides, that both the quality of the person (if she be of eminent Place and
Rank) and the weightiness of the case, make it so much the more proper for his
cognizance: But howsoever it would be done to a Man of approved wisdom, and
such an one, as will be both compassionate and secret, wherein the more freely
she shall make confession of her said sins, and the more cheerfully she shall
subject her self to perform such further acts, whether of Humiliation or
Charity, as the Bishop or Priest shall advise to be done, in testimony of her
unfeigned Repentance, the more sound comfort undoubtedly with the sentence of
Absolution bring unto the Soul.

. 14. This done, then thirdly, that she endeavor by all fair means, that the
Gentleman also her friend and partner, in the aforesaid Promise, may be brought
to the like sight and acknowledgment, of the great sins that were enwrapped in
that act, and to a true persuasion withal, that so long as he continues in the
former unlawful affection and resolution, he is not only still under the guilt
of those sins, but also in near danger (without Gods great mercy preventing it)
of falling into other and greater sins; for which purpose it will be expedient,
that he be truly and effectually dealt withal, (yet with as much lenity as the
state of his Soul will suffer, and with all possible secrecy) and that by some
such person especially as he holds a reverend opinion of both for Learning
and Piety; and to procure that this be done, the Gentlewoman ought to take it
into her own especially care; which it will concern her to do, not only in
Christian Charity for the good of his Soul, but in Christian wisdom also for
her own future benefit and security.

. 15. For when he shall be once thoroughly convinced in his judgment and
conscience, of the unlawfulness of the Promise made between them, and of the
sinful inconveniences that attend the continued purpose of fulfilling it, there
is a fair way open for that which is next and fourthly to be done, viz. That he
be then earnestly moved for his Relaxation of the said Promise to the
Gentlewoman, which (being it was but a mere Promise, and no Vow, as in the
first Point has already been showed) he has in himself a full power to make,
and this also to be done in the presence of such Persons, as they shall make
choice of betwixt themselves to be witnesses of the said Release; for although
the Promise being utterly unlawful, has no power to bind, and so there needs
no Release, as of absolute necessity, in regard of the thing it self; yet such
Release may be very behoofeful in regard of the Gentlewomans person, and for
the quieting of her conscience, in case there should remain any fears or
scruples behind, least perhaps her promise should still bind her; for as Satan
labors to benum the conscience with security to make men bold to commit sins
without scruple, till he has drawn them into the snare; so when he sees them
offer to get out of the snare again by Repentance, he is very cunning to inject
needless Scruples and Fears, if possibly he can, to hold them in by means
thereof; wherefore I hold it very expedient that such a Release, if it may be
obtained, be not neglected; for thereby the binding power of the Promise,
though we should suppose it lawful, should be quite taken away, so as there
need no scruple to remain: Abundans Cautela non nocet, is a safe Aphorism; as
wary men when they pay moneys, besides seeing the Book crossed, will crave to
have an Aquittance: So it may be some satisfaction to the Gentlewomans mind, to
have a solemn Release before witness, which say it should be more then needs,
yet can do no harm howsoever.

. 16. Fifthly, that the Gentlewoman all the while before, and so ever after
that time only excepted, when the Relaxation should be made, for then it is
requisite, she should be personally present) carefully avoid the company of
that Gentleman, and he likewise hers, so far as conveniently may be; but at
leastwise, by no means converse together with any familiarity, especially in
private; least the former unlawful affection should rekindle in either Party,
and so the disease after some measure of cure grow to a re-laps, which many
times proves more dangerous then the first malady; for commonly when the
unclean spirit is ejected by Repentance, if once he make himself master of the
heart again (as he will attempt it, and without a good watch happily effect it)
he will be sure at the re-entry, to come with a new strength, and that
sevenfold, to what he had before, and needs must the end of that man be worse
then the beginning* she must therefore resolve to shun all likely occasions of
falling again into the same snare, so far as the quality of her person and
condition, and the common affairs of life will permit: And she had need also to
use her best care and diligence (praying to God daily for Grace to strengthen
her thereunto) to withstand all wicked temptations of the flesh that she be no
more foiled thereby, neither entangled again in such sinful inconveniences, as
by Gods mercy she shall be now freed from.

. 17. If in these Directions, I be thought to deal with too much rigor and
strictness, it would be considered:

First, that it is much better to put the patient to a little more pain at the
first, then by skinning the wound overly, to heal it deceitfully; and to suffer
it to rankle inward, which will breed a great deal more grief at last.

Secondly, that since all men (through corrupt self-love, and privy Hypocrisy,
cleaving to our depraved nature) are partial toward themselves, and apt to
deal more favorably with their own sins, then they ought; it is therefore
safest for them (in their own Cases especially) to incline to severity, rather
then indulgence.

Thirdly; that there may be a mitigation used of the present Directions,
according as the state of the Patient (in the several variations thereof) shall
require; but that (for the avoiding of partiality) not to be permitted to the
sole liberty of the party himself, but rather to be done by the advice of a
Ghostly Physician, who if he be a man of such wisdom and moderation, as is
meet, will I doubt not allow a greater indulgence in case he see it expedient,
then it could be safe for the Party her self to take of her own head.

Fourthly, That in all this Discourse, I take not upon me to write Edicts, but
to give my advice, that is to say, not to prescribe to the judgment of others,
if any shall see cause to dissent, but to deliver my own opinion (being
requested thereunto by a Reverend Friend) with such a faithfulness and freedom
as becomes me to do; and truly those Parties whom it most concerns, ought
not to blame me for it howsoever; inasmuch as there can be no cause to suspect
that I should be carried with any personal respects to be partial either for or
against either of them; so God is my witness whom I desire to serve, I had not
any intimation at all given me, neither yet have so much as the least
conjecture in the World, who either of them both might be.

The CASE of a MILITARY LIFE.
SIR,
IN referring over your friend to me, you have pitched upon one of the
unfittest persons in the World, to be consulted in cases of that nature; who am
altogether a stranger to the Public Affairs of Christendom, and understand
nothing at all of the mutual Interests, Relations, or Transactions of foreign
Princes or States; yea so little curious have I been to inform my self, so much
as where the Stages lay of the chiefest Actions of these latter times abroad,
or what persons were engaged therein; that I have something pleased my self
(perhaps too much) with my own ignorance in our home Affairs: accounting it
among the happinesses of my privacy and retiredness, in these unhappy times;
that amidst so much fury and bloodshed on every side, it was never my hap to be
within the view of any Battle or Skirmish; nor did I ever see so much as a
Pistol discharged, or a Sword drawn against any single person, since the
beginning of the War. I could have wished therefore, since my opinion herein
is desired, that I had had the opportunity to have advised with some more
knowing Men, and of greater experience and judgment then my self in these
matters; or at least, that you had sent me, together with the two enclosed
Letters, a transcript of your Answer (whose Judgment I do with great reason
very much value) unto the former of them; for there I assure my self, I should
have met with such Materials as would have served me for a good foundation to
work upon; yet to satisfy your desire, so far as in me lies, and the rather
for the Gentleman's sake your friend, (who though unknown to me by face, or till
the receipt of your Letter, so much as by Name; yet by his Letters appears to
be a Person of Piety and Ingenuity, and a great Master both of Reason and
Language) I have endeavored (with reservation of Place for second thoughts,
and submission to other Judgments) to declare what my present apprehensions
are concerning the whole business; wherein the resolution of such doubts, as in
point of conscience may arise, or of the most and chiefest of them, will (as I
conceive) very much depend upon the consideration and right application of
these Four things, viz.

I. The different sorts of Men's employments in general. II. The nature of the
Soldiers employment in particular. III. The end that Men may propose to
themselves in following the War; or what it is that chiefly induces them
thereunto. IV. The condition of the Person so employed, or to be employed.
I. Considerations of Men's employments in general.
1. Men's employments are of two sorts.

The one of such as any man may (without blame from others, or scruple within
himself) follow, merely upon his own score, if he find himself in some measure
able for it, and have a mind thereunto; he has a power in himself (and that
jure proprio, by a primitive and original right, without any necessary
derivation from others) to dispose of himself, his time and industry, in that
way; for the exercise of which power, there needs no special or positive
warrant from any other person, but it is presumed he is (as in relation to
others) sufficiently warranted thereunto in this, in that he is not by any
Superior Authority, Divine or Humane, forbidden so to do; and upon this
account it is, that Men betake themselves, upon their own choice and liking, to
Husbandry, Merchandise, Manual Occupations, the study of the Law, etc.

2. But another sort of Employments there are, whereunto a man has not a just
right primitively and of himself, neither may he lawfully exercise the same
merely upon his own choice, but it is necessary, that that power should be
derived upon him from some such person or persons, as have sufficient Authority
to warrant him for so doing: Such is the Employment of a Judge, a Constable, an
Arbitrator, etc. which are therefore said to be juris delegati, because the
right that any man has to such Employments accrueth unto him by virtue of that
Authority which he receives by Delegation or Deputation from some other that
has a right by Command, Election, Nomination, or otherwise to Empower him
thereunto, whence are those usual forms, Quo jure, Quo warranto? Who made thee
a Judge? By what authority do thou those things? or, Who gave thee this
authority? A man may betake himself to the Study, and so to the Practice of the
Laws, of his own accord, but he may not take upon him to be a Judge without
Commission from his Sovereign; so he may follow Husbandry, and Merchandry, upon
his own choice, but he may not do the Office of a Constable, unless he be
chosen by the Neighbors; or of an Arbitrator, unless chosen by the Parties
thereunto.

3. Now although as well the one sort as the other, after a Man has addicted
himself to the one, or is deputed to the other, may not unfitly be termed his
Particular Calling, and the latter perhaps with better propriety, then the
former, (for the word Calling properly imports the Action of some other
person) yet according to the common Notion, which by custom of speech among us,
we have of these terms [The General and the Particular Calling] the Employments
of the former sort, are usually taken to be the Particular Calling of Men; and
those of the latter sort, will be found (if well considered) to fall rather
under the General Calling, as branches or parts thereof, inasmuch as the
exercise of such Employments, is a part of that moral duty, which all Men
(according to their several respective Relations) ought to perform to others,
being by them empowered thereunto, upon the tie of Obedience, Contract,
Friendship, etc. but for distinction sake, as the Latins make a difference
between vitae institutum and munus, we may call those of the former sort, Man's
profession, and those of the latter sort his Office; so a Man is by Profession
a Lawyer; by Office a Judge; by Profession a Husbandman; by Office a Constable.

4. To bring this Discourse home to the present business, we are next to
enquire, to whether sort of the two, the Employment of a Soldier does more
properly appertain; that is, whether we are to conceive of it as a Profession
which a man may at his own choice fix upon, as his particular vocation; or
rather as an Office of duty and service, which he is to undergo, when by the
command of his Prince, he shall be thereto appointed, and so to come rather
under the notion of a General Calling? To me it seems clearly to be of the
latter sort. For (1.) in the passage of St. Paul, 2 Timothy 2. 4. No man that
warreth, entangleth himself in the affairs of this life, that he may please
him that has chosen him to be a Soldier; the word is (...), applied to him
that warreth with the note of Universality ((...)) annexed, seems to imply,
as if he supposed that no man might go to war, unless he were chosen for that
service by some other person that might Command it. Nor do I see (2.) what good
construction can be otherwise made of that speech of our Savior, Mat. 26. 57.
All they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword; or what should be
the crime there intended to be signified, by this Phrase of taking the Sword,
if it be not this, for a man to take the Sword into his hand by his own
authority, before it be put into his hand by that Supreme Power, whom God has
immediately trusted with the bearing and managing of it. Now (3.) can that be
said to be a Man's Profession, or particular calling, which Men of all
Professions are (in obedience to their Governors, and for the service of their
Country) bound to perform whenever they shall be by Lawful Authority, called
and appointed thereunto.

5. If these premises will be granted, it will soon appear, that the answer to
the Question proposed, in the beginning of the former Letter (as it stands
there in Terminis, and in Thesi, abstractedly from the consideration of the
person in the said Letter charactered, and those other circumstances which may
vary the Case) must be in the Negative, viz. That it is not lawful to be a
Soldier, upon the same account that men apply themselves to Trades, to the
practice of the Laws, and to other (like) civil Employments.

II. Consideration of the Soldiers Employment in particular.
1. THe care that ought to be in every Man that takes upon him the exercise of
any Office, to be well assured that he has a sufficient right and warrant for
so doing, is no less requisite in a Soldier, then in any other Officer; yea
rather by so much more requisite in him, then in most of them, by how much the
matter he is conversant about, (viz, the Life of Man) is of greater
consequence, then are the matters in which most of them are employed; for the
Soldier every time he draws his Sword in the field, is by the very nature of
his Employment supposed to do it either with a resolution to lose his own, or
to take away his enemies Life; else he does but prevaricate, and is unfaithful
in the service he has undertaken: In which service if it be his fortune either
to kill or to be killed, he is actually and deeply guilty; but if neither, yet
that very resolution makes him intentionally guilty of the Transgression of
the sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill* in case he have no good right, so
far to dispose either of his own, or the others life. It concerns him
therefore to look well to that; both what power belongs to him, as a
Soldier, and by what Authority he claims the exercise of such a power.

2. Most certain it is, that properly and originally the power to dispose of
Man's Life (Ius vitae and necis) belongs to God alone, who is Dominus vitae
and necis, as the sole author of Life, so the sole Lord and Master of Life and
Death; some part of which power, since it has pleased him for the good of
humane Society, (in the preservation of Peace and Justice, and the punishment
of such as are enemies to either) to communicate unto men (which power so
communicated, is that which we use to call Ius Gladii, or the power of the
Sword) it may therefore be lawfully exercised by men; but within that latitude,
and in order, as God has communicated it to them, but not farther nor
otherwise.

3. Now God has not given to any man, either Sovereign or Subject, power over
his own life, to destroy it by his own voluntary act in any Case; no nor yet
power to expose it to the certain hazard of being destroyed by another in
fight, saving in the one only case of just and necessary defense: under which
notion is to be comprehended also the hazzarding of the Princes life, in a just
and necessary War; out of which Case, whosoever shall expose his life to
hazard by fight of his own accord; if he perish in it, cannot be excused from
being guilty of his own death, nor from usurping a power over his own life,
which God has not allowed.

4. Add hereunto the injustice, that he thereby does to his Sovereign and
Country. God has given to his Vicegerents here on Earth, a right in, and a
power over the persons of all their Subjects, within their several respective
Dominions, even to the spending of their lives in their Countries service,
whenever they shall be by their Authority required thereunto, which they
cannot therefore prodigally spend at their own pleasure, without apparent wrong
done their Governors interest; for as he that shall kill a private person, is
not only an offender against God, and against that person, in depriving him of
life; but is also by the Interpretation of the Laws, (according to the
importance of the ancient form of Enditing) an offender against the Crown and
Dignity of his Sovereign, in depriving him of a Subject, and consequently of
the interest he had in his person, and of the use he might have had of his
service: so he that is so prodigal of his own life as to hazard it upon the
Sword in fight, without his Sovereigns Authority, if he perish, is not only
guilty of his being accessory to his own destruction; but does also an act
injurious and prejudicial to his Sovereign, at whose service and disposal
(under God) his life and person ought to be.

5 And as his presumption cannot be excused, if he be slain upon that account;
so neither can he justify the killing of another (though an enemy) in Battle,
if he have no other warrant for taking of Arms, then from himself; for War is
a kind of judicature, wherein the Prince that wageth the War, is as the Judge
that gives sentence of death against the Enemy, as a disturber of the Peace of
his Country, and all that engage in the War under him, are but as so many
executioners of the sentence pronounced by him; and he that executes the
sentence of death upon another, must do it by some lawful Authority, as well
as he that pronounces the sentence; or else he is a Murderer, as well as
This. Now the Soldier that by fighting on the one side, does ipso facto
declare against those of the other side as Enemies; if he so engage of his own
mind only, he does indeed, upon the point, take upon him the Office of a Judge,
being none, and so runs before he be sent: or if it shall be said in his
behalf, That he does it not as a Judge, but as the Executioner of the sentence
pronounced by that Prince into whose service he has put himself, and who by
the accepting of his service has sufficiently authorized him to do such
execution: Your Letter has suggested to me this ready Answer, That the
sentence pronounced by one that is not his Lawful Sovereign, and by
consequence, whose judgment he is not warranted to follow, is of no more
validity (as in relation to him) then Sententia lata a non judice, and
therefore can be no warrant to him to execute it. True it is, that with license
from his Sovereign, he may serve under another Prince, and consequently do such
execution, as we now speak of; because the Sovereign by so licensing him, does
really referr him over from himself to another judgment, and consequently
warrant him to follow the same, and so render him capable (upon the others
acceptance) to execute it. All this is true, but nothing to our purpose,
because it does destruere suppositum; for we now suppose the Case of a Soldier
putting himself into service, under a Foreigner of his own mind, and where
himself thinks good, without the knowledge or license of his own lawful
Sovereign.

III. Consideration of the end to be proposed by the Soldier.
1. Since the goodness or badness of Men's actions and undertakings depends
very much upon the end which they propose to themselves therein; he that would
desire to lead a Soldiers life, must narrowly examine his own heart, what it
is bona fide, and in very deed, that first and chiefly induced him to that
desire, and what affinity there is between that end, which he proposes to
himself, as the main scope of his Intentions, and that which is or ought to be
the true end of the thing it self; the true end of the War, which only can
warrant it lawful, we all know is the necessary preservation of a Commonwealth
in Peace, by repressing (or preventing) all Seditions, or Hostile attempts to
the contrary; but as in other things it often happens, according to that
saying [Finis non idem est artis and artificis] so here many times the warrior
has another end to himself far distant from that of War, and the more distant
ever the worse; as on the contrary, the action is ever by so much the better,
by how much the intention of the person has a near affinity with, or a
directer tendency unto that for which the thing it self was ordained.

2. Now the ends, which men desirous to follow the Wars do usually propose to
themselves in so doing, are especially one of these Three, Lucre, Honor, or to
do their Country service; concerning which we are to enquire severally,
whether or no, and how far forth, any of these may be a sufficient inducement
to a Christian, or but moral man, to follow the Wars, as his particular
Calling, or Profession.

3. For Lucre first: He that has a warrant otherwise to employ himself as a
Soldier, may doubtless lawfully both receive pay and require it; John the
Baptist allowed the Soldiers (...), Luke 3. 14. And St. Paul thought it not
reasonable, that any man should go to warfare at his own charges, 1 Cor. 9. 7.
Nor so only, but he may also, in putting himself upon that employment (being
called thereunto) have an eye to his profit, and an actual intention. (if
moderate and otherwise rightly qualified) of getting himself a livelihood, yea
and of raising himself a fortune (as we call it) by his service therein; even
as men in the choice of other Professions, or undertaking Offices, usually do
and so may do without sin; but to propose to himself Lucre, as the main end and
scope of following the Wars (as it is evident by their actions, that very many
of our Common Soldiers do) is one of the most hateful and unrighteous things
in the World: so far is it from being a sufficient inducement to any man to
make that his Profession. How can it be imagined to be consistent with that
Charity, Justice, and Moderation, that should be in every Christian to set up a
Trade of killing of Men for Money? The mere Mercenary Soldier therefore, or a
Soldier of fortune (as we call him) I find every where inveighed against; as
one of the greatest Scourages or Plagues of Mankind; for such men never look at
the Cause they engage for, whether it be right or wrong, but at the pay and
prey; and therefore they take their best Markets, and care not whom they undo,
kill and oppress, by Violence, Rapine, Murder, and Plunder, so they may but
enrich themselves thereby, and can do it with safety: Nor will they stick, if
there be an advantage to be made of it; and that they can spy a fit opportunity
for it, either to betray their own party, or to revolt to the other side, or to
do any other act, though never so base and dishonest, Nulla fides pietasque
viris qui castra sequuntur.

4. Next the intuition of Honor and Glory to be acquired by worthy Actions in
the Wars, may be not only lawful, but commendable also and useful in a
Soldier; and truly this of Glory is a more noble end, of a higher pitch, and
more befitttng a Generous spirit by much, then that of Lucre is; both because
Men of eminent Birth, and Place, and Parts, are aptest to be affected with it;
whereas Gain works most upon the lower sort of Men, and also because it
puts Men upon more worthy Enterprises, and such as may win Honor and
Reputation; and restrains them from those baser acts of Injustice, Cruelty,
and Rapine, to which the desire of Gain usually prompteth the mercenary Man;
but yet as to the warranting of the Soldier for making that his Profession,
(which is the Point now in hand) this of Glory is of no importance, then was
that of Gain; for the right end of War being a safe and honorable Peace,
there is something common to both (consequential to the desire of Glory; as
well as of Gain) so inconsistent with that end, that it sets them at an
equal, or not much unequal distance therefrom: For as he that aims to gain by
the Wars, cannot but desire the continuance of War, that so his hopes of gain
may continue; so he that aims to get himself Glory by the Wars, cannot but
desire the continuance of War, that so the opportunities of increasing his
Glory may continue; for there is a Dropsy of vainglory in the Ambitious, as
well as of Avarice in the Covetous, as thirsty and unsatiable in the one, as in
the other; whence it comes to pass, that both the one and the other use their
utmost wits and endeavors to find occasions to lengthen the Wars, and to
obstruct and retard (so much as lies in them) the advices of Peace: Nay, let
me add moreover, that in this respect at least (viz. as to the effectual
hindering of Peace) that of Honor and Glory, is much the more dangerous end of
the two; because this humor is aptest to seize upon the greatest persons, and
such as by privilege of their birth, eminency of their places, activeness of
their spirits, glory of their former actions, or other like advantages, bear a
great sway in Counsels, and are of some authority in the Armies: whereas the
Peasantry, in whom most of the other humor (that of base Lucre) abounds,
have neither the wit nor the power ordinarily to do much harm. It has
therefore been a constant observation in all times and places, that the
embroyling most Commonwealths in Wars, in the mean time, and working their
ruin in the end, has grown from the restlessness of some ambitious spirits,
and their immoderate thirst after Honor and Glory:

-- Patriam tamen obruit olim
Gloria paucorum, and laudis titulique cupido:
Juvenal Sat. 10. 5. So that if there be any possibility of finding a person
capable to take upon him the employment of a Soldier, as his proper
Profession, it must be among those that propose to themselves the same end
therein, that is, or ought to be the end of War; that is to say, those that
after an impartial search of their own hearts, can truly say (and not pretend
it only) That their chiefest aim in applying themselves to the Wars, is to do
their King and Country service, in procuring or preserving the Peace thereof:
which no man can truly say, but he that prefers the public Good, and the
Peace of his Country, before all private interests. The trial whereof is, if he
take up Arms with this Resolution, and by his after carriage make it good, not
to do any act, or enterprise any thing for his own benefit, glory, or safety
that may hinder; nor to refuse any service or hazard, that may probably
promote the obtaining of that end, which Qualification supposed, I deny not but
that a Man may find warrant to go on in the way of a Soldier as his proper
Profession, and that in two Cases.

6. First, that which (in the nature of the (Employment it self) is rather an
Office then a Profession (such as we have already shown the Soulders
employment to be) may yet become to the person so employed, as his proper
Profession, if he shall be appointed thereunto by lawful Authority; especially
if it be done with a declared intention whether expressly or interpretatively
declared) of continuing him for life, or for any long space in the same; and
that the said employment during such his continuance therein, shall require his
personal attendance, either constantly or for the most part: As for example, a
Lawyer by Profession and Practice, is by his Sovereign called to be a Judge of
either Bench, or a Baron of the Exchequer, the Office of a Judge is now become
his Profession, or particular Vocation, because it is supposed that he is to
continue in that Office; and the execution of that Office will require his
attendance thereupon, in the yearly Terms and Circuits: but if the King shall
appoint a Sergeant or Counselor at the Law, by his particular Commission to
ride this Summers Circuit, into such and such Countries, and there to execute
the Office of a Judge, the Party so constituted and appointed has by virtue of
that Commission, full power to do the Office of Judge in that Circuit, and is
to be received and honored with the title of Lord, and all other testimonies
of honor and respect, in as much ample manner as other Judges in their
Circuits are; yet does he not thereby come to be denominated a Judge, as if
that were his proper Profession, or ordinary Calling, as in the former Case;
because he is empowered to execute the Office of a Judge, but during the time
of that Circuit only: Nor is his attendance upon that Office any longer
required, or so much as allowed him. In like manner, if the King of England
shall make choice of some person of Quality to be Governor of Dover Castle, or
of Barwick, that Office then is as his Profession or particular Calling;
because it is to be supposed, he is to continue in that employment, and to
attend the same, until the Kings pleasure be further known therein: but if the
King upon some sudden Insurrection and Invasion should raise an Army, and make
choice of some person of like Quality to have the Conduct thereof, for the
Suppressing or Repelling such Insurrection or Invasion, his Employment in that
service being but temporary and to determine, as soon as the business were
ended, should not otherwise then in courtesy, denominate him a General; or at
least not be esteemed as his permanent profession, but only as a transient
Office: This is one Case.

7. The other Case (which is more pertinent to the business of these Letters)
is of such as desire to employ themselves in the exercise of Arms in Foreign
Service, that they may attain to such knowledge or experience in the Art
Military, as might the better enable them to do their King and Country Service,
whenever there should be need thereof; for since the Manegery of War, is
long since grown into an Art, and that not to be learned from Books, or from
private study; but to be acquired by much practice, and experience, and
diligent observation: and the rather, for that the particular Rules of that
Art, do not stand at such a certain stay, as those of most other Arts do, but
are daily altered and improved by new inventions: It is very necessary for
every State to be well provided of a good number of such persons of their own
Nation, as should be expert and skilful in that Art; least they should be
forced, if an unexpected War should happen, to call in Foreigners for
assistance, which is both dishonorable and dangerous: the necessity hereof too
well appears by the evil consequents of the neglect of it in this Nation in
these latter times, especially in the Reigns of the two last Kings, by reason
of the long Peace; and (which commonly breeds out of it, as the rust and
canker thereof) tenderness of Education, and voluptuous living. The Nobility
and Gentry of England in the generality of them, had so much degenerated from
the Martial Prowess of their Ancestors renowned in all Histories, that in the
beginning of these unnatural Wars, there were very few to be found of our own
Nobility and Gentry, fit to have command in an Army, or that knew any thing
belonging to the Art of War; insomuch as use was made on both sides of
Mercenary Men, and most of them Scots, who being for the most part bred up
abroad (in France especially, a place of much action) had learned experience
more then our English had in such matters, by which advantage they had so wound
themselves into the chief places of Command, and had such an influence into the
Councils of both sides, that the War was in a manner wholly ordered by their
directions, witness the great power that Ruthen, Urrey, King, Meldram, etc. had
in the Armies on either side.

8. The weightiness then of Princes Affairs, upon all emergent occasions
rendering it necessary for them, not only to have power to command their
Subjects of whatsoever Rank or Profession to serve as Soldiers in their Wars;
but also to provide aforehand for a supply of able men, both for places of
Command, and to execute other parts of that service, which cannot be done,
unless a considerable number of persons be trained up in the exercise of Arms,
and bred Soldiers: It is consequently necessary, that some persons be, either
by their Authority appointed, or at least by their permission allowed, to
addict themselves to a Military course of life, as their proper Profession and
Calling, which Authority or Permission from their Sovereign, will sufficiently
warrant to their conscience the choice of that Profession; supposing (as now we
do) that the intention be right, the person meetly qualified, and all other
Cautions in respect of the matter, manner, circumstances and otherwise duly
observed.

9. The necessity of learning this Art granted, there may sometimes follow a
further necessity, viz. of learning it abroad, and after it is learned, of
exercising it abroad, and in Foreign service, and that in these two Cases:
First, when the Soldiers own Country, whereunto his service is principally, and
in the first place due, has either the happiness to be in a settled Peace and
Freedom, under the Government of a lawful Sovereign; or the unhappiness to be
in such servitude, through the prevalency of an Usurping Power, that no
Resistance can be made there against; for in the former Case, there is no
exercise at all of the Soldiers faculty in earnest; and of what little avail
to the attaining of any solid knowledge, or experience in the Art Military,
such superficial trainings, as were used (and those but very seldom neither) by
the Lieutenants of the several Counties here in England, with the
Country-Captains and Muster-Masters are (besides that our own reason will tell
us) the Rawness and Unserviceableness of our Trained-bands in the beginning of
the late Wars did abundantly manifest: and in the latter Case, the Soldier if
he will have Employment at home, must either engage on the behalf of an unjust
Power, or else run upon his own certain destruction to no purpose.

IV. Consideration of the condition of the Person.
1. THis must be considered too; for the different conditions of persons, may
make a great difference in the lawfulness or unlawfulness of their actions,
according to the old saying, which holds true in this sense also, no less
then in that other in which it is commonly used (relating to Men's corrupt
partialities) Duo cum faciunt idem, non est idem. In your Friends second
Letter, I find a demand made (as in the way of Reply to some passage of your
Answer to his first Letter) to this purpose; Suppose two great Princes (as
France and Spain for instance) have had long Wars together, and the justice of
the Cause appear neither more nor less, on the one side, then the other, if in
case a third Prince or State, out of a sincere desire to Establish the Peace of
Christendom, after other offers and mediations for that purpose made in vain,
might lawfully join in Arms with the one party to force the other to Peace,
why a private person might not as lawfully (having the same intention) enter
into Arms for the same purpose; and the reason of demand thereof is, because
every Prince or State is (in relation to other Princes and States) but as one
private man to another; for being called to the Regiment of his own people
only, he is but as a private man in Aliena Republica.

2. But that there is a great difference between a Sovereign Prince and a
private person in this affair, it cannot be denied; insomuch that I find in the
very same passage (put in as it were by way of Objection) three very
considerable differences. First, That Princes may, and sometimes are obliged by
Articles and Covenants for the defense of their Allies to take up Arms, which
cannot be the case of private Men. Secondly, That Princes may see cause to set
in for their own safety and interest, least the prevailing party might grow too
Potent, and so themselves might be oppressed by him. Thirdly, there is a
greater probability in a Prince of compassing that Noble and Glorious end, The
Peace of Christendom, then can be in a private Man. All these differences are
allowed there as true; but yet excepted against, as not contributing any thing
to the justice of the cause which is here the Question.

3. If these do not, yet a Fourth difference there is, that will (as I
conceive) manifestly contribute thereunto, to wit, that Ius Belli, is Penes
Principem solam: in the business of War, Princes have a judicial, private Men
an executive power only; and he that has no power but to execute the sentence
of a Judge, is bound to wait the Judges sentence before he offer to act;
otherwise he shall act beyond his lawful power, which is unjust: Not but that a
Prince if he raise a War where he ought not, is unjust too; even as a Judge is
unjust, which pronounces a wrong sentence: but herein is the difference
between them for taking up of Arms. The Prince having jus agendi in that
behalf, may do it justly, and he may do it unjustly; yet where he does it
unjustly, does but abuti jure suo: but the private person, not having jus
agendi, in that respect cannot (without the Authority of the Sovereign) do it
otherwise then unjustly; because in so doing, he does without leave uti jure
alieno, which is always unjust. It is one thing for a Man to use (whether well
or ill) a power that of right belongs to him, and another to assume a power
that of right belongs not to him; the one is not unjust, unless he abuse his
Power; the other is if he use it at all.

4. Neither perhaps will the Reason alleged to the contrary (viz. that a
Prince in point of justice and power is in Aliena republica but as a private
person) bear so much weight as is laid upon it, if one Point be well
considered, which I think will prove a truth, though it be very tenderly
handled; otherwise it may prove very dangerous, both because it may seem a
Paradox to those that have been little conversant in public Affairs; as also,
and especially, because it may, by racking it too high, be easily wrested to a
mischievous construction, for the Patronage of any Tyrannical action; the point
is this, that Iustitia politica; and Iustitia privata, have not in all the same
adequate measure. Princes are bound to be just, as well as the meanest private
men are, and obliged to keep faith both with Friends and Enemies, every whit as
exactly and punctually, without equivocation, reservation, or other eluding
devices, as they; of all this no man doubts: but it is not therefore
necessary, that the Rules of Justice, whereby the Councils and Actions of
Princes and States, in their mutual Relations are to be measured, should be
precisely the same with those which measure the dealings of Private men one
with another.

5. And the reason of the difference is evident; private Men's Controversies may
be decided, and their Injuries repressed or punished, by the positive Laws of
the State whereof they are Members; and consequently subject to be ordered in
all their dealings by those Laws; which positive Laws (together with the Law of
Nature, and the Divine Law, which are common to all Men) are the adequate Rule,
whereby the Justice of private persons, and of their actions is to be measured;
but since Princes and States are not subject to any such positive Laws common
to them both, as may determine their Differences and Controversies; The great
necessity of Humane Affairs, has (for the good of Mankind in the preservation
of Peace) introduced by the common consent of Nations, another Law of larger
extent, that which we peculiarly call Ius Gentium, or the Law of Nations
(whereof that which we also call the Law of Arms* is one special part) by
which the Law of Nations (together with the Law of Nature, and the Divine Law
as aforesaid) the Justice of Princes and States, and of their Actions, is as by
the proper and adequate Rule thereof to be measured. Whence it comes to pass,
that sundry things are by the Rules of Politic Justice allowed as lawful and
just between Princes, which between private men, would by the rules of mere
moral Justice, be condemned (and that deservedly too) as unjust and unlawful:
There are sundry Arcana Imperii, some arts and simulations for maintaining
Intelligence abroad, for concealing and disguising Councils at home, in the
Instructions of Ambassadors and menaging of Embassies, in making Alliances and
Confederacies, but especially in the persuance and effects of War, which seem
much to swerve from the ordinary Precepts of moral Justice; which yet (fide
integra and citra dolum malum) are by the consent of Nations allowed to be
used, and so must be, or else there could be no secure living in the World in
any Society; that saying of his Atque ipsa utilitas justi prope matter and
aequi, had somewhat of truth and reason in it.

6. The truth and reasonableness of what has been said will appear (omitting
many other) in these few Instances. First, When a Town is taken by the Enemy,
by the Law of Nations, the spoil thereof falls to the Conqueror, which if he
give to the Soldiery to plunder (as usually is done) every Soldier thereby
acquireth a just Right and Dominion in that which he can lay his hand on first,
and take into his Possession. Secondly, It may sometimes concern a Prince or
State in point of Honor or Safety to vindicate himself by War, for some wrong
offered to his Merchants, or for some Rudeness or Incivilities done to his
Ambassador (for even these, in case Reparation be demanded, and denied, have
been ever held just causes of War; as Amphitruo in Plautus rendereth that as a
sufficient reason of his War, Nimis ferociter legatos nostros increpant) in
this case it is by the Law of Nations allowed him, not only to fight against
the Prince himself, who yet only did the wrong, but to wast his Country, fire
his Towns and Villaeges, and spoil thousands of his innocent Subjects of their
fortunes and lives in persuance of his just revenge; but if a private Gentleman
wronged by his Neighbor should in like manner, in revenge of that wrong, beat
his Servants, vex his Tenants, and seek his or their undoing, the act were
palpably most unchristian and unjust. Thirdly, Since potent Princes, have for
the most part, great Ambitions (and Ambition is a boundless lust) it behooves a
Prince for his own safety, to have a watchful eye over the Motions and Designs
of a potent Neighbor, almost as much as of a declared Enemy; and therefore
wise Princes have been ever careful by all just means to balance their
neighbor Princes and States, as near as they could; in such a proportion as
might hinder the too much overgrowth of any one above the rest: In order
whereunto it has been held lawful for a Prince, laying aside the consideration
of the cause, to join in Arms with the weaker, for his assistance against his
Potent Adversary, who else were likely in a short time to swallow him up,
whereby he should become formidable and dangerous, as well to himself, as to
the other his neighbor Princes and States; upon which account alone, were
there no other reason besides, it would be as just for all Christian Princes to
compose their own quarrels, and to aid the Venetian, and Hungarian, Persian or
Tartar against the Turk, as it is expedient and honorable for them so to do:
but what is thus allowed just in the waging of War between Princes; if in a
wager of Law a private person, should attempt the like, viz. to assist with his
purse and pains, a Poor man against a Rich, without considering the equity of
the cause; the act were (as in the former Instance) palpably unjust and
unchristian: Instances might be produced many more to the same effect, were it
needful: but these I think sufficiently evidence the truth of what I undertook
to show in this particular.

7. There are also sundry other circumstances considerable concerning the
condition of the person, which may render the same undertaking unlawful to one,
which yet may be lawful for another, or more or less expedient or inexpedient
for one then for another, supposing both private persons and Subjects; as
namely, whether he be a person of Honor and Estate, or a man of ordinary rank
and fortune; whether a single man or Married? if Married; whether he have the
consent of his Wife or no? and whether such consent were a free and rational
consent in the Wife, arising from a Judgment convinced of the fitness of the
undertaking, or rather wrung from her by the importunity of the Husband, and
her facility in yielding to the potency of his desires therein? whether the
necessity of his domestical Affairs, and Oeconomical Relations will brook his
absence, for so long a time, as must be spent in that Employment; or will not
rather require his presence and care, for the menagery thereof in the mean
time? and an hundred other like doubts and difficulties meet to be taken into
deliberation, and unprejudicately weighed, against those other probabilities
and inducements, which at first kindled and after fomented his desires, before
he imbarque himself in that Employment: and yet when all is done, it were safer
for him (in my opinion) to forbear then to proceed in his intentions, unless he
shall be assured, that he has the free allowance of his Sovereign, thereunto
either expressed (which would be the clearest warrant for his conscience) or at
leastwise upon very pregnant grounds of probability presumed.

The CASE of SCANDAL.
1. IN judging of Cases of Scandal, we are not so much to look at the event
what that is, or may be; as at the cause whence it comes; for sometimes there
is given just cause of Scandal, and yet no Scandal follows, because it is not
taken: sometimes Scandal is taken, and yet no just cause given; and sometimes
there is both cause of Scandal given, and Scandal thereat taken: but no man is
concerned in any Scandal, that happens to another, by occasion of any thing
done by him; neither is chargeable with it, farther then he is guilty of having
given it: If then we give Scandal to others, and they take it not, we are to
bear a share in the blame as well as they, and that a deeper share too, (Vae
homini, Woe to the Man by whom the Offense comes, Matthew. VIII. 7.) but if they
take Offense, when we give none, it is a thing we cannot help, therefore the
whole blame must lie upon them; wherefore if at any time any doubt shall arise
in the Case of Scandal, how far forth the danger thereof may or may not oblige
us to the doing or not doing any thing proposed, the Resolution will come on
much the easier; if we shall but rightly understand, What it is to give
Scandal, or how many ways a Man may become guilty of Scandalizing another by
his example. The ways (as I conceive) are but these four.

2. The first is when a Man does something before another Man, which is in it
self evil, unlawful, and sinful; in which Case neither the intention of him
that does it, nor the event, as to him that sees it done, is of any
consideration; for it mattereth not whether the doer had an intention to draw
the other into sin thereby or not: neither does it matter, whether the other
were thereby induced to commit sin or not: the matter or substance of the
action being evil and done before others, is sufficient to render the doer
guilty of having given Scandal, though he had neither any intention himself so
to do; nor were any other person actually Scandalized thereby; because
whatsoever is in it self, and in its own nature evil, is also of it self and
in its own nature Scandalous, and of evil example. Thus did Hophni and Phineas
the Sons of Eli, give Scandal by their wretched profaneness and greediness about
the Sacrifices of the Lord, and their vile and shameless abusing the Women, 1 Samuel II. 17, 22. And so did David also give great Scandal in the matter of
Uriah, 2 Samuel xii. 14. Here the Rule is, Do nothing that is evil, for fear of
giving Scandal.

3. The second way is, when a Man does something before another, with a direct
intention and formal purpose of drawing him thereby to commit sin; in which
Case, neither the matter of the action, nor the event is of any consideration;
for it makes no difference (as to the sin of giving Scandal) whether any Man
be effectually enticed thereby to commit sin, or not; neither does it make any
difference, whether the thing done were in it self unlawful or not, so as it
had but an appearance of evil; and from thence an aptitude to draw another to
do that (by imitation) which should be really and intrinsecally evil, the
wicked intention alone (whatsoever the effect should be, or means soever should
be used to promote it) suffices to induce the guilt of giving Scandal upon the
doer: This was Ieroboam's sin, in setting up the Calves with a formal purpose
and intention thereby (for his own secular and ambitious ends) to corrupt the
purity of Religion, and to draw the people to an Idolatrous worship, for which
cause he is so often stigmatized with it; as with a note of Infamy, to stick by
him whilst the world lasts, being scarce ever mentioned but with this
addition, Ierohoam the son of Nebat that made Israel to sin. Here the Rule is,
Do nothing (good or evil) with an intention to give Scandal.

4. The third way is, when a Man does something before another, which in it
self is not evil, but indifferent, and so according to the Rule of Christian
Liberty, lawful for him to do, or not to do, as he shall see cause (yea, and
perhaps otherwise commodious and convenient for him to do) yet whereat he
probably foreseeth the other will take Scandal, and be occasioned thereby to do
evil. In such Case if the thing to be done, be not in some degree (at least
prudentially) necessary for him to do; but that he might, without great
inconvenience and prejudice to himself, and any third person, leave it undone,
he is bound in Charity and Compassion to his Brothers Soul, (for whom Christ
dyed) and for the avoiding of Scandal to abridge himself in the exercise of his
Christian Liberty for that time so far, as either to suffer some inconvenience
himself by the not doing of it, then by doing of it to cause his Brother to
offend; the very Case which is so often, and so largely, and so earnestly
insisted upon by St. Paul, Romans xiv. 13, -- 21. and xv. 1, -- 3. 1 Cor. viii.
7, -- 13. and ix. 12, 22. and x. 23, -- 33. Here the Rule is, Do nothing that
may be reasonably forborne, whereat it is like Scandal will be taken.

5. The Last way is, when a Man does something before another, which is not
only lawful, but (according to the exegencies of present circumstances pro hic
and nunc) very behoofeful, and in some sort (prudentially) necessary for him to
do; but foreseeth in the beholder a propension to make an ill use of it, and to
take encouragement thereby to commit sin; if there be not withal a great care
had to prevent, as much as is possible, the Scandal that might be taken
thereat: for Qui non prohibet peccare, cum potest jubet. In such case the bare
neglect of his Brother, and not using his utmost endeavor to prevent the evil
that might ensue, makes him guilty; upon which Consideration stands the
equity of the Judicial Law given to the Jews, Exodus xxi. 33, 34. which orders
that in case a Man dig a Pit or Well for the use, of his Family, and (looking
no farther then his own Convenience) put no cover on it, but leave it open,
whereby it happens his Neighbors Beast to fall therein and perish, the owner
of the Pit is to make it good, in as much as he was the occasioner of that loss
unto his Neighbor, which he might and ought to have prevented: In this last
Case the thing is not (for the danger of the Scandal) to be left undone,
supposing it (as we now do) otherwise behoofeful to be done; but the action is
to be ordered, and carried on by us, for the manner of doing, and in all
Respects and Circumstances thereunto belonging, with so much clearness,
tenderness, and moderation, and wisdom, that so many as are willing to take
notice of it, may be satisfied that there was on our part a reason of just
necessity that the thing should be done; and that such persons as would be
willing to make use of our example, without the like necessity, may do it upon
their own score, and not be able to vouch our practice for their excuse; even
as the Jew that stood in need to sink a pit for the service of his House and
Grounds, was-not (for fear his Neighbors Beasts should fall into it and be
Drowned) bound by the Law, to forbear the making of it, but only to provide a
sufficient Cover for it, when he had made it. Here the Rule is, Order the doing
of that, which may not well be left undone, in such sort, that no Scandal may,
through your default, be taken thereat.

6. I do not readily remember any doubt that can occurr about the reason of
Scandal, which may not be brought within the compass of these four Rules; and
then the right applying some or other of these Rules, will give some
furtherance toward the resolution of these doubts.

The CASE of A BOND taken in the KINGS Name: Proposed July 1658.
R. C. Was seized in fee of certain Houses of small value, with the
Appurtenances; and in the year 1635, whiles Owner of the said Houses, he
entreated A. B. to be his Surety for One hundred Pounds; and continued the same
at Interest till 1639. At which time he requested A. B. to discharge that Bond,
and in consideration thereof, sells the said Houses to A. B. and his Heirs
for ever; the said R. C. also buyeth of a Merchant a parcel of Goods; the
Merchant being a Receiver of some part of the late Kings Revenue, and under
pretense of a privilege thereby, takes a Bond of the said R. C. for the
payment of Two hundred pounds to himself, but in the Name of the late King, as
if indebted to the King; and under that pretense, procures an extent upon the
Houses sold to A. B. and makes seizure thereof: Was R. C. seized of the same,
when he entered into that Bond?

The said King 1640. published a Proclamation, wherein he declared, That the
taking of such Bonds, was contrary to His Intention, and an abuse of his
Prerogative, and prohibited all such crafty Courses, as tending to the
Oppression of his Subjects; and it is to be noted, that the said Proclamation
was published two years before the extent was executed upon the Houses, which
nevertheless have been held under that extent about fourteen years, which is
beyond the value of the Houses.

The said R. C. died poor, the Merchant is dead also, without any Child,
leaving an Estate behind him of Twenty thousand Pounds, as is supposed; a great
part visible in Lands, as appears by his last Will upon Record.

Advice of Council at Law being taken, how the said A. B. may be most readily
relieved; he is directed to Petition the present Supreme Power to pardon the
Debt, because taken only in the Kings Name, when there is no Debt due to him
from R. C.

As to the Case proposed.
1. I am clearly of opinion, that the taking of Bonds in the Kings Name, to the
mere behoof, and for the advantage of private persons, when there was such Debt
really due to the King, was a fraudulent and unjust act from the beginning; for
though it were not actually forbidden, and so might perhaps be valid enough in
foro externo, till the issuing out of the Kings Proclamation in that behalf;
yet was it in point of conscience unlawful before, as being a crafty course: so
refused by the King himself, and guilty of a double injustice, the one to the
King, as an abuse to his Prerogative; the other to the Subject, as tending to
their appression, as by the Proclamation is recited, and that therefore

2. Neither might the Merchant, whiles he lived, nor ought his Executors, now
he is dead, to make advantage of the Kings Name used in that Bond; nor might be
then, nor may they now, by virtue of the Kings Prerogative, or under the color
thereof, for the recovery of the said Debt, use any way to the prejudice or
damage of the Obligee, or of any Purchaser from him, other then such, as he or
they might have used, in case the Bond had been taken in the Obligee's own
Name, and not in the Kings.

3. If any Proceedings have been made already, in pursuit of the Debt, due upon
the said Bond, upon no other ground or color, then the Prerogative aforesaid,
whereby the said A. B. comes to be endammaged or prejudiced more, then
otherwise he should have been; that the Executors ought to make him some
considerable satisfaction for the same, although perhaps not to the full of
what he has suffered, or would demand; yet in such a proportion, as to the
judgment of indifferent persons (in a case wherein both parties, if they must
do what is fitting and just, are sure to be losers) shall seem reasonable, in
case the parties cannot accord it between themselves.

4. Whereof although, through the corrupt partiality, that is in most, I may
truly say, all men more or less, I do not apprehend any great likelihood (for
neither part would, and yet both must be losers) yet I should advise that trial
were made thereof in the first place; as the most kindly Christian way of
growing to peace, if parties will be persuaded to meet about it, and can be
made Masters of their own passions when they are met; and surely matters might
easily be brought to a handsome conclusion, if both parties, but especially the
Executors, who seem to have the advantage in Law, would not stand too much upon
whatsoever advantage they may seem to have, but (as in conscience they ought)
submit both that, and all other circumstances appertaining to the business, and
indeed their whole mutual demands, to the final determination of that
transcendent Law, which Christ has established, as the only Royal Standard,
whereby to measure the equity of our actions, in all our dealings toward
others, viz. To do as we would be done unto; or which comes to one, Not to do
that to another, which if he should do to us (supposing his Case was ours) we
should think our selves scarce justly and fairly dealt withal.

5. But lastly, in case no such accord can be made (either by agreement of
Parties or mediation of Friends, and that through the only default and stifness
of the Executors; A. B. having by all fair ways faithfully sought and
endeavored the same, I see not but the said A. B. may (but not to be done, but
as his last refuge) seek to relieve himself* according to the advice of his
Council, by making his Addresses to such person or personage, as for the time
being, shall be in actual possession of the Supreme Power, and so in a capacity
to overrule the Law, in a Case of that nature, by forgiving that Debt,
whereupon the King was colourably and fraudulently entitled for private
advantage, to the prejudice of a third person, but was not at all a debt owing
to him from the Obligee.

B. P.
17. July, 1658.
THE END.

