ROSEMARY and BAYS: OR, ANIMADVERSIONS Upon A TREATISE Called, The Rehearsal
Trans-prosed.

In a Letter to a Friend in the Country.

Seneca in sap. non cad. Ut quisque contemptissimus est, and maxim ludibrio,
ita solutissimae linguae est. London, Printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the Three
Roses in Ludgate Street, 1672.

To the READER.
THis Letter was written in haste unto a Member of Parliament, in the Country;
And with what Familiarity and Freedom it was at first, written, with the same
is it published. The In-artificial and Private Divertisement of one Friend
being exhibited unto the Generality, with the like Presumption.

HONORED SIR,
I Do not wonder that you so little understand the Rehearsal Transprosed; I
believe the Author himself never did: You had done better to have writ unto
some of the Virtuosi for a Key unto it; since none are so forward to suggest
impossibilities, or so great undertakers for the sense of a Man they never read
or understood, be it Aristotle or the present Writer. The Rehearsal, as it was
Acted at the THEATER ROYAL, will rather puzzle, than inform your
understanding: For, although here are some passages REHEARSED out of the Books
of the Author of Ecclesiastical Policy; yet I do not comprehend, How they are
Transprosed: They being Originally Prose. In the Comedy, which I now send you,
one Bays is represented as having certain Drama Common places; It being (as
it is said) his Method to pilfer from other Men; and If they write in Prose, He
does Trans-verse them; If they write in Verse, He does TRANS-PROSE THEM, or
express the sense of their Poesy in Prose. If you will now examine this New
Book, it will appear like a Mountebank's Ball, or a project of the R. S.
Wherein nothing does answer our Expectation. It cannot be said that the Author
of the Ecclesiastical Policy did Rehearse, or Transprose any considerable part
of His writings; (I except wherein He violates the Act of UTTER OBLIVION) for
No Author (that is fit to be mentioned) did ever hold His Principal Tenets:
They contradict the Fathers, and the Authentic Declaration of Our Church
concerning the Supremacy of Emperors and Kings: Neither is there any power
vested in our King, the which may not descend unto a Woman. Now it would seem
strange that any Woman should confer Ecclesiastical Orders, or administer the
Sacrament of the LORDS SUPPER (Baptism it is thought may be administered by a
Sage Feme) in our Church; And, notwithstanding what is said that the first
Christian Emperors new PONTIFICES MAXIMI (which perhaps is not true, as
Pacidius, or, rather Gothefredus will teach you) yet the Greek Church has a
Council. 6. in Trullo Canon 69. cum notis Zonat.
Canon, that it shall be lawful for no LAYMAN, but the EMPEROR to enter
within the Rails which enclose the Communion Table. Whosoever understands any
thing of Antiquity cannot say that any thing that contradicts this, is
TRANS-PROSED thence; and if you will ask Fleta what power our Kings had
antecedently unto the Rule of Henry VIII. He had no more than totam laicalem
potestatem, a Large power: And albeit Our Law does esteem Him to some Purposes
a MIXED PERSON, yet to extend that saying unto it is utmost latitude, is to
contradict Our Canons. If we look into ancient Governments (the formula of
Regnane Christo, were there nothing else, would justify what I say, as to the
Christians; and the Rex Sacrorum, and Pontificate, as to Rome) there is no such
Connection betwixt the CROWN and MITRE, that Ecclesiastical and Civil power
should be INSEPARABLE. These, and many other Errors, if they have not been
taken notice of, the Author of the Ecclesiastical Policy may be reputed happy
through the Ignorance of HIS ADVERSARIES: But, if what He writ is not
TRANS-PROSED, you will demand, Who it is that is the TRANS-PROSER? I learned it
long ago from the famed Stagirite, that it is more easy to propose Questions
then to solve them; and if you peruse the REHEARSAL, you will find none (or
few) of those Verses turned into Prose, by our late writer. I am certain these
are not:

Before a full pot of Ale you can swallow,
Was here with a whoop, and there with a (hollow Page 62.

Nor the Dialogue betwixt Thunder and Lightning, viz. I am loud Thunder. Brisk
Page 170.
Lightning I. I strike men down. I fire the Town. -- Look to it; We'll do it.
Since these and other passages are not TRANS-PROSED; I do not know how to
justify the TITLE PAGE of this new Book: Mr. Thomas Dring at the White Lion
next Chancery Lane end in Fleet Street, has indeed some reason to gratify the
Author, who has effectually obliged him to the prejudice of his own
reputation. For conversation-sake, I will imagine you to object, that BAYS
(not the word junior) is TRANS-PROSED: If I did not suppose this for
conversation-sake only, I should provoke you unpardonably for one word, or
name, is neither Trans-prosed, nor Trans-versed, if it consist of no more
Syllables. But why must the Author of the Ecclesiastical Policy, be called
BAYS Junior? He was no Roman Emperor, or Victorious Consul, with his Literae
Laureatae. It does not appear that He was a POET, or writ any PLAYS. What is
it then that entitles Him unto these LAURELS? If I should grant that, His
disc^urses are indiscreet, incoherent, stuffed with falsities and
impertinencies; does it thence follow that He is a POETASTER? If BAYS Junior
be, descended from BAYS Senior; it is by an Equivocal Generation, as good
Timber may by corruption produce Worms, or Vermin; and should I enlarge my self
never so much in commendation of the REHEARSAL, the REHEARSAL TRANS-PROSED
would derive no advantage thence.

But I pass from the Title page, as from an evil Portal or Frontis-piece (which
yields nothing of delight, though somewhat of ill Omen) to examine the Ireatise
it self; There are in it several Periods, which show the Author to have had
some Intervals of SI NSE and WIT; and such you may find in the Harrangues of
Enthusiasts, and Madmen, though the speakers do not apprehend the things; Or,
to deal more civilly with the Author. I do not find that His understanding is
proportionate unto his confidence.

It is not manifest unto me, by the Sarracenical Histories; nay, I am morally
certain of the contrary, that Mahomet had not two Companions, which clubb'd
with Him, in making the Alchoran, yet our Author avows it. Page 44.


The Parable of the Bramble, speaking (if we allow that the rest may be easily
granted, or extorted) has a Precedent in Scripture; and though the Author of
the Ecclesiastical policy, do explode the use of fulsome Metaphors, and Page 50.
Scriptural Allegories; yet this Rehearser seems of another opinion, and
perhaps may acquiesce in these inferior Examples of Aesop, Loeman, etc.
However if BAYS Senior be so ridiculous as the Rehearsal represents him. We
may indulge BAYS Junior, without incongruity.

But this Rehearser does spend all his wit upon the Censure of this Parable. He
reserves extraordinary flashes thereof, for the subsequent discourse about the
Situation of P. 51, etc.
Geneva upon the Lake Leman. I do except against his Raillery, by saying that
the Ecclesiastical Politition writ in England, from which the whole Lake lies
South-wards. But I might complain of the Geography of this railer, for either
occasion to be exceeding pleasant, or the vigor of his fancy transported him
into an Error, which every one may see in the large Atlas. The Lake does not
lie due East and West, but bending it self North-wards, and then turning
somewhat West-wards, does form an Half moon, and he spoke without his Compass
Lueus formam si spectes, ad Lunatam accedit. Beae^.
who observed this Lake to the East and West: But suppose this were true, yet
would it not be false to say Geneva seated on the South Side, for all that side
is the South Side, as the opposite to the North neither is Geneva seated
exactly at the end, in the Lake, but upon the Southern terra firma And it seems
strange, that the Assign^ of John Calvin, and Theodore Beza, should be so
unacquainted with the place of their residence. If any concluded that Geneva
had sold Mr. Bays a Bargain; as the Moon served the Sun in the Rehearsal they
showed their want of judgment, and as little of Memory: for the Moon sells the
Bargain unto the Earth, and not unto the Sun, Orbis, O Orbis.

If the Author of the Ecclesiastical Policy, deserve the name of Bays, though
no Epick or Dramatick Poet; we ought not to deny some such like denomination
unto the modern Rehearser, who would seem to act the Comedian, and represents
us six of Mr. Bays his Plays (as He P. 134.
calls them) and instead of Plots, we must expect nothing but Aphorisms or
Hypotheses. Pa 105.
What? Aphorisms, and Hypotheses of Plays? This Language would better become
an Astronomical, or Philosophical Treatise, then a Comedy. Well, I see the
Rehearser will not deserve the Bays; I will therefore term him Rosemary, and
then the whole Contest will be brought to this summary, that there are two
persons in the world that trade much in Rosemary and Bays, But Rosemary!
though you would have acted the part of Gideon, upon this Politicion of
Succoth, and clawed him away with Briars, for his Parable of the Bramble, and
mis-placing of Geneva: Have not you placed your Scene ill, where you represent
Bays, as Page 65.
Chaplain in a Noble-mans House, and directing his reverence toward the
Gentle-womens Pew? whereas if we understand any thing of this Nobleman, no
Women resort unto his Chapel, or Table.

Though I am not of their opinion, who imagine, that the Priesthood is really
consolidated with the Regal power in England: yet if Mr. Rosemary had assisted
at the Coronation, he might have seen his Majesty vested Page 111.
in Sacerdotal habiliments, and thereby have satisfied his curiosity, which is
now very impatient to see how the Pontifical stole would become our King.

Mr. Bays is charged to recommend unto the civil Magistrate persecution; And
that so fiercely, that Julian whom Mr. Rosemary thinks to have been first a
Reader, and then to have Held-forth in Page 125.
the Christian Churches, before he turned Apostate, and then Persecutor, could
not have outdone him in Irony, or Cruelty. I confess that Julian had some right
to the Bays, as a victorious Emperor: But if I have the True Character here
of Mr. Bays, there is not any resemblance betwixt Him and Julian. If Julian
were a Reader in the ancient Church, it does not thence follow, that he did
ever Hold forth: except those two expressions be equipollent And as for cruelty
the Reign of Julian is not infamous for that. He gave an universal indulgence,
re-called the exiled Orthodox, protected the Christian Churches, and severely
forbid that Christians should be enforced to Paganism. Where now does lie the
resemblance betwixt Julian, and Mr. Bays? I do not comprehend the Hypotheses
of this Drama.

I am no less dis-satisfied with his Allegations out of Mr. Hales's Treatise
of Schism He was a learned man, but toward his latter end so much suspected
for Socinianism, that it is ill done to reckon of him as one of that Church of
England; especially since that tract was never allowed of, or approved by the
English Church, as Hookers's policy has been.

I should exceed the bounds of a private Letter, should I render you an account
of every failour whereunto have, prejudice, or ignorance betrayed Mr. Rosemary:
He will not approve of Truths, if uttered by the Ecclesiastical Politician,
whereof this instance will convince you.

The Eccles. Pol. said that Our blessed Savior did in that action (of
scourging the Buyers and Sellers in the Temple) take upon him the Person and
privilege of a Jewish Zealot. Mr. Rosemary subjoyns -- Take upon him the
person, that is, personam induere. And what part did He play? Of a Jewish
Zealot.

The Second person of the Trinity (may I repeat these things without offense?)
to take upon Him the person of a notorious Rogue and Cutthroat! 'This seemed
to proceed from too slight an Apprehension and Knowledge of the duty we owe
unto Our Savior.

I am willing to believe that Mr. Rosemary did write this out of an hearty zeal
for the lionour of our blessed Savior; but yet his zeal is not according to
knowledge: Others may think that He intended to scourge Bays, and cast Him out
of the Temple, allotting unto Him for changing thus of our Savior the same
doom whereunto those were sentenced who changed moneys there. If he were not
more excellent at Raillery, then Criticismes, I assure him that his Reputation
would immediately decline. To take upon him the person, that is, personam
induere. He might also have taken notice that personam induere does also
signify to put on a perruke and Visor-mask; and have with abomination
declaimed against Bays, for introducing the Second person in the Trinty acting
a modern Mascarade in the Temple. But He is content the imputation shall not
extend so far: But could you imagine it to be other than the dictate of extreme
malice, thus to argue? He took upon him the person; that is, personam induere;
and that to Act a part in a Play. Is this the Rehearsal transprosed? Or rather
an innocent expression invidiously misconstrued! In the Garden, upon his
resurrection; in the Journey unto Emaus, would not any man say that the Second
person of the Trinity did take upon him the person of a Gardener and Traveller?
And when He made as if he would go farther; Oh! to what exceptions would Zeal
and Animosity have transported Rosemary; had but the Original Greek been
Transprosed, or literally translated by Mr. Bays! But Rosemary thinks, though
this expression of taking upon him the person, be it of a Reconciler and
Mediator, or Judge, (or persons when attributed unto the Trinity) may not be
perhaps culpable enough in the judgment of others; and therefore the case must
be aggravated with playing a part. Truly the words of playing the part, are
too light, and unbecoming: Ay I gad they are; And

If that design appears,
I Will lug Bays by the ears,
Until I make 'em crack.
But Sir, Mr. Bays says no such thing: this is a Flower of Rosemary. It Is
personam induere very ill transprosed. None would have scrupled at the
expression, had it been rendered, to act the part, or take upon him the person:
And perhaps by this time the Non-Conformists will not scruple at the phrase of
playing the part, since they have bought up so mightily the Original Rehearsal,
and find so great advantage by transprosing it. Well, if Mr. Rosemary may say
without offense, that Christ did take upon him the person; yet He cannot, He
doubts, say He took upon him the person of a Jewish Zealot, that is, of a
NOTORIOUS ROGUE and CUTTHROAT. I do concur with Mr. Rosemary in the latter
clause, that none ought to say, That Christ took upon him the person of a
NOTORIOUS ROGUE and CUTTHROAT. Oh! Mr. Bays, Mr. Bays.

Villain, what Monster did corrupt thy mind,
T'attacque the Noblest Soul of humane kind?
Tell me who set thee on?
Sir, I have examined him strictly, but no torture of the Rack produces this
to be his sense. He says that a Jewish Zealot has a great resemblance unto
Prince Prettyman.

What Oracle this darkness can evince?
Sometimes a Fishers's son, sometimes a Prince!
It is a secret, great as is the World;
In which, I, like the soul, am tossed and hurled.
The blackest Ink of fate, sure was my Lot;
And when she writ my Name, she made a blot.
After all this blustering in Verse, and in Prose: be pleased Sir to understand
that Rosemary, knows not the nature of a true Jewish Zealot: He had read, or
heard some body tell out of Josephus his History of the destruction of
Jerusalem, that there were a sort of Zealots, who out of a vehement and
indiscreet concern for the Mosaical Law, begot great tumults, occasioned much
bloodshed, and were the principal cause of the ruin of that State. To compare
Christ with one of these, this seemed uncouth, and intolerable in a Christian.
But, behold there were another sort of Zealots permitted by God in the Jewish
Commonwealth, who might destroy their friends, kill even their sons, if guilty
of Idolatry: such was Phineas, such was Matthias: and in cases of great
enormities and violations of the Mosaical Law, the actings of Zealots for
Reformation, were approved as Heroical, and exempt from judiciary censures or
penalties. Any man, of ordinary sense, will imagine that our Savior did (since
he was not questioned for the fact, nor opposed in it) assume the person of
such a Zealot, and was secured by the Law for Zealots: for it behoved him to
fulfill all Righteousness, at least He came not to destroy the Law. And the
Text alludes unto this case, alleging this passage thereupon. The Zeal of thy
house has eaten me up. Howsoever, Mr. Seldom authenticates the Ecclosiastical
Seldom de jure nature. Heb. l. 4. c. 4, 5.
Historian; neither is there any just offense in the expression.

But Mortals that hear,
How we Tilt and Ca^rier,
With wonder will fear
The event of such things as shall never appear.
Behold the passage whereat Mr. Rosemary was so much offended: I should have
thought the first Expressions of Mr. Bays, whereto this part of the Zealot
related, were the less supportable, viz. That Christ being not only in an hot
fit of Zeal, but in a seeming fury, and transport of Passion, did overthrow the
Tables, etc. But Page 324.
Mr. Rosemary has other Sentiments, and esteems this to be the more petulant
speech: But however that I do think somewhat ill of these words; yet I know
that in the Psalms, and old Prophets, there are passages which might as easily
be carped at by a malevolent Pen, especially if one consult the Original Hebrew
Text. And Buchanan in his version of the Psalms, does so express himself
concerning God Almighty, that we may tolerate the like in reference unto the
second person of the Trinity.

Buchanan Ps. 2.
Tum justa accensus miseros affabiturira,
Et per surorem caesa consilia suum
Turbabit --
And elsewhere:
Dum saevient is flageat in cursu furor,
Exigere paenas abstine.
It may be you will reply, That the Ecclesiastical Historian can claim no
benefit for his defense by any Scripture expressions: He, and the Author of the
Friendly Debate, are incapable of the privilege of the Clergy, and I believe
they would sooner quit their Professions (if they might hold the Emoluments)
then it should be said of either of them Legit ut Clericus: they would sooner
lose their lives, then preserve them by a fulsome, Metophorical, Allegorical
Psalm of mercy: except they be permitted to render the Moral thereof, and
having read as Clerks, to expound according to themselves. It is not to be
wondered at if such as I are at a loss, and know not what the Religion is now
of the Church of England. Were Bishop Whitgift and Jewel, Whitaker and Perkins
alive now, they would be accounted Fanatics, Heretics and Brambles: And a new
part of the Friendly Debate would evince them to be the most ridiculous,
canting Preachers that ever were. I believe they may esteem Bishop Latimer a
fool, in that he suffered for his Religion: I am sure they would have thought
him so for His Preaching. It was a wish of St. Austin, that He had but seen
Christ in the Flesh, and heard St. Paul Preach; But I see now that the Father
was a Simpleton, who delighted in canting expressions, Scriptural allusions,
and insignificant Phrases. The Apostle Paul, and the Bishop of Hippo, were the
Eastern and Southern Brambles, whence that prodigious, indefatigable, prating;
preaching, scratching, biting Bramble upon the Lake of Loman had its Original.
There is Magic, they say, in a Bramble, both ends whereof do grow, and strange
effects are said to be wrought thereby; this Geneva-Bramble was rooted on both
sides of the Lake: and besides its Agents it produced Nettles, which sting even
the Ecclesiastics of this Age, though many take them to be dead Nettles, or
Archangel. They that piss upon them, prove exceeding peevish for a long time
after: they rest evilly thereupon, and are perplexed with vexatious dreams, so
as that they disquiet their Neighbors. I could wish they would not disturb the
Visinage with declamations against Mr. Calvin. When I was a Stripling, I heard
him oftentimes cited in the Pulpit, by Men (as those times were) and they were,
as I heard, of the Church of England, very pious and Learned (and had read him)
and they always added the Elogy of Judicious, when they named, Mr Calvin; I
have seen Testimonies of an intimate Correspondence and Communion betwixt the
Foreign Protestants and those of the English Church, and our Ambassadors had a
Pew in the Church at Charenton, frequenting that Church, and receiving the
Communion there; as other Royalists, exiles, did in other places. But now I see
those people were all in the Briars, and like Truant Children forsook their
School, to go miching after Black-berries, upon which Fruit whosoever feeds
much, He will be apt to break out into the Itch (and must be clawed by the
Ecclesiastical Historian) or some other cutaneous pustules, for which the
Pilgrims-silve will be necessary; the which is to be had near the Stage of John
Punteus in Covent Garden.

I will not detain you any longer; I heartily wish that neither the
Ecclesiastical Historian, nor the Trans-proser had writ; and that there were a
prohibition against Rosemary and Bays, it is an Age of Children, and such an
Edict would be acceptable amongst those. As to the Church of England few of
them approved the Style of Mr. Bays and fewer his Doctrines: He was in the
Pulpit declaimed against as the young Leviathan: And upon diligent enquiry, I
do not see any reason why Mr. Rosemary should make so many sallies against the
whole Clergy, that were innocent and un-concerned: Thus he insinuates a seizure
of Church-revenues; and represents the Divines indefinitely as implacable
persons, and incendiaries: It is most evident, that the civil peace (if not our
common salvation) does depend upon a Reverence unto the Clergy: and they are in
times of Peace the great support of Government: whilst their dictates are
regarded awfully, the people are tractable, and the Prince may with ease manage
them: but when they become contemptible, and are inodiated, then standing
Armies, Arbitrary power, and such like contrivances must secure the Peace and
Monarchy. It is more safe and consonant to old prudence, to exact that the
Priests of all Religions shall be equally reverenced then that none should be.
I cannot allow his discourse concerning the original of the Wars: There was
such a conjunction of causes which produced those dire effects, that it is a
fallasie to assign one efficient thereof. If I were to deduce its origin, I
should fix upon the two books, Ignoramus, and Seldom of Tithes, as the occasion
thereof: besides which, there were some that wanted white staves, some that
were disappointed in their Amors, some that were made Cuck-olds, some that
envied the splendor and magnificence of others, which they themselves could
not, or would not imitate. These (and such like accidents) were the true
occasions, the rest were only coincident, or pretenses assumed, whilst the
restless, ambitious and malicious Spirits, abused the well-meaning Patriots,
and Zealots. I have heard it related from the mouth of Mornay du Plessis that
the Civil Wars of France, the Catholic league and the confederation of Henry
the third, with the K. of Navarre, had this private Original, that the Duke of
Guise cheated him that was afterward Duke of Espernon of a Miss. And let men
declare what they will, be it Religion or Liberties and Privileges, I am
resolved to remain dis-engaged in the quarrel, and imagine only that there is
an Amor in the bottom, or that some men would deprive others of their places
and estates, or that the Lawyers (finding themselves too numerous, odious,
burdensome and disrespected by the people) would indear themselves to the
Nation, and make work for their profession by seeming Assertors of the Laws,
Rights and freedom of the Subject. The business of the Minutes in Chancery
portends worse things than the Conjunction of Saturn and Macs: and for any
Chancellor to prevent 10000. Lawsuits in one Honorable Action, is a
sufficient ground for everlasting quarrels and animosities. Methinks I already
hear the complaints, that Dame Curstabel in Northumb has suffered by the Rats
in her Dairy, and that the intruding Mice have formed unto themselves Nests in
two or three of her Cheeses: which damage though it be not much considerable
to Her, or the Nation: yet the Example! the Example! the property of the
Subject, Meum and Tuum is universally endangered; and it behooves Cheshire and
Suffolk to look unto themselves. Such reasonings as these did more mischief in
1636. then Sibthorps Sermon. In the days of Queen Elizabeth, was not there a
Loan? Was not Wentworth clapped in the Tower for debating of such State Affairs
in the House of Commons, as the Queen did not refer to their consideration?
Were not the Non-conformists persecuted, and some put to death? Why was not the
Nation then so jealous and fearful of their Liberties, as to appear generally
discontented? It is most true there was so small a number of Lawyers that they
had all sufficient employment, and their interest in the Nation was not great;
nor was the Press employed about Books of Reports: But I do not attribute it
unto that cause; I rather think the People were then wiser then to think that
one Action or two in the Queen, though they did (as John Goodwin said of some
actions in K. David, and Solomon) smell rankly of Prerogative and Arbitrary
power, yet did not they presage a total subversion of the Laws and Liberties of
the People: That such an alteration of Government is not the work of every
Prince or Age; the fierce, proud, and ambitious may attempt it: but not the
popular, cautelous, and mild: Such a design is accompanied with so much hazard,
that I must have powerful Arguments to persuade me that any King goes about it;
and if He have potent neighbors, or be involved in Wars, or in danger of any,
there is not any suggestion shall ever be powerful enough to convince me that
he will pursue such projects. You see I retain the sentiments of the Age of old
Elsibeth; and if the Ecclesiastical Politician will not permit us to admire the
Wit, let us admire the wisdom, and retain the Religion of those times: As to
the former, perhaps He will join with Us; as to the latter, I conceive it is
uncontroulably settled by Law, and should we once go about to alter it, it is
doubtful when and what the Parliament and Convocation will agree unto; or the
Non-Conformists acquiesce in: It Is not in the power of the Church to comply with
all: it is not Wisdom to oblige one party to the discontent of the rest,
especially the Royallists being of that number; and it is an hundred to one but
if the Presbyterians ('it is those for which Rosemary must seem to plead) be
indulged in point of Ceremonies, a fevv of the Ministers may acquiesce in
Episcopacy, but the party will not: And then what prudence is it to unsettle
the present state of affairs, to discontent the Loyal and Generous Cavaliers,
and yet to gain (if that) a fevv Presbyterians good Benefices?

But Your long experience in the Parliament, and public affairs, renders this
discourse unnecessary. I am,

Sir, Your most devoted Servant.


