A SERMON CONCERNING SWEARING, Preached before the King's MAJESTY, In
Christ-Church Oxon; May the 12. 1644.

By W. Strode Dr of Divinity.

Published by His Majesty's Command. OXFORD,

Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1644.

MAT. 5.37. But let your Communication be yea yea, and nay nay; for whatsoever
is more then these comes of Evil.
AS in the Order of a Common wealth, so in that of the Universe, the Priority
of Duty belongs to the Supreme Head, then a subordinate proportion to our
Fellow members. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, this is
the great Command; Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, this is but like
unto it: the first Table exceedes the second as well in weight as in words;
because the higher Object gives it the heavier scale. And in duties of the
first Table, Aw of Gods holy Name is not the least: these three, Fidelity,
Reverence, and Service, do sum up the whole draft of divine worship; the
first has reference to his sole Substance, the second to his holy Name, the
third to the circumstance of his Public worship: next to his Nature is his
Name, which follows it as the shadow waits on the Body. Wherefore the Order,
in which the Reverence of his Name is ranked, declares the weight of the Duty.
And this I premise to raise a more awful attention to the words of my Text; as
directly aiming at the observance thereof. Let your Communication be yea yea,
and nay nay; for whatsoever is more then these comes of Evil.

Herein I propose to your Consideration three notions.

1. A silent toleration of an Oath in case of necessity, because the case here
put is not necessary but common. 2. An express Limitation of our words in
Communication or common Talk, Let your Communication be yea yea, nay nay, no
more. 3. A reason of such Limitation, because whatsoever is more then these
comes of Evil. Briefly thus; how an Oath may be used, how not, and why not*
these are the Parts.

First, in cases of necessity an Oath is tolerable; for what is an Oath, but
the calling of God to witness, for decision of doubtful matters which
otherwise cannot be made evident; so Philo defines it, to be (...) the
Testimony of God in a matter doubtful. Scientiall Propositions are confirmed
by Reason, particular Contingents merely by Testimony: as it is ridiculous to
prove a general Proposition by an Oath, so it is vain to prove a particular
Fact by Reason. Now humane Testimony is oftentimes so thin and weak, that it
cannot evidence the Truth; both because on the Speakers part there is aptness
of Lying, and also on the Hearers a hardness of Belief; a weak Eye cannot
penetrate a deceitful heart. Therefore to supply these defects, slippery
Mendacity and ignorant Incredulity, man in weighty matters knows not whither
to fly, but only to divine testimony; and so by an Oath calls him to
witness, whose Knowledge is universal, whose Truth infallible; whereby he can
neither be deceived, nor deceive others. This is (...) (...) (according to
Procopius) the last and most certain pawn of Credit.

In case of Exigence we may use this Pawn under diverse forms, an Oath
Assertory of things past or present, an Oath Promissory of things to come; And
each of them may be uttered either by simple Attestation seeming to call God
only as a witness; or by Execration and Cursing conditionally added upon our
selves, when he is called as a Judge too: and so again either by citing Gods
own Name, or his Creatures wherein His Majesty and Truth appears; as the
principal parts of Nature, the means of Redemption, instruments of Grace,
Gospells, Sacraments, and the like. Our Savior in the words before my Text
has reduced all Oaths by what creature soever, high or low, great or small,
Natural or Artificial, without or within us, to God their Author and Ruler,
present and powerful in them; wherefore being so referred in his ac^^ption,
they ought to be so referred in our Intention and use; that in Swearing we
neither make too little of them by Falsehood or Levity, as if God were not in
them; nor too much by Idolatry, as if they were Gods themselves. Some holier
things, wherein the Divine Truth is more clearly manifested, if expressly
terminated on God, (as St Paul terminates the Rejoicing, by which he Swears,
in Christ Jesus, 1. Cor. 15.31.) may be used in a secondary way of Attestation;
that God by Them may make the Truth appear: but these, as well as other
Creatures, are more properly cited in Cursing; and an Oath by any inferior
Name, in the safest sense, is an Imprecation, that divine Judgment may be
exercised on Falsehood, through the things which we love and use. Saint Paul, in
another place, joins an Attestation and Execration under one mixed form, I
call God for a Record upon my Soul, 2. Cor. 1.23. v. I call God for a Record,
there is the Attestative part, upon my Soul, there is the Execrative.

These ways of assevering and establishing the Truth, though some of them be
more liable to danger and suspicion of abuse, (for which cause the Council of
Carthage punished a Clerk Swearing by the Creature) yet all, if rightly
ordered, are allowable: but a right Oath by Gods own Name, is not only
Lawful, but Laudable and Religious; Laudable in the Judgment of holy David,
Psalm. 63.12. v. All they that swear by him shall be commended; Religious in
the most general esteem of the School: both because it proceeds from a good
Ground, Faith in Gods Omniscience and Infallibility, and because it tends to a
good End mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. 6.16. v. namely the End of Strife; as
in the making of Leagues, Promise of Allegiance, Trialls of Law, Compurgation
of Fame, and the like. The Act it self, unless it want these necessary
Relations, or miscarry in the manner, is Pious and Reverent. Wherefore the
Scripture measures out the due Conditions, Thou shall swear the Lord lives,
in Judgment, in Truth, and in Righteousness. Jer. 4.2. In Judgment
Discreetly, when the cause is found weighty, the doubt difficult, and an Oath
necessary, That belongs to the Person; In Truth Sincerely, when the Matter is
well known to be so, That belongs to the Matter; in Righteousness Honestly,
that Justice may be fulfilled, That belongs to the End. The Rash Swearer
through want of Judgment vilifies the Majesty of God, the Perjurd through want
of Truth calls him to witness a Lie, the Wicked through want of Righteousness
uses him as a helper of Iniquity. And therefore where these are supposed to be
wanting, as in Children not come to Discretion, and in Perjured men past Truth
and Honesty, an Oath is by no means allowable. If only the principal
Condition be deficient, if an Oath Assertory be found to want Truth, or an Oath
Promissory to want Righteousness, the one is Invalid, the other not
Obligatory; Law shows the first, and Conscience tells us concerning the
second, that one Sin cannot oblige us to commit another, nor a sin in word
to second it with a sin in work, for sin ought to be broken off as soon
as possibly it may. Wherefore David without scruple blesses God and Abigail,
for staying him in the prosecution of a rash and bloody Oath. 1. Sam. 25. cap.
To whom should an injust Oath oblige us? to God, or to Man? whether it were
taken Rashly in Error or Passion, whether it were taken violently by Coaction,
or willingly with Deliberation, or mixtly betwixt Will and Force for
Deliverance out of present trouble, yet if the Matter or End be unrighteous, or
impedient to Charity, certainly it obliges not to God, because it was contrary
to Gods will; which ought to take place of our own, upon second and better
Thoughts. Much less can it oblige to Man; especially when it is imposed
Fraudulently, or Compulsively, or without just Authority, because the Imposer
deserves to be deceived, and to bear the Imputation of that perjury which he
obtruded on others. I grant, that since every Oath is of a binding Nature, it
cannot but some way bind the Person in himself, either with a True Intention,
or with Guilt of Perjurd collusion. For the Reverence due to Gods Name requires
Truth of Intention; but when the Matter is unrighteous, Gods word forbids
Execution; and when by Satan's device, Gods Name is set up against Gods Word,
and Truth against Rigteousnesse, no wonder if intention and execution agree
not; for as Truth carries the one, so the other is to be swayed by
Righteousness. In this absurd opposition, which ought to be prevented by not
Swearing, the Swearer is so entangled, that which way soever he turn, he is
actually Perjured, by Swearing either what he intends not, or what he ought not
to perform, but to falsify, though he intended. And therefore since in this
Case Juramentum ligat non obligat, since the unlawful Oath binds the
Conscience with Guilt of a bad Promise, though truly made, but not to more
guilt of wicked Performance, it remains that the Oath past be recalled by
Repentance; hearty Repentance for shrinking under Gods Trial, for taking his
Sacred Name in Vain, and incurring a Denial of him before Men. Now at length
since a firm Oath must be jointly held up with these holy Conditions,
appointed by God, it self so upheld must needs be Holy. If rightly taken, it is
a piece of Religious worship: and not without fair ground from other
Scripture, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and Swear by his
Name. Deuteronomy. 6.13. there Swearing is commanded, and placed as the next Neighbor
to divine Service. For to give God the better, to end all Strife at the sound
of his Name, as duly ascribing to him, all Power, Knowledge, and Truth, is to
yield him Honor and Reverence. For verily a Man swears by the Greater. Heb.
6.16. per quem veneratur aut diligit, Jerome in Matthew. 5.
by whom he honors or loves, says St Jerome: an Oath (says Aristotle) is
most Honorable as being a Token of divinity; Ar: 1. met. Josep. lib. 18.
therefore C. Caligula ambitious of divine worship, published an Edict
throughout his Empire, that Men should accustom to swear by his Name:
likewise when Demosthenes swore by them that ventured their lives at Marathon,
Them: (...)
(...) as if the men ^ould be Saincted for that Expedition, he stirred up the
^^^its of his Citizens, more with that one word, then with his whole Oration
besides. So then an Oath ap^^ares to be the badge of Reverence.

God has not only allowed and commanded an Oath ^n General, but expressly and
carefully enjoined it in many ^articular Cases. As in case of Theft, Ex. 22.11.
When ^^^ds entrusted miscarry, an oath of the Lord shall be be^^me them, that
he has not put his hands to his Neigh^^ors goods: In case of Murder, Deuteronomy.
21.6. v. When a ^^n is slain, all the Elders of the City next to the slain
shall ^^sh their Hands over the Heifer, and they shall Testify and ^^^. Our
Hands have not shed this Blood, neither have our eyes seen it, be merciful, o
Lord: In case of Adultery, Number. 19. If the Spirit of Jealousy come upon a Man,
the Priest will charge the Woman with an Oath. According to the ^^tent of these
Instances, are the Oaths of Supremacy, ^llegiance, the Oath ex officio in
spiritual Courts, and the Oaths in Temporal usually administered; for the
^^rance of Fidelity and Truth. Likewise all sacred Con^acts betwixt God and us
are tied with this Knot, Bap^^sme, Confirmation, Marriage, Consecration,
Orders, Vows, are all celebrated either with an Oath, or with ^^t which is
Equivalent, the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. I could
bring a Jury of Ex^mples for godly Swearing: Abraham swore his servant, in. 24.
S. Paul, in diverse Epistles; the Angel by him (...) lives for ever. Rev. 10.
God himself to Abraham. ^^ 22. By my self I have sworn says the Lord. If
^^^re be any force in Examples, these above all others are most prevalent.

It is Remarkable, that none are absolutely averse from all Swearing but the
reputed Enemies of Obedience, Despisers of Order, Friends to Lying and
Hypocrisy; who having now gotten some power into their hands are become the
greatest Exacters of Swearing. Whereby it is the more evident, that Judicial
Swearing is of necessary use.

The chiefest Objection against all Oaths is drawn from the words before my
Text, ye have heard it said, Thou shall not for swear, but shall perform (or
render) to the Lord thine Oaths; but I say unto you, Swear not at all;
neither by Heaven for it is Gods Throne, nor by that which follows. To answer
this, the Scope of the Context must be exactly weighed. The Jews, by
Pharisaicall Tradition, or wicked practice, understood the places of Lev.
19.12. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Number. 30.2.
Scripture summed up by our Savior, to be first a Prohibition of Swearing
falsely, by Gods Name only, secondly an allowance of Swearing by Gods Name
Truly: False Swearing by the name of Creatures they did not esteem Perjury;
True Swearing by the Name of God, though needless, they did not esteem
unlawful; whereas the same Scripture which forbids to swear by his Name
Falsely, forbids also to Profane his Name. Lev. 19.12. v. according to the
sense of the third Commandment, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy
God in Vain; for Vain includes both False and needless: and again the same
Scripture which allows Swearing by his great Name, interdicts the Name of
others. Deuteronomy. 6.13. v. Thou shall swear by his Name, and ye shall not go
after other Gods. Wherefore that corrupt Interpretation Christ clearly purges,
and in one word perfects the Law, Swear not at all. As he that speaks not at
all cannot Lie, so he that swears not at all cannot Forswear, Ber: de Pert^rio
nor offend in the manner, says S. Bernard. So then with one blow Christ cuts
of four Obliquities; not only Perjurd, but all Light Swearing by the Name of
God, not only Idolatrous, but all Deceitful Swearing by the Name of
Creatures: for Christ shows that every Oath by the Creature is terminated in
God, and that every Oath by him, whether direct or indirect, especially in
Communication, comes of Evil. This word Communication being considered
together with the occasion of this Precept, shows how the Precept, Swear not
at all, is to be understood, that is, not so far as in you lies, not without
necessity. It Is the Judgment of Calvin, as well as others, that our Savior
bars not the substance of Swearing but the manner, not in all Cases but under
all ^ermes in Communication: the Original is not (...). In no Case, but (...),
not at all generally, whether True or False, in reference to the words
preceding; but how? not irreverently in Communication, as appears by the words
following; not at all Vainly under any Form whatsoever, as he further
illustrates this general Prohibition, neither by God nor the Creature, since
he that swears by the Creature swears by God also, which was not duly
considered. Wherefore Caietan grants the general substance to be also
prohibited, as it stands Naked, for so it becomes irreverent; but as it stands
invested with due Circumstance, whereby it becomes necessary, so he construes
it lawful. Luther has well endeavored to clear this point, by comparing
Christ's Sermon together with his Auditors; here he instructs not the
Maegistrate, but the People, and diverse things are unfit for them in their own
Persons, which may become fit under the Magistrates command: wherefore this
Prohibition of Swearing is to be understood like that of Anger and Killing:
neither of them is permitted to the Communalty, nor to the Magistrate himself
in common business, but to them that are called, and when they are called to
the work of Justice: so that ordinarily the safe way is here prescribed; be not
Angry at all, Swear not at all; not of your own wills, not in your trivial
affairs, but only when you are not your selves, when God through the Power of
the Magistrate, or the necessity of the Cause, according to Justice or Charity,
shall call you. For then your anger is Gods anger not yours, and likewise your
Oath not yours but Gods. As killing without Circumstance is forbidden, so
Swearing with Circumstance is commanded; but as there the conditional Negative
is reduceable to a Positive, so here the conditional Positive is reduced to a
Negative; yet both these Acts with due Condition are serviceable unto God. So
then the use of an Oath is not forbidden, but the Vanity wherein consists the
abuse.

If it be utterly unlawful to pronounce the Name of the Almighty, why has he
then a Name? how shall we praise him, or pray unto him? If it be objected that
an Oath is not absolutely directed to Gods worship, but respectively, as aiming
at the clearing of Truth for humane benefit, the like may be said of Prayer,
that it aims at our own Protection and Welfare, yet the Benefit expected
abates not the Religious Reverence performed in either. For the Beneficial
Result of Divine Attestation, C^j: in Thom. 2 a 2 ae. Q. 89. Ar. 5.
(which Caietan disdaines to call the End as being less Noble then the means)
is but Extrinsecall and Appendant to the Essence of Swearing, which rather
consists in the Religious Reverence of Divine Attestation; and the dignity of
the Person so elevates the Induction of his Testimony, that we ought to be more
taken up with performance of due Reverence thereto belonging, then with
expectation of the benefit ensuing; as also in Prayer, whatsoever our desires
are, we submit them to the overruling will of God. Does Prayer refer all
things to his Glory? So likewise the last and principal fruit of an Oath, to
which it may be Piously ordein'd, is the Glory of God, arising from the ending
of humane Controversy. And then what hinders but Humane Benefit may
subordinatly consist with Gods glory, as well in the act of man as in the Act
of God? God sent his Son a Ransom for Man, a Price infinitely beyond the
Purchase, and a means immeasurably beyond the End; yet not unfitly or
Ingloriously, because the Salvation of Man tends lastly to the glory of God. So
when divine Testimony is rightly called to be the means of Concord betwixt
Men, it is not called Irreligiously, or but Carnally, because this Citation of
Gods Name, both begins with Reverence, and concludes with his Glory.

So much for this Point; wherein you have heard, that by reason of humane
Infirmities, mendacity and Incredulity, an Oath in weighty cases not otherwise
to be cleared, is allowable* of what kind soever it be; whether Assertory or
Promissory, simply Attestating or Execrating, by the proper Name of God, or by
his Might in the Creature; because an Oath having a good Ground, Faith in Gods
Excellence, and a good end, decision of doubtful Strife, being also
accompanied with requisite Conditions, Judgment, Truth, and Righteousness,
without which it cannot stand firm, redounds to Gods Honor and worship; by
attributing unto him undeniable Authority, universality of Knowledge, and
Infallibility of Truth. That God has in diverse Cases both allowed and
commanded Swearing; and that his Saints, his Apostle, his Angel, and himself
have practiced the same: that the absolute Rejecters of Swearing, who now for
advantage are turned Exactors thereof, are men of more then suspected
integrity; that the general prohibition of all Oaths, before my Text, extends
not to the substance of Swearing but the irreverent manner, or not to the
substance invested with due Circumstance, but as it stands naked, and so
forbids it not in all Cases before a Magistrate, but under all Forms in
Communication: that an Oath taken with exact care or Reverence, and all
attending Conditions, does not only serve ourselves, but God in chief. So
from establishing the use of an Oath, I proceed to cut off the abuse, by the
Limitation of your Talk in my next point. Let your Communication be yea yea,
and nay nay.

Not your Deposition, your Sanction or Confirmation, not your Evidence or
Testimony, but your Communication: (...) signifies Speech or Discourse; and so
the sense is, Let your Talk or mutual Communication be no more then barely
Affirmative or Negative.

Now for the doubling of yea and nay, many Conjectures may be yielded: It may
bear a Relation to the Persons conferring, let such Limitation of Talk be
mutual; or a Relation to the matter spoken of, quod affirmandum affirma, quod
negandum nega, (says Cajetan) if the matter be so, so say, if otherwise, say
no: or since Truth has a threefold Residence, Objectively in the matter,
Formally in the mind, Representatively in words, and since Truth of words
should carry a double Conformity, with mind and matter, therefore yea is
doubled; yea yea for Heart and Tongue, for Word and Deed; and so there will be
no need of an Oath. Or rather the second yea is added to stint the former, and
to exclude Swearing, let your Affirmation be merely Affirmative, Let your yea
be yea, and your nay be nay, according to S. James. c. 5.12. v. or lastly, to
strengthen the Asseveration, as Pharaoh's Dream was assured by doubling it,
and as the practice of our Savior shows, Amen Amen, Verily Verily I say unto
you.

Pure Affirmation and Negation without the staring Embroydery of Oaths is
sufficient for Common discourse; because things familiarly spoken are either
credible of themselves* or else have no absolute necessity of credence. Where
nothing more then Affirmation is necessary, why should more be strained. To
lift a Feather with both hands and with strong Engines, to hoot alowd where a
whisper is better heard, is it not ridiculous?

If frequent Lying had not begot a just Incredulity, I see not why an hearty
Asseveration might not supply the place of an Oath, even in the weightiest
matters; and then the Liar might be esteemed and censured no otherwise then now
the Perjured: the same Figure put in a higher place carries ten times more
Value: so we find that the bare word of an approved honest man passes for an
Oath; so should the word of a Priest by the Credit of his Profession, and the
word of a Peer by the virtuous Estimation of his Honor. The Essens (says
Josephus) accounted him a Convict Liar, whose word would not pass without the
Suretiship of God. We never find that our Savior swore at all, though he
uttered things of greatest consequence: for indeed his works did sufficiently
confirm his words: Man's voice passes through the Ear only, but Gods through
the Eye also; Phil: de Decalogo.
as Philo observes out of the 20. of Exodus: where the People is said to have
seen the Object of the Ear, yea to have seen the noise of the Trumpet, the
like we read in the second of Jer. v. 31. O Generation see the word of the
Lord. Grant me therefore a Heart transparent in word, Real Truth conformable
to the Divine Pattern, let these grow habitual amongst us, then me thinks
all our business may well be transacted without such straining of Credit. Or
if a single Affirmation will not sufface, let it be doubled, as here in my
Text; two yeas may stand for an Oath, two nayes for an Execration: especially
when the Form has been recommended by our Savior. Doubtless this is the
way of Perfection, pointed out by his Instruction, to them that desire it:
Christ would have his so simple, as not to Deceive, so Candid, as not to
distrust. St Jerome is bold to affirm that Swearing by Gods Name was allowed
to the Jews as to Children, and no otherwise then the use of Sacrifice, to
prevent Idolatry; that the Stature of Evangelicall Truth will not own it,
since every word of the Faithful ought to weigh with an Oath.

Howsoever, though the malignity of the world require, that in arduous affairs
of inextricable doubt, an Oath be still indulged; yet let us use this our
Privilege modestly; let us honor God in this our weakness; let not the use
of his Name descend to obvious and familiar Communication; there a double yea
is superabundant: no Color, no Pretext for more there: an Oath there taken
destroys the End for which it is allowed, and instead of Credence begets more
Incredulity, more suspicion: because the Bond of Confirmation is so cheaply
esteemed.

Swearing was never commanded Absolutely, but either Comparatively that men
might rather swear by the True God then by a False, or Respectively out of
urgent necessity, or Circumstantially with due Conditions: And therefore though
it may be good in it self, it is not good for it self, not good like Health
but like Physic; which may be used for Necessity, but ought not to be desired
and frequented because of the Danger. If an Oath be but Physic for
Incredulity, take heed to thy self; for Physic swallowed without a Cause
breeds sickness. Above all things Swear not (says S. James) least ye fall
into Condemnation, Cap. 5.
least easiness of Swearing bring a habit, the habit continuance, continuance
Perjury, and these eternal Malediction. What says S. Austin? Falsa Juratio
est Impiae, vera est Periculosa, nulla est Secura, False Swearing is Impious,
True is Dangerous, none at all is Secure. Though Danger be not considerable in
case of necessity, yet beware least the past Act of necessity dispose thee to
habit. Things not Absolutely, but Occasionally good, ought to be used Rarely,
and with pondered Circumstance. To execute an Offender is Lawful, but not to
kill on particular pleasure, or in Passion: Though an Oath may be taken
Religiously and safely, as occasion shall require, yet commonly to hurl it
forth, is most Irreligious, and therefore most Banefull.

That it is most Irreligious, will some appear. Familiarity betwixt unequalls
takes of respect, whenever it is challenged; and things most glorious are
soyld by ordinary use; so is the name of the Almighty; it looses its due
Reverence by obvious usurpation, insomuch that it fails of its binding virtue
in matters of weight.

Whatsoever is Sacred on earth is shut up and abstracted from Community. What Is
the holiness of the Lords day? a separation from all work but only His
Service, any other work prophanes it. What Is the holiness of the Lords Place
or Church? a separation from all use but His; any other use, as walking, or
idle communing, especially in time of Divine Service, this as well as
Merchandise, prophanes it. What Is the holiness of God's name, which is nearer
unto him then either of these, and shall endure when these are gone? a
separation from common discourse; all speech but sacred and Necessary prophanes
it. Then wash thy mouth with tears from thine Eye, for polluting his Holy and
Reverend Name with vain Appellation.

St Paul's Attestation in his Epistles gives no example to common swearing; his
matter is not so light as our Communication, neither is the Pen so rash, as the
Tongue, Thom. 2 a. 2 ae. Q. 89. Ar. 2.
Scribentis consideratio cautior non habet linguam praecipitem (says Aquinas,)
the consideration of the wary writer prunes off all headlong Expressions
incident to talk, so that the Apostles Oath is not the zeal of Folly but of
Understanding.

It Is easily observable, that we scarce name our friends or earthly superiors
without a formal respect; sometimes we move the Hat, and sometimes we put it
off, then to use the name of God unnecessarily and Irreverently is as much as
to say, God is neither our Friend nor Superior. O wretched disrespect, where
the Proportion of Honor due is infinitely greater? would the Swearing Lord, or
forswearing Gallant, take it well himself, to be lightly talked of, to be
called Dick or Tom by a rude pesant? if such language be saucy and rustic
concerning himself, how presumptuous and profane is his own touching the
Lord of Lords?

But an Oath is more then the bare Naming of God; it calls him to witness, a
business not light, howsoever vilified through Custom, but of dreadful
weight. The Supreme Judge of all Gods and People is called from his Throne to
become a witness; he is summoned by his Providence to declare the Truth; if
not presently, yet: (as surely he will) to do it hereafter, and to execute
Judgment on the Falsifier.

To cite an ordinary honest man, or call him into public for proof of a
frivolous matter, perhaps a false one, is very discourteous and unfriendly:
What is it then to cite thy God for nothing but an empty phrase, a noise of no
substance, a thing more worthy to be false then true, some foolish vanity or
filthy Act. Reduce an Oath to the value of its meaning; and then consider how
absonous it would sound, though God were thy Vassal or Underling: Go to thy
Slave, and say thus unto him; Lend me thy hand in this Folly, or in this
mischief; for my sake do this piece of Injustice, and break a brace of
Commandments, the third by Swearing, and the ninth by false witness: will not
thy Slave start back as from a Fiend or Monster? yet thus in effect thou
invokest thy God; Lord strengthen my words with false witness, cover my shame
by coloring my Falsehood; thou, my God, steward my Cosenage, and hide it under
the shadow of thy Name, from thine own Eye, and the Eye of man; serve the way
of thy worm thou that art infinite, and of thy goodness further my sin. Art
thou ashamed thus to bespeake thy Vassal, and have thou no Regard of thy
Heavenly Lord and Father? what think thou? do thou believe he hears
thee, and is every where present? if so, how impudent is thy Brow? if not, how
Atheistical is thy mind? Stay stay, thou need not call him, he is too near
already, so near that he stands betwixt the Lips which thou openest and
shuttest with an Oath.

O shameless practice, that God should be mentioned more in Oaths then in
Prayers, or in those immediately after these; that the Creed should be run
over in such horrible Confession; that our Religion should most appear in our
Sin, our Faith in the work of Infidelity. No sooner we come from Church,
where we bow at the glorious Name of Jesus, but we may hear a mouth fling it
out with less heed then spittle, careless how it goes, or where it lights; we
may hear him torn and racked again in every part, worse then Jewishly;
because to no End at all; his wounds are ripped up, his heart melts, his blood
runs out, his feet are nailed, all his Passion is repeated; and for no man's
good, but the Speakers mere Condemnation.

To bridle the mouth, and keep it from such rude sin, first ponder your words
before you garnish them with Oaths; weigh them like Gold in the Balance;
consider whereto they tend; understand your own meaning, before you lash out
with your Tongue* for a Birth delivered before it is Conceived must needs be
monstrous; and better be dumb, then speak that which ought to be recalled. By
thus brideling the mouth in the matter of Speech, your heat and folly will be
thoroughly quelled in the manner; when you take care to speak Wisely, Truly,
and Honestly, you will be quite taken off from speaking Irreligiously. If
Opposition tempt thee to Swear, do not only examine how great the matter is,
how true, how well understood; but in what case and temper you are; how pure in
Body, how pure in Soul; before what Company, at what Time, in what Place, with
what Reverence, to what End you Swear. If still the Name of God run hastily on
thy Tongue, mark how an Oath becomes another, (for some learn better by
Example of Vice then by the Rule of Virtue, because it is easier to observe the
Faults of others then their own Duties) mark how there it sounds, and then
reflect on thy self. Remember also, that He by whom thou Swearest, as he is
ever present, so he is likewise Omnipotent, able to turn thee instantly into
the Curse which thou utterest, or into the Air which thou breathest in
Swearing.

To sum up this Point, you have heard that a bare Assertion or at least a
double one, where there is no necessity of Credence, as in common talk, is
full sufficient; that if Lying were laid aside, the weightiest matters would
need no Swearing, and that such singleness of Speech would come nearest to
Christian Perfection; that albeit some Cases may require a Toleration, yet in
slight discourse, an Oath is without color, not without great prejudice: that
being not absolutely but respectively good, like medicinal help reserved for
necessity, it proves dangerous and pernicious, if used wantonly: that also it
loses its Majesty and Virtue by unseasonable use, and that nothing is Sacred
unless it be secluded; that S. Paul is no pattern for common Swearers; that
to reverence the Name of a Friend, and yet to profane the Name of God, is
great Inequality; that God is not only named in vain by familiar Oaths, but
cited as a witness and Judge; and most Injuriously to no purpose, yea worse
then none; never man so used: that Swearing is strangely turned to a Map of
Religion; that for a restrayning Remedy, suspension of words, Consideration of
Circumstance, observation of others, Remembrance of Divine Presence and
Omnipotence ought to be interposed. To pull the reigns yet stricter, let me
pass to my last Point, the Reason here given of this Restriction, because
whatsoever is more then yea and nay is of Evil.

Not whatsoever is more by Addition of any pure Affirmative, such as our
Savior used, but whatsoever is more by Superaddition of Divine Testimony is of
Evil.

Not always Evil it self (unless in Communication) but of Evil howsoever,
(as diverse observe:) the same Reason which insinuates that an Oath is tolerable
in some Cases, shows that in all Cases it is occasioned from Evil. Dum jurare
cogeris, scies ex Infirmitate eorum venire quibus aliquid suades, quae utique
Infirmitas malum est, says S. Austin; Indeed the aptitude of Lying in the
Speaker as well as hardness of Belief in the hearer, which must needs call
for an Oath to reconcile them, are both Evils of humane Infirmity, the one is
malum Culpae and the other is malum Poenae. Now though it follow not, that
whatsoever is occasioned from Evil is Evil too, since good medicines are
occasioned from bad Diseases, and Swearing is most tolerable when it is most
urged by Incredulity, yet this will follow, that because Swearing is but
occasionally good, and upon bad occasion too, therefore it is not to be
affected nor used without necessity.

Whatsoever is more, more then yea yea in Communication, is of the Evil One,
so Theophylact understands it, and not unfitly: for we read not (...) but (...)
which word, with the Article prefixed, is an usual appellation of the Devil;
and the Devil, rightly denominated De Evil, is the subtle suggester of all
Spiritual mischief; especially of common Swearing. Would you know where his
Cunning is most evidently Operative? First, where is no Inclination by Nature,
where neither Pleasure nor Profit, the baytes of the Flesh and the World invite
us to a Sin, as neither inviteth us to common Swearing, that Sin plainly
proceeds from the Devil. Secondly, where from things useful Evil is
contracted, or from unconsidered beginnings not apparently dangerous, not
presently banefull, horrible Consequents grow in the End, as from rare Swearing
by God, or petty but common swearing by Creatures, there he is busy. Thirdly,
where the Consequents are most suitable to the Devils maine Intentions, the
Dishonor of God and the Breach of Humane Society, there he has been shrewdly
working: now common Swearing serves him in both these, by making the Name of
God familiar, and the Bond of Truth disesteemed and suspected: by such work,
you may soon discern the worker. Now God deliver the wretched Sinner, who
under the sacred sound of Gods Name, has the Devil so strong on his Tongue.

When the Tempter has once entered his Disciples into a vein of swearing, it
flows from their own Evil Condition too, most grossly and variously.

First, from Irreverence of God, whose Excellence and infinite Majesty we do
not seriously consider. The Meditation of his greatness seldom sinkes into
our hearts, and therefore his Name is so familiar on our Tongues.

Also from Inadvertence; we call on God with less intention then we call a
Boy; we name him heedlesly, as we touch the face or stir our hair, not
mindeing what we do. Or in a nearer similitude, we swear by him as we Pray
unto him, with one knee, or a knee half bowd, with one Elbow, a sleepy Head
and a wandering Thought, least regarding that only thing which we are about.
Thus through custom our sins pass by Us, like household people, without
observance.

Also it comes from much Idle talking; the Torrent of speech carries Oaths
along with it, as a violent stream tears down Trees and Trash.

Especially, where is want of Literature: he that loves to hear his own
sound, through barrennes of cleanly expression is forced to fill the gap of his
speech with profanation, and to swell his phrase with lofty Oaths, a piece of
Rhetoric learnt from the Devil.

Also it much prevails through want of breeding: for they who are brought up
to speak with Reverence and advice in their youth, will not be so rash of
Tongue in their Age. If swearing Roysters had ever duly regarded their Parents
(unless their Parents were as bad) they would show more Reverence to their
heavenly Father.

Also it flows from Lying, which seeks to deceive by the sacred bond of
Credit, Swearing and Lying are joined together by the Prophet Hosea, c. 4. v.
2. Therefore I wonder how valiant Soldiers, who most detest the Imputation of
Lying, should give such suspicion thereof by unbridled Swearing. When the Lord
of Hosts led forth his people to War, the Camp was not only the school of
holiness, Deuteronomy. 23.9.
( When the Host goes forth against thine enemies then keep thee from every
wicked thing) but also the School of Cleanliness, Thou shall have a Paddle
upon thy Weapon; when thou will ease thy self abroad, thou shall dig
therewith, and shall turn back and cover that which comes from thee, for the
Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy Camp to deliver thee, therefore shall
thy Camp be holy that he see no unclean thing in thee, Deuteronomy. 23.9. Shall there
now be less care of keeping the mouth clean, then once of covering
Excrements, less respect now of God himself, then once of the Ground under
foot? considering the foulness of the Sin, how I pity the poor Sinner, who
being likely to come to a present account of idle words, cares not though his
last breath be spent in Swearing.

But there are more Causes of Swearing, and more incident to Soldiers then
Lying: for it comes also from Vain Glory* Some think it a gallant grace to
send out a Voly of Oaths roundly, loudly, and boldly; as if they durst crack
against the Thunderer, and brave God to his face. O simple! this is Mettle.

Also from untamed Passion; as a Dog being struck bites a Stone, or any thing
that is next; so a man that gives scope to his Fury, wrecks it on the highest,
and barks against his Maker.

But most of all, it comes of ill habit; through which men's Tongues are not
their own, but the Tongues of Custom, and have gotten words which will have
vent in spite of the mind.

Now if Swearing proceed from so much Evil, how Evil must it be in it self?
be not deceived; the greatness of a sin is not to be measured by the present
Punishment, but by the Object against which it strikes, and by the manner of
violation. Theft is more punished then Adultery, yet the latter is the greater
sin, because it offends a Neighbor in a greater matter, and more nearly; for
the Body is more and nearer then Goods; but the Name of God is more then both.
I know, the Adulterer cries out against the poor Filcher; and the greater
Thief, whilst he glories in his own shame, condemns the less: why* because
the one is hanged, the other only mulct; so the Swearer feeling little or no
present punishment, is insensible of his Crime: but to speak Truth, the sin in
it self is worse then any Sin whatsoever against our Neighbor, because it
highly offends God himself. Worse and greater it is in a general Respect of
the Person offended, though less perhaps in the special manner of offending,
because it proceeds from less Atrocity of mind, and with less damage to the
Party, then Murder and some other sin. But if Christ, who now sits at the right
hand of God, were as capable of killing, as of hearing his Passion repeated,
Swearing would prove a Murder worse then Murder: if the Spouse of Christ could
as easily be corrupted as scandal'd with bad example, Swearing would prove an
Adultery worse then Adultery: if God could be as soon robbed of his Heavenly
Glory as of his Honor before men, Swearing would prove a Robbery worse then
the utmost Plunder. As it is, it stands parallel in the same degree of
Opposition against God, as False witness or Calumny against Man, because it
calls God to witness a Falsehood, and Calumniates his Name. Let me proceed
further; since the Name of God is nearer unto him then the Day or Place of his
worship, (for the Place is appointed for the Day* and both for the Honor of
his Name) therefore profane Swearing is worse then either Sacrilege or Breach
of the Sabbath. In a word, it is next to Idolatry, I may call it for nearness
sake (...) for as Idolatry makes an Idol God, so this makes God an Idol, one
that has Ears and hears not. And I may add this concerning the manner, that
it is acted with more Impudence then any other sin whatsoever, and is most
properly a Loud and Crying sin, because it provokes God, not secretly and
obliquely, but openly and directly, with loud Profanation to his Face. Then
how many great offenses are committed in this one, yet how often is this
committed in one Day, by diverse Persons, in one City? It is merely from Gods
Impassibility, that he receaves not such hurt by sin as man does; it is
therefore his Mercy not our Innocence, that sudden Vengeance does not follow,
that we are not swallowed up quick in a moment. Lesser faults then This,
picking of Sticks on the Sabbath, touching of the Arc with unwarrantable
hands, sacrificing with unhallowed fire, have been punished with present death,
so may this be too. What means St James, when he says, Above all things, my
Brethren, Swear not. Above all respect of Creatures? or above all things
mentioned in his Epistle? or above all things contained in that Paragraph of
Patience? whatsoever he means, he certainly shows thereby the heinousness of
the sin, which is grown so common amongst us.

Yet as great and as common as the sin is, it has less Temptation then any
other. Profit or Pleasure hires or allures men to other Transgressions; if one
dram of either be found in thy whole Phrasebooke of Swearing, Swear
continually. What has bewitched, who has bedevil'd you? Nemo malus gratis, no
man does the work of sin without some wages; this elsewhere is a true saying;
only in the Swearer it fails; which highly aggravates the sinfullnesse, the
madness, of this baitelesse bootelesse sin, so vainly bent.

This sore Evil, which comes from much Evil, is also fruitful in begetting
more Evil: for things produce as they are produced; Every Bird lays an Egg,
like that, of which she was hatched: I can but name those Evils, ^^d so drive
to Conclusion.

It begets public disrespect of God: Familiarity breeds Contempt, heedlesse
Swearing will make an Oath seem nothing, and God as little.

It breeds Incredulity amongst men: who will believe that man's word, who makes
so light of his Oath? Then ^^er the loss of Credit, it produces a desperate
Impudence of Lying, as careless of Truth, as hopeless of Belief.

It gives offense to all Christian Hearers with greatest Incivility. Ar: Eth:
I. 4. c. 8.
Aristotle names two Vices opposite to Vrbanity, Swearing and Clownishnesse;
whereof the first offends in Excess, and is therefore excessively uncivil;
for it drives the Hearer to this straight, either to reprove the Speaker, or to
suppress his zeal for God. What Company can endure to hear a man, I say a
man, openly slighted, whom they all honor? then with what patience their only
God? how can any that are well affected to the Name of Jesus, to which all give
Reverence before meat, hear it dishonored in the midst of Eating? Or why may
not then a Pious Christian put off his Hat without Irony, to give it honor in
the instant of such dishonor.

I forbear to show what ill Example it gives to young Children; who
understanding but few words, can only bear away those, which they hear most
frequent.

And how it hinders the Jews Conversion, when he finds those two sins, which
he most abhorres, so predominant in the Christian, Idolatry and Swearing.

Shall so much Evil of sin escape the Evil of Punishment? I will be a swift
witness (says God) against the false Swearers, Mal. 3.5. He that has been so
often called to witness, will come at length with a witness indeed. Every one
that Swears shall be cut off, Zec. 5.3. God for the abuse of his Name will
root out thy Name, and destroy thy House, so that thy Heir and it shall be
turned to one Rubbish. For certainty whereof, unless ye Repent, I refer you
to that Prophets Flying Roll; sees your Fancy nothing? the flying roll; the
length whereof is twenty Cubits and the breadth ten Cubits. This is the Curse
that goes forth over the Face of the whole Earth. I will bring it forth (says
the Lord) it shall enter into the house of him that Swears false by my Name
(as the common Swearer is apt to swear false) and it shall remain in the
midst of his house; and it shall consume it with the Timber thereof and the
Stones thereof; and then what shall become of the Family?

After all this, we are not sure that the anger of God will be turned away; his
hand may be stretched out still: for since public dishonor is done to his
Name by common Swearing, scarce or not scarce punished, how shall he rest
satisfied with private Vengeance? As the whole Body does often smart for the
Tongue, so may a general Society for some Evil Speakers; especially if their
Speech sound Treason; but if Treason against the King of Kings, how great
Vengeance may justly be feared by the whole State? one profane Achan
endangered a whole Army; and because of Swearing the Land mourns. Jer. 23.10.
v. Behold, since Punishment follows in that wherein we offend, Voluntary
Swearing is now turned to a Compulsive Forswearing, to a blind Covenant against
known Religion and Duty, against Conscience and Public Safety, quite contrary
to former Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, incapable of keeping Faith on
either side without Faith-breaking, as far from Truth and Righteousness, as
from all liberty and use of Judgment: and therefore (as I have formerly showed
in general) neither Obligatory to God, nor man; not through Excuse of
Rashness, weakness, Ignorance, Compulsion, not through benefit of
Equivocation, mental Reservation, private Construction, inward Gainsaying,
(for none can be bettered by his fault) but through the monstrous Irregularity
and horrid viciousness of it self; null by Nature; advantageous to none but
Satan, no way useful to any End, but merely to destruction of Souls by taking
it, or accidentally to a Crown of Martyrdom by refusing it. They that being
unequal to so high a pitch of Sanctity, have submitted themselves to take it,
I inquire not through what deficience, are howsoever no more bound to keep it,
then Peter was bound to deny his Master for ever, because he had once denied
him with an Oath. Indeed it obliges them to that which the Imposer least
desires, to Peter like Tears of Repentance, to abundance of bitter sorrow
according to the great absurdity of the Crime admitted, and particularly to
this kind of amendment, never to swear again without urgent necessity in a
just Cause: least all the Evil, which God has threatened, be powered out upon
them, and on all guilty Families, and for their sakes on the whole State.

You have heard how Swearing comes not only from some Evil Infirmities, but
from the Devil, and from abundance of Evil Vices, how Evil it is in it
self, how much Evil it produces, and with what Evil it shall be punished.
Now for Conclusion.

Aquinas has likened an Oath to the Sacrament, 2d. 2d. Q. 89, Ar: 2.
(for Sacramentum signifies both) I wish we took the one more seldom, and the
other more often: the likeness consists in this, that both are intended for
our good, but being illhandled they become Engines of Destruction. See the
words of S. Paul concerning the Sacrament, Cor. 1.11.27. Whosoever shall eat
this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily shall be guilty of the
Body and Blood of the Lord: but let a man examine himself, and so let him eat
of that Bread and drink of that Cup: for he that eats and drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords
Body. The same will serve for an Oath. Whosoever shall take this Name in Vain
shall be guilty of the Majesty of the Lord; but let a man examine himself and
the Cause, and so let him take this Name; for he that takes it in Vain or
unworthily, pronounces his own Damnation, not discerning the Majesty and
Presence of the Lord. The Apostle for his part had good success; for by
writing these words, he quite rooted out a grievous Sin, never heard of since,
namely Feasting at the time of Communion in the Church: Swearing at the time of
merriment in the house is much like it: how has holiness been mixed with
madness in both! Grant me then (O Lord) the like success by applying the same
words, that the Custom of Swearing be never more prevalent amongst us. Grant
it o mighty Lord, that through Reverence of thy Name, we may grow up to Fear
of thy greatness, and through Fear of thy greatness we may proceed to Love
of thy goodness; and then through Love of Thee we may come to Joy and Rest in
Thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost
be all Honor, Praise, and Glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

