THE Peoples Right To Read the Holy Scripture ASSERTED. In ANSWER to the 6th,
7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th Chapters, of the Second Part of the POPISH REPRESENTER.

LONDON; Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXVII.

IMPRIMATUR,

Hen. Maurice, Rmo in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiepiscop. Cant. a Sacris.
Maii 27. 1687.
The Contents.
Four Things proposed to be treated of.
I. WHAT the Practice of the Church of Rome in this this Matter is. II. That
this Practice is plainly contrary to the Will of God, to the Reason of the
Thing, and to the Practice of the Christian Church, for more than a thousand
Years after Christ. III. The Insufficiency of those Reasons, by which the
Representer endeavors to justify it. IV. The Truth of those Inferences the
Protestants draw from it. Page 1, 2.


CHAP. I. THE Practice of the Church of Rome in this Matter represented, Page
2, etc.
CHAP. II. THE Contrariety of this Practice to the Will of God, to Reason, and
to the Practice of the Christian Church for more than a thousand Years, Page 8,
etc. SECT. I. It Is contrariety to the Will of God, appears, in that God, 1.
Caused the Scriptures to be written in a Language understood by the Vulgar,
Page 9. 2. Adress'd them to the Vulgar, Page 11. 3. Commanded the Vulgar to
converse familiarly with them, Page 12.
SECT. II. It Is contrariety to Reason showed both from the Scope and End of the
Scriptures, and from the Testimonies of many Learned Men of the Church of Rome,
Page 14 SECT. III. It Is contrariety to the Practice of the Christian Church,
proved by unquestionable Testimonies, for twelve hundred Years downward, p. 17,
etc. When and upon what occasion, a Restraint was first laid upon the reading
of the Scriptures, p. 26

CHAP. III. THE Reasons the Representer offers to justify this Practice of the
Church of Rome, Page 27 SECT. I. The general Reason (viz. the Mischiefs that
arise from the promiscuous reading of the Scripture) considered, and the
absurdity of it exposed, p. 28, etc. SECT. II. The Mischiefs objected are all
of the same kind. p. 33In particular these three; 1. The Divisions that are
among Christians. 2. As many different Bibles as there are different Heads. 3.
Not only several Persons, but the same Person many times has different Bibles.
I. That the Divisions among Christians arise solely or principally from the
reading of the Bible by the Vulgar. 1. It is notoriously false. 2. In case it
were true, it would not be of force to infer his Conclusion. p. 36 It is
notoriously false. In that, 1. There were Divisions among the ancient Guides of
the Church. ibid. 2. There have been, and still are, Divisions, yea, as many
among the Learned of the Church of Rome, as among the Protestants. p. 37 The
Learned Romanists are divided among themselves, in all those Points in which
they are divided from Protestants. ibid. 4. Those very pernicious Doctrines and
Practices, which the Representer himself mentions, are derived from the
Learned; especially from the Learned of the Church of Rome. p. 39 5. The
Divisions among the Vulgar, for the most part are not owing to themselves, but
to the Learned. 41
If it were true, that the Divisions among Christians arise from the reading of
the Bible by the Vulgar; yet it would not be sufficient Reason for denying the
Bible to them. p. 42 II. The second Mischief, viz. If the Bible be allowed the
Vulgar, there will be as many different Bibles among them as there are Heads.
p. 43 That every difference in Sense, makes not a different Bible, p. 44 The
vanity of this Reason appears, in that, 1. It is of equal force against the
reading of the Scripture by the Learned, yea of much greater. p. 45 2. Where
the Vulgar are not permitted to read the Bible, there are as many different
Bibles (in the Representer's Sense) as where they are, p. 46 3. The Argument
retorted. p. 47
III. The third Mischief may also be objected with as much Reason, against the
reading of the Scripture by the Learned; particularly, by the Roman Bishops,
Cardinals and Popes. p. 48
SECT. III. The Reasons the Representer gives, why the Vulgar so differ in the
sense of Scripture, are two, viz. The Obscurity of the Scripture, and the
setting up every Man's private Reason to be judge of it. p. 50 1. The Obscurity
of the Scriptures. ibid. What the Protestants affirm of the plainness of the
Scripture, is no more than what the Ancient Fathers, what the Bishop of Rome
formerly, and what many Learned Romanists of this present Age have affirmed. p.
51 That the Disagreement about the sense of Scripture, proceeds not from the
obscurity of it. p. 52 From whence this Disagreement proceeds. p. 53 2. The
setting up every Man's private Reason to be judge of Scripture, p. 54 The
Protestants make not Reason judge of Scripture, as the Socinians do, ibid. They
make Reason no otherwise Judge, than as our Blessed Savior and his Apostles
have allowed and commanded. p. 55 The Clergy of the Church of Rome,
notwithstanding their loud Cry against private Reason, make it Judge as much as
Protestants. p. 56 His Argument from the Oneness of the Christian Faith,
answered and retorted. p. 57, 58, etc. His other Arguments from the Authority
of the Church, the Creed, Heb. 13. 17. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Mat. 18. 17. answered. p.
61, 62, etc.

CHAP. IV. THE false Constructions, or wrong Inferences (as the Representer
calls them) which the Protestants make from this Practice, are three; 1. That
the Vulgar Papists are deprived of the Word of God. 2. That they take up all
their Belief upon trust. 3. That the Reason why they are not permitted to read
the Bible, is for fear least they should discover the Errors of their Religion.
p. 65*
SECT. I. The first Protestant Inference justified; and the Representer's
Reasons to the contrary, showed to be idle and insignificant. p. 65, 66, 67,
etc SECT. II. That the Vulgar Papist takes all his Belief upon trust. p. 7^
This showed in each of those Heads mentioned by the Representer. And the
absurdity of his Reasons to the contrary man manifest. p. 71, 72, 7^ SECT. III.
The third Inference vindicated, and his two Reasons ^ it showed to be of no
force. p. ^^ No thanks to them that the Bible is not denied the Learned. p. ^^
That it is the Bible it self they look upon as mischievous. p. ^^ Some Learned
Men not so well qualified to discover their ^^rors as some of the Vulgar. p. ^^
Many of their Learned Men have discovered their Errors. p. ^^ Why more liberty
is given to their Vulgar here in Engla^^ than in other Countries. p. ^^ That
the Vulgar here in England have discovered their Err^^ p* ^^



The Peoples Right to read the Holy Scripture asserted.
THough it is as evident, as that the Scripture is in Print, that the free Use
of it, is by the Roman Clergy denied to the Vulgar; yet when they are charged
with it by Protestants, they either take the confidence plainly to deny it; or
if they own the Charge (as the Representer does) they endeavor to put such
glosses upon it, as to make their denial of the Scripture, to be in effect, but
a better way of granting it: For since it is not the words of the Bible, but
the sense and meaning of the words, that is properly the Word of God; while
they withhold from them the Letter, they provide means to acquaint them with
the Spirit, or the true sense of Scripture; and so deliver it to them with much
more advantage, than People of any other Persuasion have it.

What others have formerly written for their Vindication in this Matter, it is
needless now to examine; since it is not to be supposed, but that the
Representer has said as much to the purpose, as any of those who have gone
before him. I shall therefore confine the ensuing Discourse, to what he has
said in his 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th Chapters. And that it may be the more
clear and satisfactory, I shall show these four Things.

I. What is the Practice of the Church of Rome in this Matter.

II. That this Practice is plainly contrary to the Will of God, to the Reason
of the Thing, and to the Practice of the Christian Church, for more than a
thousand Years after Christ.

III. The insufficiency of those Reasons, by which the Representer endeavors
to justify it.

IV. Vindicate those Inferences the Protestants draw from it.

All that is said by the Representer, may, I think, be reduced to one or other
of these Heads.

CHAP. I.
THough some may think it needless to insist upon the first of these, since
what the Protestants charge the Church of Rome with in this Matter, is freely
enough owned by the Representer himself Chap. 6. p. 45, 46. Chap. 7. p. 52.
Chap. 9. p. 57.
; yet because some of that Communion here in England, (who for prudential
Reasons, are not so straightly tied up) do confidently deny it; it may not be
amiss, for their information, to give some short account of it, from better
Authority than that of the Representer.

For which we need go no further than the fourth Rule of the Trent Expurgatory
Index, which is this: Since it is manifest by experience, that if the Holy
Bible be promiscuously permitted in the vulgar Tongue, by reason of the
rashness of Men, more Loss than Profit will thence arise: In this Matter, let
the Judgment of the Bishop or Inquisitor be stood to, that with the advice of
the Parish Priest or Confessor, they may grant the reading of the Bible in the
vulgar Tongue, translated by Catholic Authors, to such as they shall
understand can receive no hurt by such reading, but increase of Faith and
Piety. Which Faculty let them have in writing. But he, that without such
Faculty, shall presume to read, or to have the Bible, he may not receive
Absolution of his Sins, except he first deliver up his Bible to the Ordinary.

If any Man shall say, That this Rule has not the force of a Law, Monsieur de
Maire, Counselor, Almoner and Preacher to the King of France, in a Book
published by Authority, shall give him an Answer: This Rule, says he, is
founded in Ecclesiastical Right, and no Man can transgress it, without
contradicting that Obedience which he owes to the Church, and the Holy See,
from which it has received its Confirmation: Forasmuch as this Rule was not
made but in prosecution of the Decree of the Council of Trent, etc. no Man can
deny, but that it has been approved by the Holy Sea, and authorized by the
Bulls of Pius IV, and Clement VIII; who after they had viewed and diligently
examined it, published it to the World, with Order that it should be obeyed.
Enfin je maintiens que cette Regle est fondee en droict Ecclesiastique, et qu'
on ne la peut violer sans choquer l'obeissance qu' l'on doit a l'Eglise, etc.
Le Sanctuaire serme aux Profanes, part. 3. c. 1. p. 335, 336.


If, says he, there be any thing that can hinder this Rule from having the
Force of a Law, it must be either because it has not been published, or being
published, has not been received: but neither the one nor the other can be
said, since it is evident, that this is the old Quarrel we have with our
Heretics; that this is that which our Church has always been upbraided with
by the Enemies of the Faith; this is that which is the Subject of their most
outrageous Calumnies; this is that which has been acknowledged by (...) wise
Men; that which has been earnestly maintained by all the Defenders of
Catholic Truths, -- Ce que person n' ignore; ce que tout le monde publie, n'
y aiant point de creance plus commune, ny plus generale parmy les fidels, etc.
Ibid.
that which no Person is ignorant of; that which the whole World publishes;
there being no Point of Belief more common, nor more general among the
Faithful, than this of the Prohibition to read the Bible without permission.
And this Belief so common, is (says he) a certain Proof, not only of the
publication, but of the reception of this Rule.

It cannot be denied, but that it has been received by all those Nations, by
which the Decrees of Trent were universally received: And so they were, as
Pallavicino tells us Pallav. l. 24. c. 9, 11, 12, 13.
in Italy, Spain, Sicily, Portugal, Poland, the greater part of Germany, and
many other Countries.

But suppose this Rule were not received as imposed by the Council of Trent,
yet in all Popish Countries they have made it a Law to themselves. It is not
indeed observed in France, upon the Authority of the Council; but they have set
it up, and established it as a Law by their own Authority, as is manifest by
the Mandates of their Archbishops and Bishops, the Decrees of their Provincial
Councils, and the Edicts and Arrests of their Kings and Parliaments La Bible
Deffendue au Vulgaire. Part. 3. c. 1, and 4. Collectio Auctor. Versiones Vulg.
damnant.
. It is true, there is a little more latitude in France for granting a License,
for not only the Bishop and his Vicar General, but the Penitentiary, or a Man's
own Parish Priest may grant it Mandeuent de Monseigneur L' Archevesque de Paris
portant defense de lire la Bible en Langue Vulgaire sans permission. Fait le 2
Septembre, 1650.
. But then to make an amends for this, in other Countries, the Rule is made
stricter than it was at first by the Trent Fathers; for that does not forbid
the Vulgar Bible, but only the reading it without a License; whereas the 5th
Rule of the Spanish Index, prohibits the Bibles themselves in the Vulgar
Tongue, and all Parts of them too; and that not only Printed, but in
Manuscript. Prohibentur Biblia lingua vulgari extantia, cum omnibus earum
partibus impressis aut Manuscriptis; pariter summaria and compendia quamvis
historica, eorundam Bibliorum, aut librorum sacrae Scripturae, idiomate aut
lingua vulgari.
And Alfonsus de Castro tells us, That Ferdinand King of Spain forbad any Man
under the heaviest Penalties, to translate the Bible into the Vulgar Tongue, or
to keep any Bible in his Hands already translated. Alfons. de Castro advers.
Haeres. l. 1. c. 13.
And in the Index of Pope Alexander VII, not only those Bibles that are
translated and printed by Heretics; but all Bibles in any Vulgar Tongue are
prohibited Biblia vulgari quocunque idiomate conscripta.
. Yea so careful are the Clergy in most Popish Countries to keep the Laity from
the Knowledge of the Scriptures, that, as Sir Edwin Sandys relates, in their
very Sermons, tho they preach for the most part on the Gospel of the Day, yet
they do not read, or otherwise recite the Text, but discourse only on such
Points of it, as they think fittest, that no sound of Scripture may possess the
People. I say, in most Popish Countries, because the use of France, as he says,
is otherwise. Sandys's Europae Speculum. p. 126, 127.


It would be therefore ridiculous, in Spain, to talk of a License, because the
Bible it self is not there permitted in the Vulgar Tongue. And all that is
permitted in other Countries, where the Church of Rome bears sway without
control, is, that a Man may read the Holy Scripture, in case he can get a
License for it.

But now, to whom may this License be granted? What, to all Men indifferently,
who ask it? No; but to those only who they know can receive no hurt, but
increase of Faith and Piety thereby -- Quos intellexerint ex hujusmodi
lectione, non damnum, sed fidei atque Pietatis augmentum capere posse.
. That is, as the Representer expresses it, Those who are not in danger of
preferring their own Sense, before that which they receive from their Pastors,
and the Church Chap. 7. p. 52.
. And may it not be presumed, that these Men will never so much as ask it? For
to what purpose should they desire to read the Scriptures, who are already
resolved (right or wrong) to believe as the Priest bids them? Yea, so far are
they from desiring it, that they reckon it a Mortal Sin. And should others
presume to ask it, it would be denied them; because they cannot so much as ask
it, but they will be suspected to be of the number of those Persons, who are in
the greatest danger of receiving hurt by it. So that upon the whole Matter, the
great noise they make of Licenses, is but a mere Sham; since those of the
Vulgar who might perhaps obtain them, are never likely to ask them; and those
who will be most forward to ask them, will never be able to obtain them.

And that it was indeed a Device of the Clergy, to get the Bible again out of
the Hands of the People, among whom it was then dispersed, is plain enough;
because whosoever had got a Bible, and had not a License, he might not receive
Absolution of his Sins, unless he first delivered up his Bible to the Ordinary.
And having thus got the Bible again into their own keeping, that they designed,
as much as possible, to keep it for the future out of the Hands of the People,
is further manifest, from the addition made to this Rule, by Pope Clement VIII,
upon the new Impression of it, viz. That by this Impression or Edition no new
Faculty is given to Bishops or Inquisitors, or any Superiors of Regulars, to
grant a License of buying, reading, or retaining the Bible in the Vulgar
Tongue; since hitherto by the command and usage of the Holy, Roman and
Universal Inquisition, that Faculty of granting such Licenses, of reading or
retaining the Vulgar Bibles, or any parts of the Holy Scriptures, as well of
the New as the Old Testament, in any Vulgar Tongue, has been taken from them.
Which, says he, is to be inviolably observed Observat. Clement. VIII. circa
Reg. quartam Trid.
. If then this Power formerly given of granting Licenses be taken away, and no
new Power of granting them given, it necessarily follows; That there is now no
such thing in being, as a Power of granting Licenses. Or had there been any
such Power before this new Impression of the Rule was made, yet it was then
taken away by the Pope, in decreeing, That the Command and Practice of the
Roman Inquisition, was to be inviolably observed. And lest some perhaps might
presume to read the Bible, notwithstanding the Penalty threatened to them that
do so; to give check as much as might be to such Presumption, the Booksellers
who shall sell them to such Persons, besides the loss of the price of the
Books, are liable to be punished at the Bishop's Pleasure.

It would be now superfluous to produce Cardinal Bellarmin, Sixtus Senensis,
Stapleton, Gretser, Ledesna, Azorius, or any other great Names in the Church of
Rome, as Witnesses of this Practice. I shall therefore conclude with a brief
Recollection of what has been delivered.

First, In the Pope's or the King of Spain's Dominions, no Vulgar Translation
of the Bible is allowed; nor any Parcels or Summaries of the Bible, or of the
Stories thereof.

2dly. In those Countries where the Vulgar Bible is not absolutely prohibited,
no Man is allowed to read it without a License.

3dly. This License must be granted by the Bishop or Inquisitor only; (though
by the Custom of France it may be granted by the Penitentiary or Curat.)

4thly. It may not be granted by them; to all Persons who desire it; but to
those only of whom they shall understand, that they can receive no hurt by
reading it; That is, those of whom they are so secure, that they think there is
no fear of losing them; and few or none of these will ever desire it. So that
all this talk of granting leave to read the Bible amounts to no more than this,
That those who desire it, shall for the most part be denied it. Even the
Marshall of Chastres's Lady, notwithstanding her great Quality and Piety,
could not without much difficulty get a License from the Archbishop of Sens.
Nor could she by any Means procure it for the whole Bible, but for some certain
Books only. Le Sanctuaire ferme aux Profames. p. 339.


CHAP. II.
THat it is contrary to the Will of God, contrary to Reason, yea contrary to
the Practice of the Christian Church, for more than a thousand Years after
Christ, not to permit the free use of the Holy Scripture to the Vulgar.

SECT. I.
That it is the Will of God, That the Vulgar should have the free use of the
Scripture, omitting many other Arguments, these three alone may suffice to
prove.

1. That God caused it at first to be written in a Language understood by the
Vulgar. 2. He caused it to be directed and addressed to them. 3. He commanded
them to acquaint themselves with it.
1. God caused the holy Scriptures to be at first written in a Language
understood by the Vulgar. That the Books of Moses and the Prophets were written
in the common Language of the Jews, is generally granted by the Romanists
themselves. Monsieur Mallet indeed, has been so hardy as to say, That it is
most probable, that the Books of the Law were not composed by Moses in the
Vulgar Language of the Jews. But the Arguments by which he attempts to prove
it, are not only ridiculous, and in themselves false; but in case they were
true, would be so far from establishing what he asserts, that they would quite
destroy it: He that has a Mind to see them exposed, let him consult Monsieur
Arnaud's (another learned Romanist) Confutation of his Book De la Lecture de l'
Ecriture Saint contre les Parodoxes extravagans and impies de Mons. Mallet.
; Out of which I shall at present transcribe but one Passage. I shall say a
Word only, says he, of Moses 's last Song, because it is a demonstrative Proof,
that there is nothing in the World more manifestly false, than that which
Monsieur Mallet says is probable; for there is nothing in all the Books of
Moses, that is more nobly written, and in a more lofty Style than this Song,
which he commanded the Jews to write, and to learn by Heart, and to sing often,
that it might serve as a Testimony against themselves, if they should forsake
the Worship of God. He therefore certainly supposed, that they would understand
it, since his Intention was, that in singing it, they should be touched and
affected with it Je diray Seulement un mot de son dernier Cantique; parce que
c'est une preuve demonstrative pour fair voir que Mr. Mall. appelle probable
la chose du monde la plus visiblement fausse, etc. l. 1. c. 4. p. 55.
.

As for the Books of the New Testament, there is no question (save of two only,
the Gospel of St. Matthew, and the Epistle to the Hebrews) but that they were
all written in Greek, which was then the most Vulgar Language in the World,
there being no other Tongue at that time understood by so many People. And
whereas it is objected that the Latin was the Vulgar Tongue of the Romans, to
whom notwithstanding St. Paul wrote in Greek: The answer is easy, That the
Greek Tongue was at that time more generally underderstood, and used at Rome it
self: It was more known to the Strangers there, and particularly to the Jews,
whom the Apostle had in his Epistle a special regard to; who were well
acquainted with the Greek, but for the most part ignorant of the Latin Tongue
Grot. Annot. in Evang. S. Marci and Epist. ad Heb.
. And for the Romans themselves, scarce any could be found, no not among their
Women, who did not understand it; In such common use was it, that (as Mr.
Arnaud observes) they taught it even their Parrots De la Lect. etc. l. 2. c. 13.
.

If St. Matthew's Gospel was written at first in Hebrew (as many of the
Ancients affirm); by Hebrew they meant that which was then the Vulgar Language
of the Jews who dwelt at Jerusalem, for whose sake his Gospel was primarily
written. This is asserted by such great Authorities in the Church of Rome, as
one would think no Romanist should reject; particularly by Estius and
Bellarmin. I shall recite Bellarmin's Words, and for brevity sake refer the
Reader to Estius Est Proleg. in Comment. in Epist. ad Hebraeos, super hac
quaestione. Qua lingua scripta sit Epist. ad Hebraeos.
. It is very probable, says the Cardinal, that the Gospel of St. Matthew, and
the Epistle to the Hebrews were written in the Syriac Tongue, for Albertus
Widmestadius, and Guido Fabritius have proved it by the most convincing
Arguments: Neither do the ancient Writers, Irenaeus, Origin, Eusebius,
Athanasius, Epiphanius, Jerome, who say these Books (especially the Gospel of
St. Matthew) were written in Hebrew, contradict these; for they speak of that
Hebrew which was the Vulgar Tongue in the time of the Apostles, even as in the
Gospel it self we frequently read, that a thing was so called in the Hebrew,
when it is manifest, that was so called in the Syriac: For instance, He went
forth into a place called the place of a Scull, which is called in the Hebrew
Golgotha; whereas Golgotha is not a proper Hebrew, but a Syriac word Bell. de
Verbo Dei, l. 2. c. 4.
.

Add to this, That Eusebius says expressly, that St. Matthew writ his Gospel in
his Country Language; and the reason he gives for it, necessarily required that
he should do so Eusebius. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. 3.
.

For the Epistle to the Hebrews, it matters not whether it was originally
written in Greek or Syriac, because both these Languages were then generally
understood by the Hebrews: Tho Estius has produced such Arguments as will not
easily be answered, to prove that it was at first written in Greek. To conclude
this Argument: Since God caused the Scriptures to be at first written in a
Language the Vulgar were acquainted with, who can be so senseless as to imagine,
that is was not his pleasure that the vulgar should read them?

2. God at first addressed the Holy Scriptures to the Vulgar, as well as to
others: I have written to him, (says God) the great Things of my Law Hos. 8.
12.
. Who was he to whom he had written them? The Verse foregoing told us it was
Ephraim, who is there put for the whole Body of the Israelites. The first
Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, is directed to all that in every Place
call upon the Name of the Lord Jesus. The second, to the Church of God which is
at Corinth, with all the Saints which are in all Acaia. For the rest of the
Epistles, I refer the Reader to the Discourse quoted in the Margin The
Lay-Christian's Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures.
. Now can any Man who has not quite lost his Understanding suppose, that God
would not have these Epistles read, by those Persons to whom they were written?

There are those Persons, I know, who pretend to think so; who tell us, That
though St. Paul directed his Epistles to all Christians in general, yet his
intention was, that the Pastors of the Church only should read them. But can
any thing be said more absurdly? Are not those Epistles he designed for the
Pastors, directed to them alone? as his Epistles to Timothy and Titus: Why then
should he direct his other Epistles to all the Saints, but that it was his
intention, that they all should be made acquainted with them? When his Epistle
to the Philippians is directed to ALL the Saints at Philippi, together with the
Bishops and Deacons: Can any Man have the face to say, That he intended it only
for the Bishops and Deacons? Is it not as manifest, as that there are such
Epistles, that his Speech in them is usually addressed to the People? And let a
Man but seriously consider, That in his Epistle to the Colossians, he commands,
That after that Epistle had been read among them, they should cause it to be
read also in the Church of the Laodiceans Coloss. 4. 16.
: That he gives a most solemn Charge, That his Epistle to the Thessalonians
should be read to all the Holy Brethren 1 Thessalonians. 5. 27.
; and then believe, if he can, that it was his meaning, that the Scripture
should be withheld from any the poorest and most ignorant Christian.

3. Nor has God only addressed the Holy Scriptures to the Vulgar, but he has
also commanded them to acquaint themselves familiarly with them. The words I
command thee this day, says God to all Israel, (Priests and People) shall be
in thine Heart, and thou shall teach them diligently to thy Children, and talk
of them when thou sit in thine House, etc. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8.
Can it be supposed, that they should talk of these words, when they sat in
their Houses, and when they walked by the way, when they lay down, and when
they rose up; that they should bind them for a Sign upon their Hands, and that
they should be as Frontlets between their eyes; that they should write them
upon the Posts of their Houses, and upon their Gates; that they should teach
them diligently to their Children, and yet should not be permitted to read
them? When Moses had made an end of speaking these words, having said all that
he had in charge from God to deliver to this People, he concludes thus: Set
your Hearts unto all the words which I testify among you this day, which ye
shall command your Children to observe and do, all the words of this Law; for
it is not a vain thing for you, because it is your Life, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. 45, 46,
47.
. Is this said like a Man; that would not have them so much as read the words
he had spoken to them?

And for the New Testament, the Command is general to Christians of all States
and Qualities, That the Word of Christ dwell in them; and not only so, but that
it dwell in them richly; so richly, that they may thereby be endowed with all
Wisdom Coloss. 3. 16.
. Which St. Chrysostom thought so plain a Command to the common People to read
the Scriptures, that in his Sermon upon these words, he thus earnestly exhorts
them; Hearken all ye that are Men of the World, and have a Wife and Children
under your Government, how even You he commands especially to read the
Scriptures; and that not simply, or now and then by chance, but with much
diligence Hom. 9. in Epist. ad Coloss.
. If St. Chrysostom's word be not thought sufficent, I shall add to it a late
famous Divine of the Church of Rome. What more clear, says he, than that St.
Paul thus exhorts, Coloss. 3. Let the Word of Christ dwell in You. But in what
You? In those Saints and Faithful Brethren in Christ that were at Colosse, to
whom he inscribed this Epistle, (not as some other Epistles to Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons); Let the Word of Christ therefore dwell in You in all
Wisdom, etc. Espens. in Epist. ad Tit. cap. 2 p. 518, 519.
. Which the Author speaks to show, that the reading of the Scriptures ought not
to be prohibited to Laymen. That this Prohibition is indeed contrary to the
Will of God, will yet further appear, by showing that it is very absurd and
unreasonable.

SECT. II.
Let us hear what common Reason says, (to use the words of a Reverend Person
of our own Church, in an excellent Treatise upon this Subject) and that teaches
us, That since the Holy Scriptures were written for the use and benefit of all,
all should have the liberty to read them. They were written for all, it is
plain; for that which they teach is the Duty of all, that which they promise is
the Portion of all Search the Scriptures, p. 58.
.

Dare any one say, That the Scripture was not given as a Rule to the People?
That it was not designed to teach them, not only what they are concerned to
know and to do in the general as they are Men, or as they are Christians, but
to instruct them also more particularly, how they ought to demean themselves in
their several Callings and Relations, in their different States and Conditions
of Life, that they may walk worthy of God in this World, and be made meet for
the happiness of the next? And what can be more absurd, than that a Man should
not be suffered to read those Lessons, which as he hopes for Salvation, he is
bound to learn? That he should not be permitted the perusal of those Laws,
which under peril of Damnation he is bound to obey? That he should be forbid to
see with his own Eyes, what God has promised to quicken him to his Duty; and
what he has threatened to deter him from the contrary?

Are not the Scriptures (as St. Chrysostom calls them) the Weapons of our
Spiritual Warfare, the Storehouse of Spiritual Medicines Hom. 9. in Epist. ad
Colos.
? Are they not given for a Light to our Feet and a Lamp to our Paths Psalm. 119.
105. Prove. 6. 23.
? And therefore to deprive the People of them, what is it else, but to take
away the Light from a Man in darkness? To deny Medicines to one that is sick?
Or to deprive a Soldier of those Weapons, by which he should defend himself,
and repel his Enemies? What the the Representer says in opposition to this
shall be anon considered.

I shall add no more upon this Head, than what I shall borrow from some great
and learned Men of the Church of Rome. The Bishop of Vence in his Dedicatory
Epistle prefixed to his Translation of the New Test. addresses thus to all
Christians indifferently: Behold it is the Testament of the Son of God, your
Father and your Judge, which I offer to you: I cannot doubt but the reading of
it will be acceptable to you. You will see that he has there left you a
Patrimony most divine, which is his Truth; and that he has divided it in a
wonderful manner: For though it be but one, yet he has suited it to the
condition, and to the Duties of every Man, to the end that all Men by
practicing its Precepts, may live in Peace, and may come to the possession of
his Inheritance, which is eternal Life Voicy le Testament du Fills de Dieu
vostre Pere et vostre Juge, que je Vous offer. Je ne puis douter que la lecture
ne vous en soit agreeable. Vous verrez qu' il vous y laisse un patrimony tout
divin, qui est sa Verite etc.
.

The Translators of the Mons Testament in their Preface have these Words: If
God heretofore commanded his People to read that Law without ceasing, which he
had given them, and to meditate in it day and night. And if the Religious
believe themselves obliged to read perpetually, the Rule they have received
from their Founder. How can we neglect to read the Law of Jesus Christ, the
words of which are Spirit and Life? since being entered by Baptism into the
Catholic and Universal Religion, of which Jesus Christ is the Founder, we
ought to look upon the Gospel as our Rule, which teaches us his Will, which
assures us of his Promises, which is our Light in this World, and which must
one Day be our Judge Que si Dieu avoit command autrefois a son peuple de lire
sans cesse la loy qu' il luy avoit donnee et de la mediter jour it nuit; et si
les Religieux se croient obligez de lire tous les jours la Regle qu' ils ont
recue de leur Instituteur: comment pouvonsnous negliger de lire la loy de Jesus
Christ etc p. 4, 5.
? In the Judgment of these Learned Men of the Church of Rome, to deny the
reading of the Scriptures to the People, is as unreasonable and unjust, as not
to suffer an Heir to see his Father's Will, or to forbid the Regulars the sight
of their Rule.

If any Man shall think that these Testimonies are not weighty enough, I shall
add another, which cannot be refused by those Men I now dispute against, viz.
That of Pope Gregory the Great: The holy Scripture, says he, as a kind of
Looking-glass is set before the Eyes of our Mind, that our inward Face may be
seen by it. By it we know what in us is foul and what is fair; by it we
perceive how much we profit; by it how far we are from profiting. It declares
the brave Exploits of the Saints, and provokes the weak to the imitation of
them; and while it commemorates their victorious Acts, it confirms and
strengthens our weakness against the assaults of Vice, and we are the less
fearful in the Encounter, by seeing the foregoing Triumphs of so many valiant
Men. But sometimes it sets before us not only their Virtues but their Falls,
that in the Victory of the strong, we may find that which we ought to imitate,
and again in their Falls, that which we ought to fear Scriptura sacra mentis
oculis quasi quoddam speculum opponitur, ut interna nostra facies in ipsa
videatur, etc. Expos. Moral in 1 cap. Job l. 2. c. 1. fol. 4. K
. I appeal now to the Romanists themselves, Whether this great Pope, thought it
not fit, that the reading of the Holy Scriptures should be left free to every
Man? If they say no; I question not but to make them confess it whether they
will or no, in the following parts of this Discourse.

SECT. III.
Nor is the practice of the Roman Church now, less contrary to the practice of
the whole Christian Church, for more than a thousand Years after Christ.

That the Scriptures lay open to all sorts of Persons in the Jewish Church, I
need not prove; It is sufficiently known by that Passage of Josephus Joseph. l.
2. contr. Appion.
frequently quoted by Protestant Writers, viz. That if any Man ask a Jew
concerning the Laws, he will tell him every thing more readily than his Name;
for learning them as soon as they come to have sense of any thing, they retain
them deeply imprinted in their Minds. And Maimonides informs us, That it did
not suffice a Jew, barely to read the Law; but he was to write it too. For tho
a Father had left his Son a Copy of the Law, he was notwithstanding obliged to
write for himself, another Copy with his own Hand; or procure it to be written,
if he could not write himself. And therefore the Pentateuch at least (as
Morinus a Learned Romanist infers) Exercit. Bibl. l. 2. Exercit. 16. c. 1. n.
6, 7.
that is the Books of Moses, were in the Hands of all the Jews; and frequently
many Copies were in one Family, because they were wont to keep those that were
left by their Fathers.

But my design at present, is to show, That the practice of the Christian
Church (yea of the Roman Church it self heretofore) was quite contrary to the
Rules and Practice of the Church of Rome now: And that this may be made so
evident, that those who wish it were false may be constrained to confess it: I
shall proceed in the same Method, that a Reverend Author has done in a late
learned Discourse upon another controverted Point A Vindication of the Answer
to some Papers, etc.
; viz. I shall prove by unquestionable Testimonies, for twelve hundred Years
downward, from our Savior's Birth, that the reading of the Scripture had no
restraint put upon it, but was left in common to all Christians.

That it was so in the first Age, we have undeniable Evidence in the Scripture
it self. Would our Savior and his Apostles in their popular Discourses, so
frequently have sent their Hearers to the Scriptures, had they not then been
allowed to read them Mat. 21. 13. Luke 6. 3, 4. Joh. 10. 34, 35. Act. 2. 16.
? Could the Bereans have searched the Scriptures, to see whether those things
that were spoken by Paul were so Act. 17. 11.
, had not the Scripture been in their Hands? Had not all the Saints in all
Achaia been permitted to read the Scriptures, could St. Paul have said truly to
them, We write none other things to you than what you read 2 Cor. 1. 13.
? That very Text so frequently produced by Romish Writers, to prove that the
Vulgar ought not to read the Scriptures 2 Pet. 3. 16.
, is an Argument that in the Apostles time they did so: For it is not easy to
conceive, how the unlearned and unstable should wrest the Scriptures, had they
never read them.

In the same Age, in St. Clement's Epistle directed to all the Christians at
Corinth, we find these Words: You have known Beloved, you have well known the
holy Scriptures, you have thoroughly looked into the Oracles of God, etc. (...).
And if the Christians at Corinth were so conversant in the Scriptures, surely
the Christians of Rome, in the time of this Bishop, were not forbidden to read
them.

Toward the end of the second Age, Clement of Alexandria gives this Character
of a Christian; His whole Life is a holy Solemnity, his Sacrifices are Prayers
and Praises, and conferences of the Scriptures before his Meal, and Psalms and
Hymns while he is at it (...). Stromat. l. 7. p. 728. Edit. 1629.
. Certainly no Restraint was then laid upon the reading of the Scripture, when
it was the common Practice of Christians to read it, and make it the matter of
their Discourse at their Meals.

For the third Century (tho many other Witnesses stand ready, yet) Origin alone
may suffice. Whether we consider, 1. How early he himself was educated in the
Scriptures: Or 2. What he has left on record to this purpose.

First, His Father Leonides before he put him to other Learning, put him upon
the study of the Scriptures, of which he set him a daily Task, to learn by
heart Eusebius. Hist. Ecclesiast. l. 6. c. 2,
. Now his Father being a Layman, and he himself then a Child (for the Father
was crowned with Martyrdom, before the Son was seventeen years old) what Arnaud
hence infers, undeniably follows viz. That the Church then thought it good, not
only for Laymen to read the Scriptures, but to make their Children also read
them in their tender Age.

2. Of those many Passages which Arnaud and others have observed in his
Writings, it will be sufficient to produce one: directing his Speech to all
Christians without distinction he thus exhorts them: We beseech you not to
content your selves to hear the Word of God, when read in the Church, but to
apply your selves to it at home, and to meditate upon it day and night; for
Jesus Christ is there present as well as in the Church, and they that seek him
shall find him every where. Therefore he has commanded us to meditate in the
Law of the Lord, when we walk by the way, and when we sit in our Houses, when
we lie down, and when we rise up Hom. 9. in Levit.
.

In the beginning of the fourth Age, it is certain that the Bible was in
Laymens hands, because in Dioclesian's Persecution, many Laymen, to save
themselves, delivered up their Bibles to be burnt Quid commemorem Laicos, qui
tunc in Ecclesia nulla fuerant dignitate suffulti? etc. Optat. advers. Parmen.
l. 1.
.

That in the succeeding Parts of that Age, under the Christian Emgots, they had
the free use of them is as manifest; because we find that all sorts of People
were frequently and earnestly pressed by their Teachers to read them.

I shall not insist upon what is by others produced out of St. Jerome, viz. The
Dedication of his Commentaries upon the Scriptures to Women, his Epistles to
many of that Sex, in which he highly commends them for their study of the
Scriptures, and exhorts them diligently to instruct their Children therein: How
he advised Gaudentius to cause his Daughter at seven years old to get the
Psalms by Heart, and when she should come to the age of twelve, to treasure up
in her Heart the Books of Solomon, the Gospels, the Epistles of the Apostles,
and the Prophets. But (omitting these) I think it enough, to tell you, that
even Father Thomassin affirms, that this Father most straightly charged, not only
the Clergy and the Religious (that is, Monks and Nuns) to read the Scriptures;
but recommended the reading of them to all sorts of Persons, without
distinction of Age or Sex, even to Women and Girls Part. 1. l. 11. c. 10. n. 6.
. What pretense then have the Papists, for quoting St. Jerome as one of their
side? You shall hear. In his Epistle to Paulinus he complains, That whereas Men
of all other Arts contained themselves within the bounds of their own
Profession, every one took upon him to be a Teacher of the Scriptures, even the
doting old Man, and the tatling old Wife, etc. Quod Medicorum est promittunt
Medici, tractant fabrilia Fabri; Sola Scripturarum ars est quam sibi passim
omnes vendicant. -- hanc garrula anus, hunc delirus senex, etc.
an unanswerable Argument, that the most simple of both Sexes did then freely
read the Scriptures; For could they presume to teach them, had they never read
them? Nor does he blame their reading them, but that they took upon them to be
Teachers, before they themselves had learnt them; docent antequam discant.

How vehement and copious St. Austin is, in his Exhortations to his Hearers, of
all Ranks and Qualities, to read the Scriptures, you may be informed by another
Learned Papist Espenc. Comment. in Epist. ad Tit. c. 2. p. 517. Ed. Paris. 1619.
. I shall give but a taste: It may not suffice, says he, that You hear the
Divine Scriptures read in the Churches; but in Your Houses, either read them
Your selves, or get others to read, and do You readily hearken to them. Hear
the Divine Scriptures read in the Church, as You are wont, and read them over
again at Home. If any be so employed, that before his repast, he cannot have
leisure, let it not grieve him, to read something of them at his Meal; that as
the Body is fed with Meat, so the Soul may be refreshed with the Words of God;
that the whole Man, both outward and inward, may arise satisfied from a holy
and wholesome Banquet, etc. De Tempore Sermon. 55, 56, 57. De Sanctis Sermon. 38.
.

What the same learned Romanist, has to the same purpose produced out of St.
Chrysostom, if the Representer please to read, methinks it should put him to
the blush. I shall only observe, That this incomparable Saint, makes the
reading of the Scriptures, not only necessary for all Men, of whatsoever rank
they be, but more necessary for those whose Business lies in the midst of the
World, than for those who live more retired from it. As you may see by many
pregnant Proofs, in that excellent Treatise before mentioned Search the
Scriptures, p. 40
.

Tho I omit many, as St. Basil, St. Hilary, St. Ambrose, etc. yet I shall
mention two more Witnesses in this Age; The first, is Julian the Apostate, who
derides the Christians for breeding up their Children in the knowledge of the
Scriptures. The second, is St. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, who in his Catechisms
for the Illuminate, (that is, Persons newly baptized) charges them to read all
the Books both of the Old and New Testament, and diligently to meditate upon
them Cateches. 4. de Sacra. Script. p. 36, 37, 38. Edit. Par. 1640.
.

In the fifth Age, Cyril of Alexandria, in his Books against Julian, informs
us. That it was then also the practice of Christians, not barely to read the
Scriptures themselves, but to train up their Children in them. And in answer to
the Apostate's scurrilous Objections, he shows what Advantages accru'd to them
by being early instructed in the Divine Scripture, above all that could be
expected from the Learning of the Greeks Lib. 7. contra Julianum.
.

In the sixth Age, Pope Gregory the Great, in a popular Sermon, thus exhorts
his Hearers: Study, most dear Brethren, the Words of God. Do not despise the
Letters our Maker has sent us. It is a great advantage, that by them the Soul
is quickened, lest it should be benumn'd with the cold of its iniquity. When we
there see, that Just Men have done valiantly, we our selves are disposed to
courage in well-doing. The Soul of the Reader is enkindled by the Flame of Holy
Examples. It sees their noble Acts, and is displeased with it self, that it
does not imitate them. Hence in the Voice of the Bridgroom it is said to the
Bride, Thy Neck is like the Tower of David, builded for an Armory; whereon
there hang a thousand Bucklers. In the Neck is the Throat, in the Throat is the
Voice; What therefore is meant by the Neck of Holy Church, but its Sacred
Oracles, whereon a thousand Shields are said to hang, because all our defense
is contained in the Sacred Oracles. For there are the Commandments of God,
there are the Examples of Just Men. If the Soul grow cold in the love of God,
let it hear what is said; Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Mind,
and with all thy Strength, etc. Hom. 16. Super Ezech.
He that desires to see more to this purpose, let him consult his moral
Exposition of the Book of Job, (especially l. 20.); his Epistle to Leander
Archbishop of Sevil, and read his famous Story of Poor Servolus Hom. 15. de
diverse. Lect. Evangelii.
. And when he has done so, I shall leave him to judge, whether this great Pope
was of the same judgment with Pope Pius IV, and the Trent Fathers? Whether the
Holy Scriptures were not in his time read at Rome, by the most unlearned Vulgar?

For the seventh Age, Isidore Archbishop of Sevil, is a Witness beyond
exception: The Holy Scripture, says he, to the weak, and those that are
Children in understanding, as to its History, seems low in words; when to more
excellent Men it rises higher, while it opens to them its Mysteries, and by
this means it remains common, both to the little Ones and to the Perfect. The
Holy Scripture is varied in proportion to the Understanding of every Reader; as
Manna, which to the ancient People gave a different taste, acccording to their
different Palats, etc. Scriptura Sacra infirmis and sensu par^^is secundum
historiam humilis videtur in Verbis; cum excellentioribus autem viris al^^s
incedit dum eis sua mysteria pandit, atque per hoc utrisque manet communis, and
parvulis and ^erfectis Sententiar. l. 1. c. 18.


That the same practice continued in the eighth Age, we are assured by
venerable Bede, and the Saxon Homilies. In his Character of Aidan Bishop of the
Northumbrians, he makes it none of the least of his Virtues, That he was so far
from the sloth of the Age, that all that went with him, whether Clergy or
Laymen, were obliged to meditate, that is, to take pains to read the
Scriptures, or to learn the Psalms. This, says he, was his daily Work, and the
Work of all those that were with him Hist. Ecclesiast. l. 3. c. 5.
.

And because the reading of the Scriptures was then too generally neglected,
the Saxon Church endeavored a Remedy for this Evil in her Homilies; out of
which I shall cite but one Passage, viz. The reading of the Holy Scriptures,
purges the Soul of the Reader. It brings to mind the fear of eternal
Punishment; it also lifts up his Heart to the Joy Above. Whosoever would be
together with God, he ought to pray often, and often to read the Holy
Scriptures; for when we pray, we speak to God, and when we read the Holy Bible,
God speaks to us. The reading of the Holy Bible brings a double benefit to the
Readers: The first, That it informs the Mind; the other, That it takes it off
from the Trifles of this World, to the love of God. How far was the Church yet
from believing, That Laymens reading of the Scriptures, did more hurt than
good. He that has a mind to see more out of the Saxon Homilies, let him
consult the Notes on Bede's Ecclesiastical History Lib. 3. p. 172, 173, 174. l.
4. p. 310.
.

In the 9th Age, Rabanus Maurus Archbishop of Mentz speaks thus: That Divine
Wisdom which shines forth i^ the Holy Spripture, is both to the Strong and
Weak, both to the Wise and Foolish, if they will mind it, and truly obey it, a
wholesome Medicine. It is the enlightening of the Mind, the Correction of Life,
the Path of Righteousness. And therefore both the greater and the lesser, do
want its help, and stand stand in need of its conduct Sapientia Divina quae in
Sacra Scriptura elucet, omnibus tam potentibus quam infirmis, tam sapientibus
quam insipientibus, si eam recte intenderint, and ei rite obedierint, Medicina
Salubris est. Ipsa est Illuminatio animae, etc.
.

In the tenth, Odo Abbat of Clugny tells us; That by the wild Goats which God
speaks of to Job, are meant all good and wise Men. For as these Goats abide in
the Rocks, and if they at any time fall from their Heights, they keep
themselves unhurt in their Flesh: So these good Men dwell in the Rocks, because
they endeavor to live according to the Examples of the Fathers; and when they
fall at any time, they are not dashed in pieces, because leaning upon the
Scriptures of the two Testaments, they escape, and by the comfort of them,
sustain themselves, that they do not faint in trouble Collat. l. 3.
. It seems, the Scriptures were yet thought useful to every Man, to support and
comfort him in Troubles and Afflictions.

In the eleventh Age, hear what Advice Theophylact gives to Parents: If thou will have thy Children obey thee, instruct them in the Word of God; say not,
that it belongs only to Monks to read the Scriptures, for it is the Duty of
every Christian; especially of those who are conversant in the World, who stand
in need of greater Assistances, as Men tossed in a Storm. It Is thy Concern and
Interest, that they hear the Scriptures, for they will thence learn to honor
their Father and Mother Theoph. in Ephesians. c. 6. v. 4.
. So far was this great Bishop from thinking the reading of the Scriptures
hurtful to the Laity, that he thought it more necessary for them, than others;
so far from confining them only to the Learned, that he would have Children,
the most ignorant of the Laity, to read them.

In the twelfth Age, Rupertus Tuitiensis says; That the Holy Scripture is
rightly called a Field, because it is in truth a public thing, that lies open,
and is proposed to all Men who are desirous to read or hear it Sancta Scriptura
recte dicitur ager, quia profecto res publica est, res in aperto posita, and
cunctis hominibus, imo populis omnibus legere vel audire capientibus proposita
est. L. 1. de Glorific. Trinit.
. To whom we may add St. Bernard, who in a popular Discourse earnestly exhorts
his Hearers, to apply themselves to the Scriptures, from the consideration of
those inestimable Benefits they would receive thereby Sermon. 24. de diversis.
.

Thus I have showed the practice of the Christian Church to the twelfth Age;
not from the Testimonies of obscure and suspected Authors, but of Men famous in
their Generations, and whose Names are held in great veneration in the Church
of Rome. Which I have the rather done, because some Persons have had the
confidence to bear the World in hand, that in the Primitive Church, a restraint
was laid upon the reading of the Scripture. An Assertion so manifestly untrue,
that we need desire no clearer Proofs of the contrary, than those two or three
Passages out of the Ancients, they produce for it.

If the Reader desire to know, when, and upon what occasion this Liberty was
first taken from Laymen, I Will now tell him. The first Synodical Prohibition,
was that of the Synod of Toulouse, in the Year 1228, in these words: We forbid
that Laymen be permitted to have the Books of the Old and New Testament;
unless perhaps some one out of Devotion, desire to have the Psalter or Breviary
for Divine Offices, and the Hours of the Blessed Virgin; but even those now
mentioned, they may not have translated in the vulgar Tongue. Prohibemus etiam
ne Libros Veteris and Novi Testamenti Laici permittantur habere; nisi forte
Psalterium aut Breviarium pro Divinis Officiis. ac horas Beatae Virginis
aliquis ex devotione habere velit: Sed ne pr^ libros habeant in vulgari
Translatos. D'Achetii, Tom. 2. p. 624.


The special occasion of this Decree, was the preaching of the Waldensis; who
taught, that in Articles of Faith, the Holy Scripture was the Rule, by which
Men were to judge, that whatsoever was not agreeable to the Word of God, ought
to be rejected. That the reading and knowledge of the Scripture, was free and
necessary to all Men, both Laity and Clergy Cent. 12. Ecclesiast. Hist. c. 8.
. By this time the Church of Rome had gotten such a new Faith, as would not
abide the old Test; and therefore it was prudently done, to deprive the People
of the Scripture, that they might not be able to discover those Errors into
which they led them.

CHAP. III.
LET us now see what the Representer offers, to justify this Practice of the
present Church of Rome, so manifestly repugnant to Scripture, to Reason, and to
the ancient Practice of the Church of Rome it self; yea, of the whole Christian
Church throughout the World.

Surely, they must be very weighty Reasons, or else they will never bear down
so great a weight, as lies in the other Scale against them. Does he show, that
God has retracted his first Grant? That he has repealed his old Law, and
established one quite contrary in the room of it? Does he show, That the Reason
of the Thing is changed? So that if the Primitive Fathers were alive again,
they would now with as much earnestness dissuade Laymen from reading the
Scripture, as they formerly exhorted them to it? Had he done thus, he had
spoken to the purpose: But, alas! we find nothing of this, nor any thing like
it.

What then are his Reasons? You shall now hear: And I shall endeavor to
represent them to the best advantage, without abating one grain of their just
weight. They are all reducible to this one general Head, viz. The Mischiefs
that arise from the promiscuous reading of the Scripture; several of which he
mentions, and insists upon; and then acquaints us with the Reasons (as he
supposes) of those Mischiefs. That therefore my Discourse upon them may be the
more clear and distinct, I shall divide it into these three parts.

1. I shall consider the General Reason. 2. The Particulars he insists upon. 3.
The Reasons he gives why these Mischiefs flow from the free reading of the
Bible.
SECT. I.
The general Reason he gives of this Restraint, is; The Mischiess that arise
from the promiscuous reading of the Bible: since these, and infinite other
Mischiefs arise from the free permitting the Bible among the Multitude, He
(viz. the Papist) thinks it commendable in his Church, out of a true solicitude
for the Salvation of Souls, to prevent those Evils, by teaching the true sense
of this Sacred Volume -- without leaving the Book to be scanned by them as they
please; and so not permitting them to turn the Food of their Souls into Poison,
or abuse that to their Destruction, which was ordained by Christ for their
gaining of Heaven Chap. 7. p. 52.
. But if out of pure kindness to the Souls of the Vulgar, they take away this
dangerous Book from them; Why do they give them other very perilous Books in
the room of it? I mean Images (which they call Laymens Books) tho by the
Confession of many of their own Writers, they are horribly abused by the
Vulgar. But to pass that;

This is the Argument they commonly insist upon, and tho it has been
wretchedly bafled again and again, yet for want of a better, it is upon every
occasion dressed up anew, and urged with as brisk a Confidence, as if it had
never before been heard of.

He says he does sincerely, respect, honor and reverence the Scripture Chap.
6. p. 44.
. But methinks he expresses his respect and reverence, as untowardly, as the
Lindians did toward their God Hercules, whom they worshipped by throwing Stones
at him. For what is this, but to say, that the Bible is the most dangerous Book
in the World? since a Layman cannot read it, without danger of being eternally
undone by it: And if this be to honor and reverence the Scripture, I know not
what it is to revile it.

The Representer will say this is a false Inference. I shall be glad if he can
make that appear, for nothing seems to follow more naturally from the Premises.
He will say, he does not impute these Mischiefs to the Scripture it self, but
to Men's Abuse of it Chap. 7. p. 52.
. What then? the danger is not the less, if it be so apt to be abused, that
scarce any Man can read it who will not so abuse it. Let us suppose there are
two things, the one of which is an excellent Antidote, if rightly used, but so
hard a matter it is so to use it, that not one in an hundred can be found, to
whom it does not turn to Poison: The other is it self a rank Poison, yet may be
so tempered, and taken with that caution, that it may become an Antidote: Is
not now this Antidote (however excellent in it self) as dangerous as the Poison?

But if these Mischiefs proceed merely from Men's Abuse of Scripture, why is it
then denied to those who do not thus abuse it? For in that he says, Such as for
the MOST PART are not capable of reading it as they ought, have not leave to
read it; and those that are capable may have IN MOST COUNTRIES leave to read
it, as they please Page 52.
. He plainly grants, that Some have not leave to read it, who are capable of
reading it as they ought, and that in some Countries they cannot obtain this
leave, tho they never so much desire it. Where, by capable of reading as they
ought, he must (if he speak sense) mean those who will not abuse it; tho it is
a great mistake to confound these two, as if they were the same, when they are
as different, the one from the other, as a sick Man is from one that is not
capable of being well; and therefore to say that a Man who abuses the
Scripture, is not capable of reading it as he ought, is as absurd, as that a
sick Man is not capable of recovering his Health. Were indeed all those that
abuse the Scripture incapable of reading it to good purpose, I should not deny,
but they might with good reason be deprived of it: But if they must be denied
it for no other reason but because they abuse it; then let all Men be deprived
of their Eyes, their Ears, their Tongues etc. there being no Man by whom these
are not more or less abused: Yea let not only some, but every Man in the World,
be denied the reading of the Scripture; because (I fear) there is scarce any
Man who is most careful to avoid it, but he may some time or other, through
weakness or ignorance abuse it.

It is therefore certain, that a Man ought not for every Abuse to be deprived
of this Privilege: And if for any of those mentioned by the Representer, our
blessed Savior and his Apostles were much to blame, who put all Men
indifferently upon the study of the Scripture, notwithstanding all these Abuses
were as high in their time, as they have been in any Age since. Did I say not
for every Abuse? I will add, not for any Abuse, unless there can be any that
God did not foresee; for since notwithstanding any such Abuse, he gave free
liberty to all Men, who can deny it to any, unless they will take upon them to
correct God?

And yet when all is done; in case Men are to be denied the reading of the
Scripture, because they abuse it; then those above all others ought to be
denied it, who most extragavantly abuse it. I mean those, who prove the Pope is
as much greater than the Emperor, as the Sun is greater than the Moon, from
Genesis 1. 16. God made two great Lights, the greater Light to rule the Day, and
the lesser Light to rule the Night. That in the Churches Power are two Swords,
the Temporal and the Spiritual; from that Speech of St. Peter to Christ,
Behold, here are two Swords. That the Pope is an absolute universal Sovereign;
because Christ said to St. Peter, Feed my Sheep. That a married Man cannot
please God, because St. Paul says, They that are in the Flesh cannot please
God. And to give one Instance in the Subject we are now upon; That no unlearned
Man may presume to meddle with the Scripture, because God commanded, That if a
Beast touched the Mountain, it should be stoned, or thrust through with a Dart.
Did ever Men more abuse the Scripture than those, who for bad purposes put such
absurd ridiculous Senses upon it? And yet these are the Men, who have taken
upon them to be the only infallible Interpreters of it. Let all impartial Men
then judge, who best deserves to be forbidden to read it, Whether his Holiness,
or an honest Mechanic? The Truth is, the Pope and his Clergy have set up a
Worldly Religion, so directly opposite to that of Christ, that the Heretical
Scriptures, however tortured, will never be brought to a compliance with. The
Mischiefs they talk of that arise from the Vulgar, are but pretended; the
Mischiefs that come to themselves thereby, are those they are indeed afraid of;
as was plainly confessed to Pope Julius III, by those Bishops assembled at
Bononia to consult about the establishment of the Roman Church Verger. Consil.
de Romans Eccles. stabilienda.
.

I shall not insist upon it, That the Representer is so intent upon the
Mischiefs, that he quite forgets the Benefits which arise from reading the
Scriptures, and those many intolerable Mischiefs which flow from the neglect of
it; which the ancient Fathers have largely insisted upon. The reading of the
Divine Scriptures, says St. Chrysostom, is a Spiritual Meadow, a Paradise of
Delights; a better Paradise of Delight than that other Paradise. God has
planted this Paradise not in the Earth, but in the Souls of Believers: He has
placed it not in Eden or toward the East, confining it to one place, but has
extended it to the Ends of the World. -- Here is no Serpent, it is a place free
from wild Beasts, and fenced with the Grace of the holy Spirit. -- And this
Paradise has a Fountain as the other had, a Fountain from which not only four,
but myriads of Rivers flow: -- Would you know the Nature of it, know it from
its use. It is not profitable to this present Life, but to the Life eternal.
Let us spend our Time in this Paradise, let us sit by this Fountain, let us
abide in the reading of these Scriptures. For as those that sit by a Fountain,
and enjoy that cool refreshing Air, and when the Sun grows hot, dipping their
Face continually, do drive away the stifling Heat, and easily cure their
troublesome Thirst: So he that sits by the Fountain of the Divine Scriptures, if
the flame of Lust annoy him, bathing his Soul in these Waters, he may easily
extinguish it. If fierce Anger molest him, inflaming his Heart as a boiling
Cauldron, by instilling a little of this Water, he may presently repress the
importunity of the Passion; and from all evil Cogitations the reading of the
Divine Scriptures delivers the Soul. For which Reason the great Prophet David,
knowing the advantage that comes by reading the Scriptures, compares the Man
who constantly attends to the Scriptures, to a Plant placed by the Rivers of
Waters, which always flourishes. For as that Tree is not hurt by unseasonable
Air, or by the scorching Rays of the Sun: So that Soul that stands by the
flowings of the Divine Scriptures, and is continually watered by them, is
unconquerable; if Sickness, Loss, false Accusation, Revilings, -- Yea if all
the Evils in the World assault such a Soul, he easily repels all Perturbations
of Mind, having sufficient Consolation from the reading of the Scriptures De
utilitate lectionis Script.
. If any Man list to see more to this purpose, let him consult the Sermon. And
as the Benefits are many and so great, that a Man may reap from the reading of
the Scripture, so the same St. Chrysostom tells us, that Myriads of Mischiefs
spring from the neglect of it Proaem. in Epist. ad Romans
; many of which he has given us a particular account of in several of his
Sermons.

SECT. II.
Let us now consider what these Mischiefs are the Representer makes such a
Noise about. Besides those mentioned by him, he says, there are infinite other
Page 52.
. Those infinite other, I can say nothing to, because I know not what they are:
If he please to tell us some of them (for we cannot expect he should ennumerate
all, because they are infinite) they shall be considered. All those he is
pleased to mention are of the same kind, viz. the Divisions that are among
Christians from the different Senses they put upon the Scripture, thereby
making as many Bibles as there are Men. The unhappy Divisions, says he, which
are among Christians, sufficiently inform him, that to such Readers as St.
Peter calls unwary and ignorant, how ever wise they may think themselves,
Arianism may be as obvious in this Book, as Christ's Divinity; and that when
such an one undertakes the interpretation of it, it is an hazard whether at the
end, he comes out Quaker, Anabaptist, Presbyterian, Independent, Muggletonian,
Socinian or Atheist: It Is a venture whether the Trinity shall have place in his
Creed or no: Whether he will allow of Baptism or any Sacrament; and whether
Cruelty, cutting of Throats, Oppression, Tyranny, Dethroning of Kings and
Murder of Princes, shall not with him become a necessary Duty, and a true
serving of the Lord, etc. Page 52.
. And in another place, the Reason he gives, why the Holy Scriptures are not
generally allowed to the Vulgar, is this; That there may not be as many
different Bibles among them, as there are Heads Page 54.
: Which is in effect the same with the former. And in a third; That it is not
only thus in SEVERAL PEOPLE, but even the SAME PERSON many times has the
faculty of multiplying the Word of God Chap. 9. page 57.
. That is, by reading the Scriptures, Men are not only divided one from
another, but the same Person is at different times, divided from himself, by
putting one Sense upon them at one time, and another, at another.

I shall observe one thing by the way, before I come to expose the Folly of
this way of Reasoning. Had not this Gentleman vainly presumed, that the Vulgar
of our Communion, are as ignorant as those of his own, in other Countries, he
would not have laid so great stress upon these Words of St. Peter (the
unlearned and unstable) and repeated them thrice within the compass of one half
Sheet, (tho perhaps for a disguise in the words now cited, he puts unwary and
ignorant instead of unlearned and unstable) since they are so far from proving
what he designs, that they are a fair Argument for the contrary. For, as I
before observed, could the unlearned have wrested the Scriptures, had they not
read them? And if because they wrested them, they were to be forbidden to read
them, would not the Apostle (when the matter required it) have told them so,
and given this in charge to the Pastors of the Church? Had he been of the same
judgment with his Successors at Rome, for the last three or four hundred years,
was it possible he should have forgotten this? I appeal to the Representer's
own Conscience: Does he think it was St. Peter's intention that this Epistle of
his should not be read by those to whom he wrote it? If not, he intended it
should be read by the Vulgar, for it is certain it was written to such.

I shall now proceed to the particular consideration of these Mischiefs. Which
tho all (as I said before) of the same kind; yet because to make the greater
show, the Representer has put them into a different dress of words, and
discoursed of them apart in three several Chapters Chap. 7. 8, 9.
, lest I should be thought to wave any thing material to his purpose, I shall
also speak to them severally, and they are these:

I. The many Divisions that are among Christians Chap. 7. p. 52.
. II. As many different Bibles as there are different Heads Chap. 8. p. 54.
. III. Not only several People, but even the same Person many times has the
faculty of multiplying the Word of God Chap. 9. p. 57. Mischief I.
.
I. Having just before spoken of the many unhappy Divisions among Christians,
he says, That these and infinite other Mischiefs arise from the free permitting
the Bible among the Multitude Page 52.
. Now if he speaks to the purpose, his meaning must of necessity be; That all
these many unhappy Divisions arise from this cause only, or at least from this
cause principally. And therefore no more is here needful than to discover the
falseness of this Assertion. However I shall be more liberal, and show these
two things: 1. That what is here affirmed is notoriously false. 2. That in case
it were true, it would not be of force to infer the Conclusion, viz. That the
reading of the Bible ought to be denied to the Vulgar.

First, It is notoriously false, That all the unhappy Divisions among
Christians take their rise, either ONLY or CHIEFLY from the free permitting of
the Bible among the Multitude. This will be evident by considering these five
things.

1. That there were Divisions among the Ancient Guides or Pastors of the Church.

2. That there have been, and still are Divisions, yea as many, among the
Learned of the Church of Rome, as among the Protestants.

3. That the Learned Romanists are divided among themselves, in all those
Points in which they are divided from Protestants.

4. That those very pernicious Doctrines and Practices, which the Representer
himself mentions, are derived from the Learned; and especially from the Learned
of the Church of Rome. And therefore,

5. That the Divisions among the Vulgar, for the most part, are not owing to
themselves, but to the Learned.

1. There were Divisions among the ancient Guides and Pastors of the Christian
Church; and in matters of as great moment, as those are in which the
Protestants are divided. As between St. Irenaeus and Victor, St. Cyprian and
Stephen, St. Chrysostom and Theophilus, St. Jerome and Ruffinus, St. Cyril and
Theodoret, the Bishops of the Council of Nice, and those also of Sardica, etc.
I wish those Divisions, and many other among the ancient Bishops were not too
well known to need any Proof. Now can the Representer say, That these Divisions
sprang from permitting the Bible to the Multitude? I trow not.

2. There have been, and still are Divisions, yea as many, among the Learned of
the Church of Rome, as among the Protestants. Almost every Schoolman is the
Head of a Sect; and the Controversies between the Lutherans and the Calvinists
are not so many, as between the Thomists and the Scotists. The Dissentions
between the Regular and Secular Priests, have lasted already for some Ages, and
are likely still to continue; so many several Orders, so many Sects in
Religion, you may find among the Regulars; and the Remonstrants, and
Antimonstrants, will as soon unite, as the Dominicans with the Jesuits or the
Franciscans. Yea the Popes themselves (the Center of their Unity) are often
divided among themselves, and their Definitions plainly contradictory one to
another. Witness Pope Gregory I, and Pope Boniface III. The former condemned the
Title of Universal Bishop, as abominable and Antichristian Lib. 4. Epist. 32,
33, 36, 38.
, the later ambitiously affected and obtained it from the Tyrant Phocas Plat.
in vit. Bonifacii III. Sabellic. Ennead. 8. l. 6.
. Pope Innocent I. held the Eucharist was necessary for Infants Aug. Contr.
duas Epist. Pelag. l. 2. c. 4. Binii Council. Tom. 1. p. 769.
. Pope Pius IV. denounced an Anathema against those that held it Conc. Trid.
Sess. 21. Can. 4.
. And certainly neither do these Divisions take their Rise from the reading of
the Bible by the common People.

3. The Learned Romanists are divided among themselves in all those Points of
Doctrine, in which they are divided from Protestants. I shall instance in some,
viz. The Popes Infallibility and Universal Pastorship; his Power over Princes,
and Dominion in Temporals; the Canon of Scripture, and Traditions of the
Church; the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Communion in one kind; the Worship of
Images, and Invocation of Saints; the Doctrines of Purgatory and Indulgences;
to which I shall add but one more, viz. Transubstantiation: Tho they seem
pretty well agreed to burn or hang those that deny it, yet there is not one
question about it, in which they are at an agreement among themselves. To
borrow the Words of a learned Bishop of the Church of Ireland. No sooner, says
he, was this fatal Sentence given (he means the Definition of
Transubstantiation in the Lateran Council) but as if Pandora's Box had been
newly set wide open, whole swarms of noisome Questions and Debates did fill the
Schools. Then it began to be disputed by what means this Change comes; whether
by the Benediction of the Elements, or by the repetition of those Words of
Christ, THIS IS MY BODY? Then was the Question started, what the demonstrative
Pronoun HOC signifies in these Words, THIS IS MY BODY? Whether this thing, or
this Substance, or this Bread, or this Body, or this Meat, or these Accidents,
or that which is contained under these Species, or this Individuum vagum, or
lastly (which seems stranger than all the rest) this nothing? etc. Then it
began to be argued, whether the Elements were annihilated? Whether the Matter
and Form of them being destroyed, their Essence did yet remain? Or the Essence
being converted, the Existence remained? -- Then the Schoolmen began to
wrangle, what manner of Change this was? Whether a material Change, or a formal
Change, or a Change of the whole Substance both Matter and Form? And if it were
a Conversion of the whole Substance; then whether it was by way of Production
or by Adduction? etc. Bp. Bramh. Answ. to the Epist. of M. de la Militiere.
. This is only a short taste of what the Reader may find in the Book quoted in
the Margin.

Nor do they only quarrel about the Manner, but some of their greatest Men do
not believe, and others plainly deny the Article it self; as any one may see,
who will but take the pains to consult the learned Preface to a Discourse of
the Holy Eucharist, in the two great Points, etc. and a Treatise written by an
Author of the Communion of the Church of Rome touching Transubstantiation. It
is probable, that if all the Disputes, upon all Points controverted among
Protestants, were put together, they would not amount to a greater number than
those of the Papists, in this one Article.

To conclude this: Let any Learned Romanist tell me, what his Judgment is, in
any one Point controverted between them and us, and I will engage, upon short
warning, to produce another Learned Romanist, who shall contradict him. And,
are not Men so entirely united in Judgment among themselves, excellently
qualified to upbraid Protestants with their Divisions!

4. In that he says, To such Readers as St. Peter calls Unwary and Ignorant,
Arianism may be as obvious in this Book as Christ's Divinity: It is a sign that
he expected no other than such unwary and ignorant Readers. For he must be
ignorant indeed in these Matters, who does not know, That not the Ignorant, but
the Learned; not the Laity, but the Clergy, were the Persons to whom Arianism
was in this Book so obvious; Witness the Councils of Sirmium, of Milan and
Ariminum. I need not tell him, That one or two of the Bishops of Rome, either
grossly dissembled, or Arianism was for a time, more obvious to them in this
Book, than Christ's Divinity.

And whereas he says, That when such an one (viz. one that is Unwary and
Ignorant) undertakes the interpreting of this Book, it is a hazard, whether in
the end he comes out Quaker, Anabaptist, Presbyterian, Independent,
Muggletonian, Socinian, or Atheist. He had spoken nearer the Truth, if he had
said, When such an one takes this Book as interpreted to him by a Popish Priest
or Jesuit, in the disguise of a Quaker, Anabaptist, etc. We know who have been
employed to sow and foment Divisions among us, to draw our People into
separated Meetings, upon the pretense of a more pure and spiritual way of
Worship. We can tell him of great numbers instructed in Handy-craft Trades,
trained up to dispute, one for Presbytery, another for Independency, a third
for Anabaptism, sent over hither by order from Rome; so that when the deluded
People have thought they had heard a gifted Tradesman, they have heard a Romish
Priest in that disguise. We can acquaint him with those who have been detected
exercising their Talents, in several sorts of Meetings.

But that which follows is most surprising: That it is a venture, whether
Cruelty, cutting of Throats, Oppression, Tyranny, dethroning of Kings, murder
of Princes, shall not with him (viz. the ignorant Reader) become a necessary
Duty, and a true serving of the Lord. This, I say, is most surprising; and
doubtless, he rubbed his forehead hard, before he wrote it, since he knows,
That all these have, for some hundreds of Years, been taught and practiced by
the greatest Men of his own Church; and therefore it is not a venture, but
beyond all peradventure, that when Place and Time serve, they will be so again.
He well knows what the great Cardinals, Bellarmine, Baronius, Perron, etc. What
the Learned Jesuits, Suarez, Lessius, Azorius, etc. What his own Countrymen,
Cardinal Allen, Father Parsons, Creswel, etc. have written for the deposing and
murdering of Kings. He knows what Pope Gregory VII, Gregory IX, Innocent III,
Innocent IV, Boniface VIII, Paul III, Pius V, Sixtus V, Gregory XIII, have not
only taught, but acted in pursuance of these Doctrines. He knows there was a
Holy League among those who had not the Bible in their Banners, as well as a
Solemn League and Covenant among those who had. And he knows, or (at least) may
soon know, if he please, That the chief Weapons of the Rebellion in Forty two,
were setch'd from Rome; I mean, the Arguments by which the People were stirred
up to rebel, were transcribed from Popish Writers, particularly from Mariana
and Parsons, out of whom he may see in some Books then published, whole leaves
together translated. And therefore,

5. The Divisions among the Vulgar, are very rarely in comparison owing to
themselves; they are not to be imputed to the different Senses, which they
themselves in their private reading put upon the Bible, but (for the most part)
to the different Senses they receive of it from their Teachers. For the truth
of which, I appeal to History, and to the common Observation of Mankind. If the
Representer be not satisfied with this, I desire him to answer but this one
Question: Whence came it to pass, that so many of the Vulgar in England,
France, Germany, the Netherlands, etc. divided themselves from the Church of
Rome, before they had the Bible in a Language they understood? That Division
could not proceed from their reading of the Bible, which was made before they
had ever read it. I cannot imagine what Answer he can give, but that they
followed their Leaders, Wickliff, Luther, Zuinglius, etc. who first dividing
from the Church of Rome, drew the People after them. The Division therefore
took its Rise from the Learned, and from them descended to the Ignorant.

The Trent Fathers therefore were miserably mistaken, in denying the Bible to
the Laity only; they should have decreed in the first place, that no Clergyman
should be suffered to read it, (that there might be like People, like Priest).
And this the more prudent Bishops at Bononia were aware of, when they advised
Julius III, not to permit any Mortal to read more of the Gospel, than that
little which is contained in the Mass Consil. de Romans Eccles. stabiliend. apud
Vergerium, Tom. 1.
. I need say no more to expose the Falsehood of this Assertion, That the
Divisions among Christians, proceed solely or chiefly from permitting the Bible
among the Vulgar. But,

2. If this were true, yet it would not be a sufficient Reason for denying the
reading of the Bible to the Vulgar. For if it were so now, it would have been
so heretofore; it would have been so in the early Ages of the Christian Church,
when there were as many Sects and Heresies as there are now: It would have been
so in the Time of the Apostles, for in almost every Church planted by them,
Divisions presently sprang up: It would have been so in the Jewish Church, for
they had their Sects as well as the Christians; yea, it would have been so from
the very beginning, when the Scripture was first published.

But when the Bible was first written, had this been a sufficient Reason, would
God have caused it to be written in the Vulgar Language of that People to whom
it was given, and laid his Command upon all without distinction, to apply
themselves to the study of it. And in the succeeding Ages of the Jewish Church,
yea after the Babylonian Captivity (tho some new Sects then sprang up among
them) so far was it from being thought a Reason, why they should not read the
Law, that by the Laws of that Nation, every Man was obliged to write a Copy of
the Law for himself, with his own hand. And if the Case had been altered in the
days of our Savior, would he not have told us? Would he never have reproved
the prying Multitude, (as the Representer is pleased to complement the People)
for reading the Law and the Prophets? Nay, would he have put them upon the
reading of them, as he plainly does, as often as in his Discourses to the People,
he quotes them for the proof of what he says. And had his Apostles after him
thought this a fit Expedient, either for the Prevention or Cure of Divisions,
when they wrote their Epistles to those Churches in which Divisions were
already sown, (as the Churches of Corinth and Colosse) would they have
addressed them to all without exception, and exhorted all, that the Word of God
dwell in them richly? And when, in succeeding Ages, the Church was miserably
rent with Schisms, do any of the Fathers prescribe this Remedy? Nay, tho St.
Jerome, St. Austin, St. Chrysostom, etc. sadly complain of the abuse of
Scripture by Heretics, yet do they not exhort all sorts of Persons to read it?
In a word, The Church of Rome it self, did not think this a fit Expedient, till
it was so changed from what it was in the beginning, that if St. Peter, and St.
Paul should have been raised again from the Dead, they would not have owned it
for that Church which they at first planted. I have, I think, said more than
enough, to the first Mischief.

II. The second (which he gives as the main Reason, Mischief II.
why the Holy Scripture is not allowed to the Vulgar of his Church without
exception) is this: That if this be allowed, there will be as many different
Bibles among them, as there are Heads Chap. 8. p. 54.
: that is, The words of the Bible will be understood by them, in as many
different senses as there are Men: For he thus explains himself; Tho the Book
of the Scriptures does certainly contain the Word of God, yet to every
Christian that reads it, it is the Sense and Meaning, and not the Letter, is
more properly the Word of God. Now do You but reflect in how many different
Senses the Letter of the Bible is understood, and so many different Bibles will
you find multiplied by your Followers: And tell me, upon examination, whether
this be much fewer than Heads P. 54.
? So wonderfully pleased is he with this Conceit, that he presently falls into
a fit of Raillery. Don't you think there would be a pretty variety of Bibles?
there would be this Man's Bible, and that Man's Bible; such an one's Bible, and
such an one's Bible; infinite number of Bibles. But I fear I shall quickly
spoil his mirth.

I shall not insist upon it; That every difference in sense, makes not a
difference of Bibles, as long as there is an agreement in all things material,
in those Points, which by all the differing Parties are acknowledged sufficient
to Salvation. I need not beg this, because they themselves are forced to assert
it in their own defense: For they acknowledge, that the Vulgar Latin Translation
of the Bible, differs in many places from the Original; That before Pope
Clement's Edition, there were many various Readings: That the Bibles set forth
by Sixtus and Clement, are different each from other in many Places; and yet
they say, they are not to be reckoned different Bibles, because they do not
differ in any thing material to the Faith.

This being premised, I return to his Argument, which in short is this: If the
Holy Scriptures should be generally allowed to the Vulgar, without exception,
they will every one understand them in a different sense Ibid.
. Therefore they ought not to be thus allowed.

Now in that he says generally, and without exception, He supposes, That if
they be allowed to the Vulgar, not generally, but with an Exception, they to
whom they are so allowed, will not make them so many different Bibles: From
whence it plainly follows; That if they should be allowed to all, without
exception, yet many of that all, will understand them in the same sense; which
overthrows his universal Conclusion, viz. That there will be as many different
Bibles as Heads. But I pass this; Nor shall I stay to show; First, That the
Antecedent is notoriously untrue. Secondly, That if it were true, yet the same
Mischief will follow, if the Vulgar be taught the Bible by their Pastors, (as
he says they are in the Church of Rome) because they may put as many different
Interpretations upon their words, as upon the words of the Bible. But shall
content my self to return these three things in answer to the Argument, which
will sufficiently expose its absurdity.

First; That it is of equal force against the reading of the Bible by the
Learned, yea, of much greater. The Reason is plain, because the Learned are
those especially, who expound the Bible to different Senses. The most zealous
Papist, if he please to follow the Representer's Direction, shall find this as
evident as Demonstration. Let him first ask twenty Laymen, what is the meaning
of such a Text, and write down each Man's sense at length as he delivers it, in
one Column; Then let him consult twenty of the most learned Popish
Commentators, upon the same Text, and write down what each of them says in
another; then let him compare all the Laymen senses together, and observe all
the differences that are between them: Let him then compare all the Learned
Commentators senses together, and observe likewise all the Differences between
them; then let him compare the Differences between the Vulgar, with those
between the Learned, and if he find not the former fewer and less material than
the later, I shall own that I am mistaken.

I add; That if the Understanding some places of Scripture in a different
sense, makes different Bibles, then St. Cyprian and St. Stephen, St. Austin and
St. Jerome, St. Cyril and Theodoret, yea, all the Learned Fathers of the
Primitive Church, had different Bibles; and therefore (if this Argument signify
any thing) ought not to have been suffered to read the Scripture. The absurdity
of which will yet be more manifest, because,

Secondly, Where the Vulgar are not permitted to read the Bible, there are as
many different Bibles (in the Representer's sense) as where they are: Even in
the Church of Rome, there are as many, I may truly say, many more than among
the Protestants. The Thomists have one Bible, the Scotists another; the
Franciscans one, the Dominicans another; the Jesuits one, the Jansenists
another: The Scotists Bible teaches, that Original Sin, is nothing but the
Privation of Original Righteousness; the Thomists Bible teaches, it is more:
The Franciscans find in their Bible the immaculate Conception of the Blessed
Virgin; the Dominicans find no such Matter in theirs: The Jansenists Bible
gives to God alone the praise of Converting Grace; the Jesuits Bible gives it
to God, and themselves too. In many of their Bibles, Transubstantiation is as
legible, as these words, This is my Body; in many others, no such Doctrine
appears.

Yea, the very Popes themselves (in spite of their Infallibility) have Bibles
not only different, but plainly contradictory. Pope Gregory's I. Bible, taught
him, that the Emperor was his Lord; Pope Gregory's VII. that the Emperor was
his Vassal. Yea, some of their Bibles have taught them to be downright
Heretics; so did Pope Honorius's, and John's XXIII. And which is yet worse,
not only their Popes, but their Councils too, have had different Bibles, as
might be showed at large, if it were needful. Yea if that be true which a great
Cardinal has affirmed; That the Precepts of Christ may be changed by the
Church, and at one time be interpreted to this sense, and at another time to
that Card. Cusan. Epist. 2. de usu Communionis ad Bohem.
. Then the Church of Rome may, every Age or every year, have a different Bible.

And whereas the Representer grants, that the Protestants have all the same
Bible in their hands, tho it be different in their Heads; Those of the Church
of Rome have in their Hands in one Age one Bible; in another Age, another. In
this and the Age next foregoing, the Books of the Maccabees have been part of
the Bible in their Hands, which certainly were not so in the Age of Gregory the
Great Greg. Moral. Expos. in Job. l. 19. c. 17.
.

I further add, That their agreement about the sense of the Council of Trent,
is as little, as about the sense of the Scripture. Soto's Council of Trent, and
Catharinus's Council of Trent; Bellarmin's Council of Trent, and the Bishop of
Meaux's Council of Trent, are so far from being the same, that they are in many
things directly opposite. And therefore,

3. To retort the Argument; How shamefully does the Representer delude the poor
Vulgar, in persuading them, that tho they do not read the Bible, yet the very
same Word of God is delivered to them by their Teachers; whereas when it comes
to be examined, it is not the Word of God, but their Teachers Imaginations they
are guided by. To convince him of this by his own experiment. Let him take all
the different senses their Teachers put upon the Scripture, and carry them to
any Licenser of his own Church in order to be printed and published as the Word
of God, and Rule of Faith, and see if he can find any who will set them forward
with an Imprimatur. What an Unchristian Imposture is it then, to let so many
poor Souls go on with a secure confidence of following the Word of God, when
what they follow is nothing better than the Imaginations and Dreams of their
Priests! Let now the Representer judge, to whose shame the Droll is exposed, and
if he please, let him still go on to upbraid the Protestants with their
different Bibles.

III. But the Representer will go farther with us. For Mischief III.
it is not only thus, says he, in several People, but even the same Person many
times has the faculty of multiplying the Word of God. For how many are there to
be found among the Vulgar, who according to their different humors, as their
Interest changes, according to the different Impressions they receive from
Confidents, especially such as have gained their good Opinion, espouse
different Doctrines and Persuasions, and run thorough as many Sects, as there
are Divisions in the Nation? And yet in all their windings, they follow (as
they imagine) the Scripture. -- Don't you see how to these same Persons the
Word of God is not always the same? It alters according to Seasons and Times,
and it was one Word of God directed them the last year, another this, etc.

Now suppose all this to be true of many of the Vulgar, is it not also as true
of many of the Learned? yea of many of the most Learned in the Church of Rome?
May it not as truly be said, how many may be found among your Bishops,
Cardinals and Popes, who according to their different humors, as their
Interest changes, espouse different Doctrines and Persuasions? Witness in elder
times Pope Liberius and Vigilius, who were either Heretics or Catholics, as
their Interest changed. And for later times, witness the Cardinal of Cusa; who,
one while more zealous than he, for the Authority of a General Council above
the Pope? But when he expected to be made a Cardinal, who more zealous for the
contrary Doctrine? Upon which Richerius his Words are observable: By this,
says he, we are given to know, that very many who have defended the Truth in a
state of Poverty, have deserted the same out of hope of Dignities, and a more
plentiful Fortune; and especially out of an ambition of being made Cardinals
Hist. Council. general. l. 3. p. 479.
. Witness Aeneas Sylvius, who vehemently opposed that Doctrine, when he was
Pope, which he had before as vehemently maintained, when he was Clerk to the
Council of Basil. And that it was interest that gave him this new Light, not I,
but Richerius and Maimbourg plainly assert Richer. Hist. Council. general. l. 4.
part. 1. c. 6. Maimb. Prerog. Of the Church of Rome. c. 25. p. 338.
. Yea the Pope himself in his Bull of Retractation, says in effect as much; for
speaking of the Disputes between him and Juliano Cardinal of St. Angelo, he
confesses the Doctrine he forsook was the ancient, and that he embraced was new
Tuebamur antiquam sententiam, ille novam defendebat.
. Witness the Cardinal of Lorrain: Does not he he himself confess, that his
Interest being turned, he turned with it Hist. of the Counc. of Trent. l. 8. p.
767.
? Was not his Persuasion different, according to the different Impressions he
received from the Pope and the Queen of France? When he first came to Trent,
how contrary his Sentiments in several Points were to those he had afterward,
when the State of affairs in France was altered, and he had been caressed by
the Pope, and his Holiness had gained his good Opinion, may sufficiently appear
by comparing the places quoted in the Margin Hist. of the Counc. of Trent. ps.
659, 692, 703, 704, 712, 733, 743, 744, 767, 782, 813.
.

It Is too well known to need to be mentioned, how that Gardener, Bonner, and
all the Popish Bishops (Fisher only excepted) espoused different Doctrines and
Persuasions, as their Interests changed, and according to the different
Impressions they received, either from the King or the Pope.

And don't you now see, how to these same Bishops, Cardinals and Popes the Word
of God was not always the same, but altered according to Seasons and Times?
That it was one Word of God that directed Aeneas Sylvius, while he was
Secretary to the Council of Basil, another, while he was Pope. That in King
Henry VIII's. and King Edward VI's. Reigns, the King's Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Affairs, was in Gardiner's and Bonner's Bibles: in Queen Marie's
Reign, the Pope's was found instead of the King's. The Conclusion hence is
unavoidable; That if all Men are to be denied the reading of the holy
Scriptures, who according to their different Humors, as their Interest
changes, espouse different Doctrines and Persuasions, they must be denied to
many more than the Vulgar, unless their Bishops, Cardinals and Popes are to be
placed in that rank.

SECT. III.
In the next place the Representer gives us his Reasons, why the Vulgar so
differ in the sense of the Bible which are two; one of them implied, the other
expressed. That which is implied is the Obscurity of the Scripture; That which
is expressed is, the setting up every Man's private Reason to be Judge of
Scripture Chap. 9. p. 58. Reason I.
.

I. The Obscurity of the Scripture. For if it be so plain and easy, says he,
how comes it there is so little agreement in the understanding it?

When the Protestants affirm, that the Scripture is plain and easy, they mean
it is so to those only who read it with honest Hearts, who sincerely desire to
know the Truth, and to direct their Lives answerable to it; and they mean, that
it is so, not simply in all things, but in all things necessary to Salvation.
And when they affirm this, they affirm no more than St. Austin did: Believe me,
says he, whatsoever is in those Scriptures, (speaking of the Scriptures of the
old Testament, which are more obscure than those of the new) it is high and
Divine, they contain nothing but what is true, and that Doctrine which is most
fit for the repairing and restoring of Souls, and so disposed, that there is no
Man, but may draw thence that which is sufficient for him, provided he comes
devoutly and piously affected, as true Religion requires Quicquid est, mihi
creed, in Scripturis illis, altum and divinum est: inest omnino veritas, and
reficiendis instaurandisque animis accommodatissima disciplina: and plane ita
modificata, ut nemo inde haurire non possit, quod sibi satis est, si modo ad
hauriendum devote ac pie, ut vera Religio poscit, accedat. De utilitate
credendi. c. 6.
. They affirm no more than what St. Chrysostom did; for he says, That all
things necessary are manifest (...). Hom. 3. in 2. ad These.
. They affirm no more than what the Bishop of Rome did formerly. For the Holy
Scripture, says Pope Gregory, (as I find him quoted by the Authors of the
Preface of the Mons Testament) is as a great River, which runs always, and
which will run to the end of the World. The little Children and the Men of full
Stature, the strong and the weak, do there find that living Water that springs
up even to Heaven. It offers it self to all, and it suits it self to all. It
has a simplicity that abases it self to the most simple Souls, and a height
that exercises and raises the most lofty P. 9.
.

Nay they say no more than what many learned Romanists of this present Age have
said. The Bishop of Vence, speaking of the new Testament, says, The Son of God
has in it taken care to teach us CLEARLY and DISTINCTLY, our whole Duty to
him, as well as our whole Duty to our. Neighbor and our selves. This is that
which the Gospels contain; The Epistles of the Apostles are a Comment upon it,
and an Explication more enlarged and distinct, which leave not any thing in the
Christian Life we ought to live upon Earth, unexplain'd Preface of Mr. Arnaud.
. And Mr. Arnaud says, That the holy Fathers have noted, that one of those
things which show the Divinity of the holy Scriptures, and in which they excel
all the Writings of Men, is this, That they are equally accommodated to the
Learned and the Ignorant, to little Children and to grown Men, to the weak and
to the perfect, to the shallow and the more profound Wits De la Lect de
l'Ecriture saint l. 2. c. 6.
.

But the Representer asks; If the Scripture be so plain and easy, how comes it
there is so little agreement in the understanding it? How are there so many
different and contrary Divisions, Sects and Persuasions in this one Nation? How
comes it, that even in the essentials of Christianity, concerning the Trinity
etc. there has been, and at present is so great diversity among those that read
the Scripture? I answer

1. That the agreement among Protestants is not so little as he pretends: That
the Reformed Churches agree in all essential Points of Faith, any Man may be
satisfied, who will take the pains to read over the Harmony of their
Confessions. But,

2. Let the Disagreement be more or less, it proceeds not from the Obscurity of
the Scriptures. This is evident, because the Disagreement among those that read
the Scripture, is as great in those things that are most plainly, as in those
that are more obscurely delivered. Can anything be more plain, than these words
of Christ concerning the Cup, Drink ye all of it Mat. 26. 27.
? Or those of St. Paul, in which he applys this Drinking to the Lay-Corinthians
1 Cor. 11. 25.
? Suppose it was Christ's Intention, that the Laity should partake of the Cup,
as well as the Bread; would not those Men, who do not see it in these words, in
whatsoever Words he had expressed it, have found out another meaning? It Is
plain then, that it is not the obscurity of the Text, from whence this
diversity of Interpretation arises. But.

2. To gratify the Representer, I Will plainly tell him what it is. 1. In those
who have different Lusts and Interests to serve, it is their different Lusts and
Interests with which the Scriptures must be forced to comply. 2. In those who
are sincere, and do not profess contrary to their Belief, it is the different
Prejudice or Principle they are possessed with. Tho the Scripture speaks never
so plainly against the Doctrine and Worship of such a sort of Men, yet if it be
inconsistent with that which they have laid for the main Principle and
Foundation of their Faith, they can never persuade themselves that the Words
are to be taken according to the most common and obvious sense, but must find
out some other meaning for them. For instance: It is a Principle with the
Romanists that their Church cannot err: Let therefore Scripture be never so
express against the Worship of Images, against Transubstantiation, against
Communion in one kind, against the Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, against
Prayer in an unknown Tongue, yet they must of necessity conclude, that it does
not mean what it seems to say, because if it should, it unavoidably follows,
that their Church has gosly erred, which according to their Principle is as
impossible, as that the Truth and Promise of God should fail. And that it is
indeed this Principle, and not the Obscurity of the Scripture, that makes the
difference in many Texts between them and us, is evident enough by this
consideration, viz. That they cannot see that in the plainest words, that is
contrary to their Principle; whereas in words not only obscure, but most remote
and impertinent, they can see that which is agreeable thereto.

1. They cannot see that in the plainest words, that is contrary to their
Principle. If to worship an Image be unlawful, their Church has erred;
therefore they cannot see it is forbid in the Second Commandment; tho it is
hard to conceive that other Words can be used more full to that purpose. For be
it graven Image, or graven Thing, or Idol that is forbidden, it matters not;
since the Similitude or Likeness of any thing in Heaven above, or in the Earth
beneath, etc. is forbidden also.

2. But see now, how they can find that in the most remote and impertinent
Text, that is agreeable to their Principle. Would you have a Scripture for the
Worship of Images; Bellarmine gives you Mat. 5. 34, 35. Swear not by the
Heaven, for it is God's Throne, nor by the Earth, for it is his Footstool De
Imagine. Sanctorum l. 2. c. 12.
. If you think this not clear enough, take 2 Timothy 3. 15. Thou have known the
holy Scriptures from a Child Ibid.
. The Scriptures are called Holy Scriptures, therefore the Images of Christ and
his Saints are to be worshipped. Here Is a Demonstration as bright as Midnight.
He must be stark blind, or shut his Eyes hard, who can avoid its light. I omit
many other Instances which are ready at hand. By these now mentioned, it is
manifest enough, that Men's Disagreement about the Sense of Scripture, does not
proceed from its obscurity, but from the different Principles or Prejudices
they are prepossest with. Better would it be for the Church of Rome, were it
more obscure in many Points than it is: And were it but as clear for them, as
it is against them, they would not then complain of its Obscurity, or prohibit
the Vulgar the reading of it.

II. But the Protestants are for setting up every Man's private Reason to be
Judge of Scripture. What? to be Judge of what in Scripture ought to be received,
and what rejected, as the Socinians do? This is a very disingenuous
Misrepresentation. Much more remote from Truth is it, That they are far worse
in this, than the rankest Socinian in the World P. 58.
. The Protestant, he very well knows, being satisfied by his Reason concerning
the divine Authority of the Scripture, he firmly assents to whatsoever he finds
delivered in it, tho he be not able to conceive how it should be. He indeed
uses his Reason in judging of the sense of Scripture, which he must of
necessity do, or else he can have no reason to believe it in a true, rather
than a false sense: But having to the best of his understanding found out the
meaning of it, he makes neither common nor private Reason the Measure of what
is to be received, so as to admit nothing into his Faith, but what he is able
fully to understand. Tho he meets with some things which are above his
Capacity, yet he does not say as Socinus, speaking of Christ's Satisfaction, If
the very word were in Scripture, not once, but often, yet I would not believe
it; but thinks he has the greatest Reason in the World to believe them, because
God has delivered them. And that some things in Scripture are above his
Capacity; this he thinks is so far from being a discouragement, that it is
rather a motive to his Faith; for he might be tempted to suspect the Divinity
of the Scriptures, if he found nothing in them above the reach of his own
little Understanding, either at first to find out, or afterward to comprehend.

And if this be to make private Reason, the Rule of Scripture, we need not be
ashamed to own it. For this is no more than what our Blessed Savior allowed to
private Persons. He frequently appealed to the Scriptures of the Old Testament,
but he left it to every man's Reason to judge, whether they were for him or
against him. Yea, did he not severely reprove the promiscuous Multitude, for
not judging even of themselves what was right Luke 12. 57.
? For to the Multitude ((...) v. 54.) these words were directed. This is no
more than what the Apostles of our Lord have laid as a Duty upon private
Christians; St. Paul commands them to prove all things 1 These. 5. 21.
; and thought the common Christians of the Church of Corinth wise enough to
judge what he said 1 Cor. 10. 15.
: St. John requires them, to try the Spirits whether they be of God 1 John 4. 1.
: And can they do this if they may not judge of the sense of the Scripture? This
is no more than what St. Chrysostom frequently exhorted the People to, and
sharply reproved their neglect of it.

Yea, notwithstanding the loud cry they make against private Reason and the
private Spirit, the Roman Clergy themselves are forced to appeal to it. For
when to draw Men over from us to them, they produce so many Scriptures, and so
many Reasons (such as they are) fetched from Scripture; Do they not make every
Man's Reason Judge, whether these Scriptures and these Reasons are to the
purpose?

If they say, a Man must use his Reason to judge which is the true Church, but
having once found it, he must then take the sense of Scripture upon the
Church's word: nothing can be said more absurd: Because a Man must judge of
thesense of the Scripture, before he can discern which is the true Church;
since that can no otherwise be known than by those Characters the Scripture
gives of it. Besides, one of their own Marks of the true Church, is the
Holiness of its Doctirne Bell. de Notis Eccles. l. 4. c. 11.
: A Man therefore must know what the Doctrine of a Church is, before he can
know it to be a true Church; and how shall a Man know this, but by first
examining her Doctrine by Scripture? A Man must therefore know the sense of
Scripture, before he can know the true Church. But if it should be granted,
that when a Man once knows the true Church, he must then understand the
Scripture as the Church does; yet tell me, why he must do so? Is it because he
has Reason, or no Reason, so to do? You will not say, because he has no
Reason, (for you your self give Reasons why he must) And if it be because he
has Reason, he then makes his Reason Judge of the sense of Scripture, as well
as the Protestant.

But Christian Faith, he says, is but one; that is granted. And all Christians
are directed to meet in this ONE Faith, to be of ONE SPIRIT and ONE MIND to say
all the same thing. This is also granted. Now can you imagine it possible, says
he, for all Christians to concur in the same Belief, while the Scripture being
but ONE which they read, their private Judgments give differing and contrary
Interpretations of it, and carry them several ways Chap. 9. P. 58.
? And will it be possible for all Christians to concur in the same Belief, if
the Scriptures be denied to the Vulgar? For do not the private Judgments of the
Clergy give as differing and contrary Interpretations of it, and carry them as
many several ways? And therefore are there not as many Divisions among your
selves (as has been showed) as there are among Protestants? And is it not
ridiculous, so often to insist upon that as a sovereign Remedy of Divisions,
which is so ineffectual, that the Disease is as prevalent, where it is used, as
where it is not?

The Representer may perhaps say, That their Differences are not in matters of
Faith: If not, then neither are ours, since theirs are in matters as
considerable as ours are. But the best on it is, if notwithstanding their
Differences among themselves, they are still of one Faith; then the Protestants
also may be of one Faith, not only among themselves, but with them too, and
therefore are no Heretics; since Protestants differ no more from them, than
many of them do one from another.

Tho therefore it be the Duty of Christians to be all of one Mind, and to speak
the same things; and tho I see no reason to question, but God has afforded
such helps in order thereunto, which if they were not wanting to themselves in
the use of, they might attain to this Unity: Yet we have already seen, that the
withholding the Scripture from the Vulgar is none of those means; and tho some
who will be wiser than God, have thought fit to make trial of it, yet they have
hitherto found it unsuccesful. And for those means which God has vouchsafed,
as little Reason have we to expect, that they should by all Christians be
faithfully used and applied, and they thereby be brought to this perfect Unity,
as to expect, that all Men should become sober, and just, and charitable, and
devout, which God has made no less their Duty, and for the effecting of which,
he has vouchsafedas powerful means.

But now let us again try, whether this long Harangue be not of equal force,
against the reading of the Scripture by the Learned, as by the Vulgar.

If the different Sects in Religion proceed from the reading of the Scripture
by the Vulgar, how comes it that there are so many different and contrary
Divisions, Sects and Persuasions among you Romanists? How comes it that even in
those things, that by the differing Parties are reckoned Matters of Faith,
there has been, and at present is, so great Diversity? The business is, you
suffer every Learned Man's private Reason to be Judge of Scripture, which when
put to the test, proves in thousands and thousands to be no better than
Passion, Prejudice, Interest, Imagination, Guessing, or Fancy. Don't you find
by experience, that there is no Proposal made, but presently the Learned are
divided about it? as they were in almost every Question in the Council of
Trent; nor could the Controversies be decided by the Fathers, but they were
forced to make many of their Decrees in such general Terms (for the gratifying
of the contending Parties) as might be interpreted to contrary Senses? Don't
you see again, That almost every Scholar's Reason is different, as their
Capacity, Parts, Education, Temper, Inclinations, Impressions are different?
That as every one has a Head of his own, so he has generally a Reason, or way
of reasoning of his own? Nay, are not the Learned so inconstant even to
themselves too, that what is Reason to them at one time, is unreasonable at
another? How then can you permit a thing so slippery, so weak, various,
wavering, changeable, inconstant, as you see the private Reason of the Learned
is, to be relied on by them, as their Guide in expounding of Scripture? How can
you imagine it possible for all Christians to concur in the same Belief, while
the Learned, who read and expound the Scripture, give differing and contrary
interpretations of it? For as long as the Scripture is no otherwise in their
Heads and Hearts, than by the interpretation they make of it, their Faith must
necessarily be as various as their Interpretation.

And is not the Story of the Manna (which follows) as applicable to the
Learned? For, was not the taste of the Manna as different to the Priests, as it
was to the People? Did it not relish according to that kind of Meat, that was
most grateful to every Priest's Palate? Now if the Priests in Canaan had
received a Command of bringing forth that sort of Meat, whose taste should be
like that of the Manna they ate in the Desert, was it possible they should all
agree in their Dish? Since tho the Manna was the same they all fed on, yet the
Relish was as different as their Tempers and Palats. Don't you therefore see,
that Men will never be of one Spirit, and one Mind, until the reading of the
Scripture be prohibited to the Learned? and not to some, but to all, his
Holiness, as Infallible, only excepted? For if it be allowed to the Cardinals
(notwithstanding their Eminences above others) together with his Holiness, they
will never agree in the sense of it: For I can tell you of many Cardinals who
have differed from his Holiness, and among themselves too, about the sense of
it. Is it not then as plain as Demonstration, that there will be no end of
Controversies, as long as the Scriptures are read, by any Man in the World,
besides the Pope? And perhaps not then neither, for since he is not infallible
but when he speaks from his Chair, (which seldom happens) at other times he may
chance to contradict himself, and give one sense of Scripture this Year,
another the next. It were therefore most advisable (could it possibly be
effected) that the Book it self were utterly abolished.

Let not any Man interpret this to the disparagement of Learning, since nothing
can be more evident, than that the Learned have vast Advantages above the rest
of Mankind, for attaining to the true meaning of the more obscure Texts of
Scripture; provided they sincerely search after Truth, and are so humble, so
sensible of their own liableness to mistake, that they daily implore the Divine
Assistance: But if they be destitute of these Qualifications, they are not only
as subject to err, but to err more dangerously than others.

In the beginning of the 10th Chapter, the Representer talks again at the same
impertinent rate; so agreeable to him is this way of reasoning, that he
naturally falls into it, in every Chapter. But the Vanity of it lies so open,
that it need not be further exposed. If any Man please to consult the place, I
shall leave it to himself to judge, whether it be not every whit as applicable
against permitting the Scripture to the Learned as the Vulgar.

But the Representer may say, The Church of Rome does not allow the Learned to
interpret Scripture according to their own private Reason: For the Council of
Trent has decreed, That no Man presume to interpret Scripture, contrary to the
sense of the Church, or the unanimous consent of the Fathers.

And has not the Church of England, her Confession of Faith, contrary to which
she allows none of her Members to interpret Scripture? Does she not admit all
such Traditional Interpretations as can be derived from the Fountain? And for
all such Texts as are obscure and doubtful, does she not direct the Vulgar to
consult their Guides? Tho it is true, she does not command them to believe,
that White is Black, or that Vice is Virtue, if the Priest says that it is. But
however, the Church of Rome denies them the liberty of interpreting the
Scripture in their own sense; it is certain, that they commonly take it; else
how comes it, that they give such different senses of the same Scripture? How
comes it, that many of the Learned expound the sixth Chapter of St. John, of
the sacramental eating of Christ's Flesh; and many as learned as they, say,
that no such matter is there intended? How comes it, when so many tell us, that
these words, This is my Body, are so plain for Transubstantiation, that he must
be quite blind who does not see it? that others, whose sight is as good as
theirs, tell us, they are not able to see this in them? Do these Learned Men,
in their Exposition of the Scripture, give us the sense of the Roman Church, or
do they not? If not, they follow their own private Reason; if they do, their
Church gives contrary senses of Scripture, and is as far from being one in this
respect, as it is from being Catholic.

He confesses, p. 63. That some of the Protestants, to keep up the Face of the
Church, do speculatively contend for Authority and Guides: But then he says, In
Fact they defeat all these their Pretensions. How do they in Fact defeat them?
Because they own no Authority so great or safe, but it is to be subjected to
the control of every private Examiner. They own an Authority so great, as to
Matters of External Government, as to be subject to the control of no Man, who
lives in Communion with the Church. But he means, an Authority so great, that
whatsoever the Church commands and prescribes to be received, as the Truth and
Faith of Christ, it ought to be received. But can the Church have no Authority,
unless Men are bound to believe, without examination, whatsoever she prescribes
to be believed? If so, then had she no Authority in our Savior's and his
Apostles days; no, nor for several Ages after them. For if any such Authority
had been owned in the fourth Century, how came it to pass, that after the
Nicene Council, the Arian Heresy spread more than it had done before?

If this be to open a Gate to all the Fanaticisms and Quakerisms in the World,
it is certain the Protestants did not first open it, but it was long before
opened by our Blessed Savior, when he gave this Command to his Disciples; Call
no Man Father upon the Earth, for one is Your Father which is in Heaven;
neither be ye called Masters, for one is Your Master, even Christ Mat. 23. 9,
10.
. As much as to say, There is none upon Earth, by whose sense a Christian is to
be absolutely determined, his Faith is not to be resolved into any Man's
Authority.

But by the Creed, all Christians are bound to believe the Holy Catholic
Church. Yes, That there is such a Church, and that this Church teaches all
Truths necessary to be known: But it is one thing to believe this, another
thing to believe as the Church of Rome does. And tho Protestants never refuse
to yield assent to all such Doctrines as the Church truly Catholic has in all
Ages taught; yet they can see no reason to pin their Faith upon the Church of
Rome; there being as vast a difference between the Church of Rome and the
Church Catholic, as between the Church of York and the Church of England.

But St. Paul, Heb. 13. 17. commands all to obey, and submit to those that are
over them. It Is true, and I grant, that by those that are over them, he means
Ecclesiastical Superiors. But does not the same St. Paul command Children to
obey their Parents, and Servants to obey their Masters? Would he therefore have
all Children and Servants, to take their Faith upon trust from their Parents
and Masters? He also commanded every Soul to be subject to the Higher Powers;
and yet I am pretty confident, that his meaning was not, that every Christian
should then believe as the Roman Emperor did.

But he commands to obey and submit, not only as to External Government, but as
to Truth and Belief. Then those who had Arian Bishops (as a great part of the
Church for some time had) were bound to believe, that Christ was not God; and
those who had Donatist Bishops, were bound to believe that the Church of Rome
was so far from being the Catholic Church, that it was not so much as a Part
of it. But how does the Representer prove, That the People ought absolutely to
submit their Faith to those that are over them? because the Apostle says, v. 7.
whose Faith follow. And does he not say, Chap. 6. 12. Be ye Followers of them,
who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises? Are we therefore bound to
believe, as every deceased Christian has believed? In both places the Apostle
speaks of Christians departed this Life: in the later of Christians
indifferently, in the former of Christian Bishops; And the words should be
rendered, Remember them which have had the Rule over You, which have spoken to
You the Word of God (such, for instance, as James Bishop of Jerusalem, who had
witnessed the Faith by his Death) whose Faith follow. And the meaning is this;
Imitate them in their Constancy and Perseverance in the Christian Profession
and Practice, notwithstanding all the Persecutions you meet with in the World.

The Pillar and Ground of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. may relate either to Timothy
himself, or to that Summary of Christian Doctrine that follows. But suppose it
relate to the Church, that particular Church was primarily meant, in which
Timothy was directed how to behave himself; and I think no Romanist says, That
a Man is bound to believe as every particular Church believes.

The words of Christ, Matthew. 18. 17. (If he hear not the Church, let him be
unto thee as an Heathen Man, and a Publican) are also impertinent, because he
speaks there, not of Matters of Faith, but of Fact, and directs what course is
to be taken for the ending of private Quarrels between Man and Man; tho had he
spoken of Matters of Faith, they would not have been to the purpose; because by
the Church, can be meant no other than that particular Church, of which the
offending Brother was a Member. I need say no more, to show how unconcluding
those Reasons are, by which he would persuade us to abandon our Reason, and to
take the sense of Scripture upon trust from his Church.

CHAP. IV.
I Proceed now to the fourth and last Head, viz. The false Constructions (as
the Representer calls them) which the Protestants make of this Practice of the
Church of Rome, or the wrong Inferences they deduce from it. Which are these
three;

1. That the Vulgar Papists are deprived of the Word of God. 2. That they take
up all their Belief upon trust. 3. That the Reason why they are not permitted
to read the Bible, is for fear, lest they should discover the Errors of their
Religion.
Whether these are Misconstructions, or no, I shall leave the impartial Reader
to judge, after I shall have considered those Reasons by which he endeavors to
prove that they are so.

SECT. I.
The first Protestant Inference is: That the Vulgar (...).
Papists are deprived of the Word of God, of the Food of their Souls Chap. 6*
p. 43, 44, 4^
To prevent Cavils and Evasions, I premise this: The Protestant does not say,
that the Vulgar Papists have nothing of the Scripture allowed them. He very
well knows, that some shreds of it are now and then given them in Sermons, and
some small parcels in their Catechisms, and Manuals of Devotion. But what then?
Will it hence follow, that it is false to say, they are deprived of the
Scripture? Will not every Man say, That he is deprived of his Father's Will,
who is allowed no more than the sight of here and there a Line transcribed from
it? Or that a Man's Inheritance is detained from him, who has no more than a
small Pension given him out of it?

One may a little wonder, that this should be reckoned a false Inference. What!
are they not deprived of the Word of God, who are not suffered to read it, or
so much as to have it in a Language they understand? No, says the Representer;
The Vulgar of our Communion have more of this Holy Food, than those of any
other Persuasion whatsoever P. 45.
. This is yet more wonderful, That they should not be permitted to have it; and
yet that they should have more of it, than those who have the whole of it in
their Hands, and daily read it. How shall we unriddle this? Why, They are
taught it by their Pastors. Be it so; Does it thence follow, that they have
more of it than those of other Persuasions, who are taught it by their Pastors
as well as they? For whereas he presently suggests, That the Protestants are
for leaving their Pastors, that they may teach themselves: that is a Calumny.
Tho the Protestants read the Scriptures themselves, yet they do not reject
their Pastors; They do not think, the use of the one does render the other
needless now, any more than it did in the first Ages of the Christian Church,
when they both went together, and were both thought necessary. But that they
who are taught it by their Pastors only, should have more of it than those who
are both taught it by them, and have the whole of it in their own possession,
is as true, as that a part is more than the whole.

But the Representer will say; Their Pastors teach them all that is necessary
for them to know. How shall the Vulgar know this? We can tell them of Pastors
who have concealed from their People some of the most necessary Points of the
Christian Faith; but I need not name them to the Representer. But how are the
People assured, that what they teach them, is indeed the Word of God, and not
their own Inventions, when they are not suffered to examine it? As it was
foretold that false Teachers should arise, so every Age since has seen that
Prediction verified; and for this Reason St. John exhorts Vulgar Christians, as
well as others, to bring their Teachers Doctrines to the Trial 1 John 4. 1.
. Is it necessary that every one that is commissioned to teach, should be so
sincere, as to deliver nothing but what he believes to be the Faith of Christ?
The Bishop of Minori in the Council of Trent thought otherwise, he was afraid
there might be many Priests who were real Infidels Hist. of the Counc. of
Trent, l. 2. p. 241.
. And if the Representer be not satisfied with this, we can produce those in
this very Age, who have taught that as a necessary Article of Faith, which they
were so far from believing necessary, that they could not persuade themselves
it was true.

But if the Priest be honest, is he also infallible? This the Representer must
suppose, or else he reasons at an absurd rate: For thus he argues; Was Mary
Magdalen deprived of the Word of God, who placed at her Savior's Feet, heard
it from his own most sacred Mouth? Were those People deprived of the Word of
God, to whom the Apostles were sent to preach, for those several Years, before
any of the Gospel was in writing? It is not writing, we know, that makes it the
Word of God, for all that Word of God that is now written, was once unwritten.
But pray Sir tell me; Is every thing taught by a Priest of the Church of Rome,
as certainly the Word of God, as that which was taught by our Blessed Savior,
and his Apostles? Is every Parish Priest at length become Infallible? If so,
what a shame is it that any Controversies are left among your selves, when
every Parish affords an infallible Interpreter of Scripture? If not, then they
may teach that for the Word of God, which is nothing less. However, all that we
contend for, is, That the Vulgar may be suffered to read that Word which Mary
heard, for that she heard was the same that is now written; and had it been
then written from Christ's Mouth, can any Man be so senseless as to imagine,
that after he had done speaking, he would have forbidden her, under severe
Penalties to read it?

But let us now suppose, That every Roman Teacher is both able and sincere;
will it hence follow, that the People may not read the Scriptures? Had St. Luke
thought so, he would never have commended the Bereans for searching the
Scriptures, whether those things that were spoken by St. Paul were so Act. 17.
11.
. Had St. Paul himself thought so, would he have proved what he said by
Scripture? (for in doing so, he put his Hearers upon the searching it) and
thereby taught all succeeding Pastors what they ought to do? To which purpose
the words of Origin are observable In cap. 3. Epist. ad Romans
; If such and so great an Apostle, did not suppose his Authority sufficient
Warrant to his Sayings, unless he made it appear, that what he says is written
in the Law and the Prophets, how much more ought we little Ones observe this,
that we do not bring forth ours, but the Sentences of the Holy Spirit? Now I
presume it will not be denied, but St. Paul was as faithful and able a Teacher
as any in the Church of Rome. If it should, yet doubtless it will be granted
that our Savior may compare with the best of them; and he (as we have heard
before) frequently sent his Hearers to the Scriptures. And if we consult the
Ancient Fathers, especially St. Chrysostom, (who was as diligent a Pastor as
any the Church can now boast of) we shall find, that notwithstanding his
abundant pains in teaching, he vehemently exhorted the People to read the
Scriptures themselves, and enforced his Exhortation by many powerful Arguments.
Omitting many others, I shall reciet one Passage in his 10th Homily, on the
first Chapter of the Gospel of St. John; Before I proved (says he to his
Hearers) to explain the words, I will ask one favor of you, which I beseech
you not to deny me, for it is nothing burdensome, nothing hard to be done, which
I ask, and much more profitable to you than to me. What is it then which I
desire? That one Day in the Week, at least on Saturday, you take care to read
that part of the Gospel which I am to explain to you, that every one take it
into his Hands, repeat it often at Home, consider the Scope of it, mark what is
clear, and what obscure, and what seems repugnant in it; and weighing all
things beforehand, do you thus present your selves to hear. This will bring no
small profit both to you and to me. For it will be no great labor to me, to
make you understand the force of the Gospel, when you have before rendered it,
as to the words at least, familiar to your selves at Home. And you will be not
only more quick and ready to hear and learn, but also to teach others. There
are many here present, who hear and endeavor to retain the words, and what I
say upon them, who would receive no great benefit, tho I should spend a whole
Year in preaching upon them. Why? Because by the bye, and only for a little
time here, they apply their minds to them, etc.

I grant, It was Preaching, Teaching, and Instructing by word of Mouth, was the
means appointed by Christ for planting his Gospel. But what then? does it
follow, that when the Gospel was written, it might not be read by the Vulgar?
No more doubtless, than that it might not be read by the Learned; for that was
the Means used for planting it among both. Nor can we well imagine, how it
could at first be otherwise planted, because it was then to be confirmed by
Miracles. And suppose it were true, that the Apostles who were thus commanded
to preach, had never any Command to write; Is not this as good a Reason, why
the Priests may not read the Gospel, as why the People may not?

In the words following, the Representer sums up his Argument, viz. Since then
the Papists are taught and instructed in the Word of God, the very same way
that Christ himself taught all those that followed him; since they are
instructed in it, the same way the Apostles themselves observed and commanded,
by submitting to, and obeying those that are over them: Why do you say they are
deprived of the Word of God? I answer. For these Reasons:

1. Because that which they have of the Word of God is but very little, in
comparison of what they are deprived of.

2. Because much of that little, if taken with those glosses, and understood in
that sense which they put upon it, is not the Word of God.

3. Because much of that little, which in popular Discourse is delivered to
them as the Word of God, is nothing less. This the Representer must be forced
to grant, unless he can prove these two things.

1. That both parts of a Contradiction may be true: For nothing is more
obvious, than that those Propositions are, by many of the Roman Clergy,
delivered as the Word of God, which are contradictory the one to the other. For
Example: One says, the Wood of the Cross is to be adored; another, that Jesus
Christ only is to be adored in the presence of the Cross. That the Pope has
Power to depose Kings, one makes it Heresy to deny, another to affirm it.

2. That that may be the Word of God, which is plainly contrary to what God
has taught in the holy Scriptures; for so are many things taught by many of
their Pastors: For example; That the sacred Body of the Mother of Jesus is
endowed with a super-seraphical activity, whereby she can render her self
present in a moment to all her Devotees; vieweth all their Actions, Words and
Concerns, and can aid them at whatever distance at all times, whatever their
Calamities be etc. Contemplations on the Life and Glory of the Holy Mary. p. 69.
. When the Representer shall have proved these two Propositions: That
Contradictions may be true, and that that may be the Word of God, that is
plainly contrary to the Word of God, we may then perhaps be persuaded to
believe, that the Roman Priests speak nothing but Oracles.

SECT. II.
That which is mentioned as the next Misconstruction, Inference II.
or false Inference of the Protestants, is this: That the Papist takes up all
his Belief upon trust, he is led through all the Mysteries of his Religion by
the hand, without seeing which way or whither he goes. All from beginning to
end is Blindness and Ignorance, etc. Chap. 7. p. 49.
. And what says the Representer in answer to this? A Papist believes as the
Church of God (that is the present Church of Rome) teaches. And does not he
take all his Belief upon trust, who without examination, believes whatsoever
his Church teaches? But how does he know what his Church teaches? his Priest
tells him. Well, he believes as the Church teaches, he believes the Church
teaches this or that, because his Priest tells him so; does he not then take
his Church's Faith, and his own too, upon trust from his Priest? No: For he
does not believe blindly, but knowingly and understandingly, so far as the
littleness of humane Reason, and his own Capacity will give him leave. How does
this appear? Because in order to this, his Church has provided him of variety
of Learned Books, explicating to him the sense of the Scriptures, as likewise
the Articles of his Creed, every Mystery of his Religion, the ten Commandments,
the Sacraments, and the whole Duty of a Christian, and this in such numbers,
both in Latin and English, and other Languages, etc. What? Learned Books for
the Unlearned? and in Latin too, for those who understand not a word of Latin?
May they not learn as much from the Latin Bible, as from a Latin Explication?
Well may they believe understandingly, when their Church has provided them of
such Books for that purpose, which are above their Understanding. But besides
these, he has Books in English, and other Languages. In England he is better
provided of Books, than in other Countries; But does he not take all these upon
trust too, since he is not suffered to examine so much as one of them by the
Scripture? Yea, is not his Belief of these Books, a plain Argument, that he
believes blindfold? Because many such things are contained in them, which if he
impartially examined, he could never yield his assent to. That I may not be
thought to speak at random, I shall give a single Instance (out of that great
number I could produce) in each of the Heads beforementioned. 1. For the sense
of Scripture; he must take it upon trust, who takes that Dominion ascribed to
the Blessed Virgin, to be meant in these Texts quoted for it, viz. that God
has given her sovereign Dominion in Heaven over the Angels (the Queen stood at
thy right Hand, Psalm. 44.) on Earth over Men (Kings reign by me, etc. Prove.
18.) and over Hell and the Devil; (she shall bruise thy Head Genesis 3.) Jesus,
Maria, Joseph. p. 167, 168.
2. For the Articles of his Creed: He believes upon trust, who believes
Contradictions; and so does he, who believes, that by the Catholic Church in
the Creed, is meant the Roman Catholic. 3. For the Mysteries of his Religion,
I appeal to all Men, whether he does not take them upon trust, who takes them,
as they are delivered in a Book lately printed Contemplations on the Life and
Glory of the Holy Mary.
; particularly this of the Nativity of the Mother of Jesus: That Holy Mary,
being by a singular Privilege, (in regard of her Divine Maternity) perfectly
innocent, holy, and full of Grace, Wisdom, and all Virtues, in the first
positive instant, of the Infusion of her Soul, she from thence forth ever
exercised the sublime Operations of the Contemplative and Vnitive Life, without
recourse to Images of Imagination, or dependence on sense, by the help of
abstractive Lights, divinely infused, representing, 1. The several Essences,
Attributes and Motions of the whole Body of the Creation, in their several
degrees and stations. 2. The Divinity of God, with its manifold Emanations,
Operations, and unexplicable Comprehensions. 3. And the Humanity of Jesus, with
all the Orders of Grace, Mysteries of Salvation, and extatick Loves of the
Saints, whereby her great Soul was so completely actuated, even in the Womb of
her Mother, that her Contemplations, Sallies of Love, and Unions with God were
restless, ever increasing in their vigor, and still expatiating through the
vast Motions and Methods of Mystical Love. Thus Divine Mary became still more
acceptable to God, replenished with Grace, and absorpt in the Abyss of
supernatural Perfection; which wonderfully increased the languishings of
Angels, Souls in Limbo, and of her holy Parents for the hour of her Birth Ibid.
p. 44, 45.
. This is a Mystery, (and so are several others in the same Book) which, I
fear, the Vulgar are not able to believe knowingly. 4. For the ten
Commandments, he must believe blindly, who believes he has them entire in his
Catechism, when so considerable a part is left out; Thou shall not make to thy
self any graven Image, nor the Likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above,
etc. Or that he has the fourth Commandment sincerely delivered in these words;
Remember to sanctify the holy Days. We are told I know, in the Abridgment of
Christian Doctrine, that the Church cannot be accused of the least shadow of
omitting any parts of the Commandments P. 113.
. But how can that be, when it is before acknowledged, that a great Part of the
Text is omitted? Because in no Catholic Bible, is there one Syllable left out.
But what is this to the Vulgar, who are not permitted to read any Catholic
Bible? who know no more of the Commandments, than what they find in their
Catechism. 5. As to the Sacraments. Had he not need trust strongly, who
believes, that Christ instituted the Sacrament of Order, in saying, Do this
Rhemes Test. Annot. in Luke 22. v. 19. Abridgment of Christ. Doct. p. 184, 185.
? Behold here the Lights the Vulgar Papist enjoys! Is it not now as manifest as
Light it self, That whosoever reproaches him with Blindness in the midst of so
many Lights, may with as good Reason prove him to be in the dark, when Noonday
shines upon him.

Especially considering, That besides these Books, the Church has given
direction to all Parish Priests, to explicate on Sundays and Holy Days, the
Gospel, and some Mystery of the Faith, to such as are under their Charge, etc.
But have we not reason to believe, that the Explications of their Parish
Priests are answerable to those we meet with in their Books? and then
notwithstanding these Helps and Assistances, not only some, but many of his
Church, may believe without understanding; who cannot be condemned of
Negligence and Sloth, in the use of those means their Church has provided for
them. And if the Parish Priests are generally as ignorant, as many Learned Men
of the Church of Rome tell us they are, even they themselves believe without
understanding, and therefore much more the People.

But by what follows, the Vulgar Papists are very blameworthy, if they know
not the Scripture better, than the Vulgar of any other Communion. For it is an
unquestionable Truth, that when a Book contains high Mysteries of Religion,
Mysteries superior to all Sense and Reason, and those not delivered in
expressions suited to every Capacity, but obnoxious to various interpretations,
that the People is in all probability likely to have more of the true sense of
this Book, and to be better informed of the Truth of the Mysteries it contains,
who are instructed in it by the Learned of that Communion, and taught it by
their Pastors, Prelates, and those whom God has placed over them, to govern and
feed the Flock; than any other People, who have the Book put into their own
hands, to read it, and search it, and satisfy themselves.

In answer to which I shall propose a few Questions to the Representer.

1st. Whether it be an unquestionable Truth, that when a Book contains not only
high Mysteries, but such things as for the far greater part, are not above the
Capacity of the Vulgar; that he shall have more of the true sense of this Book,
who is instructed in it by his Pastors only, than he who is instructed in it by
them, and studies it himself too? In all Sciences there are some Mysteries; now
is he likely to understand any other Science better, who takes only the
Instructions of his Teachers, than he, who together with them, diligently
studies it himself also?

2. Suppose nothing but high Mysteries were contained in this Book; yet may not
he as well understand these Mysteries, who is instructed in them by the
Learned, and searches them himself, as he that trusts only to the Instructions
of the Learned?

3. Is it for the sake of these high Mysteries, that the reading of this Book
is forbidden the Vulgar? If so, then, 1. Why was it not forbidden sooner? since
these Mysteries were in it from the Beginning. 2. Why are other Books published
for their use, in which are Mysteries superior to all Sense and Reason, and
those not delivered in expressions suited to every Capacity, but such as may be
wrested by the Unlearned and Unstable to their own destruction? Such I mean, as
the Contemplations of the Life and Glory, etc. Jesus, Maria, Joseph, etc. And
therefore,

4. Is it not evident that it is not for the sake of the Mysteries, but of
those things which are too plain and obvious to vulgar understandings, that the
reading of this Book is prohibited?

But he confirms what he says, both by Reason and Scripture.

1. By Reason. Are not the Pastors more capable of teaching the People, than
the People are of teaching themselves? An admirable Reason! Let us see how it
will hold in other matters. Is not the Master or Tutor more capable of teaching
the Scholar, than the Scholar is of teaching himself? He therefore will have
more of the true sense of any Book in Logic, Physics or Metaphysics, that
never looks into the Book himself, but only hears a Lecture once in a Week or
Month from his Tutor, upon some part of it, than he that makes the Book his
constant study.

2. As admirable are the Proofs from Scripture. We know Moses gave the Book of
the Law to the Levites to keep and read it every seven years to the People: And
in King Jehosaphat 's Reign the Priests and Levites did read it, and teach the
People; so did Jeremy by God's Command, so Isaiah, so Ezekicl. -- And did not
our Blessed Savior take the Book of the Prophet, and read it, and expound it
to the People? And was not this the Office of the Apostles and Deacons? etc.

The Argument is this. The Priests and Levites read the Book of the Law, and
taught the People; so did Jeremy, Isaiah and Ezekiel; Yea our Savior and his
Apostles read and expounded the Scripture to the People: Therefore they will
understand more of the true sense of the Scripture, who never read it, than
those who do. What pity was it, that Moses, and the Prophets, and our Savior
and his Apostles, did not understand the force of this Argument? for if they
had, they would, no doubt, have forbidden the People to read the Scripture, and
then we had never been pestered with those Sects and Heresies that spring from
it: But they were altogether unacquainted with the Roman Politics. Tho
therefore they read the Scripture to the People themselves, and read it in the
vulgar Tongue; yet they left it free to the People to read it, and not only so,
but laid it as a Duty upon them.

He adds: For this intention was Ananias sent to Saul, Peter to Cornelius, and
Philip to the Eunuch, who professedly owned, he could not understand the
Prophet in so necessary a Point as that of the Messiah, without an Interpreter
P. 51.
: None of which Instances make any thing for him, but that of the Eunuch makes
much against him. For the Eunuch was reading the Prophet Isaiah, tho he could
not understand him; and St. Chrysostom Hom. 35. in Genes.
and others Non intelligebat Scripturae sensum homo prophanus and idiota; and
tamen quoniam pio studio legebat, subito mittitur illi Philippus interpres,
vertitur Eunuchus in virum, tingitur aqua, and ater Aethiops niveo agni
immaculati vellere induitur; subitoque ex mancipio prophanae Reginae, fit
servus Jesus Christi. Eras. Epist. l. 29. Epist. 82.
observe, that God as a Reward of his Diligence and Piety, in doing what he was
able, sent him a Teacher. And what follows hence? First, that they ought not to
forbear the reading of the Scriptures, who do not understand them. Secondly,
That they who thus read them with a pious Mind, shall be graciously accepted
and rewarded by God. These Inferences are not mine, but both of them St.
Chrysostom's.

It follows; Since therefore the Papists, in delivering the Scriptures, come
nearest to this method, commanded by God in the Old Law, prescribed and
practiced by Christ and his Apostles in the New, etc. If he mean, that this was
the only Method commanded by God in the Old Law, and prescribed by Christ in
the New, I have already showed it to be false. If he mean that this was one
Method, then how widely remote the Conclusion is from the Premises, will
appear only by setting them together. One Method commanded by God in the Old
Law, was, that the Priests and Levites should read the Law, and explain it to
the People: the like Method was prescribed and practiced by Christ and his
Apostles in the New Law: Therefore the Papists, in withholding the Scripture
from the Common People, come nearest to the Method commanded by God in the Old
Law, and prescribed by Christ and his Apostles in the New. Where lies the
Connection? And yet I confess it follows as clearly as this, That the
Scriptures were not in the Vulgar Tongue, because St. Paul said to Timothy,
Thou have learned the Holy Scriptures from a Child Ledesma de Script. Divinis
quavis lingua non legendis. c. 5.
. I should have thought the quite contrary had followed, had I not been taught
otherwise, by one that follows the guidance of the Infallible Church. Had the
Representer spoken the whole Truth in the Premises, the Conclusion had been
unavoidable for the Protestants, who in delivering the Scripture to the People,
observe the same Method that God appointed under the Law, and Christ and his
Apostles under the Gospel. What follows upon this Head, we have had before.

SECT. III.
That which the Representer reckons as another Misconstruction Inference 3.
of the Protestants, is this; That the Reason why the Vulgar Papists are not
permitted to read the Bible, is for fear lest they should discover the Errors
of their Religion Chap. 8. p. 53.
. It Is true, the Protestants assign this for one Reason; but when he brings in
the Protestant saying, I can apprehend no other, he misrepresents them, because
they assign others, tho they take this to be the chief. Now this, he says, is a
Misconstruction that lies so open, that there needs no more than a glimpse of
Reason to discover it. Let us therefore see, whether there be so much as a
glimpse in those pretended Reasons he brings to confute it; which are these two.

1. That tho the Vulgar and Unlearned of the Papists, have not in some
Countries the Bible promiscuously allowed amongst them; yet that in those same
Countries, and all others, there is no College, University, Community, or place
of Learning, but where the Scriptures are publicly read and expounded Ibid.
.

2. That there can be no ground for this Pretension, at least here in England,
where the Bible in English, or the Rhemes Testament, is to be found in most
Catholic Families P. 54.
.

1. That in all Popish Countries, there is no College, University, Community, or
place of Learning, but where the Scripture is publicly read and expounded. Now
if they (viz. the Protestants) should consider this, is it possible (says the
Representer) for them to believe, that that Restraint is upon the Vulgar, for
fear they should see into the Follies of their Religion? It is possible: and
because we see a Papist can believe contrary to Sense and Reason, I add, that
it is not only possible, but there is great Reason for Protestants to believe
this. And that,

1. Because even Papists themselves believe it. So did the Bishops that met at
Bononia, to consult about the establishment of the Roman Church: For having
given it as their last and weightiest Advice, to Julius III, That he labor to
the uttermost, that as little as may be of the Gospel, especially in the Vulgar
Tongue, be read in the Cities that were under his Dominions, and that that
little might suffice which is wont to be read in the Mass. They add, This in
short is the Book which, besides others, has raised those Tempests and
Whirlwinds which we are almost carried away with: And the truth is, if any Man
shall diligently consider this Book, and then view in order one after another,
the things which are wont to be done in our Churches, he will see that there is
a very great difference between them, and that this our Doctrine is altogether
diverse from that, and oft-times even contrary to it; which as soon as Men
understand, being stirred up by some Learned Men of our Adversaries, they never
give over clamouring against us, till they have rendered us odious to all Men
Hic ille est liber, qui praeter caeteros hasce nobis tempestates ac turbines
concitavit, quibus prope abrepti sumus. Et sane si quis illum diligenter
expendar, deinde quae in nostris fieri Ecclesiiis consueverunt, singula ordine
contemplatur; videbit plurimum inter se dissidere, and hanc doctrinam nostram
ab illa prorsus diversam esse, ac saepe contrariam etiam: Quod simul atque
homines intelligunt, a docto scilicet aliquo Adversariorum nostrorum stimulati,
non ante clamandi in nos finem faciunt, donec re tandem pervulgata nos invisos
omnibus reddiderint. Consil. de Romans Eccles. Stab.
.

Of the same Belief was Peter Suitor, as appears by these words; Since many
things are delivered to be observed, which are not expressly in the Holy
Scriptures; will not the Unlearned, observing these things, be ready to murmur,
complaining that so great Burdens are laid upon them, by which their
Gospel-Liberty is sorely abridged? And will they not be easily withdrawn from
observing the Constitutions of the Church, when they shall see that they are
not contained in the Law of Christ Sed cum multa palam tradantur observanda,
quae Sacris in literis express non habentur; nonne Idiotae haec
animadvertentes facile murmurabunt, conquerentes cur tantae sibi imponantur
Sarcinae, quibus and libertas Evangelica ita gravicer elevatur? Nonne and
facile retrahentur ab observantia Institutionum Ecclesiasticarum, quando eas in
lege Christi animadverterint non contineri. De Translat. Bibl. c. 22. Fo. 96.
.

To which may be added all those (which make a vast number) who (as the
Cardinal Rodolpho Pio di Carpi) believe, that if the Bible be in the Vulgar
Tongue, all Men will become Heretics Soave 's Hist. of the Counc. of Trent. l.
5. p. 460.
. For who do they usually mean by Heretics, but those who by reading the
Bible, do first discover, and then renounce their Errors? Now tho, I confess,
there are some things believed by Papists, which I think it impossible for a
Protestant to believe; yet I doubt not but the Representer will grant, that the
belief of this, is as easy to a Protestant as it is to a Papist: And that since
it is believed by Papists, there is very good reason why Protestants should
believe it.

2. Since they allow the Vulgar the Ten Commandments in their own Tongue, what
probable Reason can be given why they leave out this part, Thou shall not Tho
to stop their Adversaries Mouths, they now put these words into the English
Catechisms.
make to thy self any graven Image, etc. but this; that they dare not let their
Laity compare their Doctrine and their Practice, with this Scripture? It is, I
know, commonly said, that this is done in compliance with the weak Memories of
the People: But he must be of a weak understanding, who is satisfied with this
Reason; especially considering, how tedious some of their Offices of Devotion
are, which are composed for the use of the Laity.

3. It is no Thanks to them that the Bible is not denied to the Learned,
because it is impossible it should be kept from them, as long as it is suffered
in any Language. But it is plain they are afraid of them, in that they do not
allow them, however learned and pious; but at the Bishop's discretion, to read
any Versions of the Old Testament; Nor do they give the Bishop leave to permit
any Man, how learned soever, to read any Versions of the New, made by those who
are censured by their Church, but confine them to the Vulgar Edition Reg. 3. ^
Trid.
. And to make as sure of them as they can, they tie them up as close as they
are able, from giving any such Interpretation of it, as may be prejudicial to
their new Faith. And yet not trusting to this Security, they endeavor, as much
as may be, to conceal from them those Scriptures which are repugnant to their
Doctrine. Which is,

4. A plain Argument, That it is the Bible it self they take to be mischievous
to them. Why else, 1. Did they blot those words out of the Margin and Index of
Rob. Stephen's Bible, which were the same with those in the Text? For Example;
Abraham was justified by Faith. He that believes in Christ, shall not die for
ever. They that blotted these out of the Index, that the Reader might not
thereby be directed to find them, would they not (if they durst) have blotted
them out of the Text too? 2. Why else have they purged, not only out of the
Ancient Fathers, but many late Learned Writers of their own Church, many
Passages of the Scripture it self? 3. Why was it commended as a most
meritorious Act in John Della Cava Archbishop of Benevento, That tho he had
not openly and expressly condemned the Gospel, yet obscurely and covertly he
had? because in his large Catalogue of Heretics, he had reprobated a great
part of that Doctrine, which is contained in the Gospel; especially some
certain Heads which were most opposite to the Church of Rome Consil. de Romans
Eccles. Stab.
.

The Representer proceeds; If their Religion be so contrary to Scripture as you
pretend, is it not more likely the Learned should make this discovery in their
reading the Bible, than the Vulgar if they had the like liberty? etc.

To which I return these two Things;

1. If the Learned are as free from Prejudice, Pride, Vainglory, Covetousness,
and other evil Affections, which darken Men's Minds, it is more likely they
should make this Discovery than the Vulgar; if not, the Vulgar are better
qualified to make it than they: For tho Learning, when joined with a sincere
love of Truth, is a great advantage for the discovery of it; yet when destitute
of this, it is as great a hinderance. The Learned among the Jews, in the days
of our Savior, are a demonstrative Proof of this. Tho Moses and all the
Prophets bore Testimony to him, yet the Scribes and Pharisees were not able to
see it: Why? because they were prepossessed with the Prejudices of a Pompous
Messiah, they sought Glory of Men, they had carnal Affections, and a worldly
Interest to serve; tho therefore all the Characters of the Messiah were visible
in him, yet because he was not a Messiah for their turn, they could not discern
them; I say, not only, they did not, but without first laying aside their
corrupt Affections, they could not: And so our Savior himself says; Ye cannot
hear my Word Joh. 8. 43.
. And how can ye believe which receive Honor one of another Joh. 5. 44.
? How wife and prudent soever they were in other Matters, they were not capable
of the Truths of the Gospel; and therefore they were hid from them, while they
were revealed to Babes Mat. 11. 25.
.

Now how few in comparison of the Learned in the Church of Rome, have not some
carnal Interest to serve? How few are not prepossessed with some such false
Principle, that be the Scripture never so clear against them, will so blind
their eyes, that they shall not be able to discern it? Should the Church of
Rome teach Murder and Adultery to be Virtues, he who makes it a Fundamental
Article of his Faith, that she cannot err, would not be able to see that they
are Sins; but would find out some other sense of these Commandments than the
words plainly import.

In short; this Argument the Learned Jews made use of against our Blessed
Savior; Have any of the Pharisees believed on him? But this People who know
not the Law, are cursed Joh. 7. 48, 49.
. As much as to say; Were he the true Messiah, the Learned Pharisees who study
the Law, would certainly know it; since therefore they do not believe on him,
no heed is to be given to the ignorant Multitude. Were therefore this Argument
of force, it would have justified the Vulgar Jews in rejecting of Christ. But,

2. Many of their Learned Men have made this Discovery. How many such were the
chief Instruments of the Reformation, and they doubtless discovered the Errors
of their Church, before they forsook it. How many continually since have
forsaken their Communion, in spite of all worldly Motives to the contrary? How
many who have not left their Communion, have given abundant Testimony by their
Writings, that they were convinced of their Errors, some in one thing, some in
another. Cardinal Cajetan, and Cardinal Contarenus, will be owned for as
Learned Men as most of their Time; and they discovered the Error of Prayer and
Service in an Unknown Tongue. Erasmus in the last Age, and Arnaud and his
Brethren the Jansenists in this, have exposed to all the World the Error I now
write against. The Learned Men of the Church of Rome, who have rejected the
Apocryphal Books from the Canon of Scripture, are too many to be particularly
mentioned; for that they are no part of the Canon, was Catholic Doctrine at
Rome it self (as a Learned Bishop of our own Church has proved) but ten Years
before the Council of Trent. And whosoever has read the History of that
Council, cannot but see, that the denial of the Cup to the Laity, was
discovered to be an Error, by many Learned Men of that Church. Yea, the great
Article of Transubstantiation, many of their most Learned Men, both in the
present and in foregoing Ages, could never persuade themselves to believe. How
many more of their Errors, have been discovered and published to the World by,
Cassander, Wicelius, Erasmus, Picus Mirandula, and many other Learned Men, who
died in Communion with them, I shall not stay to mention: But shall only make
this Inference, that the Representer would never have argued at this rate, had
he not vainly thought, that the Protestants are as little acquainted with the
Writings of the Papists, as the Papists generally are with those of the
Protestants.

What follows concerning Mechanics and Apron-strings, the Anvil, the Needle
and the Ell, I suppose he did not intend for Arguments, but only for Ornaments
and Imbellishments, and therefore I pass them over.

He adds; Is it probable, that every Man amongst the Papists, no sooner becomes
Scholar, but he turns Atheist? No. That upon their search in the Bible; they
plainly see all the Errors of their Religion, and yet are so bewitched as to
go on boldly and jocondly to the Devil, without speaking a word, or moving a
step to save their own Souls, or their Relations P. 53, 54.
. I will not say, that every Learned Papist sees [all] the Errors of their
Religion: It may suffice, that many of them have discovered many of their
Errors, and have written boldly against them. And for those who discover their
Errors, and yet profess to believe them, it is not necessary they should be
Atheists: I hope those Gentlemen are no Atheists, who for several years late
past, have believed with the Church of Rome, and professed with the Church of
England, their Religion approves Equivocations, and mental Reservation: Tho I
confess that very Argument is so great a Bar to my turning Papist, that I
cannot at present imagine, that I can ever be reconciled to that Religion,
which allows such gross Hypocrisies. I hope by this time the Representer sees,
how weak and ill-grounded his own Arguments are.

2. But he asks; What ground can there be for this Pretension, at least here in
England, where the Bible in English, or the Rhemes Testament is to be found in
most Catholic Families? If it be so, who is to be thanked for it? Not their
Churchmen: For tho they are more indulgent to their People here in England,
yet it is because they dare not be otherwise, since should they hold them to as
strict terms here, as they do where they are in full possession, it might
endanger their losing them. Besides, that it is impossible to keep the Bible
here; from those who have a mind to read it; for if they have it not with their
leave, they can have it without it. But yet, to keep them as much as may be
from it, they endeavor to persuade them, that it is a sin to read it without
leave; and many are so possessed with this Belief, that they acknowledge they
dare not read it, nor any other Book offered to them by Protestants, without
leave first obtained from their Ghostly Father: and were England as much in
their Power as Spain and Italy are, a Bible in the Vulgar Tongue would be as
rarely found in any Family here, as it is in those Nations; tho I see no
reason, but they may freely allow them the Rhemes Testament, because they have
so transformed it into their own likeness, that one would think, they need fear
no danger from it.

But if, says he, the prohibition of the Bible be, as you pretend in other
Countries, for fear of the Vulgar discovering the Errors of their Religion; how
comes it, that they don't make this Discovery here? Some may not make this
Discovery, because of those invincible Prejudices they are prepossessed with:
Others may not make it, because they do not see with their own Eyes, but leave
it to their Priests to see for them: Yet it is strange the Representer should
ask, How comes it they do not make this Discovery? as if none had made it;
when, to the great grief of their Church, such vast numbers have long since
made it. Does he not know, That one Objection against translating the Bible in
in King Hen. VIII days, was, That if Laymen had the Bible in their Mother
Tongue, it would make them all Heretics? Does he not know, how far the Event
has answered the Prediction? that whereas before the whole Nation was generally
of their Belief, so many have forsaken them since, that now perhaps one or two
in an hundred, are as many as they can challenge?

He says, Many have quitted that Communion upon other Motives, best known to
themselves, but never any one could I meet with left them yet, by reading and
following the Word of God. He has it seems, met with few who have left them;
nor could it be expected he should meet with many; for so many had left them
before his time, that few in comparison remained to leave them now. And those
who left their Communion in K. Hen. VIII days, could not leave it upon worldly
Motives, because, after he gave leave to print the Bible in English, and
encouragement to all Men to read it, he not only continued a Member of the
Church of Rome himself, but a zealous Persecutor of those who forsook it. But
perhaps he meets with none who desert them now: If he does not, yet many others
do; and I presume, those that forsake them now, their only Motive must be, to
follow the Word of God.

But if the reading the Scriptures is such a defeat to Popery as you give out;
is it likely those who have been bred up to the reading of the Bible, and have
made it their Study and Companion, should ever embrace that Communion? Not more
unlikely, than that those who have been bred up to the reading of the Bible,
should embrace diverse other Opinions and Practices, that are utterly
inconsistent with it; which we frequently see some Men do. Tho, I question not,
but if he examine their Converts, he will find but few of them such as have
made the Bible their Study and Companion. And for those who have been bred up
to the reading it, but never concerned themselves to consider it, it is not
more unlikely, that they should embrace Popery, tho never so plainly contrary
to it, than that those should, who never so much as saw it. I shall not pass a
Censure upon their late Proselytes; but I am persuaded the Representer himself
will confess, that some of them are such as they have no reason to boast of.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. Marg. for Mandeuent, read Mandement. P. 8. Marg. for Prosanes, r.
Profanes. P. 11. l. 6. after that, add it. l. last, for Acaia, r. Achaia. P.
16. Marg. l. 4. for it, r. et. P 19. Marg. for (...), r. (...). l. 2, and 3,
for (...), r. (...). P. 30. after reading, add it. P. 53. l. 27. for gosly, r.
grossly. P. 69. l. 7. for reci^^, r. reci^^. P. 80. Marg. r. contempletur.


