THE LIFE Of the Learned Sir Thomas SMITH Knight. Doctor of the CIVIL LAW;
Principal SECRETARY of STATE to King EDWARD the Sixth, and Queen ELIZABETH;
WHEREIN Are discovered many Singular Matters relating to the State of Learning,
the Reformation of Religion, and the Transactions of the Kingdom, during his
Time. In all which he had a great and happy Influence. With an Appendix,
wherein are contained some Works of his, never before published.

LONDON, Printed for A. Roper, at the Black Boy, over against St. Dunstan's
Church, in Fleet Street, and R. Basset; at the Mitre within Temple Bar
M^^X^VIII.

Sr. THOMAS SMITH Knight. Born March 28. 1512. Deceased ^u^. 12. 1577. in y^ 65^
year of his (...)



TO Sir EDWARD SMITH, OF HILHAL IN ESSEX, Baronet.
SIR,
THE Regard I have ever born in my Mind toward Men of Eminency, in Times past
born and bred among us, (especially when with their Qualities and Places they
have been adorned with Learning, Wisdom or Integrity,) led me at my
leisure-Hours to make cursory Collections out of my Books and Papers, of their
Lives and Actions. And many such men there were in the Last Age, when Learning
and Religion after a long Eclipse, began again to enlighten our Horizon.
Whereof some, however useful they were in their Times, and made a fair Figure
to the World, are now in effect quite forgotten; and though the Names of others
of that sort are better known, yet but slight and imperfect Characters remain
of them. Whenas they were perhaps the great Pillars of the State or Church, and
whose Counsils and Assistances the Prince made much use of in the weighty
Transactions of his Kingdom. Of these I confess I cannot read or hear, but I am
drawn with an Inquisitive Humor to know more of them, as whence they sprang,
their Country, their Parentage, their Education, their Tempers and
Inclinations, and remarkable Actions, and what Events fell out to them, over
and above what is commonly known or vulgarly told of them. And when by
searching a little out of the ordinary Way as it were, (I mean in the Bycorners
of old rejected Papers or Letters, and other Journals, Records, Registers,
etc.) I gain further Notice of these ancient Patriots, there is wont to arise
thence a great Complacency to my mind. And the Thoughts that it may be as
delightful to others as to my self, to revive the Memory of such, and represent
as much of them as can be retrieved, has moved me to make public some of my
Collections of this nature. And moreover, I reckon it a Matter of Equity and
Gratitude due from Posterity to preserved the Names and Remembrances of all
worthy men that have served God, their Prince, or Country by their Learning or
other Abilities. And God himself seems to take care of this, when he says,
that the Memory of the Just shall be Blessed, as their due Reward.

These, Sir, are some of the Reasons, why I have now brought that to pass,
which I formerly made you privy to; namely, the Publishing what I could
retrieve of the Life of your most Laudable and Accomplished Ancestor Sir THOMAS
SMITH. He was a Person that lived in very Critical Times, occasioned by
Court-Factions, and the frequent Alterations of Religion, and the various
Dispositions and Interests of the Princes whom he served. So that he could
hardly keep himself always upon his Legs: but by his great Wisdom and
Moderation, though he sometimes fell, he fell softly, and fell to rise again with
more Glory. This may make his History the more pleasant and useful: Especially
being mixed with many Occurrences in his Time, wherein he bore a great Part,
both in the University, in the Church, and in the Commonwealth. Where such
things may be read, which perhaps are not to be met with elsewhere.

Your said Ancestor, Sir, was the best Scholar in his Time, a most admirable
Philosopher, Orator, Linguist, and Moralist. And from thence it came to pass,
that he was also a very wise Statesman, and a Person withal of most
unalterable. Integrity and Justice, (which he made his Politics to comport
with) and lastly, a con stant Embracer of the Reformed Religion, and therein
made a Holy and good End. And therefore the English Soil which he so adorned,
would be ungrateful, if she should let the Memory of such a man born in her,
pass away, and lie for ever in obscurity. But as he was all this to the
Public, so, Sir, let me add, he is, and ever will be, an Ornament to your
ancient House and Family, to your ^^den Mount. where the Noble Seat erected by
him, will be his lasting Monument, and finally to the County of ESSEX, where he
was Born and Educated, whither he gladly retired, as often as public Business
permitted him, and where he quietly resigned his last Breath to God.

This Great man is the Subject of this Book: which therefore deserves to have
been writ by an abler Pen. I am conscious to my self that I have omitted many
remarkable Passages of his Life, which, could they have been retrieved, would
have shown him still more resplendent to the World. But it is impossible to
recover all. What I have collected together in these Papers from various and
sundry Books, and Original Writings, are sufficient to give a fair, though not a
full Account of him. And that which I value my present Undertaking for is, that
I have done it impartially: For it is not of the nature of a Rhe^orical
Panegyric, wherein more Care is taken to Praise, than to speak Truth. To which
last I have had a very tender Regard; being born out in every thing I have writ
by the Authority of indubitable Monuments; that is, either of Smith's own
Letters, Books and Papers, or of others his Friends and Contemporaries.

One thing more, Sir, seems requisite to have been done, to render this Work
more perfect, namely, together with this, to have published his Manuscript
Exercitations and Discourses, which being the Fruits and Products of his
Learned Brain, no question would have been very acceptable to all such as have
a Value for him. Two of these, that is, His Dialogues conc^rning Queen
Elizabeth's Ma^riage, and his Tables of the Valuation of Coins, I have now
brought to Light. But alas! what Pity is it, that all the rest of his brave
Philosophical, Astronomical, Moral, Political and Divine Thoughts, digested by
him into diverse Tracts, are now it is to be feared, (except his Commonwealth,
and his Books of Pronuntiation) utterly lost: together with all his other
Papers, except some Letters of State, that lie in the Kings Paper-h^use, and
those rough Writings, Sir, in your Hands, and a few others elsewhere. But where
are now his University Exercises, his Learned Readings, his Eloquent Orations,
exhortatory of Virtue, Morality and found Knowledge, his Correspondences with
the best Wits of his Age, and many Elucubrations upon ingenious Subj^^^s, which
his busy Head was always employed in? I am afraid I must say, they are
perished irrecoverably.

So that this poor Book of mine must serve for the chiefest Remains of our
Statesman. And, Sir, my Pains therein I hope, will be taken in good Part by you
and others, excusing heartily my Imperfections: As particularly my Style; which
peradventu^e to some may appear more loose and neglected; and not so smooth,
nor set off with Words, as might be expected in Books appearing abroad now a
days. But my chief Aim is to speak Truth, and to make my self understood of him
that reads me. Nor do I care, this being secured, to be too curious in my
Expressions. And perhaps my Converse with a Language and the Writings of an Age
or two past may render my Periods more rough and unpolished. But this I suppose
will humanely be forgiven me.

Nor would I have it disgust you, Sir, that in the Current of the History you
are sparingly entertained with some Latin Poetry, or other Allegations out of
Authors; so long as they are Historical and directly tend to illustrate the
Story, and the Man I am writing of: and not merely used for Flourish and
O^nament. This Caution^ the rather give, English Historic. Library, Pt. II* p.
105.
being aware of a Censure of this nature made by one Mr. Nicolson upon a Book
lately set forth, concerning the Life of Archbishop Cranner; blaming the Author
for crouding so much his other Learning into the Body of the History, (he means
Citations out of the Latin Poets and other Classics) which, as he says,
instead of entertaining his Readers answerable to his good Design, was apt to
amuse and distract them. The Rule he drives at for an Historiographer to
observe is good. For a Reader cannot but be displeased to have the Subject
matter he is reading frequently interrupted by moral Sentences, Observations or
Stories out of Authors, or other Digressions. But surely by the Wayhe has
wronged that Writer no man seeming to be more of Mr. Nicolson's Mind than he,
and less guilty of that which he lays to his Charge. For I have read the Book,
and unless I am much mistaken, there is but one Distich out of Martial, (and
scarcely another Quotation to be met with in the whole Volume,) and that was
concerning the great Pompey's having no Monument as that good Archbishop had
none. But if peradventure any other Citation be found in that Book, it is
directly in pur^^it of the History, and not surely (to speak so much in that
Writers behalf) intended as a mere Embellishment. And if this be a Fault, I may
in this Piece be guilty of some such Blemish: which I reckon in Truth none at
all.

You may possibly, Sir, here and there in the Book meet with some Passages
concerning Sir Thomas, seeming too minute and jejune to be taken notice of, and
of little Moment. But herein I entreat you, Sir, to bear with me, as you would
do with an Admirer of some Piece of Antiquity, who is want diligently to pick
up and preserve even the contemptible Stones and Fragments that he finds in the
Ruins of it. But besides, upon a little Circumstance we know many times depend
great Matters; and a Hint may open a Door into some material Points of History.
And in a word, what one Reader may run over, as not worth regarding, another
may perceive delight or Profit therein. Which were Considerations that swayed
me not to reject or cast aside even the slighter Matters that may be found in
this History.

You are, Sir, the properest Person to whom this Book should be Dedicated: Not
only in that you have so freely communicated to me diverse of Sir Thomas's
Papers remaining in your Custody; and that you are his next Relation in a
Collateral Line, and to you is descended his beloved Manor of Mounthaw, or
Mounthault, and that eligant Fabric of his rearing there; but chiefly, because
you do so truly resemble his Virtues, in being so useful a Magistrate, a
Gentleman of so sober and regular a Conversation in this loose and debauched
Age, and so constant an Adherer to the Religion professed in the Church of
England, which your Predecessor had a great hand in the Reformation of, and in
which he so steadfastly persevered.

Pardon therefore, Sir, this that I have done, to prefix Sir EDWARD SMITH's
Name to Sir Thomas SMITH's Life, and this long Address I have made to you on
the same Account: Wishing withal my Heart the Continuance of your Worthy Name
and Family, for many successive Generations in the hopeful Issue God has given
you, to be a Blessing to Essex, and to the whole English Nation. And so I
desist from being further importunate, and am, and have great reason always to
be,

SIR, Your very Humble and Obliged Servant, I. S.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS and CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
CHAP. I. Page 1

SIR Thomas Smith's Birth, Parentage and Education.

Born at Walden in Essex. An. 1512* 1526.
In what Year. His Father. The Guild at Walden. John Smith his Father High
Sheriff. His Coat of Arms. A Favourer of Religion. Sir Thomas 's Mother. His
Brother John. His Brother George a Merchant. His School. Removed to the
University. The Distribution of the History.

CHAP. II. Page 9

Sent to Queens College in Cambridge: Chosen a Kings Scholar: Reads the Greek
Lecture; And rectifies the Pronunciation: University Orator: His Applause.

An. 1526. 1531. 1533. 1535. 1536.
Entered at Queen's College. Becomes King Henry's Scholar, together with Cheke of
S. John's. What first gave Occasion to his Studies. Made Fellow. Reads the Greek
Lecture. Consults with Cheke about Greek Sounds. Brings in a new way of
Pronouncing Greek. Reads privately in his College. Smith's correct way of
Sounding the Greek prevails in the University. Made University Orator. His
Lectures flocked to.

Page 19.
CHAP. III.
He Travels: His Conferences with Learned Men at Orleans and Paris: Takes his
Degree at Padua: Returns home: His usefulness at the University: The
Controversy there arisen about his Way of Pronouncing Greek.

An. 1539. 1542. 1546.
He goes abroad. Confers with the Professor at Orleans; and at Paris with
Strazelius, and a Grecian. Travels to Italy. Made Regius Professor of the
Civil Law. A general Scholar. Chancellor to the Bishop of Ely, Breeds up
Pupils. Refines the English Writing. Ascham. A Tract by Smith writ for that
Purpose. Rectifies the Pronunciation of Greek. A Controversy arises in the
University hereupon. Cheke Greek Lecturer; Clamoured against. The Decree of the
Chancellor. Smith's Compliance. His Epistle to the Chancellor upon this
Argument. A late Professor of Basil stands up for the old Sounds. Religion
promoted by Smith in the University. He addresses to the Queen in behalf of
Cambridge. His Academical Exercises. His Preferments, while at Cambridge. His
Port.

CHAP. IV. Page 381

Smith removed into the Protectors Family: His Preferments under King Edward:
Made Secretary: Goes an Embassy.

Comes to Court. An. 1547^ 1548.
Addressed to by the University. Their Letter. Made Master of Requests to
Somerset. Other Dignities conferred on him. His Purchases. Marries. Marries
again. He is Slandered. Suffers Imyrisonment with the Duke. Made Secretary.
Goes Ambassador. His Letter to the Protector. Smith concerned in the Alteration
of Religion; and Redress of base Money.

Page 48.
CHAP. V.
Sir Thomas Smith in Commission. Words between Bishop Boner and him. His
Fidelity to the Duke of Somerset.

An. 1549. 1550. 1551.
Smith in a Commission against Anabaptists. One of the Visitors of Cambridge.
In Commission upon Bishop Boner, who would have declined him. Smith deals
roundly with him. His Word to Boner's Servants: Boner enters a Recusation
against Smith. Who charge him with Disobedience. Smith in trouble with the
Protector: Deposed against Bishop Gardener. Makes a Purchase. Goes in Embassy
to France.

Page 59.
CHAP. VI.
The Condition of Sir Thomas Smith under Queen Mary. His wise Advertisements.

An. 1553. 1554. 1555. 1556. 1557.
He loses all his Places. He has an Indulgence from the Pope. Bishop Gardener
his Friend. Gains Gardiner's Favor upon his first Address to him from
Cambridge. Ascham favored by Gardener. Even Bishop Boner pretends to be
Smith's Friend. Rob. Smith, a Retainer of Sir Tho. Smith, burnt. His Grief at
these Times. Smith's wise Advertisements and Counsels.

CHAP. VII. Page 72.

Smith called to Queen Elizabeth 's Court. Concerned in the Settlement of
Religion. His Judgment of the Queen's Marriage.

Employed in the Reformation; An. 1558. 1559. 1560.
and in one of the Committees for the State; And in swearing the Officers of
Walden. His Service in the Commission of the Peace. Subscription of the
Justices. Smith's Dialogues concerning the Queen's Marriage.

CHAP. VIII. Page 85.

Sir Thomas 's Embassies to France.

Why not restored to be Secretary: An. 1562. 1563.
Dispatched to France. Stops at Calais; and why. Directions to him from the
Council. Smith a Peace-mover. Confers with the Pope's Legate. The Secretary
Advice to the Ambassador. The Queen's Orders to him. Three Evils in France.
Smith's Behavior in his Embassy. Entertains a subtle Spy. His Complaint. The
Ambassador's. Instructions concerning the Prince of Conde. He sends N^ws to the
Council. Ordered to speak only in Latin in his Negotiation. Contention between
Smith and Throgmorton. Smith's Plainness pleases the Lord Robert. Instructions
for Smith's Dealing with the Protestants. Smith treats for Peace. Doctor
Haddon's Advice to Smith.

Page 99.
CHAP. IX.
Osorius his Letter to the Queen; And Doctor Haddon 's Answer. Difference
between Smith and Throgmorton, the Queen's joint Ambassadors. Smith and Cecyl
Friends.

An. 1563.
The Ambassador sends over Books to Cecyl. To procure a Book to be Printed in
France. Osorius's Epistle to the Queen; Answered by Haddon. This Answer
recommended to Smith to revise; And publish. A License for which, he labors to
obtain from the Chancellor: Which ^e will not grant. Smith presses it. Argues
with the Chancellor of France about it. The Progress of this Controversy.
Difference between the two Ambassadors. Some Character of Throgmorton. Cecyl's
and Smith's Friendship.

CHAP. X. Page 110.

Peace with France. Smith continues Ambassador there. His Book of the
Commonwealth of England. Returns. A Review of his Embassy.

Smith affects a Peace. An. 156^. 1565.
Sollicits the Queen's Debt. The Queen Continues him Ambassador. A Match for
the Queen propounded to him. Finisheth his Book of the Commonwealth. His
extraordinary Expense. Smith's Son with him. He labors to come home. He
returns. He is Inquisitive how his Negotiation is accepted. He follows the
Court of France. His Reflection upon his Hearing of the Queen's going to
Cambridge. He composeth his Book of the English Commonwealth at Toulouse. He
enquireth for Learned men in Paris. He procures the Printing of the Answer to
Osorius. His Correspondence with Haddon, Ambassador in Flanders. Smith's
Opinion of Tully's Philosophy and Law. His Reflection on the Troubles
occasioned by Hale's Book*

CHAP. XI. Page 124.

Smith goes over Ambassador again to demand Calais. His Employment at home.
Concerned in turning Iron into Copper.

A^. 1566. 1567. 1^70. 1571.
Smith now at home, sent again to demand Calais. Take his Son with him. The
Manner of his demanding Calais. Sues for the Place of Chancellor of the Duchy.
Sir Thomas in the Country administering Justice. Witches by him examined.
Master's wife. Ann Vicars. Sir Thomas admitted into the Council. Labors about
Transmuting Iron into Copper. His Progress therein. Some Lords come into the
Project. The Projectors formed into a Society. The Patent for it signed. The
Business finds Delay. The Chemist a Beggar.

Page 140.
CHAP. XII.
Smith waits upon the Queen at Audley^ End. Goes on Embassy to France.
Concludes a League. Concerned in Proposals of a Match for the Queen.

An. 1571.
He examineth the Duke of Norfolk's Secretary. Goes Ambassador ^gain to France,
to make firm Amity against Spain. An Article debated by Smith. His Argument
with the French Queen. Smith persuades the Queen. She consents to the League.
He loved not many Words. His hardship in France. Communication between the
Queen Mother and Smith, concerning Queen Elizabeth's Marriage. Further
Discourse on the same Argument. His Thoughts of the Queen's Marrying. His
Concern for her Sickness; And the Irresolutions of the Court. The Queen of
Navarre sends to Sir Thomas.

CHAP. XIII. Page 156.

Made Chancellor of the Garter. Comes home. Becomes Secretary of State. His
Advice for forwarding the Queen's Match. His Astonishment upon the Paris
Massacre.

The Queen gives Smith the Chancellorship of the Order. An. 157^.
Comes home. Made Secretary. Famed in the Court for his Learning. Smith's
Device for a View between Monsieur and the Queen. His Thoughts of the Massacre
at Paris. His Detestation of it. His Reason of the Manner of answering the
French Ambassador. His Observation of the Prejudice the French did themselves
in Scotland.

CHAP. XIV. Page 166.

Secretary Smith at Windsor, dispatching Business. His Care of Flanders and
Ireland, Massmongers and Conjurers ent up to him out of the North. His Colony
in Ireland.

An. 1572.
The Secretary at Windsor; Dispatching Agents and Irish Matters. His Compassion
for Flanders. His Advice about the Earl of Desmond: And the Quarrel between
Clanricard and Fitton. Mass-mongers and Conjurers, sent up to the Secretary.
His Letter to the Earl of Shrewsbury hereupon. Persuades the Queen to send Aid
unto Scotland. Which upon his Motion she condescends to. Two Scotch men by him
examined. Sir Thomas sends a Colony into Ardes. His Patent for it. Sir Thomas's
Son leads the Colony. His Rules and Orders for it. Mr. Smith's Care in the
Colony. Draws up Instructions for his Son. Families of English found in the
Ardes. Mr. Smith's good Service this Winter. Mr. Smith slain. The Ardes
neglected upon Sir Thomas's Death. How lost from the Family.

Page 184.
CHAP. XV.
The Secretary Oppressed with Business. His Discourse with the Queen about
Ireland, and the Earl of Essex. His Act in the behalf of Colleges of Learning.
His Sickness and Death.

The Secretary uneasy, at the Queen's Delays. An. 1574. 1575. 1576. 1577.
The Queen deliberates about Supplies for the Earl of Essex. Her Backwardness
thereunto troubles the Secretary. Conference between the Queen and her
Secretary about Ulster, and the Earl of Essex. His Advice to the Queen
concerning him. The Secretary with the Queen in Progress. She speaks to the
Secretary about dangerous Beggars. He procures an Act for Schools of Learning.
The Act. His fatal Distemper seizes him. It affected chiefly his Tongue and
Throat. The Orator now scarce can speak. To divert his Sickness he looks over
his former Writings. His Book of Roman Coins. The Physicians tamper with him.
They leave him to Kitchen Physic. Goes into the Country. Dies. Persons
attending his Funerals. Buried. His Monument. His Lady dies. His Person
described.

CHAP. XVI. Page 204.

His last Will.

Makes his Will: An. 1577.
For the finishing his House and Monument. To his Lady. For preserving good
Housekeeping. To his Brother. His Library to Queen's College; or Peter-House.
Books to his Friends. A Cup to the Queen. In case of Doubt arising in the Will.
His Executors. The Date of his Will.

Page 211.
CHAP. XVII.
Observations upon Sir Thomas Smith.

His Learning. A Platonic. A Physician. His Recipe for the Plague. His
Chemical Water sent to the Countess of Oxford. His Matthiolus. A Chemist. A
Mathematician. An Arithmetician. An Astronomer. His Judgment of the Star in
Cassiopaeia. A Politician. A Linguist. An Historian. An Orator. An Architect.
His Library. Books by him written. A great Judge in Learning. His Acquaintance.
The Vogue of his Learning. Beneficial to Learning. His Places. His houses; in
Chanon-Row: In London: At Ankerwick. Mounthaut. His heir Sir William Smith.

Page 233.
CHAP. XVIII.
Sir Thomas Smith 's Virtuous Accomplishments.

His Religion. His Principles by which he governed himself: His Virtues. Vices
falsely charged on him. His Spirit. His Apparel. Not oppressive, Of an
universal Charity. His Apophthegms. Leland's Copy of Verses to Smith. Dr.
Byng's Epitaph on him.

THE LIFE Of the Learned Sir THOMAS SMITH, Knight.
CHAP. I. Sir THOMAS SMITH's Birth, Parentage, and Education.
THE Learned Sir THOMAS SMITH, An. 151^. K. Henry 8.
sometimes Secretary of State to K. Edward VI. and afterward to Q. Elizabeth,
was born at Walden in the County of Essex, Born at Walden in Essex.
distinguished by the Name of SAFFRON Walden; the Lands of that Parish, and the
Parts adjacent, being famous for the Growth of the useful Medicinal Plant;
whether first brought thither by this Knight's Industry (being a great Planter)
I know not; for it was first brought into England, Camb. Brit.
as we are told, in the Reign of K. Edward III.

According to Cambden, who writes, that Sir Thomas Smith died Anno 1577. in his
Climacteric, he must have been born in the Year 1514. In what Year, Hist. of Q.
Elizabeth. Acts and Non. first Edit.
According to Fox, (who, in his Relation of an Evidence given by the said
Knight in February, Anno 1551, against Bishop Gardener, assigned his Age then
to be Three and Thirty) he must have been born in the Year 1518. But himself
puts his Age out of doubt in his Book of the English Commonwealth, where he
says, that March the 28th, 1565, he was in the One and Fiftieth Year of his
Age. By which Computation he must have come into the World in the Year 1512. (a
Year famous to England for building of a Ship, the biggest that ever the Sea
bore.) And by the Inscription on his Monument it appears, he departed this Life
in the 65th Year of his Age. So that Cambden made him Two Years younger than he
was, and Fox Five; unless we should say the Figure 33 is mis-printed for 39, a
Fault too common in his Books.

His Father.
Our Knight's Father was John Smith of Walden, Gentleman, a Person of good Rank,
Quality and Wealth. Of which we may take some Measure from two Purchases he
made of K. Edward in one Year, viz. the Third of his Reign; that is to say, a
Chauntry in the Church of Long Ashton in Somersetshire, with other Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments in the Counties of Somerset and Gloucester, which
cost him 293 l. 16. s. 8 d. His other Purchase was all the Guild or Fraternity
in Great. Walden lately dissolved, with diverse other Lands and Tenements in
Essex and London. For which he, with another Joint-Purchaser, paid 531 l. 14 s.
11 d. Of which Fraternity of Walden this, The Guild of Walden
by the way, must be remembered for the Honor of it, that in a Grant made to
it by K. Henry VIII. as he willed there, That he might evermore be remembered in
their perpetual Prayers, so he charitably desired, that he might be admitted a
Brother thereof, and his dear Wife Q. Katherine to be a Sister. And diverse
others are expressed there to be desirous to be admitted to the same, as, the
Right Worshipful Dr. Wolsey, Almoner to the King; Richard Nix, Bishop of
Norwich; Henry, Earl of Essex, and his Lady; Lord Brook, Chief Justice of
England; Sir John Cutts, Sir Tho. Semer, and diverse other Gentlemen and Ladies.

This John Smith, Jo. Smith High Sheriff.
if we look further back, was in the 30th of King Henry VIII. High Sheriff of
the Counties of Essex and Hertford: For in those Times one Sheriff served both
Counties.

In the year 1545. His Coat of Arms.
and the 35th of K. Henry aforesaid, his Coat of Arms was granted him by the
principal King of Arms, or rather confirmed. For the said King's Parent
specifies, That he was descended of honest Lineage, and his Ancestors had long
continued in Nobility and bearing of Arms; and that it was Mr. Smith's Desire,
that the King of Arms would ratify unto him his former Coat, and Register it
in the Records of his Office. The Coat therefore granted, annexed and
attributed unto him was Sables, a Fesse Dauncy between three Lionceux,
regardant, Argent, Languid Gules, pawing with their Left Paws upon as many
Altars flaming and burning thereon, (for that these were Anvils, as some have
thought, alluding to the Name of Smith, is a Fancy) Upon the Fesse Nine Billets
of his Field. The Crest an Eagle rising Sable, holding in his Right Claw a Pen
Argent, Flames of Fire issuing thereout. This Crest Sir Thomas changed upon a
notable Reason, as we shall relate in due place. Of this Coat of Arms I have
laid a Copy of the Original Patent in the Appendix; (...). 1.
which is in Parchment, very well adorned round about with Pictures of Ros^^
and Flowers de Lys, and the Lively Efsigies of Garter arrayed in his rich Coat,
standing with a white Wand in his Hand, and a Crown on his Head, and the Coat
of Smith blazon^d on the right side of him, and point^d to by the said white
Wand.

(...) Religion.
I have but one thing more to say of this Gentleman, and that is, That he was an
old Favourer of the Religion Reformed, in which he brought up his Son Thomas
from his Youth. He lies buried in the Church of Walden, where his Monument is
yet remaining; that is, so much of it as contains his Coat of Arms; but the
Brass that bore the inscription torn off. This for Sir Thomas's Father.

Sir Thomas's (...).
His Parentag^ on his Mother's side was also Genule, being derived from the
ancient Name of the Ch^^^ecks of Lancashire; his Mother Agnes being a Daughter
and Coheir of that Family. By this Gentlewoman John Smith had Issue diverse
Children of both Sexes, viz. Four Daughters, Agnes and Margery, Alice and Jane,
(which two last were married;) and three Sons, Thomas, John and George. The
Posterity of which last flourish to this Day in Wealth and Honor; and possess
the Seat and Inheritance of Thomas, the Subject of our ensuing History, with
great Improvements of the Estate. Though no more Sons are expressed in the Roll
of the Pedigree, as it is preserved in the Office of Arms; yet there seems to
have been another Son, an elder Brother to Thomas. For I have seen sometime a
Crescent for distinction in his Seal, which he used for the Sealing of his
Letters, engraven with his Arms.

His Brother John was the chief Instrument and Procurer of the new Erection of
the Corporation of the Town of Walden, His Brothe^ John.
in the Third Year of King Edward VI. after the Dissolution of the ancient
Fraternity of the Holy Trinity of the said Town, by Virtue of an Act of
Parliament in the first of the said King, mentioned before. The Corporation
then founded by that King's Letters Patents bore the Name (as the old
Fraternity or Guild had done) of Treasurer and two Chamberlains, who were
Justices of Peace, and Four and Twenty Aldermen; which now, by a later Charter,
is changed into a Mayor and Twelve Aldermen, In those Letters Patents the said
John Smith junior was nominated the first Treasurer of the said Corporation. In
the Chamber where the Town-Writings of Walden are kept, there is a Book,
containing their Bylaws, which bears the Title of Ordinances and Statutes for
the Corporation of the Town of Walden upon the new Erection of the same. From
thence is extracted what is abovesaid. Another piece of good Service done by
the said John to the Town, was, That when an ancient Almshouse, founded Anno
1400. the Lands of which were swallowed up and lost, being given to the King by
Act of Parliament, as an Appendent, perhaps, of the Guild, the Parishioners
made Suit to him in behalf thereof by this John Smith, who, by means of his
Brother, our Sir Tho. Smith, then Secretary of State, obtained Letters Patents
from the King, dated Feb. 18. in the Third of his Reign, That he the said John
Smith, being then Teasurer, and William Strachy the younger, and Thomas
Williamson, then Chamberlains, and their Successors, might found, erect, etc.
an Almshouse, with one Master and his Brother, etc. and that it should be
called King Edward 's Almshouse. I can give no Account of this Branch of the
Family, unless perhaps it was that Stock of the Smiths, that lived long in
Little Walden upon a moderate Living there; which now is gone out of the Name,
and possessed at present by the Reverend Dr. E. Norton; to whom I am beholden
for communicating what is here written of this Brother of Sir Thomas, with some
other things relating to the Town of Walden.

His younger Brother George followed the Calling of a Merchant of London,
living in a House of his Brother Thomas's in Philpot-lane, while he remained at
Cambridge. His Brother George a Merchant,
And as his Money came in there, he used to send it to his said Brother to mend
his Stock, without taking a Penny or Halfpenny Advantage in consideration of
his Loan, the better to assist him in carrying on his Traffic, as Sir Thomas
wrote somewhere, to justify himself from an Imputation of Covetousness,
charged upon him once by the Duchess of Somerset, when he lived in her Family.

Where our Youth's tender Years were formed I cannot assign; His School.
but I conclude it to be at the old School in his Native Town of Walden; which
afterward, by his Interest at the Court, he got advanced unto a Royal
Foundation, with good Endowment from the King his Master, in the Third Year of
his Reign; when he granted to the School there two Mills, viz. a Corn-mill near
the Town, and a Malt-mill in it; together with all the Emoluments, Tolls and
Benefits accrewing, and an Annuity of Twelve Pounds, issuing out of the Manor
of Willingale Spane in Essex, for the Maintenance and Support of the said
School. This seems to be but a Grafting upon the ancient School here: For I
have received from the Reverend Person abovementioned, the present Vicar of
Walden, and he from the Inspection of the Town-Writings, That there was
anciently a School in this place, and a Master and Usher over it; and that it
was governed by diverse excellent Orders for its Six Forms; and that in the 14th
Year of King Henry VIII. one Dame Jane Bradbury (for why should these old
Memorials be lost?) settled 10. l. per Annum upon it: That there was also a
Tripartite Indenture for the said School, dated Aug. 24. betwixt Dame Jane
Bradbury Widow, Sister to John Leche, late Vicar of Walden, and the Treasurer
and Chamberlains of the Guild of the Holy Trinity in the Parish Church of
Walden, and the Abbot and Convent of the Monastery of the same Town: And that
one William Cawson had behaved himself so well in singing Mass, and in teaching
the School, that he was elected when it was made a Free School; and he was
obliged to teach Grammar after the Form of Winchester and Eaton; and to teach
freely the Children that were born in Walden, Little Chesterford, Newport and
Widdington, and the Children and Kinsfolk of the said Dame Jane.

An. 1526.
We are in Obscurity concerning the Towardliness of Smith's young Years, and
those Sparks of Aptness, Removed to the University
Ingenuity and Virtue that then appeared in him; which yet we may take for
granted from his early remove to the University of Cambridge: For, according to
the nearest Computation I can make, he was transplanted thither at the Age of
14 or 15 Years at the most.

Distribution of this History
And having brought him thus far, to enter now upon our Remarks of him, and to
unveil who and what this Man was, whom I have raised, as it were, from the
Shades, now after an Hundred Years and more, to set him before this present
Age, as a Pattern of true Honor, Virtue and Generosity; We shall take a
fourfold View of him.

I. At the University, where his Learning made him famed. II. Under King
Edward, when he became a Courtier. III. Under Queen Mary, when he concealed
himself, and lived in a private Capacity. IV. Under Queen Elizabeth, when after
she had much employed him in her Service, both in her own and Foreign Courts,
he piously concluded his useful Life.
CHAP. II. Sent to Queen's College in Cambridge: Chosen a King's Scholar: Reads
the Greek Lecture: And rectifies the Pronunciation: University Orator: His
Applause.
He was admitted in Queen's College in the aforesaid University; Entered at
Queen's College.
a College then reckoned in the Rank of those Houses that Savoured Erasmus and
Luther, and harbored such as consorted privately together to confer about
Religion, purged from the Abuses of the Schools, and the Superstitions of
Popery. Of this House was Foreman, who hid Luther's Books, when Search was made
in the College for them; and Heyns, an ancient Friend of the Gospel, and
Sufferer for it; afterward Master of the College, and Dean of Exeter, and one
of those who in King Edward's Reign was chosen to assist at the compiling of
the English Communion Book. And perhaps Erasmus and his Writings were more
particularly favored here, that most Learned Man, having not long before
resided in this House. These might have been some Advantages to ground young
Smith in Principles of Religion and sound Knowledge.

King Henry 's Sch^lar.
While he was thus a Student here, such Notice was taken of his Parts and
Hopefulness, that the Knowledge of him came to K. Henry, who according to the
Custom of the Princes of England in those Times, chose him, and John Cheke of
St. John's College in the same University, afterward Tutor to Prince Edward
his Son, to be his Scholars, and allotted them Salaries out of his Revenues for
their Encouragement in their Studies; whereby Smith became assisted to bear his
Charges in the University, but especially in his Travels abroad. Cheke makes
mention of this Honor done to them both, Cheke.
in an Epistle to that King before his Edition of Chrysostom's two Homilies,
which he first published from a Manuscript, and translated into Latin, wherein
he has these words: Coaptasti me and Thomam Smithum, Socium and Aequalem meum
in Scholasticos tuos, i. e. Your Majesty chose me, and Tho. Smith my Companion
and Equal, for your own Scholars. And Smith also takes occasion to make a
grateful mention of it to Bishop Gardener in the Controversy about the right
pronouncing of the Greek, (of which we shall hear by and by) and thus describes
himself and his said Fellow: Quos par aetas, conditio similis, eadem ratio
studiorum, and parilis in utrumque Regia Benignitas, and perpetua quaedam
comparatio ingeniorum and aemulatio, quae solet inter caeteros invidiam and
dissensionem excitare, conjunctissime semper hactenus copulavit, and fraterno
amore constrinxit, i. e. That Equality of Age and Conditions, the same Course
of Studies, and the Royal Bounty equally exhibited to us, and the continual
vying with one another, and Emulation of our Parts and Wits, which in others is
wont to kindle Envy and Dissension, hitherto has united us closely, and tied
us both together in Love as Brothers. But for this Royal distinguishing Favor
they were envied by many in the University. And this was thought to be a
Reason, that there was such an Opposition made to that new correct way of
sounding Greek Words, which they first brought in. Which occasioned Smith to
say, De rect. pronunciat.
Let it not offend any, that we are the King's Scholars, and are so called; and
that his Majesty does not altogether despise us: That we profess under the
happy Auspice and Salary of the most Learned and Potent Prince.

These two proved afterward an incomparable Pair of Christian Philosophers;
and, as long as they were in Cambridge, continuing their Fame for Learning.
What first gave occasion to his Studies.
Many Years after one that knew them well, and that University, (I mean Dr.
Haddon) said of them, That such they had been, and still remained, that none of
that University could compare with them, nor, in his Judgment, any Foreigners
whatsoever. And it must not be passed over what gave one of the first occasions
to the Studies that improved them to such Degrees of Learning. Ascham's
Sc^oolmast.
I. Redman, D.D. and Master of Trinity College, but formerly of St. John's,
returning from beyond Seas, where he studied in some Foreign Universities, and
chiefly at Paris, brought home with him the Knowledge of the Latin and Greek
Tongues, and was well versed in Tully. Smith and his Companion, who were then
very young, (for it was about the Year 1531.) were stirred up with a kind of
Impulse and Emulation of his Learning, and the Honor that was on that account
daily done unto him. And being desirous to follow him and his Learning, they
threw aside their Barbarisms, and applied themselves to the reading of Plato,
Demosthenes, Aristotle, and Cicero.

An. 1531.
Smith's Diligence soon procured him to be preferred in the College, where he
was afterward to make a great Figure, Made Fellow.
and prove a most Eminent Ornament; being made Fellow in the Year 1531. then
but Nineteen Years of Age.

Scarce had two Years passed, An. 1533. K. Henry 8.
but Smith had acquired such good Skill in Greek, that he was called to read
the Public Greek Lectures, when his Learned Fellow Cheke studied and read them
more privately. Reads the Greek Lecture.
And from them we may date the Time, that the Knowledge of Greek, and the true
florid Elocution of it commenced in this, nay, and all other Nations. Custom
had now prevailed in a very improper and false sounding of certain Greek Vowels
and Diphthongs. For Men now pronounced (...), all as (...). This exceedingly
disparaged the Pronunciation of that noble Language: Nihil fere aliud haberet
ad loquendum, nisi lugubres sonos, and illud slebile (...). Smith de
Pronunciatione rect.
When the Reader had almost nothing else to speak but lamentable Sounds, and
that piteous Vowel I. as Smith himself complained.

Smith and Cheke began at last to confer together seriously about this matter,
An. 1535.
it being now the Year 1535. Consults with Cheke about the Sounds of Greek.
They well perceived how the vulgar sounding of the Greek was, and concluded it
evidently false, that so many different Letters and Diphthongs should have but
one and the same Sound. And a difficult thing they found it to teach this
Tongue well, by reason of this great and absurd Confusion. They proceeded to
search Authors, if perhaps thence any certainty might be taken up. But the
Modern Writers did but little avail them. For Erasmus they had not yet seen,
who had in a Book found fault with the common reading of the Greek. But though
both saw these palpable Errors, they could not agree among themselves; but one
thought one thing, and another another; especially concerning the Letters (...)
and (...). They both dreaded the Effects of an unusual Sound, which, by reason
of the Novelty, would be hard and hateful. A little after having gotten Erasmus
and Terentianus (an Author that wrote De Literis and Syllabis) they privately
made many Corrections, and meditated diligently within the Walls of their own
Studies a more emendate manner of speaking; but did not adventure yet to bring
it into Light, nor communicate it to any, but those whose intimate Familiarity
and Friendship made them Partakers of their Studies.

Brings in a new way of pronouncing Greek.
When this new Utterance of Greek was sufficiently conquered and inured to them
by private use, and did daily more and more please them, by reason of that
Fullness and Sweetness that they apprehended in it, they thought good then to
make Trial of it publicly. It was agreed that Smith should begin. He read at
that time Aristotle de Republica, in Greek, as he had done some Years before.
And that the Roughness of a new Pronunciation might give the less Offense, he
used some Craft, which was this, That in his Reading he would let fall a Word
only now and then uttered in the new correct Sound. Which he did for this end,
That if his Auditors utterly refused his Words thus pronounced, then he
reckoned he ought to defer his purpose for some longer time; and accordingly so
he intended to do: But if they received them with a good Will, then he would
the more speedily go on with his Innovation. But behold the Issue! At first no
Notice was taken of it; but when he did it oftener, they began to observe, and
listen more attentively. And when Smith had often inculcated (...) and (...) as
E and OI, they who three Years before had heard him sound them frequently
uncorrectly after the old way, could not think it was a Lapse of his Tongue,
but suspected something else, and laughed at the unusual Sounds. He again, as
though^ his Tongue had slipped, would sometimes correct himself, and say the
Word over again after the old manner. But when he did this daily, and, as
appeared, every day, the corrected Sounds flowed from him more and more, some
of his Friends came to him, and told him what they noted in his Lectures. Smith
now cared not to dissemble, but owned that he had been thinking of something
privately, but that it was not yet enough digested and prepared for the
Public. They, on the other hand, prayed him not to conceal it from them, but
to tell them without any grudging. Whereupon he promised he would. Upon this
Rumor many came together, and repaired to him; whom he required only to hear
his Reasons, and to have Patience with him three or four Days at most, until
the Sounds, by Use, were made more trite to their Ears, and the Prejudice of
Novelty more worn off. And so by little and little he explained to them the
whole Reason of the Sounds. Many went to Cheke, and related to him Smith's
Discourses; and others resorted to others, according as they esteemed them to
be Men of Judgment in this matter. These thought some one thing, some another;
Cheke assented.

Reads privately in his College.
At this very time Smith read upon one of Homer's Odysses at home in the
College. There he began more plainly and openly to show and determine the
Difference of these Sounds. Then many came, that they might the more easily
learn of him viv^ v^ce to frame their Tongues, and utter the true Sounds. The
same did Cheke in his College. It is not to be expressed with what Greediness
and Affection this was received among the Youth, and how gladly they agreed to
it. The following Winter in St. John's College was acted the Greek Play of
Aristophanes, called Plutus, in this Pronunciation, and one or two more of his
Comedies; when among those that professed Greek, and were esteemed Learned Men,
it was observed there was not so much as one that signified any Dislike, or
showed any Opposition.

Smith 's c^^r^ct way of sounding the Greek preva^^s in the University.
John Ponet, a Learned and Ingenious young Man, and Smith's Scholar (afterward
Bishop of Winton) seems to have succeeded his Tutor in this Place: For he read
Greek in the Schools in the Name of the University near this time, and followed
his Masters way of sounding Greek Words. Next him came into this Place Ascham
of St. John's, a Person of like Wit and Diligence; who read Isocrates. He, in
the beginning of his Lectures, contended with Ponet about this way of
pronouncing, (...) ^53%. K. (...)
and ref^s^^ to follow it: But because of the Authority that Cheke and Smith
had gained in the University, he would not reprove it openly. Yet was it not
long after, that he became a very eager Defender of this very thing, and so
remained. Thus in a few Years had this correct way of reading Greek, introduced
by Smith, prevailed all the University over. And which was more remarkable, it
was consented to by John Redman, Public Professor and Reader of Divinity, of
great Honor and Deference in the University for his Learning, Integrity of
Life, and Gravity of Manners; who, when at any time in his Reading he all^dg^d
a Text in Greek, used to read it after the correct Pronunciation. And thus by
Smith's Pains and Endeavors, never to be forgotten by Posterity, was the Noble
Greek ^ong^e restored to it self, as it was spok^n in the Times when Greece
flourished, and brought forth Plato, Dionysius, Plutarchus, D^mosthenes,
Thucydides, and others. Out of whose Writings, he had Cheke produced
Authorities that they pronounced the Greek as he taught. And by this revived
Pronounciation was displayed the Flower and Plentifulness of that Language, the
Variety of Sounds, the Grandeur of Diphthongs, the Majesty of long Letters, and
the Grace of distinct Speech.

And as the University laid that Honor upon him, M^d^ University Orator.
of making himself their Greek Reader, so they gave him the Office of their
Orator. In his Greek Lectures, among other good Authors (as Aristotle and
Homer) he read Socrates and Euripides for Philosophy and Morality. An. 1536. K.
Henry 8.
His Oratory and Learning intermixed was so admirable, and beyond the common
Strain, that Queen's College carried away the Glory for Eloquence from all the
Colleges in the University besides, and was rendered so famous by this her
Scholar, that it had like to have changed her Name from Queen's to Smith's
College. Unius Eloquio sic jam Reginea tecta
Florebant, quasi quae vellent SMITHE A vocari.
Sic reliquos inter Socios Caput extulit unus. As Gabriel Harvey, Musar.
Lachrymae.
Smith's Townsman, and one that knew him well, writes upon his Death.


His Lectures flocked to.
Such was the Fame of his Lectures, that not only his own private College, but
all the University, Learned and less Learned, Young and Old, flocked to hear
him. So writes the same Author: -- Pendebat ab ore
Unius privata domus, Schola publica, docti,
Indocti, Schola tota Virum, Schola tota Puellum.
And the Learnedest and Gravest Men, and his Seniors, and the choicest Wits of
the University, would be present when he read, and sit there as his Scholars:
As, Redman, Cox, Cheke, Cecil, (he that afterward was Lord Treasurer) Haddon,
Ascham, Car, Tongue, Bill, Wilson, Goldwel, Watson, etc. Men of great Name
afterward in Church and State. Felix qui p^tuit Smitho auscultare loquenti:
Sive illi Graece dicendum, sive Latin.
And happy he that might hear Smith speak, whether it were in Greek or Latin.
Thus he continued diverse Years in the University, till he was succeeded in the
Place of Orator by his Fellow and Friend John Cheke, and he by Roger Ascham,
another curiously Learned Man, in the Year 1544.

CHAP. III. He Travels: His Conferences with Learned Men at Orleans and Paris:
Takes his Degree at Padua: Returns Home: His Usefulness at the University: The
Controversy there arisen about his way of pronouncing Greek.
SMITH, An. 1539.
having now arrived at some Maturity of Knowledge and Learning, He goes abroad.
and in the Seven and Twentieth Year of his Age, (it being now the Year of our
Lord 1539.) went abroad to Travel, for the further improvement of himself in
polite Learning, elegant Language, Skill in the Modern Tongues, and Experience
of the Customs and Laws of other Countries. A thing commonly practiced by
Scholars in these times, to study sometime at Foreign Universities in France
and Italy, which used then to be replenished with very Learned Professors.
Being abroad, he took notice of the different Ways of speaking Latin; which,
although he did not like, especially the French, who sounded Latin very
corruptly, yet he conformed himself to their manner of Speech. And when he came
into Italy, he followed them there in pronouncing some Letters, different from
our way; as when he came home he returned to speak as his Countrymen did.

Confers with the Professor at Orleans,
But at Orleans he became acquainted with Christophorus Landrinus, a sharp and
diligent Man, samed for his Skill both in Latin and Greek, and Reader of both
Tongues in that City, encouraged with a noble Salary given him by the Duke of
Orleans. While he and Smith conferred together of Studies (as he was court^ous
to all, but especially obliging to Learned Strangers) they ^ell at length upon
the Greek Learning: Here Smith took occasion to mention the manner of
Pronuncia^^on, lately by him taught at Cambridge; and having explained to him
the whole Manner and Account of it, it cannot be expressed with what
Willingness, nay, Greediness, he received it, giving his ready Assent and
Approbation to it, not only in Words, but in Experiment and Deeds; ever after
following the same Course in his teaching.

After some Months he departed from Orleans to Paris, to wait for the Return of
Mon^y, and to receive his Allowance to defray the Charges of his Journey to
Italy. And a^ Paris with Strazelius,
But being forced to tarry there somewhat long for Letters, and weary of doing
nothing, he thought he might more profitably spend his Leisure time in reading
some Lecture publicly, and especially in Greek. This he communicated to
Strazelius, the King's Professor of the Greek Tongue there. But as yet they
came to no Resolution what Book to read upon. Nor, indeed, did the Professor
much encourage Smith to read at all: Because, as he told him, Paris did abound
with Readers; and that there were many Lectures in Greek, though none of the
best. He added, (...) that Person was honored with Audito^^, (...) that City,
not that did most lear^^d^^ (...) his Author, but that could obtain the great
Favor, and was best known a rong the (...) ple. But yet the Professor (...)
him, if he had Confidence of himself, that he mig^^ show himself before the
People. This cooled our Scholar; and now he objected, That h^ should not tarry
long there; and than there was another thing that discouraged him from ^^ading
Greek: For that, he being a Stranger, and not well skilled either in the French
Tongue, or the Customs, might expose himself to Envy; which is wont to
accompany all them that profess something different from the rest. The
Professor asked what that was. Smith answered, His Pronounciation; which, he
said, was almost quite different from theirs, which he heard there, especially
in some Letters and Diphthongs; to which, as he added, he had so accustomed
himself, that he could not easily leave it, if he would; nor indeed would he,
if he could; so far near did it come to Truth, and the Use of the Ancients, and
the Nature of Sounds; and now that he was accustomed to it, it seemed more
pleasant and easy. I understand, answered Strazelius, what you say to be that
Pronunciation that Erasmus pursued in a little Comment of his. That very
Pronunciation, replied Smith. For it is most evident that this Pronunciation of
yours is corrupt; and it is very easily proved, that the Ancients spoke
otherwise, and made a Difference where now none at all appears. Then for Proof
he produced that concerning (...), in Aristophanes, resembling the bellowing of
an Ox; and (...), out of Suidas, representing the bleating of a Sheep: Which
would not intimate either, if the former Word were read Aminia, and the latter
Bibi, according to that present vulgar Pronouncing. And several other
Authorities did Smith give, from whence he gathered, that the Sounds of the
common Readers of Greek were not the same which the Ancients in Greece used. It
is certain, said Strazelius, there be many Reasons and Conjectures in favor of
what you urge, and that place out of Aristophanes is clear. Yet they that hold
the contrary Opinion are not altogether destitute of Conjectures too. For my
part, added the Professor, I am contented with the present Sound such as it is.
I have had no mind to strive about any new Matter. And if you should attempt
any such thing, I know not how they that shall hear you, would take it, having
been always brought up in another way of Pronunciation. And to speak freely (as
he went on) these Contests about the Sounds of Words are Pedantic, and more
sitting for Schoolmasters: We promise our selves, some greater things from
you, whom we have heard to be well Versed in all kind of Philosophy. Nor would
I have you in so slight a matter provoke them here, that of themselves are too
apt to envy the Praises of others. Smith acknowledged he counseled him well,
and like a Friend, and added, that he would wait till his Money came; and if it
chanced, that he stayed any considerable time, seeing he was not bound to Read
there, he would sometimes, and according as he had leisure, consider upon these
things.

Smith, still remaining in Paris, And a Grecian.
made a Visit to a Learned Greek, that sojourned at that time in Bernard's
Cloister, a Courteous and a^fable Man. His chief Business with him was to be
satisfied from him what Sounds the Grecians themselves in Greece did use. And
by and by, when Smith began to speak of the new way, the Greek grew angry, and
called Erasmus Badin, (a French Word, though otherwise he spoke little French,
and for the most part Italian) that he being a Dutchman, had brought into
Greece, whence they were sprung, such vast Sounds, as he expressed himself, and
Absenous Diphthongs. The Dispute betw^en them could not hold long, because
Smith understood but little French, and the Greek Gentleman not much more, but
Latin he und^rstood not at all. And when he spoke Greek, although he was a very
Learned Man, yet he stuffed in so much of his vulgar Greek, that Smith could
not well understand him. And so he departed from him.

travels to Italy.
From France, our Scholar proceeded forward toward Italy; and settled himself at
Padue; studying there for some time in the Civil Law, to qualify him for State
Affairs, (for which the King designed him) and went out in the same University
Doctor of that Faculty.

Coming home, he retired to his old College a very accomplished Person. An.
1542.
In the Year 1542. Made Regius Professor of the Civil Law.
being now Thirty Years of Age, he took the Degree of Dr. of the Civil Law in
Cambridge, and was made the King's Professor in that Faculty, Wiggin being then
the King's Professor of Divinity, Cheke of the Greek Tongue, Wakefield of the
Hebrew; and Blithe, who had Married Cheke's Sister, of Physic.

A general Scholar.
A Smith had sufficiently showed himself a Grecian and an Orator; so his large
mind prompted him to make himself Master of all other kinds of useful Learning.
And he was reckoned the best Scholar in the University, not only for Rhetoric
and the Learned Languages, but for Mathematics, Arithmetic, Law, Natural and
Moral Philosophy: As one of the same University before mentioned, and that was
not long after him in time, sets out the common Vogue he bore there.

Quis primus Rhetor? Musar. Lacrymae.
Smithus. Quis maximus Hermes
Linguarum? Smithus. Geometres? Smithus and idem.
Summus Arithmeticus? Smithus. Legumque peritus
Ante alios? Smithus. Physicus celeberrimus? Ohe!
Smithus multiscius. Morumque Vitaeque Magister
Optimus? Et Smithus.
Remaining in the University, Chancellor to the Bishop of Ely.
he became Chancellor to Goodric, Bishop of Ely: Who, being himself a Learned
Man, and a favourer of the Gospel, chose such Officers about him. Such another
was Dr. Cox, who was his Chaplain; the same that was the first Instructor to
Prince Edward, and after Dean of Christ's Church in Oxford, and Chancellor of
that University; and at last Bishop of Ely, under Queen Elizabeth.

Whilst Smith lived in the College, Breed of Pupils.
he spent not his Time in Sloth and Ease, nor indulged himself to a lazy
unprofitable Life, but made himself useful and serviceable to the University in
many respects. One was in breeding up Young Men in Literature and ^^od Manners,
being his Pupils. Many of whom were of the best Rank and Quality. He was Tutor
to Edward Earl of Oxford, a Nobleman, who afterward proved of excellent
Abilities and Learning, but too much addicted to Prodigality. Sir William
Cecil, Master of the Wards and liveries, took this Young Nobleman, being a
Ward, under his peculiar Care: And in the Family with him was also another
Earl, namely of Rutland, being also a Ward. And when in the Year, 1563. Dr.
Smith, (then a Knight) was the Queen's Ambassador in France, the said Cecil,
wrote him how the former Earl, whom he styled His Scholar, had learned to
understand French very well; and that he was desirous to have an honest
Qualified Frenchman to attend upon him, and the other Earl, for the Exercise
and Speech of the Tongue. He directed Smith, that he should be one honest in
Religion, civil in Manners, learned in some Science, and not unpersonable. And
if he were worthy L. or LX. Crowns by Year, he would be ruled by him, the said
Smith. And withal, he prayed him to provide some good Rider for these Noble
Wards, (which Riders in those days commonly were Italians) and he would give
him xx l. by Year, if Smith should so judge him worthy. And Sir Thomas was glad
to be thus employed, to contribute to the generous Education of all Noble
Youth, for the good of the Commonwealth, as well as of the Earl, that once had
been his Pupil. Under him also was bred John Ponet, that Learned Man, who wrote
many excellent Books, Mathematical, and other, became Chaplain to Archbishop
Cranmer, and was preferred by King Edward VI. to be Bishop of Rochester, and
after of Winchester.

Smith, Refines the English Writing.
was also, during his Residence in Cambridge, a great Refiner of the English
Writing: Which to these times was too rough and unpolished, and little care
taken thereof, as may be seen by such as converse in the Writings of Men even
of Learning in those Days. He was noted to be one of the Three there, that were
the great Masters of the English Tongue. Ascham.
And so one of the floridest Members of that University, wrote to his
Correspondent John Sturmius at Strasburgh, upon occasion of a Book he had wrote
in English of the Education of Children, called Praeceptor, i. e. The
Schoolmaster. Which Argument, he said, was not so dry and barren, Quin Anglice
etiam (...), possit, si in artificem aliquem, qualis fuit Checus noster, and
sunt adhuc apud nos Smithus Haddonus, incidisset; But it might have been
written floridly in English, had it happened upon some Artist, such as Cheke
was (who now was gone) or Smith or Haddon, that still were with them at
Cambridge: Being a Language very capable of all the Ornaments both of Words and
Sentences.

About, or near this Time it was, A tract by him writ for that purpose.
That Smith wrote a Tract concerning correct Writing of English, and the true
sounding of the Letters and Words. That which he found fault with in our
Language was that ill and improper writing of it. As for instance in these
Words, Please, Son, Moon, Hemme, Clean, To, Toe, Mean. In which Words, he
said, those Sounds are not comprehended which we express: And in some of them
the Syllables are stuffed with needless Letters. Which Letters by themselves
have their certain Natures, as he observed, and that being joined after that
manner, have not that Force which they ought to have. And again, in other
Words, he took notice we had no Letter which express that which we spoke, and
therefore he thought it necessary to have more Letters. So he framed Twenty
nine Letters: Whereof Nineteen were Roman, Four Greek, and Six English or
Saxon. The Five Vowels he augmented into Ten, distinguishing them into Long and
Short, making certain Accents over, or on the side of them, that were to be
pronounced Long. It is worth seeing Smith's new Alphabet, wherein might be
observed that he allowed no Diphthongs, nor double Consonants, nor any E's at
the end of Words, being not sounded. He had a good mind to throw out utterly,
and banish from the Alphabeth the Letter Q. as useless, Ku expressing the full
power of Qu, for without the Vowel U, the Letter Q is never written. And the
same uselesness he found to be in the Letter C. for it is ever expressed either
by K or by S. But he retained it in his Alphabeth to serve instead of Chapter This
Alphabeth may be found in the Appendix. Numb. II.


And as he promoted the refining of the use of the English Tongue, so also of
the Greek, together with Cheke, Professor also of that Language after him: Who
labored to amend and rectify the evil and false way of pronouncing diverse
Consonants, Rectifies the Pronunciation of Greek.
Vowels and Diphthongs. What this untoward way of reading Greek was, we may in
part guess at by one Word, viz. Ku(...) which was commonly sounded, Chiverno:
Wherein, as Ascham showed to Hubert, a Learned Foreigner, in a Dissertation
with him upon this Argument, there were no less than three erroneous Soundings
in three Letters, (...). In short, (...), and (...), and (...) and (...), were
not distinguished from the sound of (...). But all has one and same sound of I,
as was shown before.

This proved a great Academic Controversy. A Controversy arises in the
University hereupon.
For though for four Years, Smith's new way of reading Greek was quietly and
gladly received, yet afterward by the means of some turbulent Men, it received
great Opposition. And certain there were that began to make a great Hubbuh
against it, Cheke Greek Lecturer.
and against Cheke, who was now by the King his Master appointed his Reader of
Greek. For to fetch the Matter a little backward, about the Year 1539. near the
Time of Smith's departure to travel, the King's Greek Lecture was committed to
Cheke, He, in the beginning of his Lecture, the better to prepare the Minds of
his Auditors to rereceive true benefit by his Readings, declaimed for six Days
together concerning the more correct sound of Letters. But on a sudden, one
Ratecliff, a Scholar in the University, stood up and declared that he would
oppose him; being instigated by such, as had no more Wit than himself. Cheke
had no need to fear him, whom all knew understood little Greek, and whom none
thought a Man sit to be refuted, or dealt with as a considerable Adversary. Yet
some were for hearing him, to make Sport. The Magistrate, to whom the
Scurrility of the Man well known, thought he ought in time to be restrained.
Nethertheless he went up to read somewhat, and having spoke a little, he was so
laughed at by the Boys, so exploded and hissed, and so tossed in the Crowd
which came together in a great Assembly to laugh rather than to hear, that his
own Friends were ashamed of him; and he himself repented him of his Folly;
Frontis nihil and Cerebri parum.
though he had but little Modesty and less Brains, according as Smith described
him; for I have related all this from his Book. But Ratecliff's Setters on
brought this Matter to Bishop Gardener the Chancellor, and told the Tale so
fairly on his Side, that the Bishop afterward objected this Man and his
Reading unto Cheke's Party. But, says Smith, his Lordship had never done this,
had they, who named him to the Bishop, declared what kind of Man he was, of
what Wit, of what Nature, of what Prudence, Gravity, Modesty and Learning; that
is to say, none at all. After this Fellow was gone, there was Peace, Quiet and
Silence concerning these Matters, and in great fervor and industry the Youth of
Cambridge Learned Greek, until the Bishop's Decree, which we shall hear of by
and by.

But all the blame of this new Pronunciation lay upon Cheke. Cheke clamoured
against for it.
He was the Man now cried out against as arrogant, proud and daring, and guilty
of high Crimes: And the Chancellor rebuked him. And all the Storm that light
upon Smith all this while was, that he was accused to have been an Abetter, and
one that approved of Cheke's Doings. But Smith was not afraid of all this
Noise, and generously took the thing upon himself, that he might take off some
of the Odium from his Friend Cheke. And so he freely told the Chancellor, I was
his Fellow and Partaker in this Matter; Quia moderati and magni animi esse
putavi Laudem ac Gloriam negligere, perfidi and ignavi, amicum in periculis
deserere. Humilem and dejectum hominem existimo, qui ex recte factit Invidiam
non posse far. Veteratorem ac senilis Ingenij virum judico, qui cum ipse
praestare possit, contegi se, ac suum factum, ab aliis patiatur defendi.
nay, I was the Head I suffer it not to be derived upon others, but I take it
in a great part to my self. And that because as I have always esteemed it the
part of a subdued and great Mind, to be negligent of Glory and Praise, so but a
trick of Treachery and Sloth, to forsake a Friend in Danger. I hold him of a
mean and abject Spirit, that cannot bear the Envy that attends worthy Actions:
And I judge that Man but a wily Knave, who, when he can do it, will conceal
himself, and suffer othersto defend what he has done.

Now did Bishop Gardener, the Chancellor of the University interpose his
Authority. For being against all Innovation, as well as Innovation in Religion,
The Decree of the Chancellor.
and observing these Endeavors in Cambridge, of introducing a more correct and
true Pronunciation of the Greek, and this, by such as he suspected to be no
Friends to the old Papal Superstitions, he made a solemn Decree against this
new Way, and that the old should be inviolably observed by all the Scholars for
the Time to come. Cheke was very earnest with the Chancellor to allow of these
rectified Sounds, and supersede and wink at his former Decree; but he would by
no means alter it, and peremptorily enjoined him to read the Greek after the
ancient rude way, urging to him the great Evil and Danger of Innovation.

Smith's Compliance.
About this time it was, that Dr. Smith, upon this or some other occasion,
repaired to the Bishop then at the Court at Hampton Court, and seeing his
Resolution, thought not sit to stir the Coals, but after a mild and ingenious
way, told the Bishop, that for his part he could read both ways, the new and
the old, that he might offend none for such a matter, as a particular Mode of
pronouncing was. That he knew, Balbutire, modo idem siquando usus sit expedite
loquatur, etiam laudi dandum est, that is, That even Stammering deserved
Praise, if so be he that did so, when need was, would speak smoothly: According
to that of the Apostle, I am Debtor both to Fo^ls and Wise,Thus pleasingly did
Smith comply with the Bishop, and yet tacitly gave him a Reproof for his
obstinate urging so blameworthy a Thing, and checking so laudable an
Enterprise.

Smith's mind still was the same. His Epistle to the Bishop upon this Argument.
For when he came home, (which was about the Month of July) he recollected his
Discourse with the Bishop, and the Bishops with him; and in a large eloquent
Epistle, privately sent to him, argued with much freedom the Points in
Controversy between them. Which Epistle, (full of Excellent Learning) consisted
of three parts. In the first, he showed what was to be called true and right in
the whole Method of Sounds and Pronunciation, and retrieved this from the
common and present Use, and out of the hands both of the Ignorant and Learned
that lived at that time, and placed it with the Ancients; restoring to them
their Right and Authority, propounding them as the best and only Pattern in the
whole Case of the Greek Tongue to be imitated by all Posterity. In the second,
he compared the old and the new Pronunciation with that Pattern, that the
Chancellor might see whether of the two came nearer thereunto, or strayed
farthest from it. That so by this, Judgment might appear, what was to be
corrected, and what followed. In the third Part, he explained by the Story of
the past time the whole Account of his Doing in this Affair, that his Lordship
might understand, that if there were nothing therein worthy to be commended,
nothing at least deserved to be reproved. Concluding with all Deference and
profound Respect to this naughty Man, (for his Temper Smith very well knew) in
these Words: However the Matter falls out, we will remain at your Command. To
your Authority I shall ever attribute as much as any Student of Law (as Smith
was) ought to give to a most Learned Prelate, and Chancellor of an University.
And so much I shall yield unto your Arguments as the truth of the Cause, and
the weight of Reasons shall require. But in every thing we shall according to
our Power maintain our Duty to you, gently respect and obey our Magistrate, and
ardently Love your Lordship.

From Cambridge Augustthe 12th, 1542.

This Epistle he afterward, while he was Ambassador at Paris, caused to be
Printed there in Quarto, Anno 1568. Entitled, De recta and emendata Linguae
Graecae Pronunciatione: Together with his other Tract of the right Sounding and
Writing of English. Both Printed in Latin by Robert Stevens, the FrenchKing's
Printer, in one Volume.

A late (...) of Basil, stands up for the ad S^an^^.
To conclude this Matter, I cannot omit to mention, that however correct this
new way of Pronouncing Greek was, and generally afterward received, a late
Learned Professor of that Language in Basil, named Witstein, made an Oration in
that University, lately Printed, to confute it, and to revive the old exploded
Sounds.

And as he was thus useful to Learning in the University, so he was also to
Religion. He was bred up in the Protestant Doctrine (a pretty rare matter in
those Times) and he never flinched from it. Religion pro^^^^ity him in the
University.
All his Kindred of his Father's side were neither Neutrals nor Papists (as he
wrote somewhere of himself) all enclining to the Truth and Gospel, Old and
Young, and so known and noted. This he wrote to some, because certain
Backbiters in King Edward's Days had charged him to have been a Neutral. The
Reason whereof seemed to be because he did not run so fast in the Reformation
under that King, as some Hotspurs would have him, who knew not what the matter
meant. For he was publicly known to be a Protestant in the time of King H^nry
VIII. living then in Cambridge, and being there in place of Eminence, when the
Bishop of Winchester, the Chancellor of that University, was severe toward
those that professed the Gospel, and threatened Fire and Faggot-bearing; Smith
publicly defended them, and opposed those rigorous Methods, and staved off
many. And this he did before all Cambridge, and all the Justices of Peace in
the Shire, and saved many, and so continued. He stood up and pleaded for the
Professors and Profession of the Gospel publicly, both in the University
before all the Learned Men; and not only so, but in the Convocation before all
the Bishops, and in the ParliamentHouse before the Lords and Commons, as he
writ in Vindication of himself.

An. 1546. K. Henry 8.
And being a Man of Reputation among them, the University made use of him once
as their Messenger and Advocate to the Court, to address to Queen Katharine
Par; He addresseth to the Queen in (...) of Cambridge.
to whom he brought their Letters, beseeching her Intercession to the King on
their behalf, being now, as they apprehended, in imminent Jeopardy. For the
Parliament in the 37th, that is, that last Year of that King's Reign, had given
him all the Colleges in the Kingdom; whereat the University was sore afraid.
Dr. Smith repaired to that good Queen, entreating her to prevail with his
Majesty, that not withstanding the late Act, they might enjoy their Possessions
as before. And she did, as she was a true Lover and Patroness of Learning and
Religion, effectually apply to the King, and had her Request in that behalf
granted; and to that purport she wrote her Letters to the University, of which
Smith was also the Bringer; wherein she called him their Discreet and Learned
Advocate; and having admonish them, that she would have their University to be
an University of Divine Philosophy, as well as of Natural or Moral, she let
them understand that she had according to their Desire, attempted her Lord the
King's Majesty for the stay of their Possessions; And, That notwithstanding his
Majesty's Property and Interest through the Consent of the High Court of
Parliament, his Highness was such a Patron of good Learning, that he would
rather add, and erect new occasion therefore, than confound those their
Colleges. So that Learning might hereafter ascribe her very Original, whole
Conservation and sure Stay to our Sovereign Lord, as she expressed her self.

In his public Academical Performances he acquitted himself with wonderful
Applause and Admiration of all the Hearers. His Academical Exercises.
And at a Commencement, which happened, as near as I can guess, this Year,
being now the King's Professor, both his Disputations and his Determinations
were such, that Haddon, as good Judge, in a Letter to Dr. Cox, (giving him some
Account of that Commencement, told him, That had he been there, he would have
heard another Socrates; and that he caught the forward Disputants as it were in
a Net with his Questions, and that he concluded the profound Causes of
Philosophy with great Gravity and deep Knowledge.

Dr. Smith's Places and Preserments in Cambridge and elsewhere, (...) at
Cambridge.
as they brought him in tolerably fair Incomes, so they, together with his
Eminent Virtue and Learning, reconciled him great Respect. For he had the
Lecture in the Civil Law, b^ing the King's Professor in that Science; for which
he received 40 l. per Annum. He was Chancellor to the Bishop of Ely, which was
worth to him 50 l. per Annum. Besides, he had a Benefice, viz. of Leverington
in Cambridgeshire, which came to the Value of 36 l. per Annum. So that his
Preferments amounted to 120 l. a Year, and upwards. And such a good Husband he
was, that he made some Purchases before, and some soon after his leaving the
University, as we shall hear by and by.

And this was the Port he lived in before his leaving of Cambridge. His Port.
He kept Three Servants, and Three Guns, and Three Winter Geldings. And this
stood him in 30 l. per Annum, together with his own Board.

CHAP. IV. Smith is removed into the Protector's Family: His Preferments under
King Edward: Made Secretary: Goes an Embassy.
(...). ^^4^. K. (...). 6.
Doctor Smith was often at King Henry's Court, and taken notice of by that King,
and was growing so dear to him, (...) to Court.
as to be received in Place and Office under him, had he lived a little longer.
But soon after K. Henry's Death he was removed from Cambridge into the Duke of
Somerset's Family; where he was employed in Matters of State by that Great Man,
the Uncle and Governor of the King, and Protector of his Realms. Into whose
Family were received many other very Learned and Pious Men.

Addressed so by the University.
Long he had not been here, but the University earnestly addressed to him to
stand their Friend in some certain weighty Matter, wherein not any single Cause
of theirs was in hazard, but themselves and their All. Which, without Question,
An. 1547. K. Edw. 6.
was the Danger the University was in upon the Bill in Agitation in the
Parliament House, for giving the King the Chauntries, Hospitals, Fraternities
and Colleges; which last Word took in the Societies of the Universities. At
which they looked about them, and made all the Friends they could at Court to
save themselves. And as they applied now to Cheke, so to Smith also in this
elegant Latin Epistle, which was drawn up by the exquisite Pen of Ascham their
Orator; wherein may be observed what a general Opinion there went of his
complete Learning:

Si tu is es, Clarissime, SMITHE, Their Letter.
in quem Academia haec Cantabrigiensis universas vires suas, universa Victatis
jura enercuecrit, si tiki uni omnia Doctrinae s^ae genera, omnia Reipub.
Ornamenta licentissime contulerit, si fructura gloriae suae in te uno
jactaverit, si spem Salutis suae in ^^ ^otissimum reposuerit: Age ergo, and
mente-ic cogitatione tua complectere, quid tu vicisson illi debes, quid illa,
quid Literae, quid Respublica, quid Deus ipse pro tantis Vietatis officiis,
quibus sic Dignitas tua efflorescit, justissime requirit: Academia nil debet
tibi, imo omnia sua in te transfudit. Et propterea abs te non simpliciter petit
Benesicium, sed merito repetit Ossicium: nec unam aliquam causam tibi proponit,
sed sua omnia, and seipsam tibi committit. Nec sua necesse habet aparire tibi
consilia, quorum recessus and diverticula nosti universa. Age igitur quod scis,
and velis quod potes, and persice quod debes. Sic Literis, Academiae,
Reipublicae, and Religioni; sic Christo and Principi rem debitam and Expectatam
efficies. JESUS te diutissme servet incolumem.

And this Address had the Success it desired: For the Colleges of the
Universities, and the other Colleges of Learning in the Nation, were spared by
a Proviso, though the aforesaid Bills passed into an Act; which we must
attribute, in good measure, to Smith and his Party stirring in the House to
bring it to pass.

Made Master of Requests to Somerset.
The Lord Protector had set up an Office in his House of a Master of Requests,
for the better care-taking of poor Men's Suits, and for the more effectual
speeding them without the Delays and Charges of Law. In this Office was Dr.
Smith placed, and seems to have been the second Master of Requests to the
Protector, as Cecil was the first.

Other Dignities conferred on (...)
While he was in the Service of this Great Duke, he obtained diverse other
considerable Places: As to be Steward of the Stannaries, Smith being an
excellent Metallist and Chemist: Provost of Eaton College, wherewith he was
very well pleased; where, whether he were present or absent, there was always
good Hospitality kept: Dean of the Cathedral Church of Carlisle, being at least
in Deacons Orders. And at last, Secretary of State to the King with a
Knighthood.

By this time he had purchased two Houses; His Purchases.
one in Channon-Row: Which he bought for Two hundred Mark of Sir Ralph Sadleir,
sometime Secretary of State to King Henry, which he Let to Mr. Comptroller for
30 l. per Ann. And here he lived himself in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: And
this was the House where the Commissioners met in the first Year of that Queen,
to consult for the Reformation of Religion, and preparing the Book of
Common Prayer. His other House was in Philpot-lane London, where his younger
Brother a Merchant lived. It was a large and fair House. He bought it of
certain Executors, but the Title being doubtful, whether the King had not a
Right in it, he procured of his Lord the Duke to speak to the King in his
behalf. To this House also another pretended. But the Contest between Sir
Thomas, and that other was referred: And so in the End Sir Thomas enjoyed it.
He also purchased the Manor of Yarlington in Somersetshire, worth 30 l. per
Ann. of the Marquis of Northampton, it being given to him at the Coronation of
Queen Katharine his Sister. This Cost Smith 300 l. or thereabouts, being Money
that he had gotten at Cambridge, before he came into the Protectors Service,
and lent to his Brother the Merchant. Of the Commissioners for the Chauntries,
he also bought the College of Darby, which went at 33 l. per Ann. which Cost
him a Thousand Marks. Which was the Portion he had with his Wife.

Marries.
For while he lived in the Dukes Family, he Married his first Wife, named
Elizabeth, Daughter of William Karkek, or Carkyke, of London, Gentleman: Whose
Sister Anne, after Married to Sir Thomas Chamberlayn, long Ambassador Resident
in Flanders and Spain: Smith's Lady was a little Woman, and one that affected
not fine, gaudy Cloths, for which she was taxed by some. And by this, one might
rather judge her to have been a Woman of Prudence and Religion, and that
affected Retirement rather than the splendour of a Court. For Dr. Smith allowed
her what she pleased: And she was his Cash-keeper.

Marries again.
However, he used to wear goodly Apparel, and went like a Courtier himself. For
which he said, that some might seem to have cause rather to accuse him to go
too sumptuously, than her of going too meanly. This Wife he buried, having no
Issue by her: And Married a second, named Philippa, the Relict of Sir John
Hambden, who outlived him, Whose Jointure was Hill-Hall. Of this Wife it was
that Secretary Cecil spoke, when in the Year 1565. Smith having been Ambassador
in France, and earnestly desiring to come home, the said Secretary wrote him
word that his Wife should either speak or send to the Earl of Leicester, that
he would dispatch Mr. Thomas Hoby, whom the Queen had determined to send
Ambassador in his Room, but delayed it.

But we are yet to look upon Smith as one of the Protector's Family; He is
slandered.
where he fluorished in Places and Honors, as we heard before: Yet he had his
Share of Trouble and Sorrow; as, the Anger of his haughty Mistress, the
Duchess of Somerset; and many unjust Imputations that were raised against him,
whereto she gave too much Credit. Which was the Cause of a large Letter, which
he addressed unto her: Wherein he vindicated himself, against many Slanders
which were told the Duchess; whereof she had twitted him in the Teeth, as
Things the World took notice of in him: Namely, I. Haughtiness, and a
disregardful, proud Temper. II. That he was Oppressive; and had, by Extortion
and Griping, got a great deal of Money. III. Covetousness. IV. That he bought
and sold Benefices, or Spiritual Promotions. Add to these, That he was a
Chopper and Changer of Lands: That his Wife went not in so Courtly a Garb as
was sitting: That he kept no House: And; That he was a Neuter in Religion. But
these were mere Aspersions, and malicious Insinuations; his generous Mind ever
abhorring any thing that was base and unjust, or unworthy of a Man, and a
Christian Philosopher. And these Calumnies he wiped off, assoiling one
Particular after another, in his said Letter to the Duchess. Indeed, she was
an Imperious and Ill-natured Woman, and had taken some Occasion to fall out
with him; and in her Passion, it seems, had cast out these Reports before him.

But Smith was a true and faithful Servant of the Duke; Suffers Imprisonment
with the Duke.
and in his Troubles, suffered with him: For he was taken up with him; and,
among those that were sent with the Duke, to the Tower, Sir Thomas was one:
Though afterward, his Innocence appearing, he was delivered, and escaped those
severe Handlings that some of the Duke's Friends and Retainers underwent.

In the Year 1548, 1548.
Dr. Smith was advanced to be the Secretary of State; as in September, the same
Year, Made Secretary.
William Cecil, Esquire was preferred to the like Office; both having been Servants
to the Protector. Smith was made use of for the Reformation of Religion, which
was now going in hand with in good earnest, as he was afterward in all the
steps of it.

In the Month of July, Goes Ambassador.
the same Year, 1548, he, with Mr. Chamberlain, went Ambassador to Brussels, to
the Emperor's Council there: Which was, I think, the first Embassy he
underwent. The Business of the State, in sending him at this time, was, the
great Apprehensions from France, who had possessed themselves of Scotland, and
so were a very formidable Enemy: And the more so, because they were so near.
But to provide against them as well as the King could, he endeavored to stop
them from the Use of the Ports of the Low Countries, which were most commodious
for Scotland. Then Smith obtained so much from the Emperors Counselors of the
said Low Countries: Though the Promise was not so well made good; for, in the
latter end of this same Year, both French and Scots came from Scotland, and
were landed and discharged at Dunkirke. Which caused another Embassy in
January, by Sir Philip Hoby, from the English Court, to the Emperor,
complaining of this; and showing how the Emperor's Counselors in the
Low Countries had declared to Mr. Secretary Smith, at the Court there, That the
French's going into Scotland, or returning thence, should have no manner of
Favor or Reception at any of the Emperor's Ports. This was one of the Business
of this Embassy; but the chief Matter indeed, and End thereof, was, for the
Raising of Soldiers in those Parts; which they did, to the Number of 2000; and
obtained the Emperor's Leave for Passing of them. There is a Letter of Smith's,
remaining in the Cotton-Library, to the Protector, while he was now Ambassador
at Brussels; wherein may be perceived the Purport of his Embassy, Galba, B. 12.
with other News of the Affairs of the World; and was an ensues: (And I the
rather set it down, to preserve what Monuments we can of this excellent Man.)

Pleases it Your Grace to be advertised,
THat We received Your Grace's Letters the xijth of July, Smith'^ Letter to the
Protector.
with the good News of the State of Our Things in Scotland: For the which We
most highly thank Almighty God, and Your Grace. And as We do not a little
rejoice at them our Selves, so We shall not fail to communicate them, as
Occasion shall occurr, where it shall be convenient. And surely, they here have
Espials in Scotland, as well as We, and be not ignorant of our Affairs there.
Nevertheless, as they pretend at least, they be very glad to hear them of us.
The Rumor runs here still, that Mr. Chamberlain, and an Ambassador, came
hither to take up Men: And hereupon has some Offer been made unto us; but such
as We could not like.

Yesterday came to us certain Almain, who brought to Yarmouth, I suppose, an
Ensign of Footmen in the King's Days that dead is: He liked so well his Pay
then, as he says, He would gladly serve the King, before any other Prince. We
said, Winter was now very near: Nevertheless, if he would write his Offer, We
would advertise Your Grace, and know further Your Pleasure. He is, one Groaning
in Frizeland. What Your Grace's Pleasure shall be, that We shall answer him,
and all such, we require Your Grace to know, so soon as conveniently You may.
This Man faith, If his Request be too much, he will be content Your Grace shall
mitigate it as shall please You. He is of the Land of Conte de Bury; and says,
He has communicated the Matter with Scepperius, [the Emp^^^^ Admiral;] and he
gives him good (...), that the Queen [Regent of Flanders] will give him
License.

Two Merchants of Antwerp, lately coming from August, [ Augsburgh,] says, That
there the Emperor compels every Man, to this Interim; and that some of the
Cities grudging at it, he has referred the Answer to Nerenburgh: But that it
is not doubted there, but that Norenburgh will do as the Emperor will have
them. They showed further, that the Emperor would have them build up their
Monasteries again, and Abbeys, and all such things: And all stands upon that
Answer of Norenburgh. Further, The Emperor has already sent 4000 Horsemen to
lie about Strasburgh; and that he does intend shortly to come thither, and to
assay the Switzers. Nevertheless, they said, That at this Counsil was none of
the Switzers, but only of B. [ Berne, or Basil.] They showed also, that there
was a Saying, that the Emperor and the French King intended to part the
Switzers between them, of Agreement, as they said. But if that be, it is more
like to make Wars, than to have any long Amity after that sort, etc. Thus,
having none other Thing worthy of Advertisement to write Your Grace, I commit
the same to Almighty God.

Your Grace's Most Bounden Orator, and Servant, T. Smith.
From Brussels, July xixth

Our Ambassador Smith came home again in September, leaving Chamberlain
Resident at that Court.

About this Time, Smith concerned in the Alteration of Religion;
(or, perhaps, somewhat before,) Letters passed between some Counselors,
touching the weighty Matter of Altering the Religion: And in this Smith was
concerned; one of whose Lettere relating to this Affair, yet remains in the
Paper-House.

When Base Moneys, And Redress of base Money.
as Testons, (coined in great Quantities, under King Henry VIII.) and other
Pieces were, near this Time, under Consultation to be redressed, Smith also was
made use of in this; and wrote a Letter to the Lord Protector, touching the
Benefit arising by the Mint, while such Moneys were coined, to give the better
Light unto this Work that was now going in hand with.

CHAP. V. Sir Thomas Smith in Commission: Words between Bishop Boner and him:
His Fidelity to the Duke of Somerset.
If we trace Sir Thomas Smith in the ensuing Year, viz. 1549, An. 1549.
we shall find him employed in certain Commissions of Importance. Smith in a
Commission against Anabaptists.


An Ecclesiastical Commission in the Beginning of this Year was issued out, for
the Examination of Anabaptists, and Arians, that began now to spring up apace
and show themselves more openly. Sir Thomas was one of these Commissioners (for
he was much employed in the Matters of Religion) jointly with the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Thirsby, Bishop of Westminster, Dr. Cox, Dean of Westminster, Dr.
May, Dean of St. Paul's, and Dr. Cook, Dean of the Arches. Who sat in Judgment
upon diverse of these Heretics in that part of St. Paul's Church, commonly
called The Altar of our Lady.

A Visitation being instituted this Summer by the King for the University of
Cambridge, One of the Visitors of Cambridge.
he was appointed one of the Visitors; in conjuction with Ridley, Bishop of
Rochester, May, Dean of St. Paul's, Sir John Cheke, and Dr. Wendy, the King's
Physician. The Business of this Visitation was to abolish such Statutes and
Ordinances as maintained Papistry, Superstition, Blindness and Ignorance, and
to establish and set forth such as might further God's Word and Food Learning:
Our Smith, with the Dean Of St. Paul's, a little before Easter acquaint^^
Bishop Ridley with it, by sending him a Letter to Rochester, and desiring him
to make a Sermon at the Opening of the said Visitation.

Another Commission dated in September from the King was issued out to Sir
Thomas Smith, In Commission upon Bishop Boner.
together with four more, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
Rochester, Sir William Petre, and May, Dean of St. Paul's, to take Trial and
Examination of Boner, Bishop of London, for certain Incompliances, and
Disobediences to the King's proceedings in Religion. Sir Thomas was Able and
Bold, and one that sincerely wished well to a Reformation of corrupt Religion.
This Commissioner of all the rest, Boner would decline him.
Boner seemed most to regret, and set himself in opposition against. His first
Quarrel against him was, that because he sat not at the beginning, when the
Commission was first opened and read, therefore he ought not to be a
Commissioner at all. For by the Law, said Boner, they that first began, must
comtinue the Commission. But Smith told him, that as cunning as he made himself
in the Law, for his part he had studied the Law too; anf that these were but
Quiddities, and Quirks invented to delay Matters. But the Commission was to
proceed summarily, Et de plano, and to cut off all frivolous Allegations. And
when at this same Session, the Bishop demanded somewhat of the Commissioners
upon pretense of Law, that was not convenient to be granted; Secretary Smith,
seeing that his Device was merely to deferr and elude the main Business told
him plainly, he asked he knew not what; and that the Bishop would have had them
to humor him, and to be lead according to his mind in these Quiddities;
whereas all was for no other intent but to delay Justice. And that herein he
did all one with Thieves, Murderers and Traitors, that the Truth might not be
known, to prevent their Shame and Condemnation. Which plain dealing did more
and more provoke that proud Bishop. And those Expressions of the Secretary he
could never forgive, but was continually pelting at him, and declining him as
none of his Judge.

The great intent of this Commission was to examine him concerning a Sermon,
Smith deals roundly with him.
which was appointed him by the Council to Preach touching the King's Authority
in his tender Age to Administer the Government, and make Laws. In which the
Bishop prevaricated, not speaking home to that necessary Point to the
satisfaction of the People; but running out upon the Subject of the Real
Prefence. Concerning which, when the Commissioners could not bring him to
confess whether in that Sermon he omitted that Article or no, shifting it off
by his uncertain Speeches, other Articles were drawn up for him to answer to by
Oath: Which Smith told him he must not dally with as he had done hitherto. And
that though he had made his Answers by writing after his wary and obscure way,
yet now he should be examined by them, and make answer by Mouth to the same
Article, or do that which was worse, namely, go to the Tower. I do not indeed,
added he, discommend your Protestations and Terms of Law, if it were in a young
Proctor, in the managing of his Clients Cause; but in you it may not be
suffered so to use the King's Commissioners.

When the Bishop was next to appear before the Commissioners, Smith's Words to
Boner's Servant.
he sent two of his Servants to excuse his not coming before them by reason of
Sickness. But the Secretary knowing well of his former ways of Delay and
Baffling the Commissioners, doubted of the Truth hereof: And therefore told the
Messengers roundly, that because he should not deceive them as he had done,
they would send the Knight-Marshal unto him, who should have Order, if he were
Sick indeed to let him alone, for that he said, was a reasonable Excuse; but if
he were not Sick, to bring him forthwith; for that he should not do as he had
done; nor would they take it at his Hands. Mr. Johnson, added the Secretary,
(he was one of the Bishop's Servants that brought his Message) you do the part
of a trusty Servant as becomes you; but it is your part also to show my Lord of
his Stubborn Heart and Disobedience, which does him more harm than he is aware
of. What? Does he think to stand with the King in his own Realms? Is this the
part of a Subject? Nay, I ween, we shall have a new Thomas Becket. Let him take
heed, for if he play these parts, he may fortune to he made shorter by the
Head. And, whereas the Bishop was all for disowning these Commissioners, and
appealing from him, the Secretary subjoyned, he may Appeal if he think good.
But whither? To the Bishop of Rome? So he may help himself forwards. I say, he
can appeal but to the same King, who has made us his Judges, and to the Bench
of his Council. And how they will take this Matter, when they hear of it, I
doubt not. He would make Men believe that he were called before us for
Preaching his Opinion of the Sacrament. Wherein I assure you he did but falsely
and naughtily, yea, and leudly, and more than became him, and more than he had
in Commandment to do. For he was not willed to speak of that Matter, and
perhaps he may hear more of that hereafter: But at present that was not laid to
his Charge.

Sir Thomas thus using to deal with him, Boner inters a Recusation against
Smith.
in many Sessions held for his Examination, and not suffering him to dally out
the Matter, and sometime taking the liberty to reprove him, the Bishop at last
made a solemn, large and formal Recusation of this Commissioners Judgment;
Exhibiting it in Writing at his next appearance; which may be read at length in
Mr. Fox's Acts and Monuments. In which Recusation, Boner showed, Page 1205.
how the Secretary had charged him with dealing with the Commissioners as
Thieves, Murderers and Traitors would have done. But notwithstanding this
Recusation, the Secretary told him that he would proceed in his Commission, and
would be his Judge still, until he were otherwise inhibited. And where you say,
proceeded Smith, in your Recusation, that I said you did like Thieves,
Murderers and Traitors; indeed I said it, and may well say so again, since we
perceive it by your Doings. Whereto the Bishop in a great Rage replied, Well,
Sir, because you sit here by Virtue of the King's Commision, and for that you
be Secretary to his Majesty, and also one of his Highness Council, I must, and
do Honor and Reverence you, but as you be Sir Thomas Smith, and say as you
have said, I do like Thieves, Murderers and Traitors, I say you lie upon me;
and in that Case I defy you in what you can do to me; I fear you not. And
therefore, Quod facis, fae citius. The Secretary told him, He should know there
was a King. Yea, said the Bishop, and that is not you. No, Sir, said the
Secretary again, but we will make you know who is. And so in fine, for carrying
himself so irreverently toward the King's Commissioners, and especially
toward Sir Thomas Smith the King's Secretary, the Knight-Marshal was called
in, and the Bishop committed to him. And the Secretary commanded him to take
and keep him that none might come at him. For if he did, he should set by him
himself.

At another Session, Smith (...).
Secretary Smith did burden him, how disobediently and rebelliously he had
always carried himself toward the King's Majesty and his Authority. To which
the Bishop replied, That he was the King's lawful and true Subject, and did
acknowledge his Highness to be his Gracious Sovereign Lord. Yea, answered the
Secretary, you say well, my Lord; but I pray you, what else have all these
Rebels in Norfolk, Devon and Cornwall done? Have they not said thus, We be the
King's true Subjects; We acknowledge him for our King, and we will obey his
Laws, and the like. And yet, when either Commandment, Letter or Pardon was
brought to them from his Majesty, they believed it not, but said it was forged
under an Hedge, and was Gentlemen's Doings. I perceive your meaning, said the
Bishop again, as who should say, the Bishop of London is a Rebel like them.
Yea, by my Troth, said the secretary. Whereat the Standers by fell into a
Laughter: How this Bishop was afterward deprived, and committed, and how he
Protested and Appealed, may be seen in other Historians.

In October, In trouble with (...) (...).
the Duke of Somerset the Protector received a terrible Shock; almost all the
Privy Counselors making a Defection from the Court, and meeting in London,
combined together against him. So that he at last was Imprisoned, and lost all
his Places, Honors and Lands. There were only Three then stuck to him in this
Time of Adversing, viz. Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir William Paget,
and our Sir Thomas Smith. Between whom and the Lords at London, Letters past
upon this affair, carried by Sir Philip Hoby. The Peril they ran was not a
little. For the Lords wrote to them, that it seemed strange to them, that they
should either assist, or suffer his Majesty's Royal Person to remain in the
Guard of the Duke of Somerset's Men, and that Strangers should be armed with
the King's own Armor, and be nearest about his Person; and those to whom the
ordinary Charge was committed to be sequestered away. And the Lords sent them
word moreover, that if any Evil came thereof, they must expect it must be
imputed to them. And whereas the Archbishop, Paget, and Smith in their Letter
to the Lords told them, They knew more than they [the Lords] knew, at those
Words they took this advantage, as they returned them Answer, That if the
Matters that came to their knowledge, and were hidden from them [ the Lords]
were of such weight as they pretended, or if they touched or might touch his
Majesty, or his State, they [ the Lords] thought that they did not as they
ought to do, in not disclosing the same to them, [ the whole Council.] In fine,
being overpowered, Smith, together with the Archbishop, and the Comptroller
Paget sent another Letter from Windsor, (where the King and they were) that
they would not fail to endeavor themselves according to the Contents of the
Lord's Letters; and that they would convene together when and where the Lords
pleased. this was a notable instance of Smith's Fidelity to the Duke his old
Master; who stuck to him as long as he durst, and was then glad to comply as
fairly as he could. And, if I mistake not, now did some storm fall upon Sir
Thomas: And I believe he was deprived of his Place of secretary. For at this
Time it appears by the King's Journal, that Dr. Wotton was made Secretary. Though
he seemed soon to be restored again.

In the Year 1550. Sir Thomas was summoned a Witness, An. 1550. K. Edw. 6.
together with a great many other Noblemen and Gentlemen of the Court, in the
great Trial of Gardener Bishop of Winton. Smith deposed against Gardener. Act.
and Mon. first Edit.
He was sworn against him in the Month of February, being then 33 Years of Age,
as it is set down in his Deposition [by an Error of the Printer for 39.] By
which it appears, that in the Year before, viz. 1549. Smith, then Secretary
was diverse times sent by the Lord Protector to the said Bishop, to travail with
him to agree to the King's Proceedings, and that he would promise to set them
forth in a Sermon, or otherwise: And that he often did, in the Company of Mr.
Cecil, repair to him for that purpose. That Smith and the said Cecil, by
Command of the said Council drew up certain Articles, to which the Bishop
should show his Consent, and to Preach and set forth the same. And that after
several Attendances upon the Bishop to bring him to this, and upon some hope of
Conformity thereto, the Lords of the Council sent for him to the Palace at
Westminster. After that, was the Lord Wiltshire sent to him, to whom he showed
some Conformity herein. Soon after that Lord went again accompanied with Smith,
to know his final Resolution. To whom he showed great readiness to set forth
the Articles aforesaid in his Sermon; yet prayed not to be tied to the same
Words. In which the Council at length yielded to him. And thus was Secretary
Smith employed in that Affair. In which he carried himself it seems with so
much Discretion and Moderation toward that haughty Bishop, that afterward in
his Prosperity under Queen Mary he was a Friend to him, when he was such a
bloody Enemy to all Protestants besides.

In this same Year, 1550. Makes a Purchase.
He made a Purchase of the King of the whole Manor of Overston, alias
Overston, in the County of Northampton, parcel of the Possessions called
Richmond Lands, and diverse other Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the
Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Bucks, Surry and Hertford. For which he gave 414
l. 10. s. 4 d. and other Lands in Derby and Middlesex. The Yearly value of this
Purchase was 87 l. 17 s. 9 d.

In the Year 1551. the 30th of April, An. 1551.
Sir Thomas Smith still under the Name of Secretary, Goes in Embassy to France.
was appointed one of those that were to go in that great and splendid Embassy
to France, with a Commission of Treaty concerning a Match for the King with
that King's Eldest Daughter, at the same time the Marquess of Northampton went
the Order of the Garter to the said King. With whom was joined in Commission
the Bishop of Ely, Sir Philip Hoby, Sir William Pickering, and Sir John Mason:
These two Leiger Ambassadors there, and two Lawyers, whereof Smith was one.

CHAP. VI. An. 1553. 1554. 1555. 1556. 1557. Q. Mary.
The Condition of Sir Thomas Smith under Queen Mary. His wife Advertisements.
SIR Thomas past the Reign of King Edward, He loses all his Places.
in great Reputation and Prosperity. But upon the Access of Queen Mary to the
Crown, as many of the deceased King's Ministers of State, especially such as
favored Religion, were cast off, so were the two Secretaries, Sir William
Cecil, and Sir Thomas Smith. And besides the loss of that honorable Station,
he was deprived also of what he held in the Church. For he was a Spiritual
Person also; and so was invested by the late King with the Provostship of Eton,
and the Deanery of Carlisle. And to spoil him of these and other places with the
more Formality, he was summoned to appear before certain Persons, whom the
Queen had Commissionated for these purposes, together with Cranmer, Archbishop
of Canterbury, and Dr. May, Dean of St. Paul's. He fell easy, for his Life was
saved, though he were a Protestant, and had an 100 l. per Ann. allow him, for
his Subsistence; but was charged not to depart out of the Realm. Which
favorable handling no doubt was obtained for him by some great Friends ai this
Court: A sign of the great esteem they had of his worth. Such was his good
Fortune in those hard times, when so many of his Friends, and the fast
Professors of Religion suffered most sharply. Dr. Henry Cole, (afterward Dean
of St. Paul's) succeeded him in the Provostship of Eton: And Dr. John Boxal in
the place of Secretary of State: As Sir John Bourn succeeded Cecil the other
Secretary. And so he made a shift to pass through this dangerous Reign in
safety, following hls Studies and Contemplations in his native Country of
Essex, at his House of Hill-hall there. And when many on all hands of him were
most cruelly burnt alive for the Profession of that Religion which he held, he
escaped, and was saved even in the midst of the Fire. Which probably he might
have an eye to in changing the Crest of his Coat of Arms, which now was a
salamander living in the midst of a Flame; whereas before it was an Eagle,
holding a Writing Pen, flaming in his Dexter Claw, as may still be seen upon a
Monument of his Ancestors in Walden Church, and likewise in another Monument in
the Church of Greensted in Essex, set up to the Memory of his Sister, who
Married Wood of Brodlane in Kent.

But which is strange, Smith Thath Indulgence from the Pope.
he acted his part so dexterously in these difficult Times, that even his Enemy
the Pope sheltered him under his Bull for many Transgressions of his own Laws.
For in the Year 1555. one William Smythwick, of the Diocese of Bath, Esquire had
obtained a very large Indulgence from Rome. For which, no question, the said
Gentleman was very liberal, which caused that Court to show her self so liberal
again. It was, that he and any five of his Friends whom he should nominate,
(excepting Regulars) such as were Married, and their Children of both Sexes,
should enjoy many extraordinary Indulgences upon his Petition to the Pope, who
then was Paul IV. Which Petition was graciously accorded to by that Pope, and
the Bull ran for Indulgence to Smythwick, and his five Friends and their
Children (as was petitioned) a Quibusvis Excommunicationis, Supensionis and
Interdicti, aliisque Ecclesiasticis Sententiis, Censuris and Paenis, a jure vel
ab homine quavis occasion vel Causis latis, ac Votorum quorumcunque and
Ecclesiae Mandatorum Transgressionibus, Perjuriorum and Homicidii casualis vel
mentalis Reatibus, manuum violentarum in quasvis Personas Ecclesiasticas, no
tamen Praelatos de praeterito, injectionibus, Iejuniorum, Horarum Canonicarum
ac divinorum Officiorum and Paenitentiarum injunctarum in toto vel in part
Omissionibus; Nec non ab omnibus and singulis eorum peccatis de quibus contriti
fuerint and Confessi, etiamsi essent talia propter quae foret Seeds Apostolica
consulenda, and That is, From all Sentences of Excommunication, Suspension and
Interdict, and other Censures Ecclesiastical upon whatever occassion or cause
inflicted, Transgressions of any Vows or Commands of the Church, Guilt of
Perjuries, and of Homicide, whether casual or mental, Laying violent Hands upon
an Ecclesiastical Persons, excepting Prelates de praeterito, Omissions in whole
or in part of Fasts, Canonical Hours, Divine Offices, Penances injoined: Also
from all and singular their Sins, whereof they are Contrite and Confessed;
although they were such for which the Apostolic See were to consulted. Likewise
many other Indulgences were by Virtue hereof granted, as to have a Portatile
Altar, to receive the Sacrament privately; that in Lent and in other Fasting
times of the Year, they might eat Eggs, Butter, Cheese, and other Milkmeats,
and Flesh without scruple of Conscience. Smythwick chose Sir Thomas Smith for
one of his Five Friends specified in the Bull, to be partaker of these
Catholic Privileges. And so it is express in an Instrument drawn out and
attested by Thomas Willet public Notary: Which still remains in the possession
of Sir Edward Smith of Hill-Hall Baronet, Dict. Smythwick discretum and
praeclarum Virum Dominum Thom. Smith de Hill-Hall Lon. Diocaes. Militem, and
Dominam Phillippam Uxorem ejus, eorumque Liberos, nominavit, Constituit,
Admisit, acceptavit, etc. pro primis personis de quinque Personis, ut
praefertur per cum Nominand. ad libere liciteque utend. and gaudend. omnibus
and singulis in ipsis literis sive Brevi apostolico concess. indult. etc. This,
no question was a good Skreen for Sir Thomas in these Evil Days.

If any still should wonder how Sir Thomas escaped so well, Bishop Gardener
This Friend.
who had been so much employed in the former Reign in the proceedings of
Religion, and had so heartily set them forward; and withal had assisted in a
Commission, wherein Boner, Bishop of London was deposed, a Man of such a
wrathful Temper; his safety was in a great measure owing to that Deference that
that stern and cruel Bishop Gardener, now Lord Chancellor, had to his exemptary
Virtue and Learning: He was struck with a king of Admiration of the Man,
pretending a great Love to him: And would Swear that he among all the rest of
the Heretics deserved only to live, and to be preferred for his deep Wisdom
and Judgment, and the Heroical Sentiments of his Mind. This is elegantly
described to us by the Poet that dedicated the Muses Tears to his Funerals;
Quique alios rabido laniavit dente sideles,
Subdolus. Antist^^ Stephanus, cognomine Vulpes,
Vnius ingenio, Literis, Gravitate virili
Sic perculsus crat; mentisque Heroica Sensa
Sic venerabatur, non solum ut parceret illi,
Sed magnum prae se Veterator ferret amorem:
Et solum Haereticos inter, Vitaque Locoque
Dignum aliquo, propter summum juraret Acumen.


And I am apt to think, Smith gains Gardiner's favor upon his first Address to
him from Cambridge.
that Smith gained the Point in Bishop Gardiner's Affection in the Year 154^.
upon his first Address in that Year. When being a Man of Eminency in Cambridge,
he waited upon him at HamptonCourt about the Difference, as it seemed,
concerning the right pronouncing of the Greek. When Tho. Smith had been the
great Reformer of the old corrupt way of reading that Language, and that Bishop
of the Chancellor of the University utterly against introducing the new correct
way; Yet Smith carried himself with so much facility and obsequiousness to him
in that regard, that it took much with him. And upon his Return back to
Cambridge, though he took the freedom to write a large Letter to the said
Chancellor, arguing against the Decree he had lately made, to forbid the new
way, and to continue the old, yet it was with extraordinary Complement to him
of his high Worth, Learning, Prudence and Acuteness: Beginning his Letter after
this obliging manner:

Right Reverend and most Worthy Prelate.
GReat was the Pleasure I took in your Discourse with me, when I was the other
Day at Hampton Court to wait upon you, partly out of Duty, and partly to
consult with you. For that which I had before learned by Fame only and Hearsay
of your Wisdom, being then present I understood by Experience; and that your
Lordship was endued not only with very great Skill and Insight in the weighty
Affairs of State, but also in these light and literary Controversies, with an
incredible sharpness, and an excellent Facility and Plenty, joined with a
wonderful Obligingness, while you are disputing and arguing, etc.


He concludes his Letter with a Protestation of entire Obedience to his
Lordship's Order, however he should determine for or against his Desire; and
that he would submit to his Authority, being the Authority of a Reverend
Prelate, and a very Learned Chancellor. From hence I date the Respect and Love
Smith gained with this Bishop.

This must be Remembered to this Bishops Commendation, among the many evil
Things that asperse and blacken his Name to this Day. Ascham favored by
Gardener.
Nor must the like favor or a greater be forgotten by him shown to such
another Learned and grave Protestant, Friend and Contemporary with Smith, I
mean Roger Ascham; which I must have leave to mention here. Whom the Bishop of
Winchester did not only spare, but called to Court, and preferred to be
Secretary of the Latin Tongue to Queen Mary. Whom for his Learning in the
Languages, and incomparable faculty of a clean Style, and beautififul Writing,
he greatly loved, and obliged with many Benefits. And when Sir Francis
Englefield, Master of the Wards and Liveries, a fierce Papist, had often cried
out upon Ascham, to the Bishop as an Heretic, and sit to be rejected and
punished as such, he never would hearken to him, either to punish him or remove
him from his Place. Thus Lived two excellent Protestants under the Wings as it
were of the Sworn Enemy and Destroyer of Protestants, Ascham, and Smith, to
whom we now return again.

Nay, and bloody Boner, And Bishop Boner pretends to be Smith's Friend.
who had a personal Pique against him since the last Reign, as was shown
before, let him alone though he were in his Diocese, admiring the Man, and
dissembling his Anger. An. 1557. Q. Mary.
Nee Bonerus eum non admiratus, amici
Vultum hominis tantas inter simulaverat iras.
But though he thus escaped this Man, Robert Smith, a Retainer of Sir Thomas
Smith burnt.
yet another of his Name, who was also a Retainer to him at Eaton, when Provost
there, fell into his Hands, whom he left not till he had reduced him into
Ashes. Namely, Robert Smith, who was burnt at Uxbridge in the Year 1555. This
Robert belonged to the Church of Winsor, and had a Clerkship there of 10 l. a
Year. Of Stature he was tall and slender, active and very ingenious for many
Things, chiefly delighting in the Art of Painting, which for his Minds-sake
rather than for a Living or Gain he practiced and exercised. He was smart and
quick in Conversation, and fervent in Religion, wherein he was confirmed by the
Preachings and Readings of Mr. Turner, Canon of Windsor and others. In his
Examinations before Bishop Boner he spoke readily and to the purpose, and with
no less Boldness, and gave that Prelate his own. He was also a good Poet
according to the Poetry of those Times: Some Pieces whereof remain in Fox's
Monuments. And his Parts, and Elegancy of Style as well as his Piety Godward,
may be judged of by his Sententious Letter to his Wife from Prison a little
before his Death: Which may be seen in Fox, Page 1544.
beginning, Seek first to Love God, Dear Wife, with your whole Heart, and then
shall it be easy to Love your Neighbor. Be friendly to all Creatures, and
especially to your own Soul. Be always an Enemy to the Devil and the World, but
especially to your own Flesh. In hearing of good Things join the Ears and Heart
together. Seek Unity and Quietness with all Men, but especially with your
Conscience. For he will not easily be entreated. Hate the Sins that are past,
but especially those to come. Be as ready to further your Enemy, as he is to
hinder you, etc. It was remarkable at his Death, that his Body well night half
burnt, and all in a lump like a black Cole, he suddenly rose upright, and
lifted up the stumps of his Arms, and clapped the same together, and so sunk
down again and Died. And this was the more to be remarked, because he had at
the Stake said to those that stood about him, that they should not think amiss
of him or his Cause, though he came to that End; and that they would not doubt,
but his Body, though so to be consumed presently to Ashes, yet Dying in that
Quarrel, should rise again to Life everlasting, and added, that he doubted not
God would show some Token thereof.

Smith, His Grief at these Times.
in these Days of Queen Mary was removed off the Stage of Action, being now but
a silent Stander by. And here he saw the pitiful Burning of poor Men and Women
for Religion, the Marriage with Spain, the Loss of Calais, and the Reduction of
the Kingdom to the lowest Ebb both in Wealth and Reputation that it had been in
for some hundreds of Years before. Which Things went close to his Heart, and
out of the Love he had to his native Country filled him with Vexation, nay, and
shame, to behold. Hear his own Words, reflecting upon these Times in one of his
private Discourses framed in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. Oration
atout Queen Elizabeth's Marriage.
We kept Calais 200 Years and odd in the French Ground, in spite of all the
French Kings which have been since that Time, in all the Civil Wars, and the
most pernicious Dissensions that ever were, either in King Henry the Fourth,
the Sixth, Richard the Third, or Henry the Seventh their Times. In King Henry
the Eighth's Time we wan also to it Bouloign and Bouloignois. I do assure you,
for my part, if I may say what I think, I question, if I should have lived
through Five hundred Years heretofore past, I should have seen England at any
time weaker in Strength, Men, Money and Riches, than it was in the time when we
wrote King Philip and Queen Mary, King and Queen of so many Kingdoms, Dukedoms,
Marchionates. For all those wily Titles, our Hearts, our Joy, our Comfort was
gone. As much affectionate as you note me to be to my Country and Countrymen, I
assure you I was then ashamed of both. -- What decay came that Time to the
substance of the Realm, and Riches both public and private, it should be no
less Pity than needless to tell.

I am sorry I can retrieve so little of this worthy Man, during these five
Years of Queen Mary, which he spent in Leisure and Retirement. Smith's wife
Advertisements and Counlsse.
However, I have retrieved a Paper wrote by him in the Year 1557. that deserves
here to be set down, Entitled,

Advertisements and Counsels very necessary for all Noblemen and Counselors,
gathered out of diverse Authors both Italian and Spanish.
1. TEll not all that you think, nor show all that you have, nor take all that
you desire, nor say all that you know, nor do all that you can. For lightly
shall he lose the Favor of his Prince that follows the Commandment of his
Lusts, and restrains not them with the Bit of Reason.

2. Beware you put not Fortune in trust with those Things that appertain to
your Person, Honor, Substance or Conscience. For the Nobleman which is wise
will not hazard himself, in hope to have relief at her hands as often as he
shall need.

3. Although all Men promise to help you if you had need, yet nevertheless trust
not too much thereto. Many of them which now do offer to take Armor for your
sake, if occasion be offered will be the first to strike you, to give you the
Overthrow.

4. In other Men's Cases meddle not too much; nor in your own enforce not Time,
For governing you so, you may remain in the good Estate you be, or else may
easily happen to utter what you were.

5. The Danger of Noblemen is like to them that be in the top of high and sharp
Mountains, whence they cannot descend but fall, Wherefore procure unto your
selves such faithful Friends, as will rather stay you from falling, than such
as will reach unto you their hands to help you up, when you be down.

6. Do good while you have power thereunto; and never do hurt though you may. For
the Tears of the Offended, and the Complaints of the Grieved may one Day have
place in the sight of God, to move him to Chastise you, and also be occasion to
make the Prince to hate you.

7. Bestow your Benefits and Offices rather upon the Good, than upon your
Friends. For among your Friends it is lawful to depart your Goods but not your
Conscience.

8. In that you Counsel be not affectionate, in that you Discounsel be not
passionate. Whatsoever you do, do advisedly. For although in the Courts of
Princes, every Man beholds the Worthiness and Nobility of the Person; Yet the
more noble a Man is, the more is he noted, marked amd hated of others.

9. If you will not err in your Counsels, nor stumble in your Actions, embrace
them that tell you Truth, and hate them that flatter you. For much more ought
you to love them that advise you, than those that will seem to pity you, when
you are in Danger.

10. Have always in memory the Benefits you have received of others, and
enforce your selves to forget such Injuries as others have done unto you.

11. Esteem much that Little of your own, and regard not the Abundance of
others.

12. Endeavor your self to do good to all Men, and never speak evil of them
that be absent.

13. Jeopard not the Loss of many things for the Gain of one thing; neither
adventure the Loss of one thing certain for many things doubtful.

14. Make much of your dearest Friends; and do not procure any Enemies.

15. Exalt not the rich Tyrant, neither abhor the Poor which is rightous. This
has a Line drawn through it by the Pen of Sir Thomas Smith Thimself as it
seems, fearing perhaps some misconstruction of his Words, which might draw him
into danger under this jealous Government of Queen Mary.

16. Deny not Justice unto the Poor, because he is poor, neither pardon the
Rich because he is rich.

17. Do not good only for Love, neither chastise only for Hatred.

18. In evident Cases abide not the Counsel of others; and indoubtful Cases
determine not of your self.

19. Suffer not Sin unpunished, nor welldoing without Reward.

20. Deny not Justice to him that asks, nor Mercy to him that deserves it.

21. Chastise not when thou art Angry, neither promise any thing in thy Mirth.

22. Do evil to no Man for malice, neither commit any Vice for Covetousness.

23. Open not thy Gate to Flatterers, nor thy Ears to Backbiters.

24. Become not proud in thy Prosperity, nor desperate in thine Adversity.

25. Study always to be loved of good Men, and seek not to be hated of the Evil.

26. Be favorable unto the Poor, which may be little, if thou will be aided of
God against them that be Mighty.

CHAP. VII. Smith called for to Queen Elizabeth's Court. Concerned in the
Settlement of Religion. His Judgment of the Queen's Marriage.
WHEN Queen Elizabieth's Turn came to sway the Scepter, An. 1558. Q. Eliz.
Sir Tho. Smith was presently called to the Court, and made use of: Smith
employed in the Reformation.
And assisted in settling the public Affairs both in Church and State. The
first thing he seemed to be employed in, was in preparing a Reformed Office of
Religion. For when a Deliberation was soon had of changing the Religion set up
under Queen Mary, in a Device offered to Sir William Cecil, (who was now
admitted Secretary of State) for the doing of it, it was advised, that before
an whole Alteration could be made, which would require some longer time and
study, a Platform or Book of Divine Service should be framed, to be shown to
the Queen; and being by her approved, to be put up in the ParliamentHouse. For
which purpose, seven Men were Nominated, Dr. Bill, the Queen's Almoner, and
Master of Trinity-College in Cambridge, and after Dean of Westminister, Dr,
Parker, late Dean of Lincoln, soon after Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. May,
late Dean of St. Paul's, and soon after Elect of York, Dr. Cox, late Dean of
Westminster, and Christ's-Church Oxon, after Bishop of Ely, Dr. Pilkington,
late Master of St. Iohn's-College, Cambridge, and after Bishop of Durham,
Grindal, late Chaplain to Bishop Ridley, and soon after Bishop of London, and
Whitehead, a grave and elderly Divine, highly esteemed by Archbishop Cranmer:
These four last having been Exiles in the last Reign. And our Knight, Sir Tho.
Smith, his Office was to call them together, and to be among them. And after
Consulation with these, other Men o Learning were to be drawn in, being grave
and apt Men, to give their Assents. And accordingly these Men met, it being now
Winter, at Sir Thomas's House, which then was in Chanon-Row. Where was laid in
a sufficient quality of Wood, Coals and drink for their use. And here was Sir
Thomas Assistant with the rest in the reviewing of King Edward's Book of Common
Prayer, to be again received and established in the Church, and in several
other things to take place in the intended Reformation.

And when in the beginning of the Queen's Reign, And in one of the Committees
for the State;
( viz. December. 23) the several public important Affairs of the Kingdom were
committed to the Cares of diverse Noble Persons and Courtiers in five distinct
Committees; as I. The Cares of the North Parts, II. The Survey of the Office of
the Treasurer of the Chamber, III. For Portsmouth and the Isle of Wight, IV.
For Enquiry into what Lands had been granted by the Late Queen Mary from the
Crown, V. For the Consideration of such Things as were necessary for the
ensuing Parliament; For this last Sir. Tho. Smith was one of the Committee,
together with the Keeper of the Great Seal, the Judges and some others.

An.1559.
In the first Year of the Queen, he was also by her employed to give the
Treasurer and Chamberlains of his Native Town of Walden, And in Swearing the
Officers of Walden.
their Oaths of Fidelity to her Majesty. To him and George Nicolls the
Recorder, a Commission from the Queen, dated May 1. 1559. was issued for that
purpose, and the Form of the Oath to be Administered, set down therein. A Copy
of which Commission yet remains in one of the Town Books.

Sir Thomas This Service in the Commission of the Peace.
And being in the Commission of the Peace, he now did very good Service in the
County of Essex where he lived. For I find him in June one of the Chief in
executing a Commission of an Order taken at Chelmesford, June 16. 1559. by the
Earl of Oxford, the Lord Lieutenant, and the rest of the Justices there met. It
was for the taking care to the Orders newly made by the Parliament for the
Reformation of Religion, and for the mustering and putting the County in a
Posture of Defense. In which, I make no doubt, Sir Thomas had a great hand, and
was a special Director. The sum of these Orders was, That every Justice of
Peace was to take an Oath, which was provided for that purpose; and that every
one appointed to be a Justice should not forbear to Serve, or take the Oath.
That the Justices should call three or four of the Honest Inhabitants of every
Parish, and charge them to get the CommonPrayer Book and Administration of the
Sacraments lately Authorized by Parliament to be said and used. And that the
said Inhabitants should see the Curates in each Parish use such Service as was
appointed in the said Book, and no other. And if any Curate refused so to do,
or Ministered some other way than was set down, or Preach or Teach any thing in
Derogation to the same, to apprehend and take him and bring him before the
Lord Lieutenant to receive Punishment according to the Statute. The said
Inhabitants also to present the Names of all Persons as did absent themselves
from Divine Service. That the Justices and all other Gentlemen give their
Attendance upon such Preachers as should be sent by the Queen or the Bishops,
so long as the Preachers should tarry in those Parts. Also, to order Watches
and Beacons to be kept within their several Division. To cause the Act for
Rebellion, and the Statute for Archery to be Published to the People. To see to
the Punishment of Vagabonds and seditious Tellers of Tales. To send their
Precepts to all Constables, to give admonition to all Persons to provide
themselves with Horse and Armor, according as the Law lately made in that
behalf ordained. The Constables to direct a Brief of the Statute of Armor with
the Pains contained, that it might be Notified to all Men, how they were to
provide for the Musters. And within three Weeks after the former Precept, to
send forth Precepts to the Constables, requiring all Men from Sixteen to Sixty,
chargeable by the last Statute for finding of Armor, to repair before the
Justices at such a Day and Place as they should appoint; and thither to bring
all their Household Servants and Arms and Horses, as they were bounden to find.
Also, to Certify to the Lord-Liuetenant of the Default and Lack of Furniture
in any. To choose out the most likely and able Men for the Wars, and put their
Names in a Book: And particularly note their Names that should be most meet for
Demi-launces, Light-horsemen, Gunners, Archers, Pikemen and Billmen. Musters
being taken, the Justices to deliver to the LordLieutenant a Certificate
containing the Number of all the Able Men within every Hamlet and Parish, etc.

Besides, the Oath which the Justices were to take, mentioned in the first
Article abovementioned, they were to Subscribe their Names to a Writing to be
transmitted to the Council, Subscription of the Justices.
Acknowledging it their bounden Duty to observe the Contents of the Act of
Parliament, that is, the Act for Uniformity of Common Prayer, etc. And for the
Observation of the same Law, they did firmly promise that they and their
Families would repair at all Times to their ParishChurches, or, upon reasonable
Impediment, to other usual Chapels for the same Common Prayer and Divine
Service: and to receive the Holy Sacrament from time to time, according to the
Tenor of the said Act: And none of them that Subscribed should say or do, or
assent or suffer any Thing to be done or said by their Procurement, in Contempt
of any part of the Religion Established by that Act. In which Subscription, as
I find the Form of it written down by Sir Thomas in one of his PaperBooks, so I
repute him to have been a great Counselor, for the furthering of Religion, and
the excluding of all Pophishly affected from having any Countenance from the
State.

Great Discourse was now had every where about the Queen's Marriage. Ann. 1560.
For it was the Nations great Desire to see the Queen have a Prince to succeed
in the Government after her. Smith's Dialogue concerning the Queen's Marriage.
The Queen seemed not inclinable to Marry; and there were some that flattered
her, and declared it were better for her and the Realm, that she should remain
single as she was. But the most part, and especially the Protestant, was
earnest for her Marriage: Yet these varied; some were for her Marrying abroad,
others at home. Of this Argument, Sir Thomas drew up an ingenious Book,
consisting of diverse Orations for and against the Queen's Marriage, fained to
be spoken by certain Dialogists according as their Judgments were in this
Point. Their Names were Agamus, whose Judgment was for the Queen's not
Marrying, Philoxenes, who was for her Marrying, but for her Marrying a
Stranger, and Axenius, who was for her Marrying at home with some one of her
Noble Subjects. For the sight of this choice MS. I am beholden to my worthy
Friends, Sir Richard Gibbs of Weltham in Suffolk, Knight, and the Reverend Mr.
John Laughton, public Library Keeper of Cambridge.

The first Entrance into this Dialogue begins thus.

As I was walking in my Garden all alone, Francis Walsingham came unto me: And
whether I espied him at the first coming or no, my Head Being occupied with
Matters, I know not. But after the first common Words of Welcome, and How do
ye, and Ye have been long a Stranger, What News? etc. I pray you, says he,
tell me, if I may be so bold to ask you, What is that you are musing upon so
sadly alone, when I came in. Methoughts you had some great Matter in your Head:
For ye scarcely did see me, and loath ye were to be interrupted. Ye guess well,
quoth I; For I was recording with my self a Communication, which was had here,
even in this Place, partly in Walking, and partly in sitting upon the Green
Bench, of certain Friends of yours and mine, which came now from the Court to
solace themselves in the Country, and took my House in their way. I pray you,
said he, if I may hear it, let me hear some piece of it. For it must be some
great Matter that makes you Muse of it all alone? S. It is great Matter
indeed, quoth I, Marry it is a Man does take it. For it was a Disputation much
after the old fort of Plato's Dialogues and Tullies, and a Thing which I would
wish some Learned Man had in hand that could handle it well, as it will bear.
For the Matter seems worthy the Writing. And they surely each Man defended
his Part stoutly and lively with so many Reasons as came to his Mind, I dare
say for that time. W. And whose Part took you? But I am a Fool to ask you that
Question before you tell me the Matter and Argument of the Disputation. S. The
Matter was of the Marriage of the Queen's Majesty, whom I had thought, that all
the World as well as I, had wished to have been Married, that it might have
pleased God to have blessed and made glad our Country with a Young Prince of
her Body. W. And is there any Man so wicked and so foolish that does not wish
so? S. I cannot tell you what he does indeed, but I assure you one, whom I dare
say ye neither account wicked nor a fool in reasoning, would show himself not
only of the contrary mind, but to have great Reasons for his Opinion. W. That
is but as you Philosophers and Rhetoricians do. For you care not what part you
take. For if you list, you will never lack Arguments; and would make some
simple Men as I am that hear you, believe, that the Cow is Wood, and that the
Moon is made of a green Cheese. S. When you speak of Learned Men, put me out of
the number. But he held that her Majesty did best in thus keeping her self sole
as she does; and would seem to be in mind, that it were best for her not to
Marry. W. Mary, that is a Mind indeed; if it were known abroad, he were of such
a mind, whosoever he were, I dare say every Man would spit at him in the
Streets as he goes; and for my part I should never love him. S. Why? If her
Majesty were of that mind, as it seems by diverse of her Doings and Sayings
she is, would you not love her? W. Love her? Her Majesty I cannot choose but
love: Her Virtues be such, that whosoever knows her Majesty (though he were not
her Subject) must needs love her. As for us that are her Subjects, Duty
compels us to love, honor and obey her, to take her part whatsoever it
shall please her Highness to do in that Case. But I cannot choose but with
otherwise. S. Well, another held the contrary. Mary, he would in any Case her
Majesty should Marry within the Realm. W. God's Blessing on his Heart: Him I
like well. S. The third thought it more convenient, that her Majesty should
have some Prince a Stranger; and brought great Reasons therefore. W. That was,
I dare lay a Wager, some Italianated English Man, or some Mongrel that has
good store of Outlandish Blood in him. S. Ye judge very fast, before ye either
know the Man, or have perused his Reasons. Well; the fourth seems most
indifferent. For he was but directly against the first. For in any wife he
liked not that sole Life of a Queen. For the rest, whether it pleased her
Highness to take a Nobleman of England, or a Stranger, he was indifferent. W.
Sir, if I may be so bold as to hear the whole Discourse, you shall do me the
greatest pleasure in the World. And seeing you were repeating the same with
your self, you were as well tell it out. With one labor you shall repeat that
thing that else you would do, and pleasure me your Friend. S. Neither the
labor is all one to meditate in a Man's Mind, and to speak out with his
Tongue: Nor his Peril is like. For if I fail in the repeating to my self,
either in my Memory of the Reasons, or plain uttering of them, I am the
Offender and Punisher, no Man else can control me. When I shall take upon me
to tell them unto you, you shall I know sometimes have cause to find fault with
my Memory, and sometimes with my Wit, and most times with my Eloquence. And
they peradventure have cause to be angry with me, because with my ill
rehearsing I do weaken their Arguments, and with my Rudeness stain their
Eloquence. W. I pray you let these things pass, and do but as well as you can.
For I can desire no better with Reason. Let me hear also what was disputed
amongst them. S. It began thus;

After Dinner they were disposed to walk into my rude Garden; and there, I
cannot tell well who, one began to tell, that now of fresh the Rumor of the
King of Sw^^^n Erieus's coming hither (for as ye know by the Death of his
Father Gustave, it began to be stayed) was renewed again, and that of many he
was undoubtedly looked for shortly to come himself hither into England, and in
proper Person, not by Embassage, to be a Wooer to her Majesty. Then, quoth I,
would that Wooing were once done, and that her Majesty had one whom she could
like of, that we might see the hope and fruit of Succession more near at hand.
What, said one of them, is there not in England as goodly Men, Noble, Witty and
Courageous, as be in other strange Places? What need it be fought so far that
we have so (...)? By my Troth, quoth another of them, me think in far more
better and honorable for all purpose, that her Majesty should take to ^d some
Prince or Nobleman a Stranger, than any of her own Subjects. Well, says the
third, and I am in that mind, (although I know it is not the most plausible
Opinion) that her Majesty does best to keep her thus sole, unmarried as she is.
The fourth at that was as much displeased as you were. Neither, says he, am I
altogether Proselyte of the first Opinion; nor yet of the second: But so, that
her Majesty Marry, whether our Countryman, or a Stranger, I like indifferently:
Mary, to hold that she should not Marry, I hold it an unnatural, and in manner
a wicked Opinion against our Country. My Masters, quoth I, we have all leisure,
thanks be to God; and ye may make me now glad. For methinks I am in Plato's
Academy, or Cicero's Tuseulane. I pray you, seeing you all four be of diverse
Opinions, let us hear your Reasons. We can have no better Place nor Time. And
if this Green Bank be not soft enough, we will have Cushions brought to fit on.
To that they all agreed, and said they needed no Cushions, the Bank was so
fair, and the Garden so pleasant. A little they strived who should begin. But
he that spoke against Marriage, said, he would gladly first declare unto them,
that his Opinion was not so strange nor so unreasonable as they took it: And so
he began.

Then he who was for the Queen's sole Life, represented under the name of
Agamus [ i. e. (...) Calebs] or ^^dspite, makes his Discourse at large. After
he had ceased, Philo^enus, [ i. e. (...)] or Love-alien, makes his Oration in
Answer to Agamus, for the Queen's Marriage. Then the same Philoxenus enters
into another Speech fortified with diverse Arguments, for the Queen's Marrying
with a Stranger. Then spoke Axenius [(...)] or Homefriend; for the Queen's
Marrying an Englishman. In all these Discourses, sir Thomas Smith lays down
what Reasons could be made use of in savor of the Argument insisted on;
adorned also with handsome Eloquence, and furnished with proper Examples out of
History, ancient and modern. In the last, and chief Discourse of all, Smith
seems to intend himself the Speaker under the Name of Axenius, I shall
exemplify these Orations for the Readers pleasure and satisfaction. And the
rather, because they have many things relating to public Affairs not long
before happening in the Realm under the Reigns of King Henry, King Edward and
Queen Mary. But if I should place them here, it would too much interrupt the
Course of the History; therefore they are reserved for the Appendix; where the
Reader shall find them. (...). III


CHAP. VIII. A^. 1562. Q. Eliz.
Sir Thomas's Embassies to France.
The Principle Queen Elizabeth went by, (...)
at her first coming to the Crown, was to displace as few as she might of the
Old Ministers of State: Whereby it came to pass that many of those that were
her Sisters Servants remained so to her. Therefore though she parted with Queen
Mary's two Secretaries, Bourn and Boxal, strong Papists, who came in the rooms
of Cecil and Smith, yet she kept Secretary Petre still, and replaced Cecil. And
intending to retain only two Principal Secretaries for the future, there was no
room for our Smith. But he was not to be laid aside; His Abilities were too
well known. And therefore the Queen resolved to make use of him for a time in
her Business with foreign Princes, till the might prefer him in her own Court.
D. (...) to France
Thus, (not to mention that he seems to be dispatched abroad into France in
the Year 1559. together with (...), Bishop of Ely, the Lord H^^rard, and Dr.
Wolten, when a Peace was concluded with that Crown; and there resided) in the
Year 1502. he was thought a s^t Person to be employed in the Embassy to France.
Of whom Cambden in his History takes no notice, though he does of the Embassage.
He received his last Instructions in September, and a Declaration written in
French; and Sir Tho. Gresham the Queen's Merchant gave him Credit. The Matter
of the Embassy was to urge the Restitution of Calais, and to keep the
Correspondence with the Protestant Prince of Conde; that in case of a Breach
with France, he might be Assistant to the English against that Crown.

Stops at Calais; and why.
Sir Thomas made some stay at Calais, waiting for the coming of Sir Nicolas
Throgmort^^, the Queen's Ambassador then in France, that they might repair to
the French Court together. But he m^de a Delay at Orleans upon some By ^nds, to
the Prejudice of the Queen's Affairs. So ^ir Thomas at last set forward himself
toward the Court, where more good was to be done with his Presence, than
otherwise. ^ut as for Thr^gmorton's Abode at Orleans, done perhaps to discredit
or impede the success of Smith's Embassy, (and so he seemed to take it, as did
others also) Secretary Cecil wrote to Smith, that he took it to be upon such
reasonable Causes as he had alleged, though other Folks were not so well
persuaded. And he wished him safe at home, to answer his own Doings: Where, as
that good Secretary wrote, he should not lack his Friendship for diverse
Respects. But this was the beginning of no good understanding between
Thr^gmorton and Smith, though both joint Ambassadors in France for the Queen.

Directions to him from the Council.
The Queen's Council wrote their Letters to him in October, wherein they showed
him what passed between the French-Ambassador and them; and how a matter of
Treason of the Poles, practiced by the French and Spanish. Ambassadors, had
been of late discovered. Which although it were a Matter of no great Moment to be
feared; Yet thereby was made apparent, how truly the Queen and her Council
judged of the House of Gaise. And that so he might, as he saw Cause, take
advantage thereby to maintain the former Reasons published by her Majesty, for
justification of her Doings, in sending Forces into France: As the Secretary
wrote to this Ambassador. But to look a little back.

Smith's great Profession was, Smith (...).
when he came into France, to be a Peace mover. As soon as he had Audience of
the King and Queen, he wrote the Council a full Account thereof to their great
satisfaction. And the Secretary wrote to him, that they all allowed of his Zeal
to procure Peace, and of his Diligence in so ample a manner, as by his Writing
had appeared.

The Cardinal of F^rr^^ra, (...) with the Pope's Legate.
the Pope's Legate, being then at Court, Smith had much conference with him.
But for this he had not escaped a Reprimand from the Court, had not some of his
good Friends interceded. Of this Cecil gave him notice in these Words in the
Month of November: The Secretaries A^vi^e to the (...).
But to write plainly and friendly unto you, as I would you should, if our
places were changed, the most here have misliked that you have treated with the
Legate, and seem willing that you should have been reprimanded therefore. But
therein I and others unto your good meaning have so tempered the Cause, as
thereof you shall hear no otherwise, except it be by me, and some others your
private good Friends. For that, as he added, there were among them in England,
diverse very scrupulous of dealing with the Popes Ministers. And therefore he
advised the Ambassador to forbear the Cardinal in these Affairs, and to use
other Courtesy to him as he should see cause, for the State of Ferrara, as the
Ambassador had well made the Distinction to himself. The Secretary also now
advised him to beware of one Monsieur de Serre, saying that he was very Fine
and Nimble in all his Practiques.

The Queen's Orders to him.
In our Ambassadors last Dispatch he wrote to the Queen, and therein took the
Liberty to give her certain good Counsel; which Letter she took in good part,
and ordered the Secretary to thank him for it, and willed him also to warn the
Ambassador of the Cardinal of Ferrara, and likewise to let all the Favorers of
the Prince of Conde manifestly understand, that without his Consent the
Ambassador would not enter into any Treaty with France.

Three Evils in France.
Smith, in this Embassy, had but ill Entertainment in France; for he went over
in a Year wherein he met with three Evils, Plague, intestine War and Famine.
Whereof the next Year the Plague came over into England: The intestine War was
pretty well ceased, but the Famine, that is, the Dearth of Provision remained
and increased there more and more.

February 1. Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, JointAmbassador with Smith, came over
into England to the Queen, leaving Smith alone in France; and nine days after
he sent over his Man to the Court with Letters.

And so well had Sir Thomas managed his Office, Smith's Behavior in his
Embassy.
and described the Affairs of France so fully, that the Letters he wrote
thereof to Secretary Cecil did much delight him: And, in an Answer he told him,
he had read over his Letters several times, Heartily Thanking him for his large
Letters; which contented him so well, as indeed he was delighted to read them
twice, or some thrice. And such was Smith's wise and true English Behavior,
and eloquent Utterance, that he got himself great Credit and Reputation among
the Frenchmen. Concerning which the Secretary, in one of his Letters to him,
used these Words, That he was glad to see his Credit so good to do good: And
indeed (added he) using Wisdom therewith, courteous and gracious Speech (which
was one of Smith's Accomplishments) does much profit.

And as that Nation was crafty and fine in all their Negotiations with other
States, Entertains a Subtle Spy.
so our Ambassador used Art, to be a Match for them; for he made use of a
certain subtle Spy in Orleans, whose Letters he received and dispatched into
England: And by the Intelligence gathered by this means our Ambassador did
excellent Service, which occasioned the Secretary in a Letter to him, speaking
of Smith's last Letters, and the Copy of others sent to the said Smith from
Orleans, to say, That he saw his great Diligence, and to speak in proper Terms,
that he dealt very cunningly, meet for the place he held: Advising him to
cherish the Party that served his Turn, and that he should be kept out of
danger, whereby his Service might last the longer. This he wrote to the
Ambassador in Cipher. The Secretary added, that he had notified him, and his
Service, to the Queen's Majesty; and so he bid the Ambassador let him know.

His Complaint.
But notwithstanding the Ambassador could not do that Service he would, for he
complained that the Instructions from England came not to him; and he was
perplexed for lack of Intelligence from thence. But the Secretary satisfied him
in part concerning that Point, in the Answer he next made him; which was, That
he knew not what more Instructions he could require than what he already had,
which was to prosecute no other Ends but the Restitution of Calais. And as to
his dealing with the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral of France, whom the
Secretary suspected to be about making Peace with the French without the
English, (as they did indeed not long after) he advertised him, how he ought to
urge to them their Promises and Compacts under their Hands and Seals: And that
if they should have no regard to these, they might expect the Judgment of God
upon them for their false Dealing. The Contents of the Contract between the
Queen, and them, were, That She should pay them a great Sum of Money, and send
them six Thousand Men for their Defense: And that they should deliver into Her
hands, for Caution, N^whaven, which She should hold in her Hands till Calais
should be restored. The Letters that past from Sir Thomas, in this Embassy this
Year, are still extant in the PaperOffice in two Bundles: One whereof about a
General Peace. And therein Letters also from Middleton, sent from Smith to the
Admiral of France.

Our Ambassador abode still in France, until the next Year 1563. An. 1563.
Then Monsieur Briquemault came over to the Queen from the Prince of Conde: The
Ambassadors Instructions concerning the Prince of C^nde.
Whose Business was to eadeavour to bring the Queen not to insist upon the
Restitution of Calais but to be satisfied with some other Terms. But in May,
when he departed, She utterly denied that there was any other way of
Satisfaction. And the Queen then also wrote Letters to her Ambassador to deal
very roundly with the Prince and the Admiral. And so the Secretary thought they
had deserved, as he wrote to the Ambassador. And yet, as he added, he doubted
not but the Ambassador would have Consideration how to strike therein, whether
high or low.

In Letters, The Ambassador sends News to the Council.
our Ambassador Smith had lately sent to the Court, he gave great content.
Wherein as he advertised the Lords of the Council plentifully of the Variety of
News in France, so he gave good plain Rules how the same Advertisements should
be taken and judged. And both the one and the other pleased them very well.

Ordered to speak only in Latin in his Negotiation.
In his Negotiation with France this Year, when things were well nigh accorded,
some Reports came out of France, which so offended the Queen, that she altered
her Resolutions; and among other things commanded Sir Thomas, that whereas
before he Negotiated in one Language (which I suppose was the French) he should
now use no other Language but Latin. Concerning which, thus the Secretary wrote
to him: This alteration of your Speech into Latin, I thought very strange; but
surely Her Majesty had occasion ministered by such Reports as now were brought,
to think the same were best. And therefore using no more the vulgar tongue of
the Nation, but the Learned, things for the future might be kept more private;
and therefore, added he, I know very well you can do this in the Latin as well
as any Man, and I nothing doubt but that ye will do it.

Contention between Smith and Throgmorton.
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, who returned into France, July 20th. and was
Ambassador there with Sir Thomas, by means of secret practicing at the Court,
was arrested by the French Kings's Order at Caudebee August 3. He was a
Favorite of the Lord Robert Duddeley, and by his means dispatched thither.
This Throgmorton was subtle and active, and a man of Intrigue. He and Sir
Thomas, a person of more Gravity and Discretion, could not well comport
together; Throgmorton rather hindering than furthering the Queen's Business by
his over-practising. The Dissension between them came to the Court. Throgmorton
had a great Friend there, namely, the Lord Robert Duddeley; so Sir Thomas's
course was to sue to the Secretary for his good Word. The Secretary wrote to
him, that as he had promised him his Friendship, so he saw it well bestowed.
Smith also desired him to acquaint the Lord Robert with the difference between
him and Sir Nicolas, writing also the Case. This Cecil accordingly caused to be
shown, and procured Mr. Summers (one who was employed backward and forward in
this Treaty between England and France) to report his knowledge, which it seems
made more for Sir Thomas, than his own Writing did. But the wise Secretary
wished, as he said, such matters to be swallowed up in forgetfulness, knowing
how by these private Animosities between the Queen's Ambassadors public
Business was hindered.

Smith also now sent a Letter to the Lord Robert himself, Smith's Plainness
pleases the Lord Robert.
which was writ with so much freedom and honest plainness, that it pleased the
said Lord, and set all right between the said Ambassador and him. The Lord
Robert showed the Letter to Cecil, and much commended his plainness of Writing
to him, and confessed it to be both wisely and friendly done. For Smith was for
Truth and Plainness, as Throgmorton was for Doubling. And the Secretary was of
Smith's mind, telling him in his Correspondence, That he for his part thought
it always the best way so to deal; for that though playing under Board served
sometimes the Jugglers, yet we saw by proof in friendship it lasted not, but
brought inconvenience.

Instru^^^ons ^^ Smith's ^^in^ng with the Pro^^stan^^.
When the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral, as was hinted before, had made a
separate Peace with the French King, and Newhaven was surrendered to the French
by the English, and Sir Nich. Throgmorton remained a prisoner to that King,
Smith's great Business now (being the month of September) was to get the said
Ambassador set at Liberty, and to get the Money lent in March last to the said
Prince and Admiral (which was 300000 Crowns) repaid, and withal to put them in
mind of their Promises made to the Queen. The Secretary told him, That he
should gain great Good Will to recover the said Throgmorton; and he thought
whatever small Color or Pretense they had for his Confinement, that much
Labor must obtain him. And Good Master Smith, added he, employ all your
Credit, and assay the Protestants there to do somewhat like to their Promises.
I marvel what Answer the Prince, and the the Admiral can make for the Money
lent them. Though Smith himself was now confined at Paris, as a Prisoner, as he
had been, Aug. 30. at Melun, the French King being then in Normandy; yet while
he was thus confined, he was sent for Sept. 11. to the Court at Corboil: But
soon after, that is, Sept. 13. he had Liberty granted, but not further than the
City of Paris. The Grant of his full Liberty followed on the 17th. And so had
the Queen confined the French Ambassador, but in no worse place than Sir Tho.
Smith's own Lodgings at Etoir.

In November our Ambassador was drawing to a Peace with the French, Smith
reateth for Peace.
Orders having been sent him to Conclude it. The Dealing was to be very
private, that is to say, Smith alone, with one single Person on the French
side. But yet he had so much Experience of the Misreports, and false Relations,
which the French abounded with, that he was afraid to deal alone; thinking,
that if some others were present, they might serve for Witnesses, if occasion
should be, of what passed on his part. This Scruple he communicated to his
Friend the Secretary, who told him very well, That although he might well be
fearful to deal alone, yet in dealing also with one alone he could incur no
peril of being misreported: For that Equity would save them both, that one
should not convinco another.

Here let us make a little Halt, before we go on in our Relation of Sir Thomas
Smith's Managery of his public Charge. And we shall take notice of some
Matters of a more private Nature which fell out to him, or wherein he was
concerned while he was here in France. Dr. Haddons Advice to Smith.


He had some cause to be jealous, how this his Negotiation was taken at Court;
and was very desirous to know what his Friends here thought of him. And
therefore to his intimate Friend Doctor Haddon, Master of the Requests, he
signified his Desire to be informed herein by him; to which Haddon answered,
That Smith knew, that he was not acquainted with the secret Counsels of the
Court, but that those, who, in his Judgment, were the most intelligent among
their Friends, attributed much to his Wisdom and Moderation; and specially
Cecil, their common Friend, who always made Honorable and Friendly mention of
him. Cicero could not correct Cato, as he confessed himself, he might lightly
mend him, and fashion him; but Haddon could neither correct Smith, nor mend
him. But he would be the Author of this Piece of Advice to him, that he should
be his own Counselor, and that he should transact Causes with himself, and not
be led away by the Blasts of Reports, or the Storms arising from Fears; not to
pursue those Purposes that he believed would tend most to the benefit and right
Administration of the State. Let who is will be Flamnsinius, added he, I would
have you to be Q. Fabius; and I hope you will be so. erentius Varro's Fame
flies through all Commonwealths; but the most happy Memory of Paulus Aemylius
is cel brated, even in his most unhappy Death; for we cannot do any thing but
may chance to fail sometimes; and where things are wisely foreseen, they ought
to have a just Praise, however some Accident may turn them to disadvantage; and
he advised him to have that of old Ennius in his memory, Non ponebat enim
rumores ante salutem.
And the mind, said he, cannot remain steady in public Causes, nor Counsels
consist together, unless there be a Constancy in our Doings accompanying. He
acknowledged Smith's Condition, in this respect, was somewhat hard, and that he
received the Laws of his Embassy from others, and managed the Affairs of the
State by Prescriptions laid down to him. Yet as you may, said he, interpose
your self, and be not silent when you perceive any thing that may turn to the
help and benefit of us your Countrymen at home. He went on in his Counsels to
his Friend: He bad him abandon all Converse with loose Women, for they blunted
the Edge of the Mind, and afforded nothing but sudden Mischiefs of Body and
Soul: That he should not be too much disturbed at the Offenses, the Passions,
and the Mistakes of others, as becoming neither his Prudence, nor Learning, nor
manner of Life. For the various Inclinations and thoughts of Men have ever
produced such Waves and high Tides in humane Life, and will do so to the end:
In which, if we proceed with Reason, as much as we can, we shall be upheld with
the Conscience of our good Deeds. Nor shall the hasty Gusts of Fortune, move a
mind founded in Wisdom. Then he remembered him of his own former excellent
Discourses, concerning Patience and Fortitude, and of the Praise of the Mind of
Man. And he asked him to what end they tended, being uttered by him with so
much moving Eloquence. What? said he, only to lie hid in the Schools, where he
once spoke them? Or, to be enclosed within the Walls of Cambridge? Or, may they
not show themselves abroad, and be seen in the Sun, and be brought forth into
Act? Will they not accompany you in France, if need be? For my part, I should
not much esteem these Arts, in which I know you are excellently instructed,
unless they be now present with you, when you have most need of them; nor
should I think you wise at all, if in these difficult times you be absent from
your self, when you ought especially to be present. These were the brave
Philosophical Arguments that one Scholar entertained the other with.

CHAP. IX. Osorius his Letter to the Queen, and Dr. Haddon's Answer. Difference
between Smith and Throgmorton, the Queen's joint Ambassadors. Smith and Cecil
Friends.
BEsides public Matters, The Ambassador s^nds over Books to Cecil.
the Secretary held a more private Correspondency with our Ambassador, as
occasion happened, concerning Learning and Religion; and according to his
Order, Smith procured and sent him diverse Books, which where not to be had at
home. Thus once he conveyed over Onuphrius and Polydore, and certain French
Books of Genealogy and Chronology for the Secretary.

There had been a dangerous Book wrote in Latin, Smith o procure a Book to be
Printed in France.
and lately printed abroad against the present State of Religion in England. An
Answer to which, in the same Language, the Secretary had procured, and wanted
nothing but to have it printed abroad, as the other was. In a Letter wrote to
the Ambassador, dated November 28th. he wished he had a sight of it, and that
he would give his allowance thereof by some Commendatory Epistle to be added;
and if he could by some good means, procure it to be well printed in France,
without peril of the Book, he would send him the Copy: Or if he could get it
Printed at Strasburgh, or Basil, by some means from thence, he would also send
it him; but if he could not, he would send by some of his Men to Christopher
Mount, the Queen's Agent in Strasburgh, for him to take care for the Publishing
of it.

Osorius's Epis^le to the Queen,
But to relate a few particulars of this Book, which made no small stir in these
Days. Hieronymus Osorius, a Portugal, then a private Man, afterward Bishop of
Arcoburge or Sylvane, wrote an Epistle to Queen Elizabeth, in an elegant Latin
Style, being nothing in effect but an Admonition to Her to wheel about to
Popery. In this Epistle, he imagined many monstrous Errors to be nurselled in
our Church, and with much reproachful Language, depraved the Professors of the
Gospel. This Libel was soon after printed in France, both in Latin and French;
as it was also printed in English at Antwerp, Ann. 1565. Translated by one
Richard Shacklock, M. A. and Student of the Civil Law in Lovain, and Entitled,
A Pearl for a Prince.

Answered by Haddon.
This the State thought necessary to have an Answer to, because, it reflected
much upon the Justice and Wisdom of the Nation. Dr. Walter Haddon, one of the
finest Learning, and of the most Ciceronian style in England, was employed to
answer this Foreigners Book, which he finished in this Year, 1563. Beginning,
Legi, Hieronyme, tuam Epistolam, etc. It is extant in the said Haddon's
Lucubrations, Published by Hatcher of Cambridge.

In the Beginning, Haddon showed the Cause of his answering of Osorius, and of
his publishing the same; namely, that Osorius had indeed writ his Epistle
separately to the Queen; yet it seemed to be intended for all, because it was
published in Print, and was open to the Eyes of all Men. He added, that this
Author had taken much upon him, that he, being a private Man, and at a great
distance, both by Sea and Land, unacquaint^d also with English Affairs, should
so considently take upon him to speak to the Queens Majesty; that he diminished
the Dignity of the Laws of England, and that in general, he mad^ the Nation
guilty of a wicked and malicious kind of Novelty. Haddon in his Answer studied
Brevity; and they were only some particular Points, whereunto he thought good
to Answer, although not to the full neither: Because he supposed (as he wrote
in his Apology) that Osorius might be deluded by some malicious Reports of our
Adversaries.

Haddon's Book being thus prepared, This Answer recommend^d to Smith o revise,
the care was to get it published: And because Osorius was printed in France,
both in Latin and French, Cecil thought it convenient, that Haddon's said
Answer should be printed in the same Place, and in both the same Languages.
Hereupon the said Cecil in January, sent the Treatise to our Ambassador,
desiring him to procure the Printing of it, and that with all Expedition: And
that he would add to it something by his own hand, where and as he thought
good, and that he would procure it to speak French, and to be published in that
Language also. And accordingly this Epistle Responsory of Dr. Haddon, was so
well considered over, and weighed by Smith, and had his Castigations, that it
might be reckoned to be Smith's Work as well as Haddon's. For Haddon also had
entreated him to ponder diligently his Answer, that nothing might be in it, but
what was sit to be seen and read for the Vindication of the Queen and Realm.

And Publ^sh.
Smith also spoke to Robert Stephens, the French King's Printer, that he would
take it in hand. He desiring the Copy, to see whether there were any thing in
it, which touched the State of that Kingdom, as also to consider the Bulk of
the Book, and on Condition, he had leave of the Queen, undertook to do it. But
it received some stop by this means, (which probably enough might have been a
thing plotted by Osorius's Friends, or Queen Elizabeth's, and the Nations
Enemies.) One de Valla came to the English Ambassador, and desired he might
have the sight of this Epistle of Haddon's; and whether he had the Ambassador's
leave or no, went to Stephens as from the Ambassador, and took the Book from
him to peruse it for a time. But while it was in de Valla's Possession, the
Provost Marshal arrested the said de Valla, upon pretense of some Crime, and
withal, took this Book out of his hand, and so it was brought to the Court, and
remained in the possession of the said Provost. This created work for the
Ambassador.

So he wrote to the Chancellor of France, acquainting him with the whole
matter; relating to him, how Osorius had in the Book traduced the Manners,
Lives and Religion of England, not according to the truth of the thing, as
indeed it was, but according to his Apprehension; and as ignorant Men had out
of Envy represented matters to him. A License for which he labors to obtain
from the Chanc^^lor*
And that if he had kept his Book within its own Bounds, and in the Shadow of
his own Closet, no matter would have been made of it: But when he had made that
public Vaunt of his performance, by setting it forth in Print, and making a
Boast of himself to the World, in this new and unusual Argument, what did he
do, but display to all, not only how ignorant he was of the Institution,
Manners and Customs, which we, said he, use at present in England, but how
little he knew of those Controversies and Questions, which now exercised the
whole Christian World, and to the understanding, whereof the minds of all were
so intent? Thus the Ambassador discoursed in his Letter. Two things therefore
in Conclusion he requested of the Chancellor; one was, that after he had read
this Epistle of Dr. Haddon, he would procure, that the Copy might be restored
to Stephens to Print it Cum Privilegio; or if that were not allowed, yet that
he might not be hindered from printing it in Latin and French. Or if yet that
would not be granted, at least to restore the Copy, that it might be printed
elsewhere. This was written by Smith, March 6th. from Melum, a place about
twenty Miles from Paris.

To which the Chancellor gave this Answer, Which he will not grant.
That the French Queen was much offended with those Folks that presumed to
print Osorius his Book in France without the King's License, and commanded him,
the Chancellor, to enquire after those that dared to Publish it, and to see
them punished. He prayed Smith, or his Messenger to procure him one of
Osorius's Books, that he might peruse it in order to the taking of Punishment
on the Printers. That the Queen, as he said, might know, that good Kings, even
in War, have a care of the Honor of crowned Heads. But disapproving the doing
it as they did, they could not, he said, permit of Haddon's Answer to be
printed; and so the French Queen ordered the Copy of the said Book to be sent
back.

Smith presse^h it.
Smith followed this Business, and sent the Chancellor a Copy of Osorius in
French, which he had gotten at Paris; for all the Latin ones were dispersed and
sold, as the Bookseller had plainly reported, and that he had printed about
500, for he had no need to deny it. For in express Words it appeared, that the
Book was Printed Cum Privilegio. So that, as he wrote to the Chancellor, it was
not po^^ible to suppress the Book, being printed with Authority, nor puni^h the
Printer who had such License; and now to prohibit t^^m to be sold, was, as he
expressed it to him, to shut the Cage, when the Birds were flown.

Smith therefore further pressed the Chancellor in this manner; That this only
remained, viz. that both Parties should be heard, as well he that made the
Answer, Argues with the Chancellor of France about it.
as he that put in the Caution. And whereas the Chancellor thought it
inconvenient to allow Haddon's Book to be printed, because it would be nothing
but a contending in Reproaches and ill Words; Smith said, that there would be
no such rude Contention between them, but that whereas Osorius, in an
Oratorical way, shook our Forms of Religion, and taxed the Manners of certain
Men; Haddon showed, that Osorius indeed knew neither the one nor the other, and
that such was the state of the thing, that in his Judgment, it were better,
that both their Orations should be Read, than either be suppressed: For that,
both of them were wrote Eloquently, and in Latin; and that which they wrote,
did not at all touch the State of France. Boldly adding, That when Osorius had
a Liberty Cum Privilegio, of accusing our Forms, we seemed to demand that which
was but equal of him, the Chancellor of France, namely to be heard with the
like Privilege; and that it must seem hard, that a liberty of Haranguing should
be granted to one Party only. The effect of this was, that our Ambassador got
the Book Printed not long after, as shall be related in due place.

But though Smith was not concerned any further in this Affair, The Progress of
this Controversy.
after he had brought the Book to the Press with his own Corrections and
Additions; yet it may not be amiss to relate the Progress of this Controversy,
which I shall do briefly. There past over a year or two, and Dr. Haddon was
appointed the Queen's Agent in Flanders, and was Leiger at Bruges. At what time
one Emanuel Dalmada, a Portuguese Born, Bishop of Angrence, suddenly sprung up
in Brussels, and undertook the Defense of his Friend Osorius: Stuffing a great
Volume full of Slanders and Brabbles. And in the end of the Book he had caused
certain ugly Pictures to be pourtrayed; thereby to deface Haddon's Personage as
much as he might. This Apology (for so it was called) when Haddon perused, he
professed he never saw so foolish and unsavory a Writing, full of Scoffs and
Absurdities. The Author therefore he despised as one altogether unlettered, and
so dull by Nature, that he was oftentimes a jesting Stock among the wiser sort
of his own Fraternity. But after some more time, Dr. Tho. Wylson, the Queen's
Ambassador in Portugal coming home, at Osorius's Request, brought certain
Volumes of the said Osorius's composing against Haddon's Answer, digested into
three Books. Whereof he delivered one to Haddon. Who received it gladly, and
perused it once or twice: Having hoped that he being then installed a Bishop,
would have been much more modest than before. But the Matter fell out quite
contrary. For instead of a civil and sober Person, he found him a most
frivolous Sophister, (I use Haddon's own Words) for a grave Divine, a childish
Counterfeit: And in the Book, of Vanity and Haughtiness good store. To this
Book, Haddon soon after began the writing of an Answer Apologetical against the
said Osorius's slanderous Invectives, as he styled them, for the necessary
Defense of the Evangelical Doctrine and Verity: And dedicated it to Sebastian,
King of Portugal, as Osorius had done his Letter before to the Queen. Which as
she had gently entertained and perused, so he persuaded himself to obtain the
like Favor of that King's Magnificence and heroical Clemency. In this Apology,
Haddon made some Progress, but died before he finished it. And the rest of it,
which was the greater part, was done very Learnedly by John Fox; and printed
about the Year 1573. And after by James Bell, put into English and printed 1581.

But turn we now again to our Ambassador Resident in France. Difference between
the two Ambassadors.
He and Sir Nic. Throgmorton, joint-Ambassador with him there, did not well
accord. Which was well enough known at Court. This gave the Secretary a great
Concern, for fear of some miscarriage in public Business by means thereof. And
in December, in one of his Letters to Smith, taking notice of it he told him,
that he hoped nevertheless, That Both, for their Wisdoms, would have regard of
the Queen's Affairs, and one of them bear with the other. For so should both of
them deserve Commendation. And in another Letter he tells Smith, that he was
sorry to see things between them no better temporized. Wisdom, said he, must
rule you both. And surely otherwise ye shall both take the Blame alike, Though ye
be not both percase alike to blame.

This Throgmorton, Some Character of Throgmorton.
to give here some Character of him, was a busy-headed Man, full of Intrigue, a
Favorite of the Earl of Leicester, and an Emulator of Cecil. For his
over-business in the French Court he was made a Prisoner, though then the Queen's
Ambassador. And in that Condition he remained some time, namely, so long till
the Peace was concluded; though he still acted as the Queen's Ambassador. He was
somewhat impatient to remain so long under Restraint, and thought that Cecil
was not sufficiently diligent to get him his Liberty. But Cecil understanding
it wrote to his Fellow-Ambassador to this Import, That as he had promised Smith
his Friendship, so he had done the like to Throgmorton, though some Clouds, he
said, let the Influence of his good Will to be felt of him. Protesting that for
his own part, God be his Judge and Avenger for all his evil meaning to him in
all those Times. And as he was angry at Cecil, whom he did not much love
before, so he was easily inclined to blame him upon any suspicion. As in the
next Year 1564. remaining under Confinement still, he was very wroth with the
FrenchAmbassador Resident in England, to whom he bore a great Malice. And yet
such was his Fineness and Dissimulation, that at the latter end of that Year,
being at Liberty, and here at home, he grew very great with the same French
Gentleman. Cecil took notice of it, and wrote to Smith, that he thought it
strange to see what great Amity now was between the French-Ambassador and Mr.
Throgmorton, considering the Hate he had before born him. It was strange to
Cecil, a plain-dealing Man, and of no Turnings and Windings, though a great and
wise Politician. But Throgmorton could play the Courtier, and pretend
Friendship in color for some private ends of his own, when the same
distempered Spirit lurked still within him that did before.

And happy was Smith in the Friendship of the foresaid Cecil, Cecil's and
Smith's Friendship.
who as he was a wise and good Man, so most sincere and cordial in his Nature.
And yet once had our Ambassador taken something ill at his Hands, according to
an ill Office that some had done between them, representing him as guilty of
some Unkindness toward Sir Thomas. Whereat he very plainly and freely, in his
next Letters dated in December, told him of it. This Freedom the Secretary took
in good part, and valued in Truth his Friendship the more for it, telling him,
that He had much Cause to thank him for his Friendly Dealing with him, and as
much more cause to praise him for his open and plain Dealing. Which I assure
you, on my Faith, as he said, I do allow more in you than any other part of
your Friendship. And hence he took occasion to give this good piece of Advice
to him, viz. wishing him to use all Integrity in his Transactions, that he
might have the Testimony of a good Conscience. Notwithstanding which Counsel he
reckoned that he needed not to give it him. For, added he piously and gravely,
when all the Glory and Wit, when all the Wealth and Delight of this World is
past, we must come before the Judge that will exact this Rule of us to discern
us from the Goats.

CHAP. X. Peace with France. Smith continues Ambassador there. His Book of the
Commonwealth of England. Returns. A Review of his Embassy.
An. 1564.
IN the Beginning of the Year 1564. by the Means and Labor of Sir Tho. Smith,
and Sir Nic. Throgmorton his Colleague, Smith effects a Peace.
Peace was concluded with France. Which was to take place on the 23d of April.
It was proclaimed in London the 22d, and on the 23d, a notable good Sermon was
made at St. Paul's with e Deum sung, and all incident Solemniti^s. The same Day
it was published at Windsor in the Queen's presence, going to Church, and
having with her the French-Ambassador. So as nothing wanted to show
Contentation. The Queen also now sent over the Garter, to be presented to that
King by the Lord Hunsdon, Sir Tho. Smith, and Sir Gilb. Dethic, King of Arms.

After the Peace was concluded, Sir Tho. Smith still resided in France. And now
one of his great Businesses was to get some good Answer for the Money due by
the Prince of Conde to the Queen. Solicits the Queen's Debt.


In September, The Queen continues him Ambassador.
Sir Thomas, desirous of returning, solicited by the Secretary his sending for
home. But the Secretary could not attain of the Queen a Determination about it,
perceiving in her a Disposition rather to have him continue till that King
should return back from those South Parts where he then was. But this Care
however she took for him, that for avoiding of the Plague, which then reigned
in France, she would have him forbear to follow the Court in dangerous Places.
Considering, as she said, the French Ambassador did forbear to follow her Court
all her last Progress into the North, taking his Ease at London; although he was
by some means moved to the contrary: Wherewith her Majesty was somewhat
offended. Wherefore she admonished Smith in like manner, according to his
Convenience, to forbear so diligent a ^a^lowing of that Court as hitherto he
ha^ used.

In this Month of September, A Match for the Queen propounded to him.
the Rhinegrave being in France, dealt with our Ambassador concerning a Match
between the Archduke the Emperor's Son, and Queen Elizabeth; With which he
acquainted the Secretary. To which the Secretary replied, That it would be very
seasonable, if it were honorably propounded. Sir Thomas afterward wrote him,
An. 1565. Q. Eliz.
that he should hear more of this another way.

In March, the beginning of the Year 1565. did Sir Thomas finish his known
Tract of the Commonwealth of England, Smith finisheth his Book of the
Commonwealth.
and the Manner of the Government thereof; Consisting of three Books. The first
whereof was concerning the Diversities of Commonwealths or Governments. And
therein he treated of the Gentlemen of England. Which he divided into the Great
and Less Nobility, and of the other Ranks of Men in this Country. The Second
Book was taken up in showing particularly the Laws of the Realm. The Third was
concerning Appeals, of the Courts of Star Chamber, Wards and Liveries, etc.
This excellent Book he wrote at his leisure Hours, while he was abroad in this
his Embassy in France: Occasioned, as it seems, by certain Discourses he had
with some Learned Men there concerning the variety of Commonwealths. Wherein
some did endeavor to under-value the English Government in comparison with
that in other Countries, where the Civil Law took place. His drift herein was,
as he tells us himself in the Conclusion (...) his Book, to set before us the
principal Points, wherein the English Policy at that Time differed from that
used in France, Italy, Spain, Germany and all other Countries, which followed
the Civil Law of the R^mans, compiled by Justinian in his Pandects and Code.
And this Tract of his, being as a Project or Table of a Commonwealth laid
before the Reader, he recommended to be compared with the Commonwealths, which
at that Day were in E^^e, or with others which did remain described in true
Histories; Especially in such Points wherein the one differed from the other:
To see which had taken the more right, truer and more commodious way to Govern
the People as well in War as in Peace. This, he said, would be no illiberal
Occupation for him that was a Philosopher, and had a delight in Disputing; nor
unprofitable for him that had to do with, or had good will to serve the Prince
and Commonwealth, in giving Counsel for the better Administration thereof.
This was written in Latin as well as in English; and many were the Copies taken
of it, till at last it was Printed, though I think not before the Year 1621. when
it came forth in English in the old Black Letter.

From the 5th of August, His extraordinary Expen^es.
to the 30th of October, Smith's extraordinary Charges, which he brought in to
the Queen, amounted to 103 l. 6 s. 8 d. And as a good part of which was for his
Servants, some sent into England, and others to the French Court, (the King
being then in his Progress, and Smith not always following the Court) so the
greatest part was spent in gratifying Spies and Intelligencers; whereof he had
both Scots and French. Of these was De Rege, whom in August, he gratified with
6 l. 13 s. 4 d. and in October following with the like Sum. Of these French
were also La Selle, La Fere, Le Meilleur, Le Gras. To whom he gave Monthly, to
some 4 l. to some 3 l. and to some 40 s.

In this Embassy, Sir Thomas Smith's only Son was with him. Smith 's Son with
his Father.
Whom he took along with him to learn Accomplishments in a foreign Court. In
the Month of August, he came to Secretary Cecil, his Father having sent him
over with a Message to the said Secretary. Who let his Father know, that he was
very welcome to him, and that he liked him well, wishing that he were with him
again: For that he seemed to have well prosit^d in Observation of many things
there. In October, the said young Gentleman went back to France, with Letters
from the Secretary to his Father.

He la^^ur^ to come home,
Sir Thomas seemed now to be near the accomplishment of his earnest Desires. For
the Queen, in October, determined the Secretary's Brother-in-Law, Mr. Tho Hoby,
should go in Sir Thomas Smith's place: Though he it seems had no great Stomach to
it. For when it was moved to him by the Secretary, he took it unkindly at his
Hands. The Queen understanding it, willed the Earl of Leicester to let him
understand peremptorily her Majesty's Pleasure. Of this the Secretary advised
Sir Thomas, adding that this, though unwillingly, he knew his Brother would not
deny: And that the Earl had promised him to send for his Brother, but yet it
was not done: And that he, the Secretary, therefore meant to have my Lady, Sir
Thomas's Wife, either to speak or send to his Lordship, to press the Business.

After the Winter was past and gone, on the 26th day of March, Mr. Hoby took
his leave of her Majesty, in order to his Embassy, He returns.
promising to be at the Seaside within Ten Days. So that in the beginning of
the Year 1566. Sir Thomas seems to have come home from his long Embassy in
France.

To take up a few further Remarks of this Embassy at the French Court, He is
inquisitive how his Negotiation is accepted.
Smith was apprehensive of the Difficulty of performing this his Negotiation to
the Approbation of others; knowing the ticklish Station wherein he stood; and
that his Absence might give occasion to some to Slander or Misrepresent him. On
which account, and being willing to know what Reports went of him, he desired
his Friend Dr. Haddon, Master of the Requests, to inform him what Opinions his
Friends of Sway and Authority had of his Discharge of the Affairs committed to
him; and what he heard in his Doings that pleased or displeased. And the Reason
Smith gave was, because it was a very difficult thing for one that was
concerned in the Managery of public Affairs, so to perform his Actions in one
and the same constant Tenor, as to be always applauded.

Sir Thomas had the Opportunity, He follows the Court in France.
in the Pursuit of his Embassy for the Service of his Mistress, to travel
through many Parts of France, that King going in Progress in the Year 1564. and
our Ambassador attending the Court. He was at Avignion, whither the Court
seemed to remove chiefly for the Plague that raged very sore now in that
Kingdom, as it had done the last Year in Newhaven, and in London. In April, he
was at Bourdeaux, as he had been at Toulouse before. At Bourdeaux, he was taken
with a Fever or Ague: Which creeping on him at first, came at length to that
Violence that he despaired of his Life: And on a sudden it abated: And then he
let Blood. Whereby in little more than a Day he felt himself to grow toward
Recovery, both in Body and Mind. The next Day he hunted the Hare, that he might
enjoy a more free Air. Which Exercise he continued for some Days. And from the
1st of March to the 12th (he writ it to some of his Friends as his Diversion)
his Dogs caught nineteen Hares.

His Refl^ction upon his hearing of the Queen's going to Cambridge.
While he was in these Southern Parts of France, his Friends wrote him word of
the Queen's intended Progress into the North, and that she would take a sight
of Cambridge in her way, to visit that University, and to hear the Scholars
Disputations. When Smith heard it, he heartily wished to be among them; Not to
Feast, or Hunt, or to indulge his Genius on this splendid Occasion, (he was
above those things) but to see, as he said, his Royal Mistress a Spectator
there, in a Place so dearly by him affected, and to partake of the Specimina of
those Wits, and to take notice what new Men of Learning and Ingenuity were
sprung up in that University since he left it.

At Toulouse, in his leisure Hours, he wrote three Books of the English
Commonwealth (mentioned before) which he Entitled De Republica Anglorum. H^
composeth his Book of the Commonwealth at Toulouse.
Wherein he described in effect the whole Form of it: Especially in those
Things wherein it differed from others. And it differed almost in all Things.
So that the Work grew greater than he thought of. He wrote it in our Language,
in a Style between Historical and Philosophical; after that Form as he
conceived Aristotle wrote concerning diverse of the Gracian Commonwealths:
Which Writings are now perish^d. Of this he wrote to his Learned Friend Haddon,
in his Correspondence with him in the Year 1564. Adding, that he had yielded a
very copious Argument to such as would dispute in a Philosophical way of the
single Questions, and whether is better, that which is held for Law in England,
or that which in France is so held, and in other Provinces which are governed
by the Roman Laws. For almost all, as he said, were different: And that he had
in gross and in sum examined both. This he drew up in the Year 1564. And as
these Writings were as yet but in rough Draught, when written fair, he promised
Haddon he would send them to him. And the value himself had of this his Labor
may appear in those Words of his (...) to the beforementioned L^^^ned (...)
will see your self certainly as I (...) you have read it over, that (...)
^^^lesly conversant in our Cou^^^^ Commonwealth. Some vacant spaces he had
left in his Manuscript here and there, because he had not with him one Book of
the English Laws, nor had he there Lawyers to consult with. Therefore he wrote
so much as the memory of things seen and read by him on the sudden suggested to
him. And what was imperfect, he intended when he returned home, at leisure to
supply.

(...).
While the Learned Smith was in Paris, he could not forbear to enquire for the
Learned Men there, to enjoy their Conversation at his spare Hours. Here he met
with Peter Ramus the Philosopher, and ^udovicus Regius an Historian, and other
Professors of Science; who were the King's Readers. To Ramus's Acquaintance
Haddon had particularly recommended him. But the Wars proclaimed between
Princes, and the Times were such, that Smith could not so frequently converse
and hold that Familiarity with them that he wished. T^^s' with th^se in Paris,
his Converse was so much, (...)
that he called them his Convictores. But he added, that he had his
Convictrices too, i. e. his She Companions and daily Guests, which created him
as much Sorrow and Anxiety, as the others did pleasure. And these were (as he
explained himself) Solicitudes, Cares, Damage to his Domestic Concerns in
England, greater Charges than he could well bear, doubtful Disputations,
various Emulations and Opinions.

While Smith was here, he procured the Printing of the Answer to Osorius, for
the Vindication of the Queen, and the Proceedings of the Realm in the
Reformation of Religion, He procures the printing of the Answer to Osorius.
as was mentioned before; when the Reader was told of the Difficulty that Smith
met with, while he required that State's Allowance for the publishing thereof.
But at last he got it into the Press at his own Charge. Which made Dr. Haddon,
the Author, after the publishing of the Book, write to him, Mul^um tibi
Responsum debet Osorianum, i. ^. That the Answer to Osorius owed much to him.
And as for Smith's Judgment of this Answer, it was this, as he wrote to the
said Haddon, That he conflicted with an Adversary too unequal for him. For
Osorius brought nothing beside the bare Imitation of Cic^ro, and the Ignorance
of that he undertook to treat of. Which Haddon pointed him to as it were with
his Finger: Yet with much Modesty, and without sharpness of Words. By April,
1564. Smith had so completed the printing of the Book, that he sent over some
Copies to the Secretary.

The aforesaid Dr. Hadd^n, His (...) Haddon, (...).
Master of the Requests, was the Queen's Ambassador at Bruges, at the same time
that our Smith was in the like Quality in France. Between whom a friendly and
learned Correspond^nce was maintained. They both were Ambassadors abroad in the
Years 1562, 1564, 1565, 1566. Diverse of the Letters written between them are
printed in Haddon's Posthumous Pieces published by Hatcher of Cambridge, An.
1567. Smith was a great Lover and Reader of Plato, as Haddon was of Tully. In
relation to which, thus did Haddon from Burges write to Smith in France; Your
Plato will not suffer you, Plato, e non si^it esse tuus, n^^ meus me Cicero,
qui Patriae nos servire volunt, and illi read* omnia, unde universa p^ius
acc^pimus.
nor my Tully me, to be our own, who would have us serve our Country; and as we
at first received all that we have from it, so to return all back to it again.
This he said, to comfort Smith and himself under their present Distances from
their Country, their Pains and Expenses in their Embassies for the Service of
their Queen and Country; The troubles whereof they were apt sometimes to lay to
heart.

Smith's Opinion of Tullies Philosophy and Law.
At another Time, viz. in the Year 1562. Haddon appealed to Smith, as a Judge
in a Dispute between him and the French Ambassador at Bruges, upon Cicero's
Skill both in Law and Philosophy. For Haddon happening to Sup once with that
Ambassador, upon some occasion Cicero was cited, when the Ambassador did admit
him to be the best Orator, but he would not allow him at all to be skilled in
Law, and that he was but a mean Philosopher. Haddon stood up for the Honor of
his Master, and affirmed that he was a very good Lawyer, and a most excellent
Philosopher. Whereupon they fell into a very hot Argument, that they could
hardly make an end. Concerning this, he took occasion in his next Letter to
write unto Smith, telling him, that he wished this Controversy might have had
his Judgment, Cui non minus uni tribuo, quam Platoni Poeta nescio quis, a
reliquis destitutus: i. e. To whom alone he attributed as much as a certain
Poet did to Plato, when he had none else of his side. Smith on the next
occasion in his to Haddon, thus communicated his Judgment; That if any doubted
whether Cicero was a Lawyer, it was not to be wondered at, because Men for the
most part are ignorant of Age and Times. That Cicero was not of those in that
Time that professed the Civil Law, but yet he was Iureconsultissimus, Admirably
skilled in it: Which not only many of his Pleadings and Orations demonstrate,
but his Topics to Trebatius. And he esteemed himself so to have prosited
herein, that he openly declared one Day, If they vexed him he would the third
Day after profess the Civil Law. But he never saw indeed Accursius, nor
Bartholus, nor Baldus, nor Jason, nor the Digests, nor Code of Justinian. A
good Reason why, because they were not in being in his Time. But so thoroughly
had he learned the Laws of that Time, that unless he had been an Orator, he had
been esteemed the Learnedest Civilian. If he that is a Lawyer deny him to be a
Philosopher, that Answer will easily be given to him, that Apelles gave the
Shoemaker, Let him not give his Judgment beyond his Slipper. But for his
Philosophy, he betook them that denied it to his Book De Deo, De Divinatione,
or what he treated of in his other Philosophical Dissertations.

In April, 1564. Secretary Cecil writ our Ambassador the News of the
Disturbance at Court, His Reflection on the Troubles occasioned by Hales 's
Book.
occasioned by John Hales's Book, wrote in the last Parliament. Which was the
cause of his being cast into Prison, and several others of the Court committed,
or banished the Court. Of this Haddon (who was now at home) had also acquainted
him, and called it Tempestas Halisiana, i. e. The Storm raised by Hales. This
Hales was a passing good Scholar, an hearty Protestant, thoroughly acquainted
with the State of this Kingdom, and a great Antipapist; he had been a Courtier
to King Edward, and an Exile under Queen Mary, and now under this Queen Clerk
of the Hanaper: And fearing the Succession of the Scotch Queen, a Papist, to
the Crown, if Queen Elizabeth should die unmarried, and childless, he by
private Consultation with others, resolved to take upon him to write a
Discourse to discuss the Title to this Crown after the Queen. And having in a
Book confuted and rejected the Line of the Scotch Queen, made the Line of the
Lady Frances that had been Married to Gray Duke of Suffolk, (who was Daughter
to the Younger Sister of King Henry VIII.) to be only next and lawful Heir. She
was Mother to the Lady Katharine Gray, who had been privately Married to Edward
Seimour, Earl of Hertford: And were now both in the Tower for that Marriage,
and under the Queen's Displeasure. In April, Hales was committed to the Fleet
for this bold and presumptuous Act, and afterward to the Tower, where he
continued a great while; Especially because he communicated these his Conceits
to sundry Persons. The Lord John Gray, Uncle to the Lady Katharine, was in
trouble about it, and so was the Lord Keeper Bacon. And besides all this, Hales
had procured Sentences and Counsels of Lawyers from beyond Seas, to be written
in maintenance of the Earl of Hertford's Marriage, which seemed to have been by
their Consents only: For which the Marriage had been declared invalid and null
by the Archbishop of Canterbury. But hereat the Queen was much offended. In
May, Hales's Business came to be examined by the Secretary. After Examination,
he was found to have procured Books in Defense of the Earl of Hertford's
Marriage, and likewise in Approbation of the Title of Succession for the Lady
Katharine. Upon this Occasion thus did Smith the Ambassador write; As I am a
Man, Ita homo sum, vexari nolim quemquam, quietus esse cuperem omnes mortales,
and libere Philosophari qui velint, caeteros suam quemque rem agere.
I would not have any Man vexed, I could wish Quietness to all the Race of
Mankind, and that whosoever would might Philosophize freely. But every Man
should mind his own Business. He declared that he for his part was for a
Liberty of Philosophizing. But whereas it was urged that they Philosophized too
much, he said, he thought what was done, was done more out of Curiosity than
Malice. And whereas he saw so much Danger and Vexation, Banishment from Court,
and Imprisonment of great Men, happening upon the Occasion of the said Book,
some for Writing it, and some for Reading it, he made this Moral and wise
Reflection, Video periculosum esse in Rebus arcanis Principum and Regnorum
nimis velle sapere.
I plainly perceive how dangerous a thing it is to be too forward in prying
into the secret Affairs of King's and Kingdoms.

CHAP. XI. Smith goes over Ambassador again to demand Calais. His Employment at
home. Concerned in turning Iron into Copper.
SMITH being come home from his Embassy, An. 1566.
the Sight of his old Friends, and the Enjoyment of his native Country was a
great Joy to him. Smith now at home.
Haddon still remained Ambassador at Bruges. Who in the Kalends of June, Anno
1566. wrote to him, that he did almost envy him this his present Happiness. Tu
patriam, principem, conjugem, amicos, otium, and praeclarissimam legationis
laudem paeriter recuperavisti. Mea singularis Infelicitas haec omnia mea ^itae
solatia detraxit
You, said he, have now recovered your Country, your Prince, your Consort, your
Friends, your Ease, and with the rest, the high Commendation of your Embassy.
Whereas it is my unhappiness alone to be deprived of all those Comforts of my
Life. And no doubt Smith returned with the same Praise for the management of
his Negotiation in France, as his Friends in England gave him, while he was in
the Execution of it; as the same Haddon signified to him not long after his
first going into France, viz. That the most intelligent Men of the Court
attributed much to his Wisdom and Moderation; but above the rest, their common
Friend Cecil, the Queen's Secretary: Who ever made honorable and friendly
mention of him.

Sir Thomas Smith spent this Year in England among his Friends. An. 1567.
He had not been above Twelve Months at home, Sent again to demand Calais.
but he was sent again into France, in Quality of the Queen's Ambassador
Extraordinary, to make a formal Demand of Calais from the French, according to
a Treaty at the Castle of Cambray Eight Years before, and when the last Peace
was made at Triers, Calais being then excepted in express Words, and to be
restored to England the second Day of April, now next ensuing. Sir Henry Norris
was at present the Ambassador in Ordinary there, who went over in February,
1566. Sir Thomas followed the next Month, viz. in March: Repairing privately to
Calais, to be there the third Day of April, to demand the Town. Not as though
they thought the Governor would deliver it, but to avoid all Cavillations,
which the French might invent, (for by Law it was to be demanded at the very
Place,) and being not delivered, the sum of 500000 l. was forfeited to the
Queen. Mr. Winter, a great Sea-Officer past secretly with him to take
Possession thereof, Cecil 's Letters to Sir Henry Norris, Cabal. p. 137. Takes
his Son with him.
if they deceived the Expectation of the English, and there were not passing
three of the Council knew of Winter's going.

Sir Thomas took his Son, Mr. Smith, along with him, bringing him up in all
generous and gentile Accomplishments, that he might be fit to do Service
afterward to his Queen and Country. And often he sent him over with Letters and
Messages, as he did in the Month of May this Year 1567. with Letters from
himself and Sir Henry, his fellow Ambassador, containing the Contents of this
their troublesome Negotiation.

The manner of his demanding Calais.
But to return to Smith his Managery of this his charge, which he did in this
Formality. He demanded Calais first at the Gates of the Town next the Sea, in a
loud Voice in French, by the sound of a Trumpet, of which an Act was presently
made by a public Notary; to which were Witnesses certain outlandish Merchants,
and others there happily present. And next coming to the French King, he
demanded Calais again, together with Sir Henry Norris, the other Ambassador.
That King remitted the matter to his Council, where Hospital his Chancellor,
and our Smith, Came. Eliz. p. 98. etc.
argued the Point largely and learnedly on both sides, which may be read in the
History of Queen Elizabeth.

This being done, Smith comes over again, and was at Court about the 12 th of
May; An. 1568. Q. Eliz.
and thus did he continue employedby the Queen in her service, Sues for the
place of Chancellor of the Duchy.
both at home an^abroad: And for his pains he justly waited for some
Preferment, as a gracious token of the Queen's acceptance of his Services. And
when in the Year 1568. Sir Ambrose Cave, a^ old Friend of his deceased, who had
been Chancellor of the Duchy, and one of the Queen^punc; Privy Council, he
solicited and labored with Cecil to be admitted into his Room. He told the
said Cecil, that if any thing came, ^r whatsoever came, he should and must
thin^ that it came by him, and promised that hewould not be unthankful; and
that if the Queen were disposed to bestow this Place uponhim, he should reckon
himself not utterly abj^ct of her Majesty. Which Words, point to ^ome
Discontent in Smith's Mind, as though he had taken it somewhat to heart, that no
preferment had been conferred upon him during the ten years the Queen had
Reigned. Dr. Haddon, the Master of Requests, wrote also upon this occasion to
the Secretary in Smith's behalf, that he might succeed in his Suit. But withal,
he wrote in that manner astho' he conjectured his Suit was in effect desperate;
which he expressed with some trouble, concluding that it was destined, Ut inter
glebas ille, Ego inter mendicos consenescam.
That as he ( Haddon) was to grow old among Beggars [for his Office was to
present begging Requests and Suits to the Queen,] so Smith to spend his life
among Turfs, meaning the Country Life, which he Lived in Essex. But withal he
wished the Queen ^o worse Counselors than he. And so it fell out: Smith missed
his Suit, and Sir RalphSadleir became Chancellor of the Duchy.

An. 1570.
So that in the Years 1567, 1568, 1569, 1570. Sir Tho Smith was much in the
Country, Living aretired Life. Sir Thomas in the Country administering Justice.
During which time, he serv^d his Country in distributing Justice, and aching
care of the Peace and Quiet of the Queen's Subjects, and Execution of her Laws,
in the Quality of Justice of Peace, in that Division of Essex, especially
a^punc; bout the Part of Ongar and Epping, where he dwelt.

Witches by him examined.
Among other Causes that came before him, there happened certain Matters of
supposed Witchcraft: Which occasioned much Disturbance among ^is Neighbors.
Arising especially from t^o Women, viz. One Malter's Wife of Theyron at Mount,
the Parish where Sir Thomas himself dwelt; and the other Anne Vicars of
Navstock, not far off.

Malter 's Wife.
The Examiration of the former he took in April, 1570. Against whom, one
Evidence deposed, that about two Years past, she bore her Husband in hand that
he was bewitched: And as a Remedy thereof, she caused a Trivet to be set, and
certain pieces of Elder, and white Hazel Wood to be laid upon the Trivet,
across, with a Fire under it; and then him, who was at that Time not well in
his Wits, to kneel down and say certain Prayers, as she taught him. And thereby
she said, he should be delivered of his Bewitching, or his Witch should consume
as the Fire did. Which when this Evidence rebuked her for doing, as using
Witchcraft, she conceived an ill Will toward him. And he having a
Sheep-shearing about that Time, and not inviting her thereto, being his
Neighbor, she, as he supposed, bewitched two of his Sheep. For immediately
after they were taken with Sickness, their hinder Legs so indisposed, that they
only could crawl, and died. The same Man had a Sow, being well when the Sun
went down, which the next Morning was found dead, with her Nose lying upon the
Groundsel of this Woman's House, where she never was f^d, nor wont to come
before.

Another Witness deposed, That she being Servant to a Farmer's Wife in the said
Parish of Theydon Mount, this Goodwife Malter came to her Mistress, who was
going to London Market, and desired her to bring her home some Sprats; but she
saying she came always laden from London, denied her. Upon this, the Deponent,
then her hired Maid, came from Milking; and as she set her Milk in the Pan upon
a Loft, there was a Speckled Bird, as she thought, which fluttered among the
Milk-Pans, and with her Feet and Wings slubbered therein: Her Mistress in the
mean time called her away. But she endeavored by a Broom to sweep or drive
away this Bird. But it would not away, but went fluttering from Pan to Pan; and
could not fly, but skip and hop. At the last, it went from the Loft where the
Milk and Wheat was, into the Cheese Loft. And then being often called by her
Mistress she came down, and being blamed for her long tarrying, she related how
she was troubled with such a Bird. And then her Mistress came her self into the
Milk Loft, and found it come down Stairs a very Toad. Which after it was once
come into the Buttery, she could never see it more. And for the space of six
Weeks after by no Means, nor Diligence, nor change of Churn, nor Cloths, could
they have any Butter; until that her Mistress did bid her carry her Milk, and
churn at a Neighbors House; and there the Milk made Butter as it was wont to
do before, and in the same Milk Pans. Other Evidences there were against this
Woman.

' Anne Vicars.'
In May, Sir Thomas took the Depositions of several against Anne Vicars. A Woman
deposed, that about three Years past, she was taken with a strange Sickness:
Her Body disfigured, her Lips great, and black, and she almost out of her Wits.
She suspecting that she was bewitched by the said Anne, went to one Cobham of
Rumford, who was thought to be Cunning in such Matters. And he declared to her
that she was bewitched by the same Woman, telling her the Words which past
betwixt Anne Vicars and her, whereby she conceived displeasure against her, and
wrought her that Mischief. And Cobham promised her, that as long as he lived,
she should have no Power over her. And so it happened: For during his Life, she
was recovered and continued well. But shortly after his Death she fell again
into her Disease.

Another Woman of Stapleford Abbots said, That about three Years past, she was
coming from Rumford Market with this Anne Vicars: And suddenly the said Anne
cast up her Nose into the Air and smelt: Which the other marvelled at, and
asked her if she saw any thing, or if there were any Carrion there. And she
said, she smelt either a Whore or a Thief. At last she espied the Wife of one
Ingarsole, going a great way before them. Whereat the said Vicars cried out
with an Oath, I told you, I smelt either a Whore or a Thief; and making great
haste to overtake her, when she came at her, she cast her Apron upon the side
of her Face next unto her: And then went backwards a great way with her Face
toward the said Ingarsole's Wife, casting her Apron over it; and making many
Crosses, saying as it were certain Prayers, but what, this Examinant could not
tell; but marvelled much at her Behavior; and said she was to blame to slander
her that was an honest Woman, and so known among her Neighbors for twenty
Years. But upon this, Ingarsole's Wife fell extremely Sick, and lost one of her
Eyes with a stroke as she thought that came unto her, she could not tell how,
in the plain Field, where neither was Bush nor Tree, or other Creature.

And the said Mawd, Ingarsole's Wife, examined, said, that the said Anne Vicars
Daughter, about the Time that this Calamity befell her, did fell Wood that was
assigned in the Common to her the said Mawd. Whereupon she forbad her to do so
any more, or else she would take away her Bill. The next Day the said Wench
came again: But she would not suffer her to carry away the Wood. Whereupon the
said Anne Vicars f^ll out with her, and wished she might not be delivered of
that she went with, being then great with Child. This Falling out was on the
Monday, and on the Thursday she lost one of her Eyes with a sudden stroke as
she thought, where no Creature nor thing was by to hurt her: Besides, that she
was extreme Sick, and in great danger of her Life.

Also one Agnes, Wife of Thomas Combres, being examined, said, That since
Michaelmas Iast, the said supposed Witch fell out with her, and upon that she
fell a Cursing and Banning at her, and wished her Eyes out. Whereupon within two
Days she fell down as Dead, extremely Sick, and hardly recovered it. And since
that Time she had mavelous Pain in her Eyes. These and diverse more
Depositions Sir Thomas now took against this Woman, of her supposed Witchcraft,
exercised upon her Neighbors. But we have said enough of this. What
Prosecutions were made of these Women, whom he seemed to have Committed to
Jail, this is not a Place to enquire into.

Sir Thomas was in the Month of March talked of to assist Cecil, (then newly
made Baron of Burghley) in the Office of S^cretary: And so to succeed in that
Room, Sir Thomas committed into the Council.
as soon as the other should be made Lord Privy Seal, which was expected. But
neither was he made Privy Seal, nor was Smith as yet admitted to that Office.
However he was now admitted into the Council.

Sir Thomas now divided his Time between the Country and the Court, An. 1571.
but chiefly in the Former; Labors about transmuting Iron into Copper.
delighted with the Divertisements and easy Cares of his belov^d Seat in
Essex. But he was not idle. For he had a busy active Mind, and a Philosophical
Head. And this put him among other Things, upon a Project of Alchimy about the
Year 1571. Hoping to transmute Iron into Copper. Into this Chargeable, but, as
was hoped, gainful Business he brought the Secretary Cecil, who had also a
Philosophical Genius, the Earl of Leicester, Sir Humsrey Gilbert and others.
The first Occasion of this Business was by one Medley, who had by Vitriol
changed Iron into true Copper at Sir Thomas Smith's House at London, and after
at his House in Essex. But this was too costly, as Sir Thomas saw, to make a
Benefit by. Therefore he propounded to find out here in England the Primum Eus
Vitrioli, and therewith to do the same Work at a cheaper Rate. Upon which, Sir
Thomas, Sir Humphrey Gilbert, (a Learned Knight. also, and of a projecting Head)
and our Medley entered into a Company under Articles, to sind this out. That is
to say, That Medl^y should be employed in this Business at the Charge of the
two other, till by the Profit he should reap from the thing found out he might
bear his Proportion. The Place where this was to be attempted and labored was
in the Isle of Wight, or at Poole, or elsewhere. But at Winchelsey, he had made
the first Trial, because of the Plenty and readiness of Wood. He received of
Sir Thomas, and Sir Humphrey an Hundred and One Pounds apiece, for the buying
of Vessels and Necessaries. They removed to Poole, thinking this Ens of Vitriol
to be there, and took a Lease of Land of the Lady Mountjoy, of 300 l. per
Annum. For the Payment of which, Sir Thomas with the other two entered into a
Bond of 1000 l.

H^s Progress there^n.
While these Things were in this State, Smith was sent Ambassador beyond Sea:
Which was in 1572. as we shall see in due place. And a Quarrel then happening
between Medley and Sir Humphrey, (and Medley gone to Ireland, being reported to
be run away) the Business lay asleep for some time. But Sir Thomas revived it
at his Return: Going down himself to Poole, where he found Arrears of Rent due
to the Lady Mountjoy, and above 60 l. due to Workmen; and no Copper nor any
Crocus of Copper made. The satisfying of which Debts, and other Charges cost
him 200 l. And after for clearing of things at Poole, sending down at several
times his Nephews William Smith, and John Wood thither.

And moveover, Smith had persuaded the Lord Treasurer and the Earl of Leicester
to enter into the Society, (This was now about December, Anno 1574.) leaving
them to satisfy themselves by sending some able or knowing Person to Medley,
Some Lords come into the Project.
to see his Method and Ability; and so accordingly to report it to them. And if
they were satisfied he could do it, then to consider of the Terms Medley had
propounded, and, if they thought good, to yield unto them. In sine, these Lords
were willing to come into the Society, and they deposited each of them an 100
l. toward the carrying it on. And it was to be ratifi^d by a Patent to be
obtained from the Queen. Medley was now removed to Anglesey, where was Fuel,
Earth and Water proper for his Business, being sufficient to do it for ever, or
at the least for a very long Time.

The Things which he undertook to do were these: The Project^rs formed into a
Society.
1. To make of raw Iron good Copper, and of the same Weight and Proportion,
abating one Part in Six. As Six hundred Tun of Iron should by Boiling, make
Five hundred Tun of perfect Copper. II. The Liquor wherein the Iron was boiled,
to make Coperas and Allom ready for the Merchant. Which, keeping the Price they
then bore, should of the Liquor of Five hundred Tun of Copper be worth 10000 l.
that is, for every Tun 2000 l. Sir Thomas was satisfied that true Copper was
made of Iron; but whether all the other incident Expenses, which would be
considerable, would countervail, that was the Matter to be examined.

The Society had seen the Trial of Crocus, at London; which might be
satisfaction in part. Smith, for his own part made no doubt, that Copper might
be made that way, and two or three other ways also, as he told the Lords: But
of the whole Work which rested in many other Points, as of the Proportion of
Iron to the Crocus, of the Crocus to the Copper, of the Allom and Coperas that
came of it; with what time of Boiling; what Expenses of Fire and Men's Labor,
Carriage, Buildings, Vessels, and all other things which be many, this he said
could not be done, nor well esteemed nor judged upon at London, but at the
Place. Whereupon he propounded to the two Lords to send down two Persons, and
he and Sir Humphrey Gilbert, one or two others, whom they might trust. These
together to vi^w and see the Doings, and one be Witness to the other; and so
all Parties to be fully satisfied by the Answer of these Viewers to every Part
of their Instructions and Articles, what they should find true according to
Medley's Promise, and what not, and the Occasion thereof. That so the Society
might be broken, if it were Deceit and Abuse, or gone forward with, if it were
not so.

The Patent for it Sign^d.
At length, there arising so much Probability of Success in the Project, he got
the Patent of the Society Signed in January 1574. And therein it was Stil^d,
The Society of the new Art. And the two Lords put into the Stock an 100 l. a
pi^ce more. Now when the Patent was signed, and the Great Seal obtained, their
next Work was to forward the Business with all speed, that they might lie no
longer at great Expense. Smith excited the Lord Burghley, that they might
proceed to a perfect Beginning of the Work in the manner of a Society. The Earl
of Leicester was very forward, offering Iron, and Lead, and Money also, and
making more Vessels. Smith also put on the Lord Burghley to make Orders when
and how it should begin; and that one Man or two should be fixed upon, as chief
Overseers to take Care and Charge of the Works; who should be answerable to the
whole Society: Making clear Books for one Day prefixed, what the Daily,
Ordinary and Extraordinary Expenses be, and what the Comings in again Weekly of
Copper, Allom, Coperas, and other Things be and were like to be. Then what
common Seal for the whole Society. And that Burghley also would out of other
Statutes for other Societies, cull out some good and wholesome Statutes and
Orders for this: Which without a Society, he said, could not well stand: And
the fewer Statutes, and well kept, the better. And lastly, he desired that all
might be ready, so as by the 10th or 15th of February, the Work might be fully
begun: That so by the last of March, a sure Guess might be made, what were like
to ensue thereof. One Sir John Hibbord, was the Man agreed upon to have the
chief Charge of the Provisions for all things necessary for the Work, and for
Disbursing Money by Accounts. And to him the Earl of Leicester had given order
for Iron, Cask and Lead. And one Cole was appointed by Sir Thomas, to be over
the Works, to be the chief Doer and Worker of the Melting, and not to go from
the Work. There was also a Clerk to keep the Reckoning, to see what the
Laborers did daily, and Weekly what was melted and made in Coperas and Allom.

The Business finds Delays.
But notwithstanding all Smith's hastening, the Matter suffered Delay, and was
retarded by Medley the chief Undertaker, who loitered in London till the 7th of
March, making Excuses, of wanting Money to defray his Charges here, that he did
not perceive that the rest were all agreed, that he thought himself hardly
dealt withal, if he should not be allowed for the Charges in making Experiments
now this two Years and more, and for his Buildings and Vessels, the sum of 400
l. But in reply to him, Smith urged, that for two Years past, Medley and
Topcliff (who was his Partner) had made Crocus; of which they might have made
Benefit for the Re-embursing of themselves. They said, they sent it away for
Essays, and part of it was purloined. Smith said again, that he might, as well
as they, claim to have his Allowance, he and Sir Humphrey Gilbert being out of
Purse 400 l. in making Trials, paid into the Hands of Medley, and to the Lord
Mountjoy. And he resented these Prolongations to my Lord Burgbley in this
manner, That Medley's Skill began by this Time to be known, which made him
jealous that his Delays would wholly spoil their Business: That Sir John Perot
had a whole Discourse of the complete manner of the Work in Writing: That the
Lord Mountjoy had gotten one of Medley's chief Workmen to him: That diverse in
the Countries knew the Earths and the Working of them. And yet, said he
discontentedly, we do nothing, and wished that he might go down himself. For
which he was very earnest, undertaking within fourteen Days to bring Things to
a full certainty, as to the understanding what Truth or Likelihood there was in
the Matter: Assuring his Lordship, that he was not satisfied, until they were
certified from thence by Order and by Accounts: That they might compare the
Time, the Charge, and the Labor with the Gains that came of it, and in what
kind it was and should arise. And that the ill Success, which it seems they met
with at Poole, and at the Lady Mountjoy's Works, taught to trust little to
Words and Promises, nor to Experiments made afar off, nor to the Accounts of
Men of that Faculty [ i. e. Alchymists.] Fain they would be fingering of Money,
said he; But when it is once in their Hands, we must seek it in the Ashes.

I find no more of this; The Chemist a B^ggar.
but I make no doubt Sir Thomas smarted in his Purse for his Chemical
Covetousness, and Gilbert seems to have been impoverished by it. And Medley was
beggered. For I find him in the Counter two Years after, viz. in the Year 1576.
made a Prisoner there by Courtis, and some others, who were Commissioners from
the Lord Burghley, Lord Treasurer, for Debt I make no Question. Though the Lady
Mary Sydney, Wife to Sir Henry Sydney, was concerned for him, having it is
probable some Opinion of his Skill in Chemistry, and wrote to the said Lord in
his favor, and against those that prosecuted him. But he gave her his grave
and wise Counsel with respect unto him, knowing better than she, what kind of
Man he was.

Thus did this Matter detain Sir Thomas Smith three or four Years to his no
little Care and Cost too.

CHAP. XII. Smith waits upon the Queen at Audley-End. Goes on Embassy to
France. Concludes a League. Concerned in Proposals of a Match for the Queen.
Smith examin^th the Duke of Norfolk's Secretary.
THE Queen was at Audley-End in August this Year. Here Sir Thomas Smith now was:
Perhaps repairing thither to Congratulate her Majesty's Coming so near Walden
his native Town, or to wait upon her for some Favor for that Place, or
otherwise. At that Juncture, a good Portion of Gold was intercepted, going into
Scotland to the Lord H^rris, for the help of the Scotch Queen's Party, together
with a Letter in Cipher, sent by Higf^rd, the Duke of Norfolk's Secretary. By
which it was concluded, the Duke was again meddling in the Matter of Matching
with her; for which he had a Reprimand some time before this, and promised the
Queen to concern himself no more in that Affair. Higford was upon this taken
up, and Committed to the Tower in London. And Sir Thomas was sent thither on
the 1st of September, to take his Examination. Who confessed to him, That the
Duke commanded him to write to one Lawrence Banister, the Duke's Man, that he
should see secretly conveyed 600 l. to the said Lord Herris, to be by him
conveyed to Liddington and Graunge. Whereupon the Duke was put into the Tower.
And Smith was one of those, that by the Queen's Appointment attended him
thither.

Another Embassy now fell upon Smith. Goes Ambassador again to France.
Mr. Francis Walsingham, the present Ambassador in France, growing very
indisposed in his Health, desired to be released of his Employment. Whereupon,
though Henry Killigrew, Esquire was sent Ambassador in October thither, in November
the Lord Gray, or Sir Peter Gray, were intended to go and assist Walsingham.
But in December, Sir Thomas Smith, who was now one of the Privy Council, was
the Man pitched upon. His Business was to Treat of Entrance into a strait
League of Amity with that King; and withal, in case that Court renewed the
Motion for Marriage with the Duke of Alanson (which was in Transaction the
summer past, but received some Interruption) he was to Treat thereof.

To make a firm Amity against Spain.
For however averse or negligent the Queen seemed to be in it before, yet now
her Courtiers so earnestly calling upon her for her own Surety, and that of her
State, which would be much advanced through the hope of her Issue, she showed
so good Disposition thereto, that the Earl of Leicester wrote to Sir Thomas,
that she so earnestly and assuredly affirmed to him the same good Disposition,
that he verily thought, that yet once again with good Handling, a good
Conclusion would follow* Smith received his Dispatch about the 6th of December.
He plied the Business he was sent for diligently. For it was thought very
necessary to join in a good League with France, to check the Greatness of
Spain, and to be the better secured against his Threatenings.

An Article debated by Smith.
In this Treaty, it is worth taking notice of one Article in Debate: Which was
that the two Princes should mutually assist each other. And if the Queen were
invaded for the Cause of Religion, that the French King should yield her his
Assistance. This Article, when almost all the rest were well accorded, that
King declined to have put into the Treaty, though he promised to perform it most
faithfully. And though it were not expressly mentioned in the League, yet such
general Words should be used, that the Matter of Religion should be contained
therein. To which Smith replied, That that could not be; and that no general
Words could contain it, if the Party that was bound would say, that it was
against his Conscience, or he meant it not. To which the King said, That he
would write to the Queen his Sister with his own Hand what he meant as to that;
and that he would as well defend her even in that Cause, as if it were expressed
in Words: and that which he said he would keep, though he dyed for it.But this
King was a great Dissembler, which our Ambassador probably knew well enough,
but gave him this discreet Answer; That for him, he thought no less, and he was
sure the Queen his Mistress took him to be a faithful Prince, and constant to
his Words as any was Living. But when they spoke of Treaties, they were not
made in Words, nor in such Letters missive, but after another Authentical sort
Sworn and Sealed. Without which, he could not, he said, for his part take it
substantially and orderly done. And besides, that the Treaty was not Personal
but Perpetual, for him and his Successors.

And when the Queen Mother would have shuffled off this and some other
Articles, His Argument with the French Queen*
saying, That when Mareshal Montmorancy should be sent over into England from
the French King to the Queen, and the Earl of Leicester should come to that
Court from the said Queen, to see the League sworn by each Prince, then all
things should be done as the Queen should desire: Smith answered, That he knew
the Fashion of Leagues. And that it must be agreed upon between the
Commissioners, that no Words be altered, then Subscribed with the Hands of both
the Parties; the French Commissioners delivering the Part Signed with their
Hands to those of England, and the Commissioners of England next to them. Then
the Prince causes it to be made under the Great Seal of the Realm, and so to
be delivered to each others Ambassador. And that he that came to see it Sworn
to, might make a new League, if the Princes would; but to alter that that was
made, he could not. For the Princes were bound to Ratify and Swear to that, on
which the Commissioners were agreed. And that it were not Wisdom, as he added,
to send such Personages as they spoke of to an uncertain League: And he might
consider that Queen Elizabeth his Mistress would not do it. This Conference
happened March the 1st, 1571.

Smith persuades the Queen. She consents to the League.
After much Pains, this Article and another about the Scotch Queen was agreed;
and Queen Elizabeth was only to give her consent to finish this happy and
advantageous League. And to excite the Queen hereunto, Sir Thomas, with
Halsingham, did freely give her advice to this Tenor, That it was for the
Assurance of her Person and Crown, as she was a Prince lawful and natural, and
had a Crown Imperial. And that she did it so by her Laws, as God's Laws and
Hers willed it to be done. That foreign Princes that were her Friends, would
and must take it well; and that such as were not, would rather laugh at her,
and be glad of it, if she did it not; and, when they should see Time, take
occasion to endanger her Majesty thereby. The Queen soon after signified her
Consent. And so in the Month of April ensuing, at Blois the League was
concluded, and signed the 18th or 19th Day. Which, according as Smith and his
Colleague did conceive, should be with as great Assurance and Defense of the
Queen as ever was or could be; the two Realms being so near and ready to defend
her, if it were required. And in case Spain should threaten, or show ill
Offices, as it had of late done against the Queen's Safety; it would be afraid
hereafter so to do, seeing such a Wall adjoined, as Smith wrote. Which he
therefore hoped would be the best League that ever was made with France, or any
other Nation for her Majesty's Surety. His good Conceit he had of this League,
did further appear by what he wrote in another Letter soon after to the Lord
Burghley, That now it could not be said, That her Majesty was altogether alone,
having so good a Defense of so Noble, Courageous, and so faithful a Prince of
his Word, (but herein our Ambassador was mistaken in his Man, none being so
false of his Word, and treacherous as he, all covered over with most artificial
Dissimulation) and so near a Neighbor, provided for, and bespoken beforehand
against any need. Partly that, and partly the Trouble in Flanders (which he
trusted God had provided to deliver his poor Servants there from the
Antichristian Tyranny) should make her Highness enjoy more quietly both England
and Ireland, and a better Neighbor of Scotland.

He loved not many Words.
When Monsieur De Foix came to him and his Colleague, with the Draught of the
whole League in French, which before was in Latin, and the Matters that past
Pro and Con, (which he said was, that the King might understand it) and had
made a new Preface, Smith did not much stick at it. And acquainting the
Secretary Cecil, (now Lord Burghley) with it, he opened to him the Reason of
it. I am old, said he, I love not much Talk, and would fain be dispatched
honestly homeward. So the Effect be there indeed, and our Queen not deceived, I
care for no more, that done. Smith loved to do his Business well and soundly,
and yet to knit it up with Brevity and Expedition. Thus again, when the French
Deputy urged much in this Treaty the Scotch Queen, that she might be sent safe
home to her Country; a thing which the English Ambassadors had order not to
deal in, by no means; he began to amplify upon that in a long Oration. But at
the Conclusion, Smith told him in short, For all your Reason you must pardon
me. I know you are a good Rhetorician, and you have Rhetorical Ornaments at
will to make; and so have I on the contrary side, if I would bestow my Time in
that sort. We are the Queen's Majesty's Servants, and we have showed our
Reasons so good, that no Man could deny that we should not agree unto it.

While Smith was in this Country, His Hardship in France.
he was forced to follow the Court from Place to Place; but it being Winter
pinched him sore. At Toulouse it almost cost him his Life, and had made an End
of him had it not been for Strong Waters, which he used for his Stomach Morning
and Evening. At Blois, where he remained after Candlemas, he endured the
greatest Cold that ever he felt, and most continual. And notwithstanding the
Cordial Waters he used, he was scarce able to resist the extreme Cold of the
Weather, there being for thirty Days together continual Frost and Snow. Neither
was there Wood plenty, nor good Chimneys for Fire. And in his Bedchamber he
could make no Fire at all.

In this Embassy, Communication between the Queen Mother and Smith, concerning
the Queen's Marriage.
the League being concluded, the Queen Mother, one Day in March ( Anno exeunte)
in the King's Garden at Blois, brake her Desire of a Marriage between Queen
Elizabeth and her second Son the Duke D'Alenson; asking Smith the Ambassador,
whether he knew how the Queen would fancy the Marriage with her said Son.
Madam, said he, you know of old, except I have a sure ground, I dare affirm
nothing to your Majesty. When she said again, That if the Queen were disposed
to Marry, she saw not where she might Marry so well: That as for those she had
heard named, as the Emperor's Son, or Don John of Austria, they were both less
than her Son, and of less Stature by a good deal: And if she would Marry, it
were pity any more Time were lost. Smith liking well enough the Motion, replied
to this, That if it pleased God, that the Queen were Married, and had a Child,
all these Brags, and all these Treasons, (he meant of the Queen of Scots, and
her Party) would soon be appalled. And on condition she had a Child by Monsieur
D'Alenson, for his part he cared not, if they had the Queen of Scots in France
[which was an Article propounded by the French King in the forementioned
Treaty, but by no means allowed by the English Ambassadors.] For then he said,
they would be as careful and as jealous over her for the Queen of England's
Surety as the Queen's Subjects, or she her self was. The Queen Mother then
subjoined, That it was true; and without this Marriage, if she should Marry in
another Place, she could not see how this League and Amity could be so strong
as it was. Our Ambassador answered, It was true; the Knot of Blood and Marriage
was a stronger Seal than that which was printed in Wax, and lasted longer, if
God gave good Success. But yet all Leagues had not Marriage joined with them,
as this might, if it pleased God. To which she joined her Wish, and added, That
if it should so happen, she would her self make a Start over and see the Queen;
the which of all things she most desired. To which again the Ambassador said,
That if he had at that present as ample Commission, as he had at the first for
Monsieur [ D'Anjou,] the Matter should soon by God's Grace be at an End. The
Queen wished he had: And asked him, If he should have such an one when he went
into England, whether he would not come again to execute it. Yes, Madam, said
he, most gladly, on so good an Intent I would pass again the Seas, though I were
never so Sick for it.

Another Day, Further Discourse on the same Argument.
in the same Month of March, the Queen Mother met Smith the Ambassador in the
same Garden, and having Discourse concerning other Matters, as of the Queen of
England's danger from the Queen of Scots, who now applied her self to Spain,
she thus brought in the Talk again of Marriage: Asking him whether his Mistress
did not see, that she should be always in danger until she Married. And that
once done, and that in some good House, who dared attempt any thing against
her? Then, said he, he thought if she were once Married, all in England, that
had any Traitorous Hearts would be discouraged. For one Tree alone (as he
ingeniously explained the Matter) may soon be cut down, but when there be two
or three together, it is longer a doing. And one shall watch for the other. But
if she had a Child, then all these bold and troublesome Titles of the Scotch
Queen or others, that make such Gaping for her Death, would be clean choked
up. The Queen cried merrily, she saw she might have Five or Six very well.
Would to God, said the Ambassador, she had one. No, said she, still merrily,
two Boys, lest the one should die, and three or four Daughters to make Alliance
with us again, and other Princes, to strengthen the Realm. Why then, said
Smith, as jocularly, you think that Monsieur Le Due shall speed. With that she
laughed, and said, she desired it infinitely. And then she would trust to see
thre^ or four at the least of her Race, which would make her indeed not to
spare Sea and Land to see her Majesty and them. And if she could have fansied
my Son D'Anjou, said she, as you told me, why not this of the same House,
Father and Mother, and as vigorous and lusty as he, or rather more; and now he
begins to have a Beard come forth. And as to his Stature, she told the
Ambassador, that the said Duke her Son was as tall as himself, or very near.
For that Matter, said he again, that for his part he made little account, if
the Queen's Majesty could fansy him. Adding this Story, That Pipin the Short,
Married Bertha, the King of Almain's Daughter, who was so little to her, that
he was standing in Aix, in a Church there, she taking him by the Hand, and his
Head not reaching to her Girdle. And yet he had by her Charlemain, the great
Emperor and King of France, who was reported to be almost a Giant in Stature.
To which the Ambassador added, the mention of Oliver Glesquin, the Britain
Constable, which the French made so much of, and lay buried among the Kings at
St. Denis, if he were no bigger than he was there pourtrayed upon his Tomb, was
very short, scarce four Foot long. But yet he was valiant, hardy and courageous
above all in his Time, and did the English Men most hurt. Thus ingeniously did
Smith hold the Conference with the Queen Mother.

But as to his Opinion of the Queen's Marriage, His Thoughts of the Queen's
Marrying.
wherein he perceived she was but backward, (and a Marriage he and the best
Statesmen in those Times reckoned the only Means for the Peace and Safety of
the Queen and Kingdom, against the Disturbances and Pretenses of the Scotch
Queen, and her Friends) the Ambassador was full of sad and uneasy Thoughts: For
so at this time he opened his Mind to the Lord Burghley, That all the World did
see, that they wished her Majesty's Surety, and long Continuance, and that
Marriage, and the Issue of her Highness's Body, should be the most Assurance of
her Highness, and of the Wealth of the Realm. The Place, and the Person for his
part he remitted to her Majesty. But what she meant to maintain still her
Danger, and not to provide for her Surety, he assured his Lordship he could see
no reason. And so prayed God to preserve Her long to Reign by some unlookt for
Miracle: For he could not see by natural Reason, that she went about to provide
for it. And soon after, when Smith had sent Messages two or three for the
Resolution of the English Court about the Marriage, which the French were so
earnest for, and in great hopes of, and no Answer came, He lamented to the
aforesaid Lord, that he, and his Colleague Walsingham, could say nothing of it,
when they were asked. And that they were sorry in their Hearts to see such
uncertain, so negligent, and irresolute Provision for the safety of the Queen's
Person, and of her Reign; Praying God Almighty, of his Almighty and Miraculous
Power to preserve her long to Reign over her People; and that his Grace and
Mercy would turn all to the best.

His Concern for the Queen's Sickness.
In the midst of these Cares of our Ambassador, the Lord Burghley wrote to him
of a Matter that put him and his Colleague into a great Consternation. It was
concerning the Queen's falling Sick of the Smallpox, and withal of her speedy
Recovery again. His careful Mind for this Matter he thus expressed in his next
Letter to the said Lord: That he and his Fellow read the News of the Queen's
Illness together in a mavelous Agony, but having his Medicine ready (which
was, that her Majesty was within an Hour recovered) it did in part heal them
again. But that, as his Lordship wrote of himself, that the Care did not cease
in him, so he might be assured it did as little cease in them: Calling to their
remembrance, and laying before their Eyes the Trouble, the Uncertainty, the
Disorder, the Peril and Danger, that had been like to follow, if at that Time
God had taken her from them; whom he styled The Stay of the Commonwealth, the
Hope of their Repose, and that Lanthorn of their Light next God: Not knowing
whom to follow, nor certainly where to light another Candle.

Another great Solicitude of his at this Time was, And the Irresolutions of the
Court.
as the Queen's Sickness, so her Slowness to resolve, and the tedious
Irresolutions at Court. Of which he spoke in some Passion after this sort: That
if the Queen did still continue in Extremities to promise, in Recoveries to
forget, what shall we say but as the Italians do, Passato il pericolo, gabbato
il fango. He told that Lord moreover, That he should perceive by their
Proceedings in their Embassy, what justly might be required was easy to be
done. But if her Majesty deceived her self, and with Irresolution made all
Princes understand, that there was no Certainty of her or her Council, but
dalliance and farding off of Time, she should then first Discredit her
Ministers, which was not much, but next and by them discredit her self; that
is, to be counted uncertain, irresolute, unconstant, and for no Prince to trust
unto, but as to a Courtier, who had Words at will, and true Deeds none. These
were Expressions proceeding somewhat, as may be perceived, from his Spleen, and
partly from his present Indisposition of Body. Which he seemed to be sensible
of. For he begged his Lordship's Pardon for what he had said, rendering his
Reason, That he had been kept there so long, that he was then in an Ague both
in Body and in Spirit. And that as the Humors in his Body made an Ague there
(of which he wished it would make an end) so that irresolution at the Court he
hoped would help to conclude; that he might feel no more Miseries: Which he
feared those that came after should feel: Because we will not see, said he, The
Time of our Visitation. Thus did Smith express his Discontents into the Bosom
of his trusty Friend, for the Mismanagement of public Affairs, as he
conceived, discovering as his Zeal and Affection to the Queen and the State; so
the Temper of his Mind, somewhat inclined to Heat and Choler. This he writ from
Blois on Good Friday.

The Queen of Navarre sends to Sir Thomas.
While Sir Thomas Smith was here Ambassador, the Treaty of Marriage was in
effect concluded between the Prince of Navarre, and the Lady Margaret, the
present French King's Sister. Which looked then very well toward the Cause of
Religion, and both that Ambassador and his Colleagues, Walsingham and Killigrew,
liked it well. One Matter in Debate, and the chief, was about the manner of
Solemnizing the Marriage. Whereupon they sent to the Queen of Navarre a true
Copy of the Treaty of the Marriage between King Edward the Sixth, and the late
Queen of Spain, the French King's Sister. Wherein it was agreed, that she
should be Married according to the Form of the Church of England. Which stood
the said Queen of Navarre in such good stead, that she produced it to the
Queen Mother of France. To which they took Exceptions, and said it was no true
Copy of the Treaty. Whereupon she, the Queen of Navarre, sent to Sir Tho.
Smith, who happened to be at that very Treaty. By her Messenger she signified
that she sent to him to know, (because he was a Dealer in the same) whether he
would not justify it to be a true Copy. To whom Sir Thomas answered, That
knowing the great good Will his Mistress did bear her, and how much she desired
the good Success of that Marriage, as a thing that tended to the Advancement of
Religion and Repose of this Realm, he could not but in Duty avow the same, and
be willing to do any good Office that might advance the said Marriage.

CHAP. XIII. Made Chancellor of the Garter. Comes home. Becomes Secretary of
State; His Advice for forwarding the Queen's Match. His Astonishment upon the
Paris Massacre.
The Queen gives him the Chancellorship of the Order.
SIR Thomas being still abroad in France, the Queen conferred upon him the
Chancellorship of the Order of the Garter in the Month of April, as some Reward
of the League that he had taken so much pains in making. For which he thanked
her Majesty, and said it must needs be to him many times the more welcome,
because that, without his Suit, and in his Absence, her Highness of her
gracious goodness did remember him.

Comes home.
About June, 1572. he came home with the Earl of Lincoln, Lord Admiral, who was
sent over to take the Oath of the French King for the Confirmation of the
Treaty. Which being done by the Queen's Command, he was no longer to abide in
France, but to return at his best Convenience.

Made Secretary.
It was not long from this Time, that the old Lord Treasurer, Marquess of
Winchester died; and the Lord Burghley, Secretary of State succeeded in his
Place. Then Smith was called to the Office of Secretary, viz. June 24. having
sometime before assisted the Lord Burghley in that Station.

And surely it was the Opinion of his great Learning, Famed in the Court for
his Learning.
as well as his long Experience and other Deserts, that preferred him. For his
Learning had rendered him very famous in the Court. A Poet in those Times,
writing an Heroic Poem to the Queen, therein describing all her great Officers
one after another, thus depainted this her Secretary: Inde tibi est altis
SMYTHUS a gravibusque Secretis,
Doctrinae Titulis and Honoris fulgidus, ut qui
Pierius Vates, prompto facundus and ore,
Et cui solliciti exquisita Peritia Iuris,
Astronomus, Physicusque, Theologus, insuper omni
Eximie multifaria tam structus in Art,
Ut fedes in eo Musae fixisse putentur.
Wherein of all the Queen's Wise and Noble Counselors, Smith her Secretary is
made to be the deeply Learned Man about her, as being an ingenious Poet, an
excellent Speaker, of exquisite Skill in the Civil Law, in Astronomy, in
natural Philosophy and Physic, in Divinity, and in a word, so richly furnished
in all the Arts and Sciences, that the Muses themselves might be supposed to
have taken up their Seat in him. Smith's Device for a View between Mounsieur
and the Queen.


And thus we see Smith re-enstated again in that Place which four and twenty
Years ago he enjoyed under King Edward. Smith now being Secretary, and
Walsingham Resident in the French Court, and the matter of the Match for Duke
D'Alenson and the Queen, transacted earnestly this Year, the main of this
Matter went through Smith's Hands. And thus it stood. The French King and
Queen Mother, and the Duke and that Court were extremely eager for it, and so
was the English Nation too; supposing it the best way for the Security of her
Majesty and her Crown. But the Queen her self was but cold in the Matter. And
when an Interview was moved between her and the Duke, she refused to yield to
it upon some Scruples. Whereat Secretary Smith to set it forward, that it might
not be suspended on such a Point, devised that the Duke should come over hither
without the Ceremony of an Invitation. For as he wrote to Walsingham in August,
he was sorry so good a Matter should upon so nice a Point be deferred. Adding,
That one might say, that the Lover would do little, if he would not take pains
once to see his Love, but she must first say Yea, before he saw her, or she
him. Twenty Ways, said he, might be devised why he might come over and be
welcome, and possibly do more in an Hour than he might in two Years
[otherwise.] Cupido ille qui vincit omnia in oculos insidet, and ex oculis
ejaculatur, and in oculos utriusque videndo, non solum, ut ait Poeta, Faemina
virum, sed Vir faeminam. What Force I pray you can Hearsay, and I think and I
trust do, in comparison of that, cum Praesens praesentem tuctur, and
alloquitur, and furore forsitan amoris ductus amplectitur. And says to
himself, and openly, that she may hear, Ten^ne te mea, an etiamnum somno volunt
Faeminae videri cogi ad id quod maxim cupiunt? If we be cold, it is our Part:
Besides the Person, the Sex requires it. Why are you cold? Is it not a Young
Man's part to be Bold, Courageous, and to adventure? If he should have [a
Repulse] he should have but Honorificam Repulsam. The worst that can be said of
him is but a Phaeton, Quam si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit Ausis. Adding,
that so far as he could perceive, this was the only Anchor, this the Dye to be
cast for us. Or else nothing was to be looked for, but still and continual
Dalliance and Doubtfulness, so far as he could see. Thus in his Royal
Mistresses, and the Nations Behalf, he could talk and direct like a Master of
Love. This Device and Counsel I suppose was hinted to the French Court. And it
was not long, but Duke D'Alenson accordingly came over, to make his Address to
the Queen.

The Parisian Massacre happening in August, so treacherous and so inhumane,
that all the World stood amazed at it, Secretary Smith abhorred, and wrote his
Thoughts of it in this following Letter to Walsingham then Ambassador there;
Sir, Hit Thoughts the Mass^cre at P^ris.
this Accident in France seems to us so strange, and beyond all Expectation,
that we cannot tell what to say to it: And the Excuse [ tam Exilis,] so slender
or fraudulent, (namely, That the Hugonots had intended to have made some
dangerous Disturbances in the Kingdom, and therefore the King was forced to do
this for his own safety,) that we wot not what to think of it. The Matter
appears all manner of ways so lamentable, the King so suddenly, and in one Day
to have dispoiled himself and his Realm of so many notable Captains, so many
brave Soldiers, so wise and so valiant Men, as, if they were unguilty of that
which is laid unto them, it is most pitiful. If they were guilty, Cur Mandati
Causa damnati sunt ac caesi? In such sudden and extreme Dealings, Cito sed sera
Poenitentia solet sequi; If it were sudden, and not of long Time premeditated
before. And if so, the worse and more infamous. Thus you see what privately any
Man may think of this Fact. I am glad yet that in these Tumults and bloody
Proscriptions you did Escape, and the young Gentlemen that be there with you;
and that the King had so great Care and Pity of our Nation, so lately with
strait Amity Confederate with him. Yet we hear say, that he that was sent by my
Lord Chamberlain, to be Schoolmaster to young Wharton, b^ing come the Day
before, was then slain. Alas! he was acquainted with no body, nor could be
partaker of any evil D^^ling. How fearful and careful the Mothers and Parents
be here of such young Gentlemen as be there, you may easily guess by my Lady
Lane, who prays very earnestly that her Son may be s^nt home with as much
speed as may be. And if my Lady your Wife with your Daughter, and the rest,
with such as may be spared were sent away home, until this Rage and Tempest
were somewhat appeased, you shall be the quieter, and disburthened of much of
your Care. You would not think how much we are desirous to hear what End these
Troubles will have; whether it rangeth further into all France, or die, and
will cease here at Paris.

Our Merchants be afraid now to go into France. And who can blame them? Who
would, where such Liberty is given to Soldiers, and where Nec Pietas nec
Iustitia does refrain and keep back the unruly Malice and Sword of the raging
Popular? Monsieur La Mote is somewhat spoken to in this Matter. And now the
Vintage as you know is at hand, but our Traffic into Roan, and other Places in
France, is almost laid down with this new Fear. It grieveth no Man in England
so much as me: And indeed I have in some respect the greatest Cause. [I
suppose, because he was the great maker of the League between that King and the
Queen, and did so assure the Queen of the Ingrity, Truth and Honor of the said
King.] Fare you well.

From Woodstock, the 12th of September, 1572. Your always assured, Tho. Smith.




POSTSCRIPT.
I Most heartily thank you for the Book of the past Troubles in France. But
alas! who shall now write worthily of the Treasons and Cruelties more barbarous
than over the Scythians used?

His Detestation of it.
And in the same Month, when upon some Treachery feared to be acted upon
Walsingham, he was sent for home for some Time; and Tidings being brought of
the Massacres upon the Protestants at Roan, and other Places, as well as at
Paris; thus did this good Man express his Detestation of these Practices: The
cruel Murders of Roan are now long ago written unto us, when we thought all
had been done. And by the same Letters was written unto us, that Diep was kept
close, and the same Executions of the true Christians looked for there, but as
then not executed. Howbeit Sigoigne did warrant all our English Men to be out
of danger, and not to be afraid. But what Warrant can the French make now?
Seals and Words of Princes being Traps to catch Innocents and bring them to the
Butchery. If the Admiral, and all those Martyred on that bloody Bartholomew
Day, were guilty, why were they not apprehended, imprisoned, interrogated and
judged; but so much made of as might be, within two Hours of the Assassination?
Is that the manner to handle Men either culpable or suspected? So is the
Journier slain by the Robber; so is the Hen of the Fox, so the Hind of the
Lion, so Abel of Cain, so the Innocent of the Wicked, so Abner of Ioab. But
grant they were guilty, they dreamt Treason that night in their Sleep, what did
the Innocents, Men, Women and Children at Lions? What did the Sucking Children,
and their Mothers at Roan deserve, at Caen, at Rochel? What is done yet we have
not heard; but I think shortly we shall hear. Will God, think you, still sleep?
Shall not their Blood ask Vengeance? Shall not the Earth be accursed that has
sucked up the innocent Blood poured out like Water upon it? I am most sorry for
the King, whom I love, whom I esteem the most worthy, the most faithful Prince
of the World; the most sincere Monarch now Living [Ironically spoken no
question by Smith, because to him that King used to profess so much Integrity.]

I am glad you shall come home; and would wish you were at home, out of that
Country so contaminate with innocent Blood, that the Sun cannot look upon it,
but to prognosticate the Wrath and Vengeance of God. The Ruin and Desolation of
Jerusalem could not come, till all the Christians were either killed there, or
expelled from thence. But whither do I run, driven with just Passions and
Heats?

And in another Letter, All that be not Bloody and Antichistian must needs
condole and lament the Misery and Inhumanity of this Time. God make it short,
and send his Kingdom among us.

La Crocque was now in England, His Reason of the manner of Anwering the Prench
Ambassador.
Ambassador from France; and notwithstanding this base bloody Action of France,
and the Jealousies that the Queen now justly conceived of that King, yet she
gave him a soft Answer to be returned to his Master, being ready to go to his
own Country. Of which Ambassador's Negotiation, and the Queen's Answer, thus
Secretary Smith spoke: His Negotiation was long in Words, to make us believe
better of that King than as yet we can; and replied to [on the English side]
liberally eenough. Although to that Prince or Country, who have so openly and
injuriously done against Christ, who is Truth, Sincerity, Faith, Pity, Mercy,
Love and Charity, nothing can be too sharply and severely answered; Yet
Princes, you know, are acquainted with nothing but Doulceur; so must be handled
with Doulceur; especially among and between Princes. And therefore to
temperate, as you may perceive. Not that they [should] think the Queen's
Majesty, and her Council, such Fools, as we know not what is to be done; and
yet that we should not appear so rude and barbarous, His Observation of the
Prejudice the French did themselve in Scotland.
as to provoke where no Profit is to any Man.

Upon the Preparations that were made in England against the feared Attempts of
the French, or other Roman Catholics, at this critical Time, of the Murders
committed upon the Protestants in France; the Secretary thus piously spoke:
Truth it is, that God disposes all whatsoever a Man does purpose, as Divines
speak. And it is his Gift, if Wise Men do provide for Mischief to come. And yet
whatsoever they do devise, the Event does come of him only, who is the God of
Hope and Fear, beyond Hope and Expectation. This he spoke in reference to the
Scots, who, hearing of this Havoc in France, whereas the Lords there were in
Civil Wars amongst themselves, fom^nted by the French, did now begin to come to
Accord, dreading these Doings, and fearing some Danger near themselves. For it
was the Desire of the English to have Scotland in Peace and Union, under the
present Protestant King. And now by a way not thought on, they drew nearer and
nearer to an Accord: To which the Cruelty in France helped not a little; and
now continuing, much more would. Which he expressed in th^se Words: The Scots,
our Neighbors he awakened by their Beacons in France. And the Scots, to show
their Resentment of these foul Doings there, issued out a Proclamation to that
purpose; which the Secretary sent to Walsingham.

CHAP. XIV. Secretary Smith at Windsor dispatching Business. His Care of
Flanders and Ireland. Mass-mongers and Conjurers sent up to him out of the
North. His Colony in Ireland.
The Secretary at Windsor;
IN the very beginning of November Secretary Smith was with the Queen at
Windsor, the Lord Treasurer Burghley, and most of the Lords of the Council
being gone to London, to the Solemnization of some great Wedding, at which the
Secretary also should have been, but he thought it not convenient to go, to be
present with the Queen whatsoever Chance might happen.

(...) A^^nts and Irish Matters.
There were now in England, Walwick, an Agent from the Earls of East-
Freezeland, who was very importune for an Answer to his Masters Requests; and
another Agent from the Town of Embden, who came about Matters of Trade. The
Consideration of whose Business, the Queen committed to Aldersay, and some
other Merchants of London; who had objected against the Agents Proposals, and
were to give in their Reasons. Smith, who was ever for Dispatch of Business,
desired the Lord Burghley to call upon these Merchants to hasten, and to
forward the Dismission of both those Agents. Irish Businesses, also lying
before the Queen at this Time, were taken care of by him: Signifying to the
said Lord Treasurer, how the Lord Deputy of Ireland wanted Comfort and
Direction in Answer to his Letters. And he desired the Treasurer to send him
the Draught of the Answer from the Lords to the said Deputy, which he would
cause to be written fair, and made ready to be Signed against his and the rest
of the Lords Return to Windsor. He further wrote to the Treasurer, that he
should have the Privy Seal sent him for 5200 l. for Corn and Money for the use
of the Deputy. He mentioned two Letters withal to be sent by the same Dispatch
into Ireland, for three Bishoprics void there, to which the Lord Deputy had
recommended certain Persons as able and fit Men for those Places. And taking
care of his Friend Walsingham, Ambassador in France, he obtained leave from the
Queen for his Return home. And when among several named to her Majesty to
succeed him, she had her thoughts upon Mr. Francis Carce, as liking him most,
he informed the Treasurer of it, and prayed him to send for the said Carce, and
commune with him to put himself in a readiness: Whereby as he said, he should
do Mr. Walsingham a great Pleasure. These were some of the State Matters
Smith's Hands were full of in the Month of November.

Sir Thomas Smith was nettled to see the proud Spaniard Domineering in Flanders
and Holland, His ^^^passion for Flanders.
and exercising their Cruelties there, and introducing a Slavery among that
free People* and very apprehensive he was of the growing Power of that Nation,
that so threatened their Neighbors, France as well as England: Especially
seeing withal how tender both Realms were to send Succors to those Parts, to
enable them to Vindicate their own Liberty and Safety from those inhumane and
insufferable Practices there prevailing. In the mean time, the French accused
the Sluggishness of the English, and the English did the like of the French.
The Queen had sent some Forces to Flushing: But there was a Report that she
upon Duke D'Alva's Motion did revoke them. But that was not so; but he was
gently answered with a dilatory and doubtful Answer. But indeed, more that
would have gone from England thither, were stayed. The English on the other
hand, had knowledge that the French did Tergiversari, hang off, and wrought but
timorously, and under hand with open and outward Edicts, and made Excuses at
Rome and Venice by the Ambassadors; importing their not meddling in Flanders,
or excusing themselves, if they had done any thing there. On which Occasion,
Smith in a Letter to the Ambassador in France, gave both Princes a Lash;
reflecting upon the pretended Activity and warlike Qualities of the French
King, yet that he should thus waver and be afraid to engage; Regem expertem
otii, laboris amantem, cujus gens bellicosa jampridem assueta est caedibus tam
exterioris quam vestri Sanguinis: Quid faciemus Gens otiosa and Pacis assueta,
quibus imperat Regina, and ipsa Pacis atque Quietis amantissima?
and upon the Slowness and Security of the Queen of England. You have, says
he, a King void of Leisure, and that loves Fatigue, whose warlike House has
been used to the shedding as well of their own as of foreign Blood. What shall
we, a slothful Nation, and accustomed to Peace, do; Whose supreme Governor is a
Queen, and she a great Lover of Peace and Quietness?

But to see a little more of his Service and Counsel in the Quality and Place
he served under the Queen. His Advice about the Earl of Desmond.
When in this Year, 1572. the Earl of Desmond was in England a Prisoner, but
reconciled unto the Queen, and had promised to do her good Service in Ireland,
and soon to drive out the Rebels out of the Country, the Queen and Court
thought he would prove an honest and faithful Subject, and so resolved to
dismiss him into his Country. And she told Sir Thomas, that she would give him
at his Departure (the more to oblige him,) a piece of Silk for his Apparel, and
a reward in Money. Upon which Sir Thomas's Judgment was, That seeing the Queen
would tie the Earl to her Service with a Benefit, it would be done, Ample,
liberaliter ac prolixe, non malign and parce, i. e. Nobly, liberally and
largely, not grudgingly and meanly. Which, as he added, did so disgrace the
Benefit, that for Love many times it left a Grudge behind in the Heart of him
that received it, that marred the whole Benefit. And the Quarrel between
Clanrichard and Fitton.


A Quarrel happened this Year between the Earl of Clanrichard and Sir Edward
Fitton, Governor of Connaught, who was somewhat rigorous in his Office, which
had caused the Rebellion of the Earl's Son. The Case came before the Deputy and
Council in Ireland, and at last to the Queen and her Council in England. Our
Secretary drew up the Lo^ds of the Councils Order about it, to be sent to the
Lord Deputy and the Council there, to hear and decide it between them, and
withal was sent the Earl's Book, and Sir Edward Fitton's Answers given into the
Council in England. The Earl seemed desirous to have Matters sifted to the full
Trial. And then each Party might say and prove the most and worst they could.
But Sir Thomas thought it the best way for the Deputy to persuade them both to
wrap up (as he expressed it) all things bypast, and to be Friends, as they had
promised, it seems, to be at a Reconciliation formerly made before the Lord
Deputy, and to join faithfully for the Furtherance of the Queen's Majesty's
Service, and the Quietness and good Order of the Country hereafter. And it was
in his Judgment, as he added, The best way to tread all under foot, that had
gone heretofore with a perpetual (...), and to begin a new Line without grating
upon old Sores. Very wise and deliberate Council! to avoid all ripping up
former Grievances, which is not the way to heal so much as to widen the old
Differences.

Mass-mongers and Conjurers sent up to the Secretary.
There was this Year both Massing and Conjuring in great measure, in the North
especially; and all to create Friends to the Scotch Queen, and Enemies to Queen
Elizabeth: The one to keep the People in the Blindness of Popery, and the other
to hood-wink them to believe, as it were by Prophesy, the speedy approaching
Death of the Queen. The Earl of Shrewsbury was now Lord President of the
Council in the North. He employed two sharp Persons, to discover these Persons
and their Doings. Which they did so effectually, that in the Month of February,
many of these Conjurers and Massmongers were seized, and by the said Lord
Presidents Order were brought up by them that seized them to Secretary Smith,
good store of their Books; which Sir Thomas seeing, called, Pretty Books and
Pamphlets of Conjuring. They brought also to him an Account in Writing of their
Travail and pains in this behalf. There was apprehended danger in these
Practices. For the Papists earnestly longing for the Queen's Death had cast
Figures, and consulted with unlawful Arts (which they mixed with their Masses)
to learn when she should die, and who should succeed; and probably to cause her
Death, if they could. This piece of Service therefore the Queen and Counsel
took very thankfully at the Earl of Shrewsbury's Hands. Which, together with
the Course that was intended to be taken with these Criminals, the Secretary
signified to him in a Letter to this Tenor; His Letter to the Earl of
Shrewsbury hereupon. Ex Offic. Armorum.


My very good Lord; the Pain, that the two, to whom you gave Commission, viz.
Pain and Peg, have taken to seek out the Conjurers and Mass-mongers, is very
well accepted of by my Lords of the Council; and they willed me to give your
Lordship, therefore their most hearty thanks. The Queen also not without great
Contentation of her Highness, has heard of your careful ordering of those
matters. The matters be referred touching the Massing, and such Disorders, to
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest of the great Commission
Ecclesiastical. That which shall appear by Examination to touch the State, and
the Prince, to be referred again to my Lords of the Council, etc. This was
dated from Greenwich, Feb. 17. 1572. But it was thought highly needful, that
this dangerous Nest in the North should be searched more narrowly for, and the
Birds taken, that they might no more Exercise these evil Practices, or worse
hereafter: The care of which was therefore committed by the Council to the
Justices of those parts, out of some secret Favor, as it seems, in some of the
Privy Counselors to Papists. For those Justices were known well enough to be
generally Popishly affected. Therefore it was the Judgment of the Secretary,
that these Justices would rather Cloak than Open, Excuse than Accuse them, who
were worthy of Accusation; and very doubtful he was, whether they would hinder
the Discovery of the Nest that would be broken. As he broke his Mind to the
Lord Treasurer, who was of the same Judgment, and so also the Lord Chamberlain
showed himself to be, in Conference with the Secretary. But the said Treasurer,
who was for doing all things with Doulceur, and with as little opposition to
others as could be, judged, that for this time the doings of these Justices
should be tried; to which Opinion the Secretary did show himself to condescend
and agree. There came soon after to his hands more Indicia of these Conjurers,
which were taken, and withal, a foul knot of Papistical Justices of Peace
discovered, and of Massing Priests, which made him signify his judgment to the
Lord Treasurer, that it would be well done, some of them should be sent for out
of hand, and laid hold on, if they could be found: And accordingly Letters were
dispatched into the North for that purpose.

About this time it was that Sir Thomas was earnest with the Queen, Persuades
the Queen to send aid into Scotland.
to send aid to reduce the Rebels in Scotland, who had fortified Edinburgh
Castle against the King and Regent; and for that purpose, he let the Queen
understand from Mr. Killigrew, her Ambassador in Scotland, how dangerously
things stood there, and therefore that it was his desire that the Peacemakers
(as he phrased it) might shortly be transported thither; to whom, when the
Queen asked, who be they, Marry, said he, Your Majesty's Cannons, they must do
it, and make a final Conclusion. Then said the Queen, I warrant you, and that
shortly: Whereupon Sir Thomas said, he was glad, for it was better to prevent
than to be prevented; such was his Facetious way sometimes of getting his
designs and Council to the Queen to succeed.

For it is to be understood, that the Queen for the securing of her Affairs
with respect to Scotland, Which upon his Motion, she condescends to.
had by her Interest there, procured the Earl of Morton a Protestant to be
Regent of Scotland. But the Papists and Frenchified Party resisted and took
Edinburgh Castle; the reducing of which so expeditely before the French could
come in to their assistance, was owing to the Managery of the Lord Treasurer
and the Secretary. His part was to urge the Queen to send speedy supply
thither, and the Lord Treasurer would have Men, Ammunition and other
Necessaries, and a Ship immediately ready at Newcastle to go for Scotland, upon
the Queen's Order: So about the 11 th. or 12 th. of February, the Secretary
moved the Queen for aiding the said Regent to reduce that place into the young
King's Hands. But she considered the Expense, and told Smith of a device she
had to do it without any such charge, that is, by a Letter to be written, it
seems, to them that held the Castle, thinking to bring them to yielding by some
good words and promises. But this the Secretary showed her the inconvenience
of, namely, that it would be a protracting of time, being the very thing which
they desired, that the French might have time to come to them with their
Succors. He showed her moreover, that now, the French King being thoroughly
occupied, was the best time to perform that enterprise that was to be done; and
in fine, she consented to his opinion; and showed her self very well pleased
with the Lord Treasures making Provision in this mean while, to have Powder and
a ship of Newcastle and other things necessary provided beforehand for the
doing it, as the Secretary had signified to Her. And she told him, that upon
that Lords coming to Court, (which then was at Greenwich) she would fully
determine with him all those Matters to be set forward with speed.

About this time were two Scotch men, Two Scotch men by him examined.
coming from France, stopped at Rye by the Mayor, and sent up to the Secretary,
who examined them. They related what confident Report went in France, what the
French would do in Scotland, and with what a mighty hand they would bring their
Desires to pass there in spite of the English, and such like. But this the
Secretary saw was but such Talk as might appear to be common in France. For
that Nation, he said, was full of Babble and Words, and all for magnifying of
their doings, and Threatening what they would do, rather than what they could
do. These men who called themselves Merchants were searched at Rye, and no
Letters nor other things suspicious found about them. Yet the Secretary advised
that Mr. Randal the Queens Ambassador in Scotland, or some other who knew
Scotch Manners and Matters better, should somewhat consider of them: and if
there were no matters against them, to dismiss them in his Mind were best.

This year Sir Thomas procured a Colony to be sent into a Land of his in
Ireland, called The Ardes, It was a rich and pleasant Country, Thomas sends a
Colony into Ardes.
on the Eastern Coast of Ulster, and of considerable Extent, lying well for
Trade by Sea: Bordering upon a Country where Sarleboy contained himself with
his Party. He was an Hebidian Scot (the Hebrides bordering upon this Province)
a long time detained prisoner by Shan O Neal, the chief Prince in Ulster. This
Country was called Clandeboy where these Scots lived; but they were beaten out
once by this Shan, who called himself Earl of Tir Oen, and had killed two of
the Brethren of Mac Conel: Of which Family was Sarleboy, whom he then had taken
Prisoner; but afterward in an Extremity gave him his liberty. This Shan was
afterward in a revenge slain by Sarleboy and his Party. A Prospect of these
Parts this Map will give.

His Patent for it.
Sir Thomas in the year 1571. had procured a Patent from her Majesty for these
Ardes. The substance whereof was, That Sir Tho. was to be Lieutenant General
there for War, and for the Distribution of Lands, Orders and Laws in the
Matters thereunto pertaining. In a word, to obtain and Govern the Country to be
won, following Instructions and Orders to him to be directed from the Queen and
her Council. And this for the first Seven years. Afterward the Government of
the Country to return to such Officers as the Customs and Laws of England did
appoint, except the Queen should think him worthy to be appointed the Governor
thereof, as being a Frontier Country. The Right to remain only in him, as to
the Inheritance; the Authority to muster and call together his soldiers
throughout the same Country, and to dispose of them upon the Frontiers, as he
should see cause for the better Defense of the Country.

In this Patent his base and only son Thomas Smith was joined with him. Sir
Thomas's son leads the Colony.
And under his Conduct Sir Thomas this year sent thither the Colony beforesaid:
having this good Design therein, that those half barbarous People might be
taught some Civility. And his hope was, that the Place might easily be defended
by Garrisons placed in a strait neck of Land, by which it was joined to the
rest of the Island. And there was a Reward of Land, to every Footman and
Horseman. But this extensive Project took not its desired effect. For the
hopeful Gentleman his Son had not been long there, but he was unhappily and
treacherously slain. It was pity it had no better Issue. For Sir Thomas a great
while had set his Thoughts upon it, undertaking to people that North Part of
the Island with Natives of this Nation.

But for his more regular and convenient Doing of it, His Rules and Orders for
it.
and Continuance thereof, he invented diverse Rules and Orders. The Orders were
of two kinds. I. For the management of the Wars against the Rebels, and the
preserving the Colony continually from the Danger of them. II. For the Civil
Government. To preserve their Home^manners, Laws and Customs* that they
degenerated not into the Rudeness and Barbarity of that Country. He divided his
Discourse into th^^e Parts. First, to speak of Wars. And therein of Military
Officers to be used there. Secondly, Concerning Laws for the Politic
Government of the Country to be possessed, for the Preservation of it. Thirdly,
In what Orders to proceed in this Journey from the beginning to the End: which
Sir Thomas called A Noble Enterprise, and A Godly Voyage.

Mr. Smiths care in the Colony.
His Son being now with his Colony upon the Place proceeded commendably in order
to the Reduction of it. He was in a good forwardness of reducing Sarleboy to
Obedience. For they had much Converse together, and came at length to Articles
of Agreement. The main of which was, that he should be made a Denizon of
England by the Queen, and hold his Land of her and him: and the same Privilege
should the rest of his Scots enjoy. Paying to the Queen a yearly Rent in
acknowledgement, and he to become Homager to Her by Oath, and so to be a
faithful Subject, or else lose his Right. Mr. Smith also began a new Fort in
this Country. He labored also to unite the English and Scots that were there,
who did not, it seems, very well agree. That their strength being united they
might be the more able to withstand the Wild Irish. And this the Scots were for
promoting, as considering that if the English and they should strive together,
when the one had weakened the other, the Wild Irish, like the Puthawk (it was
Sir Thomas's own similitude) might drive them out, or carry away both.

Besides the Pains Sir Thomas had already taken for the settlement of the
Ardes, Draws up I^structins for his Son.
he drew up this year Instructions to be sent from the Queen to his Son;
Containing directions upon what terms Sarleboy and his fellows should hold
their Lands of her Majesty and him. Likewise he drew up a draught for
explaining certain Words doubtful in the Indentures between the Queen and him
and his Son. As, about his Sons soldiers, if they should Marry in that Country,
as it was likely they would. The Secretary entreated the Lord Treasurer to
steal a little leisure to look these Writings over and correct them: so that he
might make them ready for the Queens signing. And this he hoped, when once
dispatched, might be as good to his Son as Five Hundred Irish soldiers.

At Mr. Smith's first coming hither he found some few that claimed themselves
descended of English blood, Families of English found in the Ardes.
namely the Family of the Smiths, and the Savages, and two Surnames more. And
these presently joined with the English, and combined with them against the
Wild Irish. But all the rest were mere Irish or Irish Scots, and natural Haters
of the English.

The Queen had a Force of men in those Parts for necessary Defense, and for the
keeping of Knockfergus, a very important Place for curbing the Irish. Mr.
Smiths good service this Winter.
But to retrench her Charge in Ireland, she was minded now to discharge them as
she had done some already, expecting that Smith should secure those Quarters,
nor would she grant any Foot or Horse to him. Sir Thomas therefore in February
interceded with her by the means of the Lord Treasurer, that at least for that
year she would suffer those Bands to be there, to Countenance and support the
New begun Aid and Fort, and not to leave it so naked as it had been, it seems,
all that Winter by Cassing those Bands that were heretofore the Defense of
Knockfergus, and the Bar of the North. And he told the Lord Treasurer upon this
Occasion, that it was certain, if his Son had not retrieved a Band of the Lord
of Harvey's at his own Charge, Knockfergus had been in great danger, or else
clean lost.

Mr. Smith slain. ^
But while these matters thus fairly and hopefully went on, Mr. Smith was
intercepted and slain by a wild Irish man. Yet Sir Thomas did not wholly
desist, but carried on the Colony, and procured more Force to pass over there.
For in March Anno exeunte, (his Son being but newly, if yet, dead) there were
Harrington, Clark and some others, Adventurers on this Design, that gave
certain Sums of Money for Lands there to be assured to them. In the beginning
of March 1572, the Ships, Captains and Soldiers were ready to be wasted over:
When unhappily some Persons concerned had started some new Matter in regard of
the Bargain. Which put a stop to their Departure. And one Edward Higgins the
Chief of the Gentlemen and Captains that were going over, and forward in this
generous Expedition, was hindered for want of the money agreed upon. Hence it
came to pass that the Captains lay at great Charges, when their Ships, Mariners
and Soldiers were ready, and they did nothing but dispend their Money. This
troubled Sir Thomas not a little; as appears by a Letter he wrote to one Mrs.
Pen, a Gentlewoman that had an Influence upon some of these Persons that made
the stop. To whom therefore Sir Thomas applied himself, praying her to call
upon them, to consider at what Charge the Captains did lie, and to do what she
could in any wise to help them away. Whereby she should do the Queens Majesty
good service, and him and them great Pleasure. It being a matter, said he,
which indeed for the goodness of it, I take much to heart. This was writ from
Greenwich the 6th. of March.

This Care the Secretary continued. The Arde: neglected upon Sir Thomas's Death.
For a year or two after, I find him drawing out other Passports and Licenses
for transportation of Victuals for certain that went to the Ardes, and
expressing himself then to a Friend, that it stood him upon both in Profit and
Honesty, not to let the present Month pass, which was May, An. 1574. And so
during his Life Sir Tho. labored in the Civilizing and Settlement of this his
Colony. But upon his Death it seems to have lain neglected for some Time. And
though the Family and Heirs of Sir Thomas, who are extant to this day, have often
claimed their Interest in this Land, which their Ancestor did so dearly
purchase, and well deserve, yet they enjoy not a foot of it at this present.

How lost from the Family.
For, as I have been informed by some of that Worshipful Family, Sir William
Smith Nephew and Heir to our Sir Thomas Smith was merely tricked out of it, by
the Knavery of a Scot, one Hamilton, (who was once a Schoolmaster, though
afterward made a Person of Honor) with whom the said Sir William was
acquainted. Upon the first coming in of King James I. He, minded to get these
Lands confirmed to him by that King, which had cost Sir Thomas (besides the
death of his only Son) 10000 l. being to go into Spain with the English
Ambassador, left this Hamilton to solicit this his Cause at Court, and get it
dispatched. But Sir William being gone, Hamilton discovered the Matter to some
other of the Scotch Nobility. And he and some of them begged it of the King for
themselves, pretending to his Majesty, that it was too much for any one Subject
to enjoy. And this Hamilton did craftily, thinking, that if he should have
begged it all for himself, he might perhaps have failed of success, being so
great a Thing, but that he might well enjoy a Part, especially with the
Concurrence and Interest of some of the Powerful men about the King, when they
begged for themselves. And never after could Sir William Smith, nor any of his
Posterity recover it. For the Premises had been so long possessed by others, that
neither Sir Thomas Smith, who had suffered much for his unshaken Loyalty to
King Charles I. had success in his Petition preferred to King Charles II. upon
his Return, nor yet Sir Edward Smith still surviving, in his, upon the late
Revolution. He that is minded to know more at large how this Case stood, may in
the Appendix find the Petition of the foresaid Sir Thomas Smith exemplified, N.
W.
as it was humanely communicated to me by his Son together with the Kings order
thereupon.

An. 1574. Q. Eliz.
CHAP. XV. The Secretary Oppressed with business. His Discourse with the Queen
about Ireland, and the Earl of Essex. His Act in the behalf of Colleges of
Learning. His Sickness and Death.
The Secretary uneasy,
THE Secretary could not want for Care and Toil in these busy and most
dangerous Days, wherein the Nation was exposed to the Malice and Envy of the
Pope and the mighty Kings of Spain and France, the one more Covertly, the other
more professedly, but both fatal Enemies to the Queen and the Religion
established, the Irish backed in their Rebellion by a Foreign Power, and at
home a great many Malcontents. To trace him a little in his Pains and
Diligence. To them he devoted himself even to quite Tyring, after he had been a
year or two exercised therein. For when once in the year 1574. he had a few
Play-days, and was ready to go home to his House in Essex, he told his Friends,
that he was thoroughly weary, tam Animo quam Corpore, and could scarce endure any
longer. And tha^ which increased his Weariness was the Queens Wariness, for she
did not use to be hasty in Dispatch of Matters, which was Smith's great Desire
should not hang in hand. This he would call among his intimate Friends the
Queens Irresolution; and in some Heat (as he was somewhat hasty and quick in
his Temper) complained at this time to the Lord Treasurer, That it was
sometimes So, and sometimes No; and in all times uncertain, and ready to Stays
and Revocation. And sometimes she would not be spoken with upon Business, and
Access to the Queen was clean shut up. Which made him between jest and earnest
say, That he thought her Majesty supposed, that he would chide, as he dared:
But indeed, he said, that he could not but Lament, and complain of this her
Irresolution; which did weary and kill her Ministers, destroy her Actions, and
overthrew all good Designs and Counsels. And again in this Discontent he cried
out, I wait while I have neither Eyes to see, nor Legs to stand upon. And yet
these Delays grieve me more, and will not let me sleep in the Night.

The Occasion of this present Distaste of Smith was, At the Queens Delays.
that the Queen had commanded the Earl of Leicester and Sir Christopher Hatton,
her chief Favorites, to forbear moving suits to her. And when the Secretary
went to her with private Suits, he could get neither Yea nor Nay. And if these
Two aforesaid Persons were forbidden to move Suits, Then said he, had we need
within a while to have a Horse or an Ass to carry Bills after us, increasing
daily and never dispatched, as he angerly and wittily spoke to one of his
Friends. Of these Practices of the Queen he would say, These Resolutions and
Revocations of Resolutions will be the undoing of any good Action.

The Queen deliberates about supplies for the Earl of Essex.
Matters in Ireland being in an ill Condition, the Lord Treasurer and the
Secretary dealt earnestly with the Queen to supply the Earl of Essex, (an
honest Gentleman and an excellent Commander in Ulster) with Men and Money;
those Northern Parts of Ireland being now in great Disturbance; and Essex
forced by reason of secret Enemies in the Court, to lie still and do but little
to the purpose for want of both. The Queen resolved and revoked her Resolutions
again. This created the Secretary a great deal of Vexation. For she would say,
she would consult with the Lord Treasurer when he came to Court* though she had
done it, and had his Opinion in that behalf before. The Earl of Leicester
privately hindered all, having no Love for Essex.

The Queens backwardness thereunto troubles the Secretary.
Thus the Earl of Essex's Plat stuck with the Queen. But about 10 or 12 days
passing in March, the Secretary comforted himself by the Persuasion that she
was come to a full Resolution to go forward with it, without any going back,
and that she would send for him and signify the same to him. And had it indeed
been so, to use the Secretaries Expression, the Realm and she had past a great
and troublesome Ague, and especially the Lord Treasurer and himself, and such
others as they, who had Doings in that Matter. But the Queen took respite
again, until she heard again from the Lord Treasurer. Whereat the Secretary was
so bold as to tell her, that she knew his Lordships Mind full many times told
her before. And this he signified unto that Lord, and in Conclusion told him,
That Coming unsent for to have Resolution, he was sent back again without
Resolution. He prayed God to send it that Night, or to morrow. And added, that
it was high time to resolve one Way or other. Which done he would be bold to
take a little rest, and make some start home into Essex, being thoroughly weary,
he said, am animo quam corpore, An. 1575.
and could scarce endure any longer.

But at last in the Month of March 1575. Conference between the Queon and her
Secretary about Ulster,
( Anno incipiente) Sir Thomas and the Lord Burghley got the Earl of Essex's
Business to come to a Resolution. Which was, to send a good supply, with a Plat
how he was to manage himself. The Queen had first entered into a discourse one
night with her Secretary about Ireland, and declared her dislike of the
Enterprise of Ulster, for default of them who should execute it, asking him
what Men of Counsel or Wisdom there were, into whose Hands might be committed
so great a Mass of Money, and so great a Charge as should be sent. The
Secretary answered her Majesty, That the Counsel, what and how to do herein,
was already taken. And that a Plat was laid down by my Lord of Essex, and
allowed of by the Lord Deputy and Council there, and liked of by the Lords of
her Council here; as she her self had heard of the Lords, and all their
Reasons; so that, said he, whereas it is said Priusquam incipias, consulto,
that had been Maturely and Deliberately done. And to which, as he subjoyned,
her Highness by Letters to the Lord Deputy, and the Earl of Essex had given her
Consent. And now there rested nothing but, Ubi consulueris mature opus est
facto, To which her Majesty had set a good Beginning, giving a Warrant for the
half Years Charges. Now, said Sir Thomas, Counsels be commonly of Old men,
Grave men and full of Experience, and at home; the Execution is to be done by
young men, Captains and Soldiers abroad. And tho Earl of Essex.
And, said he, my Lord of Essex, has showed great Wisdom, Courage and Boldness
hitherto, and brought it to a very good Pass for a beginning; And now having
more Experience, and Malby and other Captains with him of Courage, it was to be
hoped that he should bring it to a good End. Yea, said the Queen, but who has
he with him but Malby? Shall I trust so great a Matter to him, and such a Mass
of Money? Who shall have the Charge of it, and the laying out of it? Madam
answered the Secretary, the Money is to be committed to the Treasurer there;
and upon his Accounts to be employed upon the Captains and Soldiers for their
Wages and Victuals, and upon Fortifications. If he do keep his Plat, then he
follows that which the Wisest Heads of the Counselors in England think fit
and best to be done. Otherwise he deceives them, and your Highness, and most
of all himself. Which it is not likely that he should, and I trust he will not
do. But the Queen still harped upon that string, that there was lacking able
Ministers, and showed her self notwithstanding at this Discourse desirous to
consult with the Treasurer.

But though the Commission and Order for the Earl of Essex, His Advice vice to
the Queen concerning him.
was by her signed at last, still she was doubtful of the success of her Irish
affairs, thus committed to that Nobleman, some about her, Enemies to him,
lessening his Worth to the Queen. Whereupon the Secretary entreated the
Treasurer, whose Opinion she greatly valued in Matters of State, that he would
persuade her to think no more of it till Michaelmas, that is till half a year
were past. And by that Time he trusted she should see such good success, that
she should be glad; and sorry only that it was not set upon before. Thus
earnestly did Sir Thomas solicit his Royal Mistress for the Good of Ireland,
and labored to release and satisfy her Mind anxious about her successes, and
loath to part with her Money, without fair Probability of succeeding. And
perhaps he was the more earnest herein, the safety and good Estate of his Lands
in the Ardes depending upon this Expedition of that Noble Lord.

The Secretary was this Year with the Queen in her Progress. The Secretary with
the Queen in Progress.
And in the Month of August he was with her at Charteley. Whence she went to
Stafford Castle; and thence to one Mr. Giffords, the Secretary attending her.
This being some part of her Progress.

It was now lately grown a common Practice to ride with Daggs or Pistols. The
Queen speaks to the Secretary about dangerous beggars.
Whereby it came to pass, that Thieves wearing weapons, did more boldly rob
true men travailing upon their Occasions. And there were now also common Routs
of roguing Beggars by the high way side, naming themselves Soldiers of Ireland
lately disbanded. Of both these the Queen December. 4. willed the Lords to write
unto the Lord Treasurer for the Redress of them. And she showed the Secretary,
that some of them had said they were in Company 1500. which were fain now to go
a begging. The Secretary by a private Letter let the Lord Treasurer understand
this, and added, that it was honorable and almost necessary, that some good
Order were taken for these two Disorders. And for the Remedy hereof, Sir Thomas
drew out a Proclamation, showing how great and heinous Robberies and Murders
had been committed, both in the Highways and other Places in diverse Parts of
the Realm, by such as did carry about with them Daggs or Pistols contrary to
the good and wholesome Statutes of the Realm. That the Queen therefore, of a
great Zeal and Care that she had to the Safety and Preservation of her
Subjects, and to the good Government of the Realm in all Peace and Surety,
calling to mind how unseemly a thing it was in so quiet and peaceable a Realm
to have men go armed with such offensive Weapons as though it were in Time of
Hostility, and how prohibited by her Noble Progenitors; did charge and command
all her Subjects, of what Estate or Degree soever they were, that in no wise in
their journeying, going or riding, they carried about them privily or openly
any Dag or Pistol, or any other Harquebuse, Gun or such Weapon for Fire, under
the Lengths expressed by the Statute made by the Queens most Noble Father, upon
pain of Imprisonment, or other Punishment. And the Justices, Mayors, Bailiffs
and Constables were to arrest such as should come to any Town with such
Weapons. And all Keepers of Inns, Taverns, etc. should have care and regard,
that no man should bring into their Houses any such prohibited Weapons, and if
they did, to seize upon the same, and to bring the Persons to the Constable to
be arrested. But because for the multitude of those evil disposed Persons which
carried about them such Weapons for mischievous and unlawful Intents, some of
her good Subjects had been compelled for their own Defense, and to avoid the
danger of such Thieves, to provide them Daggs and Pistols and carry them
openly; she was contented for a certain time specified, that all Noble men and
such known Gentlemen which were without Spot or Doubt of evil Behavior, if
they carried Daggs or Pistolets about them in their Journeys openly at their
Saddle Bows, and in no other close manner: And such of their Servants as rid in
their Company.

Sir Thomas Smith in a Parliament this Eighteenth year of the Queen, He
precures an Act for Schools of Learning.
procured an Act to pass for the Universities, and the two Colleges of Eaton
and Winchester; (for which his Memory will be always dear to Scholars) which
was, that a third part of the Rent upon Leases made by Colleges, should be
reserved in Corn, paying after the Rate of Six Shillings and Eight pence the
Quarter, or under for good Wheat, and Five Shillings a Quarter or under for
good Malt. This Corn the Tenants were yearly to deliver to the Colleges either
in Kind or in Money, as the Colleges pleased, after the Rate of the best Wheat
and Malt in the Markets of Cambridge and Oxford, at the day prefixed for the
Payment thereof. Hist of Cambr. p. 144.
Fuller in his History of Cambridge makes this Remark here, That Sir Thomas
Smith was said by some to have surprised the House herein. Where many could not
conceive, how this would be at all profitable to the Colleges; but still the
same on the Point, whether they had it in Money or Wares. But the Knight took
the Advantage of the present cheapness; knowing hereafter Grain would grow
dearer, Mankind daily multiplying, and License being lately given for
Transportation. So that at this day much Emolument redouudeth to the Colleges
in each University, by the passing of this Act; and though their Rents stand
still, their Revenues do increase.

The Act ran For the bearer Maintenance of Learning, and the better Relief of
Scholars, That no Master, Provost, President, Warden, Dean, The Act.
Governor, Rector or chief Ruler of any College, Hall or House of Learning,
after the End of that Sessions of Parliament, should make any Lease for Life or
Years, of any of their Lands, Tenements, or other Hereditaments, to which any
Tithe, Arable Lands, Meadow or Pasture did appertain; Except that one Third Part
at the least of the old Rent were reserved and paid in Corn, that is to say, in
good Wheat after Six Shillings and Eight Pence the Quarter, or under, and good
Malt after Five Shillings the Quarter or under: To be delivered Yearly upon
Days perfixed at the said Colleges, etc, And for default thereof to pay the
said Colleges in ready Money at the Election of the said Leasees, after the Rate
as the best Wheat and Malt in the Market of Cambridge, and in the Market of
Oxford, and of Winchester and Windsor, for the Rents that were to be paid to
the use of the Houses there, were, or should be sold the next Market day before
the said Rent should be due, without Fraud or Deceit. And that all Leases
otherwise hereafter to be made, and all Collateral Bonds and Assurances to the
Contrary by any of the said Corporations* should be void in Law to all intents
and purposes. And the same Wheat, Malt, or Money, coming of the same, to be
expended to the Use of the Relief of the Commons, and Diet of the said
Colleges; And by no Fraud, or Color, (...), or fold away from the Profit of
the said Colleges, and the Fellows and Scholars of the same, and the Use
aforesaid, upon pain of Deprivation to the Governors, or chief Rulers, of the
said Colleges, and all others thereto consenting. And this was no more than Sir
Thomas himself had practiced long before, when he was Provost of Eaton,
whenever he made or renewed the Leases of that College. The Benefit of which
he had well experienced by the rising of the Prizes of Corn even in his
Remembrance. For this Eternal Benefit to the Houses of Learning, he deserved an
eternal Monument, and so a member of one of them in a Poetical Flight wrote: O!
Statua dignum Inventum, Phrygiaque Columna.


About the year 1576. Sir Thomas Smith began to be afflicted with that
Sickness, An. 1576. Q. Eliz. that the next Year ended his Life. Overprest with
continual Watchings,
Sir Thomas 's fatal D^stemper seizes him.
and the public Cares of the Queen and State. As it is a Thing that is wont to
create a true Friendship, I mean the Proportion and Likeness of Tempers, so it
is not without Remark, that Sir Thomas, and the Lord Treasurer Burghley, their
Distempers were the same. And which was more remakable still, they used to
seize upon these two Persons at the same Time. Their Distemper was a Rheum. The
Rheum, as he wrote to the same Lord, which is my natural Enemy, is commonly
wont to assault me most, when your Lordship is also grievously troubled with
yours. For April 22d. 1576. at which time the Lord Burghley was very ill of his
Distemper, Sir Thomas wrote him a Letter, that he was then seized with his.
And, which was an ill Sign, whereas before it used to take him either in his
Jaw, or Teeth, or in the Lower Body with Looseness, and all over with Sweat, now
it fastened it self in his Throat and Tongue; and would not by any Art be
removed. So that he was almost out of Hope of any Amendment; but clearly
without Hope of any speedy Help; though he never took so much Advice, as he
wrote, nor used so many Physicians, nor observed so much their Rules; which he
styled their Preciseness. But when all is done, added he piously, that man may,
or ought to do, the Sequel and Event of Health, and the End of Life is in Gods
Will and Pleasure. That which he shall appoint is best to me. Surely all is
one, being as willing now to Die, as to Live: and I trust (with Gods Mercy and
Hope therein) as ready. For it grieveth me to Live unserviceable to my Prince,
and unprofitable to my Country, Heavy and unpleasant to my self. For what
Pleasure can a man have of my years, when he cannot speak as he would: [For his
chief Grief was in Eating, and Drinking, and Speaking; and in the last
especially] While his Legs, he said, his Hands, his Memory and his Wit, served
as much as need be desired.

It was indeed a great Grief to him, that it so affected his Tongue. And he
avowed, That if it were at his own Choice, It affected (...) his (...) and
Throat*
he had rather his Disease had taken hold of any other Part of his Body. So
that, that Piece only, as he called it, which is contained in an handful space,
were at quiet. Which yet was without pain or grief, but when he Eat, or Drank,
or Spoke: The continual Defluxion and falling down of tough Phlegm, still vexing
it, and interrupting the most necessary uses of the Throat.

This envious Disease stopped that Eloquent Tongue of his: The Orator now sca^^^
can speak.
And that Sweet and streaming Rhetoric, which was wont to flow to the Delight
and Admiration of all, received now a Fatal Check, and Sir Thomas must play the
Orator no more: no, nor scarce utter a single Word. For to that Extremity he
was brought at last. Which the Poet that wrote the Muses Tears for him, thus
expresses: Nescio quis subito Morbus sic occupat artus,
(...) qu^ ^lim mellita din jam verba solebat
Fund^re, vix aliquam possit transmittere vocem;
Gutturis ast imis latitans radicibus intus
Haereret, nullumque Sonum Lingua ederet illo
Q^o solita esl Splendore, decus laudemque merente.


To divert (...) sickness, he looks over his former Writings.
He foresaw that he was like to continue a long while in this Condition: And be
so disablied from his common Function, and to attend the Queen's Business. But
he could not be idle, which he said was contrary to his Nature. He was
therefore minded to follow his Study, and take a Review of what he had formerly
done: and in this ^eathful Leisure, as he called it, among other Occupations
and Pastimes, he would remember the Days of his Youth, and look back again to
his Doings then; and now being Old Quasi repuerase^re, i. e. hereby as it were
to grow a Child again. When he was Secretary in King Edwards Days, he wrote a
Book of the Value of the Roman Coins to our English Standard, His book of Roman
C^^ns.
upon a Question Cecil, his fellow Secretary, had moved to him, viz. What was
the Ordinary Wages of a Soldier at Rome. This Book, as many others which he
wrote in his Youth, he had now lost. Two of these he had sent he remembered, one
to Sir Robert Dudley, now Earl of Leicester, and the other to Sir Will. Cecil,
now Lord Treasurer, Now he had lately desired Mr. Wolley to search in the said
Earl's Study for it, but it could not be found. He desired therefore the Lord
Treasurer to see for it, who he thought had not laid it up so negligently. And
especially he desired the Tables, which were exactly and plainly set forth. For
searching among his old Papers he could find the first Draught of the said
Book, and the Adversaria: Whereby he was able to fill up all the Chapters in
manner as they were at the first. But the Tables, or any Draughts of them he
could not find. And he doubted that neither his Leisure, nor Wit, nor Memory of
old Books, and the Places of them, which were formerly more ready and fresh ^o
him than they were at present, would serve him to make the Instructions again.
Wherefore he prayed that Lord to look out the Book, but especially the Tables.
This he wrote from his House at Chanon Row, April 22d. This Book, as it seems,
the Lord Treasurer found out among his Papers, and sent it to the Secretary,
according to his Request; which he had desired to see, as he said to the said
Lord, anquam filium postliminio redeuntem, perditum quasi, and iterum inventum.

This Book is mentioned, and no more but mentioned, in the History of Queen
Elizabeth, by Mr. Cambd^n; only that he calls it an exact Commentary, and worth
the publishing. After I had made great Enquiry after it without success, at
length I fortunately met with Sir Thomas his own rude Draught of it, in several
Tables of his own hand, shown and communicated to me by the obliging Favor and
kindness of Sir Edward Smith. A true Extract whereof I have made, (...)
and presented to the Readers in the Appendix.

The Physicians tamper with him.
April 25th. the Lord Burghley sent a Gentlemen to Sir Thomas, to visit him in
this his Valetudinary State. Which he took kindly, and gave him an account of
his Sickness, and of his Progress in Physic. Which was to this Tenor; That he
had put himself into the Physicians hands; and they according to their Method,
first fell to Purging him, to free his Body from peccant Humors as a
Preparatory to other Physic. A Practice which he did not like of, because it
would make a great Disturbance of the whole Body, and affect the Parts that
were well, and in a good State. And so indeed it happened to him. For this
Physic put his whole Body, and all the Parts of it, into a Commotion and
Indisposition: When it was perfectly well before, as appeared by his Urine, and
by his own Feeling and Apprehension of himself. But after he had taken this
Preparatory Physic, there was no part of his Body, which was not brought out of
Frame. His Urine so troubled, so high colored, and so confused: Which did
bespeak a Seditious Rout of Humors raised in his Body, as he spoke. This being
a little settled, they gave him a Pill, which was as insuccesful as the other.
For it gave him scarcely a Stool; and that with abundance of Wrack and Torment,
and left such an unpleasant and bitter Relish in the Stomach, that he was
forced to vomit it up again. The next Course that was taken with him, was
Shaving his Head, and wearing a Cap: Which one Dr. Langton was the chief
Prescriber of, accounted of Excellent Use for those that were troubled with
great Rheums: And was himself present, when it was laid on. The Effect whereof
was to be seen after Eight or Ten Days. Sir Thomas was very unsatisfied with
his Physicians, who for two or three Months had been thus tampering with his
Body, and with no manner of success; whereas he was for a speedier Work; and
declared himself of the Smiths mind, his Namesake in Plato, who willed the
Physician to give him a thing that would speedily rid him of his Diseas^, that
he might again Sustain his Wife and Family with his Labor, or else be rid
quickly. For he had no leisure to attend the long Prorogation of thin Diet, and
protracting Phisic. That Mind, said he, which the Smith had of necessity, I
have of Will and Desire, and ever had; Not to live, being unserviceable to my
Prince, and the Common Wealth.

Hi Physic^^ ^s leave (...) to (...) Physic.
In the beginning of May his Physic having greatly weakened his Body, and all his
good Humors dried therewith, and his Sickness so obstinate, that it little
cared for Medicine, all his Physicians with one accord agreed, advising him to
forbear all further Medicaments, and to apply himself to Kitchen Physic, giving
him leave to Eat and Drink what he would, (...) into th Country.
and what his Appeite desired. And so he resolved to retire home to his House
called Mounthaut in Essex, a Manor House of his, where now stands Hill Hall,
the present Dwelling of Sir Edward Smith Baronet, before mentioned. And here he
trusted to leave his Sickness, or his Life. Whether pleases God, said he, that
is best. But if it were in my Choice, I would leave them both at once. Yet must
I keep life so long as I can, and not leave the Station wherein God has set
me, by my default, and without his Calling. And so mind I to do: Trusting very
shortly to have some plain signification from his Majesty, to whither Haven I
shall apply my Ship, of Death or Health. An. 1577. Q. Eliz.
Blessed be his Holy Will.

God gave not our Knight his Desire, that is, a Speedy Death, Dies.
or speedy Recovery. For he continued in a decaying, consumptive, Wasting
Condition all this Year, and onward the next till August; putting a Conclusion
to his generous, and most useful Life at his beloved Retirement of Mounthal, or
Mounthaut (as he delighted to call it) on the 12th. day of the said Month, in
the Year 1577. in the Sixty Fifth Year of his Age, in an easy and quiet
Departure. And he never was afraid of Death.

He was attended to his Grave with a Decency and Splendour, Persons attending
his Funerals.
becoming the high Place and Figure he had made. There assisted in Mourning at
his Funerals George Smith, his Brother, and William the said Georges Son, Wood,
Sir Thomas's Nephew, Altham, Nicols Recordor of Walden, Wilford, Goldwe^, Dr.
Pern, Dr. Levine, and many more. Of whom, as some were his Relations, others
the Neighboring Gentry, and his Worshipful Friends, so several were Learned
men, that came as it seems, from the University, to pay their last respects to
that Grave Head, Venerable for his profound and Universal Learning, and that
had so well merited of the Learned World.

He was Buried in the Chancel of the Parish Church of Theydon Mount, Buried.
where he dyed: On the North side whereof, at the upper end there still remains
a fair Monument dedicated to his Memory: Though the Church has since been beat
down by Lightning, and rebuilt by his Nephew Sir William Smith.

He is represented by a Statue of Marble lying upon his right side in Armor,
His Monument.
a loose Robe about him, with the Arms of the Knighthood of the Garter upon the
left Arm of the said Robe, denoting him Chancellor of the Garter: Placed under
an Arch or Semicircle: on which is Engraven this English Stanza, What Earth, or
Sea, or Skies contain,
What Creatures in them be,
My Mind did seek to know;
My Soul the Heavens continually.
Upward on the highest part of the Monument, was placed his Coat of Arms;
which was three Altars flaming, supported with as many Lions. Round which were
these two Verses Written, alluding to the Fire or Flame there, Tabisicus
quamvis Serpens oppresserit Ignem,
Qua tamen erumpendi sit data Copia lucet.
Under his Coat this Motto, Quapote lucet. The Inscription was as follows.
Thomas SMITHUS Eques Auratus, Hujus Manerii Dominus, cum Regis EDWARDI Sexti,
tum ELIZABETH Ae Reginae Consiliarius, ac primi Nominis Secretarius;
Eorundemque Principum ad maximos Reges Legatus; Nobiliss* Ordinis Garterii
Cancellarius, Ardae, Australisque Claneboy in Hibernia Colonellus: Iuris
Civilis supremo Titulo etiamnum Adolescens insignitus; Orator, Mathematicus,
Philosophus excellentissimus; Linguarum Latinae, Graecae, Hebraicae, Gallicae
etiam and Italicae Callentissimus: Proborum and Ingeniosorum Hominum Fautor
eximius, Plurimis commodaus, Nemini noceus; Ab injuriis ulciscendis
alienissimus: Denique Sapientia, Pietate, Integritate insignis: Et in omni
Vita, seu aeger seu valens, ^ntrepidus mori: Cum Aetatis suae 65 annum
complevisset, in Aedibus suis Montaulensibus 12 die Aug. Anno salutis 1577, pie
and suaviter in Domino obdormivit.

Next under the Essigies is this grave Sentence, Gloria vitae auteactae
Celebrem facit in Terrae Viseeribus sepultum. Under that this Distich: Innocuus
vixi, si me post Funera laedas,
Caelesti Domino facta (Sceleste) lues.


He left behind him his second Wife Philippa; His Lady diet.
who dyed the Year after him; that is, the 20th. day of June 1578. and was
there buried by him; as is expressed in the Base of the aforesaid Monument.

Sir Thomas Smith was of a fair Sanguin Complexion: His Person described.
His Beard, which was large and somewhat forked, at the Age of Thirty three
years, was toward a yellow Color. He had a calm, ingenious Countenance: As
appears by the Picture of him hanging up in the Parlour of Hilball, done, as
they say, by Hans Holben; where he is represented with a round Cap on his Head,
and in a Gown, as a Civilian: A great Ruby Ring upon his fore Finger, with a
curious Seal. Which Ring is still preseved in the Family, and in the Possession
of Sir Edward Smith: laying one of his Hands upon a Globe, that of his own
making, as you may suppose. Underneath the Picture is written Love and Fear,
the two great Principles of Actions, wherewith God and Princes are to be served.

CHAP. XVI. His last Will.
Makes his Will.
HE began to frame his Will in the first Threatenings of his last Sickness, that
is, about Apr. 2. 1576. Wherein he piously bequeathed his Soul to God his
Creator and Redeemer. By whose Mercy he trusted* to be one of his Elect: (I use
the Words of his said Will) And his Body to be buried at Theydon Mount, or else
where it should please his Executors, and with such Ceremony as should please
them, and they should think convenient: having rather regard to the Relief of
the Poor, than to any extreme manner of Mourning, not becoming Christians:
Knowing that (as he trusted) he should dye to a better Life, and go to his God
and his Hope, which he had so longed for.

And whereas he was then in Building of his House and Sepulchral Monument for
himself, and his Lady, by a Platform of his own; for the perfecting them, For
the finishing of his House and Monument.
as also for mending of the Ways, he left his ready Money and Debts owing him
after his Funerals and Legacies discharged, and all his Chains of Gold (which
seem to have been given him in his Embassies) and a 1000 Ounces of Gilt Plate,
and more, if need were, together with all the Materials of Timber and other
Stuff prepared and laid in for that Purpose.

To his Lady for her House keeping, To his Lady.
suitable to her, and his Quality, he gave all his Kine, Oxen, Sheep, Plow,
Carthorses, and all his Cattle at Theydon at Mount, called his Stock; which was
a little before by the least Account valued at 430 l. or thereabouts, and
brought at that Time to 300 l. and odd, by the Expenses of Christmas, (so that
his last Christmas keeping cost him it seems near 130 l.) Besides Swine, and
the Corn sown upon the Ground, and all his Wheat, Malt, and bargain of Malt,
Wine, Hops, and other such like Provision: To help her to keep House. But upon
Condition she maintained, until his Buildings were fully finished, and the Ways
about his House mended, so many Teams as were then to be occupied about
Carriages: And upon Condition also that what should remain of the said Stock,
at the Time of her Decease, and the Corn sown by her upon the Grounds, should
remain to his Brother George, or such as by Sir Thomas's Device should succeed
in Mounthal. To his Wife he also gave all her Apparel, Jewels, Chains of Gold,
and all such Bedsteds, and Bedding, all Goblets, Bowls and other Plate, which
she brought with her from Hampden, to dispose at her Will and Pleasure. And
more, to the Furniture of her House, she might choose out 700 Ounces of such of
his Plate gilt, or ungilt, as she should think best to serve her Turn.

For preserving good housekeeping.
Which 700 Ounces of Plate, he gave after her Death to his Brother George, or
who should succeed at his Manor of Theydon at Mount, and all the Bedsteds, Beds
and Furniture there, as were in his new Building, and other Brass, Pewter, and
Implements, as well bought as made at his Charge. These not to be sold, nor
alienated away: but atleast two third Parts thereof to remain to him that
should succeed his Brother George in Theydon at Mount; Giving security to his
Nephew John Wood, and his Heirs, and so each Successor to his Successor. And
all this Caution Sir Thomas used for the better securing good Housekeeping, at
that which had been his Seat, for times to come. And because his Wife might
take away and dispose of several Things then at his House, which had been
brought from Hampden, to supply such Defects, he gave his Brother George all
his Household Linin, Beds and Hangings, that belonged to Ankerwic, another
House of his in Barkshire: That so his House at Hilhal might not be
disfurnished. Nay, and such care did he take for creditable Housekeeping there,
that if any Person, to whom he had Willed the Premises, were suspected not to
perform this Condition to his Successor; it should be Lawful for him, to whom
it should descend, after the Death of the suspected, to require Sureties for
the Performance of the Condition: Which if it were refused, then the two third
parts left to the suspected, should be immediately delivered to his Possession
who should succeed him, as his own, given from Sir Thomas to him.

He gave his Brother George a Thousand Ounces of Plate, To his Brother.
for the furnishing of his Stock. But upon Condition that he left three fourth
Parts of that, to him that should succeed him in Theydon Mount, and his
Successor to the next; and his Successor again to the next, and so each to
other. And all this was still for preserving and keeping up of the House at
Hillhall.

Many Legacies besides, His Library to Queens College*
he gave to his Relations, Friends and Dependents. And because he saw none of
those that should succeed him of a long time, were like to take to Learning, he
gave all his Latin and Greek Books to Queens College in Cambridge (where he had
been brought up) and his great Globe, of his own making; but so, that the
Master and Fellows, having Warning so soon as he was dead, or, at the least so
soon as he was Buried, or before (the which he willed they should have, with a
true Inventory carried to them of his said Books) sent Carts to fetch them away
within Tenor Twelve Days. And these he gave also upon Condition, that they
chained them up in their Library, or did distribute them among the Fellows,
such as would best Occupy them. But so that they did it by Indenture and
Condition; that when they departed from the College, they restored them to the
College again. Or Peter House.
But in case the Master and Fellows of the said College, would not fetch them
away; sending some careful Man to see them well trussed and packed, then he
gave them to Peter House, upon like Condition. If neither of them would do it,
then he Willed his Executors to Sell or use them at their Discretion.

But yet of many of his Books, he made gifts to his Learned Friends, Books to
his Friends.
or Scholars at the University. As to Mr. Shaw, Parson of the Parish, wherein
he lived, Chrysostoms Works in five Volumes, Origin in two Volumes, Luthers
Works, Bucer, Galatinus, Felvus super Psaltcrium, Pet. Martyr in lib. Iudicum.
And as he gave these Divinity Books to a Divine, so to one Tho. Crow, a
Physician, whom he called his Servant, he gave these Books of Galen, de
Compositione Medicament^rum, de Alimentorum Facultatibus, Methodus Melendi.
Petrus Pena de Herbis, Antidotarium speciale. Turners Herbal, Fallopii Opera,
Rendel^tius. And besides these, he gave him the Monument of Martyrs in two
Volumnes, and a Latin Bible in Quarto Gilded. Also to Sir Clement Smith (so
called, I suppose, because he was in Priests Orders, then a Resident of Queens
College; and the same I conjecture with him, that was after Doctor of Divinity,
a Younger Son of his Brother George) he gave, or rather lent, itus Livius,
Aristotle in Greek, and Plato in Greek and Latin, Tullies Works, and Ten more
of his Books, which the said Clement would choose: on Condition, that when he
went away from the College, he should restore them to the College again.

He gave a standing Massy Cup, A Cup to the Queen.
which had the Seven Planets in the Cover, to the Queen, as most worthy, having
all the good Gifts endued by God, which he ascribed to the Seven Planets; (they
be the Words of the Will) Praying her Majesty to take that simple gift in good
worth, as coming from her Faithful and Loving Subject.

And in case of any Ambiguity or Doubt, arising in any part of his Will, In
case of Doubt arising in the Will.
he gave Authority to his Executors to add to it to make it more plain, with
good Advice, so that they kept the true meaning and sense. And then himself
gave a general Explanation of one chief Part of his Will, namely, That he would
have him that should enjoy the House and Manor of Theydon at Mount, to be able
to keep House there, to the Relief of the Poor, and to set Neighbors at Work.
But if the Executors could not reconcile some Ambiguity that might happen in
his Will, that then they should stand to the Decision and Judgment of his Cosen
Nicols a Lawyer, Mr. Henry Archer, (a worthy Gentleman of the Parish of Theydon
Garnons, afterward Living and Dying at Low Leyton) and Parson Shaw
aforementioned; whom he made Supervisors of his Will. Which he did in a great
point of Wisdom, to avoid Controversies of Law: Which oftentimes break
Friendship, and swallow up an Estate so contended for.

His Executors.
He made his Youngest Brother George Smith, who had several Children, and his
Nephew by his Sister, John Wood, his Executors.

The Date of his Will.
This Will is said to be reviewed and corrected by him after the Death of his
Nephew William Smith of Walden (the Son as it seems of his second Brother John
Smith) Febr. 18. 1576. when he Signed with his Hand every Page. All his Manors,
Lands and Tenements he had already given by Indenture, made between him on the
one part, and Francis Walsingham Secretary to the Queen, James Altham, Henry
Archer, Esquires, Humphrey Mitchel, and his Nephew John Wood on the other Part,
bearing date, Febr. 4th. in the 19th year of the Queen. This Will was proved
15. Aug. 1577. before Tho, Yale, by John Wood, that is, three days after Sir
Thomas's Death: And by George Smith, not before May 14. 1578. I do not meet
with many Bequests of Charity, in this Will, because those Acts he seemed to
have done, as the wisest and surest Course, in his Life time, when himself
might see them truly and justly performed.

CHAP. XVII. Observations upon Sir Thomas Smith.
NOW to make a few Observations upon this Wise and Learned Gentleman.

And first, His Learning.
Of his Learning. For he was one of the greatest Scholars of his Age; and one
of those many brave Shoots that the University of Cambridge then produced: As
Denny, Ch^ke, Haddon, Ascham, Ponet, Cecil, and some others; that for their
Merits and Parts, were transplanted to the Court. His Profession was the Civil
Law, and he was the first Regius Professor of it in the University, placed
therein by the Royal Founder King Henry VIII. whose Scholar he was. But though
that were his Profession, yet he was a Man of General Learning. He was a great
Platonist. A Platonic.
Which Noble and Useful Philosophy, he and Cheke brought into Study in the
University, accustomed before to the crabbed, barbarous, useless Schoolmen.
Haddon speaking to him of Plato, calls him Plato tuus, Your Plato; who, he
told him, called upon him to serve his Country, and to be ready too to give it
all that he had received from it.

He understood Physic well. In his Oration for the Queens Marrying, A Physician.
against him that had declaimed for her single Life, and among other Reasons
for it urged the Diseases and Infirmities that attended Childbearing, he
asserted on the contrary, how it preserved Women from Diseases, and other
Inconveniences; and cleared their Bodies, amended their Color, and prolonged
their Health: and undertook to bring the Authorities and Reasons of Physic for
it. And when in March 1574. the Lord Treasurer had a sit of an Ague, Smith
showed his skill that Way, by the Judgment that he made of it; saying, That he
trusted it was but Diaria, coming of a sudden Obstruction in the Pores of his
Skin, as he told him, by Cold: That which in a rare Body, and tenderly kept
must needs be, till either by Evaporation or Sweat, the same be opened again.
And so he hoped that now that Lord, had but the weariness of that Accident, and
no formed Ague. His Skill herein also appeared in his Discoursing so learnedly
of his own Distemper, as we heard before.

H^^ Recipe for the Plagu^.
And here I will set down a Recipe I find in one of his Note-books, under his
own Hand, for a Sickness in the Years 1558. and 1559. among the People.
Watercresses, Scabious, Pileworth, Egremony. Boil these with Early, of each a
good handful, (saving Egrimony, but a little) Two Sticks of Liquorish bruised
with an Hammer, in running Water two Gallons, till the one half be consumed.
Drink warm Morning and Evening, half a Pint or thereabouts at a Draught, and at
other times of the Day cold. If they sweat after it, it is the better. This
purifieth the Blood, and takes away that kind of Plague or Sickness. But there
is the Name of Mr. Gale set under this Recipe, from whence perhaps therefore he
had it. His C^^m^cal Water s^^t to t^^ C^m^ss of Oxford.
Once more I find him playing the Physician, with the Countess of Oxon, the
Lord Treasurers beloved Daughter; when in the Month of December 157^. she lay
under Sickness, and far gone in it; her Stomach gone, and not able to digest
any thing; which made her refuse all Physic. Sir Thomas sent her a Water to
take in a Spoon at once: and so to use it from time to time. Of his sending
this Water to her, he gave her Noble and disconsolate Father to understand, and
withal let him know the Properties of it; and that if she took no other
sust^^^nce in three days, it would nourish her sufficiently. And within 2^
hours he doubted not but his Lordship would see great Effects, and p^radventure
some Ap^ pitite to Meat to begin to come to her within that space, Adding, that
there was never any one yet, but felt good by it.

He was very con^ersant in the Comment^ries of Matthiolus upon D^scorides, ^^
M^thiolus.
and had interspersed his own Book of Matth^olus, with many Notes and
obs^rv^tions of his own. It was a Book that was never wont to go from him. But
some Body it seems once had stolen it, which grieved him not a little,
complaining to his Friends, that he had rather have lost a far better thing:
Nor could another be bought any where in Lond^n. Therefore in the year 1572.
Walsingham being Ambassador in France, he prayed him to procure him the said
Book there translated into French; and to let it be bound with two or three
sheets of Paper, before and in the End, to serve him for inserting his Notes.
This Book Walsingham accordingly bought, and sent him over. And Smith liked it
well: but yet, as he told him, if he could have recovered his own, noted
through with his own Hand, he should have liked that far better. By his
conversing in these Books, we may judge of his Learning that Way

A Chemist.
And as C^ymistry is but an Handmaid of Physic, and usually accompanies it, so
he was as well Skilled in that Art also: And had Apartments in his House for
his Stills and Laboratories: Which were going to his great Cost. But especially
in Laboring to tran^m^te coarser M^ttals into those of more Fineness, and
greater Value.

A Mathematician.
He was an excellent Mathematician; and for his Recreation therein, made a large
Globe by his own Hand. It was his Love and Practice of the Mathematics, that
made him desire of W^lsingham at the same time he sent to him to b^y him
Matthiolus, to procure him also a Case of Mathematical Instruments, dir^cting
him to the Place where they were sold, that is, at the Palace in Paris. He
meant that it should contain two Compasses or three, a Square, a P^n of Metal
and other things. He had two already. But he was minded to have another of the
biggest size, with the Case a foot long. Walsingham accordingly in Ian. 1572.
sent him a Case of Tools: But such it seems as were extraordinary; for Smith
himself understood not them all, nor looked for so many, nor of that sort. But
this was proper Employment for him; and at his leisure he intended to find out
the Property and Use of them.

What an Arithmetician he was appears by his Money Tables. An Arithmetic^an. An
Astronomer.


Nor was he a Smatterer in Astronomy. The new Star which in the Year 1572.
appeared in Cassiopeia exercised much his thoughts, as it did the rest of the
Learned men of the World. And he could almost have been willing to believe it
to be the Soul of that brave Admiral of France, that had been a little before
that time so basely murdered in the Parisi^n Massacre. Smith was mighty
desirous to know what foreign Learned Men judged of this new Star. His
jud^^ment of the Star ^n Cassiop^ia.
Therefore December. 11 1572. he wrote to Walsingham thus of it, That he was sure
he had heard of it, and he thought had seen the new fair Star or Comet, but
without Beard or Tail, which appeared in England these three Weeks, on the
backside of the Chair Cassiopeia, and on the Edge of Via la^t^a. The bigness
was betwixt the bigness of Jupiter and Venus, and kept there to his Appearance,
who h^d no Instrument then to observe it; and because o^ that cold weather
also, dared not observe the precise Order of the fixed Stars. Such a^ one he
had never observed, nor read of. He therefore pra^ed Walsingham to let him know
what their Wise men of Paris did judge upon it. He knew they would not think it
that Admirals Soul, as the Romans did of the Comet next appearing after the
Murder of Julius Caesar, that it was his Soul. It might be Astraea, said he,
now peaking out afar in the North, to see what Revenge shall be done upon so
much innocent Blood shed in France, at a marriage Banquet, and rear Suppers
after it. Yet that it would be acceptable to him, to understand what their
Astronomers, and Heaven-gazers there did judge of it. He added, that if he were
not so much occupied as he was, he would turn over all his old Books, but he
would say something of it himself, and guess by chance, even as wisely as they;
though he would not publish it but to his Friends. Walsingham in Answer to this
of the Secretary, sent him certain Notes, and a new Book from France, of this
new Comet. For which he thanked him; but withal he observed to him, that in the
placing of it, their Astronomers and these in England differed exceedingly:
Theirs placing it in the 29 of Pisces, and ours in the 7th. degr. of aurus. So
they varied one whole Sign, and Eight Degrees. He observed moreover, that the
printed Book went upon it Suspens^ pede: and prayed the Ambassador, that if any
had writ upon it more boldly, he might see it. He added further, that our Men
did not deny that it arose in that Degree of Pisces, or the first of aurus, but
that it was one thing to rise with the Degree of the Zodiac, and to stand in a
place after Section of the Zodiac; and that our Men did find him far above the
Moon, and above the height of the Sphere of Venus. And then it could not be a
Temporary Comet. Concluding, Now things above the Moon do rise and die, which
was never believed before, but either a new Star mad^, or an old Star new seen.
Thus we see him bury in his Astronomy. Nay, if we may believe his Poet, and
that he did not take too much Poetical Liberty, Smith was arrived to the very
Top of the Astronomical Skill, and might be a companion for Ptolomy, Alphonsus
and Zacutus, if they were alive: Nec Polus aut Tillus m^g^^ ulli cogn^ta
cuiquam.
Quorsum ^go d^ss^mul^m? Fuit unus and unicus ille
F^l^us Urani^, Ptolom^ major utroque,
Et centum Alphonsis, and plusquam mill Zacutis.
And perhaps the Love and Study of the Stars might be one Reason that he
delighted so much in his high Seat at Mounthaut: where he might have a more
spacious Prospect of the Skies.

In State Policy he was a great Master: A Pol^cian.
Which by long Experience in State matters at home, in the Reigns of four
Princes, and Embassies abroad, he had acquired. Walsingham that most complete
and happy Secretary of State, improved himself much by making his Observations
of Smith; how quick and sharp his Apprehension of things, how grave and sound
his Counsels, and with what Dexterity and admirable Parts, he managed public
Affairs, and yet with clean and just hands. So he sung that made his Funeral
Verses, -- S^cius t^n^orum insignis Honorum
Qui vigilanti oculo SMITHI observasset Acumen,
Sensiss^tque acres sensus, animumque virilem,
Consiliumque grave, and pectus moresque colendos,
Virtutes etiam raras, Dotesque stupendas.


A Linguist.
He was also an excellent Linguist, and a Master in the knowledge of the Latin,
Greek, French, An Historian.
Italian and English Tongues. A great Historian, especially in the Roman
History: An Orator equal to the best, and a perfect Ciceronian. An Orator.
A Notable Specimen of whose Oratory and History, as well as of his Polities,
appears in his Discursive Orations about Queen Elizabeth's Marriage. An
Architect.
He had also a very good Genius in Architecture, which that Noble Pile of
Building at Hilhal does sufficiently demonstrate. And in the Art of Gardening,
he was very curious and exact: Employing his own Hands sometimes for his
diversion in grafting and planting. At which work I find him, when he was
making an Orchard for his new House about the latter end of 1572. having made
an Escape from the Court: though the Winds then were very unkind to him. Of which
complaining to the Lord Treasurer, he said he should soon be weary of
Mounthaut, because he could not graft nor transplant any Trees, the Winds that
then brought over the Earl of Worcester from France (who had been lately sent
to Christen that Kings Child) being as he said the worst Enemy to all Cutting,
Paring, or breaking of Trees here in England that could be, or for setting of
Herbs.

And as he was an universal and thorow-paced Scholar, His Library.
so he had a most complete Library, and kept a Learned Correspondence, and was
of a very accurate Judgment in matters of Learning. His Library consisted of a
thousand Books, of various Learning and Arts, as we are told by the Learned man
his Friend, that made his Parentalia: Which noble Treasure he bestowed upon his
own College, where at least the Remainders of them are to this day: besides
some Italian and French Books, which he gave to the Queens Library. -- Libros
Monumentaque mill
Graeca, Latina omnis generis, nova, prisca, profana,
Religiosa dedit:
Italicos praeter quosdam Francosque libellos
Elizabeteae pius Heroes Bibliothecae.


A Catalogue of the Books which he had at Hilhal in the Year 1566. N. VI.
may be seen in the Appendix.

And as he was Owner of many Books, Books by him written.
so he composed not a few himself. Three whereof are Printed. I. His
Commonwealth of England, both in Latin and English. II. Of the right and
correct Writing of the English Tongue. This I suppose is the same Book with
that which Fuller, in his History of Cambridge mentions, Pa. 81.
Of his more compendious way of Printing: which would defalcate a fifth part of
the Cost in Paper and Ink, besides as much of the Pains in Composing and
Printing, only by discharging many superflous Letters, and accommodating the
Sounds of long and short Vowels, with distinct Characters. III. Of the right
and correct Pronouncing of the Greek Language. Both these last mentioned were
published by himself in Latin, when he was Ambassador in Paris. There is a
Fourth Book lately Printed, viz. 1685. which some make him the Author of,
namely, Of the Authority, Form and Manner of holding Parliaments. Other Tracts
there be of his, that have lain hitherto unpublished, As his Orations about the
Queens Marriage; His discourse of Money, and his Tables for the reducing the
Roman Coins to the just English Standard. I have also seen another large
Writing, which by the hand seems to be his, showing certain ways and means for
the taking care of, and for the maintaining the Poor of the Nation. And many
more, whereof as yet, neither the sight, nor the particular Subjects have come
unto me. To which I add several excellent Letters of his when Ambassador in
France to the Lord Burghley, and being Secretary of State to Sr. Francis
Walsingham, Ambassador in the same Court, which are Printed in the Complete
Ambassador. And a Bundle of other Letters writ to the Court, when he was
Ambassador with the French King Ann. 1562. the Earl of Warwick going then in
the famous Expedition to New Haven, which are yet reserved in the Kings Paper
House.

He was a great Judge of Learning, A great Judge in Learning.
and Applications were often made to him for his Judgment in Matters of that
Nature. So Dr. Haddon appealed once to him in a sharp Controversy, between the
French Ambassador and himself, Whether Tully were a good Lawyer: Which that
Ambassador had denied. And how learnedly this was decided by Sir Thomas Smith,
may be seen in this History. And both Cecil, and the said Haddon, would not
allow the Answer to Osorius to come abroad, till it had past his accurate
Perusal and Correction.

His Acquaintance was with the Learned men of his Age. His Acquaintance.
As Ramus, and other Professors in Paris, while he was there: and with Cheke,
Cecil, Haddon, Wilson, Ascham, men of the finest Wits, and purest Learning. Of
this last, in a Letter to Haddon from France, he enquired diligently after, and
complained that for two years, and Six Months, he had heard nothing from him;
and then added merrily, That his Cocks (for he was a great Cock Master) ita
illum excant^sse, i.e. had so enchanted him, that he had quite forgotten his
Friends. And I find the Correspondence between him and Ascham continued after,
for in 1^68. Ascham requested of Smith, to borrow a Book of his own Writing. To
which Smith answered by a Letter, that he had sent it to Walden to be
Transcribed; least the first Copy, and the whole Invention should perish
together. And Haddon being lately dead, Smith in the same Letter told Ascham,
that his Epistles were found, but not all, and that his own Epistles to Haddon,
were more uncertain. For they reckoned it pity any thing of that most Humane
and Learned Friend of theirs should be lost. And so there was a purpose to
collect together his Epistles, and to publish them. And so they were afterward
by Hatcher of Cambridge. This Ascham about the Year 1568. sent an Astronomical
Figure to Smith, drawn by some ingenious Astronomer of the said Ascham's
Acquaintance. Upon which he sent a Latin Letter from Mounthaut, thanking Ascham
for it, and declaring how much he was pleased with it, and that he would
willingly be acquainted with the Person that described it. He acknowledged he
professed himself this Study. And this Person seemed to him, to write
Ingeniously and Learnedly; and not according to the vulgar manner of unlearned
men, who abused themselves, and the opinion of their Learning, for Gain. Whose
Friendship he declared he desired not, and whose Familiarity he was averse to.
And the Diagram and Figure that Ascham sent, he dispatched back to him, with
his own Judgment of the same, as it was put or placed. Sir Thomas Erected a
Figure concerning the same Hour and Day, according to the Ephemeris of Ioh.
Stadius. Of which he said the Diagram seemed a little a differ, but the
Judgment not so much. Thus we see his Correspondence; and withal his
Disposition to that kind of Study, of Judicial Astrology.

And in fine, The Vogue of his Learning.
of the great Opinion that went of Sir Thomas Smith's Learning, I shall mention
this Passage. When Dr. Wilson, one of his Learned Friends, Master of S.
Katharine's, and afterward Secretary of State, had for News wrote to Haddon,
then Ambassador at Bruges, of the Queens going to Visit the University of
Oxford, Anno 1565. and of the Report of the great Learning in that Place, and
what learned Exercises were then expected to be performed there, before her
Majesty; Haddon answered, not to disparage that Noble University, or the
complete Scholars that were there, but to take the Opportunity of commending
one or two other Egregious men, viz. That however magnificently it was talked
of the learned men there, Nec Smith: ibi simile quicquam, aut Checi occurret,
i.e. there would be nothing like to Smith or Cheke.

And as he was Learned himself, Beneficial to Learning.
so he was Beneficial to Learning; which appeared in that most useful Act of
Parliament, which he procured for the Colleges of Students: Which was, that a
third Part of the Rent upon Leases made by Colleges, should be reserved in
Corn, the Tenant to pay it either in Kind or Money, after the rate of the best
Prizes in Oxford or Cambridge Markets, the next Market days before Michaelmas
or our Lady day. The great Benefit whereof Scholars do find to this day, and
will so long as the Universities l^st. To his own College of Queens, he gave
for ever 12 -- 7 -- 4. Being a Rent Charge out of the Manor of Overston in
Northamptonshire. Which he appointed to be thus disposed of, according as the
Reverend Doctor James the present worthy Master of the same College was pleased
to impart to me; that is to say, Four pounds for a Lecture in Arithmetic:
Three pounds for a Lecture in Geometry: Four pounds, seven shillings, and four
pence for two Scholarships: appointing his own Relations, or the Scholars from
Walden School, ^^teris par^bus, to be made his Scholars before any others: And
the Twenty shillings remaining for a Yearly Commemoration. And of E^ton
College, where he was once Provost, Cambd^n tells us he merited well: but in
what particular respects I cannot tell, except in making his College L^ases
always with a Reserve of Rent-Corn, diverse Years before it became an Act for
the Benefit of other Colleges. And I find the Provost and College of S. Mary of
Eaton, purchased of King Edward VI. in the first of his Reign, for the sum of
25 -- ^ -- 3. and in performance of King Henry's last Will, and in
consideration of the Exchange of the Manor of Melbourn Beck, Lutton and
Ponyngton in the County of Dors^t, and diver other Lands and Tenements; the
Rectory of Great Compton in Warwickshire, lately parcel of the Possession of
The. Cromwell Knight, Earl of Essex, Attainted of High Treason; the Rectory of
Bloxham in the County of Oxon, lately parcel of the late Monastery of Godstow
in the said County, and diverse other Lands and Tenements in the Counties of
Oxford, Bedford, Lincoln, Warwick, to the value of 82 -- 11 -- 0. The Patent
bare date the 30. Aug. 1547. In which whether Sir Tho. Smith was any ways
serviceable to the College I know not, but suppose he might be.

And this Learning of his raised him to Honor and Wealth. H^s Places.
Under King Edward VI. he was made Provost of Eaton, where whether he were
present or absent, there was always a good House kept: Dean of Carlisle, and
Master of Requests in the Duke of Somerset's Family, after Cicil had left that
Place; wherein he was most unjustly scandalized by his enemies, to have been a
Bribetaker. For which he was fain to vindicate himself. He became also Steward
of the Stannaries. Soon after his Abilities were so well known, that he was
advanced to be one of the Principal Secretaries of State, and employed in great
Commissions and matters of Trust. Under Queen Elizabeth he was diverse times
Ambassador in France, and at last a Privy Councillor, Chancellor of the Garter,
and Secretary of State.

His Wealth consisted in his Land and Houses. His Wealth*
He had the Manor of Yarlington in Somersetshire, worth 30 l. per annum, that
he bought with the Money he had gotten at Cambridge, before he came into the
Lord Protectors Service. And he purchased it at 300 l. or thereabouts, of the
Marquess of Northampton, to whom it was given at the Coronation of Queen
Katharine his Sister. He purchased also the College of D^rby, whether a
Religions House or a Fraternity, I do not well know. His House.
I find he had also these Houses, to some of which were annexed Manors and
large Demeans. One was in Chanon Row in Westm^nster, In Chanon Row.
which he once let out to the Comptroller of King Edward's Household, for 30 s.
per annum, but afterward Lived in it himself when Secretary, being a very fair
House; and there the Divines in the beginning of Q Elizabeth's Reign, together
with himself, conferred about reforming of Religion. He had another House in
Philpot-lane in London, which (...) a large and fair Dwelling. In London.
The Title whereof being dubious, he had like to have lost his Money, and
Purchase too. But he procured his Master and Friend the Duke of ^^m^rset, to
obtain from the King the Confirmation of his Title. The free dwelling in this
House, he gave to his younger Brother George a Merchant; to whom he was very
kind, lending him also 300 l. for the carrying on of his Trade, without
Interest or Consideration. Sir Thomas had another House in ^leet-Lane, with
several other Tenements, which he held of the Clothworkers Company of London.
And here he would sometimes be, as a Recesse from Court. In the Country he had
Ankerwick, Ankerwic^.
(his Country Retirement in King Edward's Reign, once a Religious House for
Nuns) in Buckinghamshire, very large and spacious, with a Chapel. In Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, he frequented not this House so much; then delighting more
in Mounthal standing high, as Ankerwick was low and Waterish: which I suppose
he therefore avoided, thinking it not so wholesome for him, being very subject
to cold Rheums. In the Year 1569. he took an Account of the Furniture in each
Chamber. Here he named his own Chamber, the Chamberlains Chamber, the great
Guest Chamber, the Matted Chamber, the inner Chamber to the same on the South
side, the north inner Chamber, his Fathers Chamber, My Lords Chamber, (by which
Lord I suppose he meant the Duke of Somerset) the high Gallery called Col^s
Chamber: the Hall, the Little Parlour, the great Parlour, the Chapel, the
Wardrobe, the Lodge. By which Rooms one may guess at the largeness of the
House. And by the Furniture one may also conclude upon his Housekeeping. Where
besides abundance of Linnin, Beds and Household-stuff, in his Wife's Closet
there was a Plate-chest, containing these Pieces; A little Basin and Ewer, two
standing French Bowls, with a Cover all Gilt, one Gilt Gallon Pot square, two
great Flaggons all Gilt, Three Flemish Bowls with their Cover parcel Gilt; Two
Goblets all Gilt with their Covers; Three French Salts all Gilt with a Cover. A
Basin and Vast all Gilt. Three French Bowls all Gilt with a Cover. Twelve
French Spoons with Hyena's Feet: Two drinking Pots of Silver, one all Gilt, the
other W^ite. ^or the Furniture in the Chapel was a Cupboard or Altar of Walnut
Tree, Vestment and Albe for the Priest; a Bible, and a Pair of Virginals,
instead of an Organ I suppose: The Plate and Furniture of his other Houses,
where he dwelt, was proportionable. For he kept four Houses furnished, two in
the City, (besides his Lodgings at Whitehal) and two in the Country.

But the House which he most delighted in, and was his last Retirement, was
that at Mounthaut, Mounthaut
or Hilhal in the County of Essex. Which was the Jointure of his Wife, made her
upon her Marriage with Sir John Hamden Knight, her first Husband, the Reversion
whereof after her Death Sir Thomas Smith, purchased. Here, near the ancient
Manor House, he began a ^^ately Structure, though he lived not to finish it. But
he made careful Provision by his last Will, for the bringing it to a
Conclusion. And that it might have the better Care taken of it, he Willed
Richard Kirby his chief Architect 20 l. to be paid him as soon as the New house
was Tiled, and all Carpentry Work done; and also to his Marriage ^^lverSalt,
Twelve SilverSpoons, and one Silver Cup. And to John Dighton Steward of his
(...), and Overseer o^ the Works, to encourage him to take pains to see the
Workmen do their Work as they ought, and see them paid weekly, 10 l. The House
stands upon a great Assent or Hill, whence it has obtain^d its Name. Hence
is taken a very fair and delightful Prospect all ways, especially South and
West. Before the House, the Entrance to which is Northward, is a very pleasant
Avenue, of a great Length, and suitable Breadth: Along which on each side are
Rows of stately Elms, advancing their Heads to a great Height. And on the
right hand, are two Ranges o^ Trees of the same kind, standing very near
together, making a very close solitary Walk, ^it for Study and Contemplation.
Which they call the New Walk. And the Tradition goes they were planted by Sir
^omas himself, as it is most likely they were. This for the Situation. The
House it self is built Quadrangular, adorn ^ with great Columns, imitating
Stone, which look very gracefully. The square Court is paved with Free Stone.
The Walls exceedi^^ thick. Though there have been great alterati^^ and
Improvements made of this House, by the present Owner Sir Edward Smith, yet
there be still some Remainders of Sir Thomas ^i^ Fancy. In the Dining Room
above Stairs (to large that it is now parted into several Rooms) a Window
Westward, gives the Emblems o^ Four of the Seven ^eadly Sins painted in the
Glass, with the Name of each Vice, set down under the Emblem in Greek and
Latin; ^s (...) under o^^ ^mblem, and (...) under another, (...) under a Third,
and Hop^^i^^ under the Fourth: And under each the Name in L^tin, as I^vidia,
S^^^rdia, Superbia, and Forn^cati^. The Emblem of Pride is the Story of Lucifer
and his Angels cast down from Heaven. Round which Picture are less^r Emblems in
smaller Pieces of Glass; which are obscure now, the Paint fading. The smaller
^mblems set about that of Fornication are these: The one is a Set of Fiddlers,
under a Ladies Window Serenading her, and a Woman nak^d appearing at the
Window, throwing Water out of a Chamberpot upon their Heads. In another are
represented two Persons Duelling with Swords and Bucklers, fighting you may
imagine for their Mistress; and a man hanging upon a Gibbet, that must be
presumed to be executed for killing his Rival, the fatal End of that Vice.
There be also writ in these p^inted Representations proper Motto's for each. As
under Pride, God rests the Proud. Under that of Sloth, Go to the Ant thou
sluggard. These Painted Windows were (...) in 1569. The Rooms had much
Paintings upon the Walls of them, being Histories out of Scripture. Some
whereof in one Room still remain, and very plainly to be discovered, being the
History of Senacherib's Army destroyed by the Angel: A very fine Piece: and the
other Paintings there seem to be very good, And there is a Tradition in the
Family, that some of these Paintings were done by Sir Thomas's own Hand. And
for the Convenience and Ornament of the House, in the year 1568. (in which
year, the shell of the House was finished) he planted an Orchard adjoining, to
supply it with the choicest Fruits, especially Pears and Apples, both Winter
and Summer, which he procured from other Places. Whereof many Table X
Shillings. Groats. Pence. Halfpence. Far ^lucia. o 5 15 60 120 ^lemuncia. o 2
6 7 2 30 60 Didrachma. ^aliquum. g^o 1 3 3 3 15 30 Dram. half g^o 0 1 30 b
70 b 15 ^^squiscrupulus. Unciae Half Dram Sesquiscrupulus 30 bg 7 g
scrupulus. ^a^^a. 1/24 Unciae The third part of a Drachme 1 g 2 g Obolus. 1/48
The half of a Scruple 1 g Siliqua. 1/144 The third part of Obolus 1 q. prick
one p Gallorum Dram vocatus a Gallis Gressus continet Denarios Gallicos 3
Sterlines 2 of his Pears he had from the Lord Rich, and of his Apples from
Walden: and many of both Sorts came from Ankerwick. And for the further
Pleasure and Service of the House, there were many Fish Ponds, to the number of
Ten or Dozen about it; which he took especial care to store with Carp and Tench.

This Seat now flourishes in Plenty, Reputation and Honor, possessed by the
Line of his Younger Brother: Whereby Sir Thomas Smith's Name and Memory still
Lives, according to his Design and Intent in that Structure. And though it wants
nothing in the Inside as well as the Out, to adorn and beautify it, yet the
choicest Furniture is an excellent Original of the Builder hanging up in the
Parlour, with these two Verses written round the frame of the Picture, Cernitur
Essigies factis vera, at Penicillus
Corporis atque umbrae t^ntum simulacra r^po^*
And underneath LOVE AND FEAR. Aetat. (...) xxxiii.

Having no Child his Lady enjoyed this Manor of Mounthaut or Mounthal for her
Life; (...) (...) William Smith.
and then it descended to his Brothers Son Sir William Smith Son of George, a
brave Gentleman and Soldier in Ireland, being a Colonel there: Till having
attained to Thirty Years of Age, he returned into England, and possessed his
Deceased Uncles Estate. He married into the Family of Fleetwood of the Vache in
Backs, and had diverse Issue. And was of great Figure and Service in the County
of Essex. All which may be better known by the Inscription upon a Noble
Monument for himself, and his Lady set up on the Southside of the Chancel
opposite to that of Sir Tho. Smith his Uncle. Which was as follows;

To the^pious Memory of her Loved and Loving Husband,
Sir William Smith of Hilhal in the County of Essex Knight. Who till he was
Thirty Years old followed the Wars in Ireland, with such Approbation, that he
was ^^osen one of the Colonels of the Army. But his Uncle Sir Thomas,
Chancellor of the Garter, and Principal Secretary of State (...) two Princes,
King Edward VI. and the late Queen Elizabeth of famous Memory, dying, he
returned to a full and fair Inheritance. And so bent himself to the Affairs of
the Country, that he grew alike famous in the Arts of Peace as War. All Offices
there, sorted with a man of his Quality, he right worshipfully performed, and
dyed one of the Deputy Lieutenants of the (...); A Place of no small Trust and
Credit.

Bridget his unfortunate Widow, who during the time of Thirty Seven Years, bare
(...) three Sons and four Daughters, Daughter of Thomas Fleetwood of the Vache
(...) the County of Bucks Esquire, and sometime time Master of the Mint, to
allay her Languer and Longing after so dear a Companion of her Life, rather to
express her Affection than his Office, this Monument erected, Destinating it to
her self, their Children and Posterity. He lived Years Seventy Six, Died the
12. of December. 1626.

CHAP. XVIII. Sir Thomas Smith's Virtuous Accomplishments.
WE have seen Sir Thomas in his Secular Circumstances, as his Learning, Wealth
and Honor, made him looked upon and admired in the Eye of the World. But what
does all this Confer to the true Reputation of a man without inward virtuous
Qualifications* These were other and better things that added a Luster and
Glory to our Knight. For his Learning was accompanied with Religion, and his
Honor became more illustrious by the excellent Accomplishments of his Mind.

He was brought up in the Profession of the Gospel from his tender years, His
P^^ g^on.
and ever after stuck to it, and professed it, and that openly: and as he had
Occasion, delivered and rescued good men, from the Persecutions and Dangers
that Religion exposed them to, though he thereby sometimes ran himself into no
small hazard. He lost his Preferments upon the Change of Religion under Queen
Mary, when if he had been minded to have complied, he might have had what he
pleased. But he was of a stout and constant Mind.

His Principles by which he governed himself.
When he was in Place and Office abroad or in the Court, the Principles he
governed himself by, were Truth and Integrity, an inviolable Love to Justice
and righteous Dealing, a most unchangeable Faithfulness and Zeal to the
Concerns of his Queen and Country. His Life and Manners were unreproveable; of
a grave and yet obliging Behavior. And sometimes he would take the Liberty to
be ingeniously merry and cheerful among his Friends. A perfect stranger he was
to the Practices of some Courtiers, namely, to those of Fraud and Falsehood,
Flattery and Treachery, Vice and Corrupt Manners. Such a Description do the
Muses in their ears give him.

-- Non Fraud, D^love,
Non ullo vicius Fuco; Patriaeque suisque
Reg^n^qu^ suae fidus, n^n perfidus ulli,
At fidus cunclis, Cato vi^^, m^ribus, ore,
Sincerus sine Fraud, bonus ^^ne suspicione;
Ne^ l^vitate vacans, and sic gravitate severus,
Ut tam^n atque jocos admitteret atque lepores
Innocuos, nihilumque prius sibi duceret Aequo
Atque Bono, cui se suaque omnia vota sacravit.
His Virtues.
And again, the same Muses (showing the Reasons of his safety under the rigorous
Times of Queen Mary, notwithstanding he would not change nor dissemble his
Faith, nor comply with the Religion, that was uppermost) give us a Relation of
his Virtues, which shone so bright, that with them he did as it were charm the
Government to spare him.

Nec tamen interea parti assentarier ulli,
Nec simulare Fidem, nec dissimulare solebat.
Mirifica Virtute omnes, Gravitate colenda,
Moribus antiquis, Charitum, Aonidumque Favore,
Numine coelesti, non Impietate nec Art
Illicita, nec Perfidia, neque Fraudibus ullis,
Vir bonus and sapiens, qualem vix repperit altrum
Phoebus Apollo unquam, sibi conciliabat amicos.
But as there is nothing so good but will find Accusers and Slanderers, Vices
falsely charged on him.
so it happened to him. For his Excellences created him Envy, and Enviers. And
some there were in King Edward's time, that laid several gross Vices to his
charge, but most unjustly: As though he were proud, a Lover of Money, and that
for the sake of it, he extorted and oppressed; that he was a Buyer and Seller of
Spiritual Preferments; and chopped and changed Lands. Finally, that in the
Changes of Religion, he was a Complier. But these were all most false
Calumniations: but such as he was fain to write some Sheets of Paper, to
vindicate himself of: whereby he was forced to set forth his own Virtues
unwillingly.

His Spirit was brave and great, His Spirit great.
being a Man of a resolute and Active Mind; Faithful and Diligent, when
Ambassador and Secretary: Somewhat hasty and impatient, when public Matters
went not as they ought, being hindered by designing men for private Profit, or
secret Grudge. And so I find him somewhere describing himself, when Haughtiness
was once laid to his Charge, I cannot deny, but I am of Nature hault of Courage
and stomach, to contemn all Perils, and worldly things, or Dangers to do my
Master Service, and likely more would be, but that I am by such things [he
means Accusations and Slanders] sometime plucked back; and so again contented
to rule my self: being able I thank God to serve in the Body and Thilles (as
Carters call it) as well as in the Room of a Forehorse.

His Apparel.
His Apparel was usually good, and like a Courtier. For which he thought some
might accuse him of too much Prodigality. But it was more to suit the Office
wherein he served, than any Pleasure he took in gaudy Garments. He never sued
any man, Not Opressive.
nor ever was sued. He never raised any Rents, but contented himself with the
old ones; neither of any of his Lands or Promotions, viz. Eaton and Carlisle:
nor heightened any Fines, nor ever put out any Tenant, nor ever sued any of
them. He was in a Place, namely that of Master of Requests, wherein he might
have received many Bribes, if he would, for dispatching Suits, and selling the
Lord Protectors Letters; but he challenged all the World to charge him with one
Penny, that he had taken dishonestly. Two indeed of his Servants did use
sometimes to do so: but when it came to his knowledge, he put them away:
Acquainting the Protector with it, and sueing to him to have one of their Ears
nailed to the Pillory. And none Living remained under more Dispeasure with him,
than they did, only for that Crime, and no other.

In fine, he was of an Universal Charity and good Will, Of an Universal Charity.
and wished well to all mankind, and a peaceable State to the World, as much as
he wished it to himself. And that for this end among others, that every man
might Philosophize freely, and with the greatest Liberty study to promote Truth
and useful Knowledge. And that all others might live quietly, and mind their
own Business.

He often spoke sharp and witty sayings; His Apophthegms.
whereby his Wisdom, and great reach appeared. He called the Queens Ordnance
Peacemakers. And once desired her, that her Peacemakers might be transported
to Scotland. Which when she had demanded of him, Who they were, he answered,
Her Majesty's Canon, adding, They must do it, and make a final Conclusion.

When a Matter was to be hastened, he would say, It is better to prevent, than
to be prevented. And, The Time draws away, and Winds are changeable and Minds.

Concerning Alchymists, of whom he had bought Experience, he would say, Trust
little to the Words, and Promises, and Accounts of men of that Faculty. Fain
they would be fingering of money, but when it is once in their hands, we must
seek it in the Ashes.

The Massacres in France, he called Their Beacons. So he wrote to the Queen's
Ambassador then at that Court, Even the Scots [otherwise great Friends of
France] be awakened by your Beacons in France.

When Walsingham was tired in France, with expectation of coming home, which
the Queen put off from time to time, Smith told him, You are a wise man, and
can comfort your self, with Wisdom and Patience.

Speaking of the Irresolutions and Inconstancy of the Court, he said, That till
the Queen had signed, he durst never adventure to affirm any Thing, for fear of
contrary Winds; The which he said was no News in that Court. And again, Ye know
how long we are here a resolving, and how easy to be altered.

Folly the more it is kept in, the better: Meaning it of Astrological Judgments.

Haec est Vicissitud^ rerum Humanarum; Haec est communis Casus Hominum;
speaking of the Vidame of Chartres, a great Protestant Nobleman, escaping the
Butchery of the Paris Massacre, but reduced thereby, to more Poverty.

Video pericul^sum esse in r^bus arcanis Principum and Regnorum nimis velle
sapere. Upon occasion of the Trouble of Mr. John Hales, for meddling in the
Succession.

The best is, we stand I think upon our Guard; nor I trust shall be taken and
k^lled asleep, as the Admiral was: Speaking of those Times in England, upon
apprehension of the Danger the Nation was in, from the Neighboring Popish
States and Kingdoms.

Happy is that Prince, that has so wise a Counselor, that can see that is
best: but more happy is he, that has one so bold, that dares to tell it to
him, and so beloved of him, that he will hear it.

Irresolution and long Training, will make Opportunity, and Occasion to fly
away untaken, and a great Deal of Money to be lost.

The Gentiles were wise in their Sacrifice, when the ^r^st cried ^ver and anon,
Hoc age. For they that love ^lways to be aliud agentes, either deceive
themselves, or other men.

The Queen kept her Christmas at Hampton Court 1, 72. From hence Smith Writes
to his Friend about this Time, If ye would know what we do here, We play at
Tables, Dance and keep Christmas. A secret Lash to the Court, for their
Carelessness, at such a dangerous Time as that was.

Speaking upon the Talk of Sir Francis Walsingham's Return home from France.
When a Pin, said he, is set fast in a Hole, till we have another to thurst that
out, and tarry there it self, it is hard to get it out. And this he said was
his Case.

I have done, Lelaud's Copy of verses to Smith.
after I shall have recommended the Readers to the further Character and
Account given to this Wise and Learned Man, by two Poets of those Times. The
one is Leland, describing him while he flourisht in the University, after this
manner: Doctorum celebras, Smithi, Monumenta Verorum
Ardenti studio, and Dexteritate part.
Unde tibi accrevit Virtutis nomine Fama,
Iudice me, nullo deperit ura die.
Granta venusta tuas collaudat, cantitat, ornat
Eximias Dotes, Ingeniumque tuum.
Quicquid in Acniis speciosum montibus olim,
Quicquid in Italicis praenitet atque jugis,
Est tibi tam notum quam quod notissimum: Abundas
Artibus, and rara cognitione vales
Fontibus El^quii sitientia labra rigasti:
Atticus ille tuo regnat in ore Lepos.
Instaurare bonas pergas feliciter arts:
Laudabit faclum Posteritasque tuum.


Dr. Byng's Epitaphon him.
And the other was Dr. Byng, Regius Professor of the Civil Law in Cambridge; who
when the first News of Smith's Departure was brought thither, gave him this
Epitaph; Hic Sistas celerem gradum, Viator,
Magno Funera dum SMITHO parantur,
An mirare SMITHUM quod ipse MAGNUM
Dicam, quem Tumulus teget pusillus?
Et Magnum ingenio scias fuisse,
Et Magnum omnibus Artibus quae habentur
Doctis in pretio, simulque Magna
Traclavisse Negotia, atque Curas
Magnas sustinuisse Maximorum
Regum qu^is operam suam dicarat.
Sic Magnusque Domi, forisque Magnus,
Nunc Magno fruitur Poli Theatro.


THE APPENDIX To the Foregoing HISTORY Of the LIFE of Sir Thomas Smith, Knight.
Number I. The Patent granted by Garter King at Arms to John Smith Gentleman,
for his Coat of Arms.
TO al and singular Persons, Ex Original. Pat. penes D. Ed. Smith
thesse Present Letters hearing or seeing, Christopher Barker Esquire alias
Garter, Principal King of Arms of English men, sends due and humble
Recommendations and Greting.

EQUITY wills and Reason ordeineth, that men vertuose and of noble Courage be
by their Merits and good Renoume rewarded, and had in perpetual Memory for
their good Name, and to be in all Places of Honor and Wurship among other
noble Persons accepted and reputed, by showing of certain Ensigns of Virtue,
Honor and Gentylnes: To the Intent that by their Ensample others should the
more perseverantly enforce themselves to use their Time in honorable Wirkes,
and vertuose Deeds, to purchase and get the Renoume of ancient Noblesse, not
only for themselves, but also for there Lynge and Posterity of them
descended, according to there Demerits and valiant Actions, to be taken forth
and reputed among al Nobylls and Gentylls. And albeyt John Smythe of Walden in
the County of Essex is descended of honest Lignage, and all his Ancestors and
Predecessors has long continued in Nobylite, and beryng Arms lawful and
convenyent; Yet nevertheless he being uncertayne thereof, and not willing to do
any [thing] prejudicial to no manner of Person, has required and instantly
desired me the foresaid Garter, to ratify and confirm unto him, and also to
Register in my Record the true Arms and Blazon of his said Ancestors. And
therefore I the foreseyd Garter, by Virtue, Power and Authorite of mine Office,
as Principal King of Arms granted, annexed and attributed by the King our
Sovereign Lord, have appointed and confirmed unto the said John Smythe thesse
Arms and Crest with thappurtenances hereafter following, Viz. Sables, a Fece
dauncye betwixt III Lyonceux Regardant, Argent, Langes Goules, Pawsing with
their lift Paws upon an Awlter Gold, Flaming and Bourning thereon. Upon the
Fece, IX Bellets of his Field. Upon his Crest an Eagle rising Sables, holding
in his Right Cley a Pen Argent, Issuing thereout Flames of Fire, Set upon a
Wreath Argent and Azure, Mantelles Goules, Lined Argent, Botoned Gold: To have
and to hold to the same John Smythe and to his Posteryte, with other due
Difference therein to be revested to his Honor for ever. In wytnes hereof I the
^oresevd Garter, Principal King of A^mes as a^o^^seyd, has signed these
Prese^^ (...) [mine] own Hand; and thereunto has (...) the Seal of my Office;
and also the Seal of mine Arms. ^even at London the xii day of March, in the
year of our Lord God MVcXLV, and in the XXXV year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord King Henry VIII, by the Grace of God King of England, France and Ireland,
Defendour of the Faith, and in Earth of the Church of England and Ireland
Supreme Head.

Cb. alias Gartier.

Number. III. Sir Thomas Smith's Orations for and against the Queens Marriage.
I. Agamus or Wedspite This Oration for the Queens single Life.
ALTHOUGH I know (says he) that I speak now first at a great Disadvantage, E.
M^S. D. Richar. Gibbs, Eque. Aurat. Et Rev. D. Johan. Laughton.
as to such as have their Tongues at Will, their Wits fresh, and be good
Confuters, as I have known them by experience in the Parliament House, that
whatsoever I shall say, they can with Words make, that it shall appear quite
overthrown, and dashed in pieces; Yet because I my self would gladly learn,
whether I be in a right Opinion or no, and hear either my Opinion weakened, or
the other strengthened with good Reasons, that I may by comparing the one with
the other know my Error, which I could never yet do, I am content to speak first.
I pray you, that do note my Opinion so strange, a while suspend your Judgments
of me, until you have heard al my Reasons which moves me to take this part.

First I say, that in this Matter either we must have respect to God, to the
Prince her Self, or to the Commonwealth; or rather to al these. For as for vain
Talk of the People, and the common Opinion of every Man in this our
Disputation, I think little regard to be had to them. For neither I speak in
Pulpit before all Rascals that comes, nor I do reason with such, as I must
needs say as they say, or else hold my Peace: but with them who will look to
have no further Credit to be given to their Authority and Mind, than just
Reason does require. And therefore to Godwards ye must needs confess, that
Virginity is above Matrimony which Christ himself being our Head, King and
Master did follow. And St. Paul allowing both the one and the other, Marriage I
mean, and the Sole Life, yet prefers the sole Life far above Matrimony. And
I cannot see, that he makes any Distinction or Difference, whether they be Men
or Women, Young or Old, Princes or Subjects, Rulers or private Persons: but as
in Bondage or Freedom, whether it be of Men or Women, Young or Old, he
prefers Liberty, not excluding Bondage from the Gospel: So does he rather
allow and exhort unto, and wish tha^ Men would choose and take hold of Virginity
and sole Life, rather than Marriage, with such Elogium as would seem
slanderous, i^ it were not of his speaking. The Virgin, says he, and single
Man have care how they should ^lease God. The married Woman has chosen
infinite ways the worse Person to be pleased, and the sole Woman the better.
Wherefore as I did say at the beginning, to define what is good and most for
the Queen, if we shall try it by the best, truest and more sure Balance, that
is to Godwards, St. Paul seems to be with me: and the example of Christ
himself, and his most happy Mother, St. John Baptist, and other the Heads of
our Christian Religion, who ensued that kind of Life as best and most
acceptable to Godwards.

You see I do not bring you Histories of certain Emperors and Empresses, Kings
and Queens married, who notwithstanding their Marriage, yet lived continently;
lest perhaps you should doubt of the Truth of the History: Or if the History
were true, yet of the Perfection and Sincerities of the Persons: Or whether
therein they pleased God, although it liked them best. Nor yet I bring in that
infinite number of Names of Virgins and Widows, which at the very Beginning of
Christ's Religion professed and kept Chastity, as a thing, whereby they thought
most to please God, and made their choice of that as of the most godly Life:
Lest peradventure with the evil Example again of the Nonns, Monks and Friars of
our Days, who likewise have as holily vowed, and yet so lewdly have and do keep
the same, you should have occasion to derogate Faith from all the rest, but
sincerely and plainly and of Principles most certain I have proved, that to God
the best, most commendable and most allowable Life of these two, is to be sole
and chaste.

It is hard, ve will say, in that Liberty, Ease and Plenty of all things, which
Monarchy and Princely State does bring, to keep moderation; and much more to
keep Chastity. Mary, the harder the better, and as the Greek Proverb is, that
which is laudable is hard to attain, Ye be al learned and know Hesiods Verse;
What is that that men may take up by Heaps, and case me by? And how streit and
hard a Path is left to creep to Virtue? Wherefore when we speak of the Goodness
of a thing, or compare which of the Two is better, the Hardness is no Objection
but rather a Proof of the Goodness thereof. And because I am yet in that Part,
which is to Godward, Why shall I go any further than Christ's saying, who willed
us to enter in at the straight Gate, where few go in, and to leave the easy
way, where there be many gone, and going before, which brings eternal
Destruction? But I think this Part enough proved, till I hear the contrary of
you.

The next that I promised you to take in hand was, that to the Prince her self
this is the best. First, either all the Women in the World do wonderfully
dissemble, or, else bringing forth of Children (besides the often Irksomeness,
Loathsomeness of Meats, Appetite of strange Meats, Morfew, and other such
Troubles that they have all the Time from the Conception to the Childbirth) they
be in such Danger of Death as at no time Men be more. For we se by common
Order, they are wont to take the Communion, to take their leave of the Church,
and prepare themselves even to it as Persons that were neither Alive nor Dead,
but betwixt both. And al I am sure do not dissemble. For I pray you what number
of Women every hour even in their Travail, or shortly after, be dispatched,
and sent from their Childbed to their Burial? Not only poor Folks Wives, in
whom Negligence or Poverty might have some excuse, but Countesses, Dutchesses,
Empresses and Queens. Farther Examples we need not seek than the Mother of our
late K. Edward, Q. Jane, and of the Q. Dowager Katharin Parr. I can compare the
danger of Childbed to nothing more aptly, than to a foughten Battle, save that
there is this Difference, that in foughten Battails, the Prince by thold
Examples, as one says of Pyrrhus, provide for themselves out of the Foreward
and most Danger: But in this, whatsoever Estate they be, Queen or Empress, she
must fight with Death Hand to Hand. There is no Champion to stand betwixt, or
to bestride them, when they are down, or to take the Stroke into their Bodies
to defend them, as has been done before this by faithful Esquires, to the
safety of their Prince. And if the faithful Friends of David, after he was at
one time by chance in great Hazard in a certain foughten Battle, would not
suffer him in Person to come no more into Battle, lest peradventure (as they
said) the Light of Israel should be quenched; How should I think, that I should
have so much regard to the Queens Persons as they had to David's, if I should
not also with and desire, yea, and counsil too, that her Grace should never
enter into that Danger and Battle, wherein she her self hand to hand, and
without Aid, must Fight with Death himself a more perilous Fight than is any
set Battle. And if her Majesly be fruitful (as there is no Cause to think the
contrary) then if she escape one, she must within one year, or a little more,
prepare for the next, and so still be within the Danger of that Extremity,
which I do tremble to think upon. Well may I think, as a great learned Man
(although merrily) writes, that unless God had given a certain notable Quantity
of Foolishness and Forgetfulness to al Women, after once they had assayed the
Pains and Travails and Danger of Childbirth, they would never company with Men
again. For although Soldiers, who put their Life to sale for money, do not fear to
continue war and skirmishes, and will adventure at the Capitains Commandment
hardily upon the Spearpoint to win or loose; And although some Warlike Princes, as
Alexander and Julius Caesar, thought themselves never so well, as when they had
sown one War upon another, and were courageously in the Field themselves; yet
can it not be denied, but it had been more safty to their Persons to have lived
quietly and justly at home with their own, and made Peace with their
Neighbors. Nor tho they dyed at home amongst their Friends, the one by Surfeit,
the other by Conspiracy; yet can it not be understanded by the common Intendment,
but that they were in more Danger in the Battle: and so the Success we must
leave to Destyny and Gods Judgments. What is by the common Course of Causes,
thereof we may conclude, as far as natural Reason and Man's wisdom will go.

Wherefore in my Mind, the Queens Highness Person, by course of Nature, being
subject (as al Mortal Men's and Women's ^e) to Fevers, Plurisies, to Pestilence,
to the Sweat, and infinite other sorts of Sicknesses and Diseases, which the
Physicians can desc^ibe, from the which whenever it pleases God to send them
(as I pray God long to keep her from them) no man's Power can rescue her;
methinks willingly and wittingly to bring in one other, which shall be as
dangerous as any one, or al those, it is not the part of him that professes a
Care of her Highness Person.

Hitherto I have spoken of her Person, but as touching the Body (nevertheles by
her Person I mean all such Things as touch her privately: and although it is now
hard to make a separation of this, but that which touches her Person should
also touch all the whole Realm; yet because I speak amongst you, whom I know to
be both Learned and Wise, ye will I dare say take what I mean by the Order of
my Talk) Let us grant that her Majesty does Marry, if he be a Subject, then she
should seem to disparage her self. For what shall she do other than that which
is found fault with in certain Dutchesses and Countesses, which have married
with those which were their Servants. If she marry a Stranger, then must he
needs by Gods Laws be her Head, and where she was highest before, now she has
made one higher than her self. If she study to please him, then is she in
Subjection of him: If she mind not to please him, why should she then marry
him? And this is the best. But if there should arise any Dissension betwixt her
Majesty and her Husband, and Part-takings who should rule, as there has been
ere this in other Countries; what a Misery shall her Majesty bring her self
unto from so great a Felicity? To what a Disquietnes from so great a Quietness?
Now al depends upon her only Will and Pleasure. She only commands, and it is
done. She says the Word, and every one obeys. Then is no Grace to be looked
for, but at her Husbands hands only. Then there shall be two to sue unto, tho
not equal, yet such as each of other would not like well to have a Nay. So that
their Requests one of another shall be as it were Commandments of the one to
the other. So that if the good and loving Wife loath to displease her Husband, and
the loving Husband his Wife, when one of them shall ask and require of the
other that which the other would not gladly do, if it be not done, who is
displeased, ye perceive; And if it be done, who is aggrieved ye se. And so much
the more as the one desires in his or her mind to have it don, the other in his or
her mind, that it should not be done; so much the more Grief the Granting does
bring to the one, and so much more Hatred and Displeasure the Denying does bring
unto the other.

As for Example sake, it K. Philip desired most earnestly we should make War
with the Frenchmen, and Q. Mary desired no less to live in Quiet, and to have
Peace with them, (the Husband and the Wife in most contrary Appetites) the
Granting extremely grieved the one, the Denial should as extremely have offended
the other. Of the Event what followed we know. But ye will say, this was when a
Foreign Prince did marry the Queen, who having War of his own with the
Frenchmen, must needs desire his Wifes Country for Loves-sake to join with him.
And this Realm having Wounds enough at home, had good Cause to mislike War
abroad. But if her Grace marry one of her own here at home, there shall be no
such Occasion, you will say, but their Minds shall be al one; whom the one loves
the other loves also, and whom the one misliketh, so will the other also. This is
wholly assured, if it were always so; but seeing never Man was always in one
Mind himself continually, nor yet Woman, but that which at one time we love,
another time we hate; what we like being Children, we mislike being Men and
Women, and much more when we be old; How can we think, that any Man or Woman
may be always of one Opinion, Mind, Judgment or Desire with another, where he
is not so with himself?

Conveniet nulli, qui secum dissidet ipse, says the old Verse. And what
Mischiefs those Break may bring, we have too many Examples both amongst the
Graecians, Romans and ^arbarians.

And first, I will begin with the Goths, when they were Lords over Rome and
Italy, Amula Suinta, or as some do write her Amala Suenta, the Daughter of K.
Theodoricus, King of Rome and al Italy, and so rightfally Heir of that Kingdom,
to govern the Realm the better, took to her Husband Theodotus, a Nobleman of
the ^oths; who belike afterward dissenting with her in Opinion of Matters of
the State, first found the means to exile her into a little Island in a Lake
besides Vossinana in Italy, and afterward there caused her to be most cruelly
slain. Philippe Vicecount of Milain being at a very low Ebb, by Marriage of
Beatrice wife to Fantino Cane, had the Lordships and Seignories of Vercelli,
Alexandria, Navarra, Cortana, four goodly Cities, and a great number of Riches.
Thereby he recovered again the State of Milain and Lumbardy, which was before
lost. This man to recompense her Kindness, and al these Benefits, within a short
while after caused her to be convicted of Adultery and cruelly to be put to
death. Jane the 2d. Queen of Naples did otherwise. She took to Husband Jacques
County de la Nardy, of the French Kings Blood: with whom she indented, that he
should be contented to be called Prince Tarento, and to leave to her not only
the Name, but also the Government of the Kingdom of Naples. This liked not he,
or else his Counsillors, and so removed her from Administration, and kept her
almost as a Prisoner. She, like a wise Woman, feigned to rejoice thereat, and
to bear it well until such time, as she had compassed all her Device, and shut
him clean out of Naples. For which Cause, although he made War, yet was he sain,
at the last, (willed he, nilled he) to live as a Man banished out of that Realm.

I have read of many, being Sole Inheritors and Princesses of many Countries,
which after took unto them Husbands, who had no better success, though not all so
evil. Even in our days, Q. Mary took K. Philip to her Husband, a Noble Prince,
Wise, Discreet and Fortunate. Yet many Men think, that thereby she lost the
Hearts of the most number of her Subjects. And it is too manifest, that
immediately upon it, in a very short space, an incredible number of her
Subjects were, by order of such Law and Justice as was used in those Days, most
cruelly put to Death. And God for his part, whether offended that she so living
Sole, and as may be thought a Virgin, did so suddenly choose to marry, or
rather that she finding the Light of the Gospel abroad in her Realm, did what
she could to Extinguish it and put it out, did so punish the Realm with Quartan
Agues, and other such long and new Sicknesses, that in the two last years of
her Reign, so many of her Subjects were made away, what with the Execution of
the Sword and Fire, and what by Sicknesses, that the third Part of the Men in
^ngland was consumed. Ye see I do pass o^e^ (...) thin^s li^htly, and do not
Am^lify th^^ (...) Orato^^ (...). Bu^ (...) should have ev^ry Piece rath^^ ^o
(...) ^eighed of you de^per, than that you (...) think that I should with words
overlade the ^atter.

I com^ to the Third, that is, what is best for the Realm, and her Subjects.
And surely, in this matter, methinks, for many Reasons, it is best as it is
now. And here I will not over-slip this Advantage: I pray you what Fault is
there to be found with the Governance now? Wherein do we lack, or want an
Husband for the Queen? Compare both Q. Mary's Time married, and the Q.
Highnesses Time that now is, unmarryed. Then was Burning and Hanging at Home,
Wars and Losing of Strong Holds Abroad: Most Men discontent, except a few of
her Sect: with Subsidies and Loans, Sicknesses and Promooters, as well the one
as the other thoroughly vexed. War we saw and felt, and other Mischief was
feared: which, whether it was to come, or no, few know. Now, for War we have
Peace; for Fear, Security. So, though even the Papists, although otherwise they
lost for their Stiffness, yet they be more sure of their Lives now, by the
Clemency of the Time, than they were then by the importune Favor of the
Prince. For Scarcity we have reasonable Plenty: for Brass-Mony, good Silver:
For Servitude, Liberty. What can a Commonwealth desire more, than Peace,
Liberty, Quietness, little taking of base Money, few Parliaments, their Coin
amended, Friendship with their Neighbors, War with no Man; either to follow
the Gospel, or Security of Life, if they will be Papists? Except, peradventure,
we should seem to do as Aesop's Frogs did, which, not content with the King
which Jupiter gave them, knowing them to need none, were weary of their
Liberty, and would not rest till they had also the Stork and Hearn for their
Kings. From whom now, with all their Cries these many Thousand years, they
cannot be delivered.

Well, yet for the Wars, and such Martial Feats, it is most convenient to have
a Man, who should Govern abroad, take upon him the Spear and Shield, be there
in Presence himself; which is mavelous Encouragement to the Soldier, to
Fight in the Sight of the Prince, where he thinks his Reward shall be according
to his Deserts. And, as a great Warrior said, I had rather have an Army of
Hearts, their General being a Lion, than an Army of Lions, their General being
an Heart. First, I do not see that every Prince makes his War himself there in
Presence, nor that every one of them is that Lion which they speak of. And if
it be in a Country where Peace may be had, and the Realm so well Walled in as
ours is by the Sea, I cannot perceive but a good Prince may do more good in
well-ordering this C^mmonwealth at Home, than seeking mo^^ Conquests Abroad.
The Romans doubted whether Numa did less good to Rome, with keeping it in Peace
forty years, than Romulus the first Founder did, with maintaining so many Wars
and Conquests And Augustus was rather a Father of the Country, when the Civil
Wars ended, when he kept. Peace with all Nations, and Governed well the
Empire, than he himself was in his Proscriptions, being Triumvir, or in his
Civil Wars against Antonius; and did then more good to Rome, in shutting of
Ianus his Temple; than did Julius Caesar in his Wars against the old Pompey,
yea, or else in his long Wars against France.

And have not Queens been Warriors? What was Semiramis, and Zenobia, Maud the
Empress, and the late Queen Margaret? Amula Suenta, that we spoke of before,
was reported to be the VVarrior in the Victory which her unkind Husband
Theodotus got over Theobertus King of Mettes, and the Bur^undians and Almains.
For her Wisdom, not their Manliness did it; as appears by his vile
Cowardliness after her Death. But if Queens make Peace, and keep the Realm
flourishing in good Order and Quiet, and overcome their own and their
Undergovernors Affections, of Robbing and Oppressing the poor Subjects, they
make a Greater and more Commendable Conquest than ever Sylla, or Marius,
Pompeius or Caesar did, yea, or Carolus the last Emperor of Rome, in taking the
French King, or winning Tunis and Goleta. And if Wars should happen to come,
why may not the Queen make and maintain her Wars as well by a General of her
appointing, sought out by her Wisdom, as all other Princes commonly do? And
Plutarchus does well note, that Augustus himself had small advantage in all
Wars, wherein he had the Conduct himself, as himself also was in great danger:
but those which he did manage by Legates and Generals, all did prosper well and
fortunately with him.

But of Wars we have spoken enough: wherein it is no more need that the Prince
should be in Presence, than it is that all the Senate of Venice now, or the
Senate of Rome in times past should always have been in Presence and Person in
their Wars. For it is their Wit and Policy, their Foreseeing and Wisdom, as
well in maintaining of the War, as in choosing of their Captain, that obtains
the Victory. And I pray you, did not the one Conquer as much, and does not
the other keep as well their Conquest, as ever Alexander and his Successors did?
Then it may appear it is not the Presence, but the Wisdom of the Prince, the
Manly Look, but the Sober Discretion; the Beard, but the Cheerful Heart that
brings the Victory, and keeps the Land conquested. And this, I say, may as
well be in a Queen as in a King, in a Wise and Discreet Lady unmarried, as in
any Husband she shall take unto her.

One thing must I needs say; if it be chargeable for a Realm to maintain one
Prince or King, it must needs be more chargeable for a Realm to maintain two.
If they cry out of the Takers for the taking for one House or Train, for two
they shall have more cause. And do you think that whenever the Queens Majesty
shall take an Husband, the Court can be unaugmented? I am sure Reason, Order
and Experience shows the contrary. Well, if the greater Train bring the more
Expenses, the more Officers do require the more Charge; the greater Family does
consume the larger Provision of Victuals. And if the Realm, as Reason it is,
must bear all these, and yet all things done as well now as it shall be then, I
cannot but conclude, even of Husbanding, but as good Husbands do, that the
Affairs of the Realm being as well done the one way as the other, the best cheap
must appear the best way. Which is as ye see, that the Queens Majesty should
remain as she does now still Sole, and unmarried, neither entangle her self
with a Husband, either strange, or born in the Realm.

I have now passed over my three Parts, not so fully as one of you would do,
who have their Tongues and Wits so ready, so fine and so eloquent. But after my
rude and homely m^nner, I have declared unto (...), that simple, sole Life and
Virginity does please God better, and is better esteemed, and an higher Virtue
than Marriage. And as it is more Heroical, so more comely for a Queen, which is
a Monarch, and a Sovereign Prince born. I have also proved, that for her
Person, it is most sure, and less dangerous, for her Mind more quiet and less
doubtful; and lastly, you see I lack no Reasons to show, that it is better and
more commodious for the Realm, Why then should this Opinion be counted either
wicked, or strange, or unreasonable?

And with this he held his Peace, and none of the other were hasty to answer.
Whether it were, because they did Meditate and Record with themselves what he
had said, or what and how they should confute him or no, I know not; but, I
perceive, that they looked not for such an Oration. At the last the Fourth
brake Silence; who, save that he would gladly have the Queens Majesty marry,
for the rest he was indifferent. And he (as you know, if I should tell you his
Name, has not his Tongue ready, for he stuttereth, stammereth, and if he be
moved, uneth he can bring forth a right Word. And commonly those Men be of the
greatest Heart and Courage, and testy with it, as the Greeks call them. It
appeared that he was moved with this Oration; For with much ado he brought out
his Words. The effect whereof was this. Mary, quoth he, this is a Tale indeed,
and Arguments well picked out. You may well be called Mr. Agamus, or Misogamos,
Surnamed in right English, Wedspite, or Spitewed. For I never heard Man speak
so despitefully against Wedding and Marriage of the Queens Majesty in my Life.
I think you be one of St. Frauncis, or St. Benets Scholars. I would to God my
Tongue would serve me but half so well as yours, I would ask no help to answer
you. But now, seeing my Tongue will not follow, I shall desire these Two to
take my part: Who, although within themselves, they be not of one Opinion, yet
with me, against you, they agree. And seeing they can do it well enough, my
Stuttering and Stammering should be but superfluous.

Then (quod the one of the other) if you be so ready to Christen and Name the
Child, belike as soon as I have told the Tale, you will be my Godfather, and
give me a Name. Nay, says he, I can Name you already. For you love Aliens and
Strangers so well, and praise so well all Countries and Countrymen, save England
and Englishmen, that it is pity you were not born somewhere else. And I think
you be, or should be some VVelchman, and Named Lewelyn, as one would say,
Lovealien, or in Greek, (...). Well, said he, and laughed, you do not well thus
to Nickname, and Provoke me to be angry with you, when you pray me for to
speak for you. It is happy your Tongue serves you no better, and that God has
sent a shrewd Cow short Horns. None of us should escape you, if your Tongue
were as good as your Heart; But yet I would it would have served you now; it
should have eased me well in confuting his Tale, whom you have now Christened
Mr. Agamus, or VVedspite. Which Tale was after such a sort (I must confess unto
you) as I looked not for. But yet I trust it may be answered, and thereto if
you give me a while patient Ears, I will endeavor my self with a good Will.

II. Philoxenus, or Love alien, This Oration for the Queens Marrying.
IT shall not be amiss to begin, says he, now Mr. Agami^, (for it is like to
be your Name at this Time) where you began: Which, as methought was pretty and
Philosophical Yet must I repeat the M^tter somewhat higher. Two things being,
appointed to be had in Election, if the one be honest, the other dishonest, the
Election is easy to him that prefers Virtue and Honesty to all other things,
although the Dishonest be more profitable, or more pleasant ten thousand fold.
For always that which is honest and godly is to be taken. And yet possibly this
Election would not be so taken of every Man; as has appeared in them that have
made War to their Country, Proscription of their Citizens, and have exercised a
thousand Tyrannies, for Ambition, Profit, or Pleasures-sake, preferring the
Dishonest things, because they were profitable or pleasant, before Honesly. But
where the Things propounded be both equal, for that Part there the Election
stands in their Degrees; as if Things of themselves may be Honest and Godly,
and the Contraries thereof may also so be; and the one and the other may be
used; there the Circumstances do alter the Matter: As Peace and War, Punishment
and Forgiveness, Eating and Abstinence, Marriage and Sole Life, both not only
permitted, but allowed of God. And according to the Circumstance of Time, and
Place, Person and Occasion, sometime the one better, sometime the other. And
herein I think we do not vary. Although you seem in your Tale to make them both
Virtues, I mean Virginity and Marriage. Which, I think, you did, after the
common manner of Speaking, rather than the true manner of Understanding. For a
right Virtue cannot be abused: Either of these may be abused, and increase
Damnation. But as things indifferent, Eating and Drinking, Reasoning and
Disputing, Ruling and Obeying, Sleeping and Waking, Earnest and Play; so these
take of their Circumstances, as I said before, of Place, Time and Person,
Cause, Occasion or Necessity, to make them good or bad.

Wherefore this is not so simply to be granted unto you, that Sole Life is the
better; No, though it be the harder; but according as the Circumstances be. Who,
that should begin, being a private Person, to bring in a new Sect or Religion
to reform all the State and Order of that which has been taught before, not
with Power but Persuasion; not with Sword, but with Miracle; not with Violence,
but with Patience; not with War, but with Fleeing, when he is persecuted from
one place to another; To him it is necessary, and to all them that shall follow
that kind of Policy, to be disburthened of Care for his Wife, of Charge for his
Children, of the Negligence of Servants, of harkening to Accounts, of Saving of
his Stock, and of all such Things as Marriage necessarily does bring to the
private or public Person, whosoever he be that is not altogether without that
Affection which is most natural; the which they that lack are called (...).
Then to Christ, then to St. Paul, then to all them, who at the first Time, as
it were the Sowing Time of Christian Religion, were the Till-men of the Gospel;
ye see it was most necessary, yea, in a manner, it could not well otherwise be
done, but that they should be Sole and unmarried. That which was in their
Persons, and at that time best, whether it be now, and in the Queens Person
best, may justly be a great Doubt. I cannot see but that Abraham, having the
Seed promised him, wherein all Nations should be blessed, was as Holy in
knowing Sarah, as Elias, who was ravished into Heaven in his Virginity, if no
other Difference were but that; Nor why Manue, [ Manoah] to whom Sampson was
promised, who should be the Deliverer of Israel, did not as well therein, as
Elizaeus in keeping himself Sole, who the Prophet said should slay all them
that Iehu left.

Now let the one be simply better than the other, Virginity than Marriage: which
it seems can hardly be gathered of St. Paul: for he praises Virginity as
better, not for it self, nor in its self, but for having less Let and Trouble
than has Marriage: So that if a Marriage have less Let and Trouble, the
Virginity more, then he prefers Marriage. Wherein it may appear, that it is
not (as I said) so better, as Virtue is better than Vice, nor as Gold than
Silver, nor scarcely as the Fine than the Base; But let it be as both in one
kind of Nature, but the one as fine Gold, the more to be esteemed, the other as
base, the less: Yet where the Baser weighs Ten pound, and the Finer but one
Ounce, there must needs the Base in kind be better indeed; the Courser in
Nature of such things be more excellent in Use and Necessity. Peradventure to a
Student, a Priest, a Man of War, and a Merchant-Adventurer, the first were
best; because Care of Household and Family should happily much disturb them of
their Studies; the other, because they are always in danger and absent from
home, it were best for them to live a Sole Life. But, for a Prince, upon whose
quiet Succession a great part of the Commonwealth does hang: whose Family is
the Root and Foundation of inward Peace within the Realm; to live Sole, is to
be an Author of such Mischief, as no Man can wish to a Realm a greater. And who
would say then, That to a Prince it is simply better to live Sole, than to
marry. To kill the Prince, who is the King's Eldest Son, is worthily made
High Treason; What is it then, not to kill one but all; yea, and not that, but
the Hope of all?

And you, Mr. Aganius, open your Lips to praise Virginity, or Sole Life in our
Queen; whose Daughter, much more Son, or a Prince, if God should send one, as I
trust God, (if it shall please her Highness to marry) shortly would send a
Prince, if you should once wish dead, all Men might justly abhor you to the
Death. What could you wish more, if Domitian or Nero, if Maximine, or C.
Caligula did Reign over us, than that which the Soldiers did say, when they
slew their Children, Ex mah genere ne catulum quidem relinquendum. And because
you come with what is good to Godward, and you take your sure Rule, that which
pleases God is best, I pray you, what is the Promise that he makes to David?
If thy Sons walk before me, says he, in truth with all their hearts, thou
shall not want one, who shall come out of thy Loins, to sit upon the Throne of
Israel. And to Iebu, for the zealous Revenge of Ahab's Iniquity, that his Sons
should sit upon the Throne of Israel, to the fourth Generation. Again, What
threatens he to Saul for his Rebellion, other, than that the Kingdom should be
translated from him, and his Sons should not Reign after him: To Jeroboam, to
Baasa and Achab, for their Idolatry and Wickedness, but that he would not leave
of their Posterity one to piss against the Wall? So that it may appear a
Blessing of God, a token of Faith in God, and good Favor of God toward
Princes, when he sends them of their own Seed to Reign after them. As the
Contrary, of Disfavour, and Coffeehouse of God toward them, when he cutteth
off their Generation, and leaves them without Posterity and Issue of their
Bodies to Reign after them. Then, if it be a Blessing to Princes to have
Children to Inherit after them, which shows the Favor of God, it is a Curse
to have no Posterity, or the Posterity cut off, which shows the Disfavour of
God, as appears most manifestly by these Examples of Scripture: And Sole Life
brings the Curse, and want of Posterity, and no other thing can bring the
Blessing of lawful Children but Matrimony. Why then may not I conclude by this
judgment of Scripture, that Matrimony in a Prince is that Good to be allowed,
and that Sole Life is that Evil to be eschewed?

And what has the Queens Majesty deserved at your hands, I pray you, that you
had rather she had the Curse which fell upon Saul, Hieroboam, Baaza and Aehab,
than the Blessing which David had and Abraham?

Now the Second Part, Mr. Agamus, was so well handled, and so sinely you entered
into your Matter, and so well you shadowed it with your Histories and Examples
of such things as have been done before; that I assure you, if I had not taken
a good Triacle before, and tied my self to my Mast, as Ulysses did to pass by
Syrenes, I had been caught, as a Fish, with a Hook, and ye had led me by the
Ears whether you had would. Now marking it well, and not swallowing up the
Bait, I am able to unwind my self that same way I was brought in. You put us
first into a great Fear of the Queens Majesty's Person. Of which, what good.
English Heart is there, which will not have Care? Then ye amplified great
Dangers and Disquietness, Exaggerated great Cares, Thoughts and Griess of her
Highness Mind. From all which, as well of Body and Soul, you found but one
only Refuge, and as it were a Sanctuary, of Virginity and Sole-Life, as my
Friend here, my Godfather says. This Fancy came out of the School of Monkery;
who, when they did see the Dangers and infinite Occasions of Pleasure,
Displeasure, Honor, Ambition, Contempt, Riches, Poverty, and all other such
things as did vex them, when they remained abroad, and in the Commonwealth,
which was able to bring them from the true trade of Virtue, and to bring them
unto Vice; and peradventure had once or twice don so already; whereby they knew
themselves the better of what Metal they were made: And then saw nothing of
Monks and Friars but their Holy Coat, their Becks and their Ducks, and their
Religions Words; they thought that there was none other way to Heaven, but to
run into their Cloisters: Where they thought they were so sure, and the Gates
so well kept, that there could no Vice get in And when they were there as fast
locked in as the other, they found themselves so well eased, as the Fish that
leapt out of the Drying Pan into the Burning Coals: Or as they that be Seasick,
when they come out of the Great Ship into the little Cock-Boat, I wis their
Choler goes with them, and till they come a-land, they sind small case in the
Change.

Ye make a Mervaillous Matter of Danger in Women's Bearing of Children, which ye
exaggerated so much, that when I heard, I began to tremble with my self; as to
take their leave of the Church, to prepare for present Death, to fight hand to
hand with Death without a Custrel, or any Esquire, to be in more danger than in
a Foughten Field, where Trumpets blow, the Clarions sound, the Guns thunder,
the Noise of the strokes, the Clashing of Armor, the Clattering of Harness,
the Braying of the Horses, the Groaning of Men Dying, and the Gasping of the
Dead teaches almost to Heaven. I thought I had been at the Battle of
Muskleborough or Agincourt; But when I looked again and saw so many fair
Ladies, so goodly Gentlewomen, so fine and so trim Maids pas these Pykes so
well, not once only but twice, thrice, yea sometimes twenty times, so easily, so
merrily, so quietly, in their sine Beds of Down, their Chambers hanged with
Arras, their Curtains and Coverings of Silk, their Pillows and Cushions
Embroidered with Gold and Silver-work, their Warming-Pans, their
Perfuming-Pans, and al such things so trick and trim about them: And they a^^r
it look so fair and ruddy, and so beautiful, that it would make any man in the
World enamoured of them. And when I marked further what have they made to go to
the Battle again, I began to laugh at my self, and thought that the Fear in
which you put me was with a Vizor only which you had taken upon you, and so
made me afraid, as Children be afraid of Bearbuggs and Bulbeggers. Why? Is not
the Bearing of Children painful? Is not that dangerous, say you? Ask not that
of me, but of them who be never well til their Paniers be full, which they are
sure they cannot empty til they come to this terrible Battle that ye speak of.

Lets see, Many of them will leave and take Truce any longer than their Month or
time of Churching comes out. Which Month some of them think it so long of four
Weeks, that they end it most commonly at three weeks, because they might the
sooner come to such another of these Conflicts: So much they be afraid of it.
It was my Chance to be at Dinner with the Countes of Ormond, with whom Sir
Francis Brian married. At which time she being merrily disposed, among other
Communications that Ladies and Gentlewomen had of this matter, she said, she
had now born (as I remember) Ten Children, and she was brought to bed not so
nicely as the Ladies and Gentlewomen be here, but either in a Tent or a wide
Barn after the manner of her Country Ireland: And I'tell you, said she, I felt
in a manner no pain at al these Births. Nor I se no Cause why I should make so
nice of the Matter as you do here in England. We do not so in our Country.
Whereat an old Lady was wonderfully offended, and said they were Beasts, and
she was but a Beast to say so. Then she as a witty Lady turned the Matter, and
said, It was a Gift which St. Patrick begged for her Country-folk, the Irish
Women, of our Lady. But the Truth is al Women that stir about to travail and to
labor as they do there, and do not use themselves to Rest and Ease, as they
can better away with Travail because of use, so they bear that Travail of
Childbirth with much more Ease, and in manner with no pain. Which we do se also
in these idle Runnagates Egyptians; whose Women be always trudging from place
to place as they be, and be brought to bed in the Straw, in some Barn or
Outhouse without any great Curiosity: And within three or four days after, yea,
sometimes the second day they ride away with the rest of that beggarly Train.

I remember I read, when I was a Boy, in Aristotle, and I trow it be in his
Politics; he would that those that should make Laws for a Commonwealth,
should have regard also to Women that were great with Child; that they should
not use themselves to over-fine' Diet, nor to overmuch Rest. Which, says he,
may be don, if they do appoint them certain Pilgrimages to be don to such Gods
as have the Honor of such Matters: Meaning such Gods as the Gentiles did
Sacrifice unto for such things, as Gemini, Lucina, Parcae, Juno, etc. His
purpose is, that when the Time of Birth draws nigh, they should by gentle
means be brought to a kind of Exercise and Travail, either on Horseback, or on
Foot, or both: to the intent that they might the easilier bear the Travail of
Childbirth: And thought that they could by no means so well be persuaded unto
them, which then he somewhat heavy, because of their Burden, as by Color of
Holiness and Religion. So that our Pilgrimage, also, which we had of late
years, was not much out of the Way for such an Effect, as may appear.

But I tarry long about these Matters. To bear Children is painful I do not
deny. It is the Threat of God to Eve, and to al her Posterity, as well as to
Adam and al Men, to get his Living with the Sweat of his Brows: And yet some
Men sweat but easily. And why should not I think also that her Highness should
bring forth her Children more easily than a great sort of other Women. I se
nothing leads me to the contrary. Many things do encourage me to think so:
Her Learning, Discretion, Judgment, her store of Physicians, and of al things
necessary for them to use. That where other by their Folly do make that Travail
to them more painful and dangerous than naturally it should be, her Highness by
her Noble Virtues and Wisdom should make it more easy, yea, than of natural
Course it should be. For as there be ways to augment, so there be ways to
diminish Pain or Grief: Wherein stands the Difference of Wisdom or Folly. But
why do I stand upon this? Would not her Majesty be glad, think you, to take
some pain to make a Prince? To make one, who should be a part of her? who
should m^ke her alive after her Death, Reign in her stead, when by Course of
Nature she can tarry no longer? Who shall continue and transplant her Name and
Posterity for many an hundred years here Kings in England, and leave such a Row
of that Race, as is the Root of Iesse. Was it nor you of whom I heard even now,
that all fair and laudable things be painful to come by? Will you not grant
unto me, that this which I speak of now, to have a Prince born of her own Body,
who should Reign after her Highness here in England, in whom she might se her
own Image, not painted in a Table, but lively expressed, every Joint, yea, both
Body and Soul; who should call her Highness Queen Mother, and whom al England
should call King and Father? Whom it you do not think more to be esteemed than
all the Treasure, that the wise and rich Prince her Grandfather K. Henry the
VII. left at his Death, or that the Noble and Magnificent Prince her Father K.
Henry VIII. spent in his Life, ye are in a contrary Opinion to all English men.
Whom when she shall behold, kiss and embrace, she shall take more Comfort and
more Pleasure in, than of all the Riches and Jewels which her Highness had, or
ever was Lady of.

Do you not think I say, such a Jewel worthy to have the pains taken, for the
getting of it, and bringing it to life? Are you he that was even now so stout,
that if the Thing were good, laudable and necessary to be had, the harder it
were to obtain, the more you thought it were to be labored for? And so you
Counsilled and proved by many Reasons and Authorities. Are you, I say, now
again so weak and so womanly hearted, that for a little pains in the Birth,
peradventure of one Hour or two, or at the most of one Day (for the Extremity
of the Pain cannot lightly be longer) will counsil us to cast down our Courage,
and run away like Cowards, and leave all this so rich and so precious a Treasure
ungotten, and unlaboured for, for the Travail of one hour? I wis Foloign cost
more the getting, and Calais the loosing. And yet this Treasure were more worth
than both those Holds to her Majesty, I dare say, and unto the Realm of
England, if it should be esteemed by true value.

Mary, yet ye go nearer me, and bring in certain Queens, who have dyed in
Childbirth. And herein you had good Advantage to have two Examples so near, and
in so fresh Memory, that they must needs make much indeed to the Terror of
Mischance. And yet this is but another Startbugg, that you have gotten to make
us afraid. It is sine^ the Conquest five hundred years little under or over. In
which time our Chronicles have indifferently well been kept, and many Kings and
Queens have dyed, and al not after one sort. I pray you how many more have you
read of that have dyed in Childbed? And yet one of those was not the Queen, but
Dowager, as you know well enough. And some men would say it was thought that
that did distress her then, and bring her to her End, as much as Travail of the
Birth. But of that I will not Dispute. But if in five hundred years, in which
space so many Queens have had so many Children, and only one or two have dyed
in Childbed, would you make this so great a Fear? What Act or Doing is there,
but Men and Women have dyed in it? M^^y of Feavors, more of Surfeits, some of
Cold, some of overmuch Heat, a great number of sorrow, not a few of Gladness,
some in Talking, some in Sneezing, some in Gasping, some ailing nothing, but
making them ready in the Morning. What would you make of this, but that Death
is ready at al Times an^ Hours to us that are Mortal.

K Henry the First, who for his Surname was called The ^air Clerk or Learned
Man, dyed of eating of a Lamprey. His Prince and eldest Son, and his fair
Daughter were both drowned in the Sea. What shall never King eat Lampreys
again? Nor the Daughters nor Sons of Kings come in Ships or Boats for that
Cause? How often do you see that they shun it for all that, except the Weather
be tempestuous? K. William Rufus was slain with an Arrow in hunting. Shall
Kings therefore give over all pastime, or let no Man bear Bows while they be in
Hunting? How many do you see yearly drowned in the Thames? And who forsakes
notwithstanding to row in a Barge or Wherry? How many thousand of Children be
born every day in one Place or other? How many Hundreds think you in the City
of London, and in the Shire of Essex in a Month? And if two die in a year in
Childbed, it is a great Mervail. And yet even they commonly die of some Fear or
some Fright, or some Ague, or some other Cause, than the very Birth going
before. So that it is not Ten, but a Hundred or a Thousand to one, that the
Woman shall escape, who travaileth with Child. And yet they do not amiss to
commit themselves to God, and to require his Aid at all such good and natural
Works. And they have the more Comfort, as I think, when they be in pain. But to
make this so perilous a Case, and so fearful a Matter, and so dangerous a
Battle, I do assure you I se no Cause.

And because you reckoned up so many Diseases, whereunto natural Men and Women
be subject; And therefore you would be loath this also should be added: You
shall see how much contrary I am to you. I think that bringing forth of
Children does not only preserve Women from many Diseases, and other
Inconveniences, but it does also clear their Bodies, amend the Color, prolong
their Youth. If I should bring unto you the authority and Reasons of Physic
therefore, although it be easy to do, yet would you ask me, who the Devil made me
a Physician? And you would say yoa had no leisure to look over, and try those
Books, which you may easily look, and se the Conclusion. Mark in the Court, and
in all other places where ye go: Look what Ladies and Gentlewomen be most
fruitful, and have most Children, if they look not for their Age mo^ youngly
best colored, and be cleare^t (...) Diseases. Mark again them which be (...),
after they pass once Forty, or Forty five years, and toward Fifty, if they
look not withered, yea, either Red or Tawny colored, and older than they be by
a great way. I could bring you ready Examples not far hence, where be three
Sisters married. Theldest has Ten or Twelve Children, the middlemost but one,
or two, and the youngest had never a one, who being best kept, and most at
Ease, yet theldeit Sister being Ten years elder, looks Twenty years younger
than the youngest: And the ^^dlemost according to the Rate (...) Children. And
I could name ^^^ugh to you in the Court, and in (...), and whenever you will I
wi^^ show you them.

But I would have you, Mr. Agamus, to mark this that I say: And if you find my
Sayings true, then never be in that Heresy that you be in. But rather think,
that for the Queens Majesty's own Person, and the Preservation of her Body,
Health, Color, Beauty, Grace and Youth, it is an Hundred times better for her
Highness to Mary, and to have Children, than to live sole.

Now let us come to the Grief of Mind. For this was another piece, whereby ye
crept so into us, that no Husband pleased you, neither Stranger nor English,
neither whom her Highness would please, nor whom she would not please. And ye
thought there would be no long Agreement; Seeing no Man nor Woman does always
agree with himself; much less he can agree with another. And hereupon ye
builded your mervelous Forces and Castles: What Inconveniences come with
Disaggrements; What Grief of the Granting, What Hatred of the Denying; What
Danger of the Dissension. And you helped your self stoutly with the Histories
of Queens and Noblewomen, who have been greatly troubled, vexed, and brought to
Extremities (...) those means. I will venture with you whe^^ begun, and there
join with you where y^^ think your self strongest. Can never Man ^^ree long
with himself? Mary, so much the ^^tter, say I. We do not think al one of
things* when we be Children, and when we be Men, nor when we be young Men, and
when we be old. Mary, we be the wiser. For as Wisdom comes, Error goes away.
Folly and Wisdom cannot agree. That which to Childishness and Folly of Youth
appears good, to gray Age appears Lightness, and nothing worth. Were it not
better that this Dissension and Debate in our selves were at the first; but
that God would so train us up that we might se, how we did profit? Have we not,
after a little. Wisdom comes to us, this Debate in our selves every day? The
Appetite draws one way, and Reason another. The One would run at random,
the other holds back. What do good Fathers to their Children, but provide for
them a Dissenter, a Schoolmaster, who should by godly Persuasion, yea, and
sometimes Rebukes, keep them from that which they most desire? Does not two
Eyes se better than one? Do not the contrary Opinions declared open the better
the Truth? Why does else the Judge hear both Parties, before he give Sentence?
And wherefore be Counsillors, but because they be not always of the same
Affection that the Prince is? And by this Dissenting is the best way found out.
For even as when in a heap of Sand or Mould there is espied a bright thing like
Metal, by sifting of it and washing it, will come to a nearer Guess, and by
farther Travail be tried whether it be Gold or no: So when a thing glistereth
and appears gay, the same being sifted in Consultation among diverse
Judgments, at the last does so come to the strong Water or Ramentation, or to
the Test, til it appears in his Clearness, how it is to be reputed. Or else
Copper may sometimes be taken for Gold, and a vain thing, that will consume like
Brimstone, may be praised for good Metal. And I pray you, who shall more
carefully look to, or more faithfully counsil, or be more circumspectly
fearful, for the managing of her Highness Affairs than an Husband should do?
Or who can more amiably, more frankly, more certainly, or more secretly confer
with her Majesty for the execution of them, than he can do? whose Heart and Body
by the Law of God, and by the Law of natural Love, is knit to her Highness in a
most sure Knot.

And if they should dissent in Opinion, does every such dissenting make war;
then where should Consultation become? Methinks in this Matter we Four do but
little aggree amongst our selves; and yet I trust we be Friends, and shall be
still. Where wise Persons dissent one from another, by their having Opportunity
one to confer with the other, the Truth appears, and the best way is chosen.
Which is far from the Mischief you speak of. But you went so far, that you
would scarcely grant that her Majesty should love her Husband. What if the
Queens Highness do willingly please and gladly gratify him, is he by and by her
Superior? That that is an hard Work I dare say her Highness will sometime do for
some of her Privy Chamber, yea and other also which require things of her
Grace, when else her Majesty had rather bestow them some other way. Will you call
this Subjection? I assure you that is too precise a Calling, and far from al
common manner of speaking, or thinking. So far you do over^eac^ with Coveting to
make your Matter good.

What is the Marring of al evil Princes? What is the undoing of al Empires, but
because they have so many Flatterers, that will s^y as they say; and so few
Counsillors that will dissent, and tell them the Truth? Happy is that Prince that
has so wise a Counsillor, that can se that is best; but more happy is he, that
has one so bold that dares to tell it to him, and so beloved of him, that he
will hear it at his Hands and bear it well. For every man else faith as they say:
Every man praises that they like. What they affirm, that is true, be it never
so false: What they like not, that is Evil, be it ever so good. Every man
praises their Virtues: no man tel^eth them their Faults. Yea, they make their
Faults Virtues, and will covet to follow them. So that a Prince of himself had
need to be very good, just, temperate, and well inclined to favor Virtue, and
punish Vice; or else he shall be wonderfully led out of the Way by the Flattering
of his Counsillors, and al other his Subjects. Who will rather follow him in the
wrong way, than once to move him to turn again, and to take the right. And,
which is the Worst, the Prince sees but with their Eyes, and hears but with
their Ears. For he cannot hear nor se the Particulari^^e of things himself, but
as they bring it unto him with whom he is conversant. What did I say* se with
their Eyes, and hear with their Ears? Nay, if he did so, it were better. That
is, if they would bring to the Prince just as they se and hear. But now he
sees not as they se, but as they will tell him that they saw, nor as the^ heard,
but as they will tell him that they heard. So that if they be not wonderfully
affected to the Truth, and to the Commonwealth (as for the most part few such
as be about Princes be, but rather affected to their own Kindred, Commodity,
Lucre and Advauncement) then must it needs be, that the Prince does se many
times the Black White, and the White Black. Wherein the Prince is not in the
fault, but the Reporter to the Prince.

In this il Fortune which al Princes have necessarily, and most of al Queens,
(as naturally the Woman is the les strayer abroad than the Man, and therefore
can the les hear or se by her self) what better Remedy can there be than an
Husband, who can go abroad oftener, because he is a Man, and se and hear things
truly, because he goes abroad; bring home the ^lisreports, because he loves
the Queen, the bolder to tell it, because she loves him; be more earnest for
her Highness Wealth and Well-doing, because his Honor, Joy and Felicity lies
upon it; be most careful of any Mis-doing or Mis-governing, because his
Destruction and Danger lies thereon. For as he said to his Son, Tho thou have
many Lovers and Friends, yet thou have but one Father, (And indeed a man shall
not find one more that has the true Fatherly Affection, but only his own
Father) So may I say, tho a Queen may find many Counsillors and welwillers and
faithful Subjects, yet can she have but one Husband; nor none other that can
have so perfect, so sincere, and so true Affection to her Highness Person and
Affairs. For none indeed has such Cause as her Husband has. The kno^ of
Dearnes and Love is such, that it uniteth as it were Flesh and Blood. Insomuch
that it furmounteth the Piety and reverent Love that the Father and the Son,
the Mother and the Son has one to another. For this says God himself, A man
shall leave both Father and Mother, and shall cleave unto his Wife. So near,
and so just, and with so vehement Affection, that they shall be but one Body
and Mind. Which Affection none knows but such as have been entangled with the
same Knot.

And yet daily the experience thereof is seen. What does the Warrior, when he
willingly ventureth his Blood to be shod; The Merchant, when he forsakes not
the raging Seas; The Lawyer with his Watching in the Night, and Crying in the
Day til he be hoarse; the Carpenter, the Tailor, yea the Plowman, with all their
Occupations, with their Labor, Toil, Watch, hard Fare and Sparing; but only
to get and bring home for their Wives and Children? Look on these lusty young
men, who having a Sword and Buckler and a good Gelding, and some Money in their
Purse, do think themselves in heaven; and study upon nothing but when they may
meet to sing, dance and make good cheer. After one of them has been married a
while, all that is gone with him, and he looks where he may get, and spyeth
where he may save. He despises all the lusty Company, and studyeth how to
furnish his House at home, and to bring to pas, that his Wife and Children
should not ^^^k. This Care should not come, if Love went not before. This
Affection he knew not, til he felt the Knot. And now it is so sweet, that he
forsakes his Singing, Dancing, his making of good Cheer, and al his other
Jollities, Pleasures and Pastimes, to make much of his Wife and Children, and
to provide that they should not want any thing that should be to them
necessary: Yea, and not that only. For when that is don, he will not leave, if
he can, to labor, toil, study, travail al his Lifetime, til Age drives him
from it, only that he might leave them in better estate, than he himself was at
the first. He labors, that they might ^^^ve ease; he watches, that they
might ^^ll; he spares, that they might have plenty; he defraudeth himself, and
punishes his own Belly, that they might ^^ve enough to spend: And when they
have spent, somewhat to leave. Now if any Injury should be offered to his Wife
and Children, who is so out of Patience as the Husband? He chafes, he sumes, he
prepares himself immediately to revenge. And if the Enemies come, or the War
be menaced, first he provideth that his Wife and Children be conveyed into
sasty. Then he himself makes him ready to meet his Enemy. He offers his Body
to the Stroke, his Blood to be poured out, his Life to be taken from him,
rather than they shall have one Finger hurt.

And this so natural, so common, so don of all men, that it is no News, it is
no Wonder: No man mervaileth at it. For it is seen every day. Even the Wild
Beasts will do as much to defend their Mates: Fight to the Death with the Hunter
to keep him from the Den, where his Female, and his Whelps do ly.

And here you bring in Theodotus Husband to Amala Suenta from Rome, Philip
Viscount from Milain in Lumbardy, Jacques de la Nardie Q. Ianes Husband from
Naples. They were Monsters of Mankind, Examples of Unkindness, Spectacles of
Devilish Cruelty. Of which yet not one of them escaped unrevenged. And what?
will ye make a general Rule of this? So shall ye extinct and deface al natural
Affection, al Order of Love, al Course of Kindness. So may you bring in Nere
that killed his Mother, because she seemed to mislike some of his Vices:
Selimus that killed his Father, because he thought he ^ept the Kingdom of the
Turks too long from him: Asede^ that killed her own Children in despite of her
Husband: Ca^^line that killed his own Son, because a rich Widow would not else
marry him: Ba^^ianus, that killed his Brother G^ta, because he would rule
alone: And all the Rabbl^ment of ^ather-^illers, and Mother-killers, Son
killers and Daughter-killers, the Murderers of their Brethren and Sillers
their masters, and their chief Friends: And prove that there is no Love nor
Trust in Father or Mother, Son nor Daughter, Brother nor Sister, Kit nor Kin,
even Tymons Sect. And very much better did Christ reason with Si^^^ the
Pharisee. He whom more is forgiven, says he, more does love. As who would say,
he that has more kindness shew^^ him, as the Benefit is greater, so is his
Love more affectionate to him or her of whom he received it.

Which if it be true, who then can ^^^e a more Affection, a greater Love, and
earn^^^er Care, and a f^rventer Dearness of mind toward the Queen than he whom
she chooses above all men, whom she prefers to all the rest, to whom she
gives all that ever she has, and her self also; Yea, whom she makes her self.
In that by this Knot they be both but one Body. Can this man ever hate her? Can
he speak evil of her? Or can he suffer that the least Tittle in the world
should grieve her Mind? Sooner will he abide any Pain, any Grief, any Torment
himself? For what can be a greater Grief, or painful Disease to him, than that
she of whom he received so unspeakable a Benefit, should perceive in him the
least spot of Unkindness; Except he be a wild Beast in a Man's Likeness, a
Devil and a Monster of Mankind, as Nero was, and these whom ye named, of whom
ye have found out three since the World began. And I think you shall not, tho
von search never so near, find out so many more.

The Comfort, the Ease of Mind, the Pleasure, the Contentation that her Majesty
shall have of a loving husband, is unable with Words to be declared; and no Man
or Woman can believe it, til they have proved it. Whereof what greater Argument
can there be than this, that of so many Thousand, as be married, you shall not
se among five Hundred one which once has been married, Men or Women I say, that
when by misfortune one of the Couple dies, will abide sole without wedding
again. They think in the mean space their Houses naked, their Table without
Comfort, their Bed without Joy, themselves half maimed, and to lack in all
Purposes one of their Things most necessary, and, as Aristophanes says in
Plato, indeed they feel that the one Half of themselves all the while is away.

This far to the first two Points of your Oration. Now I come to the Third and
last Point, wherein ye disputed what were best for the Commonwealth, and for
the whole Realm. And here methought you began to handle us very ungently. Ye
asked us what Fault we find with the Government now: and wherein we do lack a
man or Husband to the Queen? To the First if we should answer, ye would bring
us in a Displeasure with the Council, as tho we disliked their Doings. To the
Second if we should, we might seem to note the Queens Majesty as insufficient
to Rule her Realm. Pretty Streights ye have devised to make us hold our Peace.
(...) this will not make us agree to your Opinion. What lack we, say you: Mary
even that which you know your self; For you were present, and a Goer with them
your self; the whole Parliament lacked you know what well enough. What was their
suite to her Majesty I pray you? What required they by the Mouth of our
Speaker? Were they then of your Opinion, or of mine touching that Matter? Why
did not you declare so much in the Parliament, before they went to make their
Petition to her Highness, as ye have done here? ye might have stayed them
peradventure, that they should not with such humble and earnest Requests have
moved her Majesty, to have Compassion upon her poor Realm, and to think upon
Marriage, wherein we might se some speedy Hope of Succession from her Highness.
But you durst not; you saw so many, even al men bent to the contrary; And you
know well enough you should not escape unanswered at the full. And possibly you
were not of that Opinion at that time. But now you be: Well, if you be so now,
to all other Reasons I have answered; to the rest this I have to say.

If in all such kind of Reasons, whether a Thing is better to be don or no, the
Authority and Judgment of wife, sober and discrete men ought to have greatest
weight, I can bring in the Authority of the greatest, wisest, sagest, gravest,
best, learned and expert men in th'affairs of the Realm, and maintaining of the
Commonwealth, as you your self can witness, which were against your Opinion at
that Time, and on my side. And if you, like a Philosopher, will not suffer me
to use Authority, I will not fly your Reasons, but as I began, I will answer still
as I have don. And ye compare Q. Mary's Time to this, and make this Time so
much better than the other as you lift your self, wherein I will not t^ive with
you, you shall find me so good a fellow yet, as Craesus said to Cambyses, who
would needs be better esteemed than his Father the wife, and great Conqueror
Cyrus, He could not be so good as his Father was, for so much as Cyrus had left
such a Son to rule after him as Cambyses Servants told him he was, and Cambyses
thought himself to be. But Cambyses himself had not yet gotten any Child. This
Fable of Crasus, as Herodotus says, so tickled Cambyses, that he escaped
thereby, and told the Truth. Why, say you, no more had Q. Mary and Child. Mary,
Sir, I do not compare the Queens Highness to Q. Mary: but yet I will say that
Queen Mary did what lay in her more for that purpose than Q. Elizabeth does.
And I would She would as well in that as in all other Things pass Q. Mary. It al
be well now, as you say it is: We have Peace, we have Plenty; We have Quiet at
home, Friendship abroad: What should we desire more?

As we have great Cause to give Almighty God Thanks for it, and to rejoice and
Congratulate with the Queens Highness for that; So have we the more Cause ^o
fear, the greater Occasion to foresee, the ^^ster Warning to provide, that this
Estate might continue. Except we shall be no wiser than the Grasshoppers: to whom
because they did not provide in Summer wherewithal to live, but applied al
their Time to Singing and Dancing, the Ants did say, when Winter came and
their Need appeared, that they must weep and repent then without Remedy. We al
rejoice in the Queens highness, and have great Cause. God prospers al things
in her Highness hands above al Expectation, and almost more than we can desire.
Because the Weather is so fair, shall we not look for a Storm? Because this is a
Summer, shall we think that Winter will never come? If we do se only that is
present; if we have no regard what shall come after: If we had no consideration
as well for our Prosperities, as for our selves, We are not worthy to be called
Men, but Beasts. Who whether of Reason or no. I know not, but certainly of a
certain Instinct of Nature, seem to have a care, and hoard up store for the
time to come. Wherefore if we have cause to like in her Majesty those Princely
and Heroical Gifts which Nature has bestowed on her Highness: That goodly
Personage and Stature resembling her Father, so noble a Prince and so well
beloved to the Realm: If her Beauty does not only please us, but bring al other
in Admiration that se her? If th'excellency of Wit, the great Understanding,
that Knowledge of so many Tongues, the Dexterity of Entertaining, and the
Gravity in Communication, and al other the Princely and Heroical Virtues, which
be so clear and resplendent in her Majesty, do ravish us in Admiration of her
Highness, Except we should do as the Grasshoppers do, content our selves with the
Time present, and look no further, what can we do but wish, pray, desire and
long for the Propagation and Continuation of the same among us? Like as we do
with Flowers which we like, with Apples and other Fruit which do please us
above al others, we desire to have more of the same kind set in our Garden, and
more of the same Fruit grafted in our Orchyard: that our Posterity may take
pleasure in them as well as we.

This is so natural, so goodly and so reasonable, that methinks it was but a
strange Question of you to ask, What we lacked. And if I could call this Realm
of E^g^a^d to speak what it lacked, and what Fault it found, I dare say it
would not only wish, but expotula^e and accuse her Highness and say, Did not I
bring thee up, O Queen? Did not I nourish thee? Has not God in thy Youth saved
thee from so many Dangers? From Prison, from Punishment, from Death? because
thou might reign and rule my People in the Fear of God, and the Knowledge of
his Son? And that thou might once again bring in the Light of the Gospel,
and cast off the Romish Yoke, and keep the Race of the Mixed Rose, which
brought again the amiable Peace ^ong exiled from among my Children by the
Striving of the two Roses: And will thou now as much as lies in thee, let it
be extinct? What if thy Noble Father had lived Sole as thou do? What if that
good Lady thy Mother had don so? Should I not have lacked thee, in whom I have
now such Joy and Comfort as I never had the like in any Prince? Remember what
is the Nature, Property and Duty of that Sex and Kind of which thou art. Is it
not to bring forth young Babes, to nourish them in their tender Age, to have
that Carefulnes, Motherly-Love, and Tenderness over them which no Man can have?
And why do I not se one in thy Arms, whom thou might kiss and embrace and
play withal of thine own; Which after thee should rule and govern this Realm,
and be the Staff of thine old Age and mine? This thou owe to the Noble King
thy Father: This to the Wife Prince thy Grandfather: This to al thy Auncesters:
This thou do to me. And if this be the Property and the end, whereunto Women
were first ordained, to bring forth Children and to propagate the Name of their
Stock and Family; why will thou, O Queen, having so many high and excellent
Virtues stain them al with this Wickedness, degenerate from this Nature? What
means St. Paul when he says of Women, That they shall be saved by the bearing
of Children, if they tarry in the Faith? And what will thou, O Queen, deny it
always? Why should the wife and courageous Prince thy Father put away the
Superstitions Nuns, if now his Daughter should take their Property, and as it
were, their Order upon her? Defer still, and still? And how long will it be? Time
goes away: Age draws on; Youth flies; Opportunity is spent. And will thou
not se the bringing up of thy Jewel, of that Tresure of the Realm? Will thou
not se him trained up in such Virtue and Nourture, as thy self was? Shall I tarry
so long for it, til Age shall drive thee away, and so leave that thy Jewel and
mine, to be brought up by the wide World? What I like in thee, that do I desire
to se in the Prince that should succeed thee. And who can be better
Schoolmaster, Nurse, Bringer-up of him, than my ELIZABETH can be, the Mother
of my Infant? And such a Mother as in a King of most Power no Realm can desire
more Princely and Heroical Virtues. And for the Pain, thou shall have again
this most pleasant Recompense; that as thou shall wax old, so shall thou se thy
self wax as it were young again in him. Now I am sure, would England say, Thou
would wish with all thy Heart, for the Love that I know thou do bear me,
thy Country, not to leave after thee a Child to Govern me, but either a man of
perfect Age, or at the least a young ^an very ne^r such Time as Princes should
take the Government themselves. And how is that possible, it thou do still
prolong, Doubt, and Defer, as now thou do.

Thus me^^^nks England might speak well enough to her Majesty. Whose Word I
trust her Highne^ will both hear and weigh, when it shall please God to put it in
her Highness mind.

But I will return to your other Argaments, Mr. Agamus. You were something long
in proving, that the Queens Majesty may in Peace by her Council, in War by her
General, govern and conduct al things as well, as tho She were there in Person
her self. Hardly will I grant that the one should be as well as the other. I se
in all other things, that Oculus Domini non solum pascit Equum optime, as he
said, but also Colit and stercorat Agrum. The Italians have a Proverb, La
^^ccia d'buomo saccia de Leone, The Face of a man is the Face of a Lion:
Meaning that the Presence of a man himself to whom the thing does appertain, to
Terror, to Diligence, to setting forward of that which is intended, does
furmount and pass al other things. As when our late Sovereign K. Henry VIII.
^ay against Boloign, and another Camp with right good Captains before Montrel,
the Courage of the Soldier, the Provision of the Victuals, the Effect of the
Enterprise ye know was not like. For the one fought under the Princes Ey,
the other as it were behind him; the one saw present Reward or Pain, the other had
but trust of their Captains Report.

As touching the Romans, where do you se or read in their Histories, that the
Lea^tes which we call Generals, or Lieutenants, did so well as the Consuls or
Proconsuls in any War. Who although they were but as other of the Senate; yet for
that Time they had a Kingly and Sovereign Authority, especially abroad. And yet
the Romans thought not that enough, but when any danger came they made
Dicta^^^ent: Who from the Time of his Dictatorship was a very King or Monarch,
as ye know well enough. So much did they think that Legates and Generals could
not do th'enterprize so well as he that has the Princely Fasces as they call
them, and the Scepter. And who that reads the Veuctian Histories shall se that
although their Captain or General has one of their Senate, called Proveditore,
with him, By whose Counsil if he do, he does avoid the danger of judgment; Yet
for because he is not indeed Consul or Dictator, ye see their Wars go but
coldly forward. And this you knowing (which Thing I marked in your Tale) you
praise them for the keeping that which they get, wherefore, I peradventure
could show some Causes. Indeed for good Warriors I never heard Man yet give
them the Prize. And if I should grant this, that the Generals in War do as well
as the Prince in Person (which thing you see I am very loath to do) and if it
had not been strange, and a thing to be wondered at in Octavius Augustus,
Plutarch would not have noted it. But if I should grant it, yet as the Greeks
say, One City is before another; and there is difference in Generals and
Lieutenants; not only in knowledge of the Feats of War, and in the Hardines of
Courage and Wisdom to atchieve them, but also in Estimation of the Soldier.

And who can be more esteemed, or go more n^er to do as much in the Wars and
with Soldiers, as the Queen her Self, if She were a Warrior, or there in
Person, should do, as either he which is the King, or the Queens Husband? In K.
Henry III. his Time, I read of Prince Edward, who was after called Long Shanks,
and in the Time of Edward III. of the Black Prince, and Henry V. that they did
as much as their Fathers; and that their Soldiers would under their Banners
sight as valiant, and go as far, as they would govern, their Fathers being then
Kings of England. And no marvail, They did not only look shortly to have them
their Sovereign Masters, but they knew in the mean time how dear those Persons
were to their Fathers. Which two things did work so much in their Hearts and
Minds, that there was small Want of the Royal Presence. So much think I it does
excel to the Encouragement of the Soldier, to the Hope of the Capitain, to the
Terror of the Enemy, to understand that the Husband of the Queen, he whom her
Highness Loves above al men, and whom She trusts most, and who can commend
their Doings at al Times to her Highness, to be in the Field; over it is, of any
other Lieutenant or General, whosoever he be.

At one thing I assure you, you had almost made me to laugh, when that you
spoke so husbandly of Husbanding. I perceive the Queens Majesty does not well,
that you are not one of the Green-cloth, you would husband the Matter so well,
and teach them al to save money. And for one thing ye might do well there,
because I perceive ye love no Takers. But if you were once of them I fear me
you would love Takers better, and bear with them as well as all the rest do. Oh!
merciful God, do you look to save money, and do not care to save your Head? You
do consider, how a few Expenses may be saved, and do not se how your Posterity
shall be spent and consumed. Call to remembrance I pray you what was spoken (you
wot Where and When) a little before the Speaker of the Parliament went to move
that Petition to her Highness, whereof I spoke even now: I would to God her
Majesty might live ever; I would she should not dye, but now I know that being
born of mortal Parents, there is no Remedy, She must once run this Race that al
her Progenitors have don before, and al mortal Men and Women shall follow. When
that is don, what a Damp shall England be in? What an Eclipse will that be, if
God do not either send a Prince before of her Body, or else incredible Aggrement
of the Nobility and Commons? We hear what the Daulphin did attempt by the Title
of his Wife; the Scottish Queen after the Death of Q. Mary. Happy is the Queens
Majesty by the great Consent of her Subjects; and happy be her Subjects by the
Life and Prosperity of her Highness. But if there come any Dissension for the
Trials of Titles: If there come Part-takings, who should wear the Crown, what a
more miserable Realm should there be in the whole World than this of England?

I am afraid to speak, and I tremble to think, what Murders and Slaughters,
what Robbing and Ri^ling, what Spoiling and Burning, what Hanging and Heading,
what Wasting and Destroying, Civil War should bring in, if ever it should come.
From the Time that K. Richard II. was deposed, in whom all the Issne of the
Black Prince was extinct, unto the Death of K. Richard III, the unkind and
cruel Brother of Edward IV. whose Daughter was Married as ye know to K. Henry
VII. by reason of Titles this poor Realm had never long Rest. Noble men were
beheaded, poor men were spoiled, both one and the other stain in battle, or
murdered at home. Now this King prevailed, now the other. No man sure of his
Prince; no man of his Goods; no man of his Life. A King to day, to morrow a
Prisoner: Now hold the Scepter and shortly after fly privily the Realm. And
when this fell upon the Head, how sped the Body, think you? Those two Blades of
Lyonel and John of Gaunt never rested pursuing the one the other, til the Red
Rose was almost razed out, and the White made al bloody; And as it were
Eteocles and ^^ly^ices, they ceased not til they had filled their Country full
of bloody Streams. They set the Father against the Son, the Brother against the
Brother, the Uncle flew the Nephew, and was slain himself. So Blood pursued and
ensued Blood, til all the Realm was brought to great Confusion. It is no marvail
though they lost France, when they could not keep England. And England in the
latter end of K. Henry VI. was almost a very Chaos: Parishes decayed, Churches
fell down, Towns were desolate, plowed Fields waxed Groves, Pastures were made
Woods; Almost half England by Civil War slain: and they which remained not
sure, but in Moates and Castles, or lying in Routs and Heaps together.

When those two Roses, by the Relics and last store of the Whole, were joined
in the amiable Knot of Marriage, then the Strife ended, and England began as it
were to be inhabited again. Men left Moates and Castles, and builded abroad
pleasant Houses. And thus it has continued from K. Henry VII. hitherto; Save
that in this Time a few Broyls of the Stirred Sea, which could not so soon be
calmed, by Martin Swarte, Perkin Warbeck, and Simond out of Ireland, were
somewhat renewed; but they were Trifles to the rest. Since which Time, not
containing yet fourscore years, you se how England is repeopled, the Pastures
clothed, the Deserts inhabited, the Rents of Lands increased, the Houses
replenished, the Woods so wasted, that now we begin to complain for want of
them, and our Increase is tedious to our selves, which find fault with the
Fruits of Peace, because we know not the Cause of the Success, nor the
Commodities thereof. But as, if all the World should return to the old Chaos, it
were the greatest mischief that Heart could invent, Tongue speak, Pen express,
or Wit indite; So if this should come to our Country of England, we for our
parts shall feel this I speak of, and as it were the particular Judgment of the
Day of Doom. And it stands but on a tickle and frail Ground, if God will so
plague our Country, whether the Red and White Rose shall strive again together,
or whether the branches of the mixed Rose shall cleave asunder and strive within
themselves, which is nearer the Root. Oh! Lord God, let me not live to se that
day. And you my Friend, do you in this Company speak of Saving of Money, to let
the saving of this Trouble from the Realm of England?

With this he held his peace, and seemed indeed very much troubled: And no man
said a word even a good pretty space; (...) at the last the Stammerer that I
told you of, whom they called after all that night Mr. Godfather, stutting after
this manner said this in effect: By the Lord, I believe you have told as good a
Tale as ever I heard. I am now glad I have an Excuse by my Tongue: for I should
not have don it so well. For both in Peace and War, and al times you have
proved, that it is best for her Grace, and most to her Comfort and Quiet, to
have an Husband. Mary, I thought long for this Last Part, of the Necessity of a
Prince of her Highness Body. And because you pass it over so with Silence, I had
thought to have put you in mind of that thing; but now I will not say more of
it; For I se it troubles you as it does us al.

Now Sir, you have said so much for me, as I would wish, and I thank you. For
the rest, as I said, I am indifferent. If you have any thing to speak for an
Alien, who be so tender unto you, and whom you do always prefer before us
English Men, speak on a Gods Name, and let this Gentleman provide well to
answer you. For I perceive ye will do well enough both.

III. Philoxenius, or Love-alien, his second Oration for the Queens Marying
with a Stranger.
IN good Faith, quoth Love-alien, now I have spoken for you so long, I am in a
manner weary, when I should speak for my self. And yet this was not out of the
Way for me so to do, but in manner necessary. For it stands not with order of
Disputation, as to my remembrance Aristotle writes, that I should go about to
prove Quale sit, before I have proved Quod sit. Therefore it had been
superfluous for me to describe what manner of Husband I thought most meet for
the Queens Highness, if it were not first proved by reason, that it were
convenient that her Majesty should have one. For if her Grace be fully
determined and persuaded by Mr. Agamus, Spiteweds Reasons, then to reason
whether a Stranger or an Englishman were more to be wished, is clean
superfluous. For it is cut off by this one stroke, Her Majesty will have none.

Well, here among this Company for Disputation sake, I will stand so well in my
own Conceit, that I take Mr Agamus his Opinion thoroughly confuted. And let us
put the Case that is aggreed upon; That best it were for her Majesty to Mary;
then stands it in Consultation farther of the manner and Condition of her
Husband. Wherein may be made many Questions; as whether a Young Man, or a more
elderly; whether a Bachelor or a Widower, an Englishman or a Stranger, a
great Prince or a King, or a mean Personage: as in all such where diverse be
offered of sundry Qualities, whereof the Choice and Election is to be taken: and
because both I am weary, and there has yet but one of these Questions been
moved amongst us, I shall speak but of that Branch only, Whether an Englishman
or a Stranger is to be perferred. Wherein because I have already declared my
Opinion which Part I mind to take, it rests that I should also declare the
Reasons which moved me to think as I have said; and here I intend to begin.

The very true, godly and essential Causes of Matrimony, (if I may use that
Term) be three; The getting of Children without the Offense of God, The natural
Remedy to resist the Temptation of the Devil, moving us to Fornication or
Adultery; And the Comfort, Pleasure and Help which the one has of the other in all private Affairs, and in Governing the House and Family. This last the
Philosophers, which knew not the right Law of God, make the first, the chief
and the whole Cause. For as for the Second, I mean Fornication, they esteemed
it not. And the first they thought they might amend, when they would, by
Adoption, either of their own Bastards, or other Folks lawful Children, with
the Consent of their Parents. For all these Three, this our Question does not
vary. For either the Stranger or the Englishman seems indifferent thereunto;
and I make no Difference in them. Then there be other Causes, which be incident
and as I might call them, Accidental, as Honor, Power and Riches: Having first
God, and those three Causes, which I called Essential of Matrimony, principally
in our Eyes, these Things ought in this Consultation to have the highest Place.

And because I take al you here to be no Children, and in this which I have
said to be in the same Opinion that I am, I will make no further Proeme, but go
to, and confer these together in the two Persons which you have brought in to
be weighed here as in a Pair of Balances; that is, the Stranger and the
Englishman. And I say, if the Queens Majesty have respect to Advancement and
Honor, can that be in Marriage of any within the Realm, who being but her
Subjects be they never so high, shall be under her highness a great Distance* So
for that purpose it shall not be Advancement but Disparagement. Wherein I must
commend the late Q. Mary; who having more regard to her Honor than to her Age,
to th'advauncement thereof than to any other Pleasure which she could long have,
took to her Husband K. Philip, Charles The Emperors Son, the greatest Prince of
Birth and Possessions in all Christendom. Whereby she gat the Sovereignty over so
many Kingdoms, Dukedoms, Marchionates, Earldoms, Baronies, Countries and so
forth; that it would be more than an Hours Work to rehearse them, and to be the
greatest Estate of a Woman in all Christendom

And if it be honorable to a Prince to Conquer one Kingdom with Dint of the
Sword, with making of War, with Spoiling, Burning, Wasting, Death, Destruction,
Fire and Sword, Man slaughter and Effusion of Christian Blood; how much more
honorable ought it to be accounted to obtain and get not one but a great fort
of Kingdoms and Dominions, not with Violence and Oppression, but with Amity and
Love, and that most godly, sweet and pleasant Knot of Marriage? So Mary the
Daughter and Heir of Charles the hardy Duke of Burgundy, by Marying her self to
Maximilian Son to Fredericus of Austriche then Emperor, has made her Progeny
the House of Burgundy, to enjoy so many Realms and Seignories in Boheme, in
Hungary, in Spain, in Sicily, in Naples and Italy, in the High and Low Country
of Germany, and near it went to have enjoyed also England and Ireland. So Mary
the Scottish Queen that lives now, if the Enterprise had had Success, and she
had had by her Husband any Son, She should have left a double King; I mean in
France a King, as well as of Scotland; and (...) them both the greater King by
her Purchase than else he should have been by his Mothers Inheritance. So
Claudia the Daughter of the Duke of Britain by Marriage with the French King
has made her Sons and Offspring not only Dukes of Britain, but Kings and
Possessors of al France; when her Auncesters heretofore had much ado always to
keep their own, being but only Dukes of Britain, much less could conquer or
adjoyne to their Duchy any thing of the rest of the Realm of France.

Now if Honor is to be desired, and if it be a Glory to be made from a Baroness
a Countess, and from a Countess a Marchioness or Duchess, and from a Duchess
a Queen; why is it not also as well to be from a Queen an Empress, or from a
Queen of one Kingdom, a Queen of two or three; and so the more Honorable, and
the more to be sought and desired? To the Increase of which Honor, if Men do
apply and study themselves sometimes by Sword and sometimes by Marriage to
attain, why should not a Queen desire to do as well as they, especially by the
better, more sure and more amiable way? Which thing ye see can be don either by
no ways, or by no ways better than by Marriage. And this I have to say of Honor.

Now I come to Power or Strength. Which stands in two Things. Either for a
Prince to keep his own Realm quiet from Rebellion, or to make that the foreign
Prince being Ambitious or desirous of War, neither may dare invade him, or else,
if the Prince be so minded, to conquer and recover such Things, which of old by
Titles and just Reasons remain to be claimed. The which the Prince heretofore
either for lack of Power or Money, for shortness of Time. Civil Dissension, their
own Sloth, or any Cause whatsoever it be, has omitted or foreslowed. For these
remain still as Causes unto Princes, when they be weary of Ease, or desirous of
Honor, or when other just Occasion is offered to exercise themselves and their
Subjects. For any of those, if her Majesty mary within the Realm, what has She
gained? All her own Subjects were her own before; all their Powers are Hers
already. Not one Man has She for the Marriage more than She had before. Whereas
if She mary a foreign Prince, if he be an Emperor, all the Empire is hers to aid
her, and her Husband at al Events. If she mary a King, likewise al his Kingdom;
if she marry a Duke, Earl or Prince, al his Vassals, Kinsfolks, Allies, and
Friends are united to her Realm, and be taken al for Brethren, to allow
Strength and Aid, both Offensive and Defensive, as Occasion and Necessity shall
serve. For who can offend the Wife, but he must offend the Husband also? So
that her Majesty's Power must needs be increased by so much as the Power of her
Husband does extend, either by Authority, Title, Blood, Alliance, Friendship or
Affinity.

Then if Princes be glad, whenever they invade, or be invaded, to ally
themselves with the Princes their Neighbors manytimes by costly Leagues and
much Suite and Entreaty of Ambassadors, if that may be don by one final Act, as
choosing such a puissant Prince to her Husband, as we would most desire to be
our Friend or Aid in Necessity either of Defense or Invasion, why should not I
think that it were better for the Queens Majesty to take such an one, whereby
she may be backed and strengthened, and her Power as it were double and treble,
than to take one by whom she shall have no more Power, Help, Aid nor Succor
brought unto her, than she had before? And it is to be feared that she shall
rather have less. For when Envy naturally kindles amongst Equals, if the Queen
take one of her higher and stronger Nobility, all the rest it will be doubted
will envy his Felicity, and tho in Words they speak him fair, yet in Heart
hardly will they love him. For they shall be as Rivals and Candidati for one
Office: where commonly he that has obtained, if of the inferior sort, all the
rest shall disdain at him. Which Disdain will bring Grudge: and Grudge never
brings good Will. So that by this Marriage her Highness shall seem, not to
increase her Strength, but to weaken it, not to unite it, but to dislolve it.

Examples be too near to be found. K. Edward IV. married the Lady Katherine
Gray, a goodly Lady, and his Enemies Wife. Did not that Marriage as all
Histories make mention, fill in manner all the rest of the Nobility, that thought
themselves somewhat, with Malice, Envy, Grudg and Displesure against al her
Blood? And her Blood by most Liklihood did not greatly come behind them. This
Mischief was the Destruction both of the one and the other; and not that only,
but of the Two goodly Young Gentlemen K. Edwards Sons, the Prince and his
Brother. Had it not been better he had married there where the Earl of Warwick
was his Spokes-man; Whereby he should have gotten Strength abroad, and his
Nobility at home not so to have been dissevered. Thus far of Power and Strength.

The same I do think also of Riches. For the which although it does most become
poor men to travail, yet I do not se, but that Princes both do and have as much
need to look and study for to get it. Especially now in our Times, when War is
made as much by Money as by Sword; and he that may longest pay his Soldiers,
goes Victor away. And if they be both disposed to cock it thoroughly, yet when
they both be made Bankrupts, then they must needs conclude a Peace. But if her
Highness do look to enrich her self and her Realms, as both Reason would, and I
am sure it is no little Part of her Graces Study so to do, (Which thing may
appear by many evident Tokens) seeing that which in England and Ireland is to be
accounted her own (as no man doubts) there can of the gathering together of
that no Advancement be accounted: But if to that which her own Kingdom has,
her Highness does adjoyn the Riches of another Region which is none of hers,
then must we needs judge the true Increase to be made. Which Thing you know the
Marriage of the Lord of the Country does without further Cost or Danger bring to
pass.

And this ye may be sure, that her Highness can take to Husband no foreign
Prince, nor Nobleman of another Country, but some Riches he will bring with
him, more than shall bear his Costs. And contrariwise, if her Majesty take one
at home, both her own Crown must be spoiled of Lands and her Coffers of Money,
to furnish him according to his Estate. For what private man, of what
Condition, Riches or Power soever he be, is able of his own Lands or Coffers to
bear or maintain the State of her Highness Husband?

And of this matter I think I have said enough. For where there be but six
Causes or Occasions of Marriage, as I have declared, whereof the Three first be
indifferent, that neither the Stranger is excluded, nor the Englishman
reckoned to have any Advantage in them; (Which Three do appertain chiefly to
the Conscience, and the godly Motives toward Matrimony,) and the Three other,
which rule and lead almost all the World after them, be al upon the Strangers
side, as you se, whether way I should lean, if my Judgment were asked, it is
apparent enough. If th'advauncemont to Honor; whereto al Princes, as ye know,
have a special regard and Ey; If the Increase of Power and Strength, which is
the thing, that a wife Prince and Governor does chiefly covet; if
th'augmentation of Riches and Wealth, which is not the least Care that a King
or a Queen ought to have; if not one I say, but al these stand on his Side. So
that the Marriage of a stranger does appear not only more Honorable, but also
more Safe and I more Profitable to the Queens Majesty, I must needs be in this
Opinion, that it is better for her Highness to take to Husband a Stranger than
any Subject of Hers within the Realm of England or Ireland.

After he had ended al, the rest held their Peace, til my Friend, the Stammerer
began, whom they all the night after (as I say) called Mr. Godfather, because he
was so ready to Nickname the rest. So that as he misnamed others (and yet not
misnamed, for according to their Opinions and Doings he gave them Names: but as
he did) so likewise was he upon his Doings called of them Mr. Godfather;
because that he, as tho he had been at a Christening, named them al of new.
Which Names they seemed to me not much to refuse, nor to be angry with them,
nor he with his. And therefore I will hereafter so name them al. Well, faith he,
for your Part, Mr. Lovealien or Lewelyn, (for my Tongue loves to speak short)
you have played it well; and now I am content to be on your Side. Mary, I cannot
tell what I shall be, when my Friend here has spoken, what shall I call him? what
other than Homefriend, or, if ye would be Christened in Greek, (...) or rather
(...). For in good Faith he is nothing but English. I think he be the Patron
and very Idea of an old Englishman, which thought no Country so good, so
plentiful, so rich, so happy as England is, nor no men so fair, so well made, so
bold, so hardy, so good Warriors, so wise and so discrete, as we Englishmen
be. And even now he is so enamoured of his Country, that he takes I dare say,
as the Proverb is, the Smoke in England to be warmer and better than the Fire
in France or Italy. And as for the Stoves in Germany, he cannot abide them.
Well, said Mr. Homefriend, and laughed, I am glad I have my Name yet before I
shall begin; And I do not fear, but when you have heard me, you will be of my
side, and so we shall be at the least two to one; although Mr. Spitewed tarry still
in his Opinion of Nunnery and sole Life. And after a little space thus he began:

IV. Axenius or Home-friend This Oration, for the Queens Majesty's Marrying
with an English Nobleman, rather than any Foreign Prince.
OF one Part of my Oration, Master Lovealien, says he, I take my self to be
well eased. For you have so much proved the Necessity, and Commodity of her,
highness Marriage, and so well refuted Agamus his Oration, that it were
superfluous for me therein to make any Words. And if you had been disposed to
have stretched the Vein of your excellent Wit, as well in the behalf of our
Countrymen, as ye were of the Strangers, who neither are so near unto you, and
shall never do you, nor your Country so much good, I know you would have done
it much better, and I had been eased of my Labor, who had rather a great deal
be a Hearer than a Talker. But now, seeing that through your unnaturalness,
this Burden lights on my Back, although I know that I am very weak, yet had I
rather overburthen my self, than leave my Country undefended, or to see my
Countrymen so much disgraced.

Our Question is, Whether, if it please the Queens Majesty to Marry, it were
better that her Majesty took an English man, or a Stranger. Here you come with
your fine and logical Distinction, and bring in the Causes Essential and
Accidental of Marriage; as though we were in a School of Dunsery, and not in a
Discourse of Pleasure, where we would seek out the Truth, without any Fraud or
Circumvention, I pray you either mince not the matter so finely, or else go not
so lightly away with every piece, before it be either granted to you, or else
fully proved.

And first, to the three Essentials which you make, I will never grant that the
English man and the Stranger be equal. For even for the first, I mean getting
of Children, if you ask mine Opinion, although after Marriage, by the Law of God,
whosoever the Father be, the Prince or Child which is gotten, shall be most
rightful Heir of England, and an English man, yet it must needs be better an
hundredfold, that our Prince be a mere English man, as well by the Father, as
by the Queen his Mother, than half English, which shall have any part of
Strangers Blood in him.

We laugh at this, and you think that I speak now of the Honor, and of the
Affection which I have to our Country above other. No, I speak not of
Affection, but as great Causes move me. For I would the Prince of this Realm,
should be wholly English, and that no other Realm had any Duty to claim of him,
but that he should think this his whole and only Country, and natural Soil. So
shall he never set by others Countries, but by this. So shall he not prefer
sickle Strangers to his trusty Subjects. So shall he ever covet to adorn,
magnify, and exalt this Realm, and drive away no Part of his Love from it to
another. Whereas if he should have to his Father a Stranger, it cannot be, but
he must have a natural Mind and Affection to this his Father's Country, and his
elder Country, and either as much, or more than to England. Of which thing this
Realm already has had Proof enough.

The Danes enjoyed once this Realm too long: Of which although some of them were
born here, yet so long as the Danes Blood was in them, they could never but
favor the poor and barren Realm of Denmark, more than the rich Country of
England.

The Normans after wan and possessed the Realm. So long as ever the Memory of
their Blood remained, the first most, and so less and less, as by little and
little they grew to be English; What did they? Keep down the English Nation,
Magnify the Normans; the rich Abbeys and Priories, they gave to their Normans;
the Chief Holds, the Noble Seignories, the best Bishoprics and all. Yea, they
went so low as to the Parsonages and Vicarages; if one were better to the Pu^se
than another, that a Norman had. Poor English men were glad to take their
Leavings. And so much was our Nation kept under, that we were glad to dissemble
our Tongue, and learn theirs: Whereupon came the Proverb, Jack would be a
Gentleman if he could speak French.

But as the Norman Blood and Tongue ^anished away, so by little and little,
Thanks be to God, this Mischief began to cease; and the Princes by Process of
Time, made mere English, merely favored this our Nation. And is not this a
good Cause, think you, why I should wish the Queens Highness Husband to be of
our Country, and the Prince her Majesty's Son to be a mere English man? For as
we have seen by these, and other Proofs in Time past, if the Prince should be a
Frenchman, he would favor the French; if an Italian, the Italians; if a Dane
or a Swedener, he would also favor his Country and Countrymen. And is not the
whole, at least the greatest part of the Love which we English men should
require of him, to be derived thither? And you may be assured, as the People
see the Prince part his Love, so will they part theirs. Which Love I would
have, and wish always to be whole, entire, and perfect in both. That there
should not arise a Seditious Person to say, Non est nobis Pars in David, nec
Hareditas in filio Jesse. Unusquisque ad Tentorium, O Israel.

As for the second, which is the Avoiding of Adultery and Fornication, it lies
more in the Gift of God, and the Godliness of the Mind of the Married Person,
than in the Quality of his or her Make. But will not evil Examples think you do
much? And I pray you, what Nation is there, where Matrimony is so indifferently
of each, and so godly of both kept, as in England? The Italians be so jealous,
that almost every private man there, does not think himself sure of his Wife,
except he keep her close in a Mew, as here in England, men keep their Hawks.
Again, he for his part takes so much Liberty, that to resort to Courtezans, to
describe his Loves and Pastimes, with others besides his Wife, so it be in fine
Rhythme, and wittily contrived Verse, he takes rather an Honor, than a
Dishonor.

Do you think her Majesty brought up in English Manner, can like this suspicion
against the Wife? Or this Licentious Liberty of the Husband? And yet if her
Grace should take an Italian, this is the Manner of his Country.

The French man in jealousy is not so much, nor does so straightly, as in
prison, keep hi^ Wife, as does the Italian. Mary, for his own Liberty, he will
give the Italian no place. Their own French Books do show no less^ and whosoever is
conversant with them, (...) understand the same. And if her Majesty should
Marry a French man, think you he would not have some great piece of his Country
Manners?

The Scots be in so natural League wi^^ France, that he is no true Scot, unless
he speak and do French-like,

The Spaniard will rule, and stands all up on Honor. For other Liberty of
such Pastime, he will give place to none, but go afar as any, yet he will do
Penance peradventure in Lent, or at Easter, and whip hims^l^ then in a Visor
naked; supposing to make God, and his Wife amends by it, as he thinks; and to
salve his fond Conscience.

But for our English Manners, I dare say we esteem i^ m^re honorable, and more
Godly, not with such Untroth to o^fend our Wives, than first to take Liberty,
and then to make so mad Amends.

The Dutch men, and the Dane, and all such Countries, as draw in Language and
Conditions toward them, with the great Love which they have to Drink, do
shadow the other Vice, and either may so excuse them, that they did it overcome
with Drink, or else indeed for two much pleasure in the one, care less for the
other. But what excuse is that, with Vice to el^de Vice? Or else what Pleasure
shall it be to one brought up in English Manners, to have an Husband, which
shall almost ever be Drinking or Sleeping? Or if not ever, yet too many times
she must be sain thus to bear with him. For it is the manner of his Country,
and so he was brought up.

These b^ the Faults of other Nations; which though they seem strange to us, yet
among them (...) ^ome, Use, Custom, and the Multitud^ of them that do so,
makes it no Shame, Reproach, nor Rebuke. Which if her Majesty do mislike, as I
am sure her Godly Wisdom must needs cause her not to like them, th^n must our
English man in this Case be preferred. And this for the two Parts which ye
passed so lightly, and take as granted, that in them there was no Difference,
between the English man and the Stranger*

For the Third, that is, the Comfort, Pleasure and Joy, which the one,
otherwise privately shall take of the other, which is most necessary, for
Q^i^tness of Mind, and Government of the House and Family, I take that there is
no Comparison. For if Likeness of Tongue, Behavior, Manners, Education be
those which make Love, bring Fruit, and cause Amity, what can Diversity of all
these do, but bring Misliking, Distrust and Hatred? Which be very hansome
Servants, ^I assure you to go on message betwixt the Husband and the Wife.

And if men be so naturally affectioned to their own Country, that they do not
only prefer the Soil and Air thereof before other Countries, although they be
indeed much better; as the Poets for Example, to declare the Nature of man's
Affection, make Uly^ses, whom they describe as the wisest and most foreseeing
of all the Greeks, after manifold Torments of the Sea and Land, yet to prefer
the little, barren and rocky Island (...), which was his own natural Country,
to all other, yea to the pl^^sant Country of Cam^^nia, where Riches did dwell,
and to the rich and plenteous Country of the Phaeaces, wherein one Grape does
ripen upon another, and Figs upon Figs; so that there is always plenty; but
also the Manners, Conditions, Affections, Ordinances and Laws of his own
Country, every man does think them better, and more to be esteemed, than thos^
of any other; as Herodetus does also write; who brings this thing for a great
Argument, that Cambyses was mad, and out of his right Wits, because he did not
esteem the Manners and Conditions of his own Country: And Alexander had much
ado to keep the Love of his Soldiers and Princes of Macedony, and was of them
misliked, as one drunken with Pride, and half out of his right Wits, because he
began to wear the Apparel, and to like the Manners and Behavior of the
Persians: Insomuch, that although he much desired it, yet he was fain to remit
that to his Macedonians, that they should not kneel, when they spoke to him;
Because they could not be brought unto it; For So Much as it was not the Manner
of their Country, to do so to their Princes: So Julius Ca^sar durst never call
himself King, nor would suffer any Man to name or write him, Lord or King;
because he knew the Romans, otherwise brought up, could not abide it: We see
when Christian Religion began first, how earnest the Jews were to bring in
their Circumcision and Ceremonies, and to lay their Customs and Manners upon
our Backs: And so much they esteemed them, that they thought Christ scarcely
able enough without them to save us; and that he was no good man except he did
as they did:

What shall I gather of this, but that if the Queens Majesty should marry a
Stranger, she shall take one, who shall, not only love his own Natural Country
better than England, but also the Apparel, Conditions, Manners, Pastime, and
Behavior of his own Country, better than those of England. For as it is
natural for an English man to love England, and to like the Manners and
Conditions of England, so it is natural to Italians, French men, Germans,
Danes, Men of Sweden, each one to like theirs. And if it be natural so to do,
than he is an unnatural man that does not, and as Herodotus thinks, a man to
be counted rather mad and beside himself than otherwise.

Now whether think you better, Master Lovealien, for the Queen to take a
Stranger, which should be counted a wise, natural and godly man to his Country,
or no? If he be so, then shall he set more by his own Country, than England.
And if he be not, then whom will you have the Queen to marry? One who neither
shall be counted wise, nor natural to his Country? And if he be to that his own
Country unnatural and unkind, do you think that her Highness shall find any
natural Love in him, in whom his Country, as Mother who first brought him up,
his Subjects of whom he is Lord and Patron, the Land that bred him, the Tombs
of all his Ancestors, that Country, where all his Friends and Kinsfolks dwell,
that Place, which next unto God, he owes most Duty unto, cannot find? He tha^
is unkind to his own, seldom is found kind to another; he that is most Loving
to his kin, hardly is to be thought for to be loving to strangers. And again,
if he be to be counted a wise, and discre^t man, and a natural man to his own
Country, as it is most likely he will be, then shall he covet to enrich that,
and to impoverish ours; to honor and exalt that, though it be with the
oppressing of this, to bring in the Manners and Conditions of that Country,
which he likes best, and to see if he can bring the Queens Highness to them;
And so to frame her Majesty, as they call it, to his Bow, which he thinks
best; not to apply to our Institutes, Conditions and Manners, which be best
indeed. Or be it in case they be not (as for my Part, I think they be) yet our
Queen and her People brought up in them, must of Force and Nature think them
best. Now, Sir, as you say of Apparel, Manners, Customs, Behavior, Pastimes,
Exercises, Eating and Drinking, so say I also of Laws, (for this Education
contains all) what Contention has been always betwixt us and Strangers,
because they like their Laws and Customs best, and we ours? They say we do
wrong, where we do not as they do. And we again think their Laws unjust and
unequal for us, not only in Succe^^^on of Heritage, but in many other
Contracts. And when they be here, we make them follow our Laws; and when we be
there, we must do as their Customs be. Now this Contention is easily born; for
the one part of sine force must give place. But if you bring this contention
once into England, the Queens Majesty shall like her own Realm, Customs and
Laws; and her People will so desire. Her Husband possibly, as he shall think
himself as great a Prince or greater, shall like his Laws, Customs and
Ordinances better, and shall by all means study to bring them hither, or else
he shall not think himself sure, or not fully a Prince. What Turmoil shall that
be, trow you, to the Realm, what Disqui^t to her Highness, what Fear,
Suspicion, and Heart-burning to her Subjects? And what better Argument will you
have of this, than our Laws and Customs of England, which may evidently appear,
(except the Acts of Parliament) to be a thing made and gathered of the Laws of
the Romans, Danes and Normans. Which three Nations have been in past times
Governors and Heads of the Realm. Each one for their Time bringing in as they
could a piece of their Country Ordinances. And do you not think, that if King
Philip had been long here, he would not have brought some piece from Spain? If
nothing else, at least the Inquisition, as they call it, as he did to Naples.
Whereby what Insurrections and Troubles arose there, it is easy to learn by
the French Histories.

Now if it please her Majesty to take one of her own Country, all these Doubts
be removed. He must needs love his Country as his own. He must favor it as the
Mother of him, and all his Ancestors, as the Land wh^rein he took his first
Breath, and that wher^in not only the most, but all his Living is. And he must
love her Majesty as the Chief of the same, reverence here as the Mother of his
Country, obey her as the Head of the Realm, to the which next unto God, he
owes Duty and Love. His Manners, Customs, Pastimes, Diets, Laws, Titles,
Rights be all English; nothing differing from those wherein the Queens Majesty
has been brought up. But so much as should make him have the more Honor,
Admiration and Obedience to her Majesty: and so much the more, because he
cannot, though he would, dissemble or forget from what Place her Highness taking
him, to what Place she has brought him. Whereas on the contrary side, the
foreign Prince standing upon the Reputation of his Country, may perhaps little
Weigh that as a Benefit, but stand upon the Terms of as Great and as Good.

Yea, but whosoever her Highness would Marry, he shall be such as* will frame
himself to all these. First, there is a Question, If he can. For they say,
Mercury is not made of every Wood. So every Person is not apt to all kind of
Manners. Then the next is, If he will. For it is hard bending an Old Oak; and
an old Tree long grown crooked, will not with ease grow the other ways. But if
he will, and can learn to apply himself to our Manners, is it not better to
take one which is already for the Purpose, if he may be had, than to take one
which is to break anew; and to be doubted of, when you have done. And if any
Breach or Dissension should chance to arise between her Highness and her
Husband; as we see no Year is so fair, but there be some foul and rainy Days in
it; and no Peace so surely made, but that it is Wisdom for Princes to provide
against War, let us examine this Part. The stranger strait stands upon his
Reputation, which should he yield, he is a great man born, a Prince as she is,
his Country as good, or as he peradventure will think, better, why should he
yield to his Wife? He will peradventure say, he has born too much, he will
bear no more. And if he cannot make his Party good here, he will send to his
Subjects, his Friends, his Kinsfolks, his Allies. So shall we have her Highness
in a strange Agony, the Realm in an intricate and unspeakable Trouble. Or if he
despair to make his Party good, he has a ready Passage home to his Country
again. There will he Triumph at his Pleasure, and have leisure there to study
upon mischief to her Highness, and Realm; or at the least so long to hold out,
till the Queen's Majesty be glad to sue to him for a Peace, and to make
Ambassadors for a Concord.

Can this happen, if her Majesty Marry one here in England? What Refuge, what
Comfort, or Succor can he have, but in her Highness? If her Highness be
displeased with him, where is his Stay, his Aid, his Defense, his Garrison, and
Help to fly unto? What has he to make any brag again to her Majesty? No, no;
It will not be. And as a man bound to the Peace in the Star Chamber in the Pain
of 10000 l. he will be loath, yea by Countenance, to seek to break it, for fear
of forfeiting of his Bond, which he is not able to pay: So that Person, if
natural Love and Duty cannot make him, yet this Danger and Fear shall make him
always to apply to Love, Serve and Honor her Majesty, because the contrary
brings to him the next Pain to Hell. And if he should be faulty, no
Sanctuary, no Refuge has he to avoid the Forfeit.

This Part indeed is that which nippeth the most; and which you would fain
steal away from us. With which and the other three ye joined God as the Author
of those Marriages, which was before all these three Causes, or any of them
were made: Wherein I do assure you in my mind, you did not only like a wise and
learned man (as we all know you are) but like one that cannot dissemble the
Truth. Although to make for your Purpose, you can play the Orators part, and pass
after such a sort, that if we had not given good eye unto you, we should have
taken no Advantage thereat: Which must have been counted rather our Folly in
this part, then any thing else: Then those Marriages which be made for these
three Grounds, and for these three Causes only; that is, the Continuance of
Succession, the avoiding of Fornica^ion, the hearty Love growing upon the
Virtuous and Godly Disposition each of others, and Comfort and Pleasure, which
they look to have in that Fellowship of Life and Community of all Thoughts,
Pleasures and Displeasures, be the godly Marriages, and those which most
commonly God will Bless, and upon whom smallest Repentance does follow. And
that Man or Woman, which for these three Causes especially do take their Mate,
seem to have God before their eyes, and to have a godly Mind and Will, and to
take the just and right way: And he or she that takes any of the other three,
which is Honor, Power, and Riches, to be their Guide, and chief Cause, and
has not the chief regard to the other three beforenamed, (which you call
Essential) leaves God out of the way, and takes some other tickle or frail
things, the Devil or the World by most Likelihood, to be his Broker and
Marriage-maker. So that her Highness by your School and Teaching, having first
in her Mind the Continuation of her Posterity with the fear of God, is to
consider and make Election of one, whom her Majesty can Fancy, by the stable
and profound judgment of her most excellent Wisdom to be such an one, as whom
she shall have always a Joy to behold; a Comfort to have at home, a most sure
Trust abroad, an Helper in Adversity, a Pleasure in Prosperity, whom for his
Wisdom and Dexterity, Gentleness, Faithfulness and A^fability, and other noble
Virtues and Qualities, her Majesty shall think worthy to be preferred above all
others; and whom she shall not think for a while to be so, or so for a Show,
but to be so indeed, and (so much as man's Instability can suffer) to be so for
ever. Wherein as it appears little regard, or nothing is to be had of
Advancement of Riches, Honor or Power For whosoever has God on his side, and
God his Guide in Marriage, must need be counted to have all these.

And hitherto you see we have proved the English man, for all these Purposes to
be far above the Stranger. And if this Election be to be had of the man,
because for such a prey no Craft of Wit, or Engine of man shall be left
unassayed; the next Care is to see that her Highness take not a Glass for a
Diamond, or Gilt for true Gold. And for that, let us see where her Highness may
soonest be deceived. The Stranger either her Majesty sees not, or sees but
for the time of his Wooing. How then? he does it by Ambassadors, and moves it
by Letters: he makes his Friends to commend him. He spares for no Gifts. What
Judgment is all this of the man? Will his Ambassadors tell any of his Faults?
And will they disclose any of his Vices? Will they open any of his
Imperfections? Nay all that must be hidden within a Ninefold Stone Wall. But
they increase with words his Virtues (if he have any) above the Skies; They
praise his Stature, Beauty, Strength, Body, as much as their Wits can extend
unto. If he have any Strength at all, they make him Achilles or Hector; if he
have ever been at Wars, he is as good a Captain as Alexander or Julius Caesar;
if he be not altogether a simple or ignorant man, he is as wise as Ulysses, and
as eloquent as Nestor; if he be not altogether deformed, he is as fair as
Paris, or Nereus; if he be a Prince not altogether a Beggar he has the Riches
of Craesus, and Magnificence of Solomon; if any doubt of his Inconstancy,
Hastiness, or any other Vice, he is as continent as Xenocrates, as meek and
patient as any Lamb, and more gentle than ever was Pomponius Atticus, This
shall the Queen hear to whom the Suit is made; this the Ambassadors shall say.
This the Commender shall write; yea, and if need be, some shall be hired at
home to help to bear a part of this Song. And is this a sure Proof trow you,
for her Majesty to adventure her Person for a continual either Joy or Torment,
as it shall happen?

Well, but for a more sure Trial of his Personage, ye shall have a Picture
brought, as they will swear, Ad Vivum. Of which if ye see Two, not one shall be
like the other. And if they be, what is the Picture to the man? And yet I heard
not many years ago of a certain Lady, who having the Picture sent unto her of
one whom she never saw, who should be her Husband, was so enamoured thereon,
and so ravished that she languished for Love, and was in a manner out of her
Wits for his long tarrying and absence. But I ween hot Love was soon cold, and
not long after repented. But what other Proofs can you have of him, that
dwells not within four or five hundred, or a thousand Miles, or more of the
Realm? And if he do come hither, he comes but his Wooing Time. All which Time
he must be Liberal, Magnificent, Plentiful, Princely, and make a Show of all
hi^ Virtues, although it be but for that while. How long I beseech you can a man
dissemble his Nature, till he come to his Purpose? Nero the Five first Years of
his Empire, was the b^st of all Princes. All those whom you have named so
unkind to their Wives were not such all that Time that they did Woe, I suppose.
For if they had been, I know those Marriages had never been made nor repented.
Thus your Stranger comes to be seen, but as it were in a Visor, scarcely so
well as if one should spy him out of a Window. So that what Diseases,
Infirmities or Imperfections soever the Stranger shall have either of Body or
Mind, the Queens Majesty cannot know them but by ^ear say, And so as I have
said, she shall hardly or never know them, or else by Assaying; and that is
when it is too late to repent.

The English man is here at home, not his Picture or Image, but himself. His
Stature, Color, Complexion, and Behavior is to be seen face to face. And not
only that, but his ^ducation and bringing up, his Study, Exercise and what
things he has a Delight in, what things he does refuse, every Fault,
Imperfection, Deformity and whatsoever should be to his Hindrance, is apparent
and clear, both to the Ears and Eyes of Time past and present; and may be
tried, and as it were pierc^d and look^d clean through, what he is dispos^d to,
and what he is like for to be, almost so well as if there were a Window made in
his Breast, as Memus did require. Then, if there be any such Qualities, and
Perfection in any of our Nation, which her Majesty can like, were it not more
to be wished for her Highness to make her Choice there where her own self is
Judge, and the Trier of the Truth, where her own Eyes, her wise and Princely
Estimation gives the Sentence; than to build upon Hearsay, and in so weighty
a Matter, to buy as the common Proverb is, A Pig in the Poke. With whether of
the two I pray you is it most like, that her Majesty shall lead her Life most
quietly, most joyfully, and most to her hearts Contentation, most agreeing to
the Nature of her Country, Stature and Comparature of his Body, such as her
self being judge cannot be dispraised; the Qualities of the Mind, which she
does esteem worthy such a Personage, the Manners, such as her Grace can best
agree with; or else him whom she never saw before, whose Tongue is not like to
hers, the Manners of the Country, and the Education strange from hers, whose
People is of another Condition than hers; for whose Corporature, Lineaments of
Body, Behavior of Manners, and Conditions of Mind, she must trust to others,
and put in hazard and adventure, whether after she shall like them or not? Of
this you see, Mr. Loveali^n, that in your three first chi^f and ^ssential
Points, which you not only made principal, but you joined with God, ^^^^thing
agree with you. ^ow will (...) to the incident Matters, where ye think to have
mavelous Advantage.

And First for Honor. In the which ye talked so, as though the Queens Majesty,
if she should Marry any Nobleman of England, it should be counted a
Disparagement. And herein you bring in such Ladi^s and Dutchesses as have
Married with their own men, wherein I must needs confess that there is a
Disparagement: for that these Men were not Noble by Birth; and therefore not
meet to Match with such Noble Women. But for the Queens Majesty to Marry one of
her Noblemen, is no disparagement at all. Neither is the Comparison like. And
in this case ye do make me to marvel at you, and to doubt what you do think of
the Nobility of this Realm of England; as though they are not as Noble as the
Nobility is of other Realms. Is not a Duke of England, an Earl, a Baron, and
their Sons as much to be counted Noble, as they be in other Realms? That I
think you cannot deny. How then should the Queens Majesty be more disparaged,
Marrying here one of that Degree than there? For m^thinks you do so speak, that
if her Highness Married a Duke, or a Nobleman of another Realm, then it were no
Disparagement. Which if you grant, then either grant this also, or show the
Diversity. Ye will say, because here they be all her Highness Subjects. So
surely they be. But her Subjects be of diverse Sorts and D^grees. Whereof the
Nobility is as the Right Arm of the Prince, the Glory and Beauty of the Realm,
the [Root and] Nursery of her Highness Stock, and Family, Offsprings of Kings
and Queens of England, and whom her Highness, and all her Progenitors, calls
always in her Letters and Writings, and common Talk, Cousins. Which word
Cousins betokens, that in mingling of that Blood there can be no
disparagement. And so much as you would seem in your Talk to embase that Order
and Estate, so much you must needs appear ^to abase and contemn the Queens
Majesty's own Blood, to whom they be, and always have been accounted Allied,
and as Cousins.

And is it a Disparagement for the Queen of England to Marry an English man?
Why more than to the King of England to Marry an English woman? The Authority
is all one. And as well is the English woman a Subject to the Crown, as the
English man. Do you think that King Henry VIII. her Majesty's Father was
disparaged, when he Married her Highness Mother, or Queen Jane, or Queen
Katharine Par; And that he was always disparaged save once, when he Married his
Brothers Wife, which was a Stranger? And think you, that all the rest of the
Kings of England, of whom a great number Married their own Subjects, were
Disparaged? Methinks this is a strange and unnatural Opinion. If it be an
Honor to be a Kings Wife, or a Queens Husband, not only to the Person, but
also to the Region, out of the which they come, no Country may justlier crave
that Honor, nor to none the Prince does more justly owe that Love, than to her
own Country, where she was born, and where she is Queen.

And if ye would be loath to suffer, and would sp^nd your Blood, rather than
this Realm should be Tributary, or Subject to any other; yea, you would not
gladly see that any foreign Prince should do so much here, or be so much set by
here, and have so much Power, as your Natural Prince and Queen; And if you may
justly call that a Disp^ragement, when this Realm, which is the Head of Nations
round about, is put under the Girdle of another; Who makes more Dispa^agement,
I pray you, the foreign Prince to be the Queens Husband, or the English Subject?

But you are of the Opinion as I perceive, that Era^mus speaks of, that
thinks it not comely for a Kings Daughter to be coupled but with a King, or a
Kings Son. To whom he answers as well as if he had studied this o^r Case.
This is private men's Affection, says he, from which Princes ought to flee as
fast as they may. If the Marry, says he, to one, who is not of such Power as
the, or her Father, what is that to the Purpose, if that he be for the Realm
more exp^dient? It is more honor to the Prince to neglect that foreign Dignity
of the Marriage, than to prefer her Womanly Affection to the Profit of the
Realm. So far is that great, learned and wise man from your Opinion, that he
calls the Marriage with Strangers Uneven Marriages, and as a man would say
Disparagements, when he says, there lacks both that Love and Dearness, which
the common Country, Likeness of Body and Mind does bring; and that Natural, and
tra^, and uncounterfeit Affection which those Marriages have, which are made
between them that have all one Country. He says also, as I have said before,
that hardly the Country acknowledge them that are born o^ those uneven
Marriages for their own, or that those that are so born, cannot with all their
Hearts love their Country: but as their Bloods be mingled out of diverse
Countries; so their Love is but as it were half dealed and parted in twain. And
did no^ this man, think you, as a Prophet, declare that thing which we did see
of late in Q^e^n Mary? Did not her vehement Love tow^rd Spain and Spaniards,
d^clare, that she was b^^ half English as it were in Affection? so th^^ mingled
Blood in her Nature could not ^id^ it self.

And if the Case stands so, and (...) be so much to be loo^t unto, as ye will
have it, better it were for her Highness, and more honorable, as it may appear
evid^ntly, to make one of her Noblemen by that means, equal to a foreign
Prince, who shall alway^; be ready to obey and Honor her; than to take a
foreign Prince from abroad, who shall look to command, and be her Superior.

And because that Poetry is reckoned of a great learned man to be the eldest
Philoso^^y (for long before the Philosophy of Thales and Socrates, began most
Ancient Writers called Poets, by fained examples, or else by Deeds done,
described like Fables, did instruct men; and cause the witty Reader in them to
see the good success, and happy Fortune of Well-doings, and the evil Success
and Inconveniences which follow of Evil-doings: that so we might have as it
were, showed before our Eyes, what to follow, and what to eschew) ^^t us weigh
and consider what they write of this Matter, and what Examples they make of
those Heroical and Noble Women, who forsaking their own Country men, fell into
the Love of Strangers. How good, how true, how Loving, I pray you, were your
Strangers to them? Was not that l^s^y and valiant Warrior Jason, soon gotten,
and most unkindly, and uncourteously did forsake M^dea of Colches, who not
only saved his Life, but for his Love, lost her Country; and to save her
Lovers Life, did abandon the Lives of her Father and Brother. How long was
Theseus of Athens kind to Ar^adne King M^n^s's Daughter, who saved his Life,
else to have been destroyed in the Labyrinth? How true was D^mophon to Phillis
of Thracia, Hercules to Omphale of Lydia, or A^n^^s to Dido of Carth^ge? All
these Queens or Queens Daughters, who contemning the Noblemen of their own
Country, as unequal unto them, chose these lus^y and courageous Knights,
Strangers, Kings or Kings Sons, to be their Husbands, Men of another Country,
Language and Behavior, than theirs.

I would not wish her Majesty, but her Highness's Enemies, such Aid, Help,
Honor, Riches and Contentation of Mind as those Noble Women had of those
Marriages by the Description of the Poets. Therefore Sophonisba wife to Syphax
was worthy Praise as a wise and stout Lady, who was content to put her self
into the hands of Masinissa. For so much as he was a Numidian born in the same
Country of Africa, that she was. But rather than she would come into the Power
and Hand of the Romans, being to her Strangers, the chose with a Draught of
Poison to rid her self, both from her Life, and from her Care.

Well, I had rather in this Matter Been ominari. And therefore I will bring no
more Examples out of Histories, as ye know well enough I can, of the Successes
of such Marriages. But well I wot our Country by all Likelihood, rather
desires that her Highness had one of this Realm, than a Stranger. It is not
long ago, Once there was a Stir for that Matter that cost a good Sort of
Gentlem^ns Lives. Do I forget, think you, what argument of Authority you used
against my Friend here, Mr. Spitewedd? Do you then remember the Motion of our
Speaker, and the ^equest of the Commons House, what they did, and could have
moved then; and how they ran all one way, like the Hounds after the Hare, High
and Low, Knights, and Esquires, Citizens, and ^argesses, ^ee^ as were of the
Privy Council, and others far and near? Whom preferred they, I pray you, then,
if they should have had their Wish? The Stranger or the English man? And think
you they did not consider her Majesty's Honor, as well as you? Do you suppose
that they knew not as well, what was Disparagement as you? Whose Judgments if
you would have to be esteemed so much, as appears in your Argument you would,
and as I think you will even now Subscribe unto, this Matter is concluded, and
your Disparagement is gone.

And where you said, that the Marriage within the Realm should bring in Envy,
Strife, Contention and Debate; and for to prove the same you show forth the
Marriage that King Edward IV. made with the Lady Katharine Gray, wherein
followed such Dissension, Cruelty, Murder and Destruction of the Young Prince
and his Brother; the sequel I grant: Mary, if you do consider the Matter well,
ye do allege Non Causam, tanquam Causam. As for the Stomach and Grief of the
Earl of Warwick against the King, I think indeed that Marriage was the Cause:
Not because the Queen was an English Woman, but because the King having sent
the Earl as his Ambassador to conclude a Marriage for him: Which the King did
afterward refuse to accomplish. And this the Earl thought not only to touch the
Kings Honor, but also his: and fought therefore the Revenging. Which he would
as well have done, and he had the same Cause, if he had concluded it in
England, and after the King refused it. So that it was not the Place, or
Person, but the breaking of the Promise, and disavouching of his Embassage, and
the touching of the Earls Honor herein, that made the strife between the Earl
and the King. For the rest, for the Beheading of the Earl Rivers and others,
the Marriage was not the Cause, but the Devilish Ambition of the Duke of
Gl^cester, and the Duke of Buckingham. Which may appear by the sequel. For the
one rested not till he had the Crown, nor the other till he lost his Head. And
I pray you what Kin was the Lord Hastings to the Queen? And yet he lost his
Head, even then. King Henry VI. Married in France. And did not that Marriage
make Dissension enough in England? And for all that the Queen was a French
Woman, was not her Husband, and her Son, by the Desire of the Crown, which the
Duke of York had, both bereaved of their Crown and Lives?

So that you see that neither Marriage within the Realm, makes these
Mischiefs, nor yet the Marriages without can let them; but Wisdom, Foresight,
and good Governance, and chiefly the Aid and Grace of God. But it is a great
thing to be considered, the Riches, Power and Strength, which shall be by
Marriage of a Foreign Prince, as well for the Establishment and well keeping of
her Highness, against Insurrections and Conspiracies which might chance here
within the Realm; and for Invasions, War, Battle to be made by, or against
Princes abroad, and without the Realm. And here you seem to triumph, as though
all were yours, and as though it were a thing clear, and without all Controversy.

But I pray you, let us weigh this Matter. Do you think so much Riches, and so
much strength gotten unto the Realm, when she shall Marry a Foreign Prince? Do
you praise so much Queen Mary for Marrying King Philip? Indeed he is a Prince,
as you say, as great in Birth and Possession, as any Christian Prince is at
this day. But what was England the better for his Marriage? We kept Calais
above Two Hundred and odd Years in the French Ground, in despite of all the
French Kings, which have been since that Time, in all the Civil Wars, and the
most pernicious Dissension, that ever was, either in King Henry IV. Henry VI.
Richard III. or King Henry VII. their times. And in King Henry VIII. his Time,
we wan also Boloign and Boloignois. And did the Increase of Strength in his
Marriage, make us to lose in this Time? I do assure you for my Part, I never
saw, nor I think if I should have lived this Five Hundred Years heretofore
past, I should not have seen at any time England, weaker in Strength, Men,
Money and Riches, than it was in the Time when we wrote King Philip and Queen
Mary, King and Queen of so many Kingdoms, Dukedoms, Marchionats and Countries,
etc. For all those jolly Titles, our Hearts, our Joy, our Comfort was gone. As
much Affectionate as you note me to be to my Country, and Countrymen, I assure
you I was then ashamed of both. They went to the Musters with Kerchiefs on
their Heads. They went to the Wars, hanging down their Looks. They came from
thence as men dismayed and forelorn. They went about their Matters as men
amazed, that wist not where to begin or end, And what marvel was it, as my
Friend Mr. Agamus says? Here was nothing but Fining, Heading, Hanging,
Quartering and Burning* Taxing, Levying, and Pulling down of Bulwarks at home,
and beggering and loosing our Strong Holds abroad. A few Priests, men in White
Rochets ruled all. Who with setting up of Six foot Roods, and rebuilding of
Rood-lofts, thought to make all Cocksure.

And is this the surety we shall look for, the Defense we shall find, the Aid
we shall hope of, if the Queen's Majesty take a Foreign Prince to her Husband?
And what Decay came at that Time to the Substance of the Realm, and Riches both
public and private, it would be no less Pity to think, than it is needless to
tell unto you especially. For first, what Debt the Realm was left in, to be
paid beyond the Seas, you heard it declared by Mr. Secretary in the first
Parliament of the Queens Majesty; and how much it did exceed the Debt of King
Edward VI. What was owing also to the Subjects within the Realm. It was
mavelous to hear, how the private Substance was diminished: Part might be
seen by the Subsidy Books. And in the first Parliaments of King Philip and
Queen Mary, You heard a Burgess of London make plain Declaration, and proof,
that the City of London alone was worse in Substance, in those Five Years by
300000 l. than it was at the Death of the late King Edward. And if you will say
that King Philip, being so occupied with continual Wars, in which the Emperor
his Father left him, could not be rich: but her Majesty may take one that shall
bring in great Wealth and Treasure, and whom his Friends have l^st very rich:
This may be done I do not deny, although it be unlikely that any Prince would be
so unnatural to Rob, Spoil, make bare, poor and naked his own Country or Realm,
to enrich this. But if he should do, does he not, think you, look to be a
Gainer by it? I think he does not mean to cast his Money away; but possibly he
may look for the greater Usury, the longer he tarrieth for it, and do as some
men do, adventure a little to get a great Treasure.

But grant that he looks for nothing. Even for mere Love and Royalty, he will
bestow the Money here in the Realm, he will enrich the Queen's Majesty, he will
frankly spend all. What shall he do when all is spent? We see the Treasure of
King Henry VII. All the Treasure which Maximilian l^ft to the Emperor Charles,
and which came to him, out of the Indi^s, and other Countries, which I take to
be as rich to his Coffers as the Indies, had an end. That which in long time is
slowly gath^red, is, if Occasion so serve, soon sp^nt and consumed. I pray God
then this sudden Riches, make not again a long Repenta^^^; this sudden joy a
long Rueing; this sp^^dy ^^riching, a longer Taking. Whereas if we were content
with our own, as we know the Coming in, so we measure the spending. If we will
say that Yearly there shall come in the Revenues of that Realm, which shall
supply again the empty Coffers: First, I will ask you, if that Realm you do
speak of is kept with nothing? And where that Realm shall stand that has no
Enemies near it, no Garrison on the Frontiers, no Soldiers to be paid, no
Officers to be kept, no Charge to go out. I know few Regions, but all that ever
can come of them ordinarily can do no more, but keep their own ordinary
Charges. For I see when they have any extraordinary thing, as War, or Marriage
to be made, the Princes are constrained to seek extraordinary means, by
Subjects Love, and other Devices, to bear them. I see this, in France, in
Italy, in Spain. The rich Indies, be so rich to the King of Portugal, for all
that He is only the Merchant of Spices to all Europe. Yet now almost every man
does see, that he is scarcely with the Revenues of them, able to bear their
Charges. As Milain and N^ples, so the Charges of keeping them is no doubt
incr^dible to him, that has not marked nor known it. And the Accounts ^ruly
made, I assure you, small Gains King Philip has of them. And if the Prince
being away from thence remaining the Enemies should invade the Realm you speak
of, should it not be necessary, trow you, to employ that Revenue, and more,
upon it? Or if the People seeing their Treasure so wasted, and their Realm
impoverished, should repine at it, as some Countries would do, and refuse to
pay any more; or if any other in his Absence should take upon him to usurp the
State, and pretend some Titles, (as we see to Ambitious Heads there never lack
Titles, either of Kindred or Commonwealth, to Claim to themselves the
Sovereignty,) what Gain shall be looked for from thence? Nay, what Charges
shall we be put to by it? Either we must abandon that Realm, which were the
greatest Dishonor that could be; or else employ all our Force and Treasure, to
the Recovery thereof. Either of which, if they should chance (as few Realms be
long without them) then casting our Cards aright, we shall find very small
Advantage.

And for Proof of this which I say, we will but examine your own Examples. Mary
the Scotch Queen was highly advanced, you say, to the Dolphin; who afterward
was the French King, called Francis the Second. But what Ric^es came by that
Match to the Realm of Scotland? Ask the Scots; who for the great Oppre^^ion
which they suffered by the French, and the great impoverishing of the poor
Realm, were fain to demand aid of us their old Enemies; and yet in their
Distress their most sure Friends, and faithful Neighbors. And then what Aid
had she of the French I pray you, when for the Misgovernment of them, the
^^bjects of her purchased Re^^m, she had almost lost the Government of her own
natural, and, as I would call it, Patrimonial R^alm, which came to her by
Inheritance from her Ancestors.

We will come to the third M^ry, the Daughter and Heir of Charles the Hardy,
Duke of Burgundy* because here you think to have your strongest Bulwark; she
Marrying Maximilian the Emperor's Son, I cannot deny but her Posterity is now
in diverse places of Christendom, the chief Rulers and Governors. But I will
deny that her Country of Burgundy is in so good an Estate, as it was in her
Fathers time. For then it was Head and Chief, but now it is Subject to the
House of Austrich. Then the Burgundians were reckoned the hardiest, and most
valiant Warriors, now be the Spaniards, Almains, and Italians before them.
Their Riches were then a Terror to France, a Marvel to all the World; now it is
but a little Patch to King Philip's Power. And if they were not as well taxed
and assessed in the Emperor Charles, and this Mighty and Puissant King Philip's
Time as ever they were, the Burguudians were much to Blame to groan so fast.
Take Antwerp apart, and a few small things by the Sea side, which have had
another Cause of Increase, let us see if all the rest of the Cities be not
greatly in Decay, and in far worser State than they were, when they had but a
Duke to their Head. As when one River falls into another they do increase
indeed, and make larger Water, but yet the l^ss River thereby loses both his
Name and strength. And the biggest River that is falling into the Sea loses
his Force and Power, and is salted as well as the rest be. So a Kingdom
swalloweth up a Dukedom adjoining, and the bigger Kingdom the less. And if they
fall both into the Lap of a Mighty great Monarch, as the Emperor of Rome, of
the Turks, or of the Persians, security they may have, but their Honor and
Liberty is clean lost; whether Conquest gives it them, or Marriage. Howbeit of
these the Empire of the Romans does least oppress, and leaves most Liberty:
Which is not for fault of Will, but of Strength. What intended Charles the last
Emperor to do to the Almains? What attempted his Predecessors against the
^wissers? What has he brought to pass at Naples and Milan? And what did King
Francis to Piedmont?

These may be Mirors and Examples to us to consider, and see what Advancement
it would be to us, to fall into the Hands and Power of a Prince that is a
Stranger, and Stronger than We be.

Now if you will say, there may be Covenants made, Bonds taken; and for the
more surely, by the Parliaments of both Realms, the Conditions of Matrimony may
be enacted, and such Assurances devised, as there may be no doubt of any
Inconveniences to follow: Indeed this is a Device, but I pray you, let me tell
you of a Question that not long ago a Baron of England moved in the Parliament
to this Purpose. And if you can assoil it, you shall move me much. If the Bands
be broken between the Husband and the Wife, either of them being Princes and
Sovereigns in their own Country, who shall sue the Bands? Who shall take the
Forfeit? Who shall be their Judge? And what shall be the Advantage? If you will
not Answer, I will tell you: Discord, Dissension, War, Bloodshed, and either
extreme Enmity, or else the one Part must at length break and yield. If you
will say, Tush! He will not do against his Promise; he will not break his
Accord and Agreement; he will so much consider his Honor and Love, that what
he has once said, he will always stand to. Well, granting that, I pray you,
what needs any Bonds? Whereupon comes this Mistrusting, but upon Fear? So long
as Love lasts, and he stands in that Mind in which ^e was, when he made the
Bonds, I my self do not doubt, but he will keep them, because he so minds.
And then the Bonds be superfluous. But if his Mind fortune to alter or change;
and so he misliketh the Conditions whereto he has agreed, and will not keep
the Covenants, what shall these Bonds avail? To which you have neither Place of
Judgment, Persons of Plaintiff or Defendant, and least of all a competent Judge
to compel the wrong Doer to abide right. And if it were done, what pleasure
shall the Compelled Party have of the Compeller? Or what Trust can the
Compeller have of the Compelled? Nay, Bonds, Covenants, Indentures and
Conditions, be far from the free Love, Sincerity and hearty Doings of Love;
when the Hearts, Minds and Bodies be united: Can there be a surer Bond than
that which makes them all one? And if they be not so, then they be two; and
what two? Marry, Princes, which know to Rule, and not to be Ruled, and who may
not abide to be compelled or enforced? Nor is it so meet that otherwise they
should, but only by Persuasion; nor indeed cannot without Battle or Bloodshed.
I think an Article comprised in the Conditions by Act of Parliament with King
Philip was, that we should not for his Cause enter into War with France. But
yet I trow we did, to our no small Loss. And you heard rehearsed by Agamus how
well Jacques de la Nard^ kept his Bonds to Queen Jane of Naples.

But let us leave all this, and have respect only to our Gain, and that the
Queens Majesty shall have her Honor, and Power marvellously advanced, and her
Dominion enlarged into I cannot tell how many Miles. This is the fair show:
Look what follows. The greater Monarchy, the larger Frontiers; ^he more
Garrisons, the more intricate Titles, the more ready occasions for War. Which
must needs be the Consuming of Money, of disquieting her Subjects, of emptying
the Realm of able men. We had two Emperors of Rome, came out of the Isle when
it was Britain, Constant and Constantine. This you will say was a great Honor
to the Realm, that a Nobleman of England, should hold the Crown of the Empire:
Not now, when it is in manner but little, but then, when to be Emperor of Rome,
was to rule all the World. And so would I say too, if I did not consider as
well the sequel thereof, as the first fair show. For in taking the Power from
hence, they took so many of the good Warriors, expert Captains, tall and likely
men; that they left the Britains so weak, that the Scots, and Princes over
them, overcame them in every Place. They were sain to ask Aid of the Saxons;
And of them who came for their Aid, they and their Posterity for ever were
driven down, out of the whole Country of England into the barren Mountains of
W^les. King Edward III, a Prince most valiant and Victorious, with those
Victories in France, and continual carrying over of men, to people such Towns,
Cities and Fortresses as he had won there, did make the People here at home so
thin, and those that were left so desirous rather to spoil than to labor, that
from the Twentieth of his Reign, to the 26 th. or 27 th. he and all the Council
of the Realm were most troubled and occupied, how to cause the Fields of
England to be Tilled* as may appear by the Acts of Parliament made in that
space. And if this Disadvantage be in Victory, what shall be in the Loss? If it
be thus in Conquering, what shall it be in being Overcome?

As for such Wars as we have for our own to do, I have not seen it, neither
read, but with our own Nation, we have been able to man them well enough; and
have not used, or have not much been helped with the Power of other Princes
allied. Which thing also Nic^lao Michiavelli has Noted* And read you the
Histories, and you shall see that when we had most help of them, then l^ast was
done. And first of France, at Agincourt, at Cressy, and at Poitiers, wherein
the greatest Battails were foughten, and the most noble Victories obtained,
there was but our own Nation, and the King of England's Subjects. King Edward
I* in so often conquering all Scotland used but his own Subjects. And hitherto
since the Time of William the Conqueror, we have, thanks be to God, been able to
defend our selves against the French and the Scots, always allied together,
without the Help of For^ign Aid. So that we have at the end saved our Realm,
and rather gotten of them than lost. And King Henry VIII. Marrying at home, did
not only save, but also got both in France and Scotland; and kept also that
which he had gotten. Q^e^n Mary, having by Marriage all these Helps, which you
so greatly praise, so far she was from getting now, that she lost that which
was gotten by her Ancestors, and had been kept by the English so long.

But because we shall better, and more near at hand see the Advantage of
heaping Realms together, King Edward III. and the Black Prince go^ almost all
France. His next Successor therefore must needs have his Power marvellously
increased. So may it appear. For though he were confess^d the ri^ht Heir, yet a
Nobleman of this Realm of England bereaved him of both France and England. King
Henry V. again drove the D^uphin to a very straight Room in France. Wherefore
by your Reason his Power must be marvellously augmented, which he did leave to
his Son. Did not a Duke of his Realm dispossess him of his Crown, for all the
help that Queen Margaret his Wife, and Daughter to Reigner Duke of Anjou, and
King of Sicily, Naples, and of Jerusalem, could bring from her Father, and all
those four Realms, to the Aid of her Husband, or the Prince her Son. So that
for that Matter, the Italian Proverb seems true, ^hi troppe abbraccia poco
stringe, He that embraces too much, holds fast but a little.

Now for Increase of Riches, let us go as near. Many would judge that the
getting and keeping of Bullo^gn and Bull^^gn^is in France, now in the Time of
King Henry VIII. and the obtaining and holding of ^addingt^n, and the P^ethes,
and a great Part of the Lowdian in Scotland, should have brought in great
Riches to this Realm. It was that almost b^ggered England For thereby our fine
Gold was conveyed away, our good Silver app^ar^d not; our M^ssy and old Plate
was m^^l^d. And every man sees, that not only our good ^^n was wonderfully
consumed, but that which was le^t, pitiously altered and m^d^ worse. The Gold
much debased: and at the l^^t for Sterling Silver, we had two (...) o^ Copper,
and scarce the Third part (...) metal remaining in the Coin. Which now, without
any such Revenues, either out o^ France or Scotland, thanks be to God and the
Queens Highness, begins well to amend again. Whether think you King Henr^
IV. which had but England, left his Kingdom richer to his Son King Henry V.
than he with all his Conquests, to his Son King Henry VI. who h^d nothing in
France but C^lais? Did not King Hen^y VII. leave more Riches in his Co^^r^ to
King Henry VIII. who Conquered both in France and Scotland, than he l^ft to
King Edward VI. And do yo^ not perceive that Q^e^n Mary, who wrote that she was
Queen of so many Kingdoms, Duchess of so many Dukedoms, Marchioness and
Countess of so many Marchion^s, and Earldoms, etc. did not ^ave l^ss ^ich^s in
her Co^^^rs, and ^^alth in the ^^alm at the Time of her Death, than ever any of
her P^o^^nito^^ did.

My Mast^^^, say what you will, and call me as it pl^ase you, ^ith^r Enemy to
S^ran^^r^, the Pattern or ^d^a of an old English m^n, Fam. friend, or what you
^i^, I say and see that it is ENGLAND alone that shall make her Highness
strong; ENGLAND, and no other her true Patrimony, Riches, Power and Strength,
whereto she must trust; ENGLAND her Highness native Country alone, being well
tilled and Governed, shall be better to her Majesty in the End, than all those
Empires, Kingdoms, Dukedoms and Marchionates, and other Rabblements of gay
Titles, which are but Wind and Shadows, and Makers of Cares and Costs. Which
are no Profit, but rather Hindrance and Loss, as at last will be proved, and as
you may perceive by these Discourses, her Predecessors have proved. Now Mr.
Philoxenus, or Lewelyn, or Lovealien (for I thank my Godfather neither you nor
I can lack Names) I have sufficiently, as methinketh, answered you to your Six
Parts, Causes or Occasions, which you make of Marriage.

You see, that for Succession, that Prince shall be to the Realm most loving,
most tender, and most natural, which has both his Parents mere English. And
such an one has England most cause to Love, who is mere H^rs, of whom no other
Region may claim any part. You see that for Pl^asure, Comfort and Joy, which in
Matrimony the one should have of the other, the English man for Likeness of
Manners, for naturalness of Education, yea, and because he is most tried and
best known, is most likely to be more kind, loving and natural, than the
Stranger; who is both different in Tongue and Manners, rather stumbled on by
Fortune, than chosen by certainty. You see how it is to the Realm most
Honorable, and to her Grace most allowable, not to despise and contemn, or to
reckon inferior to any other Country men, those which her own Region and
Country brings up. Ye see that Strength, which Foreign Princes bring, is
rather a Weakening than a Strengthening, rather to be suspected than trusted. Ye
see also, that the Stranger ever is like to have, and also more like to
impoverish, than to enrich the Realm: And that the Realm it self by good
Government, both is able enough to enrich the Princes thereof, and has
enriched them, when they have been contented alone with it, rather than when
they have sought, and gotten great Augmentations of other Countries. Which
things if you will weigh in a just Pair of Balances, without being affected so
much, as you are, to Strangers, I do not doubt but ye will condescend now at
the last to my Opinion and Judgment, and think as ever I have thought, that for
all Purposes, it were better for the Queens Majesty, if it could stand with her
Pleasure to Marry an English man, than any other Stranger whatsoever he be.

NAY, said he, whom they called Mr. Godfather, stammering after his manner,
speak to me, Man, that am indifferent, never speak to him. For ye are not so
far in with England and English men, as he is with Strangers; or to this our
Host here. Let him give judgment. For he has been attentive enough; I am sure
he has born away all that has been spoken. Come on, quoth he to me, what ^say
you to the Matter? Mary quoth I, it were a Presumption indeed to speak before
my Prince, without Commission. I trust her Highness shortly will give sentence
her self: and not with Words, but with Deeds, show who took the better Part to
the great Contentation of us all. But yonder has one stood a good while to
call us to Supper. I have caused him to stay whilst all were ended. Why is it
Supper time so soon, quoth one of them; it may be so by the Day, but methought
the Time was very short. So it appeared to me, quoth I; But Supper tarrieth for
you. Well, we must obey our Host, said they: and so walked in fair and softly,
jesting one with another at their new Names.

NUMBER. IV.
To the King's most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of Thomas Smith, Esquire; Uncle and Heir of Edward Smith,
Esquire, de^eased; Son and Heir of Sir William Smith the Younger; and Heir of
Sir William Smith the Elder; who was Nephew and Heir of Sir Thomas Smith Knight.
deceased; Shows,

THAT the said Sir Thomas Smith, the Petitioner's Ancestor, had the Honor to
serve as Secretary of State, to your Majesty's most Noble Progenitor Queen
Elizabeth of happy Memory, and served her in that Employment faithfully many
Years. And in the Thirteenth year of her Reign, the said late Queen did make a
Grant, by Letters Patents under the great Seal, to the said Sir Thomas Smith,
and Thomas his then Son, and Heir Apparent, of diverse Manors, Castles and
Lands thereto belonging, in the County of Down in the Realm of Ireland: Which
were then possessed by diverse Persons, who were in actual Rebellion against her
Highness, with Command, that the said Sir Thomas Smith should enter upon the
Parts infested by the said Rebels, and by Force of Arms obtain the same from
them.

And the said Sir Thomas Smith did at his great Charge raise an Army, and
entered those Parts, and gained them unto their due Obedience. In which said
Service the said Thomas, his Son, was slain. And then the said Sir Thomas
Smith, Assigned the said Sir William Smith his Nephew, to take the Charge of
Prosecution of that War, and came over to England to attend the further Service
of her Majesty, and to Solicit her Majesty, that the Lands might be Surveyed,
and the Rents ascertained, and his Grant and Title perfected. And her Majesty
taking Notice of such the great Service of the said Sir Thomas Smith, was
pleased several Times graciously to declare, that her Royal Intentions to the
said Sir Thomas Smith should be made good. But by reason of the many great
Troubles falling out in her Time, the same was not done during all the time of
her Reign.

And afterward the said Sir William Smith the Elder was commanded by the said
Queen upon Service into Spain, And upon his departure out of England, he
desired Sir James Hamilt^n, Knight. to prosecute his said Grant on the said Sir
William's behalf, and procure the same for him. And the said Sir James Hamilt^n
in the Time of your Noble Grandfather King James, upon some undue pr^tences,
contrary to the Trust in him reposed by the said Sir William Smith, obtained
the said Lands to be granted to himself, upon Pretense of a Valuable
Consideration paid; which, in truth, was never paid. But, in truth, according
to the Intention of the late Queen, the said Lands are the Right of your
Petitioner.

That Sir William Smith died about Forty years since; and Sir William, his Son
and Heir since dyed, and left his Son and Heir, an Infant of two years old; And
until he came at Age, nothing could be done. And the troublesome times
happening since his Death, the Petitioner and his Ancestors have sit down by
the Loss. Yet your Petitioner hops that that long Discontinuance shall not be
a Bar to his just Right:

But humbly prays your Majesty to cause an Examination of the Premises to be
made, and Certified to your Majesty; and then the Petitioner hopes, that when
the Truth of the Fact shall appear, your Majesty will be graciously pleased to
do therein, for the Petitioners Relief, what shall be agreeable to Justice. And
your Petitioner shall, etc.

At the Court at Whitehal 14 Nov. 1660. His Majesty is pleased to refer this
Petition to the Right Honorable Sir Maurice Eustace, Lord Chancellor of
Ireland. Who having examined and considered the Contents and Allegations of
this Petition, is to certify his Majesty how he finds the same, and what his
Lordship conceives to be just and fit for his Majesty to do therein, and then
his Majesty will declare his further Pleasure.


Edw. Nicholas.

Sir Maurice Eustace his Certificate. It may please your Excellent Majesty,
I have, according to your Majesty's gracious Reference, considered the
Petition of Thomas Smith, Esquire: And considering that the Petitioner does
ground his Title upon a Patent made 13. El^z. unto his Ancestors, and that the
said Title has been very much controverted, and the Possession, gone for a
long Time against the Petitioner, and some Descents last; I humbly conceive
that it is neither sit, nor convenient for your Majesty to determine this Cause
upon a Paper petition. But your Majesty, in regard your Courts of Justice in
Ireland will be soon open, may be pleased to leave all Parties pretending
Interest to the said Lands to your Majesty's Courts of Justice, in that your
Kingdom, to be proc^^ded in as they shall be advised by their Counsel. And the
rather for that the Earl of Clanbrazil, who is interested in the said Lands by
Descent from his Father, is a Minor, and under Years, and cannot be concluded
by any Order, which can be made against him, during his Monority. All which is
humbly submitted to your Majesty's Judgment.

Maurice Eustace, Canc.

NUMBER. V. Sir Thomas Smith's Tables of Money. And for the reducing the Roman
Moneys to the English Standard.
TABLE I. In the Pound Weight of Silver there is, of current Moneys,
Shil. Groats. Current. Pence. This Budaeus makes the Roman Standard, adding
to it half an Oun.
At 20 d. 20 60 240 At 2 sh. 24 72 284 At 2 sh. 8 d. 32 96 384 At 2 sh. 9 d. q.
Ounce. At of a q. Ounce. 33 4 d. 100 This I take to be the Roman Stand.
4.00 At 3 sh. 36 108 432 At 3 sh. 4 d. 40 120 480 At 3 sh. 8 d. 44 132 528 At
4 sh. 48 144. 576 At 5 sh. 60 180 The Standard 1568. Reg. Eliz. 9.
720

TABLE VIII.
The Mark contains. The Ounce at 20 d. Shill. Groats. Pence. 13 4 40 160 The
Mark contains. The Ounce at 2 sh. 16 48 192 The Mark contains. The Ounce at
2 sh. 8 d. 21 4 64 256 The Mark contains. The Ounce at 3 sh. 24 72 288 The
Mark contains. The Oounce at 3 sh. 4 d. 26 8 80 320

TABLE IX. Twenty English Pence of the Standard make one Ounce. Twelve Ounces
make the English Pound Sterling, at 11 Ounces Silver, and one Ounce Allay.
The Pound Contains. The Ounce at 20. Shill. Groats. Pence. 20 60 240 The
Pound Contains. The Ounce at 2 -- 8 This is next to the Roman Supputation.
32 96 484 The Pound Contains. The Ounce at 3 sh. 36 108 432 The Pound
Contains. The Ounce at 3 -- 4 40 120 480 The Pound Contains. The Ounce at 3
-- 8 44 132 528 The Pound Contains. The Ounce at 4 sh. 48 144 536 The Pound
Contains. The Ounce at 5 sh. 60 180 720

Then Follows a Discourse for demonstrating the Reduction of the Roman Coins to
our Money
TO Esteem these by the Coins of England which I have. I have an old Edward
Groat, whether the Third or Fourth I know not. This Groat weighs 8 d. ob. of
the Standard, which is Current (1561. Viz.) at 5 ^. the Ounce. Whereby it
appears, that then the Moneys went at 2 s. 4 d. q. the Ounce. The Pound then
contained, Shill. Groats Pence. 21 -- 3 84 339

I have also two Roman Denarii: the one entitled Lucius Valerius Flaccus; the
other Marcus Herennius. On the one side Aeneas is pictured carrying his Father;
on the other side Pietas, with the Face of Herennius. But each of them be too
light for the Groat of King Edward. And these two Denarii weigh just the Aureum
or Didrachma of Gold, which was coined in the Time of Tiberius Claudius: Which
has on the one side his Image with the Titles: On the other side a Triumphal
Arch written upon it De Brit^nnia. Which was found on the Windmil Hill at
Walden about 1535. and brought to me a Scholar in Cambridge all black: and it
weighs just the old Rial, called The Noble of the Rose;

Which is the Angel, and the half Angel, and is as fine Gold. So that it does
agree with those Coins of Gold, whereupon Budaeus makes his Estimation.

And if an hundred of those Denarii made a just pound of the Romans, as Budaeus
does plainly gather, and as it does appear by all Authors, then the Money was
at eight Denarii or Groats, and one of Denarius. And so if we count after our
Money, the 25.9 d. 4. of that Standard makes an Ounce. And so the Pound then
contained Shill. Groats or Denarii. Pence. 33 -- 4 d. 100 400 of that Stand.
Whereby it does appear, that the Standard in that King Edward's Time, whose
Groat I have, was of more value and Weight than than the Roman Standard; yea
before the Emperor did abase it.

I have also diverse Pence; but they seem to be elder. For three of the Pence
titl^d Edwards, with two Edward Half pence weighs more than that Edward Groat
by half one of Queen Elizabeth's Pence. Wherefore I take his Pence to be of
some eld^r Edward, either the Third, Second, or the First, and not of that
Edward whose I have. Of which I have also another guess. For they do name him
only Rex Angli^e Das Hybern^e where the Groat has Rex Angli^e, Franci^^, and
D^s Hyberniae. And as I remember I have read that Edward III. or else the IV,
was the first coined Groats, where before they used all P^^ce, and no bigger
Coin of Silver: As now the Turk coineth only Aspers, much of the Value of our
elder Penny.

And by these Accounts it appears, that Teustal must be civilly understood in
his Addition to his Book de Art Suppurandi: Where he says, that the Roman
Pound is double to Ours: For, by all Accounts, both the Ounce, and also the
Pound, is all one. For six Aurei Solidi, or Sextulae, made an Ounce to the
Romans; and so do to us six Angels. IV Aurei didrachmales made an Ounce; and so
do to us IV Rials. Which be both in Finenes of Gold, and also in Weight all one
with the Roman Coins. And then XII Ounces made the Roman pound: And so it does
to us in all Supputation of Money. Wherefore he must not be simply taken; that
simply the Roman Pound was double to our English pound-weight: For without fail
they were all one. Yet I must needs note, that Budaeus makes Minain, or Libram
nummariam, to contain XII Ounces, and half Oun. and makes his Supputation at
VIII Denarii, Draclmae, or Groats the Ounce: And so at 2 sh. 8 d. the Ounce, as
it is before at XII Ounces, the Pound contains Shill. Groats Pence 32 96 384 3
- Putting to the half Ounce it makes 32 - ^.d. 100 400 Mary, Ludee, to make
the French Gross Franks and Deniers, to agree with the Roman Pound, is put
sometimes to hard shifts.

But howsoever it be, whether the Roman Denariue was to be accounted, as I do
account it at 8 to the Ounce, or at 8 Denarii, or Groats, to the Ounce, and
then the Roman pound to have one half Ounce more than XII Ounces; yet when
Toustal wrote, by no Estimation their Pound can be double to ours. For he wrote
about the 12th. or 16th. year of K. Henry VIII. and then the Standard was, as
may appear by his Supputation, of the Crown of the Sun, which is 3 sh. 4 d. and
at that Account those Groats could not be the one half in proportion, neither
to the Moneys of 2 sh. 8 d. and at that Account those Groa's could not be one
half in proportion, neither to the Moneys of 2sh. 8d, as Budaeus cloth account,
neither of 2sh. 9d. q., of our Fart^ing, as I do account. But troth it is, that
at 3^h. 4d. the Ounce, 40sh. of our Current Money makes the English pound
weight, and also the Roman pound-weight. And thereby it appears, that the
20sh. at the first Coin of England weighed double so much, a^ then at 3sh. 4d.
the Ounce it did. And so our first English oun d is double to that in Weight,
which was then called in payment the English Pound, and treble to that which is
now current. But the Roman Pound and D^nari^ were in proportion to that Current
Money in the Time of ^ustal, as 120 is to an 100, or 6 to 5, which is called
Sesqui quinta. And it is to our current Money now, I mean the D^narius to our
Groat, and the Sestertius to our Penny, as 18 to 10, or 9 to 5, which is called
S^squi ^u^driparti^rs quintas. And so the Roman Denarius contains of our
Money now current 7d. (...) and one Half penny, and which by the old and first
Sterling of Groats, the Groat weighs just 12 d. of our current Money, A^.
1^61.

Wherefore ^aving all other Altercation and Vari^ty apart, I do take to be most
sure which Ba^e with exceeding Labor, and no less Wit, than Diligence has
found out, that the Roman De^^r^us, and the Athenian Dram was in the better
Worlds, and when the surest Supputation is to be made, all one. And that the
Coin called Aureus, and sometimes Philippei, or other Names, weighed just two
D^narii, or Drachmae, and so four made the Ounce, and twelve of thos^ Ounces
made the Pound, so that it is more than manifest, that the Roman pound, and the
English Pound called Troy Weight, or the Pound of Silver, or the Goldsmiths
Pound, was, and is, all one with the Roman pound. Wherein we have to glory,
that our Nation has reserved that Antiquity more than any other that I know.
For they follow all the Pound of ^ight Ounces, which is called the Mark, which
I think was brought into this Realm first by William the Norman. For I have
certain Coins of Etheldred, or other before the Conquest, whose Silver although it
appears not so good, yet the Weight goes near to the old Rate of the English
Penny.

TABLE XI. For Weighing Moneys of Gold, current in Sir Thomas Smith's Time.
IN this manner following you may weigh all manner of Gold, what Coin soever it
be, with these kind of Weights, which are called Pence and Grains, that is,
with six Pence, and four and twenty Grains. The 24 Grains weigh one Penny, and
the 24. Pence weigh one Ounce.

First, the Rose Noble, 6 d. The Half Noble, 3 d. The Quarter of a Noble, 1 d.
1^ gr. The Henry's Noble, the Flanders Noble, and the double Ducket of Italy. 5
d. 8 gr. The double Ducket of Spain. 5 d. 12 gr The half Real, the Ducket of
Spain, and the Ducket of Portugal and Hungary, and the Flanders Rider. 2 d. 18
gr. The half Ducket of Italy, the French Crown, the Salute, and the Flanders
Crown. 2 d. 16 gr. The old English Crown. 2 d. 8 gr. The Real, 4 d. 4 gr. The
Sovereign, 4 d. 16 gr. The Karolus Gilden, 2 d. 8 gr. The Andr^ws Gilden, and
the Philips Gild 2 d. 1^ gr The Angel, 4 d. The half Angel. 2 d. The Golden
Lion, 3 d. 6 gr. The C^nost^rs Gilden. 2 d. 13 (...)
And all the Gold that is not here named, and Current, and val^ed, may with
these W^ig^^s be weighed.

NUMBER. VI. Sir Thomas Smith's Library, Aug. 1.1566. In his Gallery at Hilhal.
THEOLOGICI.
OMnia Opera Augustini in X. Vol. Chrysostomi Opera Latin in V. Vol. Origenis
Pars prima Origenis Pars secunda Ambrosii Opera Vol. I. Bedae Opera Vol I.
(...) Vol. II. (...). Vol. I. Lutberi Opera To. III. Erasmi Opera To. IX.
Bucerus in Paulum ^ccesiastica Historia Tripartita Galatinus Biblia Castalionis
Nicephori Historia V.I. ^elinus in Psalmos ^l^m^rtis Stromata Psalterium
quintuplex Concordantiae Biblior. Biblia ^s^^na Biblia ex ^rancoi^ Catalogus
Testium Veritatis contraPapam Fostellus de Orbis Concordia Harmonia Evangelica
Biblia Hebraica Vo. II. Mahomet Vol. I. Proverbia Salom. Hebr. Mases Latinus
Pet. Martyr in Lib. Jud. Hieremias Hebr. Conference de la Mes. (...) (...)
Differentia Reg. Potest. and Ecclesiast. Proverbes du Solomon Satire Papale
Apology de L' Eglise D' Angleterre De faux Prophet^s Les Epistres Guevarre
Prediche di Bernard Ochiu Vol. II. 'H (...) Proverb. Salom Hebr. Flores
Theologici (...) Resolution^s Bullingois Cent Sermons f^r L'Apocalypse Malleus
Mal^sicarum K. Henry VIII. Book Response de To. Prestiene Disputatio Oxon. de
Sacramento De Mondea L'Empire Cassander de Missa Paradoxa Lamberti Commentarii
di Psalm. Eusebius captivus Ordonances de l'Eglise de Geneve.
IURIS CIVILIS.
Pandectae grand. V.III. Novellae Constitutiones Vol. I. Codex Vo. I.
Repertorium Bertachini Vol. III. Lanindwood Compendium Jur. Civilis Corani Vol.
II. Processus Juris Decreta Decretalia Sextus cum Clementinis De maleficiis,
and Poemis, and Praxis crim. persequent. Pand^ctae in 4. Vol. V. Cons^erudines
in 4. to. Instituta, in 4. to. Alciati Opera Zazius de Act. and Exc. Mainerii
de Reg, Juris Speculum Juris Vo. III. Ars Notariatus Divus and Decius Instituta
(...) Bellonus and Canciuncala Codex Theodosii (...) Practica Baldi and
Lanfrancus Paris de Puteo de Ducllo Silva nup. and Parerg. Alciati Praxis
Alciati Les Institutions Impe. Axiomata Legum Praesumptiones Alcia^. XII.
Tabulae Codex in Octavo Digest. vet. in Octavo Decretal in Octavo Pragmatic.
Sanct. Militiae forensis Les Statutes deProven. Fitz Herberts Abridgments Vol.
II, Years and Terms of Henry VI. Years and Terms of Edw. III. Statutes of Ed.
and Mar. Les pleas de la Corone Natura Brevium, F. IIe. Thabridge of the Acts
Briton Justices of Peace Parkyns Natura Brevium Littleton's Tenures Glanvile
Old Abridgment of Statutes Magna Charta
HISTORIORAPHI.
(...) Vol. I. (...) (...) Titus Livi^^s Suetonius Antonius Sabell. V. II.
Albert. Crantzii, Danica, Suevica, N^rvegica. Cornel. T'acitus (...)
Witichindus, Luitprandus and Aeneas Silvius Pirrby Piacii de Reb. Trident.
Dionysii Halicarnasses Annals Bojorum Nebress^nsis Hisp. Cromeri Polon. Hist.
Olaus Magnus de Gentib. Septen. Paulus Aemilius Polydore Virgil Chronica di
Genoa and Florent. Annals Genealog. Chronia ^de Nismes and Armories des
Conest. Platina de Vitis Pontif. Chronica Phrigionis (...) Histoire
Ecclesiastique Vol. II. Paulus Aemilius, and Ferronus de Regib. Gallor. Les
Annals de France, and Philippes Coming Description d' Affrique Fasti and
Triumphi Romani Les Annals de France Les Annals de Bretaig. Les Annals d'
Aquitaigne. Commentaria rerum Flandricarum De Migrationib. Gentium Plutarchus
de Vitis AnnalesGenealogiqu^s B^ccalii Genealogiae Deorum Beda and Saxo Gram.
(...) Terrae Sanctae Des^riptio Gaguinus. Por tenta and Prodigia Solinus (...)
(...) Nicetas Ch^niates Paradini Continuation des Temp. Petri Bembi Historia
Ven^ta Hilloria di Giovanni Villani Chroniques de Sav^ie Appiani Alexandrini de
Bellis Civilibus Thucididis en Francois Cosmographia Ptolom^ei Discourse de
guerres Civiles As^a di Barros Hall's Chronicles ^abian's Chronicles Bavaria;
Insubres. Car^lus V. Volaterranus Strabo Blondus Herodito, and ^il Principe di
Machiavelli Quinte Curse Munsteri Cosmographia Silva de varia Lection, and
Iustino Historiad. Lucius Fl^rus Notitia utraque Or. and Occid. Harding
Suetonius History di Guazzo Vol. II. Di Nicolao Leonico Vary History (...)
Olai Magni Suetica Les Chroniques des Rois De France Ludov. d' Avila de Bello
German Justinius Hist. XII. Vic^comites Pauli I^vii Appiano di guerre Civil
I^^an. Major de Hist. S^ctorum Paulo I^vio ^^o Arr^tinus, de Bello Gotherum
Capella de bello pro restir. Francisci II. Ducis Mediolan. Vita di Leone,
Adriano pontif. and Car. Colon. Salust. and Q. Curtius The Decades of P.
Martyr. Commentaria Caesaris History Fiorentine di Machiavel Discorsi di
Machiavelli (...) (...) Dione delle guerre di Romani Ammianus Marcellin. and
Cisalpinae Galliae Descriptio Lambertus de bello Germanico Le Livre de P. de
Conde Continuation de Rabatin Les Martyrs de Paris La Response du Gentilhomme
de Henalt. Expeditio Tunetana Commentar. de L'estat de la Religion. To primus
Valerius Maximus La Vita di Ecellino Romano De la Majorite du Roy Compendio d'
History de Naples Responsio Venetorum.
PHILOSOPHICA.
(...) Plato Latin (...). Vol. II. Politica Aristot. Historia Animalium
Aristot. Ciceronis Vol. II. (...) Opuscula. Politianus (...) Gesnerus
Quadrupedibus (...) (...) Alexander Genialium Dierum Francisci Pici Mirandulae
Ruellius Dioscorides Galenus Mattheolus super Diosc^rid. De Varietate rerum De
Subtilitate (...) Galen. de compos. Medicamentorum Agricola de re Metallica
Vulturius de l'art Militaire Rondeletius de Pisci. Vol. II. Cato, Varro and
Columella Jcones Avium Gentium and Familiarum Roman. Stemmata Macrobius Lazari
Baisii de re Vestiaria Agricolae Scholia in Therapeuticen. Philonii Comment in
Architectur. Vitruviii Ludo. VivesdeCorrup. Discipline. Polydor. de Inventorib.
rerum Cicero de Finib. Budaeus de Ass Rhetorica ad Hereun. etc. De Colorib de
Ponderib. de re Vestiaria De Divinationum generibus Rhetorica Trapezuntii Li
Notti di Straparola, and ord. di Cavilcare di Grizoni Cornel. Agrippa de
occnlt. Philosoph. (...) (...) Galeotus de Doctrina promiscua Aristot. de Art
Rhetorica Vives de ratione Dicendi Plinii Epist. Cato, Varro, Columella de Re
rustica La Maison Rustique Quintilianus Galeotus de Homine (...) Topographia
antiquae Romae Apothegm. Erasm. Moriae Encomium Dialect. Melaucth. Lucianus de
Sectis Dialectica Caesarii Dialectica Agricolae Demosthenis and Aeschinis,
Plutarch. de Platon. Philosoph. Agricola de Ponderib. and Mensur. Dialoges de
Charon De Art Magirica Antiochi Chiromantia, and Convival question Il
Cortegliano Le Sympose du Platon. Le Timee du Platon. Le Cinquiesme de Polit d'
Arist^^. Petri Rami Oration.
MATHEMATICA.
Alchimia Euclides and Archimedes Appianus and Astronomia Gebri (...) Julius
Firmicus, and Compositio Astrolabii Cyprianus Leovicius Ephemerides Stadii
Alphonsi Tabalae H^ly de Iudiciis Cardanus super Quadriparitum Ptolomaei Guido
Bonatus Sch^nerus de Nativitatibus Armilla Regiomontani Pratenicae Tabulae
Tabulae Directionum Cypr. Leovicii Abrah. Iudaeus, de Nativitate, and IX.
Judicum, planisph. roi^s Elcabitius, etc. Liber directionum Eras. Reinholdi
Aphemerides Stosterini Cosmographia di Ptolomaeo Ephemerides Simi Cardani, de
Iudiciis, etc. Tabulae direct, Regiomoutani Iohann. Pontani in Quadripart.
Ptolomaei Copernici Revolutiones Ephemer. Stop^ler. Albert. Dur. de Symetria
Ho^ologiogr. Mansteri De le stelle fisse Lucas Gauricus Radius Gemmae Phrysii
Regiom^nt de Triang. and problem. Astronomiae, and Geometr. (...) Hispalensis
Tabulae Berg. Stadii De Praedictione Astronom. L. Vitruv. di Architect.
L'Architecture de Vi^ruve Le Vitruvio Vitruvius de Architectura Lib X. Euclidis
The Art of Navigation Supputationes Tonstalli Algebra Arithmetica de Pietro
Borgi Paraphrase d'Astrolabe
MEDICA and CHIRURGICA.
Galenus Ruellius Matthe. super Dioscor. Dioscorides Graece Galen. de composit.
Medicam Institutiones Chirurg. Guido Is. de Vigo Actuarius Euonymii Thesaurus
Method Medendi Fuschius Scholia in Therapeucen Gal. Cornel. Celsus Alexis
Galenus de Aliment. facultat. La Mareschallerie di Laurent Ruse L' Art
veterinarie du Iean Mass. and Vigetii Le Perquirie du Grison and Ruse
Hippiatria Laur. Ruse
GRAMMATICA and POETICA.
Nizolius (...) (...) Diction. Latinogallic. Com. Budaei Grammat. Theod. Gazae
Calepinus Dictionar. Italic. (...) Dantes Petrarcha (...) Graec. Il Meschino
Fabulae Aesopi Epist. Aeneae Silvi Grammat. Despauter (...) (...) Grammatica
Heliae Statius Aristophanes Conciones Livii Sophocles cum Com. Plautus
Dictionar. H^braic. Copia Verbor. Erasm. Aulus Gellius Horatius Diomedes and
Donatus (...) Erasm. de Pronunciat. (...) Grammat. Aldi Il Petrarcha cum Com.
Willichius in artem Poeticam Munster Gram. Hebr. Viridarium Poetarum Picolomino
d' Institut. d' huomo nato (...) Epitome adag. Erasm. Aphthonius Il Filocopo
Boccasiii (...) (...) Di Pet, Aretino Comed. Comoedia Celestina (...) Ioachim
de Bellay Miscellanea Nanii (...) (...) Theater de Jacques Grevin Tragoedia de
Franc. Arbitre Defense des Dames Jacques Pelcher de pronuntiatione Linguae
Gallicae Petr. Ramus de morib. Veter. Gallorum Erotemata Liguae Hebraicae.
THE CONTENTS OF THE APPENDIX
NUMBER I. THE Patent granted by BARKER, Gart^r King at Arms, to John Smith G^^t.
Father to Sir Thomas Smith, for his Coat of arms, Page 1.
NUMBER. II. Sir Thomas (...) new English Alphabet. p. 5.
NUMBER. III. Sir Thomas SMITH's Orations, for and against the Queen's Marriage.
p. 7. 1. Agamus, or Wedspite, his Oration for the Queen's single Life. Ibid. 2.
Philoxenius, or Lovealien, his Oration for the Queen's Marrying. p. 26. 3.
Philoxenius, or Lovealien, his second Oration for the Queen's Marrying with a
Stranger. p. 69. 4. Axenius, or Home-Friend, his Oration for the Queen's
Majesty's Marrying with an English Nobleman, rather than any Foreign Prince. p.
81. The Petition of Thomas Smith Esquire Anno Dom. 1660. to K. CHARLES II. for the
Restoration of the Country of the Ardes in Ireland, belonging of right to his
Ancestor Sir Thomas Smith. p. 124.
NUMBER. V. Sir Thomas Smith's Tables of Money: And for the reducing of the Roman
Moneys to the English Standard. p. 128.
TABLE I. In the pound Weight of Silver, how much Current Moneys. Ibid.
TAB. II. When the Standard Money is at 20 d. the Ounce. Ibid.
TAB. VIII. When 15 Groats, or 5 Shillings. make the Ounce. Ibid.
TAB. IX. How much the Mark contains. p. 129.
TAB. X. How much the Pound contains. Ibid.
TAB. XI. How much the Ounce and smaller Weights contain of Moneys. p. 130. A
Discourse for demonstrating the Reduction of the Roman Coin to our Money. Ibid.
TA^. X^^. For (...) Story of Gold, Current in (...). ^3^
NUMBER. VI. Sir (...) Library, Aug. 1, (...). ^39 (...) take Notice, That (...)
of these Tables. (...)

FINIS.
Table II. When the Standard Money is at 20d ye Ounce.
Groats Pence Halfpence Farthinas Grains Fr. Grains En (...) ^ncia 5 20 40 80
576 640 ^emuncia 2 10 20 40 288 320 ^uella 1 6 13 26 192 213 ^iciliquus
^idrachmum 1 5 10 20 144 160 There is a Third Table when 7 Groats (viz)
2s....4d made the Ounce Showing how many Pence Halfpence. Farthings and I were
required to make each Piece accord with the Roman Semuncia. Duella. Sicilicus
Regalis. Denarius primus. Sextula Anaclatus. Dentarius secundus Dram.
Scrupulus Obolus. A fourth Table when 8 Groats (viz) 2s...8d made ye Ounc. A
fifth. when 10 Gr: (viz) 3s... 4d made ye Ounce. A sixth when 5 Gr: (viz) 20d
made ye Ounce. A seventh. w.n 8 Gr: or 2s...9d q^ made ye Ounce. An eight. w.n
15 Gr: or 5s make the Ounce. All which Tables I will pass over and set down
only the last because that is the present Standard at this day. ^atula ae Angel
1/7 ^enarius Rom ^rachma ^alf Real 1/9 1/10 1/11 Half Angel 1/12 Sterling Penny
1/20 Unciae Scrupulus vel 1/24 Unciae Denarius Gallic 1/24 Drchm Obolus 1/48
Unciae Obolus 1/48 Scrup. Obolus 1/48 Dram Semiobolus Obol 1/12 Dram.
Semiobolus Obol 1/66 Unciae Ceratium 1/20 Dram. Ceratium 1/160 Unciae

Table VII. When 15 Groats or 5 Shillings make the Ounce.
Groats. Pence. Ob. q^. q. c. 1 15 60 120 240 480 960 Uncia. 7 30 60 120 240
480 Semuncia. 5 20 40 80 160 320 Duella. 3 15 30 60 120 240 Sicilicus. 3 12 24
48 96 192 Denar. To. primus. 2 10 20 40 80 160 Sextula. 1/7 2 1/^ 8 4/7 17 1/7
34 3/7 68 4/7 137 1/7 Denarius To. secundt 1 7 15 30 60 112 Dram Denar. tert
1/9 1 6/9 6 13 26 53 100 1/10 1 6 12 24 48 96 1/11 1 6/11 5 5/11 10 10/11 21
19/11 43 7/11 87 3/11 1/12 1 5 10 20 40 80 1/13 1 2/13 4 8/13 9 3/13 18 6/13 36
12/13 73 11/13 1/14 1 1/14 4 2/7 8 4/7 17 1/7 34 2/7 68 4/7 1/15 1 4 8 16 32 64
1/16 0 3 7 15 30 60 1/24 0 2 5 10 20 40 Scrupulu. 1/48 0 1 2 5 10 21 Obolus

Number. II. Sr Thomas Smiths new English Alphabet.
^^men. Potestas. Exemplum. a. A short. Man. Mat. a a- A long Man. i.e. Maine.
Hat. i.e. Hate. b. Be. c. Chapter Ich. final. Ceri. i.e. Chery. Mac, i.e. Match. d.
De. th D TH. De. i.e. Th. Dou i.e. Thou. Bath. i.e. Bath. e. E short. Led.
Bred. Hell. ^ e e- E long. Led. i.e. Lead. Bred. i.e. Bread. He-l. i.e. Heal. ^
e. E English. Bred. i.e. Breed. Hell. i.e. Heel. ^. Of. Fill. Strif. F. Ev. i-l.
i.e. Vile. Stri. i.e. Strive. g. G e. Gai. Get.. e. ai. i.e. Iay. et. i.e. Iet.
he. Ha. y. I short. Hid. By. i.e. By. i^- I long. Hid. i.e. Hide. Bi^. i.e.
Buy. k. Ka. Kat. Kac. i.e. Catch. ^ El. m. Em. n. En. ^ O short. Hop. Horse.
i.e. Horse. (...) o o. O long. Hop. i.e. Hope. Horse. i.e. Hoarse. ^ P e. ^.
Qun. r. Er. s. Es. t. Ezed. Liz. i.e. Lies. Di-z. i.e. Dies. ^. E^. i.e. Esh.
Le^. i.e. Leash. Fi^. i.e. Fish. ^. Te. U u. U short. Buk. i.e. Buck. Full. ^ u
w. U long. Buk. i.e. Book. Full. i.e. Fool. ^ u Greek. True. i.e. True Ru. i.e.
Rue. N i e. New. X x. Ex


