A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL ON Christmas Day, 1682.

By N. STRATFORD, D. D. and Dean of St. ASAPH.

Published by His MAJESTY'S special Command.

LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Joseph Lawson, Bookseller in Lincoln, and sold by
Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, and Tho. Guy,
at the Oxford-Arms on the West side of the Royal Exchange. 1683.

A SERMON ON ROMANS viii. 3.
-- God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin in the flesh. SInce the Design of this Solemn Assembly, is with
all Thankfulness to commemorate the Incarnation of our Blessed Lord: What can
be more proper to entertain our Devotion, than the contemplation of the great
end, for which he was Incarnate? Which however grossly mistaken, by those who
are resolved, not to understand it; is plainly enough expressed in the words
now read; To be the setting us free from the Bondage of Sin, and the making us
partakers of his Holiness. A matter of such Grand Importance, in the Judgment
of the only wise God, that he thought it worth the sending his own Son into the
world, after he had attempted it by other means without success. For what the
Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh; When men's fleshly
Lusts were so strong and impetuous, that the Law of it self, was unable to
subdue them, and to advance Mankind to that real inward Purity, of which all
the outward Purifications prescribed by the Law were but shadows; as a more
powerful efficacious means, in order to this great end, God out of his infinite
Compassion to lost man, sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, etc.

As preparatory to the ensuing Discourse, it is needful only to acquaint you;
That by the words, (...), (translated for sin) is meant a Sacrifice for sin:
That being the Notion most agreeable to the Scope of the Text; and that in
which they are frequently used, both by the Septuagint, and our Apostle. That
to condemn sin, is not barely to pass Sentence against it; but to punish and to
destroy it. That God is said to condemn sin in the flesh, by sending his own
Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, to be a sacrifice for it; Because he most
dreadfully punished it, in the flesh of his Son; and has thereby taken the
most effectual course, to destroy it in our flesh: as he is said in Holy
Scripture to do those things, for the effecting of which, he contributes
sufficient means: so that nothing is wanting on his part, for the doing of them.

Which being Premised, the words are naturally resolved into these five
Propositions. I. That God sent his own Son into the world. II. That God sent
his own Son into the world in flesh. III. That he sent him into the World, in
the likeness of sinful flesh. IV. That he sent him in the likeness of sinful
flesh, to be a sacrifice for Sin. V. That God by sending his own Son into the
World, in the likeness of sinful flesh, to be a Sacrifice for Sin; has taken
the most effectual course for the Destroying of Sin in us.


God sent his Son. Not his Son by Creation, as Adam; nor by Adoption, as all
good men are: Not his Son, only as invested with some art of his Authority, and
commissionated by him to some eminent Office, as all Princes are: But his Own
Son (as he is here emphatically called) the Son of his own Nature, begotten by
him before all Worlds, who is very God of very God, of one substance with the
Father himself. And therefore his only begotten Son too; such as no other
person in the World, is, ever was, or shall be.

And in proportion to the peculiar, and transcendent Excellency of his Sonship,
was his Father's Love toward him; for being his only begotten, he was above
all others his beloved Son; as he himself testified, by an express voice from
Heaven, saying; this is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Matt. iii. 17.


And the greater God's Love was to Him, so much the more was it expressed to
Us, to whom alone he sent him. For he sent him not to the Apostate Angels, to
expiate their sins, and to avert the stroke of his vengeance from them; but
leaving them under an irreversible Doom, to be reserved to Chains of Darkness
at the judgment of Jude v. 6.
the Great Day; He sent him to us Men, who are by Nature inferior to the
Angels, and were become confederate with them in their Rebellion against him;
who were not only without Strength, to resist his Justice; but too obstinate to
implore his Mercy.

This is intimated in the Text; For in that God sent him, in the likeness of
sinful flesh, it is also employed that he sent him to sinful flesh: To the Sons
of Men, who had all sinned, Romans iii. 23.
and were fallen short of the Glory of God. And is plainly expressed in other
Scriptures, in which we are told; That God sent his 1 John iii. 9. 10.
Son to be a propitiation for our sins. That in this was manifest the Love of
God toward Us, that God sent his only begotten Son, that We might live through
him. His Love was indeed manifest toward Us, his Severity toward the Angels; in
that while he left them to fall a Sacrifice to his Justice, he sent his beloved
Son, to be Himself a Sacrifice in Our room.

God sent him into the World in flesh; (which is the second Proposition) Not in
the Likeness, (as some ancient Heretics phancied) but in the Truth and Reality
of flesh.

The Word was made flesh (says St. John;) John 1. 14.
Though begotten of the Father, and not made; that he might become Sin for us, he
was made flesh. He that from the Beginning was in the World in the Form of God,
in the Fullness of time, was sent into the World, in the Nature of Man; that as
the Son of Man he might suffer and die; as the Son of God, might conquer Death,
and give that Value to his sufferings, which might make them a Complete
satisfaction to Divine Justice.

And that he took upon him the Humane Nature, and in the Nature he assumed,
remaining still the same Person, came into the World a True Man (which is the
common Notion of the Word flesh, in the Language of the Hebrews, and that in
which it is always used when applied to the Son of God) we need no other
proof, than his Own words to the Jews; Now (says he) Ye seek to kill me, a man
that has told you the John viii. 40.
Truth. Nor does he only entitle Himself, Man, but more frequently the Son of
Man, which shows him to have been of Humane Extraction, and by necessary
consequence of the same Nature. If we desire to know his Pedigree, we need look
no further than the Gospel of St. Luke, who has derived it as far backward, as
from the common Father of Mankind. And because God had promised to Abraham,
that in his seed all the Genesis xxii. 18.
Nations of the Earth should be blessed; in correspondence to this Promise,
among all the Sons of Adam, he might have made choice of, he took the seed of
Abraham. And as Heb. ii. 16.
God afterward swear with an Oath unto David, Act. ii. 30.
that of the fruit of his loins, he would raise up Christ to sit on his Throne;
so we are assured, that he was made of the seed of David according Romans 1. 3.
to the flesh; and the Evangelists tell us in particular, what Daughter of the
House of David it was, who was so highly favored by God, as to be made his
Mother.

But had he as Melchisedech, been represented in Holy Scripture, as without
Father Heb. vii. 3.
and without Mother too; yet who can call in question the Truth of his
Humanity, who considers, that he had a Body of the same substance with our Own?
For because the Children were partakers of flesh and Heb. ii. 14.
blood, he also himself took part of the same (as the Author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews tells us) the Reality of which, his Adversaries were sufficiently
confident of, who made long Furrows upon his back, and pierced his hands and
his feet; And that his Body was animated by a Soul, that demonstrated it self
to be truly Humane, by all those Acts and Faculties; that are the inseparable
Properties of such a Soul.

In brief: so wonderful was the Father's Love, and the Sons condescension; that
he became not only a Man; but in the common account of the World, a man of the
meanest Birth and Quality, (for the Family Philip. ii. 7.
of David was then obscure) He made himself of no Reputation, lessened himself
into the form of a Servant: and therefore might truly call himself the Son of
Man, as that expression among the Hebrews, peculiarly signified, a Man of low
Degree, that has nothing in outward appearance that may command esteem; but is
barely a Man, and no more. He was made flesh in the more humble sense of the
word, as it is put for weakness and Frailty, for that which is vile and
contemptible; being made subject to those abasing, sinless Infirmities, to
which the most despicable of the Sons of men are. As will be manifest in
speaking to the next Proposition.

That God sent his Son into the World in the likeness of sinful flesh; in the
Show and Appearance of a Sinner. And that upon these three Accounts, especially

1. Because he sent him Subject to all the same Natural Infirmities, that
Sinners are. I say Natural, on purpose to distinguish them from such as are
Personal; for though he did not take upon himself those Infirmities, by which
one man differs from another; yet he became obnoxious to all those, that adhere
to the Humane Nature, and so are common to the whole Race of Mankind. Whether
they be such, as follow the Nature of a frail mortal Body; as Hunger, Thirst,
Weariness; Pain, yea, Death it self; or such as attend the Souls of other Men;
as Sorrow, Fear, Amazement. So great, so many, so continual were his sorrows,
that the Prophet calls him, a man of sorrows, Isa. liii. 3.
and acquainted with griefs. Now although these Infirmities are not in
themselves sins, and therefore the Son of God took upon him a Humane Nature
subject to them; yet because most of those before mentioned, are in all other
Men the Fruits and Punishments of sin; therefore by submitting to them, he took
upon himself the Livery of a Sinner.

2. Because God sent him into the World under the Law. When the fullness of time
was Galat. iv. 4.
come (says the Apostle) God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under
the Law. That he was under the Law as to its Curse, and suffered the Penalty
due to a Sinner, will afterward appear. That which I now intend is, that he was
made subject to the Commands; not of the Moral only, but of the Ceremonial Law,
which supposed sin in those who were obliged to the Observation of them. He was
Circumcised the Eighth day, which was the reputed Badge of a Sinner, as
supposing some Impurities of the flesh that were to be cut off. Though he was the
Lamb of God that took away the sins John i. 29.
of the World; Yet he eat the Paschal Lamb together with his Disciples; as if
he himself had stood in need of an Expiatory Sacrifice. Thus by submitting to
such Rites, as implied sin in the Observers of them; he seemed to be of the
same sinful mould and Constitution with other Men. But

3. And especially, God sent him in the likeness of sinful flesh; because he
sent him to be Treated as a Sinner. He made him to be 2 Cor. v. 21.
sin for us; to be reckoned, and dealt with, as one guilty of the blackest
Enormities. He was accused of the Highest Impieties toward God, of the
Grossest Injustice toward Men, of the foulest Intemperance in respect of
Himself. So Monstrous a sinner was he deemed, by those who were the Legal
Judges in such Cases, that a Robber and a Murderer when compared with Him, were
reputed Innocent. He was accordingly condemned to Death, by the sentence of the
S^pream Magistrate; and to such a Death, as none but the very scum and Reproach
of Mankind were ever put to. And yet as if that Opprobrious Death, had been too
little to represent to the World, how vile a Malefactor they thought him, to
aggravate the shame and Torment of it they added all manner of Indignities, by
which they were able to express, their utmost Scorn and Detestation of him.

Thus the Son of God, (as was long before prophesied) was numbered with the
Transgressors; Isa. liii. 12.
was treated as an infamous Person while he lived; and as such was cut off from
the Land of the Living. And all this was done by the determinate Counsel and
foreknowledge Act. 2. 23.
of God (as St. Peter tells us.) And we cannot easily imagine, how God could
contrive more Effectually, to set forth his Son in the ugly Dress of a sinner,
than by exposing him to all the most abhorred and Reproachful usages, that the
worst of sinners are ever exposed to.

But though in these Respects, he was like to sinful flesh; yet he was only Like,
and not indeed such: but perfectly Innocent, and perfectly Righteous: As is
evident by Scripture, and by Reason too.

1. By Scripture; which testifies, that in 1 John iii. 5.
him was no sin; but that he was holy, harmless, Heb. vii. 26.
undefiled, and separate from sinners. And therefore when it speaks of his
Universal likeness to us, it is with this Limitation, He Heb. iv. 1^.
was in all points tempted like unto us, yet without Sin.

He could derive no stain from Adam, because he was Miraculously conceived of a
Virgin, by the overshadowing of the Holy Luke 1. (...).
Ghost: And therefore the Angel Gabriel, to signify the immaculate Purity of
his Humane Nature, calls him, That Holy thing, by way of eminency.

Nor was he only exempt from that Pollution, which necessarily descends to all
other men by Natural Generation; but he never contracted any himself. Whereas
there is nothing, in which Persons are more apt to sin, than in speech; and
therefore St. James tells us, That if any man offend not Jam. iii. ^.
in Word; the same is a perfect Man; he never offended this way; for there was
no guile found in his Mouth; Which the Apostle mentions 1 Pet. ii. 22.
in particular, to vindicate his Innocence, from the malicious Calumnies of the
Jews; who accused and condemned him, as a false Prophet, and a Blasphemer.

And no wonder, that no sin ever proceeded out of his Mouth; since none ever
entered into his Heart. For when the Prince Joh. xiv. 30.
of this World came to him, he found nothing in him. Not so much as an evil
Thought, to take part with any of his Temptations. This his unspotted Purity,
was foretold by the Prophets long before; and represented by those Sacrifices
that were Types of him.

And great Reason there was in the second place; That he should be absolutely
free from sin. For had he not been a Lamb without Blemish, he had not been fit
for a Sacrifice. Had he had sin Himself, he had not been in a capacity of
making satisfaction for the sins of others: And therefore the Apostle tells us,
that it became us; 'twas not only meet, but necessary; that we should have Heb.
vii. 26, 27.
an High Priest, who needed not to offer Sacrifices, first for his own sins;
for had he needed that, he could not have offered a meritorious Sacrifice for
Ours. That therefore he might be qualified, to make such a Sacrifice for us,
that might be a sweet smelling savor; 'twas needful, that he Himself should be
Holy, and without Blemish.

And yet there was great Reason, why (though perfectly pure from sin) he should
be sent into the World, in the Likeness of a Sinner. And that

1. That he might by his own Example, more powerfully teach us, to deny our
Credit, when it stands in Competition with our Duty; to be content to be
reputed vile persons, rather than make our selves really such. This is a piece
of self-denial, in which Good men do commonly meet with the greatest
Difficulty: For the more ingenuous any Persons are, at so much the higher rate
do they value their good Name; and therefore are never in greater danger of
being drawn to the Commission of sin, than when they shall be looked upon as
Sinners, for not committing it. That therefore we might be the better fortified
against this dangerous Temptation, God was pleased to send his own Son into the
World, to be treated as a sinner; that looking to Him, the Captain of our
Salvation, we may follow him with an Undaunted Courage and Resolution, through
Honor and Dishonor; through Evil Report, and good Report. That we may be
willing to Sacrifice, not only our Lives; but (which is more) our Reputation
too, rather than do any thing misbecoming our Holy Profession. This is that to
which St. Peter tells us, we are called by God, and that upon this very
Account: because Christ also has suffered for us, 1 Pet. ii. 19, 20, 21, 22.
leaving us an Example, that we should follow his steps. And this is no more,
than what the Primitive Christians, had daily Trials of; and which animated by
so great an Example, they most cheerfully endured.

2. That he might the more Effectually recommend to our Affection and Practice,
all other the most excellent Christian Graces: such as Charity, Humility,
Meekness, Obedience to our Governors, entire submission to the Divine Will, in
suffering, as well as doing: All which were most lively expressed, and most
powerfully recommended to our Imitation, by his coming into the World, and
Living and Dying, in the likeness of sinful flesh.

And what can be of greater force, for the begetting and promoting the same in
our selves? How can he be Proud, who sets before his Eyes, the Unparallel
Humility of the Lord of Glory? How can he fret and fume at every little
neglect; who considers his immovable Patience, under the most Contumelious and
Despightful usage? How can he despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities;
who remembers, that he was Dumb, and opened not his Mouth, when the most unjust
sentence was pronounced against him? But

3. And especially God sent him into the World in the likeness of sinful flesh;
because he sent him to be put into the place and room of sinners; to make full
satisfaction for their Offenses, by suffering the shame, as well as the Pain,
that was due to them; which leads to the fourth Proposition.

God sent his own Son into the World, in the likeness of sinful flesh, to be a
Sacrifice for Sin. Though this was not the only, yet it was one prime end for
which he sent him; and therefore it was is no more than what was expedient,
that he should be represented to the World, in the quality of a Sinner.

That his Father gave it him in charge to lay down his Life for us, we learn
from his own Mouth; for therefore, says he, does my John x. 17, 18.
Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again: this
Commandment have I received from my Father. So much was this in the Fathers
design, that long before he sent him, he plainly signified by his Holy
Prophets, that he should not only suffer and die; but that in his Death, his
Soul should be made an Offering for sin. Yea no sooner was Isa. liii. 10.
man become a Sinner, but he gave intimation of it, in the Promise to Adam; and
in those bloody Sacrifices, which by his own Institution, were offered by
Sinners, and accepted by Himself in their room.

In humble Obedience to this Command which his Father gave him, and in
correspondence to these Predictions; he voluntarily offered himself to a
violent and cruel death: For knowing all things that should come John xviii. 4.
upon him, he went to the place, whither a band of Soldiers and Officers, were
sent to apprehend him; and after he had given them to understand how easily he
could baffle all their attempts, in case he had a mind to resist them (by
striking them down to the ground with a word of his mouth) he gave himself up
into their hands; who forthwith led him away bound to those, whose Malice he
knew was so implacable, that it would be satisfied with nothing less than his
Blood; and by their instigation he was condemned to Death (after the Judge had
again and again acquitted him) and by wicked hands was crucified and slain. And
that he might exactly answer those Sacrifices under the Law, by which his was
most eminently prefigur'd; he not only poured out his Soul unto Death, but he
also suffered without the gate of the City: like as the Heb. xiv. 11, 12.
bodies of those Beasts, whose blood was brought by the High Priest into the
Sanctuary, were burnt without the Camp.

Thus he freely gave himself an Offering and a Sacrifice to God. And that he
gave himself for us, to make expiation for our Guilts, we are as infallibly
assured by the word of Truth; which expressly affirms: That he was delivered for
Our offenses; that Romans iv. 25.
he was wounded for our Transgressions, was bruised Isa. liii. 5.
for our Iniquities; that the chastisement of our Peace was upon him, that by
his stripes we might be healed: That he has redeemed us from the Galat. iii.
13.
curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us: That we have Redemption through
his blood, the Ephesians. i. 7.
forgiveness of sins. In which words, we have not only the persons for whom he
dyed, but one blessed fruit of his meritorious Sacrifice, in all those who
truly repent, and turn from their Iniquities, viz. the forgiveness of sins: For
if the blood of Bulls, and Heb. ix. 13, 14.
of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctified to
the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the blood of Christ, who
through the Eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge our
Consciences from dead works?

This (I say) is one fruit of his Sacrifice, for this is not all. He bare our
sins in his own 1 Pet. ii. 24.
body upon the Tree, to the end that we being dead unto Sin, might live unto
God. He therefore died for our Sins, that we might die to them. Our deliverance
from the Punishment of sin, was designed by God, in order to our deliverance
from the Power of it; that sin might no longer reign in our mortal Body, that
we should obey it in the Lusts thereof; but that being made free from sin, we
might become the Servants of Righteousness: This was that which God principally
aimed at, and at the other only as a Motive to it. Which brings me to the last
thing observable in the words.

God by sending his own Son into the World, in the likeness of sinful flesh, to
be a Sacrifice for sin, has taken the most effectual course for the
Destruction of sin in us. For the purifying of our Hearts, and reforming our
Lives; that we may not live the rest of our time in the flesh, to the Lusts of
Men, but to the Will of God.

When the highest Seize of the Heathen Moralists, were to this purpose so
unavailable, that their own Precepts were a constant reproach to their
Practice; When the Law of Moses was so weak and unprofitable, that the precise
Pharisee, (notwithstanding his Zeal for the observance of it) was as great a
slave to the sins of the Spirit, as the profane Publican was to those of the
Flesh; When all those Purgatives of Humane Nature, which the wisest men both of
the Jewish and Gentile World, did most admire and applaud, were of so little
force to the end for which they were prescribed; that the whole World was
overgrown with wickedness: For the Mortification of sin, when all other ways
proved so ineffectual, that it daily improved under them; God at length sent
his only Son into the World, to die upon a Cross for it: Which however it is to
the Jews a stumbling block, and was at the first, to the Greeks, foolishness;
Yet to them that are called, (who heartily believe it) both Jews and Greeks,
it is the Power of God, and the wisdom of God: The Power of God unto Salvation;
unto that great Salvation, which God primarily designed for us; the saving us
from sin: The wisdom of God; It being incomparably above all other the most
advantageous course, that the wisdom of God ever contrived for the abolishing
of it: Both as it affords the most powerful Motives, to quicken our endeavors
to it; and as it gives us the most powerful Assistance, by which we may be
enabled to effect it. It affords the most powerful Motives to excite our
endeavors to it.

1. As it is a most palpable demonstration of God's infinite Abhorrency of sin,
of his implacable Wrath and inexorable severity against it, and of that
intolerable Damnation, that all those will unavoidably incur, who shall
notwithstanding persevere in the practice of it.

God had before taught Mankind by many sensible Experiments, that sin was an
evil, and a bitter thing: But never was his wrath so dreadfully revealed from
Heaven against it, as in delivering up his own Son, to be an expiatory
Sacrifice for it. The Destruction of a World at once (eight persons only
excepted) was in comparison but a slight expression of his vengeance: For by
how much more valuable, the single Life of his beloved Son was, than that of
the whole World of Sinners, by so much the more in his Death, did the
Indignation of God against sin appear. The destroying of Sodom and Gomorrah by
a Fire as strange as their Lusts; what was it, to the flaming out of his wrath
against him, who was as dear to him as himself? For the greater the Love of God
was to him, so much the more was his Hatred of sin thereby declared. Should we
ascend as high as Heaven, or descend as low as Hell; neither the Angels thrown
down from above, nor the dismal Groans of the Souls beneath, can so loudly
proclaim God's detestation of sin, as the strong cries and tears, the bloody
sweat and agony of his Son did. No Parallel can be found for it, no Example
that falls not as far below it, as the Creature below the Creator.

And since God was so severe in his Inflictions upon his only Son, can we
imagine that he will spare us, if in contempt and defiance of his Justice, we
shall still harden our selves in Rebellion against him? If he so dreadfully
vindicated the Honor and Authority of his Laws, on him who had never
transgressed the least of them Himself, but out of his immense Charity only
interposed for those that had; Can any man be so sottish, as to flatter himself
with hopes of Impunity, in case he still continues in the wilful Violation of
them?

For tho it is true, Christ gave himself a Ransom for all men, the most daring
sinner in the World not excepted; Yet 'twas upon condition only of their
sincere Repentance, that they were to receive the benefits of his Ransom: None
shall ever be made Partakers of the Blessed Fruits of his Cross (the Pardon of
their sins and Reconciliation with God) who do not themselves crucify the
flesh with its affections and lusts: For those who still cherish them, and make
Provision for them, nothing remains, but a certain fearful looking for of
Judgment, and fiery Indignation to devour them. For if the word spoken by
Angels Heb. ii. 2, 3.
was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if we despise so great Salvation?
There is no possibility of their escape from the Damnation of Hell in the other
World, who refuse to be delivered from their sins in this World. And who can
dwell with devouring Fire? Who can dwell with Everlasting burnings? It Is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of a Revenging God, whose Power is equal
to his Justice, and who lives for ever to take Vengeance; 'Twas ever a fearful
thing, but 'twill be now more, especially so to those who cleave to their sins,
after God has so fully discovered how intolerably odious they are to him. This
will be their Condemnation, (their Condemnation with a Witness) that they still
persist in their sins, notwithstanding God has so plainly made known, how
infinitely dear they shall pay for them.

Nor is the Consideration of Christ's Death, as a Sacrifice for sin, more
powerful to drive and affright us from it, as it is the most evident
Demonstration of God's unappeasable Wrath against sin; than it is to attract and
allure us to Holiness. As it is

2. An unparallel Expression of his Love and kindness to sinners; of his
exceeding readiness to pardon them upon their sincere Repentance; and to make
them everlastingly happy.

It would have argued great Clemency in the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth,
had he but given us leave to have petitioned him for Mercy. But though he
resolved to prevent us by his Grace, and while we were yet sinners and
obnoxious to his Vengeance, to make offers of Reconciliation to us; had it not
been enough to have sent them, by one of the meanest of those ministering
Spirits, that continually attend upon him? But if he would love us so much, who
so much deserved his Hatred, as to send his only Son out of his own bosom to
us; Who could have imagined, but he would have sent him aray'd with Light,
shining with such amazing Glory and Majesty, as might have given the World to
understand the supereminent Dignity of his Person: But to send him in Flesh,
and which is yet more vile in the likeness of sinful flesh, that in that odious
disguise he might deliver him up to the most accursed Death, to purchase a
pardon for us Miscreants with his own most precious Blood. What manner of Love
was this? Well might St. John say, Herein is 1 John ix. 1
Love. You will say perhaps, and in what not? Since the love of God is plainly
legible in all his works. True, but herein is love so transcendent, that all
the love showed to Mankind in the works of Creation, and common Providence
deserves not to be named, when compared with it. Even our Blessed Savior
himself, as if unable to express it, speaks of it with admiration. So John iii.
16.
God loved the World! So inexpressibly, so inconceivably.

And is it possible, after such a stupendous Testimony of God's love to
sinners; that the greatest sinner in the World should so much as question his
readiness to pardon him, upon his sincere Repentance? Has God given his only
Son to die for us, to the end that he may be just, and yet the justifyer of him
that believes in Jesus? And now Romans iii. 26.
that all the demands of his Justice are fully satisfied, shall he not much
more give us a Pardon? What can hinder? When even Justice it self is now become
an Advocate for sinners, and pleads for Mercy. And therefore St. John says, if
we confess our sins, 1 John i. 9.
not that he is merciful, but he is just to forgive us our sins. Let therefore
the Wicked forsake Isa. lv. 7.
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto the
Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon. Though his sins be as scarlet, they Isa. i. 18.
shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as
wool.

And can there be a more potent Motive to Repentance? Unless it be that God
will not barely pardon, but for the redundant Merit of this all-sufficient
Sacrifice, will also advance us to a more glorious and happy state, than that
which by sin we lost. What Rebel would not relent and return to Loyalty; were
he unquestionably assured that his Prince would be so far from punishing him,
that he would on the contrary promote him to the highest Honors? Such an
assurance has God given to all truly penitent Sinners; that he will not only be
merciful to their unrighteousness, and remember their sins and iniquities no
more; but will take them into his bosom, treat them as his Favorites; Yea,
make them Coheirs together with his Son, of his own everlasting Kingdom and
Glory.

And can the most resolute sinner in the World be so obstinate, as not to be
overcome, and yield himself a Captive to such Love? And if we are once brought
under the Power of Divine Love; this alone will raise and unite all the Forces
of our Souls against our sins, and make us cry out with as much vehemence
against them, as the Jews did against our Savior, Crucify them, Crucify
them; Let not one of them escape alive, and let those above all the rest be put
to a reproachful Death, that we have formerly been most enchanted and led
Captive by.

If besides these mighty Motives, (which one would think were sufficient, to
give strength to the weakest; and to raise them to the Life of God, who are
quite dead in Sins and Trespasses) any thing further can be needful to this
purpose. Consider,

3. That God (as the Purchase of this meritorious Sacrifice) has also sent his
Holy Spirit to assist our Endeavors; to raise and renew our Faculties, and to
strengthen us with that might in the inner man, by which we may be enabled to
get the Victory over our strongest and most imperious inordinate Lusts: For
certainly the most domineering and prevailing sin, has not gotten such
absolute Dominion over us, but by the assistance of this Almighty Spirit, we
may be set free from the Bondage of it.

We can scarce imagine any persons more under the Power of vile Affections,
than those spoken of, 1 Corinthians. vi. 9, 10. And yet how deeply soever they were
sunk into the Mire, the Apostle tells us, v. 11. that they were washed, that
they were sanctified, that they were justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus,
and by the Spirit of our God. In the early ages of the Gospel, so common, and
so apparent were the Effects of the Divine Graces, in reforming the most
outrageously vicious persons, that they were matter of great Boasting and
Triumph to the Primitive Christians.

And God be thanked, our own Age is not destitute of some famous Instances of
this Nature: And that we meet not with many more; it is not to be imputed to
Gods backwardness to give; but to our unwillingness to receive his Holy Spirit;
and to that Rude and Churlish entertainment we give him, when he makes his
visits to us. Did we but readily comply with his Motions, and yield our selves
up to be led by them; we should soon find it not only possible, but easy; Yea,
the most pleasant and delightful thing in the World, to deny all Ungodliness,
and Worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
World: Looking for the blessed Hope, and the glorious appearing of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous
of good works.

FINIS.

