Joanereidos: OR, FEMININE VALOR; Eminently discovered in WESTERN WOMEN, At
the Siege of LYME. AS WELL By defying the merciless Enemy at the face abroad,
as by fighting against them in Garrison Towns; sometimes carrying stones, anon
tumbling of stones over the Works on the Enemy, when they have been scaling
them, some carrying powder, other charging of Pieces to ease the Soldiers,
constantly resolved for generality, not to think any ones life dear, to
maintain that Christian quarrel for the long Parliament. Whereby, as they
deserve commendations in themselves, so they are proposed as example unto
others. With Marginal Notes on the Work, and several Copies of Verses by a Club
of Gentlemen on this Authors year and half WORK.

Languet virtus sine adversario.
Horace, Scribimus indocti, doctique etc. By JAMES STRONG Bachelor, etc.

Reprinted Anno Dom. 1674. (with Additions) for the satisfaction of his
Friends.

A BALLAD
On the Famous Author of Joanereidos, or Feminine Valor (That Incomparable
Piece, drawn some years since by his most Unimitatable Pencil.) To the Tune of
Or may indifferently suit with one of Tho. Sternhold 's Airs, and be sung as a
Hymn at a Conventicle.
Chivy Chase.
I Sing the Man whose Lofty Muse,
With Zeal and Wit inspired,
Did Western Women's Valor choose
To chant with Art acquired.
Strange is his Name, though Strong he writes,
Forgetting's Father's House,
Whom he neglects and thus slights
Because a Poor his Father was a poor Tailor at Church-stoak in Dorsetshire*
and wrought for a Groat a day, his Pottage, and Bread and Cheese.
Prick-Louse.
For ought he met him on the Road,
And in the Market Town,
But would swell on him like a Toad,
And not his Parent own;
Though he had bred him up at School,
By The help of The Wor^hy Parson of Church-stoak and afterward Warden of
Wadham-Colledge in Oxford.
Doctor Pitts,
Yet has he proved both Knave and Fool,
At least one not in's Wits.
At length to Oxford James Strange our learned Author.
James was sent,
And was there a Poor Scholar
A year or two, and from thence went
As he A Poo^ Scholar still.
came. But when Choler
And heat of Zeal had prompted him
To be a Holder-Forth,
He then became as Spruce and Trim
As Any in South or North.
The Sacred Having no Episcopal Ordination.
Function he invades
Without a Lawful Call,
(As now adays do Men of Trades,
Though learned not at all.)
And soon became a Teacher queint,
Zealous of Reformation,
Presently falling on the Point
Of dire Predestination.
Bishops and Deans he much decri'd
As Things intolerable,
The Surplice and the Cross beside
Were most abominable.
The That had so charitably contributed both toward his Education and
Instruction.
Doctor he turned out of door,
And took into possession
His Lands, his Goods, and, which is more,
His Books by Sequestration.
These he removed to Bettescombe,
Which was his Benefice,
That did by Smock-Simony come
And with a Belly-piece.
His Wife he often did chastise,
Who was a Mr. Mintern's Daughter in Dorset-shire.
Gentlewoman,
And would her Beat and Kick, though Niece
To's Patron, Old Brown of Brampton in Dorset was so called by N^l, for giving
his Voice for bringing King Charles the First to his Trial.
the Old Roman.
She hap'ning on a Day to wipe
Her Shoes with Wash-dish Clout,
He therefore gave her many a stripe,
And at Door turned her out:
But takes the Clout and buries it
In holy Turf hard by,
Causing its Knell in Angry Fit
To be rung solemnly.
The Holy He took the Font out of the Church, and made it his Pigs-trough.
Font that raised was
For the Administration
Of Infant Baptism, he (alas)
Fed Pigs, and put his Wash in.
When His Father was a Committee-man in Dorset-shire.
Raw the Sequestrator had
Himself hanged, through Despair,
Our Author (as his Chaplain) made
A Sermon to repair
The Credit of this Fallen Saint,
And did him much applaud,
As one impatient of Restraint,
From being with his God.
This Corpse which should have buried been
In some Cross-way and It should have had a Stake driven through it.
staked,
In Holy Ground interred was seen
By our Author, and up raked.
For being a Brother of the The Good-Old Cause of the Long Parliament.
Cause,
His Corpse the Temple was
O'th Holy Ghost, though judged by the Laws
The Carcass of an Ass.
But James at length so Pettish grew,
And eke so Choleric,
That his Good-natured Consort knew
Not how to find the Trick
Of Pleasing him; and therefore left
His Bed, Board, House and All,
And to her Tender Parents cleft,
To shun her Husband's Brawl.
For Iimmy is an Eager Man,
Most Froward all his Life,
No Body near him Quiet can
Be, he is so full of Strife.
And it is because he is so Eager
And Spightful too withal,
That he is grown so Thin and Meagre
By Trouble and by Thrall.
His Tenderhearted Wife he did
Heart-break, as most Men think,
Though Some there be have boldly said
They know 'twas his Breath's stink.
For James does breath so Ill an Air,
That he can Spiders slay
At three yards distance, and Few dare
In The Room, where he is, stay.
This is the Cause that near his House
No Rose or Flower blows,
Nor on his Body will a Louse
Come, nor within his Clothes.
His Feet have eke so strong a Scent
That This our Fragrant Brother
Is often sent for with intent
To cure the Women's A Disease incident to Women, proceeding from an Obstruction
in the Matrix, which our Author is well known to be experimentally skilled in
removing.
Mother.
For Feathers burnt are not so strong
In stinking, as his Toes,
Therefore they follow him in throng
Where ever Iimmy goes.
The second part to the same Tune.
But being at length Ambitious grown,
He could not be Content
With that His Parsonage of Bettescombe.
Small Lot which was his Own,
To Ilmister he went,
A Market Town in Somerset,
And though a Mr. Tarlton's Vicaridge.
Sequestration,
Yet Iimmy's Throat could swallow it
Glibber than Ordination.
Our Author here increased in Wealth,
As well as in Renown,
Though what he got was All by stealth,
And was none of his Own.
A Purchaser he then became
Of House, and eke of Lands,
And rose to be a Man of Fame;
But he built on the Sands.
For moving from the Vicaridge-house
The Porch, unto his Own,
The Fact, so Sacrilegious,
Did throw his Own House down.
And being now a Widower,
He would a Wooing ride,
To get a Rich Wife, far or near,
His Palfrie he would bestride.
In order whereunto, on goes
The Rich Black Velvet Coat,
(Which worn is, Every Body knows,
Only by Men of Note.)
In This he swagger'd up and down
Ilmister, Taunton, Chard,
On Market-daies; scarce any Town
Near him, but saw, or heard
How Brave a Gallant Iimmy was
Become. But though the Skin
Without was Lion, yet the Ass
Enclosed was within.
Thus habited, our Author did
Accost with Complement
His Widow, and as fairly bid
With His Coat, and's Implement;
As Any could at One Congress,
Which proved so Fortunate,
She thought it her Great Happiness
To make him her Bed-mate.
But not her Belly is it alone
That he has so well plied,
She often since has made great Moan,
He beats her Back and Side.
For James can Cuff, Kick, Scratch, and Scold
Like any Butter-Quean,
He Will not be Thwarted or Controlled
By Joan, Mall, Bess, or Jane.
And though he Female Valor raised
In Rich Heroic Verse,
Yet is our Author to be praised
In that he will not turn Arse
To the Weaker Sex. What ere the Song
Says, Iimmy, put up thy Dagger;
He will unsheath it, and among
His Country Lasses swagger.
For Iimmy's good at Poniard point
(The Western Women know it)
He Will pierce the Bone, and strike the Joint
(Where Is such another Poet?)
His Children very Many are,
But tattered so, and torn,
That, should you see them, you would swear
That they are quite forlorn.
On Carrion commonly he feeds,
(For his Appetite's Canine)
And therewith satisfies his Needs
Be It Bullock, Sheep, or Swine.
His Servants frequently complain
That he is so unjust,
As their Due Wages to detain;
Then summon him they must,
By Justice Warrant to Appear;
But James, This Man of Strife,
To save his Coin will boldly swear
He stands in fear of's Life:
And so does cause them to be bound
Unto the Good Behavior,
But if his Debt shall be disowned
He himself will be their Savior.
And yet will Iimmy pule and whine,
And make Devout-Bad Faces
In The Pulpit, and look so Divine,
You Would think he would All the Graces.
Did you but see him rhank his Nose
And hear its Zealous Twang,
This Instrument you would swear, in the Close,
At Formerly the Famous Seminary of Schismatics.
New-Inne Hall was strange.
On the Masculine-Feminine Poem of Mr. James Strong, Poet Hermophrodite.
POET of Mars and Venus! sweetly met,
And as before embracing in a Net.
A Net so thin and wonderfully small,
You cannot but conclude it Cobweb all.
Only the Postures changed, for by thy knack
Venus is uppermost, and Mars on's back.
Cowed Hercules must at the Distaff spin.
And Madam Omphale wears Lions skin.
The Female glory melted down thy head
As Flints are broken on a Feather-bed.
Pity it is for so much service done
Thy Pate's not washed from secret Helicon.
And with that Linen to dear flesh so nigh
Thy sacred brows and lips were not wipt dry.
Sure they would do it; and it would soon come from' em
Thou have so meltingly quite overcom' em.
Orpheus was once with furious Froes assailed
But unto thee They Have all their Kerchiefs veiled,
Thou can not stir abroad a Gossipping
But they their Caudles, Kisses, Amors bring.
They love thee for thy Name, and thy strong charms,
And all are ready Captives for thine arms.
Freely thou may (if thou will not be shy)
With Hercules his thirteenth Labor vye.
Go on brave Man, and do not think it much
(As times shall serve) to give us the other touch.
Some plagiary Poets steal their Bays,
And from what others writ their Trophyes raise.
From Homer, Virgil, much of glory drew,
And much of matter from old Ennius too.
But thou this honor have (and be it known)
That what thou writest, purely is thine own.
Nor can we call thine Dogg'rel-Poetry
Great Laureat of dear Pres-bitchery.
Thy Name's immortal then, and shall still ring,
Whilst Wives wear Breeches, and whilst Milk-maids sing.
On STRONG, and his more Stronger Poem.
STRONG is the Name, Strong is the Fame
Of this our Poet James,
Strong his Fancy's which out-prances
Valorous Western Dames.
Strong is his skull, like that of Bull,
Strong is his riming brain,
Strong is his Sconse as Parnass Mons
And Forked too some fain.
Strong are his Eyne, which by their shine
Pure Sistren comfort, Oh!
Strong his Eye-brow, like brisled Sow,
Her Arched back I trow.
Strong is his Snout, which high does strout,
Strong both his breath and weazon,
Strong is the dinn, when from within
Bag-pipe lungs he plays-on.
Strong is his Lip, whose Muscles skip
More quick than nimble Heart.
Which tear and beat like Puss in seat,
Before his words do start.
Strong is his Mouth, and firm of growth,
And also heavenly wide,
The many mops of's Monkey Chops
Shows Pug have edified.
Strong is his Tongue, which sounds among
The Precious, Alarm's,
Even to prevail unto Battle
Against Antichrist his Arms.
Strongly he strives, by his Motives,
The Saints to set a-Gog;
Strongly to fight with all their might,
Against God and Magog.
Strong is his Chin, where Jaws do twin,
Thence forking back to Ear,
Strong is their Mass, like that of Ass
Made Philistine to fear.
Strong Teeth are set in Jaw's socket,
Which meat does grind, and wrack,
Both great and small serve like Iackall
To Lion-like stomach.
When prey is got, They slow it not
Ne finee nor nibble,
He Eats so, you would cry, Oh
Th'stroak of his Mandible!
Strong are the Wrist's, strong are the Twist's
Of face so scru'd with tricks,
That it is hard bout, for to squeese out
His Costive Rhetorick's.
Forehead's drawn back, when ginns to speak,
Back nose strong fibers draw,
You Would swear like vile, Monster of Nile
He Would open his upper Jaw.
Strong is his Arm, which does much harm
To Feathers and to Wood,
When he did gin to beat down sin
It Is marle the Pulpit stood.
Strong heart of Oak, rends every stroke
Laid on by furious skill
When he does pump, then fist does thump
Like Mall of Tucking-Mill.
Strong though and fierce, yet neretheless
Cunning grew hand, and meek,
When to advance in wise semblance
It stroak'd his Mistress Cheek.
But when all wooed our Iamsee stood
Rectus in Curia,
He did embrace, and Wife solace
After the Russian way.
Strong were her tears, he perseveres
In Soul-Correcting sense,
Bangs hip and thigh, leav's place hard by
Undue Benevolence.
Strong since he grows, but weak his Spouse,
No otherwise we deem,
But James at length by tried strength,
Confutes his own Poem.
Rog. Rimer of Doggrill-Hall.

The Bookseller to the Reader.
THis matchless piece of Poetry falling into my hands, whether directed by
Providence or by Accident, I shall not distinguish; but conceiving it to be of
so much importance, in regard of the times, for comfort to those famous Western
women, whose piety and valor deserve to be recorded amongst the worthiest of
their Sex in this declining age, and may well serve as Presidents to others.
And fearing lest some malignant spirits should have injured the Author, in
exposing an imperfect copy, by reason the sundry transcriptions which this
elaborate Poem has much suffered in, the Author in this is rendered according
to the Original. And whereas many obscure places would have admitted a double
construction different from the Authors true meaning, you shall find the
literal sense of those places explained by one that had a great insight into
the Authors fancy. And for the better encouragement for a further progress,
many Wits have presumed to lend their willing fancies, as servants to usher
into the world these elaborate Poems; and though they appear to the eye but
small lights to thy Sun, yet the reflection from thee may in time make them
worthy to be accounted thy Scholars; what literal errata's thou meetest with
in the printing, let thy candid disposition pass by, and let not any fault
lessen the worth of the Author, and him that is most ambitious how he may be
accounted yours in all service,

Thomas Harrison.

To my most esteemed friend Mr. James Strong, cause these to be delivered.
Worthy Sir:
HAving had the unexpected happiness of seeing you at this Booksellers shop, I
was so surprised with your reverend aspect, grave habit, and Schollar-like
comportment, that I wanted confidence to address my self to you, being
conscious of mine own unworthiness to deserve your knowledge: but returning to
the shop the next morning, the Bookseller was pleased to show me the
incomparable Poem, which assured me that sage outside had a lining suitable;
then was I enflamed with an affection too strong to be suppressed, which has now
broke out in this address, humbly begging the happiness of your acquaintance,
and the honor to prefix a copy of commendatory verses, when you oblige the
world by making it public: truly Sir, the little needle of my soul wrought so
strongly after the great Load stone of yours, that I had designed the same
gallant subject to my thoughts long since, and intended what you have beyond
imitation performed, in so sweet a chyme of words and sense, so rare a
contexture of stories, and so exquisite embellishments throughout the whole
piece, that I must for ever be

The great admirer of your unparalled abilities, THO. ALLEN.

Honored Sir:
TO accept your courtesy might seem to argue vain glory, to deny it stupidity;
whatever I am to others, I shall acquit my self of both, and deem my self
unworthy to be so honored, as to have either countenance or commendation from
a man so dressed with ingenuity: herein indeed will be my grief, that it smells of
no more than (believe me) a year and halfs labor, whereby I may seem to
undervalue your respects for so easily acquiring it; deal with it as you
please, and to morrow if you please to give me a meeting at the three Daggers
at nine of the clock, I shall not fail of attending you.

Your undeserving friend, I A. STRONG.

To my most ingenuous friend, Mr. James Strong, on his excellently well-pen'd
Poem.
INimitable Sir, your lofty strain
So far transcends the lazy low-strung vein
Of those faint Rhimers which the world admired
For buskined raptures, that thou seem fired
From the same flame, which whilom shone so bright,
It seemed Meridian after the Starlight
Of meaner Poets, when great Gascoyn lived,
And Alexander Barklayes Muse contrived
That rare Translation of Brants stately Navis stultifera.
ship,
Fraught with those fools deserved his Satyrs whip:
I Would think their charming souls revived in thee,
But that I find a vast disparity:
Their lines are easy, and their phrases common,
Thine are heroic, thy words used by no man;
And here the Sun sets brighter in the West,
Then erst it rose in the refulgent East;
Thou have the disadvantage, but in time
Thy admirable Subject, and thy Rhyme
Will render thee more famous to the age
Ensuing, then the high Poetic rage
Of heathen wits, whose brows deserved but bays,
Whilst on thy reverent head these lines do raise
King Midas ornament, a guerdon due
Unto no mortal juster then to you:
Withers a man of Arms and Arts has wrote
In gallant Rhyme, but thy immortal throat
Has far out-voic'd him, and thy active Muse
Out-does his lance, and pen; all Pedlars use
Next unto Almanacks with care to buy
Their dear delight Tho. Pru's sweet Poetry,
Which spread in wickar scive, has often invited
The Chamber-maids with itch of verse delighted,
Unto their moving shops, where they do sell
Nothing but tape and needles half so well,
Thy stately Poem will usurp their place,
And bring them to the fatal sad disgrace
Of Chandlers shops, whilst thine alone are sung
With tuneful noise unto the long-ear'd throng;
Whose well-weigh'd praises will advance thy name
'Bove Heywood, Viccars, or John Tailors fame
As far as e're the Bard past Aristarchus,
Or foolish Bavius was excelled by Marcus.
Tho. Allen.

On this reverent Poem, and the more reverent Author.
ARms, and the man I sing, whose lines rehearse
The Western wenches doughty deeds, in verse;
More high, then (erst) the acts of Guy of Warwick,
Southamptons Beavoys, or the Knight of Barwicke.
Assist Mol Cutpurse, and ye warlike bands,
That march toward Billings-gate with eager hands,
And tongues more loud then bellowing Drums, to scale
Oyster or Herring ships, when they strike sail
In that Creeks bosom; you the Muses are
Most fit to be invoked to aid this war,
And the courageous Poet, that dares write
The Rare adventures of this doughty Knight,
Who in a Village Belfrey ruled of late
The awing rod, and in that happy state
Each hour surveyed Pernassus double Hill,
When Lillys Rules, being pars'd or conster'd ill,
The weeping Lads mount wooden Pegasus;
How could the Pedant choose being furnished thus
But write this Poem in a motley style,
Which first in bumbast prose he did compile?
With toil and sweat out of a Dictionary,
Mixing some stories of the Virgin Mary,
And other Saints, whose names his babbling tongue
(Fitter for Ballads) does profanely wrong.
Then buffeting his patient desk he bites
His nails, inspired with new fancy, writes,
Breaks off abruptly, knocks his empty scull,
Falls to it again, and with a mouth brim-full
Of spumy froth spits praises on that sex,
Tells inconsistent stories, which perplex
The sense, and his dull noddle, now at length
His hackney Muse is tired, and wanting strength
To trot on farther, ends his stately song,
With which his teeming brain travailed as long
As breeding Elephants; but by the help
Of Midwives this his self resembling whelp
Is like the Moon-calf born, and as men carry
Their Monster-children, Satyr-like all hairy,
Distorted in their limbs, dwarfish in stature,
Or unlike men in any brutish feature,
From Villages to Cities where they show
By painted clothes hung out, the throng that go
Through those streets, that their admiring eyes
For two pence may behold those prodigies.
So learned Strong full sixty miles did travel,
Maugre all danger of the dirt and gravel,
From Village Belfrey unto London City
With many a weary step, to show this pretty
Spawn of his ignorance, so like him in shape,
Owl was never liker Owl, nor Ape like Ape;
In The crooked lines of's face and hands you may
Each line within his Book fully survey,
And more exactly view wonder in both,
Then in the picture on the painted cloth:
Were he and his brat mine, I would out-vy
Thredesken, Gill, and all the frippery
In the Tower-wardrop, but in this I wrong
The Bookseller, unto whose shop the throng
Will hourly flock, amazed at the post,
Where this rare Frontispiece shall proudly boast
A sight so strange and pleasant, that his gain
Will equal thy expense in purse and brain.
Pedantick wretch, whilst thy much hoped reward
(Ten shillings) is unpaid, without regard
Of thy necessity; but thou art sure
Of happiness above a Country cure
In Gotham College; where the cap and babble,
The reverent Hood, and Tippet, shall enable
The learned Bible Clark to instal thee
Vice President of their Society.
ALLEN. THOMAS.

Verses made into Meeter, whereby they might more illustriously give praise
unto this Author, who whilom was a Student of the seventeen Liberal Sciences of
New-Inn-Hall in Oxenford.
This may be either said, Or sung, To the Tune of When Sculls.

O Oxenford! old Oxenford!
how many Clerks I wis,
Learned in deed, and eke in word,
have thou yspawn'd like this?
O New-Inn-Hall! New-Inn-Hall high!
how have thou doctrinated
His plumbeous cer^brosity,
he is so subtle pated?
Some segregated are, I ween,
fro midst the ruder throng,
By Providence, so has he been,
and placed Schollards among:
Where comptly nurtured up in good,
and savoury literature,
Sage words of wise he understood,
and put all eke in ure.
To argumentate he was taught
Syllogistically,
First to divisionating brought,
to define by and by:
But why alas? nay why alas?
should I by a gradation
Think to declare how he did pass
all men in disputation,
Or in mysterious Sciences,
As in M^ll-stones pellucid,
Saw quiddities, and entities,
and all that Art produced.
Much less how he, with sweat and pain,
drudged in Poetry,
And Mid-wiv'd gravitated brain
Swollen big with rapsody;
Taking Occasions fore-top then,
eft soons his mind he bent,
To write with paper, ink, and pen,
wars most sanguinolent.
With pulchritude of sense, and rhyme,
he strait charactered
West women's valor stout, what time
in Towns they were besieged.
And eke also what time in field,
at face of Foe they vaunted,
Whilst monstrous stones they nimbly wield,
and the fierce Soldiers daunted*
O man of worth, memento now,
in height of glory, whence,
By dotes transfunded your scull through,
your learnt skilful-loquence:
And in requital of the same
on Bodley's Library,
Bestow this Book of greater fame,
than ever Groat did buy.
This was composed by A.B. quondam Student of Oxenford.
To the Author on this never-enough praised Poem.
EVen as the Sun, and eke the Wind,
With laughter fills the Elephant:
So do I thus to please my mind,
thy praise, O Author, loudly chaunt.
And as the Moon, and eke the Sky,
are nearer unto Heaven than Earth:
So also do I versifie,
being far from grief, and full of mirth.
Or as a man, and eke a woman,
is neither Horse, nor Dog, nor Cat:
So do I write, enforced by no man,
I know not, nor I care not what.
Or lastly, as a Harry Groat,
(being gray) is worth four single pence:
So is he worthy a fools Coat,
that writes to thee in rhyme or sense.
On the Lurned labor of this Worshipful good Power.
ICh pray you Readers, have you no dizdain,
'Cause I an ing-rant, and unletterd zwayn,
'Mungst lurned Glarks do zomething notivy:
Good will unto the thang cleppt powetry;
Cham zore abasht with this rudeness to haundle
The point, or zhow forth with an hauf-penny caundle,
His worth to the world varr off and at haund,
Amongst those houge bon-vires which before this book staund,
And make zike a cracklin blaze that ich ween,
My greazed Bul-rush will scauntly be zeen;
Yet ich do well ken that moany a mon,
Will pook out my intendiments better thon
Moony tales and names, in thuck lurned Powet,
Who ich do believe himselve did not know it,
But writ it, that we with wonderment might
Think him in schollardzhip, marlous ztout;
Cham not zo well liked with his cunning wit,
As cham with the wonches he talks of in it,
Zike bounsing Lasses would hold a mon tack,
Though he had my tough gray vour horses back;
My teeth do water to wrestle a vall,
Though it were with the zdurdiest wench an um all:
Chave known the time when Maudlin and Joan,
And two ztouter girls the west has not known,
Have vallen down vlat, and not stood upright,
When I began ta buckle my tools to the vight,
And with my implement, and but two stones,
Have clawd um zoundly both twice and once:
But vor thy meed, Sir John, if thou comst ere
Toward my zimple cottage ich'le make thee good cheer,
Of Uurmenty, White-pot, vat Bacon, and Cale,
And vill thy skin with March Beer, and Ale,
Uor the zweet sport chave had and tickling lafter,
That ich shall be merry vor ever hereafter,
When I think in my mind, that moony a parson,
Poor Uicar, and Reader, and Bell-fray whoreson,
Durst never in verson zo doughty and bold,
Zince the cunning Bards, and the Monks of old,
Zet vorth the valourous deeds of women,
That have gen the voyl to moony ztout yeomen,
And dare in their zmocks without coat of Mayl
Encounter the ztrongest hind with his vlayl.
Go vorward, Sir John, and tell of the boys,
That are got on these girls in this time of noise,
Will not do exbloyts vit vor thy high verze,
With bellowing zound zweetly to reherze,
Uor which hereafter 'twill of thee be zeed,
Sir John, the Powet, had a harey head.
B. A.

A Sang made to gang to the Balliballeer, to the tune of the Authors praise, by
B. A. of Aberdeen.
O Doughty Sankster, thy luggs sa lang,
Thy loins sa stark, thy wit sa strange,
Makes me aghast with brussels upright,
As if I kend some uncouth wight,
How might I than with dread beheld
Thy gude-wives drill in martial fleld?
And heave sike miccle stanes as I ween
In Albion Clyffs man never did ken,
But what recks that these willy coats gay,
Those fause lowns did well beat by my say,
Mare sare then unwhile in Muscleborough-field,
When the stern so pour Scots-men queld;
I Would lever have a gripp of anes crage,
And with two stanes her bonny wem invade,
Then fra their weildy fists ha ane
At the fair mark of my noddle thrane.
Thus ta conclude my trim Scotch-hops now,
Mare praises to thee I must allow,
Then to Rhymer Lord Sterline, and Mis-Davee Linfy,
And all they leave an um in Poyets frensy.
An Hymn, for to declare the Authors praise withal.
WHen sculs of men are sorely bent
to learned Poetry,
Then deeds of arms are sung in tent
full lofty-loftily.
Lo, in tall Verse the Authors self,
with Pen in ear so thick,
Does brandish rhyme from Western clime,
of dead and eke of quick.
Of Giants thumbs and Saracens ears,
he nill no care to take,
Of Ladies fell and Damsels keen,
his Poem is y make:
Whose brawny arms, full delicate,
distilling amber sweat,
Through trusty nose of Poet good
inspire no vulgar heat.
Tough quil in hand is hent most sure,
which goose so gray did bear,
In wrathful wise, he to the skies
stern chivalry does -- clare.
With -- phane and sacred history
y granished all over,
The Maiden Fame is stretched out
from West, all eke to Nor'e.
No more in dirty socks, no more
shall Poet stride the plains:
Nor under fustian cap shall work
those bay-deserving brains.
On Sconce of hill bold squire of art
has shook the Laurel tree,
His gols been washed in Pegase Fount
by Ladies three times three.
Moreo're, his face is Mouse-trap true,
over done with bacon rind,
To snap your Critic black or blue
where ere so them he find.
O soul of man, to glory bent!
may that day never come,
When Custard fond, or Tart more gay,
thy leaves to pavement doom.
Performed by one of the Wisdoms.

To the Renowned Author, Master JAMES STRONG.
WHen first thy parts and person I did view,
I mean thy outward lineaments and hue,
Thy vaster bulk, thy grave and wise aspect,
And all with equal guise and beauty decked,
I much admired, and to my self concluded,
(And well I ween'd, I could not be deluded)
Within that cask (and right it was defined)
Some nobler spirit sure must be inshrined:
Thus wondering as I stood, straight to mine eye
Were brought thy rarest Rhymes and Poesy.
Poor mortal, how aghast! I read 'hem with wit so fraught,
That like to one who was of wits bestraught.
I stood amazed, astonished let it be,
For much I feared the fate of Niobe;
Only this difference 'twixt us there had bin,
(Which to forget, I fear had been a sin.)
She, she, poor soul, through grief was petrified,
But I through admiration stupify'd,
But well; these pangs, and pantings being over,
After my self, I'gan for to recover.
Oh how I kissed, embraced, and hugged thy Verse?
And now naught else but Strong I could rehearse.
Nay, which is more, I'gan to love the times
That had occasioned these thy happy Rhymes:
And blamed those peevish wits, who often had cried,
Since Abraham Frauner, and haughty Churchyard died.
All Poesy is left, (indeed I know it,
Since they were gone till now, we scarce had Poet)
For now like Sun with clouds of sable hue,
Bedeckt, and covered, all is returned in you.
No more let us now the much renowned trade
Of Ballading, too much of late decayed,
As lost bewail, for from thy clearest spring,
Poets inspired each market day shall sing;
And stories now bedight in homely Prose,
Each morn in Rhyme and Meeter we will expose
Unto the greedy view of mortals, who
Shall own restored Poetry to you.
I must confess, when first I did but glance
Upon thy huger bulk, and that by chance,
I deemed sure now a well proportioned birth
From Teeming Mount: to mortals greatest mirth
Shall issue forth, 'twas even as I did guess it,
And now my Muse desires an acquiescit.
This only needs she I must for to rehearse,
Strong is thy name, but stronger is thy Verse.
Peter Jeffrey.

A gratulatory Poem to the Western Amazons, and to their Learned Bard.
WHich I should most admire, I know not yet,
The women's valor, or the Poets wit.
He made the Verses, and they threw the stones
(Verses you would swear were all made for the nonce)
O happy stones which those fair fingers gripped!
But happier Muse, which their loud praises pip'd
Through nostrils oaten-reed, and sung so shril
That the whole Earth's Horizon 'broad they fill.
Miracles are not ceast, we see; for here
The weaker Sex, whom nature taught to fear
The face of death and danger, now out-dare
Even valiant men in fight; nor do they spare
Their willing flesh. Here comes an Amazon,
And fearless treads the assaulted Works upon:
With coats tuckt up, and tippet bolt upright,
Lap full of stone^, she fits her for the fight.
Two might have served you will think, but more she brings
Which amongst the Enemies heathen troops she flings;
And after them words, harder then the Pebbles,
She thunders against those Antichristian rebbels.
So do the rest, for planted all a-row
Fast as they can they jointly curse and throw.
O had you seen them toil, and swink, and sweat
With the same ardor they their husbands beat
When they came home at night, you would then confess
These Western Saints had well deserved the press.
They Have wrought a wonder too, and you shall know it,
They changed this Western Pug into a Poet.
Else had his moldy brains never been inspired
With rage Poetic, nor this all-admir'd
And sacred work ere seen the gladsom light.
For who'ld expect a Poem from a wight
Nursed up with Beans and Butter-milk, or on
Festival days, stale Biscuit and Poor John?
Strange diet to train up a Muse, you will say;
Yet see the luck on it; having viewed one day
A skirmish 'twixt those brave Virago's, and
Their Foes, a gray Goose quil he takes in hand
The omen pleased him well: (Quoth he) Of old
Strange stories have of these poor birds been told.
The Roman Capitol by Geese was kept,
They wak't, poor souls, when the dull Soldiers slept.
Alas! who now keeps Lime? poor female Cattle,
Who wake all night, labor all day in Battle,
Geese, as a man may call them, who do hiss
Against the opposers of our Countries bliss.
And by their seasonable noise discover
Our Foes, when they the Works are climing over.
And shall such acts as these forgotten die
Unrecommended to posterity?
No, whilst I have a Muse that can afford
One verse, their names shall stand upon record.
Nor shall the cankred teeth of envious Time
Devour the story of besieged Lime.
Thus having spoke: He drencht his Virgin Quill
In The sable Flood, and did his Paper fill
With rich Invention, which if thou would see,
Reader, disburse thy groat and happy be.
Toby Trundle.

Certain fit similitudes, whereby for to set forth the worth of this Poem.
AS little Be in broyling heat
does search the fields about,
So Authors best are drained quite,
And sucked by this learned lout:
As precious pearl in little room
shrouds virtues more then many,
So secret knowledge much is showed
in this Book, as in any.
As little sphere by tumbling round
does Heavens high unfold,
So may thou in this rumbling Book
things Heavenly behold.
As lodestone does the iron hard
by secret force hold fast,
So little volume in despite
will envy make aghast.
As glittering Sun with his bright hue,
does other Stars make slink,
So where this Book does once appear,
of others never you will think.
As Crab-tree fair, both flower and fruit
does bring forth without stay;
So fruitful is the Book to all
in time, and place always:
Then honey taste, buy precious pearl,
view sphere that turns fast,
Fear load-stones force, walk by Suns light,
eat fruit that aye does last.
By the same Author.
Coriato Juniori.
ENter the Ring, all fear discard,
The woman's grand Olympique Bard,
Thou Have foiled Apollo, and given all
The weaker Muses a fair fall:
This Trophy of thy female verse
Shows how they did themselves disperse,
Some ran away on Badgers feet,
And some on Scotch-hops, not so fleet;
(Their airy motion quite forgot)
Need makes them in thy verses trot;
Coriat had once each Eastern lip
Upon his propatetique hip:
But thy Pug poem has in hug
Each western tongues virago dug,
Wits compass has but two points blessed,
Tom's lines ran East, and yours to West.
D. VV.

Al Author.
LIsonjas introdu zidas
(Por error de las edades)
Vsurpan a las verdades,
El traje de ser creidas.
Yfrases encarecidas
(Lo mas incierto y lo mas vano)
Que yo en tu alaban c a ufano,
Sin adornos de tal tira,
Iuzgo, milagro a tu Lyra,
Ya ti, divino, en lo humano.
J. D.
FLattery the greatest crime
Was ever introduced by time;
Usurps some truth, a whoreson thief
The more to Cunny-catch belief
With heightened language of a strain,
Ambiguous ever, yea and vain:
And therefore my plain-dealing Muse
Abhorrs that vices Arts to use.
Now this premised, thrice happy I,
For Zoylous none can say I lie
In saying you are to be preferred
Before the blind or wanton Bard,
Or the best master of that trade
That ever Ode or Eglogue made.
( Phoebus his rays alas with thine
Appearing once, would lose their shine.)
Their Muses Pyes were and their songs
Ballads compared with those of Strongs:
Their Music Reeds, their Harps of Wyre;
But to speak truth it is thine's the Lyre.
To the deserved Commendations of that well meaning Poem of the Western, but
most Christian Amazons Ioanizareidos.
NO ravished Brain was e're since Homer spude
Heroique models, with a vein endude
Of such high consequence, to raise a style
Out of the medley of the Lyre and File.
How strangely are thy thoughts and numbers met!
While in each line the Fancies rise and set.
This is (indeed) to indite unto a Mint,
And to coin current Rithms that run in Print.
Thy Epique White-pot is not like the prose
Are scand upon a snorting six foot nose:
Thy valiant Muse, that is so highly born,
Fears not the wrinkles of their nasal horn,
Who under a bent Brow's prophaner Bay
Men in their nostrils rugged balance weigh;
Like nosewise Critiques striving to suspend
By judgment, what their wits can never mend.
Enjoy thy Issues attributes, well known
By Pallas voted for the Muses Hone.
Rich pen! to light upon a blessed nest
Of Amazonian Worthies in the West:
That where the Wisemans Adage says a shrew
Should be sought ought to drive away the foe:
Thy she is, like silent men themselves behave
Not (Capitolian Geese) by kackling save;
And whereas female valor (apt to quail)
Is seldom seen to rise above the nail:
Here with the Phalanx of each Hand arrayed
In natures files, they men at Arms invade.
Take heed henceforth you She-beat Royal Bands,
Who wave their mouths loud weapon in their Hands,
Will be (when all your feeble valors spent)
Most oriental in their Occident.
Aesculapius Menecraticus.
Ignoto novarum cruditatum Authori Scribendi Cacoethe laboranti S.

CArmina ronchissas balba de Nare Poeta,
Ad Rhombum resonans Maevius alter eris.
Sic glacit as mollem Calamo crepitante triumphum,
Scilicet ut fuso Palladis hasta fuit:
Exitus acta probat: Si nunc Cacophonia grata est
Sphyncteris occidui sibilus, omen erit.
Lectori.
Long as oscitationes trahenti,
Et vix sibi lecta pagina
(...) severe spectanti,
haec mora
Epigrammatis morigeri:
In morosas, hujus Morologiae cruditates,
Per Authorem, virum moratum
Et summopere morandum
Nuper editas;
Ac (O mores!) ex improviso
Excussas,
Etiam dum Remores auspicium vaticum
Moretis incusabat.
Attica Qui moriens obiter dicteria lusit,
Ille Morus, vibrans, Vtopiensis Olor;
Plebicolusque nigro Chiliadis Indice vultu,
Sacrans moriae pegmata pulchra Moro:
Arrident nostro, morum Diplomate Vati,
Quem tu morari dixeris Encomio.
Morion Colax minor
Cognomento Remora.
Custos Morii Poetici.
Helleboratus.
Cum Cicerone ad Atticum. Vultum tuum
Videre cuperem quum haec legeres.
Authori Oscedinis and Orthopnoneae
Poeticeae gravidine deplorato
Alexipharmaca
Hygiaeque Litatio.
Mandibulis prodest succis Oleaster amaris
Hinc Oscedo volans and satagentis opus.
Res. Iradices persilidis, optime succo,
Perdulcis Calami conde, superque sapis.
Os. Pennae (Scripturo) acri stet semper aceto
N^m musam ronchos ducere saepe, vet at.
POets (that have one) with a waking Nose
May make a scurvy shift to snort in Prose:
But here is the secret cunning of thy Art!
To snore so well in tune, and sing thy part.
The Greek, whose vomits dregs Thou seems to lap,
Was wont sometimes in verse to take a nap:
But herein your Errata's are at odds,
His were short slips, and yours are through nods.
He Cepius-like, to his male friends did keep;
And thou do only unto women sleep,
So loud; as if Thou Had hired Menippus cave
To be thy Muses long poetique grave.
Were tart Lucilius but alive again
To set a wiping nose upon his pen!
He would his own smart accent let alone,
Drive Hogs to Rumford in thy Muses tone.
The sneezings of thy Genius we would call
(Were there Familiars now) Socratical;
And though Thou have such rites in small repute,
VV'are bound those sacred omens to salute:
And do (as sympathetically drawn)
Grow nauseous, for to see thy Fancy yawn.
Larus Lucianus. Cognomento Implumis. Alias Jonathan. Rumford.

Physiognomical Conjectures at the unseen Author.
NAture has seemed to make our Faces terse,
In manner of a well-composed verse;
But sure, there is something in the air of Thine
Remarkable above the native line:
Thou Would be by him could copy out thy look
By pencil, for a Crisp Abderite took.
A Prophet of the true Pierian race,
Bred on Parnassus forked Top; his Face
Should have the Jiggs and Fancies of his mind
Pricked down in Crotchets, and so interlin'd
With Clifts and Moods; it might be, for a Book
Of Physiognomy, or Music took;
Not look like those, whose thoughts do suck their Dam
Through the close hurdle of an Anagram.
The wits Idea in thy Visage seen,
Works like Platonique capers on the spleen;
And brings Sardonian laughter into scorn!
Were man's dull fivers made of Stoique horn,
The spruce aspect, could not introduce a gleek
Of Cynique Spasms into his dimpled cheek.
Such in his visages Dramatique map
Was Rowley, when his look d^serv'd a clap:
Who from the Thuscan stem derive their style,
Often by Arts magique, raise a humming smile:
But thine (a virtue of a higher bi^th)
Moves, so, an interjections shaking mirth,
(Had he seen Thee) Democritus had died,
And Heraclitus eyes had soon been dried;
Sure mine (had I once entered at this door
Into thy mind) would never pain me more.
Since thy description made my midriff sprout,
And through my liver thrust these wild figs out.
Had thy rich countenance e're blessed the eye
Of my judicial Astrology;
I could have then, by virtue of a beam,
Have drawn thy Horoscope into a Scheam.
But fate has laid on me a harder task
To Physiognomize, as through a mask.
By the long strokes and scratches of thy pen,
Thou should be the seventh son of a white Hen.
Ianus de Indagine.

Pam may garw blaen blewyn baf garfr in pori kelyn kaled dan die nhad ei.
LYthyr wyfi in mined nid oes and un din am gwyr
Na egored neb honof fam selieda chwyr.
Nis gwyr and un din y chwaith ibleu traf
Os dywed ynte i un din nid ydiw fo and knaf.
Gwalcchmai fab Gwenllian ferch
Gwenhwyfar ferch Edynyfed
Fab Gronw ab Tudor fab
Angharad ferch Rhydderchap
Rhirid ben blaid.
Ai Kunt.

To her much honored, though unknown Friend, the Author on his Spinning Poem.
FAncy cut out of a block,
First, hung spindle at a rock;
And so plodding wit brought in
The Peripatetique sin.
Wine set Poets to the wheel,
Made their warmed verses reel;
Sent them strong into the loom,
Thence, they scorned the peoples doom;
Women, here set up thy Gigg,
Make it spin into a Jigg
Of as high and great regard,
As the Pyrrhique Gallyard:
But ceasing to let it feel
The scourge of thy Brains flead Eel;
Thinking it had power to keep
(Town-top like) it self asleep;
Whirling put thee in a swoon,
So (alas) thy Gigg went down:
And we doubt 'twill be in vain
E're to set it up again.
Eve Spinster.

Rhodomontado Qackesalvo Bobadill de Montebanko the Hispanolized Emperique:
On the Great Don Deigo of Parnassus, Master Operator to the Muses, thus
danceth his attendance by way of preamble, in the measures of the Spanish Pavin

OLd Erasistratus who thought!
That Nature did commit a fault
To give us Spleens were good for naught,
As he imagined.
He would have, sure, retrieved his wit,
And found some pleasant use of it
Had he felt in thy Muses fit
Thy pulses.
For there he might have found the strain
Of sweet Herophilus his vein,
Who unto Musicks living gain
The Shygmick moods did add.
His Systol' and Diastole
So with thy verses do agree,
That I must dance for company
Morisko.
Each line does run so smooth away
They nor for sense nor reason stay,
And yet the Rhymes are very gay
And well breathed for a course.
Sure Phoebus cut thy spleen from Thee
Thou mights the Muses Footman be,
And (Insect like) in Poetry
Be flying.
Hermophroditus Proselyta foeminili Poetae.
ANdrogynus nutans nec mas nec foemina, steti
Ambos sic sexus singere, Neuter eram;
Donec in Encomii requiescens auspice vatem
Hoc muliere virum vincere posse, tuli.
Demitto auriculas Epicoeni facta virago
Tiresiae venerem Martis alumna probo.
Some sprinklings of commendations on the fragrant and most aromatic Poem of
Ja. Strong.
STow talks of Albions Amazons, I swear,
Mandeviles Pigmies to thy Haeroines hear:
How they mow down their mighty foes; protest
Mere clippings, to thy hacksters in the West.
Thy Mu^e (young Ovid) trumpets these Viragoes
To the utmost bounds of Indies, or Barbados:
That Sidneyes Zelman when she will hear of you,
Will w^sh her counterfeiting gender true:
And Tomyris, (were she alive) not dead,
Had rather hold their trains then Cyrus head.
What miracle is this in sight of men,
When other folk did cry, nay howl and scream,
Put finger in the eye, and made great moans,
These should be pulling up, now throwing down stones.
They willingly embrace the cornish hug,
At which the boldest Hectors shoulders shrug,
Like to light corks they beoy up against the tide,
Like Watermen, never work before they are plied:
Or as indeed (young Ovid) thou have it best,
Like grapes never fallen till they were pressed.
Let them wear buskings ever to their knees,
Or higher it, for (friend) thy verse all sees
That is in them, of vertuousness I mean,
Pray take my rhyme as I suppost, that is clean,
Let them have statutes made (like men) of stone,
Another wonder, which may be daily sh^wn,
And let thy pen contrive it, which must stand
Immovable, when stiffened by thy hand.
Bu^ly Ioans.

Ascunes motts ou verses sur les marveilous Gests del tresnoble puzeles en le
West.
Provant auxi que le entry de ses dits puzeles sur les
Cavalieres fuit bone per le Ley.
VOus avez icy (Mastres) verses scaches
De tresgrand faits de nostre Western lasses
Et ceo suppuose que il serra come Treason
Ou al pluis meindre il serra misprision
Si nostre Ley voile riens de ceo escrie
Ne voile reporter cielx femes Chivalry
Est en nous pris un Count nosme Devon-shire
Le site and sink de plusars Cavalire
Mes ceux bones Houswives vice le broom le weapon
Ad scour ceo clean and done al eux disseison
Et s' bone ley que quant home per tort enter
Le feme avera un brief de inspiciend' venture.
John Perkins un sage Mastre de Ley. Reg. Ed. 6. ac Rotulo 1645.
To his honored friend Mr. JAMES STRONG, on his excellent Poem.
HOw do thou strain thy wits! thy thoughts perplex
With Stronger lines to court the weaker Sex!
He who in time to come shall read their story
Beyond Haec homo, or The Female glory,
Will (if no wiser than thy self) admire
Both them and thee: and think you did conspire
TO amaze the minds of men, more than to teach
The zeal you here present: For who can reach
The top of that gay garland, wherewith thou,
Like Whitson-Ladies have bedeckt their brow.
S. W.

In ipsissimum Musarum melliculum, Phoebi germanum, and maxim Familiarem
Dominum Presbyterum- IACOBVM cognomento STRONG, and pium ejus subuculare Carmen.
SAxa, virumque cano, gressus removete Prophani;
Haec ne, quisquis ades, tela lacesse volens.
Si sapis his credas, rapiat ne fide carentem
Turba loquax, captum at redime quam minim^.
Certe Author caveat, novum ne augendo furorem,
Castratus miser, hinc audiat ipse male.
Io triumph canunt petientes Penthea Bacchae.
Multae unum, minor est gloria Naso tuis.
Molle genus nobis pugnando restituit rem,
Saxa dabat testes nam retinere cupit.
Quam been scripsisses novam Batromuomachyam?
Carmine avent repeti Nuxque Culexque tuo.
Dignaque quae melius describi, a Pollice dicti
Facta Equitis: faciunt quaeque stupenda grues.
O tibi si dominae reserasset scrinia Fotis,
Bubonem been vix unctum abtisse puto.
Dicitur, ut memini, faecundis ^latibus olim,
Lascivus celeres gignere ventus equos.
Quisve neget Zephyro nostrum praegnasse Poetam,
Talibus hic videas quem properare modis.
Ast animal quodcunque, asinus, fuit, anne caballus,
Nil moror, at mulum parturit egregium,
Cardo quod occiduus trahat hunc, sympathia quaedam ast;
Nasum Heliconiadis forte lavavit aquis.
Ridiculum caput est, vultuque, habituque perennis,
Risus sacra ferens, quemque vidisse sat est.
Nil prohibet sed si ridentem dicere verum,
Musarum huic crepitus aura jocosa tulit.
D. G.
Sonnet.
WHen first thy doughty verse I read,
O verse! no verse! but stranger thing;
And saw what wondrous mirth it bred,
I marvell'd how the Queen and King
Had mist this while thy high-strain'd note,
And thou the privileged Coat.
For as the Moon with crisped beams
Produces flowers which please the sight;
And as the Sun amidst the streams
Does make the waves stand bolt upright;
So thou, though by no Star allowed,
Nor Planet loved, shin'st in the Crowd.
I Will not believe those tales, which say,
Apollo fed Admetus sheep,
His Cow, or Ox, for by my say,
Since thou the number up do keep,
The Herd was of, I dare protest,
Arcadia's more peculiar beasts.
And since the Lamiae all are pleased,
Their Gods should all be born by thee,
Thou of thy load shall not be eased
By roses, though here plenty be;
One Apuleius was, they say,
But he I think did never bray.
Wherefore be thou secure, and now
To you whose blessed hap't shall be
This Syrian Goddess to to bow,
And dream some Fane, or great City;
I tell you plain, O Mortals, Mortals,
This Myndus is, look you secure the portals,
For there the jest lies, but to thee
Again, my Meta- Virgil, terse
Thought of my end now drives me;
For since thou would live by thy verse,
How dare I hope a death in mine,
Aimed for so just, so jump, like thine.
Richard Ionson, Salamanca.

A Character of the Author.
ME thynk it, Sirs, accordaunt to reason,
To tell you now all the condycion
Of thilke on, so as it seemed me,
And what hem were, and of what degree,
And eke in what array that he were in,
And all for forward by Saint Runnyon.
A Clerk of Oxenford he was tho,
That unto Logic h^d long ygoe,
Of his complexion nothing sangyne
He is, but all swa sw^rt; and of Latyne
A few terms has he, two, or three,
That he han learned out of some degree:
His face is bald, and shines as any glass,
His mouth as great as is a furnas,
With scaled brows, black and pylled berde,
Of his visage children are sore afferde;
His voice as small as is a Gotes fare,
I trow he be a Geldyng or a Mare;
His here is by his eeres round yshorne,
His top is docked like a Priest beforne;
He is short sholdered, a thick gnarre,
There nis no door but he wol head the bar,
Or break it at a renning with his heed,
Dares none ones wyle him but he wol be deed,
Aye by his belt he bares a long Pavade,
And, of a sword full trenchaunt is the blade,
To rage as twere a whelpe he is said,
Yet of his port, as meke as is a Maid:
Full long he lokes, and thereto soberly,
Full threadbare is his over Court py;
For he han yet getten him no benefice,
Ne is naught worthy to have none office,
And yet Saint Iulyan is in's country,
And the best beggar of his house truly:
Full long are his legs and full l^ne,
I like a staff, there is no calfe ysene,
Of yedding he bares utterly the price,
Well loves he garlike, onyons, and eke likes,
He holden a side wemme for the none,
Full often time he han the bourde begone,
No Christian man so often in his degree,
And in Lyme at the siege had he be.
But soth to say he is somewhat squaimus
Of far^yng, and of speech dangerous.
Now is it not of God a sul fair grace,
That such a lewd man's wit shall pace
The wisdom of an heap of learned men?
But I must said, as that I farther twyn,
I ween he fares as does an open^^rs,
That ylke fruit is ever longer the w^rs,
Til it be rotten in molloke or in ^^re,
And so God save us all that here be.
J. Chaucer junior.

PROLOGUE.
GEntlemen, (in the Authors phrase) I come to chatter
My mind unto you, and think not I should flatter
At all our Penman; for, believe me, he
Will hardly read or hear me, willingly:
But some there be, I know, will ask why here
In Satan's name a Prologue should appear?
Since they Drammatike Ushers still were known,
And this the world will for an Epic own.
I answer, sure our Author meant to raise
The first best instituted form of plays,
To its prime height: were one Narration took
The fore-top, and the toe of the whole Book.
One more Objection there will be, which is,
Why to so scarrifi'd a piece as this,
A merry Prologue, and a laughing name,
Are tendered? Ye, fine Coxcombs, fie for shame,
Know ye not yet to what sage Mimnermus stood?
That but what pleasant was nothing was good.
Our Authors of his mind and no man grieves
So far, but that he may laugh in his sleeves.
Think then you hear him now, and think anon,
How that you hear the swelling Lycophron
Chaunt, how the Trojan women stirred their bones,
To tumble down their walls huge massy stones;
For ours did so, yet wiser far then those,
These to repel, those to let in their foes,
Oh would himself now but his face make shine,
With daubing plaster, and the Lees of wine!
Ascend a Cart (as was the mode of old)
And through the streets himself this Poem trol'd.
Yould think if not Apollo fresh and young,
Because his hair is short, his ears are long.
Because Don Phoebus robes do loosly float,
And he alas has but a petti-coat:
Yet since he had paper got, by teaching School,
He had been sworn (you would swear) Groom of his stool.
And this same Poem here which now you view,
Part of the excrements from thence which flew.
A year and half box'd up, (this is sad mirth)
From whence (like to an Elephantine birth)
Is dropped this wonder; Sirs, pray hold your noses,
Or hold some of my friends wits here for poses:
I doubt you will snuff else, and like him, to whom
Admetus showed the Verse for his own tomb,
Admire the strangeness of it, but yet say,
You wish that you had seen it yesterday.
Richard Ionson. Si non dant Proceres, dabit Histrio.

Feminine Valor: OR THE Western Women.
COme Reader will thou see how Grace
Through Sable veil shows comeliest face:
Women's virtues in the West
Like Grapes never drop till they were The Author writes to chaste ears.
pressed:
One rib of Adam there is grown
Like The History is thus. A tooth-drawer having drawn Cadmus his teeth. sowed
them on his belt, where they got him so much credit, and consequently practice,
that in a short space he had adorned it all over with the frequent
achievements of his Art and Pincers. See Ovids Metam. translated by Gawen
Duglas Bishop of Dunkelly, and Uncle to the Earl of Angus.
Cadmus teeth when they were sown;
Almost an Army, they have spent
Prayers and praise for Parliament.
Could thou the parts of Devon trace
No Milkstreet.
via lactea, but thy race
Of blood would be, there see the field
Maintained by Women tho men yield:
Look round about and see, who can
But wonder if he see a man,
But stand and wonder more at this,
To see a The word in the original Welsh signifies the succession of women into
men's breeches.
Metampsukesis.
Men's He means women turned to men; Pliny in his Natural History, lib. 7.
affirms the like of Ha^es and Conies, our Author alludes to him.
spirits lost have reinformed
Women's bodies, both's reformed:
Who could see the sword not daunting
A Woman's heart, but stand still vaunting?
A Garrison in part defended
By Women, till the Quarrels ended,
And worn out men to be supplied
By second strength of Women Whose metal has endured the Test.
tried,
And not acknowledge that it is true,
I give West Women what is Benevolence.
due.
Ia. St.

WHat former Age did ever want a Quill
Drencht with the dew of high Parnassus hill?
Those Bastard gifts of nature to record,
But ah! cannot our ill taught times afford
One to give virtue juster praise? Not the nine worthies, but the nine women
worthies. See Haywood.
Ye Nine,
Have ye no quicker fancy now then mine
To limn the praises of that weaker Sex
Exactly as beseems an Read the English ^^positer.
Artisex
Where Is now that nimble tongue, Apollos vein,
Or had we one could match blind Homers strein,
Or but that Q Horatius.
wanton Poet who to flatter,
One An Handmaid of Rome.
Lalage sweet Poems once did He sung them to the Gittar under her window in a
cold frosty night.
chatter.
Here Is now a subject worth his pains, who sings
Had need carouse of all the Both before and behind the forked Hill.
Muses springs:
A saint-like sort of Females as before,
Earths broad Horrison till now never bore.
He does not mean as Lucifer fell, not Vulcan when he broke his ships, but as
woman should do.
From heaven are fallen, O let us not be dull
To write their worth whereof the West is full.
New natured are they and their grace divine,
Come let us embalm their faces, and eke enshrine
Their worth with honor, which does claim the bays
And round their heads, let us deck the Daphnean bays.
If constancy that golden garland wreathed
Which mortals none yet wore that ever breathed,
In See Sir John Mandevil, where he speaks of a People in Africa that use to
roast Geese in the sun: and the Author, could not fancy a place of greater
danger.
sunburned times of danger, but he lost
This sacred jem, wherewith this crown's imbost
Sometime or other: O what cause had we
To spread the praise of female constancy?
Yet such a train of virtues do attend
This Alluding to Vicars in his translation of Virgils Aeneids, where he makes
Turnus call I^^urna, Sister Coachman, etc.
Lady leader, as I should not spend
Some pain of speaking of her retinue,
I should deny her what I know is due:
Not one but hand in hand me thinks she goes
Linkt to all virtues following her in rows:
An injury it were should I describe
The mistress by her self which it does ride,
Born not by few but such a train of Graces
As did the Charites, or the Adamites that go naked.
three, but see they would hide their faces:
Cease now A S^cilian much celebrated for his constancy to Pi^kins.
Agathocles to speak the praise
Of thy His wife Mrs. Agathocles.
Theogina, for our late days
Have overmatcht thy mate for constancy;
Yea constant Who this Camnia should be I cannot justly say, I guess her to be
the Lady mentioned in the first edition of some years travels, sister to the
Persian Emperor whose head was cut off, and sent to her brother upon a spears
point with her hair about her shoulders.
Camnia or A Gentlewoman of Thebes in the County of Bonia.
Antiope:
I must search further for a parable,
Or else our all past females will excel:
Virtue in those was single, show me one
Like ours hold virtue all and I have done.
If here Corvina, Sapho, or that Queen,
Zenobia for their learning would be seen
So far as ere the Bard past A Poet, Godfather to the Author.
Aristarchus,
Or foolish Bavius was outstript by Marcus:
Our For the right understanding of this. See the Mirror of Knight.
crystal wits be See Mrs. Susan Brotus de Margar.
pearl'd with gifts divine
Those ruder rugged spirits do outshine.
If Great Gorgonia or Evanders mother
Endowments now would show beyond all other, Trasilla
And prove their eminence in pious zeal,
O let our Matrons only but appeal
To heavens high Chancellor* where they may not boast
If ere himself were conquered by an host
Of praying females, where every hour
Heaven be not forced his mercy down to shower:
No strangers are they at the throne of Grace,
But vow to pray until they see his face;
Which being hidden has eclipst this I Will,
As when the glorious Sun's withdrawn a while:
Does noble Portia or A Popish Roman Dame that stabd her self for one Raph. See
the Knight of the burning Pest.
Lucretia strive
For chastity this praise us to deprive.
Modesty forbids you vaunt, hark how Diana
Prefers our females far beyond She whom the two wicked elders would grope
while she sent out her maids to fetch her some soap.
Susanna:
Who though the It seems this whore is an Hermophrodite else the feat could not
be done.
crimson whore seek to deflowr,
And spoil this Virgin virtue every hour.
Let each day testify how they refuse
Her whorlsh proffers, and do rather choose
To sacrifice their blood to Christ their Bride,
Then with Romes Idols to be To stuprifie is not found in the English
Expositers, but familiarly used by this Author.
stuprifide.
This makes Romes beasts to foam with rage
'Cause we hold fast that knot of Marriage
With Christ our Husband, and will not defile
Our milk-white garments with his whoredoms vile.
Do thou A Poetess that whipped and stripped Domitian the Emperor, because he
sent the Philosophers from Constable to Constable.
Sulpitia fret for this their glory,
And for thy verity relat'st a story
Which needs must lay a claim unto that Rose
That joys our females temples to enclose?
Their persons yet their hearts do bend
As circle lines do to one center tend.
Religion reformed is all their scope
Which not one few or most but all do hope:
Ones griefs not another joy, but all
Do live and die together, rise and fall,
So closely are they joined by union^ tie,
That all resolve to live, and all to die.
Amongst them not one Tarpeia was a Nun that dealt between the Sabines and the
Geese, about delivering up the Capitol. She was the first woman that ever was
pressed to death
Tarpeia ere betrayed
Their strength through bribes or else with fear dismayed.
Blush then to see our Not the Popish Cathedral, nor the profane Dramatique.
but that Western C^rus the Poet mentions in Little solitus savive ^^agellis.
Meaning the Beadle.
Corus so combined
That all seem better one, then more defined.
How strangely frugal still Dame Nature seemed
Pinching her gifts till now, these may be deemed
Her darling unto others being bereaved
Of those choice Some Copies have it doweets.
dowries to our sex bequeathed,
But flesh and blood never gave a legacy
To match the graces we in them descry:
None but that sacred story must produce
A Saint to challenge my undaunted Muse.
Amongst Mary's three 'twas chiefly given in charge
With never forgotten praises to enlarge,
The Sacred Bible with her praise that cast
Perfuming Nard on Christ, 'twas called wast:
Not one but many matrons there we see
Who rather then to Baal they will Make a curtsey or a leg.
bend a knee,
A set of martyred matrons chose to be,
As earths contemners jointly do contend
Who most in ointment shall on Christ expend
Whole manors, large possessions lost, are gain
In their account, Christ's honor to maintain.
Did Mary wash with tears? 'twas much with blood,
These steep the parched earth as does He means the flood of Deucalion and
Pyrrha who also threw stones in imitation of these Matrons.
a flood.
O precious balm sweat from a soul perfumed
With grace till body be again resumed.
This like an That is to say the smell of a perfumed soul is an excellent
preservative against black patches.
Ordure shall the world fill
And keep your glory pure and spotless still:
But Jael thinks at last this palm to win
By valor greater far then feminin:
Ours truly warlike are, she took the odds
When Sisera lay sleeping, ours with clodds,
So Diomedes and Aeneas in Homer, Entellus and Dares in Virgil of whom Mr.
Vicars sings. They banged each others hides And made redoubled thwak^ sound on
their sides.
Stones, swords or fists, can fight on equal terms,
A handful scorns to fly from See Coriats Trophy in his Crudities, where he
describes these bloodthirsty Myrmidons whom no mortal could ere subdue on
equal terms, but by some shift or other.
Summer swarms.
This Amazon-like train vows never to stoop
Being fled from Venus unto Mars his troop,
Where they with tumors, tossed, Truths Lasciva est Pagina vita proba est
standard bear,
And Sions downfaln breaches strive to rear:
They stop the gap themselves, where judgment flies
Praying in Moses turn with tear-swoln eyes,
Nor fancy, frenzy, or blind passion,
Or ought but pious resolution
Moves them with constant courage thus to hold,
Right tutoring reason makes them bold.
Why speak I more then this, to most it is known
The gray Mare is the better Horse.
The weaker vessels are the stronger grown.
The vine which on the pole still leaned his arms,
Must now bear up and save the pole from harms.
How many man-like spirits have been steeled
By these she helpers being like to yield.
How have some to courage been exhorted,
How often others by them been supported?
I this deblason coat that makes the crest
Is Inconstancies a vice. She that loves more then once, loves twice.
constancy of virtues all the best:
A virtue which till now was never known
In women's breasts, till now was never shown:
Their choice was Mary's (Christ) then it is not strange
Their motto's this (Our choice admits no change.)
Worlds wanton wooers may rend Joseph's coat
From him, but him from Christ's, hell cannot do it:
A sweeting solace have they in their crosses,
We keep our Christ, what matter is it for losses?
Go on, heavens saints, like to those Roman Dames
A School-mistris in Rome that taught children the Horn-book.
Cornelia, He does not mean that they should eat fi^e as Portia did, but rather
fight.
Portia, and the rest whose names
Shall wear out time, who first began
To make a Pagan state a Christian one:
Your praise is great who cannot abide
That Babels So Juvenal says of her, Lassata viris nondum satiata, Sat. 6.
tired whore her self should hide
Under Christ's garments, or be fostered longer
Within the Kingdom to some now grown stronger
By opposition filled with detestation
Of These locusts are a kind of Cantharides which the whore of Babylon uses to
take for proneness.
Romish Locusts near to deaths damnation*
Rejoice then traveling women thy time near grows
To be delivered from the painful throws
Of twice two tiring Summers that do make
Our bowels yearn to Though the belly have no ears yet it should seem it has
eyes
see our hearts to ache:
The Judge already set on bloody room
And murdered Saints cry lowdly for her doom,
How long Lord, how long shall this whore wallow
In guiltless blood, and threaten still to swallow
Each day a deeper draught; O make her drunk
With vials of thy plagues; let her be sunk
As low as hell with vengeance from above
Judged to the persecutors of thy Dove;
Mean while continue pure, the lilly scorns
To be defiled tho behedg'd with thorns.
The husbandman's at hand and he must needs
Gather the rose or else destroy the weeds.
Come Lord to thy garden and do pity
The wild Bore routs thy plants in every City:
Hedge us within the pales of thy defense
So shall thy plants be safe from violence.
Farewell rare paramours, I must confess
Virtues perfection claims a purer dress,
Stand fast a while, the nuptial chambers sweeping
To welcome those to joy that now stand weeping.
The Epilogue.
SIrs, if you are set on edge, you must excuse
Our Author says, the sharpness of his Muse.
Because he vows, and stands to it, that no wines
Do grow in the West, he thought for lack of Vines.
Next to ground apples, be loves naught before
The milk-maids courtesy behind the door,
When for a tale of love, or last nights dream,
She pays him with two kisses, and sour cream.
Besides as he remembered, 'a did think,
That 'a put verguice into once his Ink,
But wonder't should be stale, for by the sun,
He swore 'twas scarce two years since he begun.
Truth 'twas the Stati'ners fault, that was too nice,
To bate at first ten shillings in the price!
If you are displeased he vows to write no more,
But Satyrs (I'ad forgot) against the whore,
And you his friends howere he does not fear
But to prefer'em to a judges ear,
And reason; for to me, he did protest
They Would make as good neck verses as the best.
Pray don't provoke him, for you know not what
An enraged fancy may attempt; that is flat
He Will write Iambicks, and then if that you
Do hang your selves, mechance he will do so too.
Faith, do not trust him; for who justly can
Value the loss, that such a worthy man,
Would bring upon the Commonweal of wit
Should he but undergo a fate unfit?
Were not for him Apollo would be sad,
And the Muses want of mirth, poor girls, run mad.
But against the Proverb, while he lives I Will swear,
The God will laugh more then bare once a year:
Now much good do it ye, it is the Authors will;
Beshrew you if you did not laugh your fill.
But lest this mirth should cease, pray write ye too,
And then perchance we'll laugh as much at you.
Lusimus Octavi 8 Sive G. D.

FINIS.

