A LETTER TO An OFFICER of the ARMY CONCERNING A SELECT SENATE mentioned by
them in their Proposals to the late Parliament.

The Necessity and Prudentialness of such a Senate is here asserted by Reason
and History.

Whereunto are added sundry Positions about GOVERNMENT, and an ESSAY toward a
secure Settlement.

By HENRY STUBBE, of Chapter Chapter in Oxon.

Salus Populi suprema Lex esto.
LONDON, Printed for T. B. and are to be Sold at the three Bibles in Paul's
Churchyard; and in Westminster Hall. 1660.

A LETTER To an OFFICER of the ARMY Concerning A Select Senate, etc.
SIR,
WHen I was last at London, you were pleased to honor me with a Discourse
about the Proposals of the Army, and particularly about their desires for a
Select Senate: I profess your words have left such an Impression in me, that I
am ready to cry out with Tully, Pudendum sit, honestiora esse legionum decreta,
quam S^natus; and wish the Parliament no other Resolves than what you had
Proposed. The Select Senate, whose very Name has amassed some, and exasperated
others, was by you not only allayed, as to its harshnesse, but rendered
plausible and to be desired by every honest heart. It was then, I saw, your
Desires were not to oppress others, but Secure your selves, not to overthrow a
Commonwealth, but to preserve it, not to advance an I take Oligarchy here, as
the ignorant Vulgar mistake it; for the corruption of Aristocracy; whereas
Oligarchy is but the Government of a few, and not of the Body: And it is
observed by Crag. upon the Spartan Republic, that Oligarchy is a word of an
Innocent, yea, a good signification; and the Reiglement of Lacedaemon is called
an Oligarchy by Isocrates, and others; though he who shall examine the
institution of the Senate will say it was made up of the best, and so was an
Aristocracy.
Oligarchy, but to continue all in that Freedom whereunto the Lord has called
us, God having ceased to work any greater miracles than those whereby he
dis-ingaged us from Slavery: you were not now to say to a Republic NELY, as
Joshua did to the Sun and Moon formerly: Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and
thou Moon in the valley of Ai^lon; and yet, me thoughts, I saw you distracted
betwixt a tenderness for others, and a regard for your selves, and if to deny
the latter, had not been to betray the good old Cause, to frustrate all your
Performances, to forsake the returns of your Prayers, to undervalue Mercies,
when given, which you so prised at their imploring; In fine, to make the blood
of the Saints under the Altar to cry as loud against you as it did against
their Oppressors: You were so careful for Others, as to need a Monitour to
advise you to love your selves as you do men of an unkind neighborhood. You
represented unto me the posture of affairs, amongst us, the different factions
and parties, and how some did think all the Liberty, purchased hitherto, was,
that they might depresse others. You told me, how it was not impossible, but
God might dispose the result of our present Counsels to a generous and happy
issue, but that it was hard to see how an absolute Power could be bound, or
find security that the next Assembly should not undo all that this could
establish. You acquainted me with the thoughts of many precious men, that there
ought some things to be declared Fundamental, and Immutable hereafter. As, That
all Power is derived from the People, and that the Assemblies, that shall be,
are but the Peoples Trustees. That all delegated Power is for the preservation,
not destruction of the People. That to admit any single Person, who si merely
bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh, as endowed with the Supreme
Legislative power, is absolutely destructive to the Liberties of the Nation;
and, to place the Executive in One, so dangerous, (as Reason and late
Experiences teach us) that it might scarce deserve a milder censure. That,
since the men from whom this power is to be deduced are men of different gifts
and dispensations, their Trustees are not to intermeddle with matters of
Religion; It being to be supposed, that the Delegators will not give them any
such Power, upon the account mentioned, as it may be proved (and has been See
H. S in defense of the good old Cause
) that they neither could give, nor the others any way receive or execute such
a Power.


These (and it may be some other) things you said were intended by you as
Fundamentals for the new Government to be erected on, and which if they might
be continued without alteration, you did not desire that any number of men
should Oligarchically rule the great Assembly of the Peoples Representatives
hereafter, and practice a Negative, which the Nation hitherto could not brook.
You showed me how, what was your care now, had been heretofore the thoughts of
other Republics; the Cretans had their ten Cosmi, the Spartanes five Ephori,
the Romans first five, and after ten Tribunes annually for the People: You
acquainted me with the unapplicablenesse of those means to our times, not
only for the exceptions made against the two former by Aristotle, Polit. l. 2.
c. 7.
and others; but because that our Democracy must not be really such, but such
by Representatives, and to reside in a City (of which if we may judge by the
great trouble you were lately put to in Sir George Boothes Insurrection, to
keep it in peace) not so well affected to the aforesaid Fundamentals, but that
they will become an Army to assist, or force the Representatives (not too well
affected, if chosen as intended by some) to subvert the proposed Basis when
there shall be no more to show in its behalf then a Scrole signed by Mr. St.
Nicholas. If the constitution of the Tribunes were at any time effectual for
the Peoples safety and protection, it was because they made their Intercessions
against the Senate and Consuls, in a place where they could raise arms in
their defense with as much ease as they could interpose their Authority, and
send the Consul, or Censour to Prisons, and oppose the Dictator, had they not
been thus seconded by the People (as a standing Army) their place would have
been useless, or prejudicial to the Republic, as serving only to create
divisions, not redress or prevent grievances. Of this we have an instance in
the case of the Gracchi, who being Tribunes were slain notwithstanding that the
Office did render their persons sacred, Manut. de Legib. Sig^nsus de jure civ.
Romans l. 1. c. 6.
and any man might kill him that should oppose them, without being punished.
They were to sit at the door of the Senate constantly (aftertimes did place
them in the Senate) and all the Decrees of the Senate were transmitted to them
for their approbation; if they allowed them, then were they valid, being signed
with the Letter T. but if they disliked them then did they write thereon VETO,
Bodin. de repub. l. 2.
I forbid, and they were cassated: The Tribunes could assemble the people at
any time, they could call them away from any other assemblies whatever: yet
could not all this secure the peoples freedom. And if so, how can they be
secure without these provisions for their Fundamental constitutions? In the
beginning of the wars betwixt Caesar and Pompey, Caes. de bell. civ. l. 1.
it was one part of the pretenses of the former to uphold the Tribunes. Lucan
l. 1.
Expulit ancipiti discordes urbe Tribunos,
Victo jure minax jactatis Curia Gracchis.


Sparta at first, by the constitution of Lycurgus, was a Commonwealth equally
constituted of a Sanate proposing, an a popular Assembly resolving, in which
posture it continued about 100, or 130 years, their Kings being only the
fore-men of the Senate. Then Polydorus and Theopompus finding that the people
in their Assembly did not well resolve upon wholesome proposals made by the
Senate, these men did upon a pretended advice from the Oracle, erect an
Aristocracy, Bodin. de Repub. l. 2. c. 1.
or government of 30 Senators, in the election of whom all that I find the
people did, was, that as the Candidates passed by, some were to stand, observe
what applaudes they received, Bodin. Meth. Histor. c. 6.
and accordingly the deceased Senators places were filled up: and beyond this
the people had no further power in the government. So that the Lacedaemonians
or Spartans were for an Optimacy, or ruling by a Senate for life, consisting of
30 persons; and this government did they endeavor to introduce in all places
of Greece, and upon this account did they manage the Peloponnesiack war 20
years, the Athenians endeavoring to plant Democracies, Bodin. de Repub. l. 2.
c. 1.
the Lacedaemonians on the contrary Aristocracies in the Cities of Greece. And
since Mr. Harrington dispunges all the time after this war from the happy
constitution of the Commonwealth, against Mr. Wren. p. 41.
he must give me leave to think the History of Lacedaemon is a plea of
Optimacie. A plea grounded upon the experience^ of an equal Commonwealth
established by the prudent Lycurgus in a Senate proposing, and people
resolving, and practiced for more than one generation, (that custom might
inure them to it) upon such circumstances as are not to be hoped for amongst
us, yet could not all this so settle the State, If any say with Polybius and
others that the constitution of the Ephori made it to be always a Democracy,
since it is the general opinion that they were answerable to the Roman
Tribunes: I am so far from thinking so, that I imagine the Ephori to have had
no share in the Legislative power at all being erected, for ought I have
hitherto informed my self out o! Plato and Plutarch as a curb to their
hereditary Kings, and not to the Senate in which was the Legislative power, and
not in the Kings, who had only the executive, and that there should be no error
or encroachments committed therein, I suppose them to have been instituted. I
find not that they sat in the Senate, or were to practice any negative, or
that their consents was demanded to Laws; they every month made the Kings take
oath that he would rule according to the Laws in being; and in time of war two
of them did accompany him to the said end. Another end of their institution may
have been to attend upon judicature in emergent controversies betwix^ private
persons, for the decision whereof Lycurgus did not provide, but rather that
there should none arise ((...), Plutarch^ in Lycurg.) and one way to de^erre
them from strife (of the ma^y which he took) was that there was no judge to
determine them, nor no penalties for transgressors of that kind; where none
could be damaged but who was criminal to the Commonwealth. Now as the Ephori
did judge in these cases, and had their Court [(...)] to this purpose, so I
guess they may have been appointed by Theopompus to this end, and either of
these grounds is reconcilable to the answer of Theopompus to his wi^e, when she
reproved him for diminishing his power; his reply being, that his security was
the greater. How they afterward did aggrandise themselves, as the way is
easily deducible from the original which I ascribe them; so it makes for
another Po^ition of mine, if they flourished under so usurping an Ephorate,
viz. That where the Spirit of the people is qualified for liberty (and the
Spartan being once demanded what he knew, answered; to be free) there a
Commonwealth under bad orders, may subsist and that long; (for as the
exhorbitateing Tribunes did render Rome an Anarchy, so did the Ephorate Sparta)
But where the people are not so qualified, there a Commonwealth cannot be in
its extent settled; or if it be, will not continue. For the proof of which I
refer my self, to those two great Politicians in their discourses, M^lv^zzi and
Baru^a, where they enquire why Rome could not establish her liberty, after the
death of Caesar.
but tha^ they preferred an Aristocracy before that condition, and did
recommend it to others. Whilst the popular cons^itution of Athens presents us
with very little that might endear it unto us: The multiplicity of Orators, and
Philosopher^ however they uphold their credit abroad, did not adv^ntage them at
home; less talk and more prudence would have proved them more real benefits,
then those that their acquests were not great, or of that durance, and their
domestic postura has been more celebrated now then by them that lived and
acted in it, and who are famed in their writings.

But to observe one thing before I pass hence: Lacedaemon and the Country of
Laconia inhabited by the Helotes made one Commonwealth, a part only managing
the Government as to Magistratical and Military commands and performances, It
is very probable that the Helotes were numerous in Laconia, at home since in
the wars each Spartan had nine of them to attend him, as Herodotus says, l. 9.
Polit. l. 2. c. 9. Maximus Tyrius, Or. 3. does reckon for governments purely
Aristocratical or Oligarchical that of Thessaly, Pellene, and Mantino^,
together with Lacedaemon and Crete. See the preface to H. S. in defense of the
good Old Cause.
the other being excluded all acts of government, and having subjection
entailed on them as boores or peysants, yet this Commonwealth, so unequal,
subsisted above 700 years; notwithstanding all that is in our days pleaded to
evince the impossibility of such a frame, and if there did arise wars amongst
them from the Helotes, yet was not that thorough defect in the constitution,
but that being Seated in the main Land, their neighbors did excite and assist
the Helotes: whereas in Crete (which is an Island, as ours) though there was
the same constitution of government which was in Sparta (this being made a
pattern for the other by Lycurgus) their Periaeci did not create them the like
disturbances as Aristotle observes. So in Israel there were the Gibeonites, and
other Canaanites remaining in the Land, from natives changed by the new polity
into Strangers, excluded from all Israelitish government, though they had
Magistrates of their own, (from whence I may infer an inequality of fortunes)
besides these there were the descendants of those which came out of Egypt with
them, who were deprived of their liberty; in so much that in Salomons time
there were numbered of the men able to work, an hundred and fifty thousand, and
three thousand, and six hundred, 2 Chronicles. 2.17. besides there were the
Proselytes of jus^ice or Converts such as embraced the Jewish religion
entirely; these, in the flourishing days of Solomon and David as Mr. Seldom
reports out of the Rabbis, Jur. natural. Heb.

If they had been admitted to entire Proselyteship, they might by their number
have overthrown the State, having Votes in the Assembly of the Lord.


were so numerous that they were not received to become entire proselytes
(being as it was to be imagined, converted rather by a sight of the flourishing
condition Israel was than in, than apprehensions of conscience) and so enjoy
the privilege of entering into the popular Assemby, termed the Congregation of
the Lord: It is not to be doubted, but there were many Bastards considering the
politic disposition of the Jews) who were not to enter into the Congregation
of the Lord even to the tenth Generation, Deuteronomy. 23.1, 2. And at all times the
Proselytes of justice were excluded though not from suffrage in the
Congregation of the Lord, yet from bearing any Office of Power or public
Trust, though several places of Prosit they were capable of. Notwithstanding
this inequality, I do not see or read, that the ruin of that State was thereby
hastened. From whence I do conclude, That the Divisions, Disturbances, and
Dangers, which they who oppose an unequal Commonwealth do threaten us with,
are but imaginary, (upon other accounts, as well as, that we are Islanders) and
not of that moment, as to induce us to quit real and present Assecuration: And
if they do ever actually befall us, it must be through our own Defaults; which
is no prejudice to the form of Government fixed upon, but to them who shall ill
manage good Contrivances.

After we had discoursed about these Foreign Contrivances of the People to
secure their Liberty, not against conquered Enemies, but present Friends, whose
ambition (not malice, animated with a conceit of Religion) was dreaded by them;
we came to examine modern projects of our own and neighbor Nations, laid for
the attaining the same end: whose circumstances might be as suitable to ours at
present, as the republics of Greece possibly may be disproportioned through
the different temperament of the people; which is a note of so much value, that
Aristotle upon that sole inducement would have given us other advise then our
Politicians; Polit. l 7. c. 7. Campanella pol. c. 4. S. 19.
since he makes the Europaeans, Asiaticks, and Greeks upon that ground to be
incapable of a resembling Government; and for us, he is positive in it, that we
are not capable of a right Common-welth. (...).
So that we ought not to be discouraged if such a model be proposed, as has
some inconveniences in it, as examined by the rules of the Grecian Politics;
it being no less evident that all the inconveniences which ensued upon such
constitutions in Greece are not to be feared amongst us; which I could evince
to the most refractory person, if I had leisure.

Here I instanced, that it was not altogether unusual upon a Civil War, for the
Party prevailing against their oppressing Rulers, to assign them a certain
number of persons (with power to arm upon occasion) for the Securing unto them
those Liberties and Privileges, which they had fought for; however Sylla,
Mar^us, Augustus Caesar, took more severe ways: In France we find that Lewis
11. upon the prevalence of the league for the public good, had 36. appointed
him out of the three Estates by a general Assembly of them, to be Curators of
the public, and to see justice administered duly: as Hottoman informs us out of
Monstrelletus, Lamar^ius and other Historians. Franco Gal. p. 211, 212, 213.
In England, upon the Barons Wars with K. John, the like was practiced: They
having caused him to sign the Magna Charta, and Charta Forrestae, to secure
themselves in the aforesaid Liberties, they gave him a check in the Government,
Speed Hist. of K. John S. 56.
viz. Twenty five selected Peers, to whose commands all the other Barons were
bound by oath to be obsequious. Had they not taken this course, all their
Grants, though subscribed by never so many hands, and authenticated by never so
many Seals, would upon any emergency have been as unserviceable as Muncer's
Cloak, which he persuaded the German Boores (whom he had seduced into a rising)
if spread abroad, Sle^dan^ comment: lib. 5.
would in the day of Battle secure them from all the small and great shot of
their enemies. If it be objected that neither the French nor English project
did procure the effects designed. What it was that ruined them, it is rather
unsafe, then difficult to explain.
It is easily answered that the Contrivance was not therefore bad, because
frustrated by their subtle enemies; and we ought rather to seek how to prevent
their mistakes, and the errors they committed, then fall into greater by
acquiescing in single votes, and Resolves, or such like paper ware.

After a reflection upon the condition of our affairs, I concluded that a
Parchment Law, though never so fairly engrossed, could not satisfy them that
were engaged in the Cause of Liberty. When the Ligue called the Commonweal was
on foot against Lewis 11. the Duke of Millain sent to his aid five hundred men
at Arms, W. H's. Observations upon History.
with three thousand Foot, and with this power he presents his advice, That he
should yield to any conditions to divide his Enemies, and be careful still to
preserve his men. This Counsel was of more advantage to Lewis than all the
Armies he could have Levied in his Duchy: for by this he kept his Majesty
entire, and referred nothing to the uncertainty of Fortune. But the former part
of his advice was a stronger battery against the Enemies design, than all the
Artillery that Age could make. For to divide their Forces,
was to destroy them, and to bring them into jealousy of each other, was to
make each the others executioner. By which he was secure, at the Enemies cost
and danger, to work his own triumph. Then for yielding to conditions, it was
safer for Lewis to descend one step beneath Sovereign Command, then to be
enforced to fall down all the stairs: and having both wit and courage he could
not doubt but occasion would present him with means to recover, if not
transcend his former height. Hereupon at the first overture he entertaines a
treaty, which suddenly took effect; No demand of the Princes receiving the
least denial: Whereat they dissolved their Forces and Ligue, retiring to take
possession of what none did enjoy long. Methinks we may learn from these, and a
thousand more such like passages in History, how unsafe it is to rest in a bare
Declaration, and thereupon to close and unite into an equal Commonwealth,
with our inveterate enemies. It was not an hasty attempt of Sir G. Booth to
make an Insurrection, no it was an universal engagement, if not by active
correspondencies, at least in mind. The Forces which went upon the Northern
expedition with the Lord Lambert, bear witness to the general disaffection,
and neutrality of all that were not (as they commonly call them) Sectaries. And
I do verily believe, that the quarrel was Toleration, or no Toleration, rather
then Monarchy and the Stuartian interest.

Having here mentioned Sir G. Booth, and his Insurrection, I shall desire you to
inform me, What was the intent of his rebellion? It is to be presumed, that his
aims were further then to leave things in the posture they were in before his
arming. His Declaration was against Anabaptists, Quakers, and (by which having
expressed the two former he can mean the Independents only) Sectaries; and to
subvert them without fighting, since that was his Promise to those of Cheshire,
it must have been effected by a sudden Massacre of the Army at least. If that
was not his intent, (as it is discretion in his Partisans not to own it now)
yet that it would have been as outrageous an issue, is not to be doubted, since
it would not have been prudentiall, or indeed possible for him and his
confederates (especially in London) to have restrained the affectionate ardours
of an incensed rabble. But suppose we, Sir G. Booth to be Victor, how many
would have been found, the House as filled up, and free to vote against you,
being disarmed, would have pleaded for your Toleration, since there are so few
will do it now that you (and they in part) are in a different condition? To
secure themselves they must have outed you out of all commands, and places of
Trust, yea, and purged you from serving under them; and having performed thus
much, as they could have no security that you would not have resented this
procedure, so they could not but endeavor to prevent the dangers imminent from
such provocation. As for the dis-banded Soldiery, it would have been but an
easy instruction for the Justices to oppress, and the Judges to hang them,
the sense of their former actings making that Justice, which otherwise would be
Barbarousnesse, and the general voice will cry out, that all is a Judgment upon
such persons, though never so repugnant to Justice. It is recorded by a great
Courtier and Statesman, That, if it was not given in charge to them, it was
the practice of the Judges after the Irish wars to hang Soldiers for faults,
which others did escape or obtained pardon for. And for others who may by the
thoughts of a competent estate repute themselves more secure, I must tell them
that it is but a vain imagination, if they understand who are likely to rule,
and have the Militia, by the Carisbrook-Castle-Treaty: I would rather bid them
read their doom in the Spanish procedure against the Jews, when K. Sisebutus
did not only banish them all from Spain, but by threats and torments enforced
some to the profession of Christianity: (though even Mariana the Jesuit say,
that It was never esteemed consonant to Christian behavior to compel any to
the profession of true piety. Marian. de reb. Hispan. l. 6. c. 3.) and after
that under K. Egica, such as had concealed themselves were made slaves for
ever, and their goods confiscated. So Ferdinandus and Issabella, having
conquered Granada, (and so become safe from neighboring dangers) did banish
all the Jews, giving them four months time to sell their goods in, after
which time it should not be lawful for any to buy or sell, entertain, or
assist them any way. If the Heretic, or he who falls under the censure of the
Church continue impenitent, after admonition by the Minister reiterated three
times, on three Sundays, then he is to be declared Excommunicated from God, and
from the society of the Church. After which Sentence no person may have any
kind of Conversation with him, (his Wife and Family excepted) in eating,
drinking, buying, selling, saluting, or conforming with him, unless the same
be licensed by the Ministry: That he finding himself abhorred by the faithful
and godly, may take occasion to repent, and so be saved. And intimation of this
sentence is to be given through the Realm, least any should pretend ignorance
of the same. I have set down their own words (and what is the practice of
Scotland as Col. -- told me) out of Spotswoods History of Scotland, p. 166.
that so all that are or may be guilty of Presbyteri^ll Censures, for any
opinions they have, may, or do hold, and for what they have already done or may
do, and find themselves not likely to retreat, may know what to expect from
their prevailing.
You have been in Scotland and seen how great an Affinity their proceedings
have with this demeanor of the Papists: You know the dismal effects of their
great Excommunication, which if it leave a man Life, yet it is not as an effect
of their tenderness, but cruelty, since he is not only incapacitated as to
all preferments, but deprived of all that might render his life a comfort, to
be tormented by so much Charity as will not let him dye: Besides all the
contumelies and indignities that will be put upon them by the multitude, you
need not to question but that these Heretics and Sectaries, (who are now so
maligned, regretted and occasionally disgraced) will be represented in their
Memories to Posterity, as so vile, that it will be less ignominious to be
recorded in the Annals of Tiburne.

What affyance can you put in those whom your Victory and Success, not proper
inclinations gain you? Whosoever he be whose judgment disallowes a
Tolleration, his compliance is but temporising; and though Convenience or
necessity bend him down to such conditions as he otherwise regrets, yet do they
seldom oblige the Conscience longer than Fortune restrains the Power. To
assent unto a mixture of the Army with men of an un-army spirit, though there
be a Select Senate of the best affected men on earth, is a presage of ruin,
unless your Select Senate be made up of David's Worthies, each whereof could
attaque whole Armies, 2 Samuel 22.
with assurance of Victory. They who to alienate our care for
Self-preservation, tell us, that the men we resent are honest godly men; create
us no security and do in effect tell us, that we are villainous caytiffes, and
that to endeavor our extirpation is consistant with godliness and honesty. To
let you a little more see how little trust is to be placed in the combinations
with those men, behold the Character which K. James does give of them, and
after the testimony of one who was from his cradle educated amongst them, and
experimented what he averrs (besides what you cannot but have fresh upon your
own thoughts) join in an equal Commonwealth with them if you dare. Take heed
(my Son) to such ( Scottified) Puritanes, very Pests in the Church and
Commonweal, whom no Deserts can oblige, neither Oaths nor Promises bind,
breathing nothing but Sedition, and Calumnies, aspiring without measure,
railing without reason, and making their own imaginations (without any warrant
of the Word) the square of their Conscience. I protest before the great God,
and since I am here as upon my Testament, it is no place for me to lie in, that
you shall never find with any High-land or Border-Thieves, greater ingratitude,
and more lies, and evil perjuries, than in these phanatick Spirits.

King James, Basil. Dor. lib. 2.

If the Declarations of the whole world besides prevail not with you, at
least, but learn of your enemies what to do. If some body must be trusted, (and
give me leave to tell you that to erect an equal Commonwealth, is to trust
some body, since you are not likely in such a constitution to be the Majority)
why do they not trust you? May not you, (I hope you do so) have as good opinion
of your selves, as they of themselves? And setting aside the consideration of
personal uprightness and sincerity, is it not equity and Prudence, that they
rather be trusted whose sense and interest it is to preserve a Toleration, then
they who for the subverting of it lie under the greatest motives that flesh and
blood can be tempted with, I mean PROFIT, REVENGE, RELIGION, HONOR? Were the
case insisted on, a small thing, I should not thus debate it: but it is no less
than your whole fortunes, and your judgments, and those of your posterity,
freedom as to purse, as to mind, all is engaged in this question: and a power
hangs over your heads (like a cloud out of the North) much more dreadful to
tender consciencs (if all my reading and intelligence yield me any insight in
things) then the Romish inquisition, and in comparison whereof the return of
Charles Stuart with his Bishops, would prove a moderate desire.

But you perhaps will say that you are no Heretic your self, whatsoever others
may be: you are an Orthodox Independent of the Savoyards confession; you agree
with them in all fundamentals, it is but a small circumstance you differ about
contained in a leaf or two, all the rest is not dissonant, but that there is a
perfect Harmony betwixt the two Assemblies of Savoy, and Westminster, Sr. give
me leave to undeceive you a little in this point, for that which you allege as
a ground of your security, will aggravate your fault, and that wherein you
differ is sufficient for your extirpation, since it is the main cause why
others are to be persecuted. Are you so shallow as to think it is conscience
and not interest rules them? And do you not know that it is worse to withhold a
Tythe-pigg, then to deny Christ to be come in the flesh. It is an old
complaint, quis Iovinianis, quis Pelagianis diem dixit? The abettours of
free will; they who thought it unlawful to eat Rabbets because strangled, or
who did not concur about the Doctrine of the Trinity (I mention things little
and great) as the Greek and Latin Churches, could retain communion together,
whilst the Aerians, the Waldenses, the Erastians of late were not to be
endured? Search the Books of Martyrs, you will find more die for opposing the
interest of the Clergy, under the Romanists; than for professing Christ under
the Heathen Emperors. John Huss suffered for writeing false Latin, and
opposing the Popes and Clergies revenues, as you may see in the Council of
Constance. But Sr. do you think the difference that amounts to 3 or 4 Pages in
quarto to be so inconsiderable? I have heard a dappled Presbyterian highly
commend Athanasius, that he would not grant the Arians one iota, (I use his own
words) this being all the differance between them; and where are you now, Sr?
Besides, if you examine the differences betwixt you, Sr. G. Booth makes you
Sectaries.
as D. Cawdrey and others state it, you are Schismatics, you deny (at least in
effect) their Churches to be Churches, and their Ministers to be Ministers of
Christ, (and this is true) you make them Antichristian, and then shake hands of
fellowship with them; either condemn your selves for this, or approve them. But
I will tell you a greater exception against you than this, and for which you
must into the stool of Repentance, and whither they will urge you to repent in
the short, or the more tedious way, I know not; but I believe the latter, since
you are not like to be a great person, when you come to this trial; They say,
if you be Orthodox in judgment, yet you have been false in your practice: you
defeated the holy Synod in their consultations by your contests and
contrivances, until that Tares had overrun the field of Christ, and Heresies
too deeply rooted themselves in the land; that you pleaded for a Toleration
first, and now that it is clear you would give none, it is too late: that you
procured you a Sub-committee, to enform your consciences, and would not tell
them nor the world perfectly what you thought, until you published an
Apologetical narration, that you were not to be convinced, having studied as
unpartially and unprejudicially as men made of flesh and blood are ever like to
do, the ( God knows what, for you explained it not) points in controversy; and
for the Sub-committee, having dallyed with it so long as you thought it
convenient, you gave it over sultenly. If you differed so little, say they, why
did you raise so great stirrs? why did you speak so darkly, that we could-never
come to an agreement in opinion, until we come to agree in one single person?
And after you had agreed in your confession, and respects to a single person;
when he who assured you of his heart, did begin to make the like, or greater
professions in the behalf of your reconciled brethren, did not you (say they)
pull him down because he would destroy your Hopes, not your Churches? I know
not, nor do I hear of any who converse with the Presbyterians unvailed, but
says, the person who drew up the Savoy confession, is the Pest of this nation,
that he either shall receive, or merits an halter: and in the heat of the
rising (which is infinitely more a Presbyterian-plot, then that of the
Powder Treason ascribable to the Papists) did not -- picture a Gallows on his
Lodgings with this inscription -- 's fortune? How do you intend to subsist
together, and how is it imaginable you should, if it be tolerated that you
impale in your assemblies the chief persons in their parishes? With what face
can you think to invite a man from a way which you will not say is bad, unto
one which you dare not say is better? But let us imagine that you are allowed
to say your way of Assembling is Christ's way, and that yours is the instituted,
and incorrupt way, (from whence the inference is clear^ that what is not
instituted is to be forsaken, what is not of Christ, ought not to be owned as
his; what is corrupted (and you must say if you condemn not your selves, that
in what you differ, the corruption is on their side) must be redressed.)
Supposing this I say, how will you persuade the same men that they ought to pay
Tithes to their Parish-Minister, whose pastorage they are not under, and at the
same time to pay for the maintenance of their elect Teacher, how shall an
Independent Father call to account his Presbyterial Family? though you agree
never so in Doctrinals, yet it will be a very great censure, that each is not
under the discipline of Christ. Is any refractory? you teach them to reject
Synods and their Anathema's, as insignificant, humane, ungospel combinations;
how will you then complot that the Nation may be in peace, and unity? believe
them not; who profer you a Society that is not durable; fly from their
embraces if you love your selves, (and they say you do) as from the hugges of
Mil^ch wherewith that Idol received the children that were to perish betwixt
his arms. As for the Estates you have got, are not they the divisions of Deane
and Chapter-lands? And is it not a decree in the Scotch Discipline, that all
Tithes, Rents, Lands, Oblations, yea whatsoever has been given in former
times, or should be given in future times to the service of God, was the
patrimony of the Church; and ought to be collected and distributed by the
Deacons as the word of God appoints. That to convert any of this to their
particular, or profane use of any person, is detestable Sacrilege before God.
And elsewhere, Gentlemen, Barons, Earls, Lords, and others, must be content
to live on their j^st rents, and suffer the Kyrke to be restored to her
liberty. What this liberty is follows in the same place, All things given in
hospitality, all rents pertaining to Priests and Chanteries, Colleges,
Chappelries, Fryeries of all orders, the sisters of the Seynes, all which ought
to be retained still in the use of the Kyrk. Give them but leave to take their
breath, and expect the rest: The whole revenues of the temporalties of the
Bishops, Deans, and Arch-deans lands, and all rents pertaining to Cathedral
Kyrks. Then supposing an objection that the possessours had leases and estates,
they answer, that those who made them were thieves and murderers, and had no
power to alienate the common good of the Kyrk. That this is their judgment, it
is proved by the Author of the Warning, to beware of Scotch Discipline, who
transcribes what I have set down out of their very Book of Discipline. And with
his assertions does agree what Spots-wood in his History of Scotland, out of
Authentic acts, does relate. Page 164. It is true, that in the same
declaration they wish recompense to be made to such as have debursed sums of
money to those unjust possessours: but they do declare, that it is to be but a
reasonable recompense, into which the profits of the years past are to be
reckoned. And there is another proviso, that the same have not been bought of
late, in prejudice of the Church, and no conllusion used. This you may see in
Spots-wood, P. 164. So that if they prevail, however they may stroke you, they
will not want pretenses to undo you upon the principles aforesaid, when
explained and improved by a preval^nt authority, which is to be wholly at the
devotion of their Synods. Nor ought they now to cajol you into a compliance,
since to my knowledge under Richard, it was all their talk, to make you degorge,
and that you should repute it a favor in extraordinary, if you were repayd
what you disbursed, without being questioned for past profits and
dilapidations. No, it is not in the power of a few men of complying principles
or pretenses to assure you of an after-reckoning, where the Emolument is so
great, the means so facile and plausible, and if the injury be any, it is but
offered to the Egyptians. Let the present partisans (of whose minds you are
uncertain, because prosperity and power infuses new thoughts) speak you never
so fair in a Convention of Presbyters, it is in vain to mention prudence,
especially where it is ballaned with the cause of God, and interest of the
Kingdom of Jesus: not the most meek and moderate, but the most fierce sway
there, and the most zealous and hot is the better Christian: So that it is not
to be doubted, but an assembly in England as well as Edinburgh (in 1647) may
constitute, that the next Parliament, the Church should be fully restored to
its patrimony, and that nothing should be past in Parliament till that be done.
Behold, I give you a fair warning: These inconveniences will befall you, when
you will have nothing left you in your power but an unprofitable repentance,
when the sense of your being deceived will be an additional to those miseries,
which are otherwise unimaginable. A thousand things also more will be objected
unto you Savoyards, whose principles all Sects go upon, and differ from you in
Superstructure, not foundation: I shall not urge you any more in a case so
ticklish, and wherein I doubt not but you understand your adversaries: if they
have not written hitherto against your confession, it is because your Deaths or
exile will be more beneficial to them, and they will not spoil this
opportunity, by a previous Alarm. I had intended to present you with a Sermon
(such as assuredly will be made against the Army, when scattered) at the first
Presbyterian Cruzada that shall be, but I find my self to enlarge too much: I
shall therefore omit it this time, and resume our discourse about the Select
Senate.

After we had debated the foregoing examples of a power established for the
securing a people in their Liberties, I mentioned one more concerning the
Iustitia of Aragon, out of the constitution of which Kingdom (it being made up
of men not much different in temper from the English, rough-hewen, and sturdy
Mountaneers) much might be drawn for modelling of us into a Settlement: I shall
now give you a more full account thereof.

About the year of our Lord, DCCCXLII. when Sanctius Carsias IV. King of
Suprarbia was slain by Muza Abenheazin and the Moors, the Suprarbians and
Aragoneses ( who were ligued with them under an Earl) which escaped out of the
Battle, This following whilst as discourse is most extracted out of
Hieronymo de Blancas native of Saragossa, Cronologer of Aragon, who wrote
whilst as ye^ the Iustitiate was in being, and made it principal businsinesse,
to discover the nature of that Office out of the most ancient and authentic
Records, and dedicated his Commentaries to the eight Deputies of Aragon,
Protectors of the Iustitia.
fled into the Mountains together with their Wives and Children, and did there
imbody and fortify themselves, living upon the spoils which they got from the
Moors who then possessed Spain. Being destitute of a King, they at first
chose twelve Men, (Sennores) to rule them, such as were of the greatest
prudence, as well as gravity and age. And thus they continued a long time,
enlarging their bounds by little and little. But finding that the aforesaid
Reiglement was not very suitable to the posture of their affairs, which
required a quicker dispatch of Counsels, then was to be found in the
joynt-Government, of so many men, they being to make excursions upon, and to
expect Inroades continually from the Moors. Hereupon they resolve to erect
such a Government, as might redress the present Inconveniences, and yet not
destroy their own Liberty. They dispatched Ambassadors to Pope Adrian II. and
to the Lombards, ( whose Empire was indeed overthrown then, but many eminent
persons of that People were in being, and the memory of their well-founded
Governments as to Laws and Civil Liberties was renowned every where) who
advised them, That they should first of all agree upon some FVNDAMENTAL LAWS,
Righs and Liberties to be inviolably observed; and then choose them a King (no
Forreigner, but such as for whose good inclinations they might have the
security, his birth and allyances, and education, amongst them could yield) of
such extraction as not to disgrace the dignity, nor yet of that power and
means as to be able to subvert their Foundation-Lawes. Whereupon the
Suprarbians and Aragoneses did agree upon the Fueros or Forum Suprarbiense,
being certain Laws to be preserved immutably, however the King with the
Cort-General, or General Convention of Estates might make a further provision
of Laws, as they should see occasion, without retrenching upon what was the
Foundation and Basis of the Government instituted. I shall not trouble you with
all the particulars that were for ever, to be incapable of Alteration; Of the
nature of fundamentals in reference to their mutability by the people, I shall
speak more in the close of the letter.

Apud nos prius leges canditas, quam reges creatos fuisse. ^0 Blanca.


they being for ought I can judge, not very material to our affairs or my
purpose; Though it be well worth your Observation (in opposition to some that
are excellently versed in Politics, and use high Rodomontado's to decry even
the possibility, much less the plausibility of such Acts) That by the advice
of as wise men as ever the world produced, upon many years mature
deliberation, the Aragoneses did in the erection of their new Government,
previously agree upon some things that were to be immutably preserved by their
Trustees. And it is registered for an everlasting Memorial in the Proeme to
their Fueros, or Laws; That their Laws were first made, and afterward their
Kings. However I shall repeat some of them.

IVRA DICERE REGI NEFAS ESTO, NISI ADHIBITO SVBDITORVM CONSILIO.

It shall not be lawful for the King (who was to do nothing of moment but by
the advice of his Council) to enact any Law, but by the advice of his Subjects
in Cort general.

BELLVM AGGREDI, PACEM INIRE, INDVCIAS AGERE, REMVE ALIAM MAGNI MOMENTI
PERTRACT ARE CAVETO REX, PRAETERQVAM SENIORVM ANNVENTE CONSENSV.

Let the King take heed how he make War, conclude a Peace, or Cessation and
Truce, or intermeddle with any business of great moment, otherwise than by the
Advice and consent of his Sennores, that are to be of his Council.

For the securing of them in these (and other) Fundamental Constitutions, it
was agreed upon, that there should be a Magistrate ordained, who should make it
his duty and business to see that their Laws and Liberties were no way
infringed, unto whom there should lie an Appeal, or any other Officer, if any
private man were wronged, and who should defend the Republic, if the King did
oppress, or go about to oppress that.

NE QVID AVTEM DAMNI DETRIMENTIVE LEGES AVT LIBERTATES NOSTRAE PATIANTVR, IVDEX
QVIDAM MEDIVS ADESTO AD QVEM A REGE PROVOCARE, SI ALIQVEM LESERIT, INIVRIAS Q.
ARCERE, SI QVAS FORSAN REIPVB. INTVLERIT, IVS FAS Q. ESTO.

And least we should suffer any detriment or diminution in our Laws, and
Liberties, let there be an intermediate Judge appointed, unto whom there may
lie an appeal from the King, if he wrong any man, and by whom the State may be
righted, if it be any way injured.

After they had long debated these Fundamentals, and agreed on them, they took
a long time to elect a King, and at last Anno Dom. DCCCLXVIII. They fixed upon
Innicus Arista King of Navarre to be their King, who being to swear to the
observation of all these Fundamental Laws, before that they would make Oath of
Fealty to him; Innicus was at first surprised at the Office of IVSTITIA, as
thinking it a very hard condition for a King, to have another to Judge of his
Actions, and watch him, being Non Roy de nom, mais le Maistre des Roys.


But after a serious debate with the Suprarbians and Aragoneses ( whom I shall
henceforward call by the name of Aragoneses in general) having heard their
reasons, how Monarchy was of that nature as even to debauch the best men; and
though the King should not infringe their privileges, yet could they find no
satisfaction therein, since he might if he would; another procedure than what
they had taken would reduce all to a dependence upon the goodness of the King,
and not their prudent contrivance; That if they should hereafter fall into
slavery, having been perfectly free, the regret would be insupportable, being
at once to lament their misery and folly, which had precipitated them into it,
and mourn, that being likely for ever to desire Freedom, they did not provide
for the perpetuation thereof. That for a King to be bound to what was good and
just, was not to be in Fetters, or wear Manacles; That he might be as sure of
not being affronted by the Justitia, as he was of his good deportment.

That such a Magistrate could not create any Disturbances, but to which he must
give cause, and if the Nation did happen to fall into any Division and War;
though it be true that all Commotions are grievous, yet some are necessary, and
honest, and to be preferred (as Physic to distempered bodies) before a
peaceable yielding to Oppressors.

His hominibus diligenter perpensis omnes ad unum Scriptores testantur, non
p^tuisse eundem Innicum Aristam Regem vehementer non probare praecliram illam,
quiet vivendi, apertamque, simplicem, ac directam viam a nostris omnibus
constitutam, adhibitamque ab ipsis omnium, incommodo, rum cautionem. 80 Blanca.
In fine, Innius Arista having weighed these Discourses, it is the universal
assertion of all Writers, that he did highly approve of the Constitution, as
Innocent and Prudentiall, and of his own accord did add to their primitive
Fueros, this Law or Privilege.

SI CONTRA FOROS AVT LIBERTATES REGNVM A SE PREMI IN FVTVRVM CONTINGERET, AD
ALIVM, SIVE FIDELEM, SIVE INFIDELEM, REGEM ADSCISCENDVM LIBER IPSI REGNO ADITVS
PATERET.

If he should any way oppress the Kingdom hereafter, contrary to the Laws and
Liberties thereof, then it should be free unto the People to choose or call in
another King either Christian, or Infidel.

The Aragoneses refused the Liberty of recurring to an Infidel for Aid or
Protection, but engrossed the rest as a Fundamental Law, and so it was
accounted in the time of Philip II. King of Spain, 1592. when they took up
Arms against that King under Joannes Nuca, the Justitia, in defense of their
Privileges.

The Justitia of Aragon ( I shall constantly term him so, though he be, not so
named in the Fueros, and was called sometimes Justitia Major, and Justitia
Regis, or Justitia per manum Regis, and the Justitia of Saragossa, but the most
u^iversal Title given him for several hundreds of years in the Aragonian
Histories and Records, is Justiciado de Aragon). He was to be elected by the
King [ and his Council which was made up of twelve Sennores or Ricos Hombres at
first; and afterward of eight Deputies of the Cort general] but being once
Elected he held it for Life, unless the Cort general ( before whom he might be
accused, which practice was afterward commuted into a Committee of Seaventeen,
styled Forus inquisitionis Officii Justitiae Aragonum, or, Inquisitors into the
deportment of the Justitia of Aragon) did think fit to depose, or punish him;
which latter was performed according to the injury he had done any body either
in life, limb, or estate, he being to suffer the same, but his Sentence was
never to be reversed.

The Justitia was to reside about the Kings person, whose Court being commonly
at Saragossa ( after it was taken from the Moors) the Justitia was there too.

He was to be present at the Kings Council when he pleased, and I find his name
often at the Regal Charters, Deeds and Conveyances.

He was not to be one of the principal Nobility, such as they called Ricos
hombres de natura, and Ricos hombres de mesnada, because they could not be
punished with death, or any corporal punishment, unto which the Justitia was
liable, if ye were found to merit it: though in all the Aragonian History, I do
not read of any complaint made against him by the people, or that any of them
was ever punished in any manner for injustice by the Cort General, or
Inquisitors.

The Justitia was not to be an inferior person, nor a practitioner at Law (
though many of them were excellent Lawyers, as Salanova, Cerdanus, etc.) but he
was to be Miles, a Cavallero, and his way of proceeding was not by way of
tedious process, Lawyer like, with nice debates and critical disputes, but
breviter, Summarie, et de plano, sine strepitu, et figura judicij, by a brief
proposal of the case, and collation with the positive Letter of the Law. If he
had been one of the Ricos Hombres, he might have made use of the justitiate to
his own designs, having an army at command constantly of his own creatures; and
if he had been sordidly educated, or accustomed to receive fees, protract
cases, and countenance the most notorious corruptions, the Office would soon
have become prejudicial to the public. But I observe the Aragoneses were no
such friends to Lawyers in practice, As the Iustitia was not to proceed in his
decisions by juridical debates, and tedicus contests upon strained
interpretations of the Fueros: but diligently to regard the tenor of the Law,
and observances or usages of the Nation. And in all their Courts that people
made it their rule, that the Laws should not be extended by the Magistrate, but
that he as well as the people should be obliged by them: So that it is truly
sa^d by Blanca, It is our laws that speak, and the judges are but dumb
Executers of them. Unde vere dici potest, leges nobis esse loquentes; mutos
autem earum Ministr^s Magistratus. And at the conquest of Valentia, when Laws
were to be made by the Aragoneses under Iacobus 1. who subdued that Kingdom:
though it was moved, that the new Laws might be penned in Latin, or
Aragonese, it was resolved they should be written in the language of the
country, which though conquered was to be ruled by them, the Aragonese and
others their Auxiliaries, being principal Lords, the reason of which is given
by Bernardinus Gomesius in Vit: reg. Jacob. l. 12. Rex plebiscita and
municipales leges Valentinis dedit vulgari conscriptas sermon, ut populo
melius innotescerent; utque perspi^uitate, a vari^ eas, confusa saepe,
interpretatione juris, et captionibus essereret: whatever might be said for the
elega^cy or antiquity of the Aragonian language, or for the Majesty of the
chief conquerours, that ^he Laws should not only be given by them, but in their
language, yet he thought that it would be more for the convenience and unity of
the Realm, that a few should learn the vulgar tongue, [which was not the
Saracen but Aqui^an, whom he plan^ed there as the people] then that all should
study the dialect of the nobess: that it would alleviate the sense of their
subjection, and also be for their benefit, since the Laws hereupon were
perspicu^us, and freed from variety and confusion in intempretations, and
captiousness. He made the utility of the people his design, and not the in^rest
of a few, or his own glory: he thought those Laws to be elegant enough, which
were plain and intelligible unto th^se who were to be ruled by them. He did not
propose unto himself the advantage of a sort of men to be bred up as Assessours
or advocates, without which the Country should be at a stand, and not know how
to determine any thing. No, this was far from that Kings intention, who did
therefore contrive Laws in the vulgar tongue, that he might exterminate out of
the Land the veri^us, subtle, spiny and difficult interpretations, the
unavoidable consequences of Laws being written in a foreign tongue, together
with their interpreters themselves: and if there happened any doubt in Law,
which might retard the Judges in their decision, it was not remitted to them,
but to the judgment of a certain number of honest and plain men, who were to
inquire into the true and naked state of the case, and pronounce accordingly.
There being nothing more popular than that when doubtful cases arise amongst
the people, they be determined by some of their own degree and rank: for they
will think well of them, but as for professors of Law they will suspect and
hate them, as being to live by the litigiousness of the people This is the
account which Bernardinus Gomesius a native of Valentia gives of their Laws
original: In favor of my Aragoneses, I shall observe cut of Bodin a famous
Lawyer, that the good government of the Ethiopians, (civil rights are no where
better preserved) subsists without Lawyers And Ferdinand K. of Spain prohibited
any Lawyers to go into the Indies, least they should instruct the people in the
way of contention. The same man condemns Matthias Corvinus, K. of Hungary, for
inviting by large Salaries several professors and Practitioners of the Law out
of Italy, to teach a people ignorant of those arts the intrigues of contention;
the issue of which project of the King's was, that in a general convention of
the States, he was desired to banish again all Lawyers. He says that it is
natural for the French to be lit^gious, and that he would destroy that country
who should bring the Lawyers practice into di^use; but as for more northern
nations, and particularly England, it is but an introduced custom, not founded
on the natural inclination and genius of the people, whereunto it is altogether
unsuitable, and is no other then a French fashion, Gallia ca^sidicos docuit
facunda Britannos. And this is the judgment of Bodin, (de repub. L. 5. C. 1.)
then whom I think the world never yet produced a more solid and judicious
writer, one who had studled men as well as books, and had been particularly in
England, and honored with the familiarity of Q. Elizabeth, and others of the
Nobility.
as to prefer them to any place of trust and power, for they were not only
excluded the Justitiate, but they could not be of the Inquisitors into the
Justitia's actings, though the Inquisitors were to advise with them, and then
to dismiss them before they came to definitive sentence. The Iustitia had
several notorious Lawyers, and two Deputies, Lugartenimentes del justitia de
Aragon, of the same profession, to assist him in Court, and preserve a form of
dispatch and management of things.

What Salary he had I cannot inform my self, it not being expressed, but only
in general: but doubtless his Revenue and Maintenance was with convenient Port
and State: though it was not so great as that he should overbalance affairs.
At such time as he did not act as Justitia, but Counselor to the King, I find
him seated by Petrus de Luna, ( being Pope) below the Ricos hombres, though i^
is to be granted they lived in a pomp not much inferior to Kings; which made
Alphonsus 3. say, quando havia en el Regno tantos Reges, como Ricos hombres.
And in subsignations of Charters, etc. wherein he acted only as Counselor or
Witness, I find him ranked after the Ricos hombres, and Bishops, yea and
Zalmetina or Chancellor of Saragossa.

As for his Power, if any Judge, yea or the King himself with his Council, or
otherwise, were passing or executing a Sentence upon any Man, or Men, he might
inhibite upon complaint, (i. e.) help, help, force, force. Jura nostra
plenissime vetant ut quicquam fiat nisi ad illius, cujus principal^ter
intersit, instantiam: nempe qula majores nostri voluerunt, sui quimque jurls
and retinendi and dimitendi esse dominium, idque nervos esse atque artus
libertatis. Blanca.
Avi, Avi, fuerza, fuerza, ( for without complaint he was not to intermeddle)
the process or execution, until he was satisfied that all was legally done. He
had a particular prison called la carcel de los manifestados, whither he did
remove Prisoners if they implored his help, and to prevent all inconveniences
and dangers eminent, he could issue out a Writ called Jurisfirma. He was
Supreme interpreter of the Laws, and therein Paramount to the King. He did
determine of the Kings Letters mandates, ( yea and the Results of the Cort
general, which were managed by him Segu^t fuero, e Segu^t antiquame^t fue a
cossubrado.) whether they were repugnant to the Laws and Observances ( so they
call their usages, they having but few written Laws) or not; and whether they
were to be obeyed, or not. He had power to issue out his Inhibitions unto the
greatest persons, ( yea Cities and Kingdoms not subject to Aragon, though
under the same King, if the King failed; and take exemplary punishment of them)
and the King himself was upon appeals subordinate to him, and to obey him,
though his Writs did run (even to the King himself) in the King's name.

Before he came to any definitive Sentence, he was to summon all the Lawyers in
Saragossa, or (if he were any where else) that could well be procured,
excepting those that were de partida, retained by the persons concerned; and to
take their advice, and according to the majority of their Votes, he was
afterward in his own Court to pronounce Sentence: and the Sentence so given
was called, Determinatio consilii Justitiae Aragonum, and was of as much
validity as if it were a written Law. Afterward in Criminal Causes it was
thought sufficient that he should have seven Lawyers to advise with, which were
called Los Siete de la Rota.

To make his ^udgment significant, and that it is Execution might not be ended,
and his Authority thereby become contemptible and unserviceable to the
preserving of the fundamental constitutions, and other Laws in being; he had
from the beginning of that Kingdom unto Petrus 4. King of Aragon, surnamed the
Ceremonious, in 1348. a power to call together (without any pretense for
refusal) all the Ricos hombres, and to arm City and Country immediately for the
effecting thereof, without long temporising. This was called the privilege of
Union, it being thereby according to the Fundamental Constitution Lawful, and
no way to be accounted Ignominious and Rebellion, for the whole Country, Los
quatro Brac, os del Regno, to arm against the King in the behalf of the
Justitia, or (as sometimes happened) in favor of the King against the Nobles
or Ricos hombres.

But to preserve the constant repute of the Justitia; At the Cort general de
Aragoneses, or general Assembly of the States, the King sat upon thrones to an
height more than ordinary above the rest, then at his feet, yet higher than
the rest, was placed the Justitia of Aragon in great Majesty, and though the
King were there, yet was he President of the Cenvention, and ordered every
thing according to his Fueros; he adjourned, or prolonged the Assembly, even
the King being present, but in the Kings name. This Cort general was held at
first every two years, and afterward every three or four years, to enquire
into the national constitution, the Exchequer, the deportment of the Justitia,
and the like; as also to recognize the power of the Cort general and Justitiae
according to the fundamental Fueros. It is very remarkable that was done in
this Cort. Whenever the new King was to be enstalled, or rather made ( for
though the primogenito or eldest Son, or next heir, did succeed, yet did not he
come to it by way of inheritance, being not to exercise the power or own the
title of King, until his enstalment in the Cort general) a general Assembly of
the States was summoned, and after that the Corte was opened by a speech of the
primogenito ( as general Governor by place after the decease of his Father: at
other times the Kings did it) to the States, and an answer of theirs returned
by the Bishop of Saragossa, then the Justitia, being desired thereto, made an
enquiry i^to the Legality of the Corte, and what Members were absent, whom
after three days expectation (summoning them formally each day) on the fourth
he fixed a Mulct on them, and declared that their absence did not impair that
Authority of the Cort general. Then the Justitia in his habiliments, and having
written on his breast, Hattoman: Francogal: P. 123. Junius Brutus in vindic.
contra Tyr. qu. 3. Answer to misled Dr. Fern. P. 18.
IVS ARAGONICVM, or The Laws of Aragon, ( after some consultation with the
Corte) tendered him an oath, that he will inviolably preserve the Fueros or Laws
and Observances of Aragon; having first accosted him with this address, NOS QVI
VALEMOS TANTO COME VOS, Y PODEMOS MAS QVE VOS, VOS ELEGIMOS REY: CON EST AS Y
EST AS CONDITIONES: INTRA VOS Y NOS, UN QVEMANDA MASQVE VOS. That is, We that
are as great as you are, and are of more power than you, have chosen you our
King, upon these and these conditions; betwixt you and us, there is one that is
of more power than you; After that the King had made Oath to the Justitia, then
the Justitia and rest of the Assembly swear fealty to the King. And this
Ceremony was reiterated every Cort general, with as much solemnity as at the
first inauguration; and the last day of the Session, when all things that were
agreed upon to be passed, were ratified and sworn to by the King first, and
then the Justitia, ( all running in this form, El Se^nor Rey de voluntad de la
Corte estatuesce y ordena) from this ceremony, that day is called, El dia de la
celebracion del Solio, or the day of celebrating of the inauguration.

And indeed, before I pass any further, I cannot choose but reflect upon the
admirable contrivance of this Government, that each Officer might know his
duty, the King his power, and the Iustitia his, and the Peoples Sovereignty
stated, so as they who were most willing to forget, could not; and the People
were hereby so animated, as no persuasions should work upon them to think or
assent to, that where the word of a King is, there is more power, then he saw
biennially attributed to him. God in the Jewish polity seems to evince the
utility of these recognisances, that the Magistrates may be put in mind of
their original and duty, whilst he enjoins, So the Ephori of Sparta did swear
their King every month solemnly, that they should rule according to Law, and
after their Kings had sworn, then did they in the name of the people
reciprocally swear, that if so, they would preserve them safe.
that the King when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall
write him a copy of the regal Law, or that according to which he was
particularly to demean himself, in a book, out of that which is before the
Priests and the Levites; and it shall be with him, and he shall read therein
all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep
all the words of this Law, and these Statues to do them; that his heart be not
lifted up above his brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment
to the right hand, or to the left, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20.

I shall now give you some account of the deportment of this Justitia, that you
may see it was no insignificant constitution, but that it did merit that
commendation which is universally given it, to have been the preservation of
their Laws, and Liberties. Petrus 2. laid on the people an unusual tax called
Monedage: the Justitia being appealed to by some that refused to pay it, gave
sentence concerning its illegality, and immediately cites the Ricos hombres,
Cities, Universities, and Corpo^^tions to prosecute his sentence by way of
Union. Whereby the King was forced to ease the People, and to recognize
particularly in Cort general the Law or Privilege of Union.

Jacobus 1. surnamed the Conqueror had, by reason of dangers imminent from the
Moors, Monetaticum.
procured the grant of a Tax from the Catalonians, termed Bovaticum, to be
raised upon every head of Cattle; he desired the like concession from the
Aragoneses in Cort general, the Nobility refused to pay, and all were upon so
high terms that the Corte broke up tumultuarily, Gom^z. In Vit. Jacob. 1. lib.
16.
and not by a legal dissolution: Since neither King nor People did recur to the
Justitia, he could not interpose, nor did he. Things came to an open War, and
after some skirmishes and conflicts, the Nobility did invoke the Justitia, ( in
the constitution of which Office this King by long Wars attended with conquest
and plantations of additional foreign strengths, had introduced some
corruption) who forthwith took cognizance of the business, issued out an
Inhibition or Jurisfirma to the King, to stop the proceedings of his potent and
victorious Army, and in a peaceable manner determined the whole controversy,
and so disposed the King that a Cortgeneral was called, and all abuses or
inconveniences in the Justitiate were redressed.

Alphonsus 3. the Munificent, having disgusted the Aragoneses by assuming the
title of King, before his acknowledgment and oath made to the People in Cort
general; they began to be jealous of their Liberties, and fear that additional
conquests would be more dangerous to them in the end, than they were at present
beneficial: upon this account in the first Cort general at Saragossa they began
to debate upon some Laws whereby to prevent future perils: The King resented
their actings, though they pleaded their Fueros, and disorderly withdrew from
the Corte. This last departure of his being also contrary to the Fueros, they
in Corte appealed to the Justitia, who takes cognizance of the thing as a
violation of Privileges and Laws, and puts in force the Union against the
King. Alphonsus to allay this storm, being at Osca, by the advice of some
Counselors that were with him, makes and publishes several extraordinary good
and plausible Laws, and such as would have quieted all men's minds, had they
been passed in Corte, and not by the King and a few Counselors. The
dreadfulness of this President made them more vigorously prosecute the Union,
that in a little time, they so humbled the King, as to assent to their desires
and recognize the privilege of the Union solemnly. After this all was quiet,
and never was any King more revered and beloved than he after that passage.

Under Jacobus 2. the Cavalleros murmured at the King for depriving some of
them of their Cavallerias, or Lands which they held in Knights-Fee, and
disposing of them, and others, It was no Union, but a combination, unless made
by the Iustitia.
contrary to the Fueros of Suprarbia: and hereupon they combined together
unanimously against the King to right themselves without ever troubling the
Justitia. The King being in some strait, protests he had not wronged them, at
least not wittingly, and appeals to the Justitia, according to the Fundamental
Costitutions of the Land. Eximinus Petri Salanova being Justitia, issues out a
Jurisfirma to inhibite the Cavalleros from all violent actings; The Cavalleros
protested against his Authority; for being that they charged the King with
breach of his Coronation Oath, they said the business was not to be decided by
a Secular, but Ecclesiastical Judge and Arbitrator. But the Justitia
peremptorily decides the Controversy; declares their combination to be
illegal, though to Unite were not, and consequently that the Oaths they had
mutually taken, and the Hostages they had given to each other, the former to be
null, and the latter to be restored again. And further resolves it, that the
Cavallerias were in the Kings disposal, though their Lives and other fortues
were not. So he determined this great Controversy, and dissolved as great and
firmly made a League as one shall read of; desiring the King to deal favorably
with them ( being so numerous and potent a part of the Aragoneses) and neither
punish them with a total confiscation, perpetual imprisonment, or exile.

Under Petrus 4. the Ceremonious, when his brother Jacobus was put by the
General-governourship ( which appertained to him by Law, as next Heir to the
Crown) by that King, the Justitia put in practice the Union against him, after
the usual manner, whereby they vindicated their Privileges. But the King
having Catalaunia and Valentia ( being not subordinate in Government, though
they several. times made up a Cort general with Aragon) to assist him, besides
the Kingdoms of the Baleares, etc. and having bought off many Lawyers and
others, Noble Men and Cavalleros by Gifts, Honores and Cavallerias collated, he
did not value the Justitia and Union, especially since the Justitia, Garfias
Ferdinandi Castrus, had been his Counselor and Governor in his Father's
time, and afterward one of his Mesnadero's or domestique creatures, and
always expressed a particular inclination for him. So things came to open War,
to the utter ruin of the Union. For the King was resolute and fierce, and set
to destroy the Privileges of the Ricos hombres, and their way of Uniting; and
the Jutitia did faintly prosecute him out of natural weakness as well as
personal regards; and at last being not able to reduce the King by fair means
to equitable terms, and being loath to see either his friend, or his Country
ruined (and possibly not able to endure the contumelies and affronts put on him
by such as he ought to have protected) he died, and thereby endamaged them more
than by his life. For the Election of the Justitia being in the King, he
deferred to make one till he had subdued the Union, which now was become of no
Authority ( though they did choose Conservators of the Union) by reason there
was no Justitia in being. This consideration made both sides hasten to a
Battle, wherein after a bloody conflict, the Union was dissipated, and the
King absolute Conqueror, who thereupon made one Galacianus Tarba to be
Justitia, who had been instrumental in betraying the Union to which he first
adhered; and he did publicly with his sword cut in pieces the Writings
containing the Privilege of Union, and destroyed all the memorials thereof
which he could come by, and enacted, that it should never be revived again. As
for the Justitiate, it was weakened (though not frustrated) by being turned
into a Court of Judicature, and to be managed accordingly, eight men (of the
great Personages) being enjoined in each Cort general to help him in the
executing of his Sentence. And it did prove a great protection to the
Aragoneses as to criminal Causes, and things of lesser moment, but though the
old Solemnities were upheld, yet did not that restrain their Kings from
retrenching upon their Fueros, there being no standing Militia under the Ricos
hombres to assist him. This happened in the year, 1348. After this it continued
in manner aforesaid, (doing sometimes notable service) to the great
satisfaction of the n^w effeminated and degenerating Aragoneses, until the
reign of Philip 2. King of Spain, at what time the Justitia having interposed
in the case of Antonius Perez a prisoner whom the King would have executed out
of reason of State, Philip was hereat so angry that he sent an Army under
Alphonsus Vargas to deprive them of their privileges, who pretended he was to
march against France, and not them, and so temporised with them until it was
too late for them to arm, and advance the Standard of the Union: there was no
standing trained Army, nothing but effeminacy and luxury in the great men, whom
the Gold of the Church had debauched, their Counsels were tedious, being first
to be resolved on by the eight (which were the Kings Officers too) and then to
be referred to the Cort general, which was to be summoned by the King, or
Viceroy; so that though the Nation did at last Arm, and the Clergy preach up
Liberty, yet the tediousness of the dspatch, and their intestine weaknesses
concurring, they were not able to bear up against a King so potent as Philip,
who was Lord of all the Kingdoms about them, so that there was no hope of
Foreign aid.

Thus fell the Iustitiate of Aragon, having continued ^24. years, longer than
most Common-weaths ever did, yielding more Peace, Security, and universal
Satisfaction to the People, than any Government I have read of. Hieronymus
Blanca (who lived when it was in being, only deprived of that quick prosecution
which the Union afforded, 1588.) gives it this commendation, after a diligent
enquiry into the Nature and History of it; That by the means of the Iustitiate,
Jure affirmare possumus, in hoc uno, e^ re^g^bus and regno civilis tuendae
concordia summam ext^^isse.
the Majesty of their Kings, and the Liberties of the People, both had been
preserved still, and that in a peaceable manner: for the prosecution of the
Union was a thing of sudden dispatch, and never came to much Bloodshed, but
under Petrus 4. This is the Government so long debated of, and set on foot by
so many eminent men who devised it: celebrated by all that mention it; even
Ferdinand (who married Issabella) when the Castilian Counselors exhorted him
to overthrow it as being inconsistent with the Majesty and Grandeur regal: He
did not only refuse to subvert it, Thuanus Hist. lib. 104.

Ac vel ex eo maxim praestans, magniquesemper habita, quod in tanto sibi jure,
ac praesidendi potestate collata nulli fuit unquam Tyrannldi, neque
perturbationi rerum obnoxia Gomez. l. 16.


but (though he had experimented an absolute Monarchy, and its pleasures in
Castile) did infinitely praise it. Bernardinas Gomezius of Valentia, writing
the Life of Iacobus 1. amongst other Elogies, says of it, that Notwithstanding
the greatness of its Power, the Iustitiate was never obnoxious to raise a
tyranny, or create disturbances. That it was so far from fomenting divisions,
that it appeased or prevented them; so far from debasing the King, that it
preserved him; -- and that it was by this means that the Kings of Spain did
receive fewer complaints from Aragon then any of their other Dominions. In
fine, as Blanca observes, they continued in the enjoyment of their Fueros, when
Navarre (which refused to erect a Iustitia, being destitute of a King at the
same time that the Suprarbians were) had lost theirs, So true it is that the
same Author observes, Our Ancestors did secure our Liberties at first unto us
by three most sure Guards: viz. The Iustitia: The great power of the Ricos
Hombres; And the Privilege of Union. The first was a Civil and Forensical
curb: The second, a Domestic, and more pinching one: The third, Popular and
Warlike. Nor indeed could there have been less provision made for it, that it
might continue to our times. It fell not to the prejudice of the Dignity, or
out of any evils it did in it self draw upon the Nation; but when nothing but
arrogance and ambition would overthrow it, and nothing but baseness and malice
could speak ill of it, when it might have subsisted longer by its intrinsic
constitution, and when the People, Laiety and Clergy, were ready to expose
their lives for its continuance.

I should now accommodate my discourse to our present times, and deduce
something from the Constitutions of Aragon, that might be advantageous to
England. But as my own disabilities and unexperiencednesse makes it impossible
for me to serve you herein, so the sense of your actings make me unwilling to
attempt it. If Scripture had not prohibited me to meddle with them that are
given to change; common discretion would me better to engage my self by advise
with persons so irresolute. Consider your dealings; I am loath to give a Name
to some of them; but lo! are you not become as Mungrel Samaritans, who by the
dictate of their own inclinations, and the delusions of intermixing Priests
were brought to divide their service betwixt the true and false God? Do not you
now caresse the honest party, yet comply effectually with -- Give me leave to
be free with you for once, I know not whether your inadvertency, and the active
malice of your enemies may not reduce you to such a straight as not to receive
a second Application from me. The good things you speak and make semblance of
to do, I know not whether they are your Raptures, or your Reason; your lucid
Intervals, or your Phrenzies: You are too Mercenary to be reputed public
spirits, you are too publick-spirited to be Mercenaries: Nay it may be (so
usual it is for the most Victorious to be outwitted) it may be that there is
not such a man as Colonel --, it may be you are ignominiously Cashiered, and
excommunicated the Society of all the faithful and godly!
not to receive a good word from them, who never intended you more, nor had
given you that, but to overthrow you: or it may be you are not so stubborn but
to expiate your former actings against the [ Presbyterial] Church of God by
some months Repentance, solemnly performed in Margarets Westminster; It being
a thousand pitties that since you agree in Fundamentals, and make one common
profession of Faith, that such a Ceremony as the standing in the Stool of
Repentance (by which they reconciled themselves to their King Charles Stuart in
Scotland, and you must not expect more favor) and the giving up of one
thousand pound per annum, given you for the Arrearage of Services against your
good Brethren, should create any strife. It may be too, that you are now in
Prison, voted to the Tower, shipped for the Barbados, or flying into Holland,
and what I have already writ shall never come to your hands. However, since I
believe that God will dispose of all things for the Salvation of his dear ones,
and bring your Freakes to a better issue then your Counsels, I shall deposite
with you an hasty essay toward that Settlement which is expected. Things are
brought to that pass as if God by his Providence had left you no more to do,
then Moses, had to secure Israel after the passage through the Red Sea, he did
but stretch out his hands, and the waters returned and covered the Egyptians,
and they were seen no more. Do but dare to be honest; and be otherwise at your
peril. But though you do ruin your selves, yet will not we despair: For He
who is the Hope of Israel is mighty to save: and His Word fails not, though
you recede from yours. He that we trust in, is the same in the Mountaiues and
Valleys, in our Highest, in our Lowest condition, and howsoever you put men to
a loss or stand in their purposes, you but carry on His still. Miscellaneous
Positions concerning Government.
I. ALl men are by nature free, and equally free from an overruling
Magistratical Power.

II. The rise, extent and limitations of Magistratical Power is from the people.

III. When a Government is broken, all men are cast into their Natural freedom.

IIII. When any men agree to erect a Government, they being at liberty so to
do, there the Government established is lawful.

V. They who have any such intentions, may appoint Legislatours for themselves,
but not for others directly.

VI. Where there is any such intention in any nnmber of men, and it be certain,
or highly probable that others who either live intermixed with them, or joining
unto them, will oppose or subvert the Government which they are going to
establish: it is lawful, and an Act of self-defence, to subject such persons,
or parties, and so far to depresse them, as there is danger of their
prejudicing the Government intended.

VII. The demeanor of the prevailing party or people toward them that are
thus subjected, is not to be examined by a rigorous justice, but there is a
great latitude granted, within which all the procedure is just.

VIII. If there be any excess in the sufferings of a party so depressed, they
are to consider not what the prevalent party does, but what occasions they give
them for such actings: The natural deceitfulness of the heart of men, together
with [possibly] additional breach of trust or inconsistency of principles, and
the greatness of the danger upon any miscarriage, justify a Scrupulous
severity.

IX. It is the duty of a prevailing party to give every person his due liberty.

X. So much liberty is due to such as oppose or are inconsistent with the
rising Government, as may consist with the continuance thereof.

XI. To allow them more, is in the Legislatours a breach of Trust, they being
to make laws for the preservation of them who entrust them: and in the people
themselves, if they ratify such concessions, not only folly, but an unlawful,
unwarrantable Act, being a neglect of that self, the love whereof is to
regulate our love to others.

XII. Where there are two or more parties disagreeing as to the erection of a
Government, and but one agrees to this determinate form, there the Magistrate
has a direct power only from and over them: his power over others is
indirect, and in order to the safety of those who empowered him.

XIII. There is a great difference betwixt the liberty of men by nature, and
that which they enjoy under Government.

XIII. By Nature a man is absolved from all laws but such as God has
imprinted in his soul, or revealed unto him by his spirit: in a constituted
Government he is obliged by accessional orders: by nature there is no property,
but his possessions are as great as he can make them: in a constituted
Government, things are not so, but the greatness of his possessions, and the
manner whereby he is to attain, maintain and dispose of them, all depends upon
laws agreed upon by the whole people engaged into that polity; and every man
living under it is to be presumed to have given away all those claims which
are prejudicial to the durablenesse of the league contracted. So that in a
Government it is perfect liberty, if men with security enjoy what they honestly
get under such laws as they themselves enact, or choose who shall enact, (and
can repeal them, if they be found grievous) and none of them be secluded from
Government, and making or executing their own laws by any superior power, but
by accidental circumstances, as defect in abilities or estate, (and the like)
whereby to be able to discharge such places.

XV. Humane prudence is not to be neglected in the choice of Governors, or
erection of Government.

The innocence of Doves is not more enjoined, Godliness and Saintship is so far
from being the sole qualification of a ruler, that in the election decreed by
Moses, Deuteronomy. 1.13 i^ is only required that the ^ulers be men known (for their
just deportment and visible godliness) wise and understanding.
then the wisdom of Serpents, such prudence does not repugne to godliness, it
being the very gift of God, prayed for by Solomon, 2 Chron^ 1.10. Give ^e
wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people: for
who can judge this thy people, that is so great? and for which praye^ God does
highly commend him, and as a blessing for so discreet a choice God gives him
riches and honor; that which he desired, was not that wisdom which should
qualify him in the condition of a Saint but in the regal posture, viz. wisdom
and knowledge, that he might judge his people. The conveniences attending the
Pursuit whereof^ and the inconveniences following upon its neglect, are so
published in Scripture Pov. chapter 1.2, 3, 4, 5. that he may justly deserve to
become a Proverb himself who does vilify it.
XVI. In the founding a Government, the Legislatours must be accurate and
distinct: it being no where more verified then here, that a small error in the
beginning does aggrandize in the end.

XVII. Since the good of the people is the end of Government, and regulates as
well as gives a due val^e unto the means ordained thereunto: it is necessary
to be known who the PEOPLE are.

XVIII. To be a part of the people it is not necessary that one actually have
land in such or such a Country: as is clear from the examples of Rome^ Athens,
Sparta.

XIX. To become a part of the people it is not sufficient that one do live in
this or that Country, and either farm, or actually possess lands therein: The
Helots were not the people of Lacedemon, though they were the Boo^es and
pesantry thereof, renting the whole Country, and infinitely more in number
then the Lacedaemonians; the Proselytes for inhabitation amongst the Jews were
not a part of the people, nor the Gibeonites, though they were considered in
the Jewish Polity. And in Sparta if any Citizen did not submit to the
fundamental discipline of the Country, through dissoluteness or tenderness,
though he did not forfeit his Lot, or Land, yet did he cease to be a part of
the people. So Xenoph. de repub. Lacedaem. (...). They who observe the rigor of
the Spartan laws though they be insufficient in strength of Body, or Riches,
yet are they citizens, and equally share in the public liberties: but if any
through effeminacy or other motives declines their way of educatio^, he is not
reputed any longer as a part of the people, notwithstanding his means, or
abilities of body.


XX. They only are the people who upon the erection of a Government, have
empowered the Legislatours to act, being avowedly ready to stand by and uphold
them in their actings.

XXI. To be in the pay of a State does not render an Army mercenaries or
deprive them of their share in being the people. It did not so in Rome nor
Sparta.

XXII. In the enquiry after the people of England, I think it most rational to
make that division amongst us, which God by his providence, and signal
distinguishing mercies has ordered: and that, whom God has separated, man be
cautious how he join them.

XXIII. The last division which God prouidentially has made in this Nation, is
that of such as adhered to or abetted S. George Booth and his confederates, and
such as actively owned the Parliament at that day of trial.

XXIV. Neuters in the constitution of a Government are not considered as the
people, or any part of them; since they confer no power on the Magistrate,
(being merely passive) but submit to what another shall give him: and
consequently neither do the Magistrates receive, nor the people give any other
power over Neuters, then what arises from the apprehensions of their proper
security.

XXV. Whether we reflect upon addresses previously delivered to the Parliament,
or subsequent actings, I believe the Army and their adherents (without any deep
scrutiny into what has been confessed) are satisfied, that by the last
division which God has made, the Presbyterians are excluded.

XXVI. In the last division which God has made, the Sectaries are all
included, both by previous addresses and subsequent services.

XXVII. Whom God has joined, let man be tender how he separate.

XXVIII. The basis upon which the aforesaid people can erect any lasting
Government, must be such a Toleration as each may be secured of the continuance
thereof without molestation from, yea under the protection of the Magistrate.

XXIX. The Toleration of others who are not the people, is to be regulated by
their compossibility and consistency with such a Toleration, and Government
erected thereupon.

XXX. No religion does enterfere with such a Toleration.

XXXI. There is no religion which can lead a man to renounce the performances
of such actions, as render him capable of civil or political Society.

XXXII. If the weakest amongst the Sectaries be so gifted as that he may
receive from God that Elogy; Luke 19.17.
Well, Matthew. 25.21.
thou good Servant: because thou have been faithful in a very little have thou
authority over te^ cities: If God will say thus to them, why should man say
otherwise? since that little in which they have been undeniably faithful, is
that whereby the State has been and must be preserved, and is sufficient to
discharge satisfactorily what an equal Toleration will make them capable of.

Silence is not to be taken for consent, where a party is under force.
XXXIII. Where one part of a Nation does withhold the rest from such a
Government as they would otherwise erect, or continue; and does set apart
Legislatours upon their own account, without the concurrence of the other
either tacit or open: there after the actual establishment of such a
Government uniuersally, the after-act and reception of the other party, kept
under force, is not a collation of power to the Magistrate: or if it ^e; upon
such a change of circumstances as may render them free, their former acts are
revocable according to the common usage of the world justified by eminent
Lawyers.

XXXIV From whence it is clear, I say force them, because I think a prejudiced
people, passionate and ignorant naturally, will so long stick at the ^l^ction,
without force, as to ruin us all.
that there is no security in any ratifications that can be drawn from such as
we are (by some) persuaded to force into an equal Commonwealth with us; but if
they get once a power they will as little want the desire, as plausible
pretenses for annulling all preceding actions.

XXXV. To step forthwith into an Equal Commonwealth (supposing that it could be
regularly done) considering our present divisions and jealousies, is a desire
not unlike to the superstitious observation of the Arabians, where several
words come together having over them the point Vashlu: viz. they are to be
pronounced with one breath, and that must be done, although a man stifle
himself about it.

XXXVI. It is not only unlawful in our Commonwealth that is to be erected, but
unnecessary in any Republique that all therein (excluding sojourners) be
equally regarded in privileges.

This appears from the constitutions of Israel, Rom^ and Venice: not to mention
what I have already said concerning Israel, I shall here exhibit a brief
description of that Commonwealth and the other of Rome as to this inequal
constitution of theirs out of Seldom de jur. nature. Hebr. Li 2. c. 4. p. 164.
Having discoursed concerning proselytes and their admission into the
participation of the name of Jews and Commonwealth of Israel, he shows that
they were never so franchised as not to retain a character of their having been
aliens, an Hebrew of Hebrews being distinctly recorded from an Hebrew
proselyte, Philip. 3.5.
who yet were called Jews, Joseph. orig. l. 13. c. 17. and as to real
immunities, he does thus summarily express their condition. Let us suppose
aliens not descended from Roman families initiated in the Roman religion, to be
customarily called Romans, and yet to be excluded all honors and dignities
within the city of Rome or its precincts: and that several other things are
denied them upon the account of their being strangers by descent; yet that they
participate in many things. This would be the express condition of the Jewish
proselytes, that embrac^d totally that religion. Those aforesaid would receive
a demonination from Rome, into which (as if it were a new native country) they
should have adopted themselves, for as much as by a solemn initiation they
should become Romans, and enjoy sundry privileges God wards, and amongst men,
and live in the Roman territory under new Laws. Yet for so much as some things
(according to our Supposal) should be denied them upon the account of their
being aliens, it would necessarily follow that they lie under a perpetual
distinction of being strangers. So as, though they should be never reputed of
otherwise then as Romans, yet should they fall under the exception of being
Stranger-Romans; such as were not plenarily citizens, but in part only. In so
much as these proselytes, retaining this character of their being aliens,
should much resemble the Cumani, Acerrani, and Atellani^ people that were upon
this account made Citizens of Rome, Festus in Municeps.
that they should always continue their re^glement or Commonwealths in several
from the people of Rome, and serve in the Roman Legions, but bear no Office or
dignity; or the Municipes Agel^. noct. Attic. lib. 16. c. 13.
who were honorarily entitled to the City, but without power of Suffrage, or
being Magistrates. So that if we follow Aristotle, who does Suppose a Citizen
to be no way better defined then by a capacity of being preferred to
judicatures and Magistracy, (...) Polit. 3. c^ 1. and 3.
A proselyte of justice however he might vary his appellation, and be styled a
Jew, yet was not he simply to be reputed a Jewish citizen, but always a
stranger who had gained several rights and immunities amongst the freeborn
citizens. The posterity of such proselytes were in the same condition with
their anc^stours, nor did they ever reap greater immunities then their parents.
The like practice hereunto is found in Spain established by Law, where such
Mahometans, and Jews as are converted to Christianity, they retain for ever a
memorial of their having been aliens, and upon that account are excluded, both
the one and the other, from places of honor and civil employments almost all
upon that very account. As Ludovicus a Peguera, Ioannes Escober, and other
Spanish Lawyers largely inform us.

And thus much out of Mr. Seldom concerning the inequality of the Commonwealths
of Rome and Israel; yet does not all the History of the Jews acquaint us with
any detriment (or least insurrection) that befell them from such a
constitution, By stranger is meant such a Proselyte as I speak of.
in which they thought there was so much of justice as did not retrench upon
the precept, Number. 15.15. One ordinance shall be both for you of the
congregation and the stranger that sojourneth with you. As ye are, so shall the
stranger be before the Lord. Nor repugne to that prohibition which they had
received not to vex or oppress a stranger, Levit. 19.33. yea Philo, though
their privileges were no other then Seldom relates, boasts of the
favourablenesse of the ^ewish Legislatour, who had given Proselytes equal
privileges with the natives, (...). lib. de Monarch and de legate. ad Cajum.
and placed them in equal esteem.

In Venice there are three sorts or ranks of Citizens, the Commonalty, the
Cittadini, and the Patricians: who yet are not to be reputed Citizens according
to the definition of Aristotle, for the two former are excluded from public
Magistracy. So in Rome some were Citizens of greater privileges then others:
Citizens of the best quality, or cives optimo jure, Citizens of an indifferent
quality, cives mediocri jure, This distinction of the Roman citizens does not
respect the richest, but such as were incorporated, they were privileged
without detriment to the public, in a different way. As for the native
Citizens of Rome, he that will may learn the great inequality they lay under in
their Comitia Centuriata and Tributa out of Sir Robert Filmores discourses upon
Aristotle's politics: but I do not remember that I have read how from such
inequality either the people became mutinous or the republic, damnified, much
less overthrown.
and Citizens of the worst quality, Cives deterrimo jure, such were the people
called Cerites, who were declared Citizens without any power of suffrage. One
of the Cittadini may be Chancellor of Venice; they may be sent as Residents to
any below the degree of a King, and other places of profit (as Secretaries of
State) are allowed them. As for the common Artisans and Tradesmen they enjoy
nothing of privilege, nor no interest in preferments, or government, only some
immunities as to customs and taxes, wherein they pay but half so much as
others, and pettit colledge-offices. And this account is given of Venice by
Bodin in his Method of History, c. 6. and the C^mmentatour upon Gianotti, p.
324 etc.


XXXVII. Experience tells us that a Commonwealth thus unequal may stand under
good Orders, and flourish: and where any of this nature (and such ever were the
best and most flourishing) have been overthrown, it was not thorough any
intrinsecal defect in such a constitution, but thorough a defect originally or
afterward contracted in the regulation or management of orders necessary to
their preservation.

XXXVIII. Good orders do not secure a Commonwealth wherein the major or more
active part is not spirited for such a form.

XXXIX. Where men are never so well disposed and spirited for a Government, it
is by a due constitution of orders that they must hope to subsist.

XL. By orders is not meant a bare vote, or proper design, but an actual
m^delling of the people into a determinate posture under law and Officers
suitable to the continuance of them herein.

XLI. It is not the erecting of a Commonwealth by force, which subjects it to
destruction, but the not making it Natural afterward.

XLII. Nature is nothing else but a determination of adjoining causes where a
thing acts thus, or thus.

For a stone to move downward, it is natural: because God has so determined
the univers^, as to impresse a gravi^ation into it If the circumstances were
altered, it would be as natural for a stone to mount upward.
LXIII. To make a Government natural the circumstances of affairs must be so
disposed of that they may necessitate to such a posture.

XLIV. A violent necessitation is not durable.

There is a necessitation to be laid upon men which is durable, and not violent.

The difference betwixt Moral and Natural causes is in the Manner of operation,
not in the uncertainty of producing the effect; but men usually mistake herein,
and suppose the falliblenesse to be in the cause, which indeed is in
themselves, who from different circumstances look for resembling events. He
must not deny this, whosoever in humane actions demands, why? or debateth how
this or that is to be done?
XLV. He that would make a durable Commonwealth upon the means aforesaid, must
consider what is the Basis whereon its erection depends and what are the means
naturally conducing to its establishment.

XLVI. In every Government where the determinate form is agreed upon, it is
fundamental that the means conducing to it is establishment be upheld.

The means conducing to the obtaining an end may be two ways considered:
either in themselves, or as to be practicated in this or that place. Though
some things may not be fundamental to a government absolutely considered, yet
they may be, as it is not otherwise possible to be erected in a nation: and so
the accessional care of them becomes a fundamental to the Legislatours; since
without the consideration of such circumstances, they who are not likely to
want opposition, will want defense. And so I conceive a Toleration to be
fundamental to a Commonwealth in England; for upon less security then that it
shall be irrepealable, and means used to continue it so, how can it be
expected that the Secta^ies (as they are called) should venture their lives and
fortunes cheerfully in the behalf of them, who only seek for a present
subsistence by their h^lp, and may afterward reduce them to a worse condition
then ever a Court of politicians will put them under.
XLVII. Lycurgus his law was fundamental to Sparta; and so was Moses his law to
Israel; though it were not fundamental in the latter that they should be
executed by a Senate: for they might choose a single person to that, Deuteronomy.
17.14.

From whence it is clear that the distinction of things into fundamental, and
not fundamental in a republic is not absurd, though it be not imaginable how
an absolute power can be bound extrinsecally: since intrinsecally and by
natural necessity an absolute power may be bound; as it was ordered by Moses
and Lycurgus. If they who desire any thing should be fundamental, do not
purpose the establishment of means suitable thereunto, it is indiscretion in
them: but if they do, it is an impertinency to demand, how this or that shall
be unalterable? when the means are exhibited whereby to keep it from being
altered^

Whilst I was reflecting upon the constitutions of Aragon, and weighing the
different circumstances wherein they at first were to what ours are, I thought
the following proposals might advantage something to a secure establishment
amongst us.


I. Let all those who have adhered to the Army and Parliament in the time of
the last conspiracy by an active compliance be registered as the Liberators of
their country, every one of them: and let care be taken by country registers,
and court of Honor, for the perpetuating of their memory in Families, and
their descendants after them. Let them be as the prime-gentlemen, and at
present only capable of places of power and trust; and hereafter if they or
their posterity shall be found of equal abilities with others, let them claim
the pre-eminence before others.

II. Let them be all put into a Military posture under faithful Commanders, and
accustomed to one another and so correspond in a more firm amity: which will be
effected by frequent musters to the same benefit to the Commonwealth, that the
public Feasts in Switherland produce, or the old Andria and Phiditia in Crete
and Sparta.

III. Let none else be permitted the use of Arms, unless public exigency
require it; then they may be employed as the Jews did their proselytes, and
the Spartans their Helots.

IV. In case any Gentlemen shall give by a succession of services and deports
answerable, testimonies of his good affection and fidelity so as to be trusted,
let him be admitted to the privilege of a Lib^ratour of his Country, yet
retaining a distinguishing character of his being only impriviledged. So in
Aragon there were Ricos hombres de natura, and Ricos hombres de mesnada:
besides the examples of Venice whereof I have already spoken

V. As for the inferior sort (of whose coming in there is as little doubt, as
danger) let them be privileged after some time: but admitted to Musters before.

VI. Let the Armies of Ireland and Scotland be included in the number of the
Liberatours of the Commonwealth of England, and registered accordingly: every
man being to take care for his being registered, if he intend that himself or
family shall reap any benefit hereafter. The like custom is observed in Venice
amongst the Cittadini.

VII. Let all this body of the Militia of England including the Armies of
Ireland and Scotland choose a proportioned number of deputies at their several
musters, who may out of their number by the Ballot elect some persons [it may
be nine or thirteen] who shall make up the Select Senate or Conservators of the
liberties of England.

VIII. Let this Senate be for life; so as that once in two years there be the
like procedure as for the election of the Senate, to elect a determinate number
of men to be inquisitors into the deportment of the Senate, with power to
examine briefly and plainly their behavior, and by Ballot to sentence by fine
or deposition, any or all of them: and to issue out summons for a new election.

IX. Let the Senate, and the Inquisitors be inviolably so to be elected as that
they bear some proportion with the Chambres impartes in France; as those Courts
are made up out of Protestants and Papists entermixed, so let the Senate and
Inquisitors be made up of the several parties in the Nation ligued in the
establishment of a Commonwealth, viz. Independents, Deuteronomy. 23.
Anabaptists, Fifth-Monarchy-men, and Quakers.

X. Let Papists, Prelatical. and Presbyterial persons be for ever excluded the
Senate.

XI. The Select Senate is not to intermeddle ordinarily either in the Executive
or Legislative power of the nation by their own proper authority.

XII. The end of their appointment is to secure the fundamental constitutions
unto the Liberatours of the Commonwealth: that so they being secured, the other
part of the Nation may enjoy that freedom which otherwise could not be
permitted them with safety.

XIII. The Security which the people (for so I shall for brevity sake call the
Liberatours) can have as to their fundamentals, does lie in the management of
the Militia, Universities and Ministry: therefore the inspection and care of
all those (according to fitting ways) must be vested entirely in them; and the
Inquisitors are to research into their faithful deportment herein.

XIV. Let all their processes run in the name of the Commonwealth of England,
and be signed only by the Conservators of the Liberties of England.

XV. Let the forces now in being continue for ever; those in Ireland and
Scotland for the security of those Provinces: (and let me be recorded as a fool
and Idiot to all posterity, if that the incorporation of those countries prove
not destructive to the English Liberties, and particularly Scotland, which if
ever it unite in our Parlaments, farewell peace and liberty of conscience.) The
Army in England must be kept up as Guards to the Parliament, Council of State,
and Select Senate, but to be under the latter, and whom the Commander in chief
is to recognize.

XVI. This care being taken for securing fundamental liberties, let the
Parliament be chosen by the whole Nation, and not the people only, upon due
qualifications, and a regulated way of Elections.

XVII. Let each County choose a triple number to what shall serve in the House;
and let them by an after-election agree upon their Members.

XVIII. Though the President of the Select Senate be to be elective and vary
every two months: yet at the Session of the Parliament, however it happen, let
them agree upon a particular President, who shall be Speaker of the House pro
tempore, and who jointly with them shall examine all elections, and tender a
recognition of the fundamentals to each member.

XIX. All the Select Senate must have the privilege of sitting as members in
Parliament.

XX. Let the making of laws not retrenching upon the fundamentals nor power of
the Senate about the Militia, Ministry, or Universities, be in the power of the
Parliament; as also war, peace, matter of trading, taxes, customs, enquiry in^o
the receipts and disbursments of moneys, as also the disposal of places of
profit, etc. Justices of peace, but not Sheriffs; let them be nominated by the
select Senate.

Let the Parliament be called ordinarily once in two years, and to endure Three
months after the first opening of the Session by the Speaker; and to be
summoned upon any extraordinary emergency, by the Council of State.

Let the Parliament choose out of their number a Council of State to manage
affairs in the intervals of Parliament, and to be accountable to them.

Let Three of the Select Senate be at the Council of State constantly, with a
liberty of debate, but not suffrage; and let them be as inferiors to the
members of the Council, whilst they are in the Council, and at other times,
saving when they act in their own Court as Conservators of the Liberties of
England.



I shall not particularize any thing further, by reason of the small insight I
have in our national constitution^ I shall not touch upon the regulation of the
Law, Ministry, Elections and qualifications of Parliament men, or the like:
whereof none can judge, but they who are thoroughly acquainted with
circumstances whereto, I could never attain. If I favor the perpetuation of
the Army, it is because I think it necessary that there be an alteration of
quarters in the forces of Scotland and Ireland, which if they be relieved by
fresh Forces out of England, the Governors there will be able to fasten the
less interest in the Soldatesque, and the people less imbue them in principles
of disaffection.
Besides, I am of the mind that all Government is by an Army; and that the
Signiory of Venice is no less a military Government then the Empire of Turkey.
The difference (as to the execution of laws) lying in this; in Turkey laws
are enforced by a standing Army, and in Venice the Army is not in pay, but he
who shall refuse to submit to the laws will soon discover this truth, that the
foundation of all jurisdiction is an Army. I have already showed the small
assurance that a Parlamentary vote gives, or a select Senate not backed with an
Army, in the good discipline whereof the Conservatours of the liberties of
England will be so much concerned as to look thereto, for otherwise their
condition will be unsafe. When Tiberi^s Gracchus endeavored to establish the
Licinian law, the nobility slew him, though a Tribune of the people, and dearly
loved of them; at whose death they who should have defended him, were so
astonished, as they moved not to revenge it. In like manner was Cajus Gracchus
slain, and his death not resented: so little trust is there to be put in an
established Senate which may be thus overthrown when the people (as not in a
constant Military posture) are their security. But it is obvious to any one,
whose will be the Army, if the present forces be disbanded: I am sure they who
are concerned in a Toleration will not be able to bear up. The Iustitia of
Aragon lost his authority when the standing Army of the Ricos hombres was put
down; though his power were rather greatned in legal concessions.
Yea, any popular tumult in that unruly City of London may destroy them
irrevocably. Thus a standing Army is at present necessary, and will hereafter
be prudential by reason of the City of London, which without such a
counterpoise is able to give laws to the Nation, and make the authoritity of
the Nation precarious. As to what inconveniences man arise from the standing
Army; the provinces being their enemies, and they being subjected to the
Senate, who are likewise to have a care of the Country Militia, I think there
needs no further corrective.

I should end my discourse here, but that some reflections upon the whole
precedent discourse do now come into my mind, without an hasty solution of
which difficulties I think uncivil to break of. I confess to any Objector,
that all our debate concerning the Ephori of Sparta, the Roman Tribunes, the
Select Council appointed Lewis of France, or K John of England, as far as they
purely are alleged, for proof of a Power to be constituted for the
preservation of Fundamental Liberties against a popular Assembly, so far they
are impertinent unto our affairs, who doubt not but there may be a way to
restrain the exorbitancy of Kings, though not of Parliaments. How this later
may be done is our Inquiry now, and a President for that is demanded, as well as
contrivance by model. I say hereupon that the Iustitia of Aragon was a Check to
the Parliamentary Assembly of that Kingdom: For he might not only suppress
any Party as the Ricos Hombres, or Cavalleros, or Cities, upon any emergency by
the privilege of Union; but also frustrate all the Decrees of the Cort
general, if they did not proceed according to his Fueros. I have given you an
instance hereof in my relation of the Iustitia's actings under Iacobus 1. nor
do I doubt but if his aid had been implored by the Commonalty, he might have
advanced the Standard of the Union, and by the People themselves have
prosecuted even the Cort general, if they infringed his Iustitiate. So that it
is clear that though there be no balance for the people themselves, if they
fix upon the overthrow of fundamentals, yet there may be a counter-poyse for
the representatives of the people. This truth will much more appear from the
Constitution of Rome, in which I find the People balanced by the Order of
their Classes and Centuries in their great Assembly, or Comitia centuriata. The
whole People were divided into six Classes, and each Classis into Centuries of
a very unequal proportion. The Patricians, Senators, Noblemen, Knights, and
Gentlemen of Rome, made up the first Classis, and Ninety eight Centuries. All
the poorest sort of People made up but one Classis and Century, whereas upon a
due proportion of number, they should have made up a thousand Centuries. Here
you have a balance for the People by the Original design of the Commonwealth:
For if 98. Centuries of the Gentry, and first Classis, or 97. agreed, (things
carried not by Poll, but number of Centuries concurring) then were not the
other Centuries called to suffrage, being a Political Minority. So that it is
possible you see by an Original contrivance to limit the Legislating People
themselves. But to give you a further and very material instance for a select
Senate, I aver that the Senate of Rome was in its Constitution until I.
Caesar's time, such a coordinate Senate as many now cry up. That the Executive
power was in them is not doubted: That they were concluded by the Laws enacted
by the People, is unquestionable. They had moreover a dormant Power to secure
the Fundamental Laws and Frame of the Commonwealth, even against the
Representatives of the People, viz. the Tribunes, or even the People
themselves: And of such emergencies they themselves were Judges. This appears
by the power they had to create a Dictator Paramount to all patrician or
popular Magistrates, who might arbitrarily dispose of the Life and Fortunes of
any Roman Citizen, or parties. Secondly they had upon cases of intestine
dangers from the Tribunes or populace: A Power to make that extreme and
ultimate Vote, of Viderint Consules nequid Resp. detrimenti capiat. Let the
Consuls take care that the Republic be not prejudiced. And when this Vote was
made, the Consuls might fall on any mutinous Citizens, and slay them without
trial: by such a Decree were the Tribunes of the Gracchi slain, and those in
the time of Caesar forced to fly Rome, as any one may read in Caesar's
Commentaries of the Civil war, Lib. 1. Thirdly, this Senate (which was for
life, unless the Censor outed any for misdemeanors) had a power to annul
Laws made by the People, as Manutius in his Book de Senatu, shows out of
Tully. So that it is manifest, that as all the good government of that
Republic, and all the grandeur was derived from the Senate, so the aforesaid
Senate was a power in some cases coordinate, or rather Supreme to the People.
And I will evidence it, that such a power in that Senate was not the cause of
the subversion of that Commonwealth, but other male-constitutions, which if
they had not been, this Frame had not been ruined.

Having mentioned unto you Fundamental Constitutions of the Roman
Commonwealth: you may possibly demand of me, if they had any such? Sir, you
will not be the first who make this enquiry, but I assure you they had, and
that they were not only unalterable, but never altered. The People in their
Secession to the Mons Sacer did ordain them, Manut^ de leg^ Romans p. 190.
and the Senate (without such demurs as we are now troubled with) did assent to
them, and they were called Leges Sacratae, or Sacred Laws. All other Laws might
be abrogated, Manut. de leg. Romans P. 351.
but not these: the Executive Magistracy might be new modelled and varied, but
not these Laws. Nor do I find that the having such Fundamentals was accounted
by any judicious man heretofore an imprudent act; or found in practice
detrimentitious to the People or State.

But further, it is a ridiculous argument, The People generally assembled, can
lie under no restrictions of their power^ (which is false; for their way of
assembling may be so contrived, and a party so ordered as to be able to check
the more numerous, if they should, who are morally inhabilitated to such a
design, conspire to subvert the Fundamentals.) Therefore the Peoples
Representatives can lie under no restrictions. The People personally assembled
are an Army, and so the Power as well as Authority visible: but their
Representatives are not so; and therefore may be checked by the Senate,
empowered to that end with their Guards.

This last discourse suggests unto me another Model, which I shall exhibit to
you, leaving circumstances to further contrivance.

Let there be a Select Senate for the securing of the Fundamentals, with the
standing Army for their Guards, and a power to curb the Trustees of the whole
Nation in Parliament, if they go about to subvert the Fundamentals. Let them
have the Executive power, and the Parliament in ordinary the Legislative.

I have not time now to discriminate their powers, but if the posture of the
people in a Militia be settled according to my other model, according to this
all parties may receive a fair establishment. There may be Censors contrived,
or Inquisitors; to enquire into the deportment of the Senate, and supply their
number. And if it be thought meet to fix an extraordinary character upon any
person amongst us; He may be as in the Roman Senate, princeps Senatus, or
Prince of the Senate, a Title which has nothing of power, or of a single
person, but only Honor; for the power was in the Consuls and Senate, the
prince was only reputed the best and ablest man in the republic, and who had
signalised himself by his actings formerly, and was first to give his suffrage,
or deliver his mind by speech, ^f he thought it meet.

I have been the longer herein, not only because I take an infinite pleasure in
entertaining you, but because possibly your negligence may bereave me of any
opportunity of writing to you more. It is not now a time to dally; hitherto
your neighbors were not at leisure to attend your actions, or contrive your
ruin, now they are not only vacant to wa^ch all advantages, but it is become
their interest to effect it^ Thus your Dangers multiply from abroad, and your
Friends decrease: a league with you is like an Egytian Reed, which is likely
either to fail, or wound him that loans thereon: none can build any certainty
upon your promises, yea it is dubious whether they may ever come to be
ratified. How then can your Envoyes abroad treat, or how can you expect but
that all should desert you, since it will become their prudence to do so? If
you defer your Settlement some months (for I shall not suspend my thought till
May) all your confederates must fix upon other designs then you would wish.
And at home, how do you think they who are called Sectaries shall support you,
upon no other, nor more advantageous terms than of bleeding for insensible and
discurteous Friends? I at present call you Friends, though your deportment
shows that you are, or would be even their Masters? If their hands are weakened,
how will others be enraged who have not fastened the like obligations upon you,
that you have received from them. If they who met you in the Wilderness, who
refreshed you in your distress be thus disgusted by you, what fears will seize
upon them who might justly dread what God awarded to Amalek? But to conclude;
Be more suspicious of your enemies, and less jealous of your friends: nothing
can secure you of the former but an utter impossibility of hurting you, and of
the latter you have the assurance not only of their affection, but incapacity
of prejudicing you. Regulate the -- erect -- destroy the established intrest of
-- let them shift for their livings, who plot to take away your lives: when ye
have done thus let him be a Monarch that will. The most wise cannot effect a
regality, nor a fool keep it. You may commit a thousand errors in the
government you establish, but the greatest you can possibly fall into is the
leaving us in unsettlement. I beseech you to excuse the freedom I make use of
in this address; the smitings of a friend are faithful, and if I have let fall
any thing that may give you cause to entertain other thoughts of me, I shall
upon any opportunity evince unto you, how I am with the greatest inclinations
possible.

Sir, Your most affectionate-humble Servant; H. S.
Chapter Chapter Oct. 13. 1659.
FINIS.

