THE Necessity of Reformation, With respect to the Errors and Corruptions OF
THE CHURCH of ROME.

The Second Part.

Wherein is showed, The Vanity of the Pretended Reformation of the Council of
Trent; and of R. H's Vindication of it; in his Fifth Discourse concerning the
Guide in Controversies.

IMPRIMATUR:

Martii 6. 1685/6. Carolus Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris
Domesticis.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1686.

The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. NO hope of Reformation from the CHURCH of ROME. 2 CHAP. II. The
Authority of Father Paul's History of the Council of TRENT asserted. 29 Sect.
1. The Author's Sufficiency for the Work, and his Sincerity in performing it.
Ibid. Sect. 2. The Credit of this History so fan from being overthrown, that it
is rather established by those that endeavored to destroy it. 68
CHAP. III. The Vanity of the pretended Reformation of the Council of TRENT. 61
Sect. 1. In those Matters in which a Reformation was most necessary, not the
least Reformation made, or so much as pretended. 62 Sect. 2. In those Matters
in which a mighty Reformation was pretended, little, or rather none, was really
made. 68 Sect. 3. Instead of Reformation, the Council produced a greater
Deformation: What it found bad, it left in many respects worse. 91

ERRATA.
PAge 8. in Not. l. 1. read Fascic. rerum expetend. P. 9. Not. l. 2. r.
Meritorum. P. 10. Not. l. 2. r. exoptata. P. 12. Not. l. 3. r. cognoscitur. P.
16. l. 22. for too, r. to. P. 19. Not. l. 5. r. Luitprand. P. 23. l. 10. blot
out of, l. 22. put as before has, l. 30. r. generality. P. 38. Not. l. 1. r.
Not. P. 60. l. 18. r. Mufottus. P. 64. l. 9. for he proceeds, r. they proceed.
P. 69. in Not. l. 3. r. prurientes. P. 70. l. 8. r. infallible. P. 71. in Not.
for at, r. atque. l. 4. r. Apostolicae. P. 77. in Not. l. 1. ^. obedientia. P.
79. l. 22. r. King. P. 80. l. 4. after composed, add as. P. 81. in Not. l. 1.
r. egregium. P. 83. l. 5. for (z) r. (y). l. 11. for (a) r. (z). l. 18. for (b)
r. (a). l. 19. r. prohibits. l. 26. for (c) r. (b). P. 100. l. 30. after As,
put in if, and for Truths, r. Truth.

The Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the Errors and Corruptions of
the Church of Rome.
THIS will be manifest to all unprejudiced Persons, by the proof of these Six
PROPOSITIONS.

Prop. I. That the Church of Rome is not only fallible, but had actually erred.

Prop. II. That her Errors were not slight, and in Matters of small Moment; but
so gross and enormous, when the Reformation was set on foot, that there was a
necessity of reforming them.

Prop. III. That no hope was left, that the Church of Rome would either reform
these Errors in her self, or give consent to the Reformation of them in any
other Church that communicated with her.

Prop. IV. That every Particular National Church, had a Right to reform it self
without her leave.

Prop. V. That this Right of the Church of England in particular, was
unquestionable; And therefore as a necessary Conclusion from these Premises.

Prop. VI. That the Church of England was indispensably obliged to reform her
self.

The two first of which Propositions having been already proved, in a foregoing
Discourse, the third comes next in order to be treated of.

CHAP. I. No hope of Reformation from the CHURCH of ROME.
PROP. III. That no hope was left, that the Church of Rome would either reform
these Errors in her self, or give consent to the Reformation of them in any
other Church that communicated with her therein.

Which tho it contains these two Propositions;

1. That there was no hope that she would reform those Errors in her self.

2. That there was no hope that she would consent to the Reformation of them in
any other Church that communicated with here therein: Yet because the latter of
^hese will plainly follow from the proof of the former, I shall therefore
insist upon that only.

Tho her Corruptions were numerous, and many of them in their Nature and
Consequence very dangerous; yet if she could have been persuaded to purge them
out, and return to her Primitive Purity, the Protestants would have accepted
the Reformation from her Hands, and have heartily thanked her for it. But alas,
there was no hope left, that she would ever be cleansed; but the greatest
reason to fear, that She that was filthy, would be filthy still. As will be
manifest by the following Considerations. For;

1. Could there be any just ground of hope, that she would ever reform, after
she had obstinately refused, and showed her self incorrigible, notwithstanding
those frequent Complaints, that for many Ages had been made against her
Corruptions, by many great Men, both Ecclesiastical and Secular, of her own
Communion? Passing over those that are more remote, I shall take notice of the
Complaints of later Ages only.

In the twelfth Century, the Emperor Frederic I. Naucleri Chronograph. vol. 2.
generat. 39. p. 849. Sigon. de Regno. Ital. l. 14.
. Hen. II. King of England, Matthew. Paris in Hen. II. An. 1164, 67, 68.
. And Lewis VII. King of France, Matthew. Paris ad Anno 1146.
. St. Bernard, Sermon. 6. in Psalm. 90. Sermon. 33. in Cantic.
. Honorius of Austun, De Praedest. and lib. Arbit. Dialog. inter opera Cassand.
and in Biblioth. Patr. tom. 15.
. John Sarisburiensis Bishop of Chartres, Policrat. l. 6. c. 24. l. 8. c. 17.
and in aliis locis.
. Petrus Blesensis Archdeacon of Bath, Epist. 5, 8. and in multis aliis.
. Arnulphus a famous Preacher at Rome, Platin. in Vita Honorii II.
made grievous Complaints against the Tyrannies, Usurpations, and Abuses of the
Pope and his Clergy.

In the 13th Century the same Complaints were continued and increased by the
Emperor Frederic II. Aventin. Annal. Bojor. l. 7. p. 531, 532, 542. Bas. 1580.
. Maenardus Count of Tirol, Avent. Annal. Bojor. l. 7. p. 577.
. Probus Bishop of Toul, l. 7. p. 572, 573.
. Everhard Archbishop of Saltzburg, l. 7. p. 546. 547.
. Rob. Bishop of Lincoln, Matthew. Paris in Hen. III. ad An. 1253, 1254.
. And Peter Cassiodore, Epist. de Tyrannide Pontif. Romans apud Goldast. vol. 1.
.

In the 14th Century, Ludovicus Bavarus the Emperor, with the consent of the
States of the Empire, proclaimed the Pope to be the Arch-Heretick, and the
Antichrist which sat in the Temple of God, Aventin. Annal. Bojor. l. 7. p. 610,
611, 612.
. Edw. III. and Rich. II. Kings of England, not only complained, but made
severe Laws against his Encroachments, 27. Edw. III. c. 1. and 25. Edw. 3. 16.
16. Rich. 2. c. 5. and 13. R. 2. c. 3. See Coke upon these Statutes, Institut.
part. 3. c. 54.
. And many of prime note among the Clergy, such as William Occam (their
invincible Doctor) Disputat. Sup. Potest. Praelat. Eccles. atque Princip.
terrar. Commiss. Goldast. vol. 1.
. Leopold Bishop of Bamberg, Aventin. l. 7. p. 629.
. Durand Bishop of Menda, Tract. de modo Generalis. Council. Celebrand. partis
3. tit. 1. 27, 28, 29. and passim in aliis titulis,
. Marsilius of Padua, Defens. Pacis, pars 2. c. 23, 24, 25, 27. and per totam.
. Francis Petrarch, Archdeacon of Parma, Epist. de Jur. Imp. Romans and Injur.
Pap. Romans Ejusque Asseclar. Goldust. Monarch. tom. 2. p. 1345.
. The Divines of Paris and Bononia, made doleful outcries against the Rapines
and Oppressions, the Pride and Covetousness, the Luxury and Sensuality of the
Bishop and Court of Rome.

In the 15th Century, the Emperor Sigismund, Goldast. Constit. Imper. p. 1. p.
146.
. Petrus de Alliaco Cardinal of Cambray, De Emendat. Eccles. Patrib. olim.
oblat. in Council Constant.
. John Gerson Chancellor of Paris, Sermon. de Tribulat. ex defect. Ecclesiast.
Regim. and Sermon. coram. P. P. Benedict. and Alexand.
. Nic. de Clemangis Archdeacon of Bayeux, Tract. de corrupt. Statu Eccles. and
de Reparat. and Ruina Eccles.
. Jacob. de Paradiso, Collect. de Sept. Statib. Eccles.
. And many more made dismal Complaints of Corruptions and Abuses, and
vehemently called for the Reformation of them.

And what was the Fruit of all these Complaints and Outcries? Was any Grievance
Removed? any Abuse reformed? No, not so much as one; but rather on the
contrary, the Corruptions were daily increased and multiplied, like an
impetuous and irresistible Torrent, they swelled the higher, by how much the
more they were opposed.

Obj. It will perhaps be said, that these Complaints were made against the
Corruptions of the Court, not of the Church of Rome.

Ans. It Is true; That many of them were more immediately levelled against the
Pope and his Court, those especially made by Kings and Emperors, who chiefly
concerned themselves in vindicating their Rights, against the Usurpations of
the Court of Rome: But many more, against those Corruptions which generally
obtained in the Church. And the truth is, the Corruptions of the Court cannot
be confined to themselves, but derive themselves into, and overspread the
Church; so that it can hardly be avoided, but that in proportion to the
corruption of the one, will be that of the other, (as will appear in the sequel
of this Discourse.)

2. The Reformation of the Church of Rome was yet more hopeless, because not
only these, but many other Attempts made toward it, had by the Pope and his
Court been already defeated. How earnestly did the Emperor Sigismund endeavor,
that a Reformation might be wrought by the Council of Constance? And many
Decrees were passed by the Council in order to it, Sess. 4, 5, 39, 40.
. And what was the Event? Did any Reformation follow thereupon? Not the least;
the Decrees were all eluded by the Popes Richer. Hist. Council. General. l. 2.
c. 3. p. 261.
. Which Gerson reflecting upon, makes this Remarque; I see, says he, That a
Reformation will never be made by a Council, without the presidency of such a
Guide, as is well affected toward it, Richer. ibid.
. And that he was not in this a false Prophet, is too manifest by the like
fruitless event of succeeding Councils. None ever more endeavored the
reforming of Abuses, and the restoring the Church to its Rights and Liberties,
than the Council of Basil; but to as little purpose as the Council of Constance
had done before: For when the Pope saw what they were resolved upon, he brake
the Synod in pieces, by translating it first to Ferrara, and then to Florence
(whither a great part of them refused to go, and declared those that went a
Conventicle of Schismatics) and then not a word more was heard of Reformation
Richer l. 3. p. 481.
: And tho some good Constitutions and Decrees were made by it; yet so far was
the Pope from putting them in execution, that he rejected them all, and made it
his endeavor to punish those who observed them; as Tho. de Orbellis, the
Nuncio of the Council of Basil, told the Council of the Church of France
assembled at Bourges Verum magnus dolor in Ecclesiam irruit, cum ille qui
primus sacros Canones exequi debebat, and caeteris viam salutis ostendere,
omnia haec Constituta and Decreta (quantum ipsum concernebant) rejiciebat; ita
ut nullum unquam Decretum Concilii concernens Reformationem, in efficacem
executionem ponere compertus est; quinimo condemnationes censurarum and
poenarum in eos proferre conabatur, qui ea Decreta observabant. Richer l. 3. p.
605, 606.
.

The Fathers of the second Pisan Council, decreed to reform the Church; but
before they could put their Decree in execution, that Council was dissolved by
Julius II, who pronounced them a pack of Schismatics, and threatened Damnation
to all those who adhered to them; and by a Council of his own choosing, summoned
to Rome, reprobated and disannulled all their Acts Sleidan. Comment. l. 2.
.

When the Princes and States of Germany would no longer be put off with words,
but in case the Pope would not effectually set himself to Reform, threatened to
take the Work into their own hands Fascic, rerum expetend. ac fugiend. fol. 188.
; the utmost that could be obtained from Campegius the Pope's Legate, was such
a light Reformation of the Inferior Clergy, as would have proved a Remedy
worse than the Disease. As for the Abuses of the Court of Rome, (the Source
from which all others derived themselves) he would yield nothing; but when they
began to discourse of them, he either said, that it was Heresy to reprehend
them, or that he referred them to the Pope himself Soave 's Hist. of the
Council of Trent, l. 1. p. 32. printed at Land. 1640.
: Since therefore the Heads of the Church of Rome had withstood, and defeated
so many Attempts for Reformation, he must needs be a Man of a sanguine temper,
who could still hope that he should at length see her reformed.

3. There was yet greater reason to despair of ever seeing this; because after
all these Complaints and Endeavors, her Corruptions were so far from being
removed, that they were indeed confirmed, rendered more fixed and immovable than
they were before. That Patient, doubtless, is desperate, who is made more sick
by the most proper means of Cure. This was plainly the case of the Church of
Rome; by the Medicines applied, her Disease was strengthened, and became more
obstinate. For in the last Lateran Council, that nothing might remain to give
check for the future, to the Exorbitancies of the Pope and his Court, the
pragmatick Sanction was abrogated, and so much of the Council of Basil, as set
Bounds to their lawless Tyrannies; the Constitution of Pope Boniface VIII, was
renewed, Sess. 11.
which determins it necessary to Salvation, for every human Creature to be
subject to the Bishop of Rome; and the Pope's Supremacy set so high, that none
might say unto him, what do thou?

It is true, this Council was summoned by Julius II, upon pretense of reforming
the Church; but that which he really intended was, to defeat the Reformation
decreed by the Council of Pisa, as Du Ranchin tells us Review of the Council of
Trent, l. 4. c. 7.
: And that this was no uncharitable Surmise, is sufficiently evident by the
Event. For what one Act can be mentioned of Julius, during those five Sessions
he lived, that so much as looked toward a Reformation? And when after some
Years Travel, by the Midwifery of Pope Leo X, something called a Reformation,
was brought forth; what was it else, but a Reformation from better to worse?
For as it takes no notice of any Corruption in Faith or Worship, but supposes
them entirely sound: So,

1. Not one in ten of those Abuses in other matters, which were most complained
of, are so much as mentioned; as will appear to any Man who will be at the
pains to compare it with the Grievances; which not long after were presented by
the Princes of Germany; to Pope Adrian VI, Fascit rerum expetiend. ac fugierd.
fol. 177, 178.
and with the Articles of Reformation presented by the select Council to Paul
III. Richer. l. 4. p. 136.
and with other Catalogues of Abuses concerning Ecclesiastical Persons and
Things, published long before, by Petrus de Alliaco, Gerson, and other Members
of their own Church. As for those Abuses which it meddles with, what are they
for the greater part, but such as were in matters of small moment? How triflng
is all the Reformation that concerned the Cardinals, who above all others (his
Holiness only excepted) stood in need of being reformed?

2. Several of those Abuses it would seem to abolish, it does it with such
Reserves and Exceptions, as do in truth give Protection to them. For instance,
In the first Decree, which is ushered in with such a solemn Preface, that if a
Man read no further, he will conclude, that certainly some great Matter
follows: and so indeed it is, as to the matter of the Decree; but then an
Exception is added, which renders it utterly insignificant. For the Decree is,
That Patriarchal, Metropolitical and Cathedral-Churches, and Monasteries, shall
be disposed, not at the instance of any Person by way of Commendam; but shall
be provided with such Bishops and Abbots, as are of suitable Age, Learning, and
Gravity of Manners: Hitherto well; but see now the Exception: Unless it shall
be thought good, that with respect to the profit of the Churches, they be
conferred upon Men otherwise qualified, upon the account of their Prudence,
Nobility, Probity, Experience, or for that they have been Ancient Courtiers,
and deserved well of the Apostolic See Nisi ratione utilitatis Ecclesiarum,
Prudentiae, Nobilitatis, Probitatis, Experientiae, atque curalitatis antiqae
cum competenti literatura, and in sede Apostolica veritorum, aliter visum
fuerit faciendum. Sess. 9. in Decret. Reformat.
. Is not the Mockery now manifest? Does not the Exception pull down, as much as
the Decree sets up? Was not the Church (notwithstanding this solemn Decree)
like to be provided with excellent Bishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs, when
it was sufficient qualification, that they were Noblemen, ancient Courtiers
with a competency of Learning, or such as had done the Pope good Service? To as
good purpose was it decreed, That no Man should be dispensed with to hold more
than two incompatible Benefices, without a great and urgent Cause Bulla
Reformat. Sess. 9.
. For when the Pope has a mind to gratify a Favorite, will he not easily find
such a Cause? Beside, That a manifest Abuse is hereby established, viz.
Dispensations without any urgent Cause, to as many as the Pope pleases, to hold
two such Benefices as are incompatible.

3. Instead of the Removal, some very pernicious Corruptions and Abuses were by
express Law established. I shall instance in one, viz. The Exemption of
Churchmen (both as to their Persons and Purses) from the Jurisdiction of all
Secular Powers Reformat. Curiae and alior.
; which is utterly inconsistent with Civil Government, and has been one main
Cause of those numberless Treasons, Seditions and Rebellions, in which that
Church has the preeminence of others.

4. As for some other Decrees which respect Manners and Discipline, namely,
That Clergymen especially should live chastely; and that they who live
otherwise, should be severely punished according to the Canons: That the
Constitutions of former Popes against Simonists should be renewed Ibid.
. Could they be otherwise than insignificant, as long as the causes of these
Corruptions were still maintained, and no provision made for putting the Canons
in execution? For the Pope to talk of reviving the ancient Canons, without
first reforming his own Court, from whence the neglect and contempt of these
Canons mainly proceeded, was as absurd, as to go about to cleanse the Stream,
while the Fountain remains polluted. And that de facto, the Censures decreed by
this Council, were for the most part never executed, is confessed even by the
Bigot Carranza Summa Concilior. p. 897.
.

I need say no more; Nor was it indeed needful to say so much, since I might
have spared the pains of proving that, which was so notorious by the event. I
appeal to the Romanists themselves, whether Corruptions and Abuses did not more
abound; and whether Complaints against them were not more loud and clamorous,
after the celebration of this Council, than before? A worthy Reformation! so
palpable was the Cheat, that diverse of their own Church speak of it with
Indignation and Abhorrency. This, says the Doctor frequently quoted, is that
excellent Reformation, so earnestly desired by all Christian Nations for 200
years; or to speak more truly, this is the Cover and Daub for the Abuses of the
Roman Court Haec illa est eximia and tantopere a Christianis Nationibus
ducentis abhinc annis exoptatat Reformatio; vel ut verius dicamus, abusuum
Curiae-Romanae incrustatio atque involutio. Richer. l. 4. p. 26.
. And speaking again of this Council, he represents it, as that which might
make any Man despair of ever seeing a good Reformation: For since, says he,
Diseases, Injuries and Corruptions flow thence, from whence Medicine and
wholesome Laws ought to proceed; who would not abandon all hope of the public
Safety, and of the Restoration of the Church, to a better state Cum igitur
morbi, injuriae atque corruptelae illinc, unde medicina juraque salutaria
debebant promonare, scaturiunt; quotusquisque and de Ecclesiae in melius
instauratione, and de publica salute spem omnem non merito abjiciat? l. 4. p.
117, 118.
? What those Diseases, Injuries, and Corruptions were, which flowed from this
Council, and how grievous and intolerable, the same Author largely represents,
in many foregoing pages. Of the same Judgment was Beatus Rhenanus, who in the
year 1522 (about five years after the ending of this Council) thus concludes
his Invective against the Pope's Usurpations: Farewell, Christian Reader; and
together with me lament the Discipline of the Church, daily declining to the
worse Vale, Christian Lector, and Ecclesiasticae Disciplinae ad deteriora
prolabantis quotidie (quoniam aliter nihil fere restat) communibus mecum
suspiriis ingemisce. Goldast. Monarch. S. Romans Imp. vol. 1. p. 647.
.

Nor can any Man think it strange, that this Council produced no better Fruits,
if he considers, That those few Bishops of which it consisted, were purely the
Pope's Creatures -- In qua vix alium, quam Aulicum Episcopum invenias. Richer.
l. 4. p. 14. Haec Synodus ex solis Curiae Romanae Ass^clis conflata est: p. 19.
, and that nothing was decreed by it, but what was before decreed, and made
ready for their hands, by the Pope and his Cabinet Council Hic autem solus Papa
tanquam absolutus Monarcha, illa quae domi in secreto and oligarchico Concilio,
etc. P. 24. item l. 2. p. 187.
: so that nothing was synodically discussed and concluded, but all things
determined by the Pope's Omnipotent Fiat -- Nulla est Sessio in qua aliquid
Synodice conditum fuerit, sed cuncta despotico Imperio edicta and conclusa
sunt; etiam a Julio and Leone x. armatis, p. 48, 49.
; I say Omnipotent, because no less than all Power both in Heaven and Earth,
was in this Council blasphemously ascribed to him Sess. 9. p. 117. Bin. Edit.
1636.
. No Man, I say, that considers these things, will much wonder, that matters
were so carried. For to proceed:

4. Who could hope that the Pope would consent to a Reformation in good earnest
(without whose Consent to suppose it could be wrought in the Church of Rome, is
as absurd, as to suppose that the Body should move one way, and the Head
another); Who could so much as dream that the Pope would ever consent to that,
which was so directly opposite to his dearly beloved Inclinations and Interests?
The Pope was now quite another Man from what he was in the beginning; from a
Servant of Servants, he was now exalted to be King of Kings, and Lord of the
World Regum Rex, and Orbis Terrarum Monarcha.
: All Kings and Emperors were become his Subjects, or rather his Slaves Quod
solius Papae pedes omnes Principes deosculentur. Dictat. 9. Greg. VII. Bin.
tom. 7. part 1. p. 362, Baron. Annal. Anno 1076. N. 32,

Innocent. III. told the Emperor of Constantinople, That the Pope is as much
greater than the Emperor, as the Sun is greater than the Moon. Quanta est inter
Solemn and Lunam, tanta inter Pontifices and Reges differentia cognosciter.
Decretal. l. 1. de Majorit. and Obed. c. 6. Innocent. IV. reckoned Kings no
better than the Pope's Slaves. Matthew. Paris Hist. in Hen. 3. ad An. 1257.


; and he such an absolute Sovereign over them, that he might give away their
Kingdoms at his Pleasure. He was to be acknowledged the alone Fountain of
Honor, and all the Wealth of the World was to flow to his Exchequer, to
maintain the Pomp and Granduer of his Court. Whereas Humility and Charity,
Poverty, and Patience, and Suffering, were his ancient Characters; he was now
known and distinguished from other Mortals, by his numerous and splendid
Retinue, by the Prostration of Kings at his Feet, and by setting his Feet on
their Necks; by exalting himself above all that is called God, or worshipped.
In a word, Pride and Ambition, Covetousness and Rapine, Tyranny and Oppression,
were those Graces in which the Pope was become more excellent than his
Neighbors.

For as if these were now his inseparable Adherents, how meek, and humble, and
mortified a Man soever he was before, when he came to the Popedom, or to
approach so near as to be within the hope of it, he was presently transformed
into a Man of another Spirit. How zealous against the Usurpations of the Roman
Court and Bishop was Nicholas Cusan, when Pope Eugenius first attempted to
dissolve the Council of Basil? Richer. Hist. Council. General. l. 3. c. 6. p.
477.
But when he was promoted to be a Cardinal, his Eyes were so dazzled with the
shine of his red Hat, that the Pope seemed a Person of a quite different
Character from what he formerly was: He that before was not only falliable, but
had so grossly erred, (at least in Practice) that he was thought above all
others to stand in need of being reformed, was now become such an
uncontrollable Judge, that no Appeals might be made from him, Invect. Greg.
Heimb.
.

There had been no Pope for some hundreds of Years, from whom more good might
in reason have been expected, than from Pius II. who while he was Aeneas
Sylvius, and unacquainted with the Arts of the Roman Court, had a great Zeal
for Reformation: but some time after, when from Aeneas Sylvius, and Canon of
Trent, he was promoted, first to be Bishop of Trieste, then designed Bishop of
Siena, and a little after created Cardinal, he fairly faced about, and wholly
bent his Studies to oppose that Truth, which when poor and private he had
defended Qui quidem cum esset privatus, necdum Curiae Romanae arts and studia
nosset (ut ipse in literis retractationis Actorum Synodi Basiliensis a se
Scriptorum testificatur) strenue quidem pro veritate, and necessitate
reformandae Ecclesiae pugnavit. Sed postquam ex Aenea Sylvio and simplici
Canonico Tridentino, primum Turgestinus, deinde Senensis Episcopus a Nicolao V.
designatus, and aliquanto post Anno 1456. creatus est Cardinalis a Calixto III.
totus quidem in studium oppugnandae atque involvendae veritatis, quam pauper
and privatus defenderat, and enucleaverat, incubuit. Richer. l. 4. part. 1. p.
6.
. And no sooner was he exalted to the Papal Throne, but he labored, with might
and main, to obliterate the memory of those Decrees of Basil, which as
Secretary of that Council he had before published, and highly recommended to
the World, Richer. l. 4. part. 1. p. 35.
. None more zealous against the Pope's Supremacy than Aeneas, Maimb. Prerogat.
of the Church of Rome, c. 25. p. 338.
. Which he so stoutly asserted when Pius II, that he huffed and hectored Kings.
In a word, Canon Sylvius, and Pope Sylvius, were as opposite in their
Judgments, Tempers and Behaviors one to the other, as Massianello the poor
Fisherman, to Massianello the domineering Tyrant.

Must not he then be a fond Man, who could hope for a good Reformation from the
Bishops of Rome? A Reformation! there was nothing in the World they were so
averse from; Death and Hell were not more odious to them. And why? This would
wrest the Temporal Sword quite out of their Hands, and tumble the Triple Crown
from their Heads; they must then quit claim to their Universal Empire, and be
content with their ancient Enclosure, the Suburbicary Region: Their
Dispensations and Commutations, their Pardons and Indulgences, and a thousand
Crafts more, by which they get their Wealth, would then be set at naught. In
brief, they would then be divested of their usurped Power and Greatness, and
rendered as poor and despised, as the Crow in the Fable, when stripped of those
fine Feathers he had plucked from others. And could it be supposed that his
Holiness would consent to be so degraded, that he would pull down with his own
Hands, that pompous Fabric which for a thousand Years he had been raising?
When Satan casts out Satan, we may then expect that the Pope will in good
earnest endeavor a Reformation.

5. The Reformation was yet more hopeless, because the Bishops, and the rest of
the governing part of the Churchmen, were several ways engaged to submit
themselves to, and follow the Pope's Conduct: So that supposing they had any
good wishes for a Reformation themselves, yet both their Tongues and their
Hands were so tied up, that they might neither speak, nor act, for the
promoting of it, without leave first obtained from his Holiness. There was a
twofold Bond, besides other (which shall be afterward mentioned) by which they
were more especially enslaved to the Pope's Pleasure; the one of an Oath, the
other of Interest Considerations touching the true way of suppressing Popery,
etc. p. 138, 139.
.

1. Every Popish Bishop, at his Consecration, had taken an Oath, from that time
forward to be faithful to St. Peter, and to the Holy Roman Church, and his Lord
the Pope, and his Successors canonically entering; to help them to defend, and
to keep the Papacy, and the Rules of the Fathers, etc. which Oath may be seen
more at large in the Decretals Decretal. l. 2. Tit. 24. c. 4.
. And tho one would think this Oath were enough; yet, as if it had left them
too much at liberty, several Additions have been since made to it, by which the
Pope has bound them more closely to their good Behavior, (which render
Reformation now more desperate); The Rules of the Holy Fathers, are changed
into the Royalties of St. Peter Regalia Sancti Petri.
. They Swear to be Obedient, as well as Faithful Fidelis and obediens cro. Dom.
N. Papae, etc.
; not only to endeavor to preserve and defend, the Rights, Honors, Privileges
and Authorities of the Pope, but to increase and advance them Jura, Honores
Privilegia and Authoritatem Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, Domini nostri Papae and
Successorum conservare, defendere, augere, promovere curabo.
; yea, to the utmost of their Power, to cause the Pope's Commands to be
observed by others, as well as to observe them themselves Mandata Apostolica
totis viribus observabo, and faciam ab aliis observari. Pontifical. Romans de
Consecrat. Elect. in Episcop.
; together with many other things not contained in the Oath of Greg. VII. And
is not this a strong tie to all those who make Conscience of an Oath? that is,
to all those, who say not in their Heart, there is no God. And,

2. For those, whose Consciences are so debauched, that they despise an Oath,
the Pope has them so much the more secured by their worldly Interest. For what
will not such Men do for Riches and Honors? and from whom can they hope for
these, so soon as from his Holiness? The Cardinals are all Creatures, purely of
his own making; and no Man can be a Bishop, or an Abbot, but if he be not made,
he must at least be allowed and confirmed by him: All the best Preferments do
some way or other depend upon his Pleasure; and whom should he rather promote
to them, than those who approve themselves his most obedient Servants? This is
the only Argument that prevails with many to be fast Friends to the Papacy. It
is Richerius his Note upon Cusan's Revolt from the Council of Basil, and going
over to the Pope's side. By this, says he, we know, that many who defended the
Truth, while they were poor, desert the same in hope of Dignities, and a richer
Fortune, and especially moved with ambition of the Cardinal Purple Ex quo datur
cognosci, permultos qui veritatem in statu paupertatis defenderunt, eandem spe
dignitatum, atque pinguioris fortunae, and praesertim desiderio purpurae
Cardinalitiae deseruisse. l. 3. p. 479.
. And therefore John Major spoke to the purpose, when he said, It ought not to
seem strange to any Man, that more teach that the Pope is above a Council, than
that a Council is above the Pope; because the Pope gives Dignities and
Ecclesiastical Benefices, but a Council gives none.

Obj. It will perhaps be said, That these Reasons can be of no force, because
they are contradicted by Experience. For it is sufficiently known, that in the
Councils of Pisa, Constance, and Basil, many of the Prelates ran Counter too,
and openly opposed the Pope.

Ans. To which it is easily answered, That this was an extraordinary Case, such
as, considering all Circumstances, never happened before or since, and it is
likely will never happen again; as will soon appear, by a short reflection upon
each of these Councils.

I. As to the first Pisan Council (as it is usually reckoned) let these things
be considered.

1. That the Pope's Title was then disputed. For that Council was summoned by
the Cardinals, on purpose to extinguish the Schism, that had been long before
raised, and was then continued by the two Anti-Popes, Greg. XII. and Benet.
XIII. Bin. Praefat. ad Council. Constant. Richer. Hist. Council. General. l. 2.
c. 2.
. Nor was the Council able to determine which of the two was the rightful Pope.
Tho therefore the Bishops had sworn Obedience to the Pope, yet in that case,
their Oath did not oblige them to obey one rather than the other; that is, to
obey either of them. And as they were loosed from the Bond of Conscience, so
neither could the Temptation from Interest then take place. For as there was in
effect no Pope (since it could not be known who he was) so it was uncertain who
would in the end obtain the Popedom; whether either of those who thought it his
due, or some other Person who did not yet pretend a Title to it. And so indeed
it happened, for those who laid claim to it, were by the Council both rejected,
and another chosen, to whose lot the disposal of those Preferments fell, which
the Pope's Parasites gape after.

2. The two Anti-Popes (besides other enormous Crimes) were both convicted of
notorious Heresy Sess. 9, 10, 11, 15.
. And therefore in case they had been duly elected, had lost their Right to the
Papacy. For as their Canon Law expressly teaches, that an Heretical Pope may be
judged -- a nemine judicandus, nisi deprehendatur a fide devius. Distinct. 40.
c. 6.
; so Cardinal Bellarmine himself affirms, That a Pope who is a manifest
Heretic, ceases to be Pope, and Head of the Church; as he ceases to be a
Christian, and a Member of the Body, the Church Est ergo quinta opinio vera,
Papam Hereticum manifestum, per se definere esse Papam and Caput, sicut per se
desinit esse Christianus and membrum Corporis Ecclesiae. Bell. de Romans Pontif.
l. 2. c. 30.
. And this he says is the judgment of all the Ancient Fathers, and of the most
learned Modern Writers.

II. As to the Council of Constance, let these things be considered:

1. That tho the Pisan Council had deposed Greg. XII, and Benet XIII, and put
Alex. V, into the Chair; yet neither of the deposed Popes could be brought to
submit to the Sentence of the Council. When therefore the Council of Constance
assembled, so far was the Schism from being lessened, that it was indeed
increased into one branch more than it had before: For whereas before, two only
laid claim to the Papacy, there were now three -- Revixit continuo Schisma quod
extinctum putabatur; imo vero non revixit (neque enim erat extinctum) sed cum
in occulto flamma lateret, repent majori impetu erupit, majusque incendium
excitavit. Cum enim Gregorius and Benedictus, Synodo parere, seque Pontificatu
abdicare nollent, statim illud in Controversiam venit; number Synodus Pisana in
illos animadvertere potuerit; praesertim cum eorum alteruter verus esset
Pontifex tametsi uter is esset, non plane constaret. Itaque cum hoc Schisma duo
tantum capita haberet initio, Synodusque utrumque abscindere vellet, tria simul
eodem tempore extitere, etc. Hist. Council Constantiens: apud Bin.
, each of which had fair Arguments on his side; and it was very difficult, if
not impossible, for the Council to determine whose Right it was Inchoato deinde
Concilio, tametsi eam ob causam potissimum erat coactum, ut Schisma
extingueretut; nunquam tamen in eo elaborarunt Patres, ut singulorum Pontificum
jus perpenderent, aut quis reliquis praeferendus esset, rationibus and
argumentis exquirerent, erat enim id difficillimum, vixque unquam ad exitum
fuisset causa perducta, ibid.
. And therefore in this Case, the Ties beforementioned must be also loosed.
Besides, that the Roman Courtiers themselves grant (as Richerius tells us) that
in case of Schism, the Pope loses his Sovereignty, and becomes subject to a
Council Hist. Council. General. l. 2. c. 3.. 25.
. But,

2. Let it be granted, That John XXIII (who succeeded Alex. V.) was owned by
the Council for the true and lawful Pope, (as indeed he was by the major part)
yet he had forfeited his Title to the Papacy these two ways especially. 1. By
Heresy. It Is true, that Heresy is not mentioned in the Sentence passed against
him, as that for which he was condemned; yet it is also true, That as he was
accused of Heresy, so it was believed that he was guilty Council. Constable. Sess.
11. in Concilior. Collect. Regia Gers. Viag. Reg. Romans prima direct. salut. in
via verit.
. 2. By the most notorious, enormous and incorrigible Scandal; of which he was
convicted in more than forty Articles proved against him Council. Constable. Sess.
11. Plat. in ejus vita.
. Now the Gloss upon their Canon Law tells us, That if the Pope's Crime be
notorious, and the Church be scandalized thereby, and he incorrigible, he may
be accused; and gives this Reason for it, Because Contumacy is called Heresy
Certe credo, quod si notorium est crimen ejus quandocunque and inde
scandalizatur Ecclesia, and inco^^igibilis sit, etc. Gloss. in Can. si Papa
distinct. 40. Vide Consil. Decii apud Richer. l. 4. part 1. p. 241, 242, 243.
. Yea, that in this case he may be legally deposed, the Romanists must grant;
if they consider, That for this very cause John XII was deposed by a Council
Luit. prand. de rebus Imperat. and Reg. l. 6. c. 7, 8, 9, 10.
, the Legality of which has been owned, and its Acts approved, by the constant
Tradition of the Roman Church; and among others, by three Cardinals, who were
vehement Assertors of the Popes Prerogatives, as Launoy has proved at large
against Baronius and Binius Launoii Epist. part quarta ad Lud. Maraesium.
. The same is also confirmed by the concurrent Judgment of learned Divines of
the Romish Church, of which you may find a great number in the Epistle now
quoted. 3. Before the Council proceeded to accuse and condemn him, the ancient
Doctrine was established as an Article of Faith, namely, That a General Council
is above the Pope Sess. 4.
. I know Platina tells us, That they first deposed him, and passed this Decree
afterward in their own defense Plat. in vita Johan.
. But he that will take the pains to read the History of the Council, will
plainly see, that Platina was mistaken. For this Decree was made in the fourth
Session, whereas he was not deposed before the twelfth; it being then a point
of Faith in this Council, That the Bishops, who in their single capacities are
the Pope's Subjects, when met in Council, are raised to a Sovereignty over him;
that Oath which they had severally taken as his Subjects, they concluded did
now cease to oblige them, when become his Sovereign. As the Oath of Obedience
which a Priest takes to his Bishop binds him, as long as he remains a bare
Priest; but if he be once advanced to be the Bishop's Metropolitan, is of no
force.

3. As to the Council of Basil (omitting many others), I shall propose these
two things; First, That this Council depended on the Council of Constance, as a
River on its Fountain; it being the Execution of the Decrees of the iv, v,
xxxix, xl, and xliv Sessions of that Council Richer. l. 3. c. 1.
. 2. In the Council of Basil, the Bishops were set free from their Oaths of
Subjection to the Pope, by the Pope himself; first, by Martin V, who had
confirmed those Decrees of the Council of Constance, which made the Pope
subject to a Genesis Council Council. Constable. Sess. 45. Rich. l. 2. c. 3.. 23.
Maimb. Prerog. of the Church of Rome, c. 21.
. Secondly, by Eugenius IV, who ratified the same Decrees of the Council of
Basil Plat. in vit. Eugenii.
, and that before the Council had proceeded to any judicial Act against him
Richer. l. 3. c. 3.. 1. Maimb. Prerog. of the Church of Rome, c. 21.
. So that now the Bishops when met in a General Council, representing the whole
Church, by the Pope's own Act were made his Superiors; and therefore the Oath
they had before taken of Subjection to him as single Persons, was now out of
doors. But when the next Lateran Council came, the case was quite altered, the
Pope was then mounted above a Council; and his Supremacy, and their Subjection
owned by them, and by the succeeding Council of Trent.

The sum of what has been said, may be reduced to these four Heads, which
quite evacuate the force of the Objection.

1. That in the Councils of Pisa and Constance, the case with respect to the
Pope, was as different from what it was, and ever will be, when there is a Pope
whose Right is not disputed, as the case of Subjects under a Prince, whose
Title is unquestionable, from what it is under many Pretenders, who are not
able to make out their Claim. The Subjects are obliged in Conscience, and
usually by Interest, to obey the former, but by neither, to obey the latter.

2. Suppose their Title was at first unquestionable, yet they lost it by
Heresy, Schism, and their prodigiously scandalous Vices.

3. In the Councils of Constance and Basil, it was reckoned a Point of Faith,
That the Bishops change their place in relation to the Pope, when united in a
General Council; and by consequence, were no more bound by the Oath they had
taken to the Pope, than a Servant who swears Obedience to his Master is, in
case he cease to be his Servant, and his Master become Servant to him. And,

4. In the Council of Basil, the Pope himself had set the Bishops free from
their Oath of Subjection to him, by voluntarily subjecting himself to them.

By this time it is, I think, evident enough, that (notwithstanding this
Exception in an extraordinary case) the Reasons before mentioned stand good.
But what need I prove, that the Sun is up at Noon? The Reason, the Sense, and
common Observation of Mankind, do all tell us; that as Men who have any
Religion, cannot but have a great Veneration for an Oath: so on the other hand;
that they who have none, cannot but be swayed by their worldly Interests: Where
the Carcass is, thither will the Eagles resort. Since therefore the governing
part of the Church of Rome, were so miserably enslaved to the Roman Bishop,
could there be any hope of Reformation, when there was no reason to hope that
the Bishop of Rome would consent to it?

Obj. Some perhaps may say, that I wrong the Popes, in representing them as so
obstinately set against Reformation. For as many of them pretended a Zeal for
it; so it is certain there was one at least (viz. Adrian VI.) who did himself
earnestly endeavor it.

Ans. But what kind of Reformation was it he endeavored to make? In matters of
Faith, and of the Sacraments, he would allow no Man liberty, so much as to
dispute what had been once decreed by General Councils Soave l. 1. p. 25.
Sleid. Comment. l. 4.
, that is, by any of those Councils which he called General, many of which were
no more than Italian or Papal Councils. Whosoever was so bold, as to call any
such thing in question, he was to be dealt with as John Huss and Hierom of
Prague Soav. ibid.
; so that if any Man denied the imaginary Fire of Purgatory, he must presently
be confuted by real Flames.

The Popes usurped Power and Greatness (the source of numberless other
Corruptions) so far was he from retrenching, that he rather endeavored to set
it higher. The Princes of Germany were looked upon as too saucy, and thought to
entrench upon his Prerogative, for desiring only, that a Council might be
called with the Emperor's Consent Soav. l. 1. p. 28.
.

What then was the Reformation Adrian aimed at? Why, the Churchmen were in
their Morals so monstrously degenerated, that in almost all places they were
become abominable: The Abuses in Discipline were grown so intolerable, that the
Princes of the World were resolved no longer to endure them: That therefore
which he designed was, to reduce the Clergy to somewhat better Manners, and to
correct some gross Enormities in Discipline, which were most offensive. This
was all the Reformation he endeavored; for other Corruptions, so far was it
from his intention to reform them, that he was resolved more firmly to
establish them. And yet this piece of Reformation he did not effect, tho he
much desired it. Which leads me to another Consideration, which further shows
how hopeless the Reformation of the Church of Rome was. For,

6. Let us suppose, That such a Man had been advanced to the Papacy, who would
have set himself in good earnest to make an impartial Reformation (one of the
most unlikely things in the World, as the state of that Church then was, and
for a long time before had been) he would have failed in his Attempt, and not
have been able to accomplish it. And that for these two Reasons: 1. Because he
could have made no such Reformation, unless he first made void those
Obligations, by which the governing part of that Church, both in point of
Conscience and of Interest, were held in subjection to him. 2. Because of that
opposition, which, they being so let loose, would for the generality have made
against him.

1. Because he could have made no such Reformation, unless he first made void
those Obligations, by which the governing part of that Church, both in point of
Conscience and Interest, were of held in subjection to him. The great holds he
had upon their Consciences, proceeded from several corrupt Doctrines, and those
Practices of the Popes that were built upon them. For instance, That the Pope
is by Divine Ordination Head of the Universal Church; that all other Bishops
are his Subjects, and that he has power to impose an Oath upon them, as their
Sovereign; that he is the Supreme Judge of Controversies, and all Men obliged to
stand to his Sentence. These, and several other Doctrines of a resembling
nature, have been defined by the Popes themselves, and with great Zeal asserted
as unquestionable Truths, by their Flatterers; and had been so far owned by the
governing Clergy, that they had bound themselves by solemn Oath (has as been
already showed) to be obedient to him.

But now no Reformation to purpose could have been made, but the Pope must
condemn these Doctrines, and divest himself of those Prerogatives, which, by
virtue of them, he lays claim to: Because these are not only great Errors
themselves, but productive of all other the grossest Corruptions Richer. Hist.
Council. General. l. 1. c. 13.
.

Nor must he only loose the tie of Conscience, but that of Interest too (which
with the generallity of Men, is the stronger of the two). He must no longer
assume to himself the sole power of erecting, and pulling down of Bishoprics;
of electing, confirming, deposing and restoring of Bishops; of disposing of all
the greater Dignities and Ecclesiastical Benefices; of conferring those that
are incompatible upon the same Person: In a word, of trampling upon all the
ancient Canons. And should the Pope have once parted with these Prerogatives,
together with many other of the like nature, which must have been done if a
Reformation had been made to purpose, he would have been able to do nothing
more. For,

2. The Prelates (as has been before showed) First part, p. 55, 56, 57.
were so deeply sunk into Earthliness and Sensuality, that there was nothing
they would have more vehemently opposed than a Reformation. This they gave a
sufficient proof of, in that they were so distasted with that Confession of
their Excesses, which Adrian made to the Diet at Nuremberg Soave l. 1. p. 29.
: For if the bare Confession of their Faults was so displeasing, how much more
grievous would the reforming of them have been? Which tho Adrian likewise
promised, yet how unable he would have been to perform it, we may conclude from
that ill success he met with in Rome it self: For tho he resolved to reform
Abuses at home, before he sent his Legate to treat with the Princes of Germany;
yet he met with so much difficulty in the Attempt, that he was forced to quit
his Resolution P. 24.
. And can it be supposed that he should be able to reform the Universal Church,
who could not correct the Disorders of his own Court Palpabiliter cernitur,
ipsam ejus Curiam, maxima indigere Reformatione, sicut omnia clamaverunt ultimo
celebrata Generalia Concilia. Quam suam Curiam, si non potest, aut non vellet
reformare, quam sub alis suis contegir, quomodo credendum est, quod tam late
diffusam reformare possit Ecclesiam. Jacob de Paradis. Collect. de Authorit.
Eccles.
? And therefore after he had made some trial of his strength, and found how
unequal it was to his undertaking, he said to his familiar Friends, That the
condition of the Popes was very miserable, since matters were come to that
deplorable pass, that tho they never so much desired it, yet they were not able
to reform the Church Saepe enim sanctissimus Pontifex, ubi Curiae Romans arts
and consilia perspecta habuie, cum Gulielmo Encurtio and Theodorico Hezio suis
familiaribus conquestus est, permiseram esse Pontificum Romanorum conditionem;
eoque in statu res esse, ut quanquam maxim vellet, Ecclesiam emendare non
posset, etc. Richer. l. 4. part. 2. p. 133. Soave, p. 24.
.

And what was the reason he was not able to effect what he so earnestly
endeavored? One main reason doubtless was, that he in some measure let loose
that Tie which he had upon them from their worldly Interests. No plurality of
Benefices with cure of Souls was to be expected from him; He was resolved, as
he said, to adorn Churches with Priests, and not Priests with Churches Lannoii
Epist. part. 4. Epist. ad Hen. Barrill.
. Such a little piece of Reformation as this, the corrupt Manners of the
Courtiers were not able to bear; they therefore set themselves to oppose him;
and being impatient of enduring him any longer, 'twas by some suspected that
they hastened him into another World by an Italian Trick Raynald. in Adriano, n.
13^.
.

The plain consequence of what has been said, is this; That the Reformation of
the Church of Rome must needs be very hopeless; since the Pope himself, tho he
should have seriously endeavored it, could not have made it; because he could
not have made it without doing that, (which as the case of that Church then
stood) would have disabl'd him to make it. A desperate case indeed! when it
could not be effected, whether the Pope were for it, or against it: If the the
Pope were against it, the rest of the Prelates were not able without him to
compass it; if the Pope were for it, he must in order to it, do that which
would have rendered him unable to compass it.

Obj. If it be objected, That the Reformations attempted in the Councils of
Constance, Basil, and the last Pisan, are an evident Argument, that the Romish
Bishops were not generally so averse from a Reformation.

Ans. I answer. 1. That in the Councils of Constance and Basil, many of the
Bishops were over-awed by the good Emperor Sigismund, whose Authority at that
time bore a much greater sway, than the Popes. 2. In these Councils, the
inferior Clergy had a decisive voice, which was denied them in the succeeding
Florentine, Lateran, and Trent Councils. And Ludovicus Cardinal of Arles, and
John Bishop of Segovia. (whose Authority in this matter is unquestionable)
assure us, that it was not the Bishops, but the inferior Clergy, by which
Matters were carried in the Council of Basil for the Reformation, and against
the Pope Aeneae Sylv. Comment. l. 1. p. 29, 34.
. 3. 'Twas but a piece of Reformation these Councils designed, and that not the
most considerable. Those demands of Reformation in the Head and Members, says
the Cardinal of Perron, propounded before the last division of the Church, have
been demands of Reformation, not in the Doctrine of Faith, and the Sacraments,
but in Manners, and in the practice of Ecclesiastical Discipline, which even
these words of Reformation both in the Head and Members, principally used in
the time of the Councils of Constance and Basil signify Reply to the King of
Great Brit. l. 4. c. 30.
. And those matters of Discipline they aimed at, were such as did almost all
concern the Exorbitances of the Pope and his Court, as appears by the eighteen
Articles of Reformation proposed in the Council of Constance Sess. 40.
. And therefore no wonder if the Bishops did the more easily yield their
Consent to them. 4. Tho the second Pisan Council voted a Reformation both in
Faith and Manners. Yet it is sufficiently known, That that Reformation was
resolved upon to serve a Design against the Insolences of the present Pope, in
opposition to whom that Council was called, by some of the Cardinals who had
been disgraced and insolently treated by him. Tho even that was a plain
Argument of the necessity of it, and how earnestly it was desired by the
Christian World.

But because in discoursing afterward upon the Council of Trent, I shall have
occasion to say those things, which will be more than an Answer to this
Objection, I shall only at present add, That if the Bishops were not generally
abandoned to Ambition, Covetousness, Sloth, and Sensuality, it is not I, but the
Romish Writers themselves that slander them. For this I appeal to Marsilius of
Padua, Nicolas Clemangis, the German Bishop who wrote the Book called Onus
Ecclesiae, Father Paul; yea even to Pope Pius II himself, before he was Pope,
Cardinal, or Bishop, who in his Comments upon the Council of Basil, has left
on record this sad Complaint, (among many others) of the Cardinal of Arles;
Alas, at this day a Prelat who does not prefer temporal things before those
that are spiritual, is rarely found! De Gest. Council. Bas. l. 1. fol. 12.
.

7. There is one Consideration still behind, which of it self (without the
Assistance of any of those forementioned) amounts to no less than a
Demonstration; viz. That the Church of Rome was so remote from reforming her
Errors, that she would not be brought to acknowledge, that she could err in any
of her Definitions; but on the contrary, condemned them for Heretics, who did
not take her most palpable Errors for unquestionable Truths. And tho the
Romanists cannot agree among themselves about the subject of this
Infallibility; but if you ask them where, or in whom it is seated? they answer
with confusion of Language, like that of Babel; yet they all agree in this,
That they have it somewhere, and make this the Foundation into which they
resolve their Faith.

Now what hope can there be of curing that Person, who is so far from seeking
out for a Remedy, that he will by no means hear that he is so much as capable
of being sick? Such was the condition of the Church of Rome: Tho she was sick,
even nigh unto Death; yet she would not endure those who said no more, than
that it was possible she might not be well. This rendered her Disease absolutely
incurable.

Though the Arguments produced, will, I question not, be thought satisfactory
by all disinteress'd Judges: yet it cannot be expected, but some Persons will
be found, who will think they can easily confute them by plain matter of Fact;
that is, by showing, that the Reformation so much desired before, and in
Luther's time, has been long since made. If they can indeed do this, it must be
granted, That these, and all other Arguments of the like import, are no better
than Fallacies. For as Diogenes sufficiently confuted Zeno (who denied the
possibility of Motion) by rising and actually moving; so if any Man can show,
That those Errors and Corruptions so much complained of, have by the Church of
Rome been reformed, he must be not only absurd, but impudent, who shall still
assert, That the Reformation was desperate. And to convince you, That this
Reformation has indeed been made, they will send you no farther than the
Council of Trent, in which they will tell you, this work was so completely
done, that nothing was left undone, that could be thought needful to a thorough
Reformation.

This being the thing which the Romanists chiefly insist upon, and make their
boast of: That my Answer may be the more full and satisfactory, it will not be
amiss to spend a little time in showing what sort of Reformation it was, that
was made by that Council; by which it will be manifest, how much they endeavor
to impose upon the World, who represent it as a Reformation so entire, that
nothing of moment, can by any unprejudiced Person be found wanting in it.

It Is confessed; That as that Council was called, as the Pope pretended, for
the Reformation of the Church; so that in pursuance of that Pretense, many
Decrees concerning Reformation were made by it: But that the Reformation they
made such a noise about, was indeed no more than Noise (a great Cry and no
Wool) designed to abuse Princes, and to put a cheat upon the World, by amusing
them with the name, that they might beguile them of the thing, will, I think,
so plainly appear by the sequel of this Discourse, that those whose great
Interest it is not to confess it, will scarce have the face to deny it.

But because two famous Jesuits, namely, Scipio Henricus, and Cardinal
Pallavicino, have made it their business to blast the Credit of the History of
this Council, written by Father Paul, by representing it to the World as a
slanderous Libel, made up in great part of malicious Forgeries: before I
proceed, it may not be amiss to vindicate its Credit from their false
Imputations, though it be not indeed necessary in order to that which I intend;
because the Charge I shall draw up against the Council, will not be taken from
that History alone, but from other Authors, and for the most part from the
Decrees and Canons of the Council it self.

CHAP. II. The Authority of Father Paul's History of the Council of TRENT
asserted.
THE Credit of the History will be sufficiently cleared by showing these two
things: 1. How well the Historian was qualified for the work. 2. That it is so
far from being overthrown, or so much as impaired; that it is rather
strengthened and established, by those who endeavor to destroy it.

SECT. I. The Author's sufficiency for the Work, and his sincerity in
performing it.
First, The Credit of any History bears proportion to the Authority of the
Writer; and the Authority of the Writer, to his sufficiency for the Work, and
his sincerity in performing it: By how much the greater his knowledge was of
the things he delivers, and by how much the greater evidence there is of his
sincerity in delivering them; by so much the greater is his Authority; and by
consequence, so much the more unquestionable the truth of his History. In case
then there be no reason to suspect, that the Writer is defective in either of
these Qualifications; but a Person of unquestionable Ability, and approved
Sincerity, there can be no reason to question the truth of what he relates; but
on the contrary the greatest reason in the World to entertain it as a faithful
saying. To apply this to the Historian we now treat of:

1. No Man can doubt of Soave's Ability, who considers, That he wanted neither
that Judgment nor those means of Information that were needful to qualify him
for such a Work.

1. He could not want Judgment, who was the Miracle of his age for all sorts of
Learning: Not only for such, as are wont to be found in Cloisters; but such
also, by which the Physician, the Lawyer, the Gentleman and the Statesman are
recommended to the World: and particularly, for his Skill in History, both
Sacred and Profane, (as may be seen in his Life, written by Fulgentius.) To
which if we add, That he wrote this History, not in his greener years, but when
his Understanding was fully ripe, we must needs grant, that he had a sufficient
talent of Judgment and Discretion for such a Work. So admirable indeed was his
Judgment in all matters, That (as the Author of his Life tells us) never any
thing was proposed to him, whereto he did not as readily and solidly answer, as
if it had been in his only Profession; and he gave no answer so suddenly, that
seemed not to be long and studiously considered of, and such an one as could
not be bettered Life, p. 131. printed at Land. 1651.
.

2. Nor could he want means of being rightly informed, and sufficiently
instructed in those things he delivers. He was a Neighbor to the place where
the matters he writes of were transacted. He lived in a City full of learned
and inquisitive Persons, who had collected Memorials of what had passed in this
great Affair Jur. Hist. Reflect. p. 94.
. He had the sight of the Letters, Diaries and Memorials of many great Men;
some of which were employed in matters relating to the Council, others were
themselves parts of it, and prime Actors in it. As the Diary of Cheregat Soave,
p. 24.
Pope Adrian's Nuntio in Germany. The Register of the Letters of Cardinal
Monte, Pope Paul's prime Legate in Trent P. 114.
. A great number of Letters that passed to and fro between the Pope and the
Legates before they could agree to open the Council P. 118.
. The Memorials of those who had part in the Disputes about the certainty of
Grace P. 207.
. Thirty four Votes, in that one Article of Residence, in that form in which
they were delivered, and the Conclusions of all the rest P. 486.
. The Letters of Charles Visconte, Bishop of Vintimille P. 517.
, (Pope Pius his secret Minister in the Council) out of which he extracted,
what he has written in his Three last Books, about the famous Dispute of
Residence, and the grand Question of the Institution of Bishops. The public
Monuments, in which was Registered, what he relates of the Negotiation of
Cardinal Morone with the Emperor L. 7. p. 705.
. The Memorials of Cardinal Amulius P. 815. Pallavicino. l. 14. c. 14. n. 2.
, who was so dear to Pius IV. that he called him his Vessel of Election Pallav.
l. 15. c. 6. n. 7.
, and chose him Cardinal, in spite of all the resistance he was able to make.
He was highly in favor with Cardinal Castagna, who was afterward Pope Urban
VII. and with Cardinal Borromeo Life of Father Paul.
, who had particular advice of whatsoever happened in the Council under Pius
Soav. l. 6. p. 517.
. He most intimately conversed with Camillo Olivo, Secretary to the Cardinal of
Mantua Life, p. 10. Soav. l. 6. p. 517, 518.
, who was President of the Council. He was admitted by the Republic into the
two Secrets of Venice; that is, the two Chambers, in which, besides the public
Reasons of State, the Fundamental Laws, etc. the Records of the public
Negotiations of all States are kept Life, p. 142, 143. Amelot. Preface.
; In which it may be presumed, he had the view, as of many other matters
relating to the Council, so of the Legation of Cardinal Contarini, at the Diet
of Ratisbon (of which he has given an account in his first Book). And that he
had seen the Instructions and Letters of the King of France to his Ambassadors,
his Letters to the Legates and Fathers of the Council; the Lettets of Monsieur
de Lisle, his Ambassador at Rome; the Letters of Monsieur de Lansac, de Pibrac,
du Ferrier, his Ambassadors at the Council; and the Letters of the Cardinal of
Lorain; no Man will question, who will but take the pains to compare his
History with them, as they are published in the French Memoires of the Council.
To which if we add, That for a long time he gathered with extreme diligence,
whatsoever he could attain to know concerning this great Affair, either by Cost
or Friendship, not only in Italy, but from abroad, sparing neither Labor nor
Money, we cannot imagine, but he was sufficiently furnished with Instructions
and Materials for this Work P. 97.
.

I know Pallavicino represents Father Paul, as one who collected his History
from those who were either suspected for Heretics, or were really such Pallav.
Apparat. ad Hist. c. 4.
. The falsity of which Accusation, is so manifest by what has been already
said, that it needs no further Confutation. But because it is not so much the
want of ability, as of sincerity, that Father Paul is by his Adversaries
charged with; Consider,

2. That the Arguments of his Sincerity are so bright, that he must be either
blind, or wink hard, that can avoid the sight of them. For,

1. He was a Person exemplary for Piety, Modesty, Humility, Charity,
Forgiveness of Injuries, and all other Virtues both Christian and Moral, as
Father Fulgentius (who most intimately knew him) tells us. Even in his Youth,
says he, he was never reprehended for speaking an undecent word, or doing an
unbeseeming act Life, p. 16.
. Can it then be supposed, that in his elder age, he should publish to the
World a Book fraught with malicious Lies?

2. To what purpose, can we suppose, he should report things otherways than he
knew them to be? Men are not wont to play the Knave, for naught, but in hope of
some advantage, which may accrue to themselves thereby; and the Baits by which
they are allured, are either the lust of the Flesh, or the lust of the Eye, or
the pride of Life.

To the lust of the Flesh, he was so mortified, that he drank nothing but Water
till he had passed the 30th Year of his Age; and then not without much
averseness, was he prevailed with by his Physicians, in order to his Health, to
drink Wine; and among other things, which he repented himself of, this was one;
that he had been persuaded to the use of Wine. His Food was so slender, that
for the most part he eat nothing but Bread and Fruits; of Flesh very little,
till he had passed his 55th Year. His Life was the most toilsome and painful,
that any Religious Man was able to lead See his Life, P. 18. 20, 156, and
passim.
.

The lust of the Eye, had so little power over him, That he never had of Money
any more, than was necessary for a days use; though he had daily opportunities
of heaping up Riches. He yielded his service freely in all causes, without
receiving any Recognition whatsoever. And though many attempted to fix a Gift
upon him, yet he never received the least Gratuity; being always content with
this only Reward, of having done well P. 132, 133.
.

And for the Pride of Life, he so much despised it; That he not only not
desired, but refused to accept many great Honors and Preferments that were
offered him; and was content to spend his life in a Cell, so far from any
manner of Pomp and State, that he never had any Ornament for his Chamber, nor
more than one simple Garment to put on. In short, the manifest truth is; that
had he sought after worldly Glory or Greatness in any kind, his Temptations lay
all on the other hand; for would he but have humored, and flattered the Pope,
and his Court, he might have easily been advanced, to be the chief Minister of
State under him Et si Papae adulari assentarique animum induxisset, Ministrorum
Pontificiae dominationis facile Princeps.
.

It is, I know, said by some, that all this was to get a Name. But what can be
said with less pretense of Truth or Reason? since this was that he studiously
declined. How many useful Inventions does the World owe to him, which he would
not own himself to be the Author of? How many secrets did he discover, which he
was pleased others should have the honor to publish, as if they had been
Theirs? How resolute was he to leave nothing behind him, either of his own
hand, or other Men's that might carry his name, or preserve his memory P. 157.
158, 159.
? And had his design been to render himself infamous to all succeeding
Generations, the belying of the Council, had been a most proper means in order
to this end; there being those memorials in many Men's hands in France, in
Spain, in Germany, in Italy, by which the Falsity might be detected, and he
exposed to the reproach of all the World.

3. But be it so, that none of the flattering temptations were able to corrupt
him; yet it is certain (say others) that having been highly disobliged by the
Pope and his Court, he was resolved to be revenged for the wrongs they had done
him. Which aspersion is easily wiped off by considering these two things: 1.
His wonderful Charity, not only in Giving, but Forgiving. 2. How earnestly he
endeavored, when he had the greatest provocations to the contrary imaginable,
to conceal those things, that might reflect Disgrace upon the Religion he
professed. Of both which Father Fulgentio has given us pregnant Proofs in his
life. When he was treacherously Assaulted, and barbarously Wounded (by wretches
hired by the Pope to murder him) what was his Revenge? He prayed the high
Council often, that as he with all his heart did pardon him that offended, so
they would make no other demonstration of it, but what might serve to defend
him better, if God should please to prolong his Life; expressing in his actions
as a Christian, and Son of the Heavenly Father, his due obedience to the
Gospel; and as a Philosopher, that he had eradicated out of his Soul all spirit
of Revenge Life, P. 123. 124.
. And when it was reported, not many hours after, that the Assassins were
apprehended, he seemed to be much displeased at the news, saying, Perhaps they
may discover something, that may give scandal to the World, and prejudice to
Religion P. 126.
. when another Plot against his Life was discovered, instead of making a
requital, he interceded for the Murderers, and that not slightly, but
petitioned often upon his Knees, demanding this as a favor in recompense of
his best services done for the Public, that for his sake, they should not be
made spectacles, to the dishonor of his Religion P. 144.
. When not only his Life, but (which is more) his Honor was attacqu'd by the
most opprobrious Libels, he never showed the least sign either of Disdain, or
Revenge. In such perfection was his meekness, that those of his Religion, with
a general Voice rendered him this Testimony, that they never knew him endeavor
any the least kind of Revenge P. 148.
. And it is Fulgentio's Note upon his Charity expressed toward his Assassins,
That it was not a singular action of his, upon that offense only; but that
formerly, and after in the whole course of his Life, he never procured any
Revenge, although the injuries were never so great. And the most that was ever
heard to come out of his Mouth, with respect to his Wrongs, though most
insufferable; was to say sometimes, with a serene Countenance, Videat Dominus
and requirat.

Nor did he think it enough, not to return the evil, but so great was his
Charity, that it put him upon doing Good, as he had opportunity, to his
implacable Enemies. He was no less zealous after the Stabbs given him, than he
had been before, in defending the lawful Rights of those, to whom he imputed
that Villainous Act Non minus etiam post, quam ante lethale Vulnus pro eorum
legitimis juribus stetit, quibus ipse cum plerisque patratum facinus
adscribebat. Com. Jul. Clem. Not. 64. Moral. P. 43.
. To conclude this particular: What show of probability is there, That the
Friar should compile this History, out of Spite and Revenge, for the Wound
given him, and the Snares laid for him by the Pope? when it is certain, That he
had undertaken this work many Years before, (and perhaps by that time finished
it), it being not the Product of a sudden Passion, but, as Pallavicino
confesses, the Work of almost his whole Life Desudavit in hoc opere non aestu
quodam celeri, sed tanta laboris maturitate, ut in hoc vitam fere totam
impenderit.
.

By what has been said, is manifest; as his Charity for his Enemies, so his
Piety toward God too: That he had a value for his Religion, more than for his
Life; was so tender of its Reputation, that in comparison he neglected his own.

4. Though this alone is enough to clear him, from the black charge of Impiety
and Hypocrisy, that Pallavicino prefers against him; yet because the Jesuit
pretends to prove what he says, I shall briefly consider the proof he produces.
The Charge in brief is; That he did not believe the Faith he professed, but was
a Catholic in pretense only, an Heretic in truth Apparat. ad Hist. c. 3. n. 4.
. And four arguments are brought to prove it.

1. Because his History of the Council, is a Book destructive of the Faith he
professed Apparat. ad Hist. c. 2.
. It Is granted, that he sometimes speaks freely, of those Errors both in
Doctrine and Practice, by which the Christian Faith was shamefully corrupted in
the Church of Rome: But if this be to subvert the Faith, how many must be put
into the list of Heretics, who yet pass in the Roman Church for good
Catholics? Let them produce any one instance out of Soave's History, that is
most derogatory to their Faith, and I promise to produce the same, or one
equivalent, out of some other Romish Writer, who is not yet censured for an
Heretic. And what palpable iniquity is it, to make that a note of Heresy in
him, which they account not so in others?

But what if Pallavicino's own History be more injurious to the Roman Faith
than Father Paul's? It is so in the judgment of some learned Romanists.
Aquilinus says roundly, That it is more mischievous, and he gives these reasons
for it; Because, says he, Pallavicino relates many scandalous passages which
Soave omitted; and frequently interprets, amplifies and defends those ill
things, that are written by him; and those things which are for the honor of
the Council, and are truly reported by Soave, they are either lessened, or
omitted, or contradicted, by Pallavicino Refert enim quamplurima quae scandalum
inducunt, and apud Petrum Soave non sunt; ac non semel malorum quae ab illo
scripta sunt, est Amplificator, Interpres, atque Defensor, p. 51. Ex dictis
optime liquet, quanto pernicios^or fit Pallavicini quam Petri Soave Historia,
cum in illa and offendatur Romanorum Pontificum fama, Haereticorum dicta
enumerantur and amplificantur; rixae, contemptiones and scandala inter
Catholicos, quae in Concilio acciderunt, sigillatim referuntur; and quae bona
and recta a Petro Soave enarrata vel minuuntur, vel praetermittuntur, vel in
contradictionem vocantur; quae omnia aperte indigitant, quantum Catholicae
fidei, and Concilii Tridentini causae non leviter noceant. p. 95.
. So that he concludes, That by special Divine Providence it came to pass, that
his History swelled into two Volumes, that very few might be found, and those
none but such as are exceeding phlegmatic, who will have the Patience entirely
to read it. Another learned Man of that Church, is much of the same mind; for
he says, That the Cardinal, who complains that Friar Paul does nothing but
defame the Legates and the Fathers, had done them much more honor, if he had
not reported so much of those matters, which may give advantage to Heretics
and to Critics, may scandalize weak Persons, and destroy that grand conceit,
which People ought to have of the Majesty of Councils, and that Reverence which
that of Trent deserves Amelot. Preface Histoire du Concile de Trente.
. And Come^s Julius Clemens, (another learned Man of the Roman Communion)
shows, that his History is scandalous, and more pernicious than Father Paul's
Not. Moral. etc. p. 18, and 41.
. Judge now, which of the two Historians does best deserve the name of Heretic.

2. The Cardinal thinks to prove him a counterfeit Catholic, by certain
Letters intercepted, supposed to be his, written to Castrine a Hugonot in
France, in which he seems to wish well to the Hugonots Cause. But does not the
Cardinal himself seem to doubt, whether these Letters were his, when he says,
That either they were written with his own hand, or by signs and efficacious
proofs known to be his. He dares not say they were written with his own hand;
what then are the efficacious proofs? Not the least shadow of proof is
produced, unless this may pass for one, That they were sent as his, to Paul V.
by Cardinal Ubaldin the Pope's Nuncio in France. And verily, if the Cardinal's
prime argument against Father Paul be efficacious, so far is this from being a
proof that they were his, that it is an efficacious argument, that they were
not. For what is the Argument he most insists upon, to prove that no credit is
to be given to Father Paul; but because he was an Enemy to the Pope and
Catholics? And can it be supposed that he was a greater Enemy to the Pope,
than Vbaldine was to him, who made it his constant practice to defame him with
odious names Questo sempre infamava il Padre, con nomi odiosi, per i scritti
publicati. Vita del Padre Paolo. p. 223.
? whose enmity against him was so monstrous, that he professed, That he the
more believed him to be a lewd Wretch, and an exquisite Hypocrite, from his
irreprehensible life Al che replicava il Nuntio Ubaldini, che tanto piu si
consermava nella sua opinione, che fosse un'huomo tristo and un hypocrita
esquisito, dalla sua irreprensibil vita. p. 224.
. Is there any Calumny so gross that such a Man would boggle at? May we not
therefore conclude, by Pallavicino's own Logic, that he either forged the
Letters, or at least corrupted them? But in case he did not, may it not be
reasonably supposed, that some other Person did, if we consider, 1. The
palpable forgeries that in his life time were foisted into some of his printed
Discourses. 2. The numberless Calumnies that were spread of him by the Popes
Creatures. 3. The false Reports raised of him by that great Man Cardinal Maffeo
Barbarini (who was afterward Pope Urban VIII.) so base and unworthy, that the
Author of his Life was ashamed to mention them P. 290.
. 4. The frightful Stories divulged of him presently after his Death; as that
he died howling, and crying out of the apparition of black Dogs; that in his
Cell and Chambers hideous noises were heard P. 317, 318.
. These things considered, it may well be supposed, that the passages alleged
are none of Soave's, especially considering, 1. That nothing is produced to
prove that they are. 2. That he was so far from any inclination to change his
Religion, that when he had the strongest Temptation to it, he expressed his
firm Resolution to adhere to it (as will presently appear).

Nor is this to be looked upon as the shift of an Heretic, for the learned
Romanist before quoted, asserts the very same thing. It is to be believed, says
he, that these Letters are either forged, or at least kneaded with a Foreign
Leven, that has corrupted the whole Lump Mais il est a croire, qu'elles sont,
on suposees, ou du moins repetries avec un levain etranger, qui en a corrumpu
toute la mass, Amelot.
. I proceed to Pallavicino's next Argument.

3. Claudius Sarravius, a Calvinist, saw several Letters of Father Paul 's to
Philip Mornay, and Villerius Hottoman. who were also Calvinists. But is any
thing quoted out of these Letters, that smells of Heresy? Not a word. How then
does it appear by these Letters, that Father Paul was an Heretic? because they
were written to those that were Heretics. As if it had not ever been the
practice, and ever will be, for learned Men of different Religions, to hold
correspondence by Letters. As if a Counselor of State in England, could not
write to a Papist in France, but he himself must be a Papist; or a Papist write
to a Protestant, but he also must turn Protestant. If this Argument be
conclusive, how many pernicious Heretics will be found to be right good
Catholics? But Sarravius speaks of the Father, with respect and honor. And so
does Melancthon of the Bishop of Ausburg Melancth. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 65.
, and the Bishop of Breslaw, and of Julius Pflug and Groperus Lib. 3. Epist. 45.
; and yet I trow, these were no Heretics. And Cardinal Sadolet in his Epistle
to Melancthon, speaks highly in his commendation, and makes profession of great
friendship to him, who yet was never thought to be either Lutheran, or
Calvinist, or Zuinglian. Lib. 3. Epist. 39.
But the killing Argument comes last, viz.

4. That Father Paul thus addressed to Sommerdick the Holland Ambassador, I
exceedingly rejoice, that I have lived to see in my Country, an Ambassador of
that Commonwealth, that together with me acknowledges this truth, That the
Bishop of Rome is the Antichrist Laetor summopere me eo usque vixisle, dum in
Patria mea cernerem legatum illius Reipublicae, quae mecum hanc veritatem
agnoscit, Romanum Pontificem esse Antichristum. Apparat. c. 2.
. This would indeed do the work, were not the Calumny too broad to gain credit.
For put case it be true, That the Pope is Antichrist; yet is it credible that
Father Paul believed it? When (as the Author of his Life tells us.) he always
spoke and writ with great Reverence concerning the Popes, and the Apostolical
Chair P. 102. Edit. Land. 1651.
. That (when upon the Interdict of Paul V. many Pamphlets were published to
render the Pope odious, and to provoke the Republic to change their Religion)
he inculcated upon them the necessity of adhering to it; That God by his
singular Grace, had placed them in the Catholic Apostolic Roman holy Church,
for which they were bound to acknowledge his Divine Favor, and to render him
continual Thanks, since no greater misfortune could befall them, than that they
should abandon or forsake it: That no Man ought to suffer himself to be shaken
in his confidence; nor the Prince to give way, that a change or alteration
should be so much as spoken of P. 160, 161.
. In a word, That in all his Consultations and Writings, he always honored the Sea Apostolic, and the Popes, with a Supreme Reverence P. 165.
.

But suppose the Father had thought the Pope to be Antichrist, can any
considering Man believe, that he would have declared it to the Dutch
Ambassador? Is it to be imagined, That such a wise Statesman (as his
Adversaries grant him to be) That he who in the heat of his Dispute with the
Pope, was so cautious, that no unhandsom reflecting word might slip from his
Pen; That he who took so great care that nothing might pass the Press, that
might be just occasion of offense to the Pope and his Court; That he who well
knew how tender the Republic was of their Honor in point of Religion, and how
highly offended when Pius IV. seemed to think, that they had recommended to him
for Cardinal, a Person suspected of Heresy; That he who (after he entered upon
public employment) denied himself the pleasure of converse with many learned
Men, that none might take occasion to reflect upon the State; That he who knew,
that if he was suspected of Heresy, the State would be so too, because in all
matters relating to Religion, he was their Oracle, and that nothing could be
more dangerous to the State, than to fall under such a suspicion? Can it, I
say, be supposed, by any Man not forsaken of Sense and Reason, that such a
Person as this, should utter those words? and that he should utter them to a
Stranger? and to a Stranger, that he spoke to but occasionally, and in haste --
Incidissetque ipsi opportunitas cursim illius alloquendi. Apparat. c. 2.
?

But now for once, to gratify the Cardinal, let us grant, That, in his notion
of Heresy, Father Paul was an Heretic; For he did not believe, that the Pope
is above a Council, or that he has power to depose Princes. He did not believe
him to be an infallible Dictator, and that (in case he err) Men are bound to
own his Errors for Truths: And such Heretics, I think, we may reckon Gerson,
Espensaeus, Richerius, and the generality of the Gallican Church. But to
proceed:

5. There cannot be a more undoubted Argument of Sincerity in an Historian,
than Impartiality; and this is in many things so visible in Father Paul's
History, that he must shut his Eyes close, who does not discern it.
Pallavicino, it is true, frequently represents him, as a Man of such malignity
against the Popes, the Presidents of the Council, and the Catholics (as they
call themselves) in the general, as prompted him always to defame them. But
this is a wilful misrepresentation. He was as ready to speak good, where there
was ground for it, as evil of them; He relates those things that make for their
Credit, as well as their Disgrace; and sets their Virtues in as clear a light
as he does their Vices. I shall give some Instances relating to the Popes and
Presidents of the Council.

1. To begin with the Popes. He says of Leo X. That he was careless in things
that concerned Religion and Piety. But does he not also say, That he adorned
the Papacy with many good parts which he brought into it, amongst which were
his singular learning in Humanity, Goodness, and a mavelous sweet manner in
treating of affairs, with a pleasing behavior more than humane, joined with
incomparable Liberality, and a great inclination to favor those that were
Learned, and endowed with any extraordinary Quality. Which Virtues were not
found in that See of a long time before, neither equal, nor near unto his P. 4.
. He tells us, That Clement VII. was a Bastard, and mounted to the Popedom by
Simony, and lays open those Artifices by which he eluded the calling of a
general Council: But when he gives us his Character, he also acquaints us with
his Virtues, (such as they were) He died, says he, with no small joy of the
Court. For though they admired his Virtues, which were a natural Gravity,
exemplary Parsimony, and Dissimulation; yet they hated more his Avarice,
Rigidity and Cruelty P. 71.
. Of Paul III. he says, That he was a Prelate endowed with good Qualities, and
among all his Virtues, he made more esteem of none than of Dissimulation Ibid.
. Of Julius III. That he spent whole days in Gardens, plotted out delicious
Buildings, and showed himself more inclined to Pleasure than Business Lib. 3.
p. 299.
. But is it not commendable, that he made choice of Cardinal Pool, for his
Legate into England, thinking, that because he was of the Blood Royal, and of an
exemplary Life, he would be the fittest Instrument to reduce that Kingdom to
the Church of Rome Lib. 5. p. 384.
? He represents Paul IV. as a passionate, proud, domineering Huff: But he
withal mentions the severity of his manners, in the foregoing part of his life,
and his endeavors after he came to the Popedom to reform the Court. In like
manner he treats Pius IV. In a word, those Popes who were most infamous for
their Vices, he finds something to say of them, that is laudable.

But then, what says he of Adrian VI? Oh! he was a Man too good for this World:
For the Court (says he) being not worthy of such a Pope, it pleased God to call
him Lib. 1. p. 30.
. What says he of Marcellus II? He was a Man grave and severe by nature, and of
a constant mind, that showed the World that his Dignity had not changed him; He
thought it necessary to make an entire Reformation, and that it would be no
loss to the Papacy, to cut off its Pomps and Vanities, but would preserve and
enlarge it Lib. 5. p. 389, 399.
.

Now is not this to write impartially? Had he hated the Popes, and not their
Vices only, he would have spoken ill of one, as well as another. Had he been
such a Momus to the Popes, as Pallavicino reports him, Lynceus ille Romanorum
Pontificum Momus. l. 14. c. 1. n. 6.
he could have seen nothing in many of them, besides their Vices: Whereas the
truth is, if he was partial, it was rather in their favor. For though indeed
the Pictures he has left of some of them, are ugly enough; yet they are so
much more deformed, as drawn by others (who yet were no Heretics) that his
when compared with theirs, may be thought to flatter them. Yea, I appeal to any
indifferent Reader, whether Pallavicino himself says not more to the discredit
of Leo X. Hist. l. 1. c. 2.
. Whether the Character he gives of Julius III. does not make more to his
disgrace L. 13. c. 10. n. 8.
, than that Soave gives him. And for those Popes which Soave highly commends,
does not Pallavicino as much defame them? Adrian of whom Soave thought the
World not worthy, Pallavicino represents as a Pope not worthy of the World. He
was indeed an excellent Priest, but in truth a mean Pope; the Cardinals valued
him above his desert, when they exalted him to the Papal Throne Fu
Ecclesiastico ottimo, Pontifice in verita mediocre, etc. l. 2. c. 9.
. And for Marcellus, though he falls foul upon Soave for defaming him, yet see
what a worthy Eulogie he has left of him. 'Twas happy for him that he died so
soon, for had his Reign been long, he would hardly have maintained by his
actions, that high opinion the World had conceived of him Lib. 13. c. 11. n. 7.
. To conclude this, if we may credit Aquilinus, Pallavicino seems to have done
more mischief to the Church of Rome, by what he has written of the Popes, than
Soave Certum sane apparet, quantum detrimenti Catholicae reipublicae inducat
haec Pallavicini historia in his quae de Romany Pontificibus narrat. Unde e
contra minus damni Petrus Soave in suo opere afferre videtur. p. 77.
. Quis tulerit Gracchos?

2. Having seen how fairly he treats the Popes, let us now look, whether he
has showed himself so just to their Legates in the Council. Pallavicino says,
That he defames not only some, but all the Presidents, and that perpetually Non
parlo del vituperio perpetuo col quale infama e tutti i Presidenti di essa,
etc. Introduz. c. 11.
. If this Accusation were true, it would be a shrewd Argument of his
insincerity; but how remote it is from the neighborhood of truth, will soon be
made appear.

The Presidents of the Council under Paul III. were John Maria de Monte,
Cardinal Bishop of Palestrine; Marcellus Cervinus, Cardinal Priest of the holy
Cross; and Reginald Pool, Cardinal Deacon of S. Mary in Cosmedin. Hear now what
Soave says of them. In this Man (viz. Reginald Pool) the Pope chose Nobility of
Blood, and Opinion of Piety, which commonly was had of him: In Marcellus,
Constancy, and immovable and undaunted Perseverance, together with exquisite
Knowledge: In Monte, reality and openness of mind, with such Fidelity to his
Patrons, that he preferred their interest to the safety of his own Conscience
L. 2. p. 111.
. Is there any thing in this, but what is for the credit of Reginald and
Marcellus? and nothing but the last clause that can reflect the least
disparagement upon Monte. He says, That the Legates admonition (at the opening
of the Council) was accounted Pious, Christian, Modest, and worthy the
Cardinals L. 2. p. 132.
. And this, I hope, is not to disgrace them. Again, That they proposed to the
Popes consideration, that it would be good, to make some effectual Reformation
in Rome L. 2. p. 254.
. And that at Trent in the next Congregation, they proposed the Reformation of
diverse Abuses P. 256.
. These things are spoken of the Legates in common.

Let us now see, what he says of each of them apart, and first of Marcellus.
When a great and rich Prelate This was the Cardinal of Trent.
, in the Congregation went about to show, that they ought only to aim at the
Reformation, aggravating much the common Deformation of the whole Clergy, and
inculcating that so long as our Vessels were not cleansed, the Holy Ghost would
not dwell in them: The Cardinal of Holy Cross, much commended that Prelate for
making mention of a thing so holy, and of so good example: for beginning from
themselves, they might easily reform all the rest of the World; and he
earnestly exhorted all to the practice thereof L. 2. p. 144.
. He tells us also, That the Cardinal took incredible pains to make the Decrees
(viz. of the sixth Session) avoiding as much as was possible to insert any
things controverted among the Schoolmen, and so handling those which could not
be omitted, as that every one might be contented P. 215.
. And truly says he, concerning these particulars, it is not fit to rob the
Cardinal of his due Praise P. 216.
. It seems Soave intended this for his Praise.

And so did he many things which he has left on Record concerning the Cardinal
of Monte. For instance, his Discourse about Residence, in which the Cardinal
says, That the World has complained long since of the absence of Prelates and
Pastors, daily demanding Residence: That their absence from their Churches, is
the cause of all the mischiefs of the Church: For the Church may be compared to
a Ship, the sinking whereof is ascribed to the absent Pilot: That Heresies,
Ignorance and Dissolution do reign in the People; and bad Manners and Vices in
the Clergy, because that Pastors being absent from the Flock, no Man has care
to instruct those, or correct these, etc. L. 2. p. 191.
. When his Master, the Pope, ordered the Legates, to find out matters to delay
the Session, Monte, who was of an ingenuous Disposition, thought it would be
hard, and could not promise to be constant, in so long a Dissimulation P. 204.
. This may perhaps pass for a Defamation with Pallavicino, the Jesuits being so
excellent at the art of dissembling. He elsewhere tells us, That Monte was
peremptory against the Abuse of selling the Sacraments P. 247.
. And his Zeal, Courage, and undaunted Resolution, upon all occasions in
asserting and maintaining the Pope's Power and Greatness P. 260, 261, 266, 268,
279, 281.
, one who has read Pallavicino's new Gospel, would not think the Cardinal
should reckon it a Disparagement to him.

Let us now see how Soave defames Cardinal Pool. He says, That he was of the
Blood Royal; That the Dependents of the Farnesi, for his good Disposition, were
content to elect him Pope, to succeed Paul III. That he was of exemplary life.
That he was acceptable to the Nobility of England, for his Wisdom and Sanctity
P. 298, 384, 405.
. That many in England were scandalized, and alien'd from the Pope, for
depriving him of his Legation. And if this be to dispraise, what is it to
commend a Man? But let it be, that in the Jesuits reckoning, good Disposition,
and exemplary Life, are no matters of just Commendation.

The Presidents of the Council under Julius III. were Marcellus Crescentius,
Cardinal of S. Marcellus; Sebastianus Pighinus, Archbishop of Siponto; and
Aloisius Lipomannus Bishop of Verona; the first in the capacity of Legate, the
two last as Nuncii, but of equal authority with the Legate. And why, says Soave,
did the Pope pitch upon these? Upon Marcellus, because among all the Cardinals,
he found none more trusty, and withal more worthy: upon the Archbishop of
Siponto, for that great confidence he had in him before his Papacy: upon the
Bishop of Verona, for the form of his great Piety, Loyalty and goodness L. 3.
p. 310, 311.
. And what character, says he did the Pope give of them to the Council? That
Marcellus was a zealous, wise, and learned Cardinal; That the Bishops of
Siponto and Verona, were famous for Knowledge and Experience. And if we read
the Exhortation, which Father Paul tells us, those Presidents gave to the
Fathers of the Council, in the first Session under Julius, I can hardly
imagine, that there is any Man in the World, but a Jesuit, who will not think,
that the Father intended it for their Commendation; and that there is something
in it, which really deserves it, particularly the Conclusion, that they should
handle the matters of the Council with all Gentleness, and without Contention,
as becomes so great an Assembly, using perfect Charity, and consent of minds,
knowing that God does behold and judge them L. 4. p. 317.
.

Of the Legates and Presidents under Pius the 4th, I shall take notice of three
only, viz. Gonzaga Cardinal of Mantua, Cardinal Seripando, and Cardinal Morone.

Mantua, Soave tells us, was a man eminent, not only in regard of the greatness
of his House, and of his Brother Ferandus, but for his own Virtue L. 5. p. 444.
. And one great instance of his Virtue, is the freedom (Soave tells us) he used
to the Pope: For he wrote to him with his own hand, that he had not a face to
appear any more in Congregation, to give words only, as he had done two years
together; That all the Ministers of Princes do say, that howsoever his Holiness
does promise much for Reformation, yet seeing nothing to be executed, they do
not think, that he has any inclination to it L. 7. p. 675.
.

Seripando, he says, was a Divine of much fame L. 5. p. 445.
. That when he came to be prime Legate, upon the death of Mantua, he wrote to
the Pope, That he would be glad his Holiness would send another Legate, his
Superior, to govern the Council, or remove him; But in case he would leave him
prime Legate, he told him, he would proceed as God should inspire him; and that
otherwise it were better to remove him absolutely L. 7. p. 678.
. But that which especially commends this President, is the account Soave gives
of his death. He died, says he, to the great grief of all the Prelates, and of
all Trent, having in the morning received the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which
he took out of his Bed upon his Knees. After that he returned to his Bed, and
in the presence of five Prelates, etc. he confessed his Faith, wholly
conformable to the Catholic of the Roman Church, spoke of the works of a
Christian, of the Resurrection of the Dead, of the Council, recommending the
progress of it to the Legates, etc. L. 7. p. 687.
.

Among many things related of Cardinal Morone to his Praise, I shall mention
only some passages of that Speech, which he made upon his first coming to
Trent. He told the Fathers, That the Wars, Seditions, and other Calamities
present, and imminent for our sins, would cease, if a means were found to
appease God, and to restore the ancient Purity. That he brought with him two
Things; one a good Meaning of the Pope, to secure the Doctrine of Faith, to
correct bad Manners, etc. the other, his own readiness to do what the Pope had
commanded him. He prayed the Fathers that Contention and Discord, and
unprofitable Questions being laid aside, which do grievously offend
Christendom, they would seriously handle the things which were necessary L. 7.
p. 697.
. Is there any thing in this, that Pallavicino can interpret to the discredit
of Morone.

I think I have now proved, what I undertook as to the Popes and Presidents of
the Council; which was not, that Soave never says any thing to their dispraise,
but that he sometimes says those things which are for their Commendation; which
is a plain Confutation of Pallavicino's Calumny, and an irrefragable argument
of Father Paul's sincerity. And if the Jesuit so shamefully forges in matters
so obvious, what credit is to be given to him in other things, in which the
Falsity is not so easily detected? Having said more than enough for the
clearing of the first thing proposed, I proceed to the second, viz.

SECT. II. The credit of his History so far from being overthrown, that it is
rather established by those that endeavored to destroy it.
Secondly, The credit of Father Paul's History, is so far from being
overthrown, or so much as lessened, that it is rather confirmed and improved by
those who have endeavored to destroy it. Those are especially the two Jesuits
before named, viz. Scipio Henricus, and Sfortia Pallavicino. Scipio Henry's
Book is divided into two parts. In the first he has extracted out of Soave's
History, what he thought was good, and advantageous to the Catholic Religion;
and this he has digested into an History of the Council. In the second (which
is divided into five Sections) he has gathered together the Tares (as he calls
them) and bound them up in Bundles to be burnt Et sane admirabile est qua
ratione in opere hoc vera cum falsis admixta sint: and ex bonis and pro
Catholica Religione utilibus Haereticorum deliramenta oriantur. Cum ergo pia
and impia cognoscantur in hoc Volumine admixta, meum erit Haereticorum Zizania
alligare in fasciculos ad comburendum, and Catholicae veritatis triticum in
horreum Christi reponere. Praefat. ad Lect.
. In both which he has very much confirmed the truth of Soave's History.

1. In the first, because his own History of the Council is taken out of Father
Paul's. He himself tells us, That he has put in nothing of his own invention;
That he has borrowed almost nothing from the Writings of others, but that his
History is made up of those things alone, which are contained in Soave's Work
Lectorem admoni^^^ volo me in Hist. Concilii Trident. componenda, nihil ex
proprio ingenio, nihil fere ex aliorum Scriptis reposuisse: sed ea tantum quae
in ipsius Historici opere continentur. Praefat. ad Lect.
. Now these, which are the principal things, he supposes may be all true,
(though he says indeed, that he will not vouch for the Truth of them) Praeterea
est advertendum, quod ea, quae ex illo volumine extracta in Historiam a me
rediguntur, non protinus ut vera and approbata amplectenda esse: sed ut quae in
illo opere inventa; and possibisia fuisse non repugnet. Ibid.
. Yea, in the passage before quoted, he calls these, the Wheat of Catholic
Truth, which is to be laid up in Christ's Granary: And if it be granted, that
these are truly reported by Soave; there will be little reason to suspect, that
other matters of less moment are forged.

2. In the second Part, he further builds up what he intended to pull down,
because those things in Soave's History which he says are Lies. First, some of
them in case they are so, are Lies of his own forging. Secondly others, the
Reasons he gives are of no force to prove them so. Thirdly, Others are such
things which an unprejudiced person will be so far from looking upon as Lies,
that he will be thereby the more inclined, to believe all the rest Father Paul
says to be true.

1. Some of them are Lies of his own making, by misrepresenting Soave's Words.
For instance, The Historian, says Henry, lies, in saying, that the Fathers
themselves were not Divines; for since in every Session they had Sermons,
certainly some of them were Divines Mentitur Historicus dicendo Patres ipsos
non fuisse Theologos; cum enim per singulas Sessiones Conciones in eis
habuerint, certe aliqui ex eis Theologi erant. Sect 5. Art. 2.
. As if Father Paul had said, that none of them were Divines, when he says
nothing like it. There were, says he, few Divines but of less than ordinary
sufficiency L. 2. P. 163.
. Which words suppose, that many of them were Divines, and assert only, that
there were but few of those many, whose Abilities were not below the vulgar
sort of Divines. As he here abuses Soave, by taking from his words, so in other
places by adding to them. As when he makes him say, That the Assertions of
Luther were condemned by Courtiers that were unlearned and unskilful, and not
fit for matters of so great weight Quinto, quod harum assertionum damnatio
facta fuit a quibusdam Aulici, imperitis, and ad res tanti ponderis non been
aptis. Quare Judices isti simpliciter Aulici indocti, ut postea, Historicus
asserit, non fuerunt. Sect. 5. Art. 1.
. The words, unlearned, etc. are foisted in by himself, to furnish out matters
for a Lie.

2. Other matters which he says are Lies, the Reasons he gives are of no force
to prove them to be so. For instance, It Is false, says he, that the common
opinion of the Divines was, that this Article [Men are not bound to communicate
at Easter] ought not to be condemned for Heretical. Why? Because it was
afterward condemned by the Council Sect. 2. Art. 3.
; As if the Bishops in Session, might not condemn that for Heresy, which the
greater part of the Divines in Congregation, were of opinion deserved not so
severe a Censure: For the same reason he concludes, that there was no such
difference in opinion among the Divines, as Soave mentions, about the
Sacramental eating of Christ Ibid.
.

3. Many of them are such, which an unprejudiced man will be so far from taking
for Lies, that he will for their sakes be the more inclined, to believe all the
rest that Soave says to be true. For will he not conclude, that certainly
untruths are very rarely to be met with, when a spiteful Adversary (who was
resolved either to find or make them) was forced to reckon for lies, such
things as these.

1. Those things which are reported by other Historians of untainted Credit.
For instance, That the Council was translated to Bologn, by the Popes order
Sect. 4. art. 2.
. Which is expressly affirmed by Onuphrius In vita Pauli III.
. And as Aquilinus tells us, Mamfrinus Rosseus, and Dionysius a Foeno, and
those Italians that write general Histories, report the same thing; Yea, that
all those Writers who before Soave 's time, make mention of this Translation,
they ascribe it to the Popes Mandates P. 32.
. And so pitiful are the Reasons Scipio (and Pallav. too) give to the contrary,
that they are despised by Aquilinus, and represented as ridiculous, by Amelot
Preface.
.

2. Those things, which if they are lies, the Bishops of the Council, the
Princes and their Ambassadors, yea the Pope and his Cardinals are the liars.
For instance. It is, says Henry, a vain and ridiculous thing, yea the Forgery
of the lying Historian, that if the Residence or Institution of Bishops, be
declared to be of Divine Right, the Pope can have no more Authority over them
Quare vanum and ridiculum est, imo and figmentum mentientis Historici, si
declaretur Epscoporum Residentiam sive Institutionem, etc. Sect. 3. Art. 4.
. Let it be so ridiculous; but then not Soave, but the Archbishop of Granata,
the Bishop of Segovia, and the rest of the Spanish Bishops (yea and Lainez the
General of the Jesuits) were the Forgers of this ridiculous lie; for they were
the men who asserted it, and Soave as an Historian only reports it of them:
Yea, the Cardinals and the Pope himself were almost as much mistaken, as we
find by the Letters of Monsieur de Lisle, the King of France's Ambassador then
at Rome Cet article de residence est repute de grand prejudice, au Pape and a
ceste Cour, and de grande efficace pour croistre la dignite and authorite des
Evesques, etc. Let. au Roy du 6. May 1562. Et vous assure que cet article de
residence attribuee au droict Divin, avec autres qui en dependent, est repute
icy de grande and dommageable consequence. Ext act d'une let. de Mons. de Lisle
a Mons. de Lansac. Memoirs pour le Council de Trente, p. 189. See also p. 322.
. Again, That the Council was not free, Henry reckons for a lie. But if it be
so; the Emperor, the King of Spain, the King of France, together with their
Ambassadors, and the Spanish, French and Polonian Bishops, were also Liars: For
they frequently complained that the Council was in servitude.

3. Diverse other matters in which he gives Soave the lie, are such notorious
Truths, that no Man who has not the Impudence of Jesuit, can have the face to
deny them. For instance, Soave says, That he that reads S. Austin will know,
that in nine places, not in word, but in a Discourse, he does affirm the
necessity of the Eucharist for Children, and two of them do make it equal with
the necessity of Baptism: Yea, he says more than once, that the Church of Rome
has held and defined it necessary for the Salvation of Children, and does
allege for it Pope Innocent, whose Epistle does yet remain, in which he says
it plainly L. 6. P. 539.
. Now here the Jesuit with open Mouth cries out, that he belyes both S. Austin
and Pope Innocent. For what he says (says he) of the Authority of Austin, is a
manifest lie; and it is certain, that the Historian after his wonted manner,
belyes Pope Innocent Caeterum quod dicit de authoritate Augustini, est apertum
mendacium: Et debuisset Historicus non loqui perperam, sed refer loca atque
ejus verba. Oppositum enim ex eodem Augustino asserit S. Thomas 3. P. q. 73.
art. 3. referens verba ejusdem ad Bonifacium contra Pelagianos, quae talia
sunt: Nec illud cogitetis, parvulos vitam habere non posse, qui sunt expertes
corporis and sanguinis Christi. Et ibidem qu. 50. Artic. 7. refert eundem
Augustinum asserentem, parvulos ante usum rationis communicandos non esse De
Innocentio Papa certum est, Historicum mentiri more solito. Sect. 5. Art. 9. p.
208.
. A manifest lie! These two things he says of S. Austin. First, that he does
affirm the necessity of the Eucharist for Children. Secondly, That he does
allege for it Pope Innocent: Both which will presently appear to be most
manifest Truths.

As to the first, no Man that has looked into the writings of S. Austin
against the Pelagians, can be ignorant, that he frequently, and with zeal
asserts this, if the words Parvuli and Infantes signify Children. But because
the Jesuit says, that the Historian ought to have quoted the Places, and the
words; though it will be too tedious to transcribe the words, they are so many;
yet I will refer the Reader, to at least nine places, in which he may find such
words as manifestly prove this Epist. 106. Epist. 107. De Peccator. Merit. and
Remiss. L. 1. c. 20. and cap. 24. Contra duas Epist. Pelag. l. 1. c. 22. l. 2.
c. 4. l. 4. c. 4. Contra Julian. l. 1. Col. 943. and Col. 949. and l. 3. c. 1.
Col 991. Contra Pelag. Hypognost. l. 5.
. And diverse of these places (particularly de Peccator. Merit. and Remis. l. 1.
c. 20. etc. 24.) do make the Eucharist as necessary to Children, as Baptism.
And which is observable, S. Austin makes the drinking of the Blood of Christ,
no less necessary to Infants, than the eating of his Flesh; which is a manifest
proof, that in his days, the Cup was thought necessary for the Laity.

It Is true, that Aquinas in the place quoted by Henry, asserts the contrary
Doctrine out of S. Austin: But nothing can be truer, than that Aquinas either
ignorantly or wilfully abuses the Father, by perverting first his words in
changing cogitatis into cogitetis, (for so it is in Aquinas,) and then wresting
them to a sense directly contrary to S. Austin's meaning; for those very words
are used by him, to prove that little Children cannot be saved, without
receiving the Body and Blood of Christ, as will be evident to any Man, who will
be at the pains to consult the context. What he says, S. Thomas quotes out of
S. Austin to the same purpose, qu. 50. Art. 7. is certainly false, because
there is no 7th. Art. under that Question.

And as manifest it is, That S. Austin alleges Pope Innocent for this
Doctrine, (which is the other thing Father Paul says of him) For behold (says
he) Pope Innocent of Blessed Memory, says, That little Children have not Life,
without the Baptism of Christ, and without partaking of the Body and Blood of
Christ Ecce beatae memoriae Innocentius Papa, sine Baptismo Christi, and sine
participatione corporis and sanguinis Christi, vitam non habere parvulos,
dicit. Contr. duas Epist Pelag. l. 2. c. 4.
. And see (says he) to Julian, what thou can answer to S. Innocent, who has
determined, that little Children can no way have life, unless they eat the
Flesh of the Son Sancto Innocentio vide quid respondeas, qui nihil aliud de hac
re sapit, etc. Qui denique parvulos definivit, nisi manducaverint carnem filli,
vitam prorsus habere non posse. Contra Julian. Pelag. l. 1. col. 943. to 7.
Edit. Bas.
. I think by this time, what the Jesuit calls a manifest Lie, does appear to be
a Truth, as manifest as Day.

But it is certain, says he, that he belyes Pope Innocent. All that he says
concerning Innocent is, That his Epistle yet remains, in which he plainly says
this. If then it be certain, that Father Paul belyes him, it must also be
certain, That when he wrote this, there was no such Epistle of Pope Innocent's
in being. And yet it is certain, that this Epistle remains still, and any one
that lists may see it among S. Austin's Epistles (viz. Epist. 93.) and in
Binius Council. Tom. 1. p. 768, 769.
. His words are these; That which your Brotherhood asserts they Preach (viz.
the Pelagians) that little Children may attain the Rewards of Eternal Life,
without the Grace of Baptism, is very absurd: for unless they eat the Flesh of
the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, they shall not have Life Illud vero quod
eos vestra fraternitas asserit praedicare, parvulos aeternae vitae praemiis
etiam sine Baptismatis gratia posse-donari, perfatuum est: Nisi enim
manducaverint carnem filii hominis and biberint sanguinem ejus, non habebunt
vitam in semetipsis.
. Binius upon these words, Nisi manducaverint, etc. says, That some Men of good
Learning have thought, that Innocent understood this place of S. John, not of
the Eucharist, but of Baptism: But they were deceived, (says he) in that they
did not apprehend the force of the Argument which the Pope uses. For he proves
the necessity of Baptism for Children, because the Eucharist is necessary, of
which they are not capable with ut Baptism. And upon these words, Illud vero,
etc. his Note is; Hence it is manifest that in the judgment of Innocent I. the
Eucharist is necessary even for Infants Hinc constat Innocentii I. sententia
(quae sexcentos circiter annos viguit in Ecclesia, quamque S. Augustinus
sectatus est) Eucharistiam etiam Infantibus necessariam esse. Council. Tom. 1.
p. 769.
. In short, what the Historian here affirms, is so far from a certain and
manifest Lie, That Binius and Maldonate expressly affirm the same, both of
Innocent and S. Austin: And not only so, but that this Opinion prevailed in the
Church, for about 600 Years Missam facio Augustini and Innocentii I. sententiam
(quae sexcenros. circiter annos viguit in Ecclesia) Eucharistiam etiam
Infantibus necessariam esse. Maldonat. 6. cap. Joh. v. 53.
. The manifest consequence of which is; That since the Council of Trent has
denounced an Anathema, against all those who say the Communion of the Eucharist
is necessary for Children Sess. 21. Can. 4.
. It is certain, That either Pope Innocent I, S. Austin, and other the most
eminent Fathers for 600 Years were Heretics, or Pope Pius IV. and the Council
of Trent have erred. If any Person desires more Instances of this nature, they
shall soon be produced.

2. Nor is Father Paul less beholden to Pallavicino; for the confutation of his
History of the Council; and that upon many accounts, a few of which it may
suffice briefly to mention.

1. He refutes it by such Arguments, as are apparently vain and unconcluding:
viz. That a thing is false, that is not to be found in those Letters, Memorials
or Acts, which he had consulted. The Divines of Lovain (says Pallavicino) did
not oppose the Reservation of Cases to a Superior Tribunal; Why? Because he
found not in the Acts of the Council, that they did L. 12. c. 11.
. It Is false, That many of the Spanish Prelates did make instance to the
Legates, that the Imperialists might not be present at the Consultation about
the Chalice; Why? because no mention is made of this in the Acts, in the
Letters of the Legates, or of the Spanish Ambassador, to Cardinal Borromeo L.
18. c. 5. n. 4.
. It Is not to be imagined, That the Emperor wrote to Cardinal Morone, That all
former evils did arise from the oppressions attempted by the Ecclesiastics
against People and Princes; because he found no such matter in the public
Registers L. 23. c. 1.
. As if those Records which he had seen, must of necessity contain whatsoever
was done or spoken in, or concerning the Council; As if Soave might not know
many things concerning the Council, which he could not be informed of, who was
fifty Years more distant; As if he could not have those informations from Men
who were Eye and Ear-witnesses of all that passed, which Pallavicino could by
no means attain to, after those Persons were gone into the other World.

When two Persons write of the same subject, is it a good Argument, that
whatsoever is said by one of them is false, if it be not also reported by the
other? S. Matthew and S. Mark have both written the Life of our Blessed
Savior, may we not as reasonably conclude, that many things delivered by S.
Matthew are false, because they are not to be met with in S. Mark?

2. He misreports many things delivered by Soave, and then cries a Lie, when he
himself has made it. He tells us Soave says, That the words of the Pope's Bull
for recalling the Council to Trent, were such which plainly expressed the
continuation of the Trent-Council -- Che apertamente esprimevano di continuare
il Concilio in Trento. l. 11. c. 11. n. 4.
. But this is plainly to belie Soave, for he has no such word as continuing,
but his words also are to reassume and prosecute it Oltra che il dire di
^iassumerlo and proseguirlo.
. In the next Paragraph, speaking of a Decree made in the Diet, he leaves out
the most material passages, and those which alone were pertinent to the matter
in hand, and then represents Soave as contradicting himself. If the Reader
please to consult the place, and compare it with Soave, he will no doubt be
surpised, if the commonness of Misrepresentations, from the Men of his
Society, do not make the wonder cease.

3. The Errors he charges Soave with, are for the greater part in matters of no
moment. Of that pompous Catalogue of 360, more than 200, says Amelot, are so
slight, that they are not worth the labor of mentioning Quant aux 361. fautes,
ou faussetes, que le Cardinal refute, il y en a plus de 200. qui sont si
legeres, qu'elles ne valoient pas la peine d'en parler.
. What matters it, whether a Congregation was held the next day after the
Session, or the next but one? Whether a Session was appointed on the 9th of
October, or on the 11th? Whether the King of France died the 21st or the 31st
of March? Whether such a Man came to Trent the 14th, or the 24th of August?
Whether Martinuccio were a Monk of the Order of S. Basil, or of S. Paul the
Hermit? Are these things, whether so or so, any thing to the main business?
What Histories can be justified, if a mistake in things of this nature is
sufficient to condemn them? Since none can be found, which do not as much
differ one from another in such Circumstantials, as Father Paul's does from the
Vatican Records. Yea may not the Cardinal by the same way of reasoning
conclude, that no Credit is to be given to S. Luke's History of the first
Council at Jerusalem, since Persons that have written about it, contradict one
another in matters as considerable, as those beforementioned?

4. His own Errors are as numerous, as those he pretends in Soave. I could,
says Amelot, easily find as great a number of faults in his Histrry, as that is
either of real or pretended Faults, which he has reckoned in Friar Paul's Car
je pourois bien en trouver un aussi. grand nombre que celui des fautes, vraies
ou pretendues, qu'il compte dans l'Histoire de Fra Paolo.
. Nor are his Errors only as numerous, but many of them such, which it can
hardly be supposed, but he himself must know to be Errors. He tells us, That
Luther and Sleidan convince Soave of a Lie, in ascribing the rise of Heresy
(so he calls Luther's Doctrine) to the abuses in selling Indulgences L. 1. c.
3, n. 5.
. What Luther says of this matter, I know not; but whosoever will be at the
pains to read the first and second Pages in his Commentaries, he will plainly
see, that Sleidan says the very same things concerning it that Soave does.

5. Were Soave's History entirely, in every tittle, true, it would nevertheless
have appeared false to Pallavicino, whose sight was so enormously vitiated, by
the overflowings of his Gall. Men usually see things, not as they are in
themselves, but as they are discolored by their own Passions and Appetites;
the brightest Truth will appear a Lie, to him who is resolved to have it so;
and so is that Man, who is resolved to contradict; who needs no more to make
him speak ill of a Man (as a Romanist observes of Pallavicino) than that Father
Paul speak well of him, as if he thought it better to renounce common sense,
than not to oppose his Adversary: who as if he had lost his discerning faculty,
falls foul upon all he meets with, right or wrong; and rails at as triumphant a
rate, against those Errors, which if such, are very harmless ones, as against
those that are most pernicious Iste vero summo livore imbutus, omnia ut pessima
reprchendit ac promiscue sive bonu sive mala verborum profluvio involvit, atque
ut falsa suadere nititur. Aquilin. p. 8.
.

6. Such are Pallavicino's Proofs as render his whole work suspected. For from
whence are they taken? from Memorials and Registers locked up in the Vatican
Library. That they are so indeed, he expects we should believe upon his bare
word, which yet will not pass for much, among many Men of his own Church. But
suppose they are, is it a thing granted, that all is true, that is in the
Vatican Manuscripts?

He frequently quotes the Acts of the Council; the Vatican, it seems, is
furnished with plenty of them; the Acts of Paleottus, of Mensottus, of the
Bishop of Salamanca, etc. O how thankful would many Men be to his Holiness,
would he bless the World with the sight of these! Yea, what would they not
willingly give to purchase them? If then they are such as will abide the Test,
why are they still kept under Lock and Key? Is it not to be suspected, that the
Wares are adulterate, when the Merchant will not be persuaded to bring them
into the Light? Is the Court of Rome so self-denying, as not to publish those
things, which make for their advantage? May we not then conclude, That either
they are such as will not endure the Trial; or in case they will, that besides
what makes for them, they contain those matters also, which make more against
them?

Besides, It is a thing known to the World, that the Legates in the Council, had
two sorts of Instructions: one Letter was to be showed to give satisfaction to
the Bishops and Ambassadors; another ran counter to it, and was to be
concealed: And may we not suppose, that those Letters which the Cardinal so
frequently cites, were of that sort only which were to be communicated, which
were direct contrary to those that were concealed? What credit then is to be
given to his Proofs?

For these, and many other Reasons (which to avoid tediousness I omit) the
Cardinals Counter-History, has not met with that esteem among learned Men of
the Church of Rome, as was expected; and instead of blasting the Reputation of
Father Paul's History, has made it to be more highly valued by many Men, than
it was before.

CHAP. III. The Vanity of the pretended Reformation of the Council of TRENT.
HAving given Father Paul his due, I shall now proceed to treat of the
Reformation made by the Council.

I might premise several general Considerations, by which all impartial Persons
will be abundantly satisfied, that no Reformation to purpose could be made by
it: viz. such as these:

1. The Pope and his Court, were very averse from such a Reformation.

2. The Pope by his Legates, presided in the Council.

3. The proposal of all matters to be treated of, was reserved to the Legates.

4. The Legates in doubtful matters confulted the Pope, before they proposed
them to be discussed.

5. After matters had been discussed in the Congregations, before they were
proposed in the Session, the Legates sent to Rome to know the Pope's Pleasure.

6. The Bishops of the Council, were generally such as were addicted to the
Pope; either as they were Italians, or as they were his Pensioners, or both:
And therefore such as would not contradict him, except in such rare Cases, in
which the Pope's Interest, and their own could not be reconciled; such as the
Exemption of Regulars, and the Divine Right of Episcopacy.

7. When any considerable opposition was like to be made, all Arts were used,
the most disingenuous not excepted, to bring over the Dissenters to the Pope's
Party.

8. Nothing was proposed in the later Sessions to be defined, till they were
before secure of a Party, to carry it that way which the Pope desired. He that
considers these things, cannot expect any good from this Council.

But passing over all these, I shall at present consider matter of Fact only,
what was done, and what was not done, by the Council, which shall be reduced to
these three general Heads:

1. That in those matters in which a Reformation was most necessary, not the
least Reformation was made, or so much as pretended. 2. That in those matters,
in which a mighty Reformation was pretended, little or rather none was really
made. 3. That instead of Reformation, the Council produced a greater
Deformation; what it found bad, it left in many respects worse.
SECT. I. In those matters in which a Reformation was most necessary, not the
least Reformation was made, or so much as pretended.
First, That in those matters in which Reformation was most necessary, not the
least Reformation was made, or so much as pretended. And these things were of
two sorts; matters of Doctrine, and matters of Worship. In which, I say,
Reformation was most necessary, because Errors in these, are of the most
dangerous consequence.

First, That the Romish Errors in Doctrine were numerous, and many of them in
points of the highest moment, I have already showed Part. 1.
, and therefore shall spare the labor of mentioning them here. That the
Protestants with one Mind and one Mouth demanded a Reformation of these
especially, as absolutely necessary, I need not prove, it being a thing
notorious to all Men, who have read but so much as the Ausburg Confession. Yea,
That many Errors in Doctrine were so gross, that those very Romanists, who (in
compliance with their worldly Interest) resolved not to reform them, were not
able to shut their Eyes so close, as not to discern them, we may conclude, from
that Counsel which the Bishops assembled at Bononia, gave to Pope Julius III.
for the establishment of the Roman Church, viz. The Lutherans receive and
confess all the Articles of the Athanasian, Nicene, and Apostles Creed. The
same Lutherans refuse to admit any Doctrine, except that only which has the
Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles for its Authors, and wish that we would
imitate the ancient Churches, and not think of receiving any Traditions, which
it is not more manifest than the Noonday light, were dictated and instituted
by our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Apostles. But we, on the contrary, following
the opinion of your Holiness, will have all Traditions, Constitutions, Rules,
and Ceremonies, which have heretofore, either by the Fathers, or Councils, or
even by any private Man (with a good Zeal) been introduced into the Church, to
be believed, and accounted necessary to Salvation. And particularly, as to
Tradition, we entirely believe and confess, as a true Article of Faith, That
which the Council of Trent has determined in the Decree of the third Session.
And although we cannot prove this (for we plainly confess between our selves,
that we cannot prove, that which we hold and teach concerning Tradition) yet we
confess it to be true, because the Roman Church holds it. -- But that we may
confess the Truth (which must be kept as a secret) in the time of the Apostles,
and for some Years after the Apostles, there was no mention of the Papacy, or
the Cardinalship; much less were there these Doctrines, these Laws, these
Customs, no, nor the Empire over the Nations, that we now obtain: But all
Ministers of all Churches (of the Roman no less than of others) did voluntarily
obey Kings, and Princes, and Magistrates Lutherani Symboli Apostolorum, Nicaeni
and Athanasii Articulos omnes recipient, etc. Consil. de stabiliend. Romans
Eccles. Vergerii Tom. 1. p. 95, 96.
. And a little after, he proceeds thus: Certainly we scarce retain in our
Churches, so much as a shadow of the Doctrine and Discipline, which flourished
in the times of the Apostles, but have brought in another quite different from
it Certe vix umbram quandam retinemus in nostris Ecclesiis ejus doctrinae and
disciplinae quae Apostolorum temporibus floruerunt, and prorsus aliam
accersivimus. p. 97.
. And in the conclusion, they give the Pope this Counsel, as the most weighty
of all. That he labor with all his might, that as little as possible of the
Gospel (especially in the vulgar Tongue) may be read in the Cities, that are
under his Dominion; that that very little, which is wont to be read in the
Mass, may be sufficient, and that no mortal Man may be permitted to read more
of it. For as long, say they, as Men were contented with that little, your
affairs succeeded according to your wish, which began to decline to the
contrary, as soon as Men took upon them to read more. In brief this is the
Book, which has raised the Tempests and Storms with which we are tossed. And
the truth is, if any Man shall diligently consider that Book, and shall take a
view of those things which are done in our Churches; he will see, that there is
a vast disagreement between them; and that our Doctrine, is not only altogether
different from that, but which is more, is often contrary to it Denique (quod
inter omnia consilia, quae nos dare hoc tempore Beatitudini tuae possumus,
omnium gravissimum ad extremum reservavimus) oculi hic aperiendi sunt; omnibus
nervis adnitendum erit, ut quam minimum Evangelii poterit, (praesertim lingua
vulgari) in iis legatur civitatibus, quae sub tua ditione ac potestate sunt;
sufficiatque tantillum illud, quod in Missi legi solet, etc. p. 102. 1.
.

This was the Confession of Popish Bishops, but made in the Pope's Ear, and
afterward divulged to the World, by a great Bishop of that Church, who a little
before was so zealous an Advocate for the Romish Faith, and so much the Popes
Favorite, that he made choice of him before all others, for his Legate, to
reduce the Heretics in Germany.

Forty years before this, the Cardinals and Bishops in the Council of Pisa, not
only confessed their Errors in Doctrine, but decreed a Reformation in Faith, as
well as in Manners Sess. 3. Richer. Hist. Council. general. l. 4. part 1. p.
430.
. For though (as I said before) that Decree was made by them to serve a Design;
yet the serving of that Design, was a plain Demonstration that such a
Reformation was judged needful by many of the Roman Church. Add to these the
Emperor, the King of France and the Duke of Bavaria, who demanded such a
Reformation from the Trent-Council, as was in many points plainly repugnant to
the received Doctrines of the Roman Church Natalis Comes l. 14. Hist. sui temp.
Soave. l. 6. p. 513. p. 527. l. 7. 652.
.

And was any thing done by the Council in compliance with these Confessions and
Demands? No, not one of their Doctrines, was so much as reflected upon, much
less condemned. Yea, so far was the Council from making any alteration in
Doctrine, that the Emperor with all his Authority, could not obtain leave for
the Protestants, so much as to propose their Doctrine Soave l. 4. p. 359. 360.
Vergerii Secret. Pontif. Actio 1.
.

And to make all sure, against any such kind of Reformation; the Pope provided,
that his most learned Prelates might not come acquainted with any other
Doctrine, than what their Mother (the Church) had taught them: For he
prohibited not only the Bishops, but the Cardinals too, to look into the Books
of the Lutherans Verger. secret. Pontif. Act. 3. p. 77, 78, 82, 83.
. And were not they, think you, likely to be equal Judges, who were to condemn
those Doctrines, which they were not permitted to examine?

But it is needless to show that no Reformation was made in Doctrine, since R.
H. confesses, That the Tridentine Fathers were unanimous in condemning the
Protestant Tenets Considerat. on the Counc. of Trent. s. 150.
. And that the Pope had no need of the Italian Bishops to that purpose, because
the whole Council did concur in condemning them S. 167.
. Nor did the Fathers so much as pretend to any such Reformation, the very
notion of Reformation being by them limited to so narrow a compass, as not to
reach it: Nor could they extend it further, without quitting their claim to
Infallibility.

Secondly, Nor was any the least Reformation made in matters of Divine Worship;
No, not so much as in the Language in which it was celebrated, though earnestly
desired by the Emperor, the King of France, the King of Poland, the Duke of
Bavaria, etc. But notwithstanding the importunity of these great Catholic
Princes, backed with the most persuasive Arguments, in plain contradiction to
Scripture, and to the Practice of the ancient Church; in defiance to Reason and
the common sense of Mankind, the Church Service was still continued in a
Language not understood by those that heard it; No, nor many times, by those
that read it; and an Anathema denounced against those who shall dare to say,
that Mass ought to be celebrated in the vulgar Tongue Council. Trident. Sess.
22. Can. 9.
. And could it be expected, that they should reform any Abuse in the Object or
matter of their Worship, who would not remove that, which defeats its very end,
and makes it instead of a reasonble, a brutish Service? especially considering,
that it might (as one would think) have been done, without the least detriment
to any of their worldly Interests.

I know that R. H. in his Catalogue of those Grievances, which, he says, the
Council took into consideration, and rectified what they judged amiss, so far
as that iron Age would permit Considerat. on the Counc. of Trent, c. 12. s. 209.
, mentions the withholding of the Cup, as if this had been one of the
Grievances rectified. That the Council took this into Consideration is granted,
but it is certain they did not rectify it, and therefore (it seems) judged
nothing amiss in it; for had they done so, the obstinacy of the Age, could not
have hindered them from rectifying it: for that Iron Age, how stubborn soever in
other matters; as to this piece of Reformation was so flexible, that (excepting
the Spaniards) it generally inclined to it. And yet after all the consideration
the Council had about it, they at length determined, not to determine it, but
to refer it entirely to the Popes Judgment Hoc decreto Sancta Synodus refert ad
Pontificem Max. sententiam and judicium integrum illorum duorum Articulorum,
quos antea propositos nondum discusscrat: nimirum, an Consuetudo Catholicae
Ecclesiae communicandi Laicos, and non conficientes Sacerdotes, sub una tantum
specie panis, ita sit retinenda, ut nulla ratione Calicis usus, cuiqu^m sit
permittendus, etc. Decret. super Petit. Conces. Calicis Sess. 22.
.

Thus we have seen, that no Reformation at all was made, in those matters, in
which a Reformation was most necessary, and which in comparison were the only
things the Protestants demanded a Reformation of. For though indeed they made
great complaints, of Corruptions in Manners and Discipline, yet they withal
professed, that they did not look upon these, as sufficient ground, to break
with the Church of Rome. But that their Errors in Faith; their Sacrilege,
Superstition and Idolatry in Worship, were the only Grievances that were
intolerable; without the redress of which, there was no remedy, but they must
forsake her Communion.

SECT. II. In those matters in which a mighty Reformation was pretended, little
or rather none was really made.
2dly, It remains then, That if any Reformation was made, it was only in
matters of Ecclesiastical Discipline; and so much of Manners as followed
thereupon. This is indeed all, that the zealous Patrons of the Council assert;
Yea all, that the Council it self pretended to. And in these matters (if we
will believe some Romanists) great things were done. But if we consider the
things themselves, we shall find them so little, or rather nothing, that they
deserve not the name of Reformation. This will, I think, be evident, by
considering these five things.

1. The Persons who were exempted from the Reformation. 2. The Corruptions and
Disorders, which the Council passed over, without taking notice of them. 3.
That those Abuses the Council took notice of; for some of them it made no
Decrees of Reformation; for others, the Decrees concerning them, were many of
them mere Shams and Illusions. But 4. Supposing the Council had extended their
Decrees to all Persons and to all things, that stood in need of being reformed;
That they had so framed them, as to render them most effectual for obtaining
their end; yet they in effect revoked them all again. And 5. That these things
are so notorious, that they are confessed, and complained of by the Romanists
themselves.
1. The Persons who were exempted. To talk of reforming, and not to correct
him, or them in whom the Deformity has its rise, and from whom it descends to
others, is as absurd, as to talk of curing a Disease, without removing its
prime cause; which no Physician will pretend to, who is not either a Knave or a
Fool. And yet such unskilful or unfaithful Physicians, were the Fathers of the
Trent Council, as will appear, if we consider these two things.

1. That the evils complained of, did chiefly, if not wholly proceed from the
Popes themselves. 2. That the Council made no provision for reforming of them.
1. That the Popes themselves were the Fountain from which the evils chiefly
flowed. For the proof of this (passing over many others as needless) I shall
content my self to produce two witnesses, whose Authority is beyond Exception.
The first is the Select Council of Cardinals and other Prelates, Deputed by
Paul III. to acquaint him with the abuses, and what were the best expedients by
which they might be reformed; who presented to him upon Oath, That the Original
of the evils the Church groaned under was, that some Popes (his Predecessors)
having itching ears, had heapt up to themselves Teachers after their own lusts;
not such from whom they might learn what they ought to do, but such by whose
art and cunning they might find out a way to make what they listed, Lawful; so
that the will of the Pope, (whatsoever it was) might be the rule by which his
actions were to be directed. From this Fountain, say they, as from the Trojan
Horse, so many abuses, and so grievous Diseases have broken into the Church of
God, by which it is brought almost to a desperate condition Et quoniam
Sanctitas tua spiritu Dei erudita (qui ut inquit Augustinus, loquitur in
cordibus nullo verborum Strepitu) probe noverat principium horum malorum inde
fuisse, quod nonnulli Pontisices tui Predecessores prurientis auribus -- Ita
quod Voluntas Pontificis qualiscunqe ea fuerit, sit regula qua ejus
operationes, and actiones dirigantur; ex quo proculdubio effici, ut quicquid
libeat, id etiam liceat. Ex hoc font, sancte Pater, tanquam ex equo Trojano,
irrupere in Ecclesiam Dei tot abusus and tam gravissimi morbi, quibus nunc
conspicimus eam ad desperationem fere salutis laborasse etc. Richer l. 4. par.
2. p. 137. Sleidan Comment. l 12. Thuani l. 35.
. This was the Voice, not of one single Cardinal, but of many United, and of
those among them, who were thought the most Eminent.

But if that Authority which is next to Infallible, be thought too little, let
us hear what was the Judgment of one of the better sort of Popes in this
matter; I mean Adrian VI. who confessed in the Diet at Nuremberg, That many
things to be abominated, had been for some years past, in the holy See; abuses
in spiritual matters, excesses in Commands, and that all things were out of
order; that the Disease had descended from the Head to the members, from the
Pope to the other Prelates. As for what concerns us, says he to his Legate, Thou
shall promise that we will use our utmost endeavor, that this Court from
whence peradventure all this evil did proceed, may be first reformed; that as
the corruption has flowed from thence to all Inferiors, so the Health and
Reformation of all, may proceed from the same too Scimus in hac Sancta Sede
aliquor jam annis, multa abominanda fuisse, Abusus in spiritualibus etc.
Odaric. Raynald. Tom. 20 Thuan. l. 35.
. This doubtless, is a Testimony, that no Papalin can refuse. I shall therefore
conclude with it, lest by adding more, I should seem to derogate from the
Infafallible Oracle.

Thus we see, That the chief cause of the Deformation of the Church, was the
wound in the Head, as James of Paradise expresses it Et hanc profecto
potissimam reor causam deformationis Ecclesiae, quia cernitur in capite vulnus,
quod necesse habeat ante curari. Jacob. de Paradis. Collect. de Auth. Eccles.
. Which every man will easily grant, who impartially considers, That of those
five Popes who sat during the Council Paul. iii. Julius iii. Marcellus ii.
Paul iv. Pius iv.
, there was but one (viz. Marcellus) who was not infamous for Vice; and his
Reign was so short He died the 20th day of his Popedom. Papir. Masson. in vita
ejus.
, that it deserves not to be mentioned.

2. Did the Council make provision for curing this Disease in the Head? No, The
Pope was Lord Paramount to the Council, too high to be within the reach of its
Power; so sacred was his Person, as to give protection to his Vices.

He is indeed in one Decree, taxed of some Misdemeanors Sess. 24. cap. 1.
; But it is done so civilly, as if they intended to oblige, rather than provoke
him; for he is not plainly and directly, but covertly only and by consequence,
accused, by reprehending some abuses in Government, which were practiced by
other Bishops, as well as himself. To correct which abuses in part, he is in
the same Decree tied up in the creation of Cardinals, to persons so and so
qualified; and in a few other matters mentioned by R. W. Considerat. on the
Counc. of Trent, c 12.
, his Power is a little contracted, and the Profits of his Court in some things
abridged: But that this was done for show only, and not with an intention to
bind him, nothing can be more manifest, because they themselves let him loose
again, and amply restore to him whatsoever they seemed to have taken from him:
So that suppose all the Reformation, which that Author mentions, and much more,
had been really Decreed; all those Decrees would have been defeated, by that
Decree which the Council concluded with, viz. That in all the Decrees
concerning Reformation of Manners and Ecclesiastical Discipline, with what
words or clauses soever, made under Paul iii. Julius iii. Pius iv. it shall be
understood, that the Authority of the Apostolic See is always excepted and
reserved Postremo sancta Synodus omnia and singula sub quibuscunque clausulis
and verbis, quae de morum Reformatione, at Ecclesiastica disciplina tam sub
Fell. rec. Paulo. iii. ac Julio iii. tam sub Beatissimo Pio iv. Pontificibus
max. in hoc sacro Concilio constituta sunt, declarat ita decreta fuisse, ut in
his salva semper Auctoritas sedis Apostoliae and sit, and esse intelligatur.
Sess. 25. c. 21.
. Does not this undo all that was done before? And would it not have done so,
had it been a thousand times more than it is? For such is the Plenitude of the
Popes Power, (if either the Pope himself or his Creatures may be credited) that
it admits of no bounds, but what he himself shall please to give it Gerson de
Potest. Eccles. Considerat. 12. Dictat. Gregorij. vii. etc.
. So that to say, That in all their Decrees the Authority of the Apostolic See
is preserved, is to say, (if the Pope be Judge, which the Fathers themselves
have made him) that none of their Decrees bind him.

To conclude this first Consideration. Was the Church likely to be reformed,
when no provision was made to reform those from whom the Deformity principally
proceeded? The darkness cannot be taken from the Stars, except it be first
removed from the Sun; nor the sick body be healed, as long as bad dispositions
remain in the Head, which disperses them to all the members, as the Bishop of
Segnia Not Sidonia, at it is falsely Printed in the History of the Council.
Unanswerably argued in the Council, to the great displeasure of the Papalins
Soav. l. 6, p. 533.
.

2. Let us consider the Abuses and Diforders which the Council passed over,
without taking any notice of them; and that both as to their Number, and their
Quality: They being many more, and many of them much more mischievous than
those which the Council reflected upon.

First, As to their Number, they were many more. Because it would be a tedious
work to make a particular recital of all Abuses complained of, I therefore
refer the Reader to those Authors and Tracts quoted in the Margin Gerson.
Declarat. Defect. Viror. Ecclesiast. Pet. de Alliaco de Reformand. Eccles. Onus
Ecclesiae. Centum Gravam. Nic. de Clemang. de corrupt. statu Eccles. Marsil.
Patav. Defens. Pacis. Claud. Espens. Comment. in 1 Cap. Epist. ad Tit. Consult.
delect. Cardinal. and alior, Praelat. Appellat. Universital. Paris. advers.
Concordat. Soave's Hist. of the Counc. Du Ranchin's Review, etc.
, which if he will have the Patience to peruse, and then read over the Decrees
of the Council, and compare them together, he will be abundantly satisfied
concerning the truth of what I now assert.

2. As they were many more, so many of them were in matters of greater moment,
and much more Mischievous both to Church and State, than those which the
Council reflected upon. From the beginning to the end of the Council, there
were no more than twenty five Sessions. Now after the 21. Session, one of the
most noted Bishops in the Council affirmed, That for Reformation, nothing had
been proposed, but matters of no moment Soav. p. 570.
. After the 22. Session, the Archbishop of Prague told the Assembly of
Ambassadors, That much time was consumed by the Council in doing nothing; that
the Legates had often promised to handle Reformation, and yet they were
entertained with Speculations, or with Provision against small Abuses; and that
it was now time to make an effectual instance, that they would begin to handle
important matters p. 643.
. After the Decrees of Reformation in the 24. Session had passed, (which R. H.
takes to be the most considerable, and recommends to our perusal above all the
rest); Considerat. on the Counc. of Tr. c. 12. s. 206.
Count Luna, the Spanish Ambassador complained, That the principal matters for
which the Council was assembled were omitted Soav. l. 8. p. 802.
; so that in the judgment of these great men, (who also made a great figure in
the Council) the Decrees of Reformation, may not unfitly be compared to those
Night-birds (to which a Romish Writer compares Pallavicino's History of it)
which appear great, not because they have much flesh, but many feathers Caes
Aqu lin. de Trib, Hist. Council. Trident, p. 49.
.

I grant, that some of those things mentioned by R. H. are matters of moment
Considerat. etc. c. 12.
. But besides, That all of them put together, are but few in comparison of
those many, in which a Reformation was needful; so the weightiest of them are
but light, if compared with many of those which the Council has wholly omitted.

When that Gentleman undertook to acquaint us with the great Reformation the
Council made concerning the Pope, and Court of Rome, and the Clergy; who would
not have expected to have heard, that the Council had effectually provided,
That his Holiness should no more take upon him to dispense with all the Ancient
Canons, much less with the Divine Laws? That it should not be in his Power to
Excommunicate and Depose Kings and Emperors, to absolve Subjects from their
Oaths of Allegiance, to raise them in Rebellion against their Sovereigns, and
to Usurp and Translate Kingdoms at his Pleasure? Who would not have thought,
but that his Spiritual Sword had been taken much shorter, and that he had been
wholly deprived of the Temporal? (Saving only in those narrow Territories in
which he is Prince, as well as Bishop.) That the Weapons of his Warfare should
be no longer those carnal ones, by which for many Ages he has been a Man of
Blood and Slaughter; but that he should be forced to live for the future a
little more becoming the Vicar of the Prince of Peace? Who could have imagined,
but that he had been forbidden, under forfeiture of his Tripple Crown, to share
the Church Revenues between his Byblows and his Donnaes? And to transfer the
Government of the Universal Church from himself, to a young Gallant called
Cardinal Padrone? And who would not have expected, That some care should have
been taken, to remove those gross Superstitions and Abuses, which they
themselves acknowledged were too frequently practiced in the Worship of Images?
And to prevent those shameless Cheats that were put upon silly People by
Counterfeit Relics? And that (if not for Conscience, yet for shame at least)
the Penitentiary Tax should have been utterly abolished, and the yearly Kine
turned out of their fat Pastures? That mercenary Whores might no longer brave
it in Palaces, and mounted upon their Mules, be attended at Noonday by Nobles
and Clergymen through the Streets of Rome. (An Abomination, for which the Select
Council of Paul III. could find no parallel in any other City of the World) In
hac etiam urbe Meretrices ut Matronae incedunt, per Urbem, seu Mula vehuntur;
quas affectantur de media die nobiles Familiares Cardinalium Clericique. Nulla
in Urbe Videmus han^ Corruptionem, praeterquam in hac omnium exemplari habitant
etiam insignes aedes. Council. delect. Card. and alior. Praelat. de emendanda
Eccles. An. 1538.
.

These things are no more than what every sober Romanist would have expected
should have been done; and yet not only these, but many more of great
Importance, were not so much as touched. If then we suppose the best that can
be, viz. That the Council effectually provided for the Correction of those
Abuses it thought good to Reflect upon; yet, since those which were much more
mischeivous were wholly neglected, must it not needs be a goodly Reformation?
That Physician is likely to make an excellent Cure, who in an Hectical Body,
applies himself only to the Killing of the Itch. Which was the Censure
generally passed upon the great Reformation made in the 21. Session Soav. l. 6.
p. 539.
. And yet,

3. If we consider those Corruptions and Abuses the Council took notice of, it
will appear they were not in good earnest in that slight Reformation they would
seem to make; and that upon this twofold account. 1. Because many of them, it
passed no Decrees to reform them, but referred them to the Pope. 2. For others,
concerning which it passed Decrees of Reformation, many of the Decrees are mere
Shams and Illusions.

First, Several of those Abuses it took notice of, it referred the Reformation
of them to the Pope. We have before heard that the Reformation of the Pope
himself, was left to himself; and by consequence, those Abuses which were the
Source of all others. We have likewise seen, that the withholding of the Cup,
was remitted entirely to his Judgment. To which I add the abuses of Indulgences
(which had given infinite Scandal, and were a chief motive to the Reformation);
The Synod desiring, that these might be corrected, ordains in the general: That
all wicked gains for the obtaining of them, be utterly abolishd. But for other
Abuses, which proceed from Superstition, Ignorance, Irreverence, or other
occasions whatsoever, seeing by reason of the manifold Corruptions of Places
and Provinces in which they are committed, they cannot be prohibited in
particular, It commands all Bishops, that every one of them diligently collect
the Abuses of his own Church, and propose them in the first Provincial Synod;
to the end, that being known by the other Bishops also, they may forthwith be
presented to the Pope, by whose Authority and Prudence, that may be determined
which is expedient for the Universal Church Abusus vero qui in his irrepserunt,
and quorum occasion insigne hoc Indulgentiarum nomen ab Haereticis
blasphematur, emendatos and correctos cupiens, praesenti decreto generaliter
statuit, pravos quaestus omnes pro his consequendis, unde plurima in Christiano
populo abusuum causa fluxit, omnino abolendos esse Caeteros vero, qui ex
superstitione, ignorantia, irreverentia, aut aliunde quomodocunque provenerunt,
cum ob multiplices locorum, and provinciarum, apud quas hi committuntur,
corruptelas, commode nequeant specialiter prohiberi, mandat omnibus Episcopis,
ut diligenter quisque hujusmodi abusus Ecclesiae suae colligat, eosque in prima
Synodo provinciali referat ut aliorum quoque Episcoporum sententia cogniti,
statim ad Summum Romanum Pontificem deferantur; cujus auctoritate and
prudentia, quod universali Ecclesiae expedit, statuatur.
. What a heap of Abuses is here at once remitted to his Holiness; for indeed
the whole matter of Indulgences, as it is usually taught and practiced in the
Church of Rome, is nothing else but Abuse.

2. For other Abuses, the Reformation of which, the Synod took to themselves,
many of the Decrees by reason of some defect or excess; for want of something
that should make them effectual, or by the addition of those Salvo's,
Exceptions and Limitations which defeat their force, are but mere Shams and
Illusions. This is manifest in one Decree or other of almost every Session in
which any thing is decreed concerning Reformation. But it may suffice to give a
few instances.

Sess. 6. c. 1. The Synod ordains, That if the Governor of a Patriarchal,
Metropolitic, or Cathedral Church, shall be absent six months together from his
Diocese, without a lawful impediment, and just and reasonable causes, he shall
lose the fourth part of the revenue of one Year; and if he continue absent six
months more, he shall lose another fourth part: and the Contumacy increasing,
he shall (if a Suffragan Bishop, by his Metropolitan; if a Metropolitan, by the
Senior Suffragan) within three months be delated to the Pope, who by his
supreme Authority may punish him, and provide the Church of a more profitable
Pastor Si quis a Patriarchall, Primatiali, Metropolitana, seu Cathedrali
Ecclesia sibi quecunq, titulo, causa, nomine seu jure commissa, quacunque ille
dignitate, gradu and praeeminentia praefulgeat, legitimo impedimento, seu
justis and rationabilibus causis cessantibus, sex mensibus continuis extra suam
Diocesin morando abfuerit, etc.
. Now who that has but half an eye, does not see, that this Decree is
evacuated these three ways? First, by the exception of just and reasonable
Causes: For these will never be wanting when those are Judges, whose Interest
it is not to have Residence practiced Soav. p. 2^9.
. Unless the Council had determined in particular, what those just and
reasonable causes were. 2. In that wirhout any cause, and without any
forfeiture too, he may be absent six months together saving a few days; yea,
eleven Months, if two or three days of Residence be interposed in the right
place (viz. about the middle of the sixth Month) for he loses nothing, unless
he be absent six Months together. And, 3. In case he continue contumacious,
what is to be done? He is at last to be referred to the Pope. And it might be
presumed, that his Holiness would be so kind, as to grant a Dispensation upon
reasonable terms; (for no Decree had yet passed, for granting one gratis).

It will perhaps be said, That what was wanting in this Decree, was supplied
afterward, Sess. 23. c. 1. Where the Synod to prevent misinterpretation (as if
by Virtue of this Decree, a Person might lawfully absent himself Five Months
together) Ordains; That all that have Bishoprics (Cardinals not excepted) are
obliged to Personal Residence; nor may they be absent from their Churches,
except for causes there mentioned, which are to be approved by the Pope, or the
Metropolitan. And what are those Causes? Not only Christian Charity, urgent
necessity, and the evident profit of the Church or Commonwealth, but due
Obedience also -- Nam cum Christiana Caritas, urgens necessitas, debita
obidentia, ac eviden^ Ecclesiae vel Reipublicae utilitas, aliquos nonnunquam
abesse postulent and exigant, decernit eadem sacrosancta Synodus has legitimae
absentiae causas, a beatissimo Romano Pontificae, aut a Metropolitano -- in
Scriptis esse approbanda^.
: So that when the Pope requires it, Bishops not only may, but are bound to be
absent from their Churches, by Virtue of that Obedience they owe to him. And
this is no more than what the Pope often requires of bare Bishops; but of
Cardinals usually, by Virtue of their Office, which is to be personally
assistant to him. So that a Cardinal who holds Five or Six Bishoprics, may by
Virtue of this Decree be obliged never to see one of them as long as he lives.

Sess. 7. c. 6. The Decree to prevent and annul abusive Unions of Benefices, is
illusory. For first it confirms all those Unions right or wrong, that could
plead Prescription but of Forty years; yea, but of Twenty eight: For as the
Congregation of Cardinals interpret that Decree, the Forty years were to be
reckoned from the confirmation of the Decrees of the Council Non datur potestas
per Concilium Tridentinum examinandi and revidendi Uniones, quae per 40 annos
ante Confirmationem Decretorum ejusdem Concilii factae fuerunt Uniones
perpetuae a 40 annis, a publicatione Concilii Tridentini computandae.
which was not till Twelve years after that Decree was made. 2. As for other
Unions which had been made within that time, those which were obtained by false
Information shall be declared Void; those which have not taken effect, and
which shall hereafter be made, if not made for reasonable Causes, and with
Citation of all that were interess'd before the Ordinary, they shall be
presumed to be surreptitiously obtained, and therefore shall be of no force,
unless it shall be otherwise declared by the Apostolical See Uniones perpetuae
a quadraginta annis citra factae, examinari ab Ordinariis, tanquam a sede
Apostolica legatis, possint -- nisi aliter a sede Apostolica declaratum fuerit,
viribus omnino careant.
. So that all Unions which had not yet taken effect, and which should afterward
be made without reasonable Causes, or without Citation of those which were
concerned, shall be Valid, if it seem good to the Apostolic See to declare
them so. An excellent Piece of Reformation! But to conceal the Knavery, R. H.
thought it advisable not to make mention of the latter Exception Considerat.
etc. Cap. 12. S. 220.
.

Sess. 14. The Decrees, Chapter 1, 2, 3. are all ineffective for want of express
mentioning the Pope, by whom the Licenses, Privileges and Faculties were
granted, the exercise of which is by those Decrees prohibited Soav. l. 4. p.
352.
. And Chapter 5. the exception in the conclusion is of larger extent than all the
Remainder p. 353.
.

But because R. H. recommends to our consideration above all the rest, the
Decrees of the Twenty fourth Session Considerat. etc. Cap. 12. S. 206.
, I shall proceed to them; and (for brevities sake) passing over those which
concern Matrimony, shall in a word reflect upon some of the rest.

Chap. 8. To those which Sin publicly, public Penance is decreed. But the
Decree is void by what follows, viz. Yet the Bishop may change this public
Penance into another secret, when he shall judge it more expedient, Episcopus
tamen publicae hoc poenitentiae genus, in aliud secretum poterit commutare,
quando ita magis judicaverit expedire.
. Chap. 17. Plurality of Benefices is straightly forbidden; but the foregoing
Decree, Sess. 7. Chap. 5. is not rescinded, which renews the Constitution of
Greg. X; by which this Abuse is established Decretal. L. 6. Cap. 1. Tit. 16.
Cap. Ordinarii.
.

The Decree of Cognition of Causes in the first instance, Chap. 20. was quite
destroyed, says Soave, by the exception added, i. e. Except those which the
Pope will commit, and reserve to himself. For Causes were never taken from the
lawful Tribunals, but by Commission and Advocation of Popes; and now the cause
of the Disease was preserved, and the Symptom only cured. And however the
adjunct (for urgent and reasonable Causes) did seem to moderate the matter
well; yet Men of Understanding knew, that it was as much as to say, for any
Arbitrary Cause Soav. l. 8. p. 792.
. And R. H. himself grants almost as much as this amounts to. For in that he
says, A Rescript after the matter is particularly made known to the Pope, and
upon this his Hand and Seal obtained, cannot be a thing so ordinarily happening
as to overthrow the whole benefit of the Decree Considerat. etc. Cap. 12. S.
212.
He plainly intimates, that it may so often happen, as to overthrow the Benefit
in a great measure.

But what a ridiculous Piece of Mockery was the Explication of the Clause,
proponentibus Legatis, Chap. 21. The Emperor's and the Kings of Spain's
Ambassadors had often declared against it, (as that which destroyed the
Liberty of the Council) and earnestly demanded, that it might be revoked, but
could by no means obtain it; at length, when they were now putting an end to
the Council, they declare, That the meaning of the Synod was, not to change in
any part the usual manner of handling Matters in general Councils: As if a
Physician who could not be prevailed with to do any thing for his Patient while
there was hope of Life, should set himself to apply his Medicines just when his
Patient was dying.

By what has been said, it is sufficiently manifest, That many of the Decrees
concerning matters to be reformed, were so framed, as to defeat themselves.

4. But let us now suppose, That there had been no fraud in the Decrees
themselves, but that they had been all so composed, to render them most
effectual for obtaining their ends; That they had been extended to all Persons,
and to all matters too, that stood in need of Reformation: Yet they were all in
effect revoked (that is, rendered no further binding than the Pope pleased)
these two ways. 1. By reserving to the Pope a power of dispensing with them. 2.
By reserving to him, the whole power of expounding them.

1. By reserving to the Pope a power dispensing with them; For nothing was
decreed but with this reserve, Saving always the Authority of the Apostolic
See in all things. This was expressly premised to the Decrees of Reformation,
Sess. 7. Eadem Sacrasancta Synodus, eisdem Praesidentibus Legatis, incaeptum
residentia and Reformationis Negotium, ad Dei Laudem and Christianae Religionis
increnentum prosequi intendens, ut sequitur statuendum censuit, salva semper in
omnibus sedis Apostolicae auctoritate.
. And lest it might be thought not to extend to all the subsequent Decrees, to
make all sure, in the Conclusion of the Council, it was again declared (as we
have before heard), That in all the Decrees of the Council made under Paul,
Julius and Pius, with what Words or Clauses soever, it should be understood,
that the Authority of the Apostolic See is excepted and preserved Sess. 25. c.
21.
.

And what is meant by the Authority of the Apostolic See in this matter, but
an Authority of dispensing with the Canons and Decrees, whenever the Pope
shall judge it convenient? Thus it is interpreted by Espensaeus In cap. 1.
Epist. ad Tit.
, Richerins Hist. Council. general. l. 4. par. 2. p. 182, 183.
, and other Romish Doctors. Thus it was understood by Cardinal Amulius, when he
persuaded the Pope to confirm the Decrees absolutely; For that his Holiness
might provide for his Ministers by Dispensation, without violating the Decrees
of the Council; because, in them the Apostolical Authority is reserved Soav. p.
815, 816.
. But it is needless to produce Witnesses for the proof of this; since, as
Father Paul says, Every Fool knew what this Exception meant P. 260.
. And was not this to pull down all they had before built up, as Richerins says
Septima Sessione ubi de Reformatione agitur, hoc egreginem assumentum omnibus
aliis capitibus quae de disciplina aut Ecclesia emendanda Sciscuntur pro
exordio praemittitur; quo quidem Caetera omnia diruuntur and antiquantur, l. 4.
par. 2. p. 182.
, or as Du Ranchin expresses it, To put a Gull upon all Christendom Review of
the Council of Trent, l. 2. c. 4. n. 26.
.

I know Pallavicino tells us, (which R. H. lays much weight upon) That although
they may lawfully dispense with these Laws, yet the Popes for their Conscience
and Honor sake, require for the most part such weighty Causes, and so rarely
happening for doing this, that their Concessions in matters prohibited by the
Council, do not amount to the 20th part of those formerly made Apparat. ad
Hist. c. 10.
.

Methinks the Jesuit speaks faintly. He says not, that the Popes always, but
for the most part require such weighty Causes; which is a plain Concession,
that they sometimes not only dispense with these Laws, but without any such
weighty Causes: And if he confess, that sometimes, we may then take it for
granted, that they often do so. But whether the Popes, since the Council of
Trent, have been so tender of their Consciences and Honor in dispensing with
the Laws made by it, let some Instances determine.

By one Decree, Expectative Graces, and secret Reservations Sess. 24. c. 19.
, by another Accesses or Regresses to Ecclesiastical Benefices, are forbidden
Sess. 25. c. 7.
. How well those were observed by the Pope, let Espensaeus inform us, who five
years after the Council was ended, makes doleful complaints of these, and many
other Abuses of like nature, then practiced by the Court of Rome Comment. in
cap. 1. Epist. ad. Tit. p. 483. Edit. Paris. 1619.
.

The Council decreed, That no Ecclesiastical Person, tho a Cardinal, should
hold two Bishoprics, or other Ecclesiastical Benefices Sess. 24. c. 17.
. And yet, many years after this Law came to be in force, one French Cardinal
had at the same time three of the wealthiest Arch-bishopricks, and six of the
richest Abbeys; another was possessed at once, of twelve Abbeys, and one of the
fattest Bishoprics Richer. l. 4. par. 2. p. 192.
. And we cannot reasonably suppose, but that his Holiness made as liberal
Provision for the Cardinals of other Nations, as for those of France. There had
need be a weighty Cause indeed, to warrant such enormous and scandalous
Dispensations as these. But could there be any cause, why the Rich and the
great Ones, should (as Richerius says) without any difficulty obtain from the
Court of Rome Dispensations for many Benefices Hercle ad corruptelarum cumulum
apprime facit, quod Divites and Magnates nullo negotio a Curia Romana
dispensationes obtinent ad plura Beneficia, p. 193.
? Yes, a very weighty one; because the Rich and the Great were best able to pay
for them. But why should the Cardinals, notwithstanding this express Law to the
contrary, hold all sorts of Benefices; how incompatible soever, without a
Dispensation, by Virtue of a Privilege which they call, Os apertum Et inter
alios, Cardinales propter Privilegium, quod os apertum nominant, nulla omnino
indigent Dispensatione, ad omnia omnis generis Beneficia quantumvis
incompatibilia possidenda, ibid.
? (How wide is a Cardinals mouth when opened)? Why, to maintain the Pomp and
Grandeur of the Roman Court. And is not that a weighty Cause too, and such as
rarely happens?

Two other of the most important Decrees, are those by which Provision is made
of fit Persons for Bishoprics, and other Ecclesiastical Benefices Sess. 24. c.
1. etc. 18.
. And were not these well observed, when six Abbeys, and one Archbishopric,
were reserved for a Child of three years old Richer. l. 4. par. 2. p. 192.
? And was not Urban VIII. very scrupulous in dispensing with them, when he gave
nothing to those who had best served the Church, but what his Nephews had
before refused, as unworthy of their acceptance? And Innocent X. did as well
observe them, when he committed the Government of the Universal Church, to an
imperious and insatiable covetous Woman, and bestowed all Livings as She was
pleased to direct and command Rycaut in the Life of Innocent X.
. And Clement X. was no less careful to put them in Execution; when all Persons
of Virtue and Merit were rejected, and none but a sort of progging Merchants
advanced to Benefices Id. in his Life.
.

There is another Decree, by which all Titles and Rights to Benefices, that
were obtained by Simony, are made void Rycaut in his Life.
. And this, no question, was worthily executed by the same Innocent X. when a
rate was set upon all Benefices, great and small, and they were sold as in a
common Market by the Lady Olympia; when Simony was become so common, that for
this cause People began to abhor Churchmen, and to hate their Ministry Id.
. And as tender was Clement X. of dispensing with it, when the Cardinal Nephew
would not suffer the Seals to pass for any Benefices, without money paid in
consideration thereof to himself, (tho it was a Living of but 10 Crowns a year)
when for better management of this Simoniacal Trade, he appointed Brokers in
the Palace to set up an Office, and there publicly, and without shame, to
bargain and contract for Offices and Benefices Long Major sane, atque
vigentior ratio postulare videtur, ut ipse Romanus Pontifex, quem tanquam
lucernam ardentem super candelabrum in domo sua posuit Altissimus, tam salubria
Patrum Constituta retineat, ut caeteris Antistibus ad illa Servanda exemplo
praeluceat.
.

I shall mention one Decree more (viz. That which prohibts all Bishops to
enrich their kindred with the Goods of the Church) because in the judgment of
the present Pope, the Pope himself is above all others bound to observe it;
For, says he, there is a much greater and stronger reason, why the Roman high
Priest himself should observe such wholesome Constitutions of the Fathers, to
the end, that he may give an Example to other Prelates to observe them (c). But
I appeal to all those who have made any enquiry into their Lives and Actions,
whether Greg. XIII. Sixtus V. Paul V. Greg. XV. Urban VIII. Innocent X.
Alexander VII. and Clement X. did so observe this Decree, as to show that they
consulted, either their Conscience, or their Honor. Sess. 24. c. 14.


2. But suppose the Council had reserved no such power of dispensing, to the
Pope, yet they put it into his hands to make void all their Decrees, or to
transform them as he pleased, by leaving to him alone the power of interpreting
them. When the Council was now breaking up, The declaration and resolution of
all Doubts, which should happen to arise about the sense of the Decrees, was
referred to his Holiness Quod si in his recipiendis aliqua difficultas Oriatur,
aut aliqua inciderint, quae declarationem aut definitionem postulent; praeter
alia remedia in hoc Concilio instituta, confidit sancta Synodus Beatissimum
Romanum Pontisicem curaturum, ut vel evocatis, ex illis praesertim provinciis,
unde difficultas orta fuerit, ijs, quos eidem negotio tractando viderit
expedire, vel etiam Concilij generalis eclebratione, si necessarium
judicaverit, vel commodiore quacunque ratione ei visum fuerit, Provinciarum
necessitatibus, pro Dei gloria, and Ecclesiae tranquillitate consulatur. Sess.
25. c. 5.
; And therefore in his Bull of Confirmation (as the Bishop of Bestice advised)
he forbad by his Apostolical Authority, all persons both Ecclesiastics and
Laics, of what quality or degree soever, to publish any Commentaries, Glosses,
Annotations, or any sort of Interpretation of the Decrees; and if any matter
seemed to any man obscure, and to need any interpretation and decision,
commanded that he should have recourse to the Apostolic See, the Mistress of all
the Faithful. As for Controversies and Difficulties if any arise from the
Decrees, we reserve them, says he, to be declared and decided by our selves,
as the holy Synod has decreed Ad vitandam praeterea perversionem, and
confusionem quae oriri posset, si unicuique liceret, prout ei liberet, in
decreta Concilij Commentarios and interpretationes suas edere, Apostolica
auctoritate inhibemus omnibus tam Ecclesiasticis personis, cujuscunque sint
ordinis, conditionum and gradus quam Laicis quocunque honor ac potestate
praeditis, etc. si cui vero in iis aliquid obscurius dictum and statutum
fuisse, eamque ob causam interpretatione aut decisione aliqua egere visum
fuerit, ascendat ad locum quem Dominus elegit, ad sedem Videlicet Apostolicam,
omnium Fidelium Magistram, cujus auctoritatem etiam ipsa Sancta Synodus tam
reverenter agnovit. Nos enim difficultates and controversias, si quaeex iis
decretis ortae fuerint, nobis declarandas and decidendas, quemadmodum ipsa
quoque Sancta Synodus decrevit, reservamus. Bulla Super. Confirmat. Concilij.
. Thus the meaning of the Decrees, was by the Council reserved to the Pope, and
by the Pope assumed to himself; in pursuance of which, he forthwith constituted
a particular Congregation of Cardinals, not only for the Execution, but for the
Declaration of them.

Now how easy a matter is it, by adding a little to, or by paring away a
little from, by a Distinction, a Limitation, and I know not how many other
Arts, which the Pope and his Court are well acquainted with, to make a Gloss
that shall quite overthrow the Text.

I shall produce one famous Instance of this kind. The Council decreed, That
those who had many Bishoprics, one of them, which they chose, being retained,
they should quit all the rest Nemo quacunque etiam dignitate gradu aut
praeeminentia praefulgens, plures metropolitanas aut Cathedrales Ecclesias in
titulum sive commendam aut alio quovis nomine, contra Sacrorum Canonum
instituta recipere, and simul retinere praesumat. Qui autem plures Ecclesias
contra praesentis Decreti tenorem nunc detinent, una quam maluerint detenta
reliquas intra sex menses, si ad liberam sedis Apostolicae dispositionem
pertineant, alias infra annum dimittere teneantur: alioquin Ecclesiae ipsae,
ultimo obtenta dumtaxat excepta, eo ipso vacare censeantur. S. 7. c. 2.
. Hear now Pope Paul III. his interpretation. He shall quit the Rest, but so as
to Reserve the whole Profits to himself, allowing such a Pittance to the person
to whom he resigns, as may serve in some sort to maintain his Dignity: Yea, and
when the Church he quits happens to become void, it shall return to him again,
that he may again resign it upon the same terms Espens. Comment. in cap. 1.
Epist. ad Tit. Digress. 2. Richer. l. 4. par. 2.
. Impudent Mockery! Thus, says Espensoeus, one of the Cardinals who lately
died, reserved the Profits of five Bishoprics, and as many Abbeys, the fourth
part of the Profits only being assigned, to the person to whom he resigned Ibid.
.

As Chemists in their analizing of Bodies, by separating some parts, and adding
others; by dissolving the former frame, and producing new Coalitions, are wont
to extract those substances out of them, that were never formally in them: so
while the Pope has the analizing of the Decrees, it is certain there will scarce
ever any thing be found in them, or extracted from them, that is contrary to
his, or his Courts Affections and Interests.

This the Bishop of Bestice was well aware of; and therefore when the Pope's
Officers dissuaded the Confirmation of those Decrees, which they thought
prejudicial to their Profit: He like a better Politician, counseled the Pope
to confirm them without exception; because, by his Exposition, he might give
them a more ample, or a more strict sense; yea, and contrary to that which the
words do import: so that if his Holiness ordain, That in all Doubts men come
for Exposition to the Apostolic See, no Man will be able to make use of the
Council to the prejudice of the Court. If this were done, he foresaw that by
the Decrees of the Council, the Authority of the Apostolic See, the Rights and
Perogatives of the Church of Rome, will not only not be diminished, but
increased and enlarged Soav. l. 8, p. 816, 817.
.

By what has been said, it is sufficiently evident, that the learned Dr.
Stillingfleet spoke no more evil of the Council than they justly deserved, when
he said, That their Decrees appertaining to Reformation, were merely delusory;
and therefore need not much dread that Account which R. H. tells him, he must
one day give to the Celestial Majesty, for his speaking Evil of so Sacred an
Authority Considerat. etc. Cap. 7.. 124.
.

I have now showed, that as to those Matters in which alone a Reformation is
pretended, 1. That those Persons were exempted from it, who were the prime
Causes of the Abuses. 2. That those Abuses which the Council did not concern
themselves about, were as to their Number more; as to their Nature and Quality
more mischievous, than those which the Council reflected upon. 3. That those
Abuses the Council took notice of, some of them it made no Decrees of
Reformation about, but referred them wholly to the Pope; Others, the Decrees to
reform them, were many of them mere Shams and Illusions. 4. That supposing the
Council had extended their Decrees to all Persons, and to all things that stood
in need of being reformed; that they had so framed them, as to render them most
effectual to the obtaining of their end; yet they in effect revoked them all,
both by reserving to the Pope a Power of dispensing with them, and by reserving
to him alone the Power of interpreting them. From whence the Conclusion is
plainly this, That even in Matters of Ecclesiastical Discipline, and of Manners
(which were the only Matters the Council undertook to reform) the Reformation
was delusory; not in Truth and Reality, but in Word and Pretense only: Which
was the thing to be proveed.

Object. If it be objected. That this is the Accusation of Protestants only,
who are Enemies to the Council, and therefore in this Point not to be credited.

Ans. I answer, First, If it were true, That this is the Accusa-of Protestants
only, yet that does not lessen the force of it; but, Secondly, That it is not
true, but manifestly false.

1. If it were true, that this is the Accusation of Protestants only, yet that
does not lessen its force; because the Protestants do not desire to be credited
upon their own word, but upon the Authority of the Evidence they produce; they
demand belief, not of what they say, but of what they prove: As therefore our
Blessed Savior said to the unbelieving Jews: If I do not the work of my
Father, believe me not; but if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works
Joh. 10. 37, 38.
: In like manner may the Protestants say; If we do not sufficiently prove what
we assert, believe us not; but if we do, though ye believe not us, yet believe
our Proofs. And therefore the Questions, Whether the Protestants be Enemies, or
whether they be Friends, are in this Case wholly impertinent; because credit is
due to the greatest Enemy in proportion to the proof of what he asserts. But,
Secondly, That this Accusation is preferred against the Council, by Protestants
only, is not true, but manifestly false; as will appear by the last Argument
proposed for the proof of the Second Proposition, (which will for ever silence
this Objection). For consider,

5. So notorious was the Cheat, that many great Men of the Church of Rome
confess it, and cry out against it. Out of those many which offer themselves, I
shall select a few Witnesses whose Authority is unquestionable.

The Emperor when the Twenty second Session was passed, wrote to the Cardinal
of Lorain, That the impossibility of doing good in the Council being palpable,
he thought it was the Duty of a Christian and wise Prince, rather to support
the present Evil with patience, than by curing it to cause a greater Soav. l.
8. p. 727.
. The King of the Romans, after the Twenty third Session, said, That it was
good to finish the Council; because it did no good, nor gave any hope that it
would do p. 789.
. The Cardinal of Lorain told the Bishop of Vintimiglia, That it was plain by
long experience, that howsoever his Holiness promised many things, yet nothing
was executed in Council p. 692.
. Yea after the same Cardinal had been highly caressed by the Pope, and made
entirely his Creature; when the Decrees of the Twenty fourth Session (though
last save one) were read, he made this Protestation both in his own Name, and
in the Name of all the Bishops of France: When the Day before yesterday, I
declared my Opinion concerning the Articles of Reformation, I premised that I
greatly desired, that the Ancient Ecclesiastical Discipline might be restored:
But since in these most corrupt Times and Manners, I am sensible that those
Remedies cannot be used that are most needful, I in the mean time assent to,
and approve the Decrees already made; not that I think them sufficient to work
an entire Cure, but because I hope that these lighter Remedies being first
used, when the Church can bear those that are more severe, the Popes, and
chiefly our most holy Lord Pius, will diligently take care that by supplying
those things that are wanting; and finding out more efficacious Remedies, he
may restore the Church to its Ancient Soundness Cum nudius tertius meam de
Reformationis Articulis dicerem sententiam, praefatus sum etiam me valde
cupere, ut prisca illa Ecclesiastica restitueretur disciplina, sed cum his
corruptissimis temporibus and moribus intelligam non posse ea, quibus maxim
opus est, protinus adhiberi rentedia, interim assentiri and probare ea quae
nunc sunt decreta: Non quod ea judicem satis esse ad integram aegrotantis
reipublicae Christianae Curationem: Sed quod Sperem, his prius levioribus
fomentis, adhibitis, etc. Rich. l. 4. par. 2. p 241, 242.
. Du Ferrier, the Ambassador of the King of France, thus addressed himself to
the Fathers: Give us leave to use the same words which the Orators of the Jews
formerly used to Haggai, Malachy, and Zechary the last Prophets: Shall we Fast
and Weep yet in the Fifth and Seventh M^nths? An 150 years are passed, since
the most Christian Kings have demanded of the Popes a Reformation of the
Ecclesiastical Discipline; and notwithstanding this, we must still Fast and
Thirst; not as those Jews in the Fifth and Seventh Month, but now Two hundred
years complete; and God grant they be not Three hundred and many more: But they
say, as he proceeds, You are abundantly satisfied with so many Anathematisms
and Decisions of Doctrine: We confess indeed, that if it be right to give one
thing in payment for another, when the Creditor is unwilling to receive it, we
are satisfied* but if not, we are still Creditors, etc. Liceat Patres Sancti
Nobis Oratoribus Regis Christianissimi iisdem verbis nunc vobiscum agere,
quibus olim egerunt Judaeorum Oratores cum Aggaeo, Malachia and Zecharia
ultimis Prophetis. Number jejunabimus and flebimus quinto adhuc and Septimo mense.
Siquidem CL. anni elapsi sunt ex quo Reges nostri petierunt a Pontificibus,
Ecclesiasticae Disciplinae, jam tum labentis restitutionem. etc. Thuani. l. 35.
. A Jest was made of the Reformation in France; and in Germany it was not
thought considerable, no not by the Catholics Thuani. l. 3^. Rich. l. 4 par. 2.
.

But let us hear what was the Judgment of some of their most learned Divines.
Espencoeus who was present at the Council under Paul III. could not be
persuaded by the Cardinal of Lorain, to go with him again under Pius IV;
because he certainly presaged from what he had before seen, that nothing would
be done in good carnest about Reformation Richer. l. 4. par. 2. p. 189.
. The same Dr. speaking of the Reformation made by the Council, says, That
nothing was amended, but all hopes of Reformation dashed Et tam diuturnorum
motuum non alia causa major, quam quod tot annis. nihil immutatur; nihil
emendatur, and omnis Reformandi spes inde abrupta, p. 480
. Claudius Sanctius, another Sorbornne Doctor, who attended the Cardinal of
Lorain to Trent, in his Letter from thence to his Colleague Espencoeus, highly
congratulates his good Fortune, in that he went not to the Council: For, says
he, I believe it would have been death to you, to see those vile Arts that are
used to hinder Reformation Monsieur vous ne fustes jamais mieux inspire que de
ne venir point, ear je croy que fussiez mort des indignitez qu'on commet par
deca, pour obvier a la reformation. Memoirs Pour le Conc. de Trent, p. 441.
. The Complaints of Gentianus Hervetus are so large, that I shall not
Transcribe them, but refer the Reader to his long Epistle to the Jesuit
Salmeron Richer. l 4 par. 2.
. All Christian Nations, says Richerius, for more than Two hundred years,
panted after a Reformation; and at length instead of one that was true and
genuine, they had one that was counterfeit and imaginary Venio ad decreta de
morum and Disciplinae Ecclesiasticae reformatione; ad quam universae Nationes
Christianae cum animo ardentissimo ab ducentis amplius annis anhelabant: Tandem
pro vera atque genuina, imaginariam and subventaneam reformationem habueruut.
p. 181, 182.
. All Christian Princes, says he in another place, vehemently desired of the
Trent Fathers, that the whole time might be spent in repairing the Manners of
Churchmen; but could never obtain this from the Court of Rome, which gave them
only a personated and painted Reformation Quamobrem omnes Christiani Principes,
atque inter alios Ferdinandus Imperator, Sicut etiam Carolus IX Franciae Rex
cum omnibus aliis Catholicis Principibus ardenter flagitabant, a Papa and
Tridentinis Patribus, ut relictis disputationibus and relictis de doctrina quae
a Catholicis minime in dubium revocabantur, totum tempus reparandis moribus
Ecclesiasticorum potissimum impenderetur. Sed hoc nunquam a Curia Romana
impetrare poterunt, quae quidem pro vera Reformatione, personatam and fucatam
nobis exhibuit, p. 240.
. And again, this was the issue and aim of the Trent Reformation, that no
respect should be had to Truth, but to show, and outward Pomp only; and that
all things should be referred to the Splendor and Profit of the Roman Court
Hic Tridentinae reformationis fuit exitus and scopus, ut nihil ad veritatem,
sed in quandam speciem and pompam externam, atque ad privatum Curiae Romanae
splendorem and commodum cuncta referrentur. p. 245. 246.
.

If any thing can be thought wanting to add Authority to the forementioned
Witnesses; let it be considered, that the Censure passed by them, was
sufficiently confirmed by the Pope himself, at the same time that the Decrees
of the Council were, in the Oration that he made to the Cardinals in full
Consistory. We are not a little obliged to the Fathers, says he, that in
reforming Manners and Discipline, they have used that Moderation and Indulgence
toward us, that if we our selves had chosen to take the work upon us, we had
certainly used more severity Quibus praeterea non mediocritrr obnoxii sumus,
quod in moribus ac disciplina reformandis, ea moderatione, ac indulgentia erga
nos, us^ sunt, ut si maluissemus hanc nos ipsi curam suscip^re, eorumq
arbitratui non committere, plus certe severitatis a nobis fuisset adhibitum.
Pallav. l. 24. c. 9 n. 5.
. If any have conceived an ill Opinion of us, as if in those things which
respect Reformation, we would violate the Council: We will when there shall be
need, rather correct by our Diligence, the Moderation used by the Fathers, and
supply their defects as a thing reserved to our judgment Potius igitur
Moderationem limitationemque a Patribus Usurpatam, nos ubi opus fuerit,
diligentia nostra corrigemus, and tanquam rei nostro judicio reservatae
supplebimus, ibid.
. How very little must that Reformation be, which he who thought the least too
much, acknowledged to be defective? Yea, must it not be worse than none, when
he who was an Abhorrer of all, was thankful for it, and took himself to be
obliged to the Fathers for it? That it was so indeed, I shall presently make
appear.

Having already showed, That 1. In those things in which a Reformation was most
necessary, not the least was made, or so much as pretended. 2. In those things,
in which a mighty Reformation was pretended, the Reformation was not real, but
Sham and Mockery. I proceed to show:

SECT. III. Instead of Reformation, the Council produced a greater Deformation:
What it found bad, it left in many respects worse.
III. THat instead of Reformation, the Council produced a greater Deformation;
and that both in matters of Doctrine and Worship, and in matters of Discipline
too.

1. For matters of Faith and Worship it left them worse than it found them,
upon a twofold Account. 1. By confirming those Errors and Corruptions that were
before. 2. By adding others to them.

1. By confirming the Errors and Corruptions before introduced. That the
Fathers made no Reformation of these, I have already showed. I now add, That
they undertook the Defense of them, made Decrees to confirm them, and cursed
all those who should dare to oppose them. The Popes Supremacy,
Transubstantiation, Adoration of the Host, Communicating in one Kind,
Invocation of Saints, Veneration of Images, and of Relics, Purgatory,
Indulgences, were all established, and (as much as in them lay) rendered
immovable against all Assaults. I need not prove this, because it is not only
confessed by all, but is by some insisted upon as a mighty Argument against the
Protestants, That the Fathers were unanimous in condemning their Tenants (that
is, in condemning all those Doctrines that were opposite to the Romish Errors)
and in asserting the contrary R. H. Considerat. etc. S. 152.
.

2. Nor did they only support the old, but introduced many new Errors in the
Faith. Those who were read in Ecclesiastical Story said, That in all the
Councils held in the Church from the Apostles time, until then, there were
never so many Articles decided, as in the sixth Session only; in which, says
the Historian, Aristotle had a great part, by having exactly distinguished all
the kinds of Causes Soav. l. 2. p. 228.
. (Thanks to Father Aristotle. One would think his Logic and Metaphysics
added to the Holy Scriptures, might make them a complete Rule, without the
Addition of unwritten Traditions).

It Is true, that some of those Points were not then first broached, but had for
some time before been commonly taught and received in the Church of Rome; but
none of them were Articles of their Faith, or any more than disputable Points
among themselves, before they were defined by the Council. And therefore, in
further Prosecution of this, I shall do these two things. 1. I shall mention
several of their new Definitions, some of which are at the best but matters of
Opinion, others of them palpably False. 2. I shall show, That these new
Articles, some at the best doubtful, others manifestly false, are by the
Council made necessary to be believed in order to Salvation.

1. For their new Definitions (besides many others which I shall omit) take
these following; which I shall for the greater part but barely mention.

1. That unwritten Traditions are of the same Divine Authority with the Holy
Scriptures Sess. 4
.

2. That the Books of Tobit, Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, Judith, and the two Books
of Maccabees, are Canonical Scripture Ibid.
. The contrary to which was Catholic Doctrine at Rome it self, but a few years
before this Council Et quoniam Hieronymum sortiti sumus Regulam ne erremus in
Discretione Librorum Canonicorum, nam quos ille Canonicos Tradidit, Canonicos
habemus; and quos ille a Canone discrevit, extra Canonem habemus. Cajetan.
Comment. in 1. cap ad Heb. verse 1.
, and approved by Pope Clement VII. Divo Hieronymo, Pater Beatissime Universa
Ecclesia Latina plurimum debet, non solum ob Annotatas ab eo in Libris Veteris
ac Novi Test. particulas tum adjectitias tum ambiguas, sed etiam propter
discretos ab eodem libros Canonicos a non Canonicis. Liberavit siquidem nos ab
Hebraeorum opprobrio, quod fingamus nobis antiqui Canoni^ Libros aut Librorum
parts, quibus ipsi penitus carent. Cajetan Epist. Dedicat. ad Pap. Clement.
VII. ante Comment in Libros Hist. V. T. See Bishop Cosins Scholast. Hist. of
the Canon of the Scripture.
. I know R. H. C. 11.. 198.
, and many more Romish Writers tell us, That this was defined in the Council of
Florence. If it was, this will add but very little, either to its Antiquity, or
to its Authority; but that it was, there can be no proof produced, but a
spurious Article in Caranza's paultry Epitome; the least Intimation of which is
not to be met with in any of the larger Editions of the Councils.

3. That by the Grace conferred in Baptism, all that which has the true and
proper nature of Sin, is removed Sess. 5. c. 5.
.

4. That Concupiscence in the Regenerate, is not truly and properly Sin Ibid.
.

5. That the Works of justified Persons are truly Meritorious of Eternal Life,
and increase of Glory Sess 6. Can. 32.
.

6. That the Catholic Church from the beginning, has always observed the
manner of confessing to a Priest alone in secret Sess. 14. Can. 6.
.

7. That Confession to a Priest is necessary to Salvation, by the Law of God
Ibid.
.

8. That to obtain Remission of Sins, it is necessary by the Law of God to
confess all and every mortal Sin, which a man can call to remembrance, to a
Priest Sess. 14. Can. 7.
.

9. That it is necessary by the Divine Law, to confess the Circumstances of
every mortal Sin, which change the nature of the Sin Ibid.
. And is there one in an hundred that knows which are the Circumstances that
change the kind?

10. That a man conscious of mortal Sin, how contrite soever he thinks himself,
is not duly prepared for the Eucharist, without preceding Confession to a
Priest Sess. 13. Can. 11.
.

11. That the Mass is a true and proper Sacrifice Sess. 22. Can. 1.
.

12. That Christ by these words, Do this in remembrance of me, did institute
his Apostles, Priests, and ordained that they should offer his Body and Blood
Can. 2.
.

13. That the Sacrifice of the Mass is Propitiatory, and ought to be offered
for the Living and Dead; for Sins, Punishments, Satisfactions, and other
Necessities Sess. 22, Can. 3.
.

14. That the Mystical Benedictions, Lights, Incense, Garments, and many other
things of like nature used in the Mass, are by Apostolical Tradition Cap. 5.
. This is so palpably false, that it has not the least Color of Truth: And
this the Trent Fathers knew well enough: For Antonius de Valletelina, a
Dominican, told them, That it was plain by all History, that anciently every
Church had her particular Ritual of the Mass brought in by use, and upon
occasion. That the Roman Rite has been (to gratify the Pope) received in many
Provinces, tho the Rites of many Churches are still most different from it.
That the Roman also has had great Alterations (as will appear to him that
reads the Ancient Book called, Ordo Romanus) which have been made not only in
Ancient times, but even in the latter Ages also; and the true Roman Rite
observed within 300 years, is not that which is now observed by the Priests in
the City, but that which is retained by the Order of St. Dominick. For the
Vestments, Vessels, and other Ornaments of the Ministers and Altars, it
appears not by Books only, but by Statues and Pictures, that they are so
changed, that if the Ancients should return into the World, they would not know
them. Therefore he concluded, that to bind all to approve the Rites which the
Church of Rome uses, might be reprehended, as a condemning of Antiquity Soav.
1. 6. p. 548, 549.
. This Discourse displeased the Auditory, but the Bishop of five Churches
protected the Author of it, and said, that he had delivered nothing untruly;
and that he that would condemn the Friar as scandalous or rash, did first
condemn himself as incapable of Truth Ibid.
.

15. That not only the Degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity, expressed in the
Book of Leviticus, hinder or dissolve Marriage Sess. 24. Can. 3.
.

16. That Matrimony confirmed, not consumnated, is dissolved by the solemn
Profession of Religion of either party Can. 6.
.

17. That Matrimony contracted by Clergymen, is made void by their Vow Can. 9.
.

18. That the Roman Church is the Catholic Church Bulla super forma Juramenti
Profes. Fidei.
. This will perhaps be true, when the part comes to be equal to the whole.

19. That the Roman Church is the Mother of all Churches Ibid. and Sess. 7. Can
3. Sess. 14. de Sacramento Extr. Unct. c. 3. Sess. 22. c. 8. Sess. 25. in
Decreto de libror. delectu.
. If so, the Daughter is the Mother, and the Mother is the Daughter. For they
themselves acknowledge, that St. Peter erected a Church at Antioch, seven years
before he went to Rome; and this Church at Antioch, was the Daughter of that at
Jerusalem: And therefore that at Jerusalem, which is the Mother of all
Churches, is at least the Grandmother of the Church at Rome.

20. That all things delivered, defined and declared by the Sacred Canons, by
General Councils, and especially by the Council of Trent, are necessary to
Salvation The 12th Article of Pope Pius IV. Creed, made in pursuance of a
Decree of the Trent Council, and comprehensive, as R. H. grants, of 1200
Articles, c. 11. ^. 194.
. So many Contradictions as are involved in this, so many Falsities at least
are contained in it: And those are not a few, since nothing is more easy than
to produce Canons and Definitions of such Councils as the Romanists will have
to be General, which are manifestly repugnant (not only to Scripture, but) one
to another.

These are a few of those many new Definitions made by the Council of Trent.
The greater part of which are most palpable Falsehoods: The rest were not only
disputable points in the Church of Rome, before the Definitions of the Council;
but some of them are still disputed, others of them stiffly denied by learned
men of that Church. So that were the Propositions true, yet the Articles of
Faith are false.

2. These Propositions, the best of which are doubtful, the rest manifestly
false, are made by the Council so necessary to be believed, that whosoever does
not assent to them, is eo ipso branded for an Heretic, and condemned to the
portion of Reprobates.

This one would think were evident beyond all contradiction, both by the
Anathema affixed to every Canon, and by the Declaration of Pope Pius IV. at the
end of his new Creed, viz. This is the Catholic Faith, without which no man
can be saved. Part of which Catholic Faith, is the belief of all the Decrees
and Canons of the Trent Council.

But R. H. says, That all the Canons in the Council that have Anathsma affixed,
do not enjoin assent under Anathema to the contradictory Preposition, nor make
it an Article of Faith necessary to be believed under the penalty of being
reputed an Heretic S. 186.
. How then shall we know which do? For our resolution, he gives us these rules
of Canus. When the Decree, to which such Canen relates, binds to assent with a
firma fide Credendum, -- hoc est dogma fidei Catholicae -- Contrarium
asserentes (or tenentes) judicentur pro Haereticis, or some other equivalent
expression: Or when the Canon runs, Siquis hoc senserit, Anathema sit Ibid.
. Since he has referred us to Canus, let Canus be Judge; provided those other
words and Rules in Canus, which he has unsaithfully omitted, may be supplied.
And

1. The first Rule Canus gives, by which we may know that a Decree is de side,
is this, (which he says is manifest) If those who assert the contrary, are
judged to be Heretics Prima, and ea quidem manifesta, si contrarium asserentes
judicentur pro Haereticis, Locor. Theolog. l. 5. c. 5. qu. 4.
. Now in the close of the Doctrine of Penance, and Extreme Unction, the Synod
for ever damns and Anathematizes those, who assert the contrary Asserentes
contrarium perpetuo damnat and Anthematizat. Sess. 14.
; that is, judges them to be Heretics. And in the conclusion of the Doctrine
concerning Matrimony, the Synod decrees the following Anathematisms expressly
against Heretics -- Hos in ipsos Haereticos, eorumque errores decernens
Anathematismos.
. And therefore by this Rule, the contradictory to every one of those
Propositions which are anathematized in the Thirteen Canons concerning
Penitence, the Four concerning Extreme Unction, and the Twelve concerning
Matrimony, is an Article of Faith necessary to be believed, under the Penalty
of being reputed an Heretic: Such for instance are these,

That Penance, Extreme Unction, and Matrimony, are truly and properly
Sacraments.
That no Man can be saved who does not confess to a Priest, those circumstances
of Mortal Sin which change the kind.
That Matrimony consers Grace.
2. It is a Decree of Faith, when the Canon runs in this form. If any Man
thinks this or that, let him be accursed Siquis hoc aut illud senserit,
Anathema sit. Canus ubi supra.
. As by this Rule the far greater part of the Propositions defined by the
Council, are made no Articles of Faith; so those which are made such, are none
of the unquestionable Verities, but as much disputed as any. For if I mistake
not, this word senserit is but twice used by the Council in this Matter, viz.
Sess. 5. Chap. 5. This Concupiscence which the Apostle sometimes calls sin, the
holy Synod declares, the Catholic Church has never understood to be called
Sin, because it is truly and properly Sin in the Regenerate; but because it
proceeds from Sin, and inclines to Sin. But if any Man shall think the
contrary, let him be Anathema Hanc Concupiscentiam, quam aliquando Apostolus
peccatum appellat, sancta Synodus declarat Ecclesiam Catholicam nunquam
intellexisse peccatum appellari, quod vere and proprie in renatis peccatum sit;
sed quia ex peccato est, and ad peccatum inclinat. Siquis autem contrarium
senserit anathema sit.
. And Sess. 25. after the Decrees concerning the Intercession and Invocation of
Saints, the Veneration of Images and of Relics, it is added, If any Man shall
teach or think contrary to these Decrees, let him be Anathema Siquis autem his
decretis contraria docuerit aut senserit Anathema sit.
.

However by this Rule, all those Propositions are condemned as Heretical, which
are contrary to those Decrees of the Twenty Fifth Session, and to the latter
part of the Fifth Chapter of the Fifth Session, such (among many others) are
these,

That Concupiscence is truly and properly Sin.
That it is repugnant to the Word of God, to pray to the Saints with Mental as
well as Vocal Prayer.
And the contrary to these made necessary Points of Faith.

3. Another Rule laid down by Canus, by which it may be known, that a Decree
contains Matter of Faith necessary to be believed, is this. If the Sentence of
Excommunication be passed upon those who shall contradict (or speak against it)
Tertia est, si in eos qui contradixerint (not contra senserint)
Excommunicationis sententia ipso jure feratur. ibid.
. Now by this Rule, not only all those disputable and false propositions before
mentioned, but almost all the Doctrines defined by the Council, are made
Articles of Faith necessary to be believed; because an Anathema is denounced,
not only against those who shall teach or preach, or in public dispute, defend
the contrary Propositions, or say that the Church has erred in defining them;
but against those who shall but barely say the contrary to any of them.

And is it not strange, that R. H. should overlook this Rule? But he is to be
excused, because his design was to put a favorable gloss upon this odious part
of the Council: Or we may charitably suppose, that the sight of so many
terrible Anathema's, put him into such a Fright, that he forgot himself.

4. The first part of the Fourth Rule, teaches that Doctrine to be necessary,
concerning which it is expressly said, That it is firmly to be believed by all
the Faithful Quarta, si quicquam express and proprie a fidelibus firmiter
credendum, aut tanquam dogma Fidei Catholicae accipiendum dicatur, vel aliis
similibus verbis aliquid esse Evangelio doctrinaeve Apostolorum contrarium.
ibid.
. By which Rule the whole Doctrine of Justification, Sess. 6. will be found to
be de Fide; because the Synod says, Except a Man do faithfully and firmly
receive it, he cannot be justified -- Post hanc Catholicam de Justificatione
Doctrinam, quam nisi quisque fideliter, firmiterque receperit, justificari non
poterit.
. And the last Clause of this Rule is of such latitude, (viz. by other like
words something be said to be contrary to the Gospel, or the Doctrine of the
Apostles) that it may be extended to almost all the Doctrinal Decrees.

There is another note proposed by Canus, before these Four already mentioned,
which is of such large extent, that there are very few, if any of the
Definitions of Trent, that will not fall within the compass of it. It Is in
short this,

5. The Doctrine of Conncils if proposed to the whole Church, if proposed also
with an Obligation of believing it, is a necessary point of Faith Itaque
summorum Pontificum, Conciliorumque doctrina, si toti Ecclesiae proponatur, si
cum obligatione etiam credendi proponatur, tum vero de fidei causa Judicium est.
. Now I think no Doctrine defined by the Council of Trent, is limited to any
particular Church; or that any one can be named, which a Romanist will say, is
not proposed to the Church Universal; in like manner as the Council expressly
proposes those of Sess. 14. to be believed and held of all Christians Haec sunt
quae de Poenitentiae and extremae Unctionis Sacramentis haec Sancta Oecumenica
Synodus profitetur and docet, atque omnibus Christi Fidelibus credenda and
tenenda proponit.
. And that the Synod intended (what in them lay) to oblige all those to whom
they were proposed, to believe them, is manifest by those Curses it thunders
out against all those who shall dare to contradict them.

I think it is now evident, That by Canus his Rules, all the Canons of the
Council of Trent, in which Persons are Anathematized barely for affirming or
denying such or such a Proposition, do enjoin assent under Anathema to the
contradictory Proposition.

I need not insist upon what R. H. quotes to the same purpose out of
Bellarmine; not only because he himself says, it is much what the same; but
because Bellarmine himself speaks doubtfully of it, and dares not trust to it.
For after he has told us, what words a Council uses when a Decree is proposed
as a matter of Faith, he concludes, When they say none of these things, it is
not certain that it is a matter of Faith Quando autem nihil horum dicunt, non
est certum, rem esse de fide. De Council. l. a. c. 12.
. It is certain it seems, that it is, when a Council uses such words; but it
not certain that it is not, when it does not use them.

But be it so; Yet says R. H. Cap. 11.. 192.
, The contrary to such Propositions, the maintainers whereof, are Anathematized
as Heretics, is not hereby made by the Council an Article of Faith, in such a
sense. 1. As if it were made a Divine truth now, which was not so formerly. The
Council was Modest, in not assuming to it self a power of making Divine Truths.
But in case they were not Divine Truths sormerly, and by consequence they are
not such now; (in that the Council did not make those Divine Truths which were
not such formerly), did it not arrogate a little too much, in obliging men
under a curse, to believe them to be Divine Truths? Or 2. As such Divine Truths
were not also revealed, and declared to be so formerly, either in the same
Expressions, or in its necessary Principles. It will not, I suppose, be
pretended, as to most of the Propositions before mentioned, as false or
doubtful, that they were formerly declared Articles of Faith in the same
Expressions. It will then be well worth the knowing, what were those
Principles, those necessary Principles, in which these Articles, for instance,
were formerly declared, viz. That the Lights, Odours and Vestments used in the
Mass, are of Apostolical Tradition; That the Church of Rome is the Mother of
all Churches. Or 3. As if any such thing were now necessary explicitly to be
known, or believed absolutely ratione medii, for attaining Salvation, which was
not so formerly. Then none of the Propositions before mentioned, are now
necessary to be believed, ratione medii. Or 4. As if there might not be such a
sufficient proposal made to us of such a Point formerly, as that from this, we
had then an Obligation to believe it. If there was such a sufficient Proposal
formerly of all Points determined by the Council, how came it to pass, that
many of them were not known to be Divine Truths; no, not by those Persons who
could not be ignorant of such a Proposal, if any such had been? I mean the most
Learned Men of that Church; not those who were suspected to have too much
kindness for Heretics, viz. Erasmus, Cassander, Wicelius, etc. but the
stoutest Champions of the Papacy, and those of highest Authority in that
Church, next to the Pope himself; such as Cardinal Cajetan, who not long before
the Council, taught things plainly contrary to diverse of the Trent Decrees. Or
5. As if the Ignorance of such Point before the Definition of a Council, might
not be some loss in order to our Salvation. Some loss! A man then it seems
might have been saved, who held the contrary, yet so as by fire. That Sin
therefore, which was but Venial before the Definition of the Council, became
Mortal after it. Another new Article, which the Council forgot to define.

But if not in this, nor that, nor the other sense, in what sense at last, after
all these Limitations and Exceptions, are these Points made, by the Councils
defining them, Articles of Faith? Why, in no sense; for they were Articles of
Faith before; the only difference is, that they were then less necessary, now
more necessary to be believed: For by the Councils desining them, they are made
necessary to be believed in some degree of necessity, wherein they were not
before R. H. S. 192.
. But till it be proved, that they were necessary to be believed before, by
some better Argument, than barely saying so, we shall hardly be persuaded that
they are more necessary to be believed since.

But how comes it to be more necessary now than formerly, to believe these new
old Articles? By reason of a more evident Proposal of them, when the Council
(whose Judgment we are bound to believe and submit to) declares them to be
Divine Truths Ibid.
. But how come we to be bound to believe and submit to the Judgment of the
Council of Trent? Was it a Council of the Catholic Church? No, but of the
Roman Church only. Does the Church of England owe any Subjection to the Church
of Rome? No, that Church had never any Dominion over her, but what was Usurpt.
Had the Church of England any Representatives in the Council? No, in the
Catalogue of the Bishops, one British Bishop is mentioned, (viz. Tho. Goduclus,
Bishop of St. Asaph) but he had no Commission from this Church. Have the
Decrees and Canons of the Council been since received by the Church of England?
No. Will it not then be a hard matter to prove, that the Members of this Church
are bound to submit to the Judgment of this Council? And yet we shall readily
submit to it; First, In case it be once proved, (which this Author supposes,
and takes for granted) that this Council was Infallible. Or 2 ly, Supposing it
has erred, (which is most notorious) That it is our Duty to assent to its
Errors as Divine Truths.

What he says afterward of the obligation that lies upon us from the Definition
of the Church R. H. S. 193.
, is the same thing repeated; because by the Church, he means no more than the
Roman Church assembled at Trent: And therefore the Church of England in not
submitting to her, is no way defective in her Duty of Obedience, because she
owes no obedience to her.

But are not the Points themselves defined, such as require our acceptance?
Because they are such as are some way profitable to our Salvation, some way
advantageous to Gods Glory, some way conducible to Christian Edification, to
the Peace of the Church, etc. Ibid.
. I wish he had told us what way: for it is hard to conceive, that it is any
way more profitable to our Salvation, to believe with the Council of Trent,
that Concupiscence is not Sin, than to believe with St. Paul that it is Romans 7.
7.
. That it is any way more advantageous to Gods Glory, to believe with the
Council, that there is no Divine Precept for the Laity to receive the Eucharist
in both Kinds Sess. 21. Cap. 1.
, than to believe with Pope Gelasius, that it is Sacrilege to divide that
Mystery De Consecrat. Did. 2. c. 12.
. That it is any way more conducible to Christian Edification, to believe that
the Books of Maccabees are Canonical, than to believe with Pope Gregory the
Great, that they are not Greg. Moral. Expos. in Job l. 19. c. 17.
. That it is any way more Subservient to the Peace of the Church, to believe
that the Church of Rome is the Mother of all Churches, than to believe with the
second General Council, that Jerusalem is (...), Council, Constantinop. ^ Epist.
Episcop.
.

I shall not insist upon the Bull of Pius IV. by which all men are excluded
from Salvation, who do not assent not only to all matters defined, and declared
by the Council of Trent; but by other General Councils; because, what I
undertook is already so fully proved, that it needs no additional Evidence. It
may suffice to make three brief Remarks upon R. H's. Discourse in Vindication
of it, in his four next Sections.

1. In that he says, The Clause (haec est Fides Catholica extra quam nemo
Salvus) is a Declaration of the Pope, and can have no more Authority than other
Papal Decrees S. 194.
. Thereby plainly intimating that a Papal Decree is of less Authority than that
of a general Council; What can be said more absurd, when spoken with respect to
the Council of Trent? Since this Council did not only again and again expressly
own the Pope for their Lord; -- Decrevit integrum negotium ad Sanctissimum
Dominum nostrum esse referendum. Decret. Super Pet. Concess. Calicis Sess. 22.
but did also humbly Petition him, that he would vouchsafe to confirm their
Decrees In Decreto de fine Concilii. Qua propter nos Johannes Cardinalis
Moronus. and Ludovicus Cardinalis, Simoneta -- humiliter petimus nomine dicti
Concilii Oecumenici Tridentini, ut sanctitas vestra dignetur confirmare omnia
and singula, quae tam sub. fell. rec. Paulo iii. and Julio iii. quam sub
Sanctitate Vestra in eo decreta and definita sunt. Confirmat Concilii.
, and many other ways acknowledge his Superiority over them, as will afterward
more fully appear.

2. He says, Whatever Profession of Faith is made in the Bull, it concerns
not any Person, save those who enter into Religious Orders, or into some
Ecclesiastical Benefice c. 11.. 194.
. It concerns not any save them to make this Profession; but the Faith
professed, so far concerns all, that (if the Pope do not err) no Man can be
saved without it. And one part of this Faith is an assent to all the
Definitions of the Trent Council: For the words are these, All other things
likewise do I undoubtedly receive and profess, which are delivered, defined,
and declared by the Sacred Canons and general Councils, and especially by the
holy Council of Trent. Then it follows, This true Catholic Faith without which
no Man can be saved, which at this time I willingly profess, etc. Caetera item
omnia a sacris Canonibus, and Oecumenicis Conciliis, ac praecipue a sacrosancta
Tridentina Synodo tradita, definita and declarata indubitanter recipio atque
profiteor; simulque contraria omnia, atque haereses quascunque ab Ecclesia
damnatus and rejectas and anathematizatas, Ego pariter damno, rejicio and
anathematizo. Hanc veram Catholicam fidem, extra quam nemo salvus esse potest,
etc.
So that the Faith professed concerns every Person, as much as his Salvation
does; though making a Profession of it in the Solemn form here prescribed,
concerns Churchmen only.

3. He adds, These Persons are not therein obliged to believe the Articles or
Canons of Trent, in any other sense than that which we have but now mentioned
195 n. 1.
. That is, in any other sense than that which is false; as has been already
showed in my Reflections upon 192.

And for that Clause of the Bull (haec vera Catholica fides extra quam nemo
salvus esse potest) if we take it in that limited sense, which R. H. himself
contends for, viz. That no Person can be saved, who opposes or denies assent
to any point therein, when sufficiently evdenced to him, to be a Definition of
the Church ibid.
; this absurdity unavoidably follows, viz. That no Man to whom it is
sufficiently evidenced, That the Councils of Constance Sess. 4. and 5.
and Basil Sess. 2.
, defined a general Council to be above the Pope; and the Councils of Florence
Sess. 25.
and Lateran V. Sess. 11.
defined the Pope to be above a General Council: That the Sixth General Council
declared Marriage to be dissolved by Heresy, Can. 72.
and the Council of Trent declared the contrary, Sess. 24. Can. 5.
can be saved unless he assent to these Contradictions. Which we confess it
would be our Duty to do, in case he had once proved that these Councils were
all infallible; which he can never attempt with any success, till he has first
proved, that both parts of a Contradiction may be true.

As a Confirmation of his foregoing Discourse, he adds in the next Section;
That the most or chiefest of the Protestant Controversies defined or made de
Fide in the Council of Trent, were made so by former Councils of equal
Obligation; or also were contained in the public Liturges of the Catholic
Church 198.
. By former Councils of equal Obligation, he can mean no less than General
Councils, or such at least as the Church of Rome calls so. Now we freely grant
without his asking, that many of the Romish Errors both in Doctrine and
Worship, were defined and made de Fide by such preceding Councils; such are
those I have before mentioned, not as first defined, but as confirmed by the
Council of Trent. So that setting aside all those which were aded by Pius IV.
and the Trent Fathers, we desire no more to justify the Reformation made
before that Council assembled: But as the Reformation was necessary before, so
(to use the words of our Author) it became necessary afterward in a new degree
of necessity, by reason of those new Errors defined by the Council. For how
many soever the other Protestant Controversies were, defined by former
Councils; not so much as one of those, I have before instanced in, was so
defined. There are no more than three of them, that can be supposed to be
comprehended in the Catalogue R. H. has given us of the Controversies before
defined: 1. That of the Canon of Scripture. 2. That of Confession to a Priest
as necessary by the Law of God. 3. That of the true and proper Sacrifice of the
Mass.

The First of these, he says, was declared by the Council of Florence. But
that is a Cheat first imposed upon the World by Caranza, who mentions this in
Pope Eugenius's Decree given to the Armenians Summa Council: p. 873, 874. Edit.
Rothomag. 1633.
.

2. The great Lateran Council did, I grant, enjoin Confession to a Priest once
a year; but not from the Obligation of any Divine Law, that was the Invention
of the Council of Trent.

3. He could, it seems, find no Decree of any foregoing Council, for the
Sacrifice of the Mass; but he has found something else, which he has put in
its room, as if it were of as good Authority, though in plain contradiction to
what he asserts about half a Page after; where he tells us, that the
Definitions of Councils only requires submittance. But what says he for the
Sacrifice of the Mass? It is, he says, apparent in the Liturgies of the Church
preceding the Council of Trent. Is it so? and so is the story of the Seven
Sleepers Breviarium ad usum Eccles. Sarisburiens.
, and many more which are fit for nothing, but to move Indignation or Laughter.
And are these all Articles of Faith too? But if all Matters delivered in the
Liturgies of the Church before the Council of Trent, were Matters of Faith; how
came the Trent Fathers to think it necessary to correct many things in their
Missal and Breviary? And how many Articles of Faith are now lost, by being left
out of the reformed Breviary of Pope Pius V. so that how much soever we owe
them for their new Articles, we are little beholding to them for robbing us of
so many old; and those some of them very pleasant ones. And yet the loss is the
less, because they were such, as they themselves were ashamed any longer to own
to the world.

And yet after all, it is to be considered, That a Sacrifice is one thing, and
a true and proper Sacrifice is another. As the Church of England, and, I
suppose, every other Protestant Church asserts a Sacrifice; so, I fear, no
Liturgy of the Church of Rome can be-produced, preceding the Council of Trent,
in which it is called a true and proper Sacrifice.

But R. H. will say, What need of Proof, when this is no more than what seems
to be acknowledged by Bishop Bramhall, S. 198.
. It would be hard, if after the Romish Artillery is defeated, we should at
last be beaten with our own Weapons. But let us hear the Bishop's words. These
very Points, says he, which Pope Pius IV. comprehended in a new Symbol or
Creed, were obtruded upon us before by his Predecessors, as necessary Articles
of the Roman Faith. This is the only difference, that Pius IV. dealt in gross,
his Predecessors by retail; they fashioned the several rods, and he bound them
up into a bundle. Tom. 1. Disc. 3. p. 222.
And what then? These Points were obtruded upon us before by Pope Pius 's
Predecessors, therefore they were defined by former General Councils. Where
lies the consequence? Were General Councils, Pope Pius his Predecessors? Or
were the Popes (his Predecessors) general Councils? But be it so, that Popes
only, and not Councils, were his Predecessors; yet by the help of an (i. e.)
those rods which were fashioned by Popes, were fashioned by Councils too; For
they (viz. the Popes) fashioned the rods, i. e. in the Synods held in the
Church before Luthers appearance R. H. c. 11. S. 198.
; As if the Pope had not authority to make a rod without a Synod.
Notwithstanding the good service this Author has done his Holiness here in
England, were he at Rome, he would be whipped for his pains with a Rod of the
Popes own making, for derogating so much from his Authority, in setting a Synod
above him. And yet after all, I think no Romanist will be able to produce any
General Council before Luthers time, in which any one of those Rods, I have
before mentioned, was fashioned by the Pope.

But, The Protestants who accuse, seem as guilty R. H. S. 199.
. In that the Protestants seem as guilty, it is confessed that the Council of
Trent is really guilty. The Protestants perhaps seem as guilty to him; that
they but seem so, will easily be made appear. For whatever new Definitions the
Protestants have made in opposition to the new Romish Errors, they do not make
them such neeessary Articles of their Faith, as that without the belief of
them, no man can be saved. There is nothing in all this Section, nor in all his
tedious Discourse upon this subject in another place Disc. 3. c. 7.
, that looks toward the proof of this, except this passage; As the Roman Church
does anathematize those, who affirm the contrary to her Articles to be true; so
does the Church of England, in the Synod held under King James, 1603. Can 5.
excommunicate those that affirm any of her Articles to be erroneous. How
unfaithfully is this represented! does the Church of Rome anathematize those
only who affirm the contrary to her Articles to be true? Does she not also
expressly anathematize those who think the contrary to several of them Sess. 5.
c. 5. Sess. 25. c. 2.
? and that in Points, not only denied by Protestants, but by some of her own
Children? Yea, does she not make all those Propositions, Articles of her Faith
necessary to be believed, which are contrary to those propositions to which in
the Canons an Anathema is affixed? (as has been already proved out of Canus,
whom our Author has made Judge of this Controversy) Yea, does not he himself
tell us again and again, That any man who denies Assent to any Point when
sufficiently evidenced to him to be a Definition of the Church, is guilty of
such a sin, which unrepented of, ruins Salvation Considerat. S. 192. 194. Disc.
3. S 81. n. 4, 5, 6.
? He says indeed, not because it is in it self, for the matter, necessary to be
believed; but because it is defined by the Church, which is infallibly
assisted. But does not this render the Tyranny of the Roman Church, so much the
more intolerable, unless he also prove, that she is in all her Definitions so
infallibly assisted? Which if he once do, no Protestant, I presume, will ever
again call in question any of her Proposals.

But now the Church of England does not require any man to believe that all her
decisions, contrary to those of Rome, are necessary Points of Faith; She
censures no man for thinking, but only for speaking or acting; and not for
saying, That all her Doctrine is not infallibly true, but that any part of it
is false; She excommunicates those only, who affirm, that her Articles are
erroneous. But now what a wide difference is there, between not saying that
they are erroneous, and saying, that they are necessary; ten thousand
Propositions may be true, which are no necessary Points of Faith.

This is yet further evident, by the subscription required of those who are
admitted to holy Orders, or to any Ecclesiastical Benefice. What is it they
subscribe to? That the Book of Common Prayer was composed by men infallibly
assisted? That the 39 Articles are as necessary as the Apostles Creed? No. But
1. That the Book of Common Prayer, and of ordering of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, contains in it nothing contrary to the word of God, and that it may
lawfully be used Can. 36. Art. 2, 3.
Can a thing be spoken with greater Modesty? In what a different style does the
Council of Trent speak of the Canon of the Mass? The sacred Canon is so free
from all error, that nothing is contained in it, that does not in the highest
degree savor of Holiness -- Ita ab omni errore purum, ut nihil in eo
contineatur, quod non maxim sanctitatem, ac pietatem quandam redoleat. Sess.
22. c. 4.
. 2. That he allows the book of Articles of Religion (allows only); and
that he acknowledges all and every the Articles therein contained to be
agreeable to the word of God Ibid.
; And every thing is agreeable to the Word of God, that is no way contrary to
it; and so thousands of Propositions, which are far enough remote from being
Articles of Faith.

But now in what a lofty strain does the Subscription to Pius's Creed run? All
things delivered, defined and declared by Sacred Canons, Universal Councils,
and especially by the Council of Trent, I undoubtedly receive and confess; and
withal I Condemn, Reject and Accurse all things contrary, and all Heresies
whatsoever, condemned, rejected and accursed by the Church. This true Catholic
Faith, without which no man can be saved, which at present I freely prosess,
and truly hold, I the same N. do Promise, Vow and Swear, most constantly to
retain and confess entire and inviolate to the last gasp; and to take care to
the uttermost of my Power, that it be Held, Taught and Preached by those that
are under me, or such as I shall have charge over in my Office Bulla super
forma Jurament Profes. Fidei.
.

Again, Can. 6. of the Synod held under Charles I. Anno 1640. the form of
Subscription runs thus, I A. B. do Swear, that I do approve, and sincerely
acknowledge the Doctrine and Discipline established in the Church of England, as
containing all things necessary to Salvation. Not that all things contained in
them, are necessary to Salvation; but that all things necessary to Salvation
are contained in them. By what has been said, it plainly appears, That there
are other main differences between the two Churches, in making new Definitions,
and requiring assent to them, besides those mentioned by R. H. 201.
. And it might as easily have been showed, That those very differences are by
him not fairly represented.

I have, I think, sufficiently proved, That the Council of Trent, instead of
making any Reformation in Faith and Worship, did on the contrary, not only
confirm these Corruptions it found, but superadded many to them.

2. Nor did it only cause a greater Deformity in Faith and Worship, but in
Discipline too. This will be evident, by showing these two things: 1. What
Corruptions in Discipline were strengthened and confirmed by it. 2. What were
created, or introduced anew.

1. What Corruptions in Discipline were strengthened and confirmed by it. Not
that I intend a complete Enumeration of Particulars, (that would be too tedious
a Work) but only to mention some of the greater, and so comprehensive of
mischief, that as long as they remain, it is in vain to hope for any good
Reformation in Discipline.

1. The Popes Absolute Supremacy, or his Superiority over a General Council
(which tho a point of Doctrine, is the chief point of Discipline too). I grant
what R. H. says, That this passed not from the Council as any Decree 155.
. But if the Council be Infallible, Is it not the same thing to acknowledge,
That he has the Administration of the Universal Church, as they expressly do in
one of their Decrees Sess. 25. c. 1. de Reformat. general.
? But, suppose there was not a word in any Decree that looked this way; is it
not enough that their Actions loudly declared it? Did they not in all cases
consult his Holiness as their Oracle? Was any thing almost treated of without
his Direction? Was any thing determined without his leave? Did they not submit
all their Decrees to him, to be either dispensed with, or interpreted to what
sense he pleased? Does not the whole Conduct of the Council from the beginning
to the end speak his Superiority? Was it not convened, continued, translated,
suspended, dissolved by the Popes command? In a word, did they not in all
things behave themselves toward him, as their Lord and Master? And is not a
constant Tenor of Actions, a more real owning of his Supremacy, than the
largest Recognition in Words only? Does not the Representative of the Nation
more effectually acknowledge the Kings Sovereignty, by coming and going at his
command; by acting, or suspending their acting, as he directs; by submitting
all their Resolves to him, and acknowleding that whatsoever they do, is of no
force unless confirmed by him; than by barely saying a thousand times over,
That he is their Sovereign Lord See Jur. Reflections on Councils, Review of the
Counc. of Tr. l. 4. c. 1.
?

But there is no need of reasoning for the proof of this; since Cardinal
Pallavicino tells us in one place, That the Fathers of the Council did not so
much as call it into question De hac autem absoluta Jurisdictione Pontificis
tanquam Ecclesiae gubernandae necessaria, ^epius abunde differ^^imus. Neque
Concilii Patres id in Controversiam ^adduxerunt, etc. Hist. Council. Trident. l.
9. c. 16. n. 4.
. And in another, That nine parts of ten were for the Popes Prerogative above a
Council l. 24. c. 14. n 12.
.

2. The Exemption of Ecclesiastics from the Jurisdiction of Temporal Princes.
This Immunity the Council tells us, is by the appointment of God; and therefore
Decrees and Commands, That the Sacred Conons, and all General Councils, and
other Papal Constitutions in favor of Ecclesiastical Persons, and the Liberty
of the Church (all which by this present Decree it renews) ought to be exactly
observed by all men Sess 25. Cap. 20.
.

Now the Immunities of the Clergy, which are said to be established by General
Councils, and Papal Constitutions, are these, and such like: That they take no
Oath of Allegiance to their Prince Council. Lateran. sub Innocent. III. Can. 43.
. That they be not cited for any Crime, before any Secular Judge Bulla Pauli
III. Idibus Aprilis, 1536.
. That they pay no manner of Taxes, without the Popes leave Council. Lateran. c.
46.
. In a word, That they are not subject to the King, but the King ought to be
subject to them, according to the Decretal of the same Pope Innocent III.
Decretal. l. 1. Tit. 33. Cap. 6.
. And is not that Church like to be well governed, and kept in excellent order,
where so numerous and considerable a Body of men, as the Clergy, own no
Subjection to, or dependence upon their Prince?

3. Another great Abuse confirmed by this Council, is the Excommunicating of
Princes, and depriving them of their Dominions. It Decrees, That the Emperor,
Kings, Dukes, Princes, Marquesses, Earls, and all Temporal Lords, of what Title
soever, who shall grant a place for Duelling in their Dominions among
Christians, shall eo ipso, be Excommunicated, and Deprived of the Jurisdiction
and Dominion of the City, Castle or Place, where such a Duel was permitted, if
they were held in Fee from the Church; but if from others, then they shall
escheat to their Principal Lords Sess. 25. cap. 19.
. All Princes whatsoever (Sovereigns not excepted) are excommunicated; all
Feudatary Princes are moreover deprived of the Dominion of the Place where the
Duel is fought.

But we shall more fully understand what Liberty this Council has taken to
Excommunicate Princes, if we consult some of those General Councils and Papal
Constitutions, which in favor of Churchmen it renews and confirms. Pope
Bonisace VIII. Excommunicates by his Decretal, Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Counts,
Barons, and all other of whatsoever Preeminence, Condition or State, that shall
impose any Collection, Taxes, Tenths, etc. upon Churchmen, without the Popes
leave; together with all Ecclesiastical Persons that shall pay them Decretal.
6. l. 3. Tit. 23. cap. Clericis Laicos.
. Which Decree, tho as to some intents revoked by Clement V. Clementin. l. 5.
Tit. 17 cap. Quoniam
, was entirely renewed by Leo X. in the fifth Lateran Council Sess. 9.
. And Clement V. in the room of it, renewed two other Decrees more ancient: One
of Pope Alexander III. the other of Pope Innocent III. which tho in some
matters less Scandalous, yet as to the point I am now upon, were in effect the
same. That of Innocent was passed in the great Lateran Council, in which were
Twelve hundred Fathers, and by it, not only Consuls and Governors of Cities,
but others also, who shall presume to burden Ecclesiastics with Tolls, Taxes,
etc. are excommunicated Council. Lat. Sub. Innocent. III Can. 46. Decretal. l.
3. Tit. 49. c. 7.
. And that the word others, extends to Kings and Princes, we are taught by no
less Authority than the fifth Lateran Council Sess. 9.
, which is another of those which the Council of Trent commands to be observed:
Now this Lateran Council having promised, That no Power is either by Divine or
Human Laws given to Laymen over Churchmen; it innovates all the Constitutions
of foregoing Popes, made in favor of Ecclesiastical Liberty, and inforces all
the Penalties contained in Bulla Caenae Domini: And particularly it
Excommunicates Kings and Princes, who shall impose any Taxes upon Churchmen, or
receive any from them, tho they pay them willingly Ibid.
.

I might instance in many more, but it is needless in a matter so notorious.
The Bulla Coenoe Domini, as it was published by Paul III. (without those
Additions which have been since made) is it self alone an irrefragable Evidence
of the Judgment of this Council, as to the excommunicating of Kings: For in
that Bull, all secular Powers are excommunicated, who call any Ecclesiastical
Persons to their Tribunals, Courts, etc. Bulla Pauli III. Idib Apr. 1536.
Bullarii Rom Tom. 2.
. And this Bull was published before the Convocation the Trent Council, and
twenty seven years before the Decree mentioned was made by the Council, and
therefore was confirmed by it: And if any Prince stands a year excommunicated,
he is judged a Schismatic and Heretic; and what punishment he is then liable
to, I need not tell you.

4. Another gross Abuse confirmed by this Council, is giving the Pope the
Election into Bishoprics in foreign Dominions. As the form of Examination of
Persons fit to govern the Churches in every Province, is to be approved by the
Pope; so when the Examination is finished, it is to be reduced into a public
Instrument, and sent to him, to be examined by four Cardinals, and proposed in
Consistory; that his Holiness having full knowledge of the whole matter, and of
the Persons, if by the Examination and Inquisition made, they shall be found
fit, he may out of them profitably provide for the Churches Sess. 24. Cap 1.
.

5. The reserving of all such weighty criminal causes of Bishops, as deserve
Deposition and Deprivation, to the Popes Cognizance and Decision. And if the
Cause be such, as it must necessarily be tried out of the Court of Rome, that
it be committed to none, except such Metropolitans and Bishops as the Pope
shall choose: But that the Commission be special, and sealed with the Popes own
Seal, and that he never give them any more Power, than barely to take
Instruction of matter of Fact, and to make the Process, which they shall
forthwith send to the Pope; the definitive Sentence being reserved to his
Holiness Sess. 24. Cap. 5.
. Now as this, and the Abuse next foregoing, are both intolerable Usurpations
upon the Rights of Princes; so they make the Bishops in the whole Christian
Church, entirely dependent on the Pope; He may set them up, and pull them down
at his Pleasure. And is not the Universal Church like to be well governed, when
all the Bishops are at the Popes beck?

6. The Exemptions of Monastic Orders from the Jurisdiction of Bishops. This
Abuse had been complained of long before, as the great bane of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and the chief cause of the lewd and scandalous Lives of the Monks;
and the Reformation of it was demanded of the Council by the Emperors
Ambassadors Soav. p. 513.
. And what did the Council do in order to the removal of this grand Abuse? Did
they abolish all Exemptions already granted, and forbid the granting of any
more for the future? No, they ordained indeed, That no Secular Clerk, nor
Regular, dwelling out of his Monestry, should be exempted (if he offended) from
being visited, punished and corrected by the Ordinary of the place, As Delegate
of the Apostolic See Sess. 6. cap. 3.
. That the Chapters of Cathedrals, and other greater Churches, by no
Exemptions, Customs, Oaths, or Agreements, should be freed from being visited
and corrected by their Bishops, and other greater Prelates, by Apostolical
Authority Sess 6. c. 4.
. That the Ordinary of the place, shall every year by the Apostolical
Authority, visit all Churches, however exempted Sess. 7. cap. 8.
. That all Secular Clerks notwithstanding any Exemptions, Declarations,
Customs, Oaths, Agreements, shall as often as there is need, be corrected and
chastized for their Excesses and Faults, by the Bishops resident in their
Churches, as Delegates of the Apostolic See Sess. 14. cap. 4.
. That the Monastries held in Commendam, the Abbeys, Priories, etc. not tied to
a Regular observance, shall be visited by the Bishops, as Delegates of the
Apostolic See Sess. 21. cap. 8.
. But for those Monasteries and other Religious houses, in which they are tied
to Regular Observance, the Bishops shall provide by Paternal Admonition, that
the Superiors observe their Regular Constitutions, and cause them to be
observed by those that are under them; and if within six months after
Admonition, they do not visit and correct them, then the Bishops, as Delegates
of the Apostolic See, may proceed to Visitation and Correction.

This is (as I take it) the sum of what the Council has decreed concerning
Exemptions. In which observe, 1. That the Bishops have nothing to do with any
Regulars of what Order soever, who do not dwell out of their Religious houses,
in case their Superiors take care, that they observe the Rules of their Order:
By which, vast numbers of men are left at liberty to defy the Bishops, and to
create to them all manner of Molestation. 2. In case their Superiors neglect
their Duty, the Bishops cannot proceed to visit, till they have first
paternally admonished them; and their six months further neglect, after such
Admonition. But 3. That which I chiefly observe is; That not only no
Monasteries, whether Regular, or not Regular, but not so much as any Churches
or Chapters, are otherways subjected to the Bishops, than as they are the Popes
Delegates, they act purely by a Power derived from him, which he may therefore
either revoke, or contract at his Pleasure. A fine Sham! Are not the Bishops
highly promoted? They may now visit and correct Churches, Chapters, Colleges,
Monasteries, Abbeys, Priories, Provostships: Yes; so far, and so often as the
Pope gives them leave.

We have seen that the Trent Council was so far from making any real
Reformation in Discipline, that it not only took no effectual course for the
removal of any Abuse, but on the contrary confirmed many; and those such as
were of all others most pregnant with mischief. And yet this is not the worst;
for as it confirmed the old, so

2. It introduced many new Errors in matters of Discipline (as well as
Doctrine) by which the Popes Tyranny was enlarged, and advanced to a higher
pitch than ever. Several of which have been already mentioned, and therefore I
shall not now enlarge upon them. As

1. The Decree of Proponentibus Legatis passed in the first Sesfion under Pius
Sess. 17.
, That nothing should be proposed to be treated of in Council, but by the Popes
Legates. A Privilege never granted to any Pope, by any foregoing Council.

2. The making of all their Decrees with the Reservation of the Popes Authority
Sess. 7. and Sess. 25. cap. 21.
, (as has been before showed). Another new Prerogative conferred on his
Holiness.

3. The giving the Pope a Power to expound their Decrees (as we have also
before heard) in case any difficulty arise about the sense of them, or a
necessity of Declaration Sess. 25.
, which was never granted by any former Council. They might as well have left
it to him to make them, as they in effect did, for nothing was decreed without
first asking his leave.

4. The imposing on Provincial and Diocesan Synods an Oath of true Obedience to
the Pope Sess. 25. cap. 2.
, another new piece of Tyranny; for tho the Bishops at their Consecration
fomerly took an Oath of Fidelity to him; yet never before was any Oath imposed
upon them, when met together in Provincial and Diocesan Synods.

5. Usurping the Rights of Bishops, by making them the Pope Delegates in
matters which belong to their Ordinary Jurisdiction Episcoporum potestas non
solum non aucta, sed ex ea multum delibatum est; cum ea potestas quae ipsorum
propria est, and ex Dei instituto iis attributa, iis tanquam a sede Apostolica
delegatis concedatur, Thuan. l. 6. c. 2. Review of the Council of Trent. l. 6.
c. 2.
. Whereas anciently every Bishop governed his own Diocese, without Dependence
upon, or Subordination to the Pope; by the Laws of Trent, they can do almost
nothing, unless by Delegation from him. May Bishops provide Vicars to supply
the room of such Clergymen as are dispensed with for non-residence, and assign
them a competent Salary out of the Fruits? Not by their own Authority, but as
they are Delegates of the Apostolic See Sess. 6. cap. 2.
. May they depute Assistants to unlearned and ignorant Parish Priests? They
may, as Delegates of the Apostolic See Sess. 21. cap. 6.
. May they take upon them to Examine a Notary, and if they find him unfit,
forbid him the Exercise of his Office in Ecclesiastical matters? Yes, but as
Delegates of the Apostolic See Sess. 22. cap. 10.
. But surely in matters which belong to Visitation, and the Correction of
Manners, the Bishops may of themselves ordain and execute those things which
they judge necessary for the good of their People, and for the profit of the
Church: No, but only as Delegates of the Apostolic See Sess. 24. cap. 10.
This is the enlargement of the Bishops Power, which R. H. so much boasts of
Considerat. on the Council of Trent, c. 12. 211
.

Many more Instances of like nature might be produced, but these may suffice to
show how palpably untrue that Assertion of Pallavicino's is, viz. That there is
not so much as one Syllable in this Council for any new Emolument to the Pope
In hoc Concilio ne una quidem conspicitur syllaba pro novo Pontificis
Emolumento. Apparat. ad hist. c. 10. n. 3.
. And how unjustly the same Cardinal charges Soave with falsity for saying,
That this Council has so established the Popes Power, that it was never so
great, nor so solidly founded Ibid.
. And likewise, that R. H. had as little reason to carp at a like passage of
Dr. Stilling fleet's, viz. That which was intended to clip the Wings of the
Court of Rome, had confirmed and advanced the Interest of it Considerat. c. 12.
103.
. For as all those Decrees, that might otherwise have retrenched their
Exorbitances, were themselves so clipped by Exceptions or Restrictions, or by
some other Counter Decree, that they could effect nothing; so many other
Decrees were made, by which the Interest of the Pope and his Court were highly
promoted; particularly this last mentioned, of deriving all Jurisdiction from
the Pope, by making all other Bishops his Vicars and Commissaries. And
therefore no wonder, that his Holiness was transported with Joy, and gave
immortal Thanks, that the Council had such an happy Issue Pallav. l. 24. c. 9.
n. 5.
. For (to use the words of Du Ranchin) you shall never read of any Council that
was so much to the Popes Honor and good liking as this. Amongst so many Bulls
and Constitutions which have come forth since, you shall scarce find any which
does not make mention of this Council, which does not name it with Honor,
which does not express an earnest desire of the observation of it, and which
does not in some sort confirm it. Among all the Councils that ever were, no
compare with this for Reverence and Respect. It has quite defaced and
extinguished the memory of all the rest. It is their Minion, their Favorite,
their Champion, their Arsenal, their Bulwark, their Protector, their Creature,
and good Reason why they should make so much of it Review of the Council of
Trent, l. 1. c. 1.
.

FINIS.
AN ADVERTISEMENT Of Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THe History of the Reformation of the Church of England, by GILBERT BVRNET, D.
D. in two Volumes, Folio.

The Moderation of the Church of England, in her Reformation, in Avoiding all
undue compliances with Popery and other sorts of Fanaticisms, etc. by TIMOTHY
PVLLER, D. D. Octavo.

A Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church: more
particularly of the Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome upon other Sees; by
WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. Octavo.

An Answer to Mr. Sergeants [Sure Footing in Christianity] concerning the Rule
of Faith; with some other Discourse; by WILLIAM FALKNER, D. D. Octavo.

A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England, against the
Romanists; by GILBERT BVRNET, D. D Octavo.

The APOLOGY of the Church of England; and an Epistle to one Signior Scipio, a
Venetian Gentleman, concerning the Council of Trent. Written both in Latin, by
the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL Lord Bshop of Sarisbury. Made
English by a Person of Quality. To which is added, The Life of the said Bishop;
Collected and Written by the same Hand; Octavo.

The LETTER writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion. Together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction Translated into English, and
Examined by GILBERT BVRNET, D D. Octavo.

The Life of WILLIAM BEDEL D. D. Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland; Together with
Certain Letters which passed betwixt him and James Waddesworth (a late
Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition in Sevil in matter of Religion, concerning
the General Motives to the Roman Obedience; Quarto.

The Decree made at ROME the Second of March 1679. condemning some Opinions of
the Jesuits and other Casuists; Quarto.

A Discourse concerning the necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome; Quarto, First and Second parts.

A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue;
Quarto.

A PAPIST not Misrepresented by PROTESTANTS. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented] Quarto.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England in the several Articles
proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM [in his Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church.

An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England; Quarto.

A CATECHISM Explaining the Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome; with
an Answer thereunto, by a Protestant of the Church of England; Octavo.


