A CENSVRE UPON CERTAIN PASSAGES Contained in the HISTORY OF THE Royal
Society, As being Destructive to the ESTABLISHED RELIGION and CHURCH of ENGLAND.

Parque novum fortuna videt concurrere, Bellum
Atque virum. --
Oxford, Printed for Ric. Davis, A. D. 1670.

TO THE REVEREND Dr JOHN FELL, D. D. Dean of Christ-Church.
SIR,
I Offer these Papers unto you, not to implore your Patronage, but to
acknowledge your Favors: Had my leisure, or abilities, qualified me for a
greater performance, it had been tendered unto you with the same readiness:
This veneration I bear not to the Rank you hold in the Church, or University,
but to your Merit; and in you, I at once honor a Learning above this age, and
a Piety becoming the best: Permit me to be just to so real worth, and grateful
for your constant civilities to me, and I shall no way Interest your Person in
this Quarrel: It Is enough, that I defend Truth, and the Church of England; and
that whatever else I have achieved, I intermedled with nothing but what 'twas
necessary to be undertook by some body: This none can dispute who understands
the Politics of our Nation, and upon what foundations the public Tranquillity
is suspended: Let them that will, question the prudence of this action, I am
satisfied in the profession of a Wisdom that is first pure, and then
peaceable. I am perfectly

Your humble Servant, HENRY STUBBE.
Warwick, Feb. 16. 1669.
A Censure on certain passages in the History of the Royal Society.
It is Natural to men's minds, when they perceive others to arrogate more to
themselves, Hist. of the R. S. p. 47.
then is their share; to deny them even that which else they would confess to
be their right. And of the truth of this, we have an instance of far greater
concernment, then that which is before us. And that is in Religion it self.
For while the Bishops of Rome did assume an Infallibility, and a Sovereigne
Dominion over our Faith; the Reformed Churches did not only justly refuse to
grant them that, but some of them thought themselves obliged to forbear all
communion with them, and would not give them that respect which possibly might
belong to so ancient, and so famous a Church; and which might still have been
allowed it, without any danger of Superstition.
BEfore I come to resolve and parcel out this impious and pernicious paragraph
into several Propositions, it is requisite that I premise two Observations:
the first is, that by Communion here is not meant Civil commerce, and the
performance of those mutual offices by which societies in general, or Trading
is carried on, or Humanity alone is relieved: no Reformed Church ever denied
this to the Romanists: But the Communion here treated of is Ecclesiastical,
and consists not only in the acknowledging of such as are communicated with, to
be members of the universal Church of Christ, built upon a right foundation,
and holding either no errors, or such as do not overthrow the fundamentals;
but in resorting to the same Church assemblies, and celebrating devoutly the
same offices, or Prayers, Ceremonies, and Sacraments: and this is to be done
interchangeably, so that each (upon occasion) resort unto the Churches of the
other, and join in the celebration of the same Liturgies or public prayers,
and participatio^ of the same Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is more
particularly termed the Communion, and was always accounted the tessera or
mark of Church Fellowship. The truth of this Observation appears from that
notion which all ages have had of Church Communion, which is agreeable
hereunto: To own any number or association of men to be a part of the Church
Catholic, and yet not to resort to the same religious offices, amounts not to
Church Communion: since All Excommunication cuts not off from the body of
Christ, but from outward or exterior Communion with a visible Church: thus
when Chrysostom separated himself from the followers of Meletius, and of
Paulinus, though he did acknowledge both Churches to be Orthodox, yet is it
said that He communicated with neither. (...). Socrates Histor. Eccles. l. 6.
c. 3.
Neither does it amount to an Ecclesiastical communion if a man be present at
the religious Assemblies and offices of another Church, if so be he do it not
upon a religious account, nor devoutly join therewith: thus when Elijah was
present at the Sacrifice and worship of Baal, he did not communicate with those
Idolaters, 1 Kings 18.26, 27. Thus Lyranus, Cajetanus, and other Casuists
excuse Naaman for bowing (upon a Civil account) in the house of Rimmon; M. Fr.
Wendelin Chr. Theolog. System. May. l. 1. c. 24.
and allow the case of a Christian slave which waited on her Mistress to the
Sarracen worship, and bore up her train, but did not join in the Mohammedan
Service: thus the Protestant Divines, (as Sleidan, Council of Trent. l. 1. page
52.
and the History of the Council of Trent inform us) resolved that it was
lawful for the Protestant Princes to pay a civil attendance on the German
Emperor even at Mass in the Royal Chapel. These things therefore amount
not unto Church Communion: But the joining religiously in the same
Church-worship, Communio inter fideles, in publicis maxim pietatis exercitiis
est posita: atque hoc est optatae bonis unionis vel praecipuum coagulu^.
Casaubon. resp. ad Card. Person.
and particularly in celebrating the Lords Supper together: and this is to be
done interchangeably; for otherwise only the one side can be said to
communicate with the other: not vice versa: Thus when the Papists did resort to
our Churches in the beginning of the Reign of Qu. Elizabeth, and joined in the
same prayers, and participation of Sacraments with the Church of England, it
might justly be said, that they did hold communion with us; but since the Laws
then in force did prohibit the Protestants to be present at, or join in any
public Service (or administration of Sacraments) where other ceremonies then
what were inacted by the Church of England, 5. and 6. Edw. 6. c. 1. and 3. as
also the Act of Qu. Eliz. for Uniformity.
should be used: it is manifest that the Church of England did not communicate
with the Papists.

The second Observation is, that our Historian in this Paragraph does make use
of the words communion and respect as equipollent and Synonymous: otherwise
there is no apodosis, no sense in the saying -- Some of them thought themselves
obliged to forbear all communion with them, and would not give them that
respect, which possibly might belong to so ancient and so famous a Church. If
respect be a term of a lesser import then communion, then might those Reformed
Churches decline all Exterior communion with the Church of Rome, justly and
without blame, and yet retain a respect and kindness such as Christians may
and ought to bear to the excommunicate, to the Heathens, and Publicans; and in
which there is no danger of Superstition,; though in this Exterior communion
there be evident peril not only of Superstition, but Idolatry.

1. These things being premised, my first Animadversion shall be, That the
Comparison betwixt men denying to such as usurp too much even their due rights,
and those that separate in case of religious usurpations, is so carried on by
the Historian, that to forbear all communion with the Church, and Bishops of
Rome, is represented as an extreme opinion, and consequently as culpable,
Schismatic, and damnable. 2. Secondly, that He represents the case so, as if
some of the Reformed Churches only did forbear all Communion with them. 3.
Thirdly, That the grand occasion of the differences betwixt those of the
reformed religion, and the Papists, was that the Bishops of Rome did assume an
Infallibility, and a Sovereign dominion over our Faith. 4. Fourthly, That
notwithstanding this usurped infallibility of the Bishops of Rome, and their
assuming a sovereign dominion over our Faith; yet we may give them that
respect which possibly might belong to so ancient and famous a Church: and to
decline this, is to run into an extreme. 5. Fifthly, That the Church of Rome
according to its present establishment, and under that constitution wherein the
first Reformers found it, may be denominated a Church, Ancient, Famous; and
that upon those accounts ( for none other are mentioned) possibly there does
belong a respect unto it, or an obligation to communicate therewith. 6. Sixthly,
That such a respect or exterior communion may be entertained with Rome, and yet
we incur no danger of Superstition.
The first Proposition is Impious, Blasphemous, and Offensive to all Protestant
ears: It condemns the Reformation carried on by the Evangeliques abroad, and
in the Church of England, as culpable, guilty of an extreme; and there is so
much of Schism justly charged on us, as there is of extremity in our
procedure. It subverts all those Laws which are now in force, whereby all
Communion with Popish Offices and Sacraments (celebrated in a different way
from that of the Church of England) is prohibited to us upon penalty of being
imprisoned six months without bayl for the first offense; See also the Act for
Uniformity premised to the English Liturgy.
for the second, twelve months; and for the third, during life: upon 5 and 6
Edw. 6. cap. 1. and 3.

The second Proposition is notoriously false: there being no Reformed Church,
no not of the Lutherans, but has constantly held themselves obliged to forbear
all Communion with the modern Bishops and Church of Rome. Besides, it carries a
most dangerous insinuation in it, as if the Reformed Churches were divided upon
this point, (the contrary whereof is manifest out of the Harmony of
Confessions) so that such as abet this Popish compliance want not their
Assertors, even to the repute of most of the Reformed Churches: and such as
disclaim it, are the less considerable for number and authority, having only
the concurrence of some of the Reformed Churches. How pernicious an intimation
this is amongst ignorant persons, and such as are unacquainted with the state
of Religion (a study much out of fashion now) let any man judge, and withal
remember, that the Church of England is of the number of those reflected upon
here.

Who are they that pretend to forsake the Churches corruptions, Chillingworth
chapter 5.. 45.
and not her external Communion? Some there be that say they have not left the
Church, but only her corcorruptions: some that they have not left the
Communion, but the corruptions of it, meaning the internal communion of it, and
conjunction with it by faith and obedience: which disagree from the former
only in the manner of speaking; for he that is in the Church, is in this kind
of Communion with it; and he that is not in this internal communion, is not in
the Church. Some perhaps, that they left not your external communion in all
things; meaning, that they left it not voluntarily, being not fugitivi sed
fugati, as being willing to join with you in any act of piety, but were by you
necessitated and constrained to do so, because you would not suffer them to do
well with you, except they would do ill with you: Now to do ill that you may do
well, is against the will of God, which to every good man is an high degree of
necessity. But for such Protestants as pretend that de facto they forsook your
corruptions, and not your external communion, that is, such as pretend to
communicate with you in your Confessions, and Liturgies, and participation of
Sacraments, I cannot but doubt very much, that neither you, nor I, have ever
met with any of this condition.

Causabon'. resp. ad Card. Perron.
Postremo addit Rex, magnum se quidem crimen judicare, defectionem ab Ecclesia:
sed huic crimini affinem se esse, aut Ecclesiam suam, penitus pernegat. Non
enim fugimus, aiebat ejus Majestas, sed fugamur. Scit vero tua illustris
Dignitas, ut qui optime, quam multi, quam praestantes pietate ac doctrina viri,
ab annis minimum quingentis, Reformationem Ecclesiae in capite and membris
optarint. Quam graves bonorum Regum ac Principum quaerelae sint saepe auditae,
statum Ecclesiae suis temporibus lamentantium? Quid profuit? ^ihil enim eorum
ad hanc diem videmus esse emendatum, quae correctionis egere cum primis
censebantur. Quare non veretur Ecclesia Anglicana, ne candidis aestimatoribus,
in hac separatione, Donatistis simile quid fecisse videatur. Illi gratis and
sine ulla causa Ecclesiam Catholicam, gentium cunctarum assensu comprobatam,
cujus neque fidem, neque disciplinam culpare poterant, deseruerunt. Angli ab ea
Ecclesia, NECESSITATE DIRA COGENTE, Secessionem fecerunt, quam innumeri populi
Christiani veram, Catholicam and universalem esse non concedunt, ut
modestissime dicam: quamque in dogmatis fidei and disciplinae forma multum
variasle ab antiqua, multa assuisse nova vetustis, mala bonis, etiam e vestris
Scriptores quam plurimi ingenue dudum sunt confessi: and vero notius jam est
universo mundo, quam ut possit quisquam vel negare, vel etiam ignorare. Add
quod jugum Romanae servitutis ita durum per aliquot retro secula erat experta
Ecclesia Anglicana, novis subinde vexationibus, and inauditis angariis atque
exactionibus supra hominum fidem cruciata, ut vel illa sola causa apud Judices
non iniquos a Schismatis suspicione, and ut loquitur Augustinus de Donatistis,
iniquae discissionis, posse videatur ipsam liberare. Non enim pro^ecto Angli a
charitate fraterna animi causa dissilierunt, ut Donatistae; neque ut december
tribus populi Iudaici, metu impendentis mali, quod nondum premebat; sed post
plurium seculorum patientiam, post exantlatas inenarrabiles aerumnas, onus
intolerabile, cui ferendo pares amplius non erant, neque permittebat
conscientia, subductis cervicibus tandem excuslerunt. --

From hence, as also from our Laws, our Thirty nine Articles, and Homilies, it is
manifest that the Church of England is in the number of those that separate
from the communion of the Church and Bishops of Rome, and that for such
important reasons as justify the action from being causeless, or culpable:
though amongst all the Reasons alleged by K. James in that Letter of
Causabon's, or in our Laws, or other Controvertists, I do not find that
reckoned for any motive of that great rupture, much less for the principal or
sole one, which is represented as such by our Historian.

The third Proposition therefore carries something of prevarication in it. So
those Advocates which would betray the causes of their Clients, propose a wrong
state of the Case, the vanity whereof being once discovered, renders the
Plaintiff contemptible in the sight of all men, and reduces him to a necessity
of complying with the injured Defendant. There is a great deal of ignorance and
intricateness (the Consequent thereof) in the Proposition of our Author, as it
is by him worded: for Infallibility, I grant that Papal Infallibility (were
there such a thing) would oblige us to an assent, but not enforce us:
Sovereignty im^lies power; but Infallibility does not so.
and a sovereign Dominion over our Faith, are not equipollent Terms, nor
terms indifferently used. No Papist did ever ascribe unto the Bishop of Rome
(except some Parasitical Canonist, whose Credit is little in that Church) a
sovereign dominion over our Faith. He that is Sovereign, knows not any
Superior; nor any coercive Law, but his will; the objects about which his power
is conversant, are liable to what alterations he pleases, and he rules by the
Lex Regia: but what Divine did ever ascribe such a power to the Pope in matter
of Faith? Let a man but inquire into the Papal power, to nature and management
in Cajetan, Victor a, Panormitan, Tur^ecremata, Gerson, and others, that write
about the power of the Pope's briefs in France or Spain, etc. and he will find
that the Papacy is no Sovereignty either in matters of faith, or of lesser
importance.
Place the Chair where, and how you will, none of that Church ever assumed so
much, nor did that Church ever attribute so much to the Bishop of Rome. There
have been those that have taught, that if (by way of supposal) it could be
imagined, that all the Pastors of the Church Catholic should err in a Decree
of Faith, the Laiety were bound to submit thereunto: but such a Sovereignty in
matters of faith, none (except some Jesuits and Parasites) ascribe unto the
Pope's person; his Briefs, and Decretals have not that credit amongst the
Romanists as to authenticate such Assertions, nor is the belief thereof a
necessary condition to communicate with that Church upon. If we look upon the
contests in Germany that introduced Protestancy at first, we find the erroneous
doctrine about Indulgences to be the primary occasion there: In Switzerland,
and in France, and Holland, abuses, and Idolatrous practices, or false
Doctrines, are the first subjects of Disputes, and occasion the Reformation
there: Transubstantiation, Communion in one kind, the propitiatory sacrifice of
the Mass, Image Worship, praying to Saints, and such like Controversies, are
the first, and most fiercely debated: In England, under Henry the VIII, the
Pope's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes, and appeals to Rome etc. give the
the first occasions of discontent, and that change, which was afterward
carried on to a total Reformation of the doctrine and discipline of the Church
of England: then came in question the power of the Bishop of Rome, the nature
of his Primacy, the Authority and Fallibility of General Councels, the power of
National and provincial Churches to reform themselves during the interval of
Councels, or without dependence thereon: whether the Scripture were the sole
rule of faith, how obligatory were Traditions: the interest and influence of
the Civil Magistrate in ruling Ecclesiastical Affairs, these came next into
agitation. The usurpation of Infallibility, and a pretended Sovereignty in
matters of faith to be lodged in the Pope, It is true that long before the
Reformation, when the Guelphs and Gibellines contested, there were some,
especially Canonists, that did attribute to the Pope, and some Popes challenged
a Sovereignty over the Christian faith, to make new Creeds and Articles of
faith, even such as might contradict the old: but these were not agitated at
the Reformation, and are no more to be imputed indefinitely to the Bishops of
Rome, then the extravagant claims of some Princes are to the Monarchies they
hold.
was neither the occasion of the Protestant separation, nor a material part of
the first controversies: though perhaps some Italianated persons and Canonists
might assert some such thing; and since the growth of the Jesuits, tenets of
that nature have been much advanced, thereby to justify their Vow of blind
obedience to the Papal commands. The memory of the Councils of Basil, and
Constance, was fresh in the minds of men, See the conference betwixt Raynolds
and Heart. c. 9. divis* 4. page 582. where you will find, that before the
Reformation, the consent of the Doctors and Pastors throughout all Christendom
(except the Italian faction) had condemned the usurped Monarchy of the Pope.
The Lateran Council never gave it him; and whatever for his Supremacy (not
Infallibility) were defined or acted at Trent, yet it was opposed there; and
the Authority of that Council (together with the tenet) rejected in France at
this day without a Schism.
and the superiority of a Council above the Pope a common and authorized tenet
in that Church. The personal infallibility, and the supremacy of the Bishops of
Rome had of old received too great a check in the cases of Vigilius and
Honorius, and in the declared sentences of the Councils of Pisa, Constance,
Basil, and of the Universities of Paris, Loven, Colen, Vienna, and Cracovia,
(not to mention particular Writers) to be the occasion of that rupture. The
Sorbone to this day continues its former judgment: and even the present King of
France has asserted the liberties of the Gallick Church in that point. See
Arrest de la Cour de Parliament portant que les propositions contenues en la
declaration de la Faculte de Theology de Paris etc. Da. 30. May. 1663. And
Declaration du Roy pour l' Enregistrement des six propositions de la Faculte de
Sorbonne etc. A Paris 4. d' Aoust. 1663.

What the Popish Church now holds and requires, amounts not to any such
Authority as our Author asserts, if you will believe Cardinal Perron before our
Virtuoso. Casaubon. resp. ad Cardin. Perron.
-- Scribis de Romano Pontifice nolle te verba facere: quum vel mediocriter in
Historia Ecclesiastica versatis compertum sit, primorum seculorum Patres,
Concilia, and Imperatores Christianos, primas illi semper detulisse, and
praecellentis dignitatis praerogativam, in omnibus negotiis, ad religionem aut
Ecclesiam spectantibus: atque hoc solum exigere Ecclesiam vestram pro articulo
fidei credendum ab iis, qui communioni suae se adjungunt. -- If this Cardinal
understand any thing, the Romish Church demands no more of her Members then
that they own the Pope's primacy, not Supremacy, or Infallibility: nor have the
the books of such as derogate from the excessive greatness of the Papal power
been ever called in, or censured in that Church, or communion denied to the
Assertors of the infallibility of Oral Tradition, or of General Councils, in
opposition to the personal Infallibility of the Bishop of Rome. It was, and is
still a common opinion amongst the Papists, Fr: Victoria relect. 5. de pot.
Eccles. sect. 1.. 6.
that the Pope may be an Heretic: I learned it from Franciscus Victoria in his
Relections; Haereticus potest esse non solum Presbiter, sed Pontifex etiam
summus; ergo caput Ecclesiae. Davenant. de judice and norma fidei. cap. 21.
And Bellarmine himself does not assert the Infallibility of the Pope, no not
though He be assisted with a provincial Council. In libr. 2. de council. c. 5.
fatetur hanc propositionem, scilicet, Concilia particularia, a summo Pontifice
confirmata, in fide and moribus errare possunt, non esse fide Catholica
tenendam: ejus tamen contradictoriam temerariam and erroneam pronunciat. Nay
the same Writer in his solemn Lectures at Rome teaches, that Opinio verae est,
posse esse Haereticum.
it is true, the Pope maybe an Heretic: Probabile est, and pie credi potest,
haereticum esse non posse.
But it is probable and godly to be thought, that he cannot be an Heretic. In
the conference betwixt Dr. Raynolds and Heart, I find this passage.

Raynolds. The Pope may not only err in doctrine, See the Conference chapter 7.
divis. 2. page 236.
but also be an Heretic; which (I hope) you will not say that Peter might.


Heart. Neither by my good will that the Pope may.


Raynolds. But you must: no remedy. It is a ruled case. Your Schoolmen and
Canonists, In dialogo part. 1. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Ockam, In summa lib. 5. tit. de haereticis.
Hostiensis, sum: de Eccles. l. 2. c. 93. and 112.
Turrecremata, de Schismate Pontificum.
Zabarella, de concord. catholica. l. 2. c. 17.
Cusanus, sum: part. 3. tit. 22. c. 7.
Antoninus, adv: haereses l. 1. c. 2, and 4.
Alphonsus, locor. Theolog. l. 6. c. 8.
Canus, de visibili Monarch. l. 7.
Sanders, controv. 4. part. 2. q. 1.
Bellarmine, and Canonistae in did. 40 c. si papa. Archid: and Ioann^ Andr. c.
in fidei. de haereticis. in Sext. Cajetan. de authoritate Papae and Concilii c.
20, and 23.
others, yea the Distinct. 40. c. si Papa.
Canon Law it self, yea a Council, a Synodus Romana quint. sub Symmach^.
Roman Council, confirmed by the Pope, do grant it.


Heart. They grant that the Pope may be an Heretic perhaps by a supposal: as
many things may be, which never were, nor are, nor shall be. For you cannot
prove that any Pope ever was an Heretic actually, though possibly they may be,
whereof I will not strive.


This point of the fallibility of the Pope, and his subjection to a Council, is
so notorious with every man, that is acquainted with the more ancient and
modern Writers; so known to any one that has either read the determinations of
Bishop Davenant (qu. 5.) or the defense of the Dissuasive of Bishop Taylour
(page 40.) or the Review of the Council of Trent (written by a French
Catholic, from whom the Disswader borrowed his allegations) or that has so
much as read over the History of the Council of Trent, that I need not insist
on it any longer. Notwithstanding the earnestness of the Jesuits under Laynez
in the Council of Trent, yet neither was the Pope's superiority over a Council,
nor the Infallibility of the Bishops of Rome, defined there directly, as
appears out of the Review of that Council, lib. 4. c. 1. and out of the English
History page 721, 722. Neither is there to this day amongst the Papists any
thing enacted or determined in that Church, which obliges a man under pain of
Excommunication to hold any such thing as the personal Infallibility of the
Bishops of Rome, the contrary being daily maintained there by more than the
Iansenists; much less is there any Sovereignty in matters of Faith ascribed
unto them at this day. All books of the Papists are subjected to the judgment
of the Church, not to the Arbitrament of the Pope. The fides Carbonaria, or
Colliers faith, so famed amongst the Papists, was not established upon the
infallibility or sovereignty of the Bishops of Rome; no, he told the Devil,
that He believed as the Church believed, and the Church as He. And how
necessary soever they make the communion with the particular Church of Rome,
how great influence soever they ascribe to the Pope over Councils, yet the
Decrees of the Council of Trent run in the name of the Holy Synod, not Pope,
and there it is determined sess. 4. that none dare interpret Holy Scripturs
against the sense which our Holy Mother the Church has held, or does hold. If
you enquire in-the doctrines of Mr White, Dr Holden, Serenus Cressy, and such
others as endeavor at present (and that with great show of wit and artifices)
to seduce the English to that Apostaticall Church, there is not one of them
that I know of who attributes any infallibility to the Pope, or submits his
faith to the Sovereigne decisions of the Bishop of Rome.

As for Serenus Cressy, S. Cresseyes Exomolog. c. 51. Edit. 1.
he very judiciously deserts the School-terme of Infallibility for that of the
Churches Authority, and says that the exceptions and advantages which the
Protestants have against the Roman Church, proceed only from their
misunderstanding of her necessary doctrines, or at most, that all the efficacy
they have is only against particular opinions and inferences made by
particular Catholic writers.He shows that Dr Stapleton asserts that the
infallible voice and determination of the Church is included in the decree of
the Church speaking in a General Council representatively. Ibid. c. 52.
In which the Church is infallible with this restriction, viz: in delivering
the substance of faith, in public doctrines, and things necessary to
salvation. Other Catholics, and namely Panormitan teach that the decrees of
General Council are not absolutely and necessarily to be acknowledged
infallible, till they be received by all particular Catholic Churches:
because till then they cannot properly be called the faith of the universal
Church, or of the body of all faithful Christians, to which body the promise
of infallibility is made. And this was the Doctrine of Thomas Waldensis, and
some other Scholmen, etc. An opinion this is which though not commonly
received, yet I do not (says S. C.) find it deeply censured by any: yea the
Gallican Churches reckoned this among their chiefest privileges and liberties,
that they were not obliged to the decisions of a General Council, till the
whole body of the Gallican Clergy had by a special agreement consented to
them, and so proposed them to the several Churches there. And to this last
opinion does S. C. incline; and his book was approved at Paris as consonant to
the Catholic faith: He guides himself by the Authority of received Councils:
Ibid.
he acknowledges that to be only necessarily accounted an Article of
Catholic faith, which is actually acknowledged and received by Catholics;
and since contradictions cannot be actually assented unto, it will follow that
whatsoever decisions of Councils may seem to oppose such articles, are not
necessarily to be accounted Catholic doctrines; and by consequence, not
obligatory. -- He denies that General Councils can make new articles of faith:
they are witnesses of what has been delivered, not Sovereigns to determine of
new truths, either by way of addition to the former, or in opposition
thereunto. Their Infallibility is limited to Tradition, and spiritually
assisted in the faithful reporting of what has been delivered: what ever
reports or decrees they make of another nature, they are to be received with a
different assent from what is Catholic faith. There is a double obligation
from decisions of General Councils: Ibid.
the first an obligation of Christian belief in respect of doctrines delivered
by General Councils as of universal Tradition: the second only of Canonical
obedience to orders and constitutions for practice, by which men are not bound
to believe those are enforced as from Divine authority, but only to submit
unto them as acts of a lawful Ecclesiastical power, however not to censure
them as unjust, much less to oppose and contradict them. Much more does the
same Author add which give little countenance to that state of the
controversy which our Author forms unto us: No Sovereign dominion over our
faith is by him ascribed to the Bishop of Rome, or National, or General
Coun^ills: and as to Infailibility, which Mr Chillingworth had impugned, he
thus acquits himself. I may in general say of all his Objections, Ibid. c. 59.
that since they proceed only against the word Infallibility, and that word
extended to the utmost height and latitude that it possibly can bear,
Catholics, as such, are not at all concerned in them, seeing neither is that
expression to be found in any received Council, nor did ever the Church enlarge
her authority to so vast a wideness as Mr Chillingworth either conceived, or
at least, for his particular advantage against his adversary, thought good to
make show as if he conceived so. -- As to the subject wherein Infallibility or
Authority is to be placed; since Catholics vary as to that point, he says
it is evident thereby that they are not obliged to any one part of the Question:
only they are to agree in this Tridentine decision* Ecclesiae est judicare de
vero sensu Sacrae Scripturae. It belongs to the Church to judge of the true
sense of holy Scripture.

Dr Holdens book is Licensed and highly commended by the French Divines, Dr
Holden de resolut. fidei. l. 1. c. 9.
and he himself a Doctor of the Sorbonne; and he thus delivers himself.

Statuendum est, quod quicquid a Theologis Catholicis in utramque partem, etiam
cum maxima acerbitate, disseritur ac disputatur, dum vel propriis suis
adhaerent nimis Sacrarum Scripturarum interpretationibus, vel patronorum suorum
opinionibus, vel tandem consecutionibus deductis ex fidei principiis,
certissimum est neutrum contentionis seu concertationis extremum, posse Divinae
and Catholicae Fidei rationem habere.

Quo sequ^tur Summum Pontificem nullatenus posse in sua sola persona
disceptatas hujusmodi quaestiones ita decernere, ut vi solius sui decreti pars
definita sit fidei divinae and Catholicae articulus. Disputant siquidem
Theologi, an si quando Summi Pontifices hujus^emodi argumenta, in Scholis
utrinque agitata, definiverint, sintne eorum decreta ex institutione Christi ab
omni errere libera. Imo an Decretum aliquod a solo Pontifice Summo emanans, sit
ex hoc tantum capite divinitus infallibile. Haec inquam, in utramque partem
ventilata videmus a piissimis quamplurimis and doctissimus Catholicis Autoribus
tam antiquioribus quam recentioribus, quorum neutram partem audivimus unquam
fuisse Censuris aliquibus authenticis prohibitam, aut improbatam. Quapropter
evidentissime constat Catholicum neminem astringi aut huic aut alteri part
adhaerere tanquam Fidei Catholicae and divinae articulo: tametsi Summorum
Pontificum definitionibus debitum obsequium sit praestandum. --

Out of all this precedent discourse it is manifest that Infallibility, and
Sovereigne dominion over our faith, usurped by the Bishops of Rome, neither
was, nor could be upon Catholic principles, and amongst men of common
understanding, the cause of Separation betwixt the Reformed Churches, and the
Romanists: since neither the one, nor other branch of that assertion is defined
in that Church, or so censured as not to be held upon pain of Excommunication.

The fourth Proposition as it is conjunctive or copulative (to which it is
necessary that both parts be true) must admit of a distinction before it be
censured. To assert that we may hold communion with any one, that is, account
him of the same Church in general with us, and join with him in the
celebration of the same Church worship, and participation of Sacraments, it is
necessary that we consider what it is He professes, and what it is wherein he
and we communicate, and what relation we stand in, in relation to the Actings
of our Superior Governors, that may have influence upon the case. As for
Example* if the King by an Act of Parliament shall forbid us exterior
Communion with the Pope, whatever charitable opinion I might be induced to have
otherwise of him, yet I should not think fitting to do it, or that such my
procedure were Schismatic. Thus Obadiah, and the seven thousand incorrupt
Jews, together with Elijah and Elisha, did not resort to the Temple-worship at
Jerusalem, by reason of the prohibition by Jeroboam, 1 Kings 12. Thus the
English Papists complied in England with the Actions of H. 8. Now it is
notorious that by our Laws the English are forbid in England to be present at
any other rites or communion, then what are authorized by the Church of this
Nation, and that upon penalties very great: upon 5. and 6. Edward. 6. and 23.
Eliz. 1. so that in reference to this particular, the Assertion of our Virtuoso
is contrary to the Laws of our Land, charges them with injustice, and tends to
seduce the Kings Subjects from their obedience. If we abstract from this
consideration, and reflect upon the persons to be communicated with, and the
things wherein the communion is held: I say it is a difficult thing to
determine what those tenets are which cut a man off from the general communion
of Christians, provided that the matters wherein the communion consists be
innocent, and blameless. I find the Apostles to communicate with the Jews in
the Temple-worship, and in their Synagogue-worship. I find the Communion not
interrupted by the Assertions, that the Observation of the Leviticall Law was
necessary to a Christian, Act. 21.20. Thus though S. Paul found very enormous
errors (and such as would now be called Fundamental, and a ground for
Anathema's) in the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, and Colossi, yet did he speak
honorably of them, calls them Churches, communicates with them, but not with
their errors and heresies. I find the Arians and the Orthodox to communicate
together at first in the same worship, scarce to be distinguished one from
another, till the Gloria Patri, came to be said: and after the determinations
of Nice, when the Arians had gained the advantage at Ariminum, though there
were some Catholics so scrupulous that they would have no communion with such
as received the Council of Ariminum, yet S. Hilary thought it best to converse
with them, and to call them to such Councils as were frequently held in France
upon such occasions. And where this sort of communion is to be carried on, and
when to be interrupted, I am not learned enough to understand out of Antiquity.
It appears to me that the bare pretense of an Infallibility is not enough to
cut off Communion, if the Infallibility be restrained to some limitations and
explications: for as the natural man may say he is sometimes infallibly
assured of sensible objects, and consequently be so far infallible: so the
Spiritual man may be in many things infallibly assord certitudine fidei, cu^i
non potest subesse falsum* by the grace of God, and the special assistance of
the Holy Ghost, so as that he is so far infallible. Romans 8.16. 1 John 5.13.
John 14 20. 2 Cor. 13.5 1 Cor. 2.11, 12. And this circumstantiate Limited
infallibility, if it extend it self to some things past, whether of a moral
or spiritual nature, is not always blame worthy, much less a sufficient
ground for to rescind Exterior Communion. It remains then that we inquire into
the nature of the pretended infallibility, what it proceeds upon, and what it
interferes with. For any man to assume to himself an absolute, and essential,
and unconditionate infallibility, is blasphemy, if not madness in an humane
creature; and undoubtedly rescinds all communion, if it do not rather entitle
to Bedlam. For any man to assert that he is by the particular favor, and
promise of God infallible, either in omnibus quaestionibus tam facti quam juris
(which some Jesuits avow of the Pope) or in matters of faith only (however
that tenet be explicated) either in relation to the determining of what has
been taught by the Church of Christ; I am very irresolute in this opinion of
mine; because I often find the ancient Fathers, and Councels, upon the account
of error and heresy to Excommunicate, and forbid all resort to heretical
Synagogues, and other Acts of Church communion, though I do not find that they
varyed from the Catholics in their Liturgies: and there be some texts of
Scripture that may render the case doubtful, as 2 John 7, 8, 9* 10, 11, 12. 1
Cor. 8.10. and 1 Cor. 10.20* 21, 22. Tit. ^* 10. yet may th(...) cogency of
these and other texts be eluded by contrary practices, determinations, and
Texts, as 1 Co^ 3 12. Ephesians. 4, 5, 6.

1 Eliz. c. 1. ^ Calybute Do^ning, of the sta^ Ecclesiasticall^ here, conclus.
2* p. 41.


or as to additionall decisions; that the profession of such infallibility
(provided it do not extend to the preaching of any known fundamental error)
nor impose on the communicants the belief of, and assent unto the reality of
such infallibility, perhaps it is not enough to break off an Exterior
communion. But if such infallibility be made use of to the establishing of, or
introducing impious, blaspemous, and Idolatrous practices, if it frustrate the
tenure of the Gospel, and render the Word of God (as suspended upon that
Authority) of none effect as to being the rule of our faith, and the final
Judge of controversies; I do think, that although the errors, and Idolatries
were no part of the Church Service, nor imposed on the Communicants to hold,
yet were all Communion exterior to be avoided with such a person and his
adherents, so that none ought to resort to their assemblies after sufficient
and due detection of that Antichristian monster: But agreeably to the practice
of the Church of England (our indulgent mother) I do think that the resort of
such men to our Church-worship and Communion ought to be allowed, and not
scrupled at. Thus our Laws enacted in Parliament (which with the assent of
Convocation) is the Supreme Judge here on earth of Heresies, and consequently
of Legal Non-co^munion, punish Recusants for not communicating with us in the
Church Service; yet enjoynes them not to relinquish their opinions. But in case
such Infallibility in matters of faith be pretended to by any, or owned, as
introduces Blaspemy, Idolatry, error, and superstition into the public
Offices of Divine Service, a Protestant cannot lawfully, and with any good
Conscience join with Him, or Them in such worship: viz: No Protestant can out
of Devotion (which is requisite to Prayer) join with the Papists in the
blaspemies, and Idolatries of the Mass, as any man knows that has but
lightly inspected their Missall, or receive the Sacrament in one kind,
(contrary to the divine institution) as an Expiatory sacrifice availing the
quick and the dead (which is repugnant to the primary intention of Christ) and
this paying a religious veneration to the gross elements, and breaden god.
This judgment I am much confirmed in by Mr Chillingworth, Mr Chillingworth chapter
5. 11.
where he says, that the causes of our separation from Rome are (as we
pretend, Ibid. 40.
and are ready to justify) because we will not be partakers with her in
Superstition, Idolatry, impiety, and most cruel tyranny, both upon the bodies
and souls of men. -- you mistake in thinking that Protestants hold themselves
obliged not to communicate with you, only, or principally for your errors and
corruptions: for the true reason is not so much because you maintain errors
and corruptions; as because you impose them; and will allow your Communion to
none but such as will hold them with you: and have so ordered your Communion,
that either we must communicate with you in these things, or nothing. Thus much
may suffice for that part of the Proposition, that notwithstanding the usurped
Infallibility of the Bishop of Rome, yet ought we to hold exterior Communion
with that ancient and famous Church. For supposing the case to be as I
(agreeably to the Church of England) have stated it, the Antiquity, Grandeur,
and Fame of the Church of Rome are too extrinsecall and weak Arguments to sway
us into an impious Communion. Nor is the imputation of Schism so horrid, nor
exterior communion so amiable and inviting, that to pursue that we should
either abandon, or endanger the truth. So King James in his reply, Neque
ignorant Rex multa saepe veteris Ecclesiae patres (...) fecisse, Causabon. resp.
ad Cardin. Perron.
pro bono pacis, ut loquebantur, id est, studio conservandae unitatis, ac
mutuae communionis abrumpendae metu. Quorum exemplum se quoque paratum esse
profitetur aemulari, and sectantium pacem vestigia persequi ad aras usque; hoc
est, quantum in hodierno statu Ecclesiae per conscientiae integritatem licet.
Nemini enim se mortalium cedere, aut in dolor quem capit gravissimum e
membrorum Ecclesiae distractione, quam pii patres tantopere sunt abominati: aut
in cupiditate qua tenetur, communicationem habendi cum omnibus, si possit
fieri, qui membra sunt mystici corporis Domini nostri Jesu Christi. Haec, quum
ita sint, existimat nihilosecius Rex, justissimam habere se causam, cur ab iis
dissentiat, qui simpliciter sine ulla penitus distinctione, aut exceptione,
hanc communionem sine fine urgent. Inter proprias Ecclesiae notas hanc fatetur
esse cum primis necessariam: non esse tamen autumat veram ipsam Ecclesiae
formam, and quod Philosophus appellat (...). Didicit Rex e lectione Sacrae
Scripturae (neque aliter Patres olim sentiebant ad unum omnes) veram and (...)
Ecclesiae formam esse, Joan. 10.3.
ut audiant Oves Christi vocem sui Pastoris, and ut Sacramenta administrentur
rite and legitime, quomodo videlicet Apostoli praeiverunt, and qui illos
proxime secuti sunt. Quae hac ratione sunt institutae Ecclesiae, necesse est
ipsas multiplici communione inter sese esse devinctas. Uniuntur in capite suo
Christo, qui est fons vitae, in quo vivunt omnes quos pater elegit pretioso
sanguine ipsius redimendos, and vita aeterna gratis donandos. Uniuntur unitate
fidei and doctrinae, in iis utique capitibus quae sunt ad salutem necessaria:
unica enim salutaris doctrina, unica in coelos via. Vniuntur conjunctione
animorum and vera charitate, charitatisque officiis, maxim autem precum
mutuarum. Uniuntur denique spei ejusdem communione, and promissae haereditatis
expectatione; gnari se ante jacta mundi fundamenta praedestinatos esse, (de
electis loquor) ut sint (...), Ephesians. 3.6.
quod divinitus ait Apostolus. Sed addit Rex, eandem tamen Ecclesiam, si
aliquod ejus membrum discedat a regula fidei, pluris facturam amorem veritatis,
quam amorem unitatis. Scit supremam legem esse in domo Dei, doctrinae coelestis
sinceritatem; quam si quis relinquat, Christum relinquit, qui est (...);
Ecclesiam relinquit, (...): 1 Timothy 3.15.
atque eo ipso ad corpus Christi desinit pertinere. Cum hujusmodi desertoribus
nec vult, nec potest vere Catholicus communicare. 2 Cor. 6.15.
(...); fugiet igitur horum communionem Ecclesia, and dicet cum Gregorio
Nazianzeno, De pace orat. 1.
(...). Nec dubitabit cum eodem beato Patre, si opus fuerit, pronuntiare, esse
quendam (...). In Orat. habita in Council. Constantin.
Quod autem in Ecclesia futura esset aliquando necessaria hujusmodi separatio,
cum aliis sacrae paginae locis clare docemur; tum illa aperte declarat Spiritus
sancti admonitio, non temere profecto Ecclesiae facta, (...), inquientis,
(...). Quaenam sit illa Babylon, unde exire* populus Dei jubetur, non quaerit
hoc loco Rex, neque super eo quidquam pronunciat. Hoc quidem res ipsa
manifestissime ostendit, sive privata quaedam Ecclesia eo loci intelligitur
appellatione Babylonis, sive universae pars major: eam prius fuisse legitimam
Ecclesiam, cum qua pii pie communicarent; postea vero quam longius processit
ejus depravatio, jubentur pii exire, and communionem abrum pere: ut facile fit
vobis intelligere, non omnem communionem cum iis qui de nomine Christi
appellantur, fidelibus esse expetendam; sed illam demum quae sit salva
doctrinae coelitus revelatae integritate. Out of which words (and they seem to
be the words not of Casaubon, or K. James, but the Church of England) if I am
able to deduce any consequence, vide praef. ad D. Tho. Edmundu^.
I am sure this is one, that it is not at any time lawful to hold with any
Church a communion with her enown defaults and impieties: and that how
desirable soever Unity be, yet the regard thereto ought never to transport us
so far, as to mix the service of God with that of Belial; Neque nos
consensionem and pacem fugimus: sed pacis humanae causa, cum Deo belligerari
nolumus. Dulci quidem, inquit Hilarious, est nomen pacis: sed aliud est, inquit,
pax, aliud servitus. Nam ut, quod isti quaerunt, Christus tacere jubeatur, ut
prodatur veritas Evangelii, ut errores nefarii dissimulentur, ut Christianorum
oculis imponatur, ut in Deum aperte conspiretur non ea pax est, sed iniquissima
pactio servitutis. Est quadam, inquit Nazianvenus, pax inutilis, est quoddam
utile* dissidium. Nam paci cum exceptione studendum est, quantum fas est,
quantumque liceat. Alioqui Christus ipse non pacem in mundum attulit, sed
gladium. Quare si nos Papa secum in gratiam redire velit, ipse prius in gratiam
redire debet cum Deo. Juellus apolog. Eccles. Anglic. page 194.195. edit.
latin. Londin. 1591.
that some circumstances do legitimate an holy war, and that a bad agreement is
not to be chosen before a contest and separation in the behalf of real
Godliness. I am sure I am by the tenor of that Letter justified, if I dare not
join with a Church service, wherein Transubstantiation, and the sacrifice of
the Mass, and prayers for the dead, and to the Saints (not to mention the
mutilation of the Communion, and Image-worships must be owned, or
hypocritically complied with, to the dishonor of God, 1 Cor. 10.20, 21, 22.
the detriment and offense of the weak Christians, 1 Cor. 8.10, 11, 12. and the
strengthening of the party communicated with in those errors and Blasphemies.
How far further I am warranted by that Letter, and the practice of the
primitive fathers to rescind a Communion (not otherwise erroneous or faulty)
upon the account of errors, Idolatry, or conceived Blasphemy in the practice or
speculative tenets of a Church, or person, what private men, what a particular
Bishop, or national Church may do, I shall not entermeddle with; as having
alleged enough in opposition to what our Virtuoso lays down. I should proceed
now to enquire whether that we may hold communion with the Bishops of Rome,
supposing that they challenge a Sovereign dominion over our faith? But since
there was no such thing pressed upon the English Church to occasion the first
rupture, the generality of Christendom being then, and at the first calling of
the Council of Trent inclined to the contrary tenet, of the Pope's being
inferior to a Council General, denying his Sovereignty and Dominion over the
faith of the Church; and his personal Infallibility being an opinion scarcely
to be mentioned, or insisted on, much less authenticated in those days: and
since that now, neither the one or other tenet can justly be charged upon that
Church, nor is a condition of their Communion at present: since the
Controversy would be large, and intrigued with distinctions, I leave the
debating thereof as inutile, and content my self with having sufficiently
refuted our Virtuoso already, in what has been alleged, though seemingly to
another purpose. Undoubtedly there is no conniving or complying with such a
person, for one that is to avoid the appearance of evil. It is a dethroning of
Christ whom God has appointed to be the head of the Church, and by him all the
body furnished and knit together by joints and bands, Ephesians. 1.22.
increases with the increasing of God. Coloss. 2.19.
It is the introducing of another Cornerstone, and another foundation; the
creating of another fabric then what is built upon Christ, and the Apostles,
and Prophets; at least it is a compliance with all such unchristian
Monstrosities, a silence, that is equivalent to an Assent in such high cases: I
have learned it from Dr. Raynolds. Seeing that to exercise this rule and
dominion, Raynolds conf. with Heart. c. 1. divis* 2. page 6.
is a prerogative Royal, and proper to the King of Kings; to give it either in
whole, or in part, cannot be a lesser offense than High Treason.

Fifthly, that the Church of Rome, according to its present establishment, and
under that constitution wherein the first Reformers found it, may be
denominated a Church, Ancient and Famous; and that upon these accounts (for
none other are mentioned) possibly there does belong a respect unto it, or an
obligation to communicate therewith.

The first part of the Proposition is false, and notoriously contradicts the
doctrine of the Thirty-nine Articles, and Homilies of the Church of England.
For although it be granted that even those Articles, the Homilies, and our
Writers (and I my self) do bestow vulgarly the appellation of a Church, yet is
that an impropriety of speech, and not to be justified otherwise then by
professing, that when the name of Church is attributed to Rome, and England,
the predication is equivocal; since that the definition of a true Christian
Church, which makes up the Ninteenth Article, cannot be accommodated to the
Romanists: viz The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men,
in the which the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly
ministered, according to Christ's ordinance, in all those things that of
necessity are requisite to the same. This Definition is asserted and enlarged
upon in the second Homily for Whitsunday, in these words.

The true Church is an universal congregation or fellowship of God's faithful
and elect people, built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Ephesians. 2.
Jesus Christ being the headcorner stone. And it has always three notes or
marks, by which it is known. Pure and sound doctrine: The Sacraments ministered
according to Christ's holy institution: and the right use of Ecclesiastical
Discipline. This description of the Church is agreeable both to the Scriptures
of God, and also to the doctrine of the Ancient Fathers, so that none may
justly find fault with it. Now if you will compare this with the Church of
Rome, not as it was in the beginning, but as it is presently, and has been for
the space of Nine hundred years and odd, you shall well perceive the state
thereof to be so far wide from the nature of the true Church, that Nothing can
be more. For neither are they built upon the foundation of the Apostles,
retaining the sound and pure Doctrine of Jesus Christ; neither yet do they
order the Sacraments, or else the Ecclesiastical Keys, in such sort as he did
first institute and ordain them; but have so intermingled their own Traditions
and inventions by chopping and changing, by adding and plucking away, that now
they may seem converted in a new guise. Christ commanded to his Church a
Sacrament of his Body and Blood: they have changed it into a Sacrifice for the
quick and the dead. Christ did minister to his Apostles, and the Apostles to
other men indifferently under both kinds: they have robbed the Lay People of
the Cup, saying that for them one kind is sufficient. Christ ordained no other
Element to be used in Baptism, but only water, whereunto when the word is
joined, it is made (as S. Augustine says) a full and perfect Sacrament: They
being wiser in their own conceit than Christ, think it not well, nor orderly
done, unless they use Conjuration, unless they hallow the water, unless
there be Oil, Salt, Spittle, Tapers, and such other dumb Ceremonies, serving to
no use, contrary to the plain rule of St. Paul, who wills all things to be
done in the Church to Edification. 1 Cor. 14.
Christ ordained the Authority of the Keys to excommunicate notorious Sinners,
and to absolve them which are truly penitent; They abuse this power at
pleasure, as well in cursing the Godly with Bell, Book, and Candle, as also
absolving the Reprobate, which are known to be unworthy of any Christian
Society: whereof they that lust to see Examples, le them search their Life's. To
be short, look what our Savior Christ pronounced of the Scribes and Pharisees
in the Gospel, the same may be boldly and with a safe conscience pronounced of
the Bishops of Rome, namely they have forsaken and daily do forsake the
Commandments of God, to erect and set up their own Constitutions. Which thing
being true, as all they which have any light of God's word, must needs confess,
we may well conclude according to the Rule of St. Augustine, That the BISHOPS
OF ROME, AND THEIR ADHERENTS, ARE NOT THE TRUE CHURCH OF CHRIST; much less to
be taken as chief Heads and Rulers of the same. Whosoever, says he, do dissent
from the Scriptures concerning the Head, although they be found in all places
where the Church has appointed, yet are they not in the Church. A plain place
concluding directly against the Church of Rome.

These Homilies are of such Authority with us, that the Clergy must subscribe
unto them. That they are a part of the Liturgy, See H. L'E-Strange about the
Liturgy.
the Rubrique in the Common Prayer, and the Preface to them shows: and the
Preface says, they were set forth for the expelling of erroneous and poisonous
Doctrines. More fully it is said in the Orders of K. James, Ann. Dom. 1622. the
Homilies are set forth by Authority in the Church of England, not only for the
help of non-preaching, but withal as it were a pattern for preaching
Ministers. Neither is Bishop Jewel, in his Apology for the English Church, any
more favorable to the Pope and his Adherents. Iuell. Apolog. Latin. page 139*
140. edit. Londini. 1591


Nam nos quidem discessimus ab illa Ecclesia, in qua nec verbum Dei pure audiri
potuit, nec Sacramenta administrari, nec Dei nomen, ut oportuit, invocari; quam
ipsi fatentur multis in rebus esse vitiosam: in qua nihil erat quod quenquam
posset prudentem hominem, and de sua salute cogitantem retinere. Postremo ab
Ecclesia ea discessimus quae nunc est, non quae olim fuit: atque ita
discessimus, ut Daniel e cavea Leonum, ut tres illi pueri ex incendio: nec tam
discessimus, quam ab istis diris and devotionibus ejecti sumus. ibid. page 191
And in the conclusion that pious Bishop thus delivers himself again. Diximus
nos ab illa Ecclesia, quam isti speluncam latronum fecerant, Mark this, tha^
the great Apologist (who lived and acted in the transaction) no^ only
professes that there was no resemblance of a Church in Rome, but als^ that the
Separation was made not out of a violent heat and transport, as our Historian
says, but in obedience to the precept of God.
and in qua nihil integrum, aut Ecclesiae simile reliquerant, quamque ipsi
fatebantur multis in rebus erravisse, ut Lothum olim e Sodoma, aut Abrahamum e
Chaldaea, non contentionis studio, sed Dei ipsius admonitu discessisle, and ex
sacris libris, quos scimus non posse fallere, certam quandam Religionis formam
quaesivisse, and ad veterum Patrum, atque Apostolorum primitivam Ecclesiam, hoc
est, ad primordia atque initia, tanquam ad fontes rediisse.

I might prosecute this point with an infinity of Citations out of such Divines
as were eminent Writers and Actors in the beginning and throughout the Reign of
Qu. Elizabeth, when the Church of England (even in the judgment of Dr. Heylyn)
received her establishment, and when her Sentiments were best known: but I
shall content my self with Dr. Whitaker alone. Whitaker controv. 2. qu. 6. c. 1*
Romanam Ecclesiam Catholicam quae nunc est, quaeque recentioribus hisce
temporibus floruit, eam nos non solam Ecclesiam Catholicam, sed ne omnino
quidem Catholicam esse dicimus; nec tantum non Catholicam, id est Vniversalem,
sed ne veram quidem Ecclesiam Christi particularem esse contendimus. Quare
deserendam esse dicimus ab omninibus, qui servati volunt tanquam Antichristi
and Satanae Synagogam -- Nullam in ea salutem sperandam esse, imo damnandam
illam dicimus tanquam barathrum haereseos and erroris -- Si quando ex animo de
Ecclesia illa loquamur, eam semper Romanam, Papisticam, Antichristianam,
Apostaticam Ecclesiam vocamus. Other Elogies then these no true son of the
Church of England did afford unto the Romish Church at first: and they who
afterward began to speak more mildly of her (in which number were Bishop Hall,
Dr. Potter page 81. says, Although we confess the Church of Rome, in some
sense, to be a true Church, and her errors (to some men) not damnable; yet to
us who are convinced in conscience that she erres in many things, a necessity
lies upon us, even upon pain of Damnation, to forsake her in those Errors; --
that is, whosoever is convinced in conscience that the Church of Rome erres,
cannot with a good conscience but forsake her in the profession and practice of
those Errors: and the reason is manifest, for otherwise he must profess what
he believes not, and practice what he approves not. Chillingworth chapter 5. 104.
and Dr. Potter) they allowed her the name of a Church, but with those termini
minuentes (the addition whereof renders all simple predications to be false)
those restrictions of a Schismatical, Heretical, idolatrous, and superstitious
Church. They compared her to a man mortally wounded: nothing can be argued from
their Writings to condemn the Protestant separation of Schism: they make her
so a Church, as to interdict all communion, and all peace with Her. And if it
be thus difficult to procure from any man, that regulates his judgment
according to the established doctrine of our Church, any manner of grant that
the Romanists are a Church; I am sure it is impossible to extort from any such
person a confession that the Church of Rome, in that condition wherein our
Reformers found it, and wherein it still continues, is either Ancient or
Famous. The Homily aforerecited allows it no greater antiquity than of about
one thousand years: and it is an avowed Truth, that whatever is not primitive and
Apostolic, is an innovation. The transactions betwixt the Emperor Phocas and
the first of the Universal Bishops are too recent, and too infamous to give
unto the present Romanists any repute. It has always been the profession of
the Church of England, and of all Protestants, that they deserted the Church of
Rome, because she was apostatised from what was truly ancient; and the Church
of England is really, what the Papists pretend to be: this Jewel declares in
his Apology more than once: Iuell. apol. page 117.
Nostra doctrina, quam rectius possumus Christi Catholicam doctrinam appellare,
-- nova nemini videri potest, nisi sicui aut Prophetarum fides, aut Evangelium,
aut Christus ipse videatur novus. The passage I mentioned formerly, shows that
we reformed our selves from their errors and impieties, to conform with the
genuine Antiquity. The Homily against peril of Idolatry, Hom. against Idol*
part. 3.
allows scarce of any Antiquity but within the first three hundred years.
Others extend a fair respect as far as the days of the Emperor Marcianus, in
whose time the Council of Chalcedon was held. Casaubon: ep. ad Perron.
Rex and Ecclesia Anglicana, quatuor prima Concilia Oecumenica quam ad mittant,
eo ipso satis declarant, verae as legitimae Ecclesiae tempus non includere se
uno aut altero demum seculo, verum multo longius producere, and Marciani
Imperatoris, sub quo Chalcedonense Concilium est celebratum, tempus complecti.
If our Historian can show, that the present Church of Rome, and the Tridentine
model is so ancient as to come within this period, I shall admire him, and the
Congregatio de propaganda fide multiply their acknowledgments unto him beyond
what his present performances deserve: yet really He merits very much from the
Romanists, in charging all the Schism upon the Protestants who made a
causlesse separation: and whilst he condemns the Pope only for usurping an
infallibility, and sovereign dominion over our Faith, without so much as
imputing unto him any abuse of that pretended power and infallibility, without
fixing on him any error, superstition, Idolatry, or other temporal
retrenchments upon our Monarchy, which alone would have justified a separation
from the Papal Church. But to resume my former Discourse, I shall add this
passage out of K. James, thereby to manifest how much more knowing our Virtuoso
must be, than all the Prelates of the Church of England were then, if he can
assert this Fame and Antiquity of the Romish Church. Fatetur Rex, Ecclesiam
suam a capitibus non paucis ejus fidei and disciplinae, quam hodie Romanus
Pontifex probat, and omnibus tuetur viribus, discessionem secisse; verum eam
Rex and Ecclesia Anglicana non defectionem a fide veteris Catholicae
interpretantur, sed potius ad fidem Catholicam pristinam, quae in Romana novis
inventis fuerat multipliciter mire deformata, reversionem, and ad Christum,
unicum Ecclesiae suae magistrum, conversionem. Quare siquis doctrina hujus
observationis fretus, infer ex illa velit Anglicanam Ecclesiam, quia Romanae
placita nonnulla rejicit, a veteri Catholica discessisse; non hoc illi prius
Rex largietur, quam solidis rationibus probaverit, omnia quae a Romany
docentur (illa praecipue quae volunt ipsi ut necessaria ad salutem credi ab
omnibus) antiquae Catholicae a principio probata fuisse and sancita: hoc vero
neminem posse facere, aut unquam facturum; neminem certe hactenus fecisse, tam
liquido Regi constat, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae Antistitibus, quam Solemn meridie
lucere. But, to gratify our Historian, to yield up the utmost of Antiquity to
the Church of Rome, to ascribe all that renown which so charms our Virtuoso,
and which is not to be found in the Narrative of that Papacy, which contains
nothing almost but what is ignominious, base, and detestable; to do all this,
signifies nothing to Communion, unless I also grant that the Romanists are a
true Church, and that there is not any thing in the constitution of that Church
which may give a pious Christian just occasion to avoid or rescind
Ecclesiastical Communion therewith. Imagine them as ancient as the Manichees,
Gnostics, and Simon Magus, or even the old Serpent: as flourishing and
renowned as ever were the Arrians, When the Devil (who wanted not the pretense
of Antiquity) tempted our Savior, by proposing (and pressing) unto him the
Kingdoms of this World, and all their Glory; he would not worship or
communicate with him, but dismissed him with an Apage Satana: and must we kiss
the Pope's pantafles, and give him the right hand of fellowship, or bid God
speed him, upon no grater motives, if so great.
or Saracens: all this concerns not the little flock, them whose portion and
kingdom is not of this world, whose calling is of another nature. There was a
time when Christianity it self must have been slighted justly, and the Scribes
and Pharisees were in the right, if to make one Orthodox he must be fortunate,
and that Antiquity and outward splendour must be the Characteristical
discoveries of Truth: it is better to be Master of the treasures in the Castle of
S. Angelo, than to be endowed with the Holy Ghost, if Peter must also say, Gold
and Silver have I none. The Laws of the Jews were thought novell by Haman: what
S. Paul preached at Athens was not endeared with the most material
circumstances of Antiquity, Juell. Apolog. page 115.
and Fame. Et Celsus cum ex professo scriberet adversus Christum, ut ejus
Evangelium novitatis nomine per contemptum eluderet, An, inquit, post tot
secula nunc tandem subiit Deum tam sera recordatio? Eusebius etiam author est,
Christianam religionem ab inition contumeliae causa dictam fuisse (...), hoc
est, peregrinam and novam. But I shall silence my self, and pursue this
controversy no longer, it having a thousand times been handled succesfully in
opposition to the Papists by Protestant writers of our Nation, and others
beyond the Seas, who have treated de signis Ecclesiae. It is evident that the
Romanists are not ancient, nor famous, nor a true Church, according to the
doctrine of the Church of England: Or if in any limited sense it may be called
a Church, Ancient and Famous, none of these attributes can give it such a
repute that any obedient and true Son of our Church can say, that such respect
is due thereunto, as infers any Ecclesiastical exterior Communion: much less
can I, or any else assent to the subsequent Proposition.

6. That such a respect, or exterior Communion, may be entertained with Rome,
and yet we incur no danger of Superstition.

To censure this Proposition, it is necessary that we consider it in a twofold
sense: either as it relates to that original mistake of our Historian about the
Infallibility and Sovereign Dominion over our faith assumed by the Pope: or as
it relates unto the real condition and constitution of the Romish Church in its
Offices, and religious Doctrines.

Upon the first consideration arises this Question; Whether a Protestant of
the Church of England can entertain communion with the Church of Rome,
(supposing no material Errors in the worship wherein the Communion is
maintained,) the Bishop thereof assuming, and the Church allowing of an
infallibility in him, and a sovereign dominion over our Faith, and not only
over theirs; and this without danger of Superstition?

Upon the second Consideration arises this Question; Whether it be possible
for any Protestant of the Church of England to hold Communion with the present
Church of Rome, in its Ecclesiastical Offices and Doctrines, without danger of
Superstiton?

The first Question is easily decided against our Virtuoso, from that those
Churches who have held communion with the Pope when those pretensions were on
foot, have been involved in superstitious and idolatrous practices: which is
notorious out of all Church history, and the exorbitancies of the Pope in that
kind (when the Canonists and other abettours ascribed unto him a Sovereignty
over the Christian faith) have introduced all the Superstitions of the
Gregorian Missal, and Blasphemies, and Idolatries: nor does it appear that any
thing ever contributed so much to the advancement of all those superstitious,
and Idolatrous practices and Tenets as some unwary expressions and respects of
Communion, which have been indulged to the Pope by the Fathers, and others of
succeeding Ages: which is notorious to any man that considers the pretenses
upon which the Dominion of the Pope, and his Supremacy is founded, by the Roman
Courtiers. For though neither did the French Church, nor other Bishops ever
intend to submit unto several superstitious and destructive tenets that the
Papacy and Canonists urge, yet into what dangers some are fallen and ensnared,
and others are threatened to be involved, is manifest; and all this from too
great tenderness in point of Ecclesiastical Communion. It is manifest from the
mutability and frailty of humane nature, and the usual effect thereof upon
temptations, that where such a power or Sovereignty is lodged, it may be
applied to the introducing of Superstitious and Idolatrous practices. Thus
Jeroboam the son of Nebat made Israel to sin: they perhaps innocently complied
with that Sovereignty, when Orthodox; and he misimploying it, diverted them
from the true worship of God. So Nebuchadnezar one day erects an Idol, and
appoints all upon pain of death to worship it; by and by commands all to
worship the God of the three children. Thus Darius makes a Decree, that none
shall put up any prayer or petition to God, but only to the King for thirty
days; the transgressor being to be cast into the Lyon's den. How many, think
we, by holding Communion with a Prince owning such a power, were by those
Caprichio's engaged not into the peril of, but actual Superstition and
Idolatry. Nor are the Papal pretenses less, the Canonists and Decretals
ascribing unto him a power even to alter the Christian faith, and not only to
enlarge it; that He and Christ have but one Tribunal, that He is God; that if
He vary from the Scripture and Christianity, it is to be presumed that God
Almighty has changed his mind: with such expression heretofore the Papal
Letters and Canonists were stuffed; and what danger there is from our
Historian's communion of Superstition and Idolatry, appears from the
Determinations that have been made about Transubstantiation, and the consequent
worship and superstitions about that Breaden God. In fine (for I will not
insist upon so notorious a point) since the Council of Constance could
determine, and involve others in a superstitious and impious compliance, that
non obstante, notwithstanding any thing in the Scripture to the contrary, the
Communion in one kind should be celebrated: It Is strange for any man to say,
that there is no danger in communicating with one pretending to such a power,
(though not yet abusing it) there being so evident instances of fact to the
contrary. If there were no other argument for the continuance and advancing of
the study of Philology, and all ancient Learning and Church History, the horror
of this Assertion of our Virtuoso is such, that no Protestant of the Church of
England can otherwise but assent thereunto now. Any man that understands the
controversies betwixt the Papists and Protestants, and contests about Image
worship, and several other Papal Superstitions and Idolatries, which have
happened in Greece, Germany, France, Spain, and England, of old and later days,
betwixt those of the Roman. Catholic Communion, will never assent to our
Author's opinion, or free him from the imputation of gross and intolerable
ignorance.

The second Question, Whether it be possible for any Protestant of the Church
of England to communitate with the present Church of Rome in her tenets and
Ecclesiastical offices, without danger of Superstition? is easily determined,
by considering the nature of Ecclesiastical communion, which I explained in the
beginning, and the nature and grounds of our separation from Rome, and
Reforming our selves. No man can hold such an assertion, but he must desert the
Thirty nine Articles, wherein the invocation of Saints, and Image worship,
prayers in an unknown Tongue, the five additional Sacraments, Communion under
one k^nd, Transubstantiation, worshipping of the Host, are all condemned. Nay
the last additional Rubrique declares it to be express Idolatry to worship the
Bread. Now the actual acknowledging of all these superstitions and errors, the
actual complying with such as relate to practice, is so required of all such as
hold communion with the Church of Rome, that none can remain therein without
being sensible thereof: so that either our Virtuoso understood not what it was
to communicate with the Romanists, or was ignorant what Superstition and
Idolatry are, when he writ this passage.

But so much has been said by me in the foregoing passages, in vindication of
our Church for departing from the Romish Communion; and our Laws, together with
other Ecclesiastical constitutions are so positive and severe against all such
Communion, that I need not insist hereon further: but leave it to the
Consideration of my Superiors, and of those that are skilled in the Laws of
the Land, How consonant this passage of our Historian is thereunto, how
pernicious toward the subversion of the established Religion, and how far
punishable; it being a notorious endeavor to withdraw the King's Majesty's
subjects from the Religion established to the Romish Religion.

Histor. R. S. page 349. He [ the Natural and Experimental Philosopher] will be
led to admire the wonderful contrivance of the Creation, and so to apply and
direct his praises aright: which no doubt, when they are offered up to Heaven
from the mouth of one that has well studied what he commends, will be more
suitable to the Divine Nature, than the blind Applauses of the Ignorant. This
was the first service that Adam performed to his Creator, when he obeyed him in
mustering, and naming, and looking into the nature of all Creatures. This had
been the only Religion, if men had continued innocent in Paradise, and had not
wanted a Redemption.

THe former part of this passage is contrary to the Analogy of Faith and
Scripture, in that it makes the acceptablenes of men's prayers to depend more or
less on the study of Natural Philosophy. Whereas the Apostle suspends the
acceptablenes of all Prayers unto God, in being made unto him in the name, and
for the mediation of Christ Jesus, applied by faith: Hebr. 10.19, 20, 21, 22.
Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of
Jesus, By a new and living way, which he has consecrated for us, through the
veil, that is to say his flesh; and having an High priest over the house of
God, let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure
water. Here is not any mention how that Experimental Philosophy does render
any prayers more suitable to God, than those of the less curious: this
knowledge is no where in the new or old Testament so far recommended unto us, as
that without this qualification the Saints should be said to offer up the blind
applauses of ignorant persons. Particularly, I do not find this circumstance
endeared unto us by that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.2. Though I have the gift of
Prophesy, and understand all Mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all
faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and have no charirity, I am nothing.
Certainly no prayers were ever more suitable to the mind of God, than those
which the first Christians poured out, when it was true to say, Ye see your
calling Brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many noble
are called. But God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27. It was not intended of the Virtuosi: Except ye become
like one of these, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

It may not be perhaps amiss to insert here the Article of our Church
concerning works before Justification, this new way of rendering our praises (I
do not perceive that our Experimentator is ever likely to say any prayers) more
acceptable to God being not mentioned in the Doctrine of the Church of England.

Works done before the grace of Christ, Ar^ic. 13.
and the inspiration of his Spirit, are not pleasant to God, for as much as
they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ: neither do they make men meet to
receive grace (or as the School-Authors say) deserve a grace of congruity: yea
rather for that they are not done as God has willed and commanded them to be
done, we doubt not but they have the nature of sin.

Thus, for ought I can find by our Church, and the Scripture, though our
Experimental Philosopher study the Creation never so much, and never so well,
and so, that is from those contemplations, form his Hymns and Panegyriques, He
will not come to be more acceptable to God, than another, who with humility and
reverence studies well the Scripture, and seeks to be accepted in and through
the merits of Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30. Who thinks
that though the Heavens declare the handiworks of God, and that rains and
fruitful seasons may witness for him: yet that the Divine nature will be still
incomprehensible, all humane language, and thoughts, beneath his Majesty; that
the word of God is that whither Christ sends us to search; that God best speaks
concerning himself; that a Psalm of David, the Te Deum, or Magnificat, in a
blind and ignorant, but devout Christian, will be better accepted than a
Cartesian Anthymne.

In the latter part, it is something more than is revealed in Scripture, to say,
that the first service Adam performed to his Creator, consisted in naming (for
it is contrary to the text that Adam mustered them together, The Lord God
formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air, and brought them
unto Adam, to see what he would call them, Genesis 2.19.) and looking into the
nature of all creatures. It Is very probable, that there passed some other acts
of worshipping and glorifying his Creator before, upon his first original; and
when he received that positive commandment relating to the forbidden fruit:
nay it is unimaginable that it should be otherwise. The subsequent clause, if it
relate only to the study of the nature of all creatures (as it seems to do) is
an assertion such, as never fell from any Divine. No man ever taught, that
Adam's fall (which was a breach of his religious duty toward God) was a
deficiency from the study of Experimental Philosophy: or that he was not
ejected paradise for the breach of a positive command, but for not minding the
cultivation of the Garden, See the Article about Original sin.
and natural curiosities. I never heard that this was that sin for which death
passed upon all men, nor this the transgression wherein Eve was the first. I
would willingly have constrained my self so as to carry on the relation of
these words beyond those immediately preceding them: but I find it too far a
fetch. page 346.
It is true, our Author does acknowledge elsewhere, that there are principles of
natural Religion, which consists in the acknowledgment and worship of a Deity:
page 349.
and also, that the study of Nature will teach an Experimentator to worship
that wisdom, by which all things are so easily sustained. But these passages
are too remote from this place to have any influence upon the text; and the
words that follow next argue for me herein. viz. This was the first service
that Adam performed to his Creator, when he obeyed him in mustering, and
naming, and looking into the nature of all creatures. This had been the only
Religion, if men had continued innocent in paradise, and had not wanted a
Redemption. Of this the Scripture makes so much use, that if any devout man
shall reject all Natural Philosophy, he may blot Genesis, and Job, and the
Psalms, and some other books out of the Canon of the Bible. From whence it
seems manifest, that our Virtuoso so represents the matter, as if Natural and
Experimental Philosophy, not Natural Theology, had been the Religion of
Paradise: nor does he mention any thing of the obligation Adam had to fulfill
the Moral Law, or obey the positive occasional precepts, or to believe the
incident Revelations with which his Creator might acquaint him.

Histor. R. S. page 355. Religion ought not to be the subject of Disputations:
it should not stand in need of any devises of reason. It should in this be like
the temporal Laws of all Countries, toward the obeying of which there is no
need of Syllogismes, or Distinctions; nothing else is necessary but a bare
promulgation, a common apprehension, and sense enough to understand the
Grammatical meaning of ordinary words. Nor ought Philosophers to regret this
divorce, seeing they have almost destroyed themselves, by keeping Christianity
so long under their guard: by fetching Religion out of the Church, and carrying
it captive into the Schools, they have made it suffer banishment from its
proper place, and they have withal very much corrupted the substance of their
own knowledge. They have done as the Philistines by seizing of the Ark, who by
the same action, deprived the people of God of their Religion, and also brought
a plague amongst themselves.

THis Paragraph is a congeries of gross untruths, tending to the dishonor of
God, and the destruction of the Protestant Religion, as introducing of a Popish
implicit faith, Pontificii per fidem implicitam intellig^nt eam fidem qua Laici
ignota and nondum intellecta ^idei dogmata eredunt implicit in illo generali,
Quod vera sin^ omnia quae Romana Ecclesia credit, and p^o veris amplectitur*
^^uae ^ides non est divina, sed humana, id est, non ^ilitur Dei, sed hominum
tes^imo^^o; non est (...), sed levis and ^aliax conjectura, quae non Dei verbo,
sed hominum judicio per se parum firmo, atque adeo fragili admodum and ruinoso
fundamento nititur. Rob. Baronius exercit. 3. de fide and scient. Art. 5.83.
or something which is in effect the same, but attended with more ridiculous
circumstances. For our Historian would oblige us to receive our Religion upon
trust, or bare promulgation, but neither tells us what promulgation is, nor what
opinion we are to have of the Promulgator. I have met with disputes amongst
Polemical Divines about the proposal of things to be believed, when that is
sufficiently done, and so as to oblige the party concerned unto assent and
belief: but Promulgation, bare promulgation, is a new term, and such as never
was heard of in the Divinity-Schools. It is a Law-terme, and very dubious:
sometimes Acts are legally promulgated, when passed in Parliament, and recorded
there. Sometimes they are also printed, sent to the Sheriffs, and posted up in
the Marketplaces. Sometimes they are read in the Churches by the Ministers.
There are many circumstances required by Canonists, and Casuists, and Lawyers
to determine of promulgation, which no man ever applied to Scripture, (which is
the formal object of our Faith) and to the particular doctrines which compose
our Religion. If bare promulgation, a common apprehension, and sense enough to
understand the Grammatical meaning of ordinary words, were sufficient
requisites to make a Religion accepted, what Religion almost could be false? Or
how was not Arianisme of old, how is not the Council of Trent now true? If
Grammatical meaning in our History be equipollent to literal, and opposed to
figurative, how then is not Transubstantiation (not to mention other tenets)
how is not it credible? If a common apprehension, and sense enough to
understand the Grammatical meaning of ordinary words be the standard by which
faith is to be regulated, or measured, is not the Natural man capable hereof,
though incapable of the things appertaining to God? 1 Cor. 2.14. In a Synod
holden in a Council before Constantine and Helena, Review of the Council of
Trent, l. 1. c. 8.. 5.
where it was disputed whether the Jewish law or the Christian should be
preferred, Craton the Philosopher, who would not possess any worldly goods, and
Zenosimus, who never received Present from any one in the time of his
Consulship, were appointed for judges. With which does accord that saying of
Gerson, the learned Chancellor of Paris, There was a time, when without any
rashness or prejudice to faith, the controversies of faith were referred to the
judgment of pagan Philosophers, who presupposing the faith of Christ to be such
as it was confessed to be, however they did not believe it, yet they knew what
would follow by evident and necessary consequence from it. Thus it was in the
Council of Nice, as is left unto us upon record. So likewise Eutropius, a pagan
Philosopher, was chosen judge betwixt Origin and the Marcionites, who were
condemned by him. Is it not recorded, that the Devils believe and tremble: Iam.
2.19. they are qualified with all our Virtuoso requires to be Religious, yet
sure He will not say they are so. Where is that exceeding great, and
hyperbolical grace of God, by which true converts are induced unto, and fixed
in the Christian Religion? what needed the Apostle to pray for the Ephesians
thus, That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of glory, Ephesians. 1.17,
18 19.
might give unto them the spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of
him, the eyes of their understanding being enlightened, that they might know
what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints* and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to
us ward, who believe according to the working of his mighty power. Why did he
pray of God for any more, then that he would make them good Grammar-scholars,
and give them a common apprehension? In what language must this promulgation be
made? In the vulgar Latin? If none but ordinary words must be the ingredients
of our Religion and Symbols, what must become of the words Essentia, Persona,
Hypostasis, the first, second, and fifth Articles of our Church, and the
Athanasian Creed? what of justification, mediator, imputed righteousness,
Grace, new birth, and regeneration, and many such words, that have a place in
our Confession? Must we all turn Nicodemus's? who must be the judge of words
ordinary; some words being ordinary with the learned, which are not so to the
ignorant and illiterate? where is the Authority of the Church in controversies
of faith, (avowed by our Church Artic. 20.) if a common apprehension be that
according to which controversies of faith must be decided? Should a man demand
of our Virtuoso, according to what is here laid down, what is the formal object
of his faith, or why he believes the Protestant religion here in England
established? I doubt the Answer would not be satisfactory, nor agreeable to the
Church of this Nation, which should be shaped thereupon. If Religion must not
be the subject of Disputations, we must receive it implicitly, we must not try
any thing, nor in order to our holding it fast, consider and dispute what is
good, but what promulgated: such an Assent is the reasonable sacrifice which we
must offer up, and this that reason of our faith which we must be ready to give
to all that ask us. Oh foolish, and not more generous Beraeans, that durst
controvert this Religion, and searched the Scriptures daily, to see whether
those things were so, which the first missionaries promulgated, and therefore
believed, because they found the truth of the doctrine confirmed by the holy
writers. Act. 17.12, 13. Why did Christ dispute with the Doctors in the temple,
both hearing them, and asking questions? why did he argue with the Sadduces
about the resurrection? why did Paul dispute at Athens with the Jews and devout
persons, and sometimes in the school of Tyrannus? what mean those
argumentations in the word of God, by which the principal points of our
Religion are evinced? Besides, if Faith be not a blind assent; if we must hear
and understand, Math. 15.10. if we must search the Scriptures, John 5.39. if an
understanding ((...)) be requisite, that we may know him that is true, 1 John
5.20. If we must take heed how we hear, Luc. 8.18. If we must prove all things,
1 These. 5.21. and try the spirits whether they be of God, 1 Ioh. 4.1. If the
very nature of faith be such, that it cease to be what it is if it be not
discursive, it not being an adherence to principles self-evident, Robert.
Baronius exercit. 3. de fide sc^elia, and opin. Artic. 16.
but an Assent grounded upon Divine Revelation, so that it necessarily involves
in it this Syllogism, Whatsoever God reveals is true;
But God hat revealed this, or that,
Ergo.
If this be true, how can it be said, that Religion ought not to be the subject
of disputations, but by one who thinks the owning thereof to be needless, and
that faith is but empty talk? If it be certain, Christiani non nascuntur, sed
fiunt, if there be any such thing as Conscience, (which is a Syllogism, and
defined Applicatio generalis notitiae ad particulares actus) if there be any
such thing as those practical argumentations, by which Believers apply unto
themselves particularly the general promises of the Gospel: it is manifest that
there must be Disputes.

Whereas he says, that Religion should not stand in need of disputes; me
thinks it is a reflection upon the Divine Providence, which so ordered the
condition of mankind, that disputes are unavoidable, as Heresies are: who
introduced Faith amongst the intellectual Habits, and made it an Assent, firm,
certain, but destitute of scientifical evidence: who made us but to know in
part, and to see even that but as it were in a glass; the consequent of which
mixture of light and shade, knowledge and ignorance, is disputatiou and
fallibility. Alphonso King of Portugal professed, that if he had assisted God
Almighty at the Creation, he could have amended the fabric of the world: Our
Historian in this passage insinuates almost as much; had he been amongst the
first Promulgators of Christianity. I cannot also conceive, but that He
condemns all Sermons, Expositions, Homilies, Ceremonies, and all those
rational contrivances by which the Church has endeavored gently to gain upon
the Affections and Opinions of men: in that he asserts, that Religion should
not stand in need of any devises of men.

Religion should in this be like the Temporal Laws of all Countries, toward
the obeying of which there is no need of Syllogismes, or Distinctions; nothing
else is necessary but a bare promulgation, a common apprehension, and sense
enough to understand the Grammatical meaning of ordinary words. That there may
be, and have been in some Countries Temporal Laws; to the obeying which there
is no need of Syllogismes or Distinctions, I am ready to grant: but to say it
has been so in all Countries, is such an Assertion as becomes not an
Englishman, nor one that understands the Civil Law, or that even of the Jews.
No Laws in a Government not Despotick ever were so contrived to all
circumstances, that to the obeying of them there would not need any Syllogismes
or Distinctions. In our Nation it is notorious; nor is it so facile a thing to
determine what is included in the extent of a Law, what influence the preamble
and title have upon the subsequent Act; a Common Apprehension, and sense enough
to understand the Grammatical meaning of ordinary words will not carry a man
through without Cowel's Dictionary, Spelman's Glossary, and many other Law
books, so as to understand the meaning of our Laws: and as to their being in
force, how many Arguments are there about that? when the obligation of the Law
cease? whether discontinuance, or the ceasing of those motives which give
being to a Statute, or the introducing of a contrary Law without repealing the
former expressly, do abrogate any Statute? An infinite of Controversies daily
arising, show that Syllogismes and Distinctions are necessary to our Temporal
Laws being understood and executed. But perhaps our Virtuoso may propose a new
regulation of Law, and Gospel too: but till that be effected, I am sure his
Assertion is false. But if the case in Temporal Laws were such as it is
represented, (as it is not, but in Seignoral Monarchies) yet were there great
reason for men to be more solicitous about their Religion, or Spiritual Laws,
than about the Civil and Municipal. That Scripture which subjects us to the
Civil Magistrate for conscience sake. Romans 13.5. bids us first to seek the
Kingdom of God and his righteousness: Math. 6.33. and rather to fear him that
can kill the body and soul, than him that can only kill the Body. Matthew.
10.28. Luc. 12.4, 5. If the person whose Majesty is offended be greater, if the
penalties be more horrid upon the violation of the true Religion, than upon
transgression of the Civil and Municipal Laws; men are to be excused for being
more solicitous, inquisitive, and disputatively searching into the will of God,
to see what enterferes with, and what is conformable to the will of the
Magistrate: where their Commands are repugnant, it is better to obey God than
Man. Act. 4.19. As much as God is above any ordinance of man, and an Essential
underived Majesty above secondary and communicated power (1 Pet. 2.13.) as much
as the soul and its welfare is above the body, so different ought to be our
concerns about these two obligations. For what is a man profited if he shall
gain the whole world, and loose his own soul? or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul? Matthew. 16.26. He that a sinner has to do with, is a
jealous God, and a consuming fire: It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God; Heb. 10.31. He must be worshipped in spirit and in truth:
John. 4.23, 24. Therefore a Christian must (with Syllogismes Distinctions,
Humility, and Prayer) soberly search into his heart, and examine that he err
not in the Object of his Religion, or the manner of his worship and obedience,
or in the frame of spirit which is requisite to them that worship the true God.
He must be satisfied about the lawfulnes of each action: a bare Imperial
command, though promulgated, will not engender in him a pious plerophory, who
knows that such Edicts have no direct and immediate influence upon the
conscience, that they are not in themselves a sufficient Rule of action (for
then the Command of an earthly Sovereign were always to be obeyed actively:
and a disobedience to the decrees of Jeroboam, Manasseh, and Nebuchadnezzar,
were criminal) though we do submit our selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether it be to King as supreme, or unto inferior Governors. 1
Peter 2.13. Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. But this hinders not a
Christian from disputing piously the commands of his Superior, and paying him
an Obedience merely passive, where he cannot act without sinning against God.
No Christian was ever obliged to think every Decree of his Judge to be just, or
every penalty inflicted righteously: but since a Christian's concern is not
much in this world, either as to life or goods, since his stay on Earth is but
a deprival of greater and more stable happiness; since whatever any Humane Law
can bereave him of, a thousand casualties may take from him; since he is forbid
to set his heart on things below, to turn the other cheek being buffeted on the
one, and to give up his coat after his cloak is taken away from him; he is very
indifferent in the transactions of this world, neque Cassianus, neque
Nigrianus, He is of a passive temper, his Eye is always fixed on his Lord,
that compliance which he permits and enjoins he readily pays, and in other
cases patiently submits: but still considers, still acts, or suffers out of a
principle of faith and holiness, without which it is impossible to please God,
without which every performance is sinful. Hebr. 11.6. Romans 14.23. True
Religion is not only directed to God and the Father, but seeks an interest in
Christ Jesus, who pronounces, I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man
comes unto the father but by me. John 14.6. Through him we have access by
one spirit unto the Father. Ephesians. 2.18. A general knowledge of a Deity will not
satisfy God, where a man is not sollicitous about further discoveries, or
where accessional improvements may be attained: we ought not to acquiesce in
the first rudiments, not always to be Babes, and pursue milk in stead of
stronger meat. (...). Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them,
that thy profiting may appear to all. 1 Timothy 4.15. No more will a general
intention to serve God content Him, if his worship be not celebrated in a right
manner: Since the Gospel, it is impiety to serve him according to the Law,
Galat. 4.9, 10, 11. or to worship the true God by way of Images. Romans 1.21, 22,
23. Amidst such nice, difficult, and perilous considerations who can wonder,
if Men be more scrupulous about Divine than Humane Laws, and the active
compliance therewith? who can blame the sober disputers, who work out their
salvation with fear and trembling, who cannot rest in a bare Promulgation, who
fear least sometimes the Grammatical meaning of ordinary words may not always
be the mind of God, who may use Greek words Hellenistically, or as Hebraisms;
and use the language of one Country with relation to the Idioms, customs,
sentiments of another? who can conceive that the course of our Historian will
produce in a Christian that Faith which must be (...); or that it is fitting for
us to neglect and slight all those means, which our Divines have always
(agreeably to S. Austin) inculcated for the discovery of the will of God in
holy Scripture, Raynolds against Heart. chapter 2. divis. 2. page 45, 46.
the knowledge whereof joined with Obedience constitutes the Religion of a
Christian.

But further: it is observable that our Virtuoso passes in this Paragraph ab
hypothesi ad thesin, and having spoken before of Christianity, he here speaks
indefinitely, as if no Religion were to be the subject of Disputations: which
condemns the Original of the Gospel, and the propagation of it where a
different Religion is settled: it justifies the Turks and Paynims (as well as
foreign Papists) in their sentiments, though they be without Christ, aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of promise,
having no hope, without God in the world. Ephesians. 2.12.

To conclude the Censure upon this place, I desire our Historian not to
introduce Law-termes, and yet to be scrupulous about the Scholastic and
Transcendental notions, [pag. 354.] nor to think Christianity injured by being
carried into the Schools of our Divines any more then of old into the Schools
of the Prophets: the Church and Schools are not opposite, though distinct
amongst us: a Divine may be, and is found in holy places, without doing
unseemly, much less apostatising: It Is his duty to be able to convince
gainsayers, and the Schools do but qualify him for that work: Show us how the
Divines of the Church of England have carried Religion captive, from the
Church, into the Schools: Is not the Word of God there the Rule, and formal
object of faith? Are the Scriptures so immured up there, that they are banished
from their proper place? However this Objection might be made against the
Papists, who deprive the layity of the Scriptures, and bind their Church to
the Latin version, yet it is a Calumny to impute this to the Church of England;
and yet that seems touched in this insinuation, if not only aimed at: for all
that discourse of our Vertuoso, is to show that the constitution of the R. S.
will not prejudice the established Religion and Church of England. Show me the
defaults of our Liturgy, Articles, Homilies, Canons, whereby it should appear
that our Divines have very much corrupted the substance of their own knowledge:
as yet I as little believe it, as I do that the Israelites lost their Religion
with the Arc unto the Philistines, and that Samuel and others, not Idolaters,
had lost all Piety as long as that discontinued. I read how a Woman said, That
the Glory of Israel was departed, 1 Samuel 4.21. But I never heard that all their
Religion was lost at that time, before now: nor do I understand what connection
there was betwixt the Arc and the Religion of the Israelites, so as that the
absence of the former, should extinguish the later. They were religious before
the Arc was made; and there is not any ground in the Text to imagine that
Samuel lost all sense of Religion during that Interval, but rather to the
contrary: The generality of the Israelites had been wicked and Idolatrous,
serving Baalim and Ashtaroth after the decease of Joshuah, Judge. 2.11. 1 Samuel
7.3, 4. but that they did rather amend, than grow worse during their overthrow,
and the seven Months absence of the Arc, appears by the History. Besides, the
Prophets and other Israelites that were not Idolaters in Samaria, were deprived
of the Arc, yet it is manifest they did not loose their Religion, 1 Kings 19.18.

I shall conclude this Animadversion with one Note, that the Arians long ago,
to overthrow the Council of Nice, and the Catholic faith, made use of this
pretext which our Virtuoso pursues here, and elsewhere more than once in the
History. They desired that the uncouth words of Homousios, Hypostasis, etc.
might be forborne, as not to be found in Scripture, Hilarious de Synodis adv.
Arianos id. ibid.
nor to be understood: Evitant Homusion atque Homoeusion, quia nusquam scriptum
sit. And because the answer of S. Hilary will justify the Church of England in
her Articles, in her Liturgy, and in her Scholastic controversies, I shall set
that down. Oro vos ne ubi pax conscientiae est, ibi pugna sit suspicionum.
Inane est calumniam verbi pertimescere: ubi res ipsa, cujus verbum est, non
habeat difficultatem. Displicet unquam in Synodo Nicena Homusion esse
susceptum? Malo aliquid novum commemorasse, quam impie respuisse. id. ibid.
Hoc si cui displicet necesse est placeat quod ab Arianis est negatum. -- Si
propter negantium impietatem pia tum fuit intelligentia confitentium: quaero
cur hodie convellatur, quod tum pie susceptum est, quia impie negabatur? Si pie
susceptum est, cur venit constitutio pietatis in crimen, quae impietatem pie
per ea ipsa quibus impiabatur extinxit? -- Under the Emperor Constantius,
there was a Decree made, that the word Homusios, and such other terms as fill
the Athanasian Creed, should be laid aside and disused, as which with their
novelty and difficulty, did very much distract and puzzle the Church: this the
Arians gained, and it proved an infinite advantage to the growth of that
Heresy; and the restoring of those transcendental notions, and Scholastic
terms, did resettle that Peace in the Church, which could not be effected by
the prohibiting of them, and acquiescing in the Grammatical meaning of plain
words. Nolo verba quae non scripta sunt dici. Hilarious contra Constantium jam
vita defunctum.
Hoc tandem rogo quis Episcopis jubeat? and quis Apostolicae praedicationis
vetet formam? Dic prius si recte dici putas: Nolo adversum nova venena, novas
medicamentoru^ comparationes, Nolo adversum novos hosts nova bella, Nolo
adversum novas insidias consilia recentia. Si enim Ariani haeretici ideo
idcirco (...) hodie evitant, quia prius negaverunt: nonne tu hodie idcirco
refugis, ut hi nunc quoque denegent? Novitates vocum, sed prophanas devitari
jubet Apostolus. Tu cur Pias excludis? It is but too apparent, that those in
our days, who join with the Arians in decrying new words, and such as are not
in Scripture, who think that Christianity ought not to be confined to any
Methodical Creeds or Articles, but be left in that latitude of phrase wherein
the Scriptures have delivered it; it is manifest that they look with
indifferency on the things signified by those words and forms; it is manifest
that they make way for growing Atheism and Socinianisme; it is manifest that
they overthrow the Constitutions of the Church of England, whose Articles make
use of those significant terms, transmitted from the Fathers to our Schools;
and subvert the Basis of our Religion, as it is represented in our Laws, to
consist of an owning of three Creeds and four Councils, besides the Holy
Scripture. Thus primo Elizabethae cap. 1. The four General Councils are
mentioned after the Scripture Canonical, and that is to be adjudged Heresy,
which has been adjudged, ordered, and determined, to be Heresy by the
Authority of the Canonical Scripture, or by the first four General Councils.
The same is averred by King James in his Letter. Casaubon. respons. ad Card.
Perron.
-- Rex and Ecclesia Anglicana, quatuor prima Concilia Oecumenica quum
admittant. -- And that King challenges the Title of Catholic as due to him,
Qui tria Ecclesiae Symbola, Concilia quatuor Oecumenica prima agnosceret. This
is evident to all that know any thing of our Church: and it is as manifest, and
whosoever writes otherwise, repugnes to our Laws, and whatever he subscribes
unto, or professes, is no true Son of the Church established in England.

Histor. R. S. page 362. The grounds whereon the Church of England proceeds,
are different from those of the Separists, and also of the Church of Rome: and
they are no other but the Rights of the Civil power; the imitation of the first
incorrupt Churches, and the Scriptures expounded by Reason.

This last clause is so far from being true, that it is directly contrary to the
constitutions of our Church, and better becomes a Socinian from Poland or
Amsterdam, then a Divine of our Church: not that I say, that our Church did
ever expound the Scripture against Reason, but that our Church did never rely
upon Reason, as it is opposed to Authority of the Ancient Fathers in the
determining of the will of God revealed in Scripture. If the Historian meant
nothing else but that the actions of men are always rational, and that the
assent we yield to any thing, is never so blind and implicit as to be
destitute of all motives and inducements thereunto: so that we resign our
selves up to Authority upon the score of Reason: If he meant no more then this,
why does he speak in the language rather of a Socinian than a Protestant? This
expression is dangerous as it is worded, because the Socinians may derive
advantage from it, and the Orthodox may think and find themselves injured
(especially in these times, when the Socinians multiply upon us) by it amongst
the unwary: as if there were no use of the Fathers, but that we were (without
researching of Antiquity) to consult the grounds of Reason, such as are
commonly found in men, and bred in them either Naturally, or from the
contemplation of the ordinary course of things Physical and Moral in this
World. Whence what confusion will arise, when all holy Sobriety is cast of, any
man knows who has but inquired into the controversies of these last Centuries,
when the Scripture has not been made by men the Rule of Faith, or formal
object thereof, but only accommodated to the phansies and imaginations of
prejudicate and prepossessed men. Upon this account the Church of England has
by her Canon, in which she follows the Council in Trullo, tied her Doctors as
much as the Council of Trent does, to expound Scriptures according to the sense
of the Ancient Fathers: This Bishop Tailor avows in the Introduction to his
second Dissuasive: This Doctor Heylyn in his Cyprianus Anglicus (page 52.) does
aver: and I shall here set down the Canon of our Church.

Concilium Trullanum (sive Synodus quinisexta, Canon. 19. edit. per Francisc.
Ioverium Parisiis, A. D. 1555. Quod oportet eos, qui praesunt Ecclesiis, in
omnibus quidem diebus, sed praecipue Dominicis, omnem Clerum and populum docere
pietatis ac rectae religionis eloquia, ex divina Scriptura colligentes
intelligentias, and judicia veritatis, and non transgredientes jam positos
terminos, vel divinorum patrum traditionem. Sed and si ad Scripturam pertinens
controversia aliqua excitata fuerit, ne eam aliter interpretentur, quam quomodo
Ecclesiae luminaria and doctores ex suis scriptis exposuerunt: and majorem ex
iis laudem assequantur, quam si quae a se dicuntur componant.

Liber Canonum quorundam Londini 1571. Concionatores. Inprimis vero videbunt,
nequid unquam doceant pro concione, quod a populo religiose teneri, and credi
velint, nisi quod consentaneum sit doctrinae veteris aut novi Testamenti,
quodque ex illa ipsa doctrina Catholici Patres, and veteres Episcopi
collegerint.

Thus K. Charles I. in his third Paper to Mr. Henderson. In the fifth paper his
Majesty says also, that the Unanimous consent of the Fathers, and the universal
practice of the primitive Church, is the best and most authentical interpreter
of Gods word.
If the practice of the Primitive Church, and the universal consent of the
Fathers, be not a convincing Argument, when the Interpretation of Scripture is
doubtful, I know nothing: for if this be not, then of necessity the
interpretation of private spirits must be admitted, the which contradicts S.
Peter, (2 Pet. 1.20.) Is the Mother of all Sects, and will (if not prevented)
bring these Kingdoms into confusions.

Histor. R. S. page 414, 415. The Wit that may be borrowed from the Bible is
magnificent, and as all other Treasures of Knowledge it contains,
inexhaustible. This may be used and allowed without any danger of Profaneness.
The ancient Heathens did the same; They made their Divine Ceremonies, the chief
subject of their phansies: By that means their Religions had a more awful
impression, became more popular, and lasted longer in force than else they
would have done. And why may not Christianity admit the same thing, if it be
practiced with sobriety and reverence? What irreligion can there be in applying
some Scripture-expressions to Natural things? Why are not the one rather
exalted and purified, then the other defiled by such applications? The very
Enthusiasts themselves, who are wont to start at such wit as Atheistical, are
more guilty of its excesses then any other sort of Men: for whatever they
allege out of the Historical, Prophetical, or Evangelical writings, and apply
it to themselves, their Enemies, or their Country, though they call it the mind
of God, yet it is nothing else but Scripture-comparison and similitude.

It is to be observed that this passage is inserted into a discourse concerning
Wit, as it discovers it self in the ordinary conversation and writings of the
Railleurs, and is founded on certain images (as our Historian phraseth it)
which are generally known, Page 413.
and are able to bring a strong and a sensible impression on the mind. It is an
Humor that has generally possessed the Gallantilloes of this age, whereby
they endeavor to recommend themselves as agreeable company to the empty or
less serious part of mankind upon all occasions: it is no other humor then the
Romans put upon their Slaves, when the graver persons had a mind at Banquets,
and other divertisements, to relaxe and entertain themselves with Pantomimes:
it is the Buffone of Ben. Johnson turned into a Gentleman; and thus what these
men cannot make out in solid or learned discourses, they supply with Comical
Wit, and prove or refute every thing by similitudes, and turn the most serious
and pious things into ridicule. Commonly such entertainments are composed of
what is irreligious, and Atheistical, or obscene; but though our Historian
design not the encouragement of that humor, yet it seems too much for a Divine
to give any countenance to those at best but Idle words, especially where the
Sacred word of God is the subject to be alluded unto. A greater veneration
would become a Minister of Gods word, and one who is concluded by what is
expedient, what is of good report, for the honor of God, and without scandal
or offense, not only of the stronger Christians, but sometimes of the weaker
sort, and not only by what is in its self lawful. The Papists in the Council
of Trent, as little as that party regard sometimes the Scripture, antecedently
unto that Decree, did make a severe Canon against that irreverent use of holy
language: not are the Jews less severe in their sentiments (though they
frequently practice the contrary) as the learned and reverend Dr. Pocock
informs me. I profess, to wonder why a man should apprehend the indignation of
God, when his Name is taken in vain, and yet can think he should be guiltless,
when his Word is vainly made use of, or profaned. I find not this
qualification of a sober and reverent Railleur, amongst the requisites of a
Churchman in Saint Paul's instructions to Timothy: and this magnificent, this
inexhaustible treasure of Wit is no part of those useful discoveries wherewith
the Apostle acquaints his Disciple. From a Child thou have known the holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which
is in Jesus Christ. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness; That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. But this is a Post-nate discovery, not
practiced in the primitive times, however our Virtuoso say that this delightful
wit has in all time been raised from the Bible, Page 314.
as well as other subjects. It is true that there were by the holy Writers and
Fathers frequent uses made of the Tropological and Anagogical sense of the
sacred Scripture, in their pious advertisements and Sermons: Of this nature are
those allusions or (...) in S. Matthew, viz. Out of Egypt have I called my Son,
and In Ramah was a voice heard, Rachel weeping for her children, etc. both
which (as many other passages) were rather accommodated unto Christ in this
manner, then intended at first of him, Dan. Heinsii Exerc. Sacr. in Matthew. c. 2.
as Heinsius observes. In imitation of those primitive Authors, and the Fathers
all along, many since may have used sometimes, by way of illustration, the
Scripture in the like senses, but always where at least their general
intendments were to serve God, or advance Piety, by instruction, reproof, etc.
which procedure, if discreetly done, and in order to edification, is not to be
condemned, or termed holy Raillery, or the like, by a Son of the Church of
England: (though the way be not argumentative, it is pious) and where a parity
of reason justifies the application of threats or promises made to one sort of
men, unto others in resembling circumstances, whether it be out of Historical,
Prophetical, or Evangelical writings, it is something more (if I understand any
thing) then Scripture-comparison and similitude.

As for the ancient Heathens, what they did is not very material to this
purpose, because they had no sacred Writ, penned by Divine inspiration, at
least not what they reverenced equally to what the Jews and Christians do (or
ought to do) the Bible: if they had had it, it is probable they would not have
applied it to jeasting, or allowed the use of it in their Fescennines, and
Fabulae Atellanae, or the like: It Is well known how they kept the Sibylline
Oracles, and with what veneration they consulted them. And though some of their
Pontisical words are used by their Poets, and other Writers, though the
Ceremonies of their Religion, and their Gods, have been the subjects sometimes
of their phansies, yet how disadvantageous this proved to their Religion,
(introducing it into contempt amongst themselves) and what advantages the first
Christians drew therefrom to inodiate or vilify it, appears from the writings
of Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Lactantius, Arnobius, etc. And how
cautious they were against these exorbitant Railleurs, we may learn from these
instances.

Sam. Petitus in leges Atticas, page 33. Siquis arcanae mysteria Cereris sacra
vulgasset, lege morti addicebatur.

(...).
Qui Mysteria vulgarit, capite luat. Meminit hujus legis Sopater in Divisione
Quaestionis, nosque ex eo descripsimus, (...), aliunde namque constat nobis
Capitale Athenis fuisse vulgar haec initia: ea quippe de causa proscriptus
fuit ab Atheniensibus Diagoras Melius, ac propositum talentum unum ei, qui
Diagoram interfeciss^t, duo, qui vivum adduxiss^t. Interpres Comici ad Aves,
and ex eo Suidas. (...) (...). Etiam Aeschylus in vitae discrimen veni^, cum in
Tragaediis nonnulla, quae haec initia spectabant, e^ulgasse cre(...) C^emens
Alexa^d^inus Stromat. 2. (...). ^wordthius in cap. 1. lib. 3. Ethic. Nicomach.
(...). Itaque siquod judicium de rebus quae ad haec Mysteria referrentur esset
reddendum, cancellis fori arcebantur, ne judicio interessent, qui non essent
Epoptae.

It may not be amiss, as to the Papists, in this place to show how tender they
are in this case of applying the holy Scripture unto Raillery, and
accommodating the expressions thereof to flattery, jeasting, etc. by relating
this Decree of the first Provincial Council in Milaine under Cardinal Borromeo
in 1565.

De abutentibus Sacra Scriptura. Nefaria est eorum temeritas, qui sacrae
Scripturae verbis vel sententiis ad jocum, ostentationem, contumeliam,
superstitionem, impietatem, aut ad quos vis profanos sensus abutuntur.
Quamobrem Episcopi in hos qui in hoc genere deliquerint, ex sacrorum Canonum,
and Tridentini Concilii decretis graviter animadvertant. Et ut detestabilis
haec licentia prorsus tollatur, fidelem populum per concionatores, parochos,
confessores de hujus peccati gravitate frequenter admonendum curabunt.

Council. Trident. Sess. 4. Sacrosancta Synodus temeritatem illam reprimere
volens, qua ad prophana quaeque convertantur and torquentur verba and
sententiae sacrae Scripturae, ad scurrilia scilicet, fabulosa, vana,
adulationes, detractiones, superstitiones impias, and diabolicas incantationes,
divinationes, sorts, libellos etiam famosos, mandat and praecipit ad tollendam
hujusmodi irreverentiam and contemptum, ne de caetero quisquam quomodolibet
verba sacrae Scripturae ad haec aut similia audeat usurpare, ut omnes ejus
generis homines, temeratores and violatores verbi Dei, juris and arbitrii
paenis per Episcopos coerceantur.

What there is amongst the ancient Canons, If I have in the Preface against
Glanvil, said, that the Canon was ancient in this case, it is a mistake I think.
(...).
what in the Fathers prohibiting this usage, I do not now remember after so
great a discontinuance of those studies; but that Dionysius Areopagita (or
whosoever Writ those works) is as severe in some places, as if he had continued
the Court amongst Christians, and that the mystery of Christian Godliness were
as much to be reverenced as the Eleusinia Sacra, this I am sure of. Whether
there be any prohibition amongst the rules of our Church, I know not: perhaps
it may be in this case the Church of England is silent, and with as much of
Prudence as that State was, which made no law against Parricides; being not
willing to think any humane creature capable of such barbarity, or by
inhibition, to put them in mind of such an horrid fact. But since the Railleurs
have met at last with an Advocate, who teaches them that they may boldly take
the sacred Word of God into their mouths, though they hate to be reformed; and
that they may innocently apply it to their civil entertainments and discourses,
though it be notorious that it is a vain talking, neither for the glory of God,
nor edification, nor decency, nor without great scandal (and yet the precaution
of the latter; and a constant regard to the former, But speak thou the things
that become sound doctrine Tit. 2.1.
is an indispensable Command, and at all times obligatory) though it be
manifest, that whosoever uses the utmost extent of his Liberty, approaches
very near to a vitiousness of acting; that this Holy Raillery has given
occasion to most profane Burlesque, and that it is the subject matter, not
words which hallow a conversation. (Oh! that any Divine should be ignorant of
this! or expect a contrary issue!) It is time that public Authority interpose,
and that our Church concern her self; seeing that our concern for the
sacredness of Scripture ought to be much greater in point of Prudence, then
that of the Papists, with whom the Canonical Books are but a part of Sacred
Tradition, and no further a Rule of Faith and Authenticate, then their Church
delivers and expounds them, (so that if the repute thereof were
extinguished, yet would not their Church fall) we have no foundation but the
Apostles and Prophets; upon this we are built, this is our hope, in this we
doubt not to find Eternal Life. And how this foundation will be sapped and
undermined by the project of our Virtuoso, I do submit unto the serious
consideration of the Church of England.

If any one would understand, what is particularly meant by this application of
Sacred Writ, to vulgar discourse, and the manner of this Holy Raillery deduced
from Scripture: let him read Mr. Cowley's Poems, especially his Mistress; such
as this, where he detests long life without enjoying his Mistress.

The old Patriarchs age, and not their hapiness too,
Why does hard fate to us restore?
Why does Love's fire thus to Mankind renew,
What the Flood washed away before?
Resolved to be Beloved.
Thou shall my Canaan be, the fatal soil,
That ends my wanderings and my toil:
I Will settle there, and happy grow,
The Country does with milk and honey flow.
The Welcome.
Go, let the fatted Calf be killed;
My Prodigal's come home at last;
With noble resolutions filled,
And filled with sorrow for the past.
No more will burn with Love or Wine;
But quite has left his Women and his Swine.
My Fate.
Me, mine example let the Stoics use,
Their sad and cruel doctrine to maintain,
Let all Praedestinators me produce,
Who struggle with eternal bonds in vain.
This Fire I Am born to, but it is she must tell,
Whether't be the Beams of Heaven, or Flames of Hell.
These and such like Instances, as they frequently occur in those Poems, so
they are to be allowed by our Virtuoso for a Treasury of magnificent and sober
innocent Wit: for when Mr. Cowly died, he desired him to revise his Works, and
to blot out whatever might seem the least offense to Religion or good manners.

FINIS.

