A TREATISE Showing the Subordination of the WILL of MAN Unto the WILL of GOD.

By that eminently godly, able, and faithful Minister of Christ, WILLIAM
STRONG, lately of the Abbey at Westminster.

The greatest part Printed with his own Marginal Quotations in his Life Time,
and now published by Mr. Row, Master Manton, and Master Griffith.

LONDON, Printed by R.W. for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in Fleetstreet,
near the Inner Temple-Gate, 1657.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
THere are two things always in competition for the throne God and Self: lay
aside God, and Self steppeth in as the next Heir: there are four undoubted
privileges and prerogatives which belong to God, and are as it were the
flowers of the Crown of Heaven, not to be alienated or communicated to any
creature; these are to be the first cause upon whom all things depend in their
being and operation; the chiefest good, and so to be valued above all beings,
interests, and concernments in the world: the highest Lord, to sway all things
by his Laws and Providence: and the last end, in which all things do at length
terminate and center. Now the great Idol of the world Self (as Reuben went into
his Fathers bed) seeks to usurp this peculiar honor, which is only due unto
God; we seek to justle him out from being the first Cause by self-dependance,
the chiefest good by selflove, the highest Lord by self-will, and the last end
by self-seeking: in other Treatises already published, the Author has pleaded
Gods Right against Self, as he is chiefest Good; he now pleads his
sovereignty against self-will, as he is the highest Lord: we own God as the
highest Lord by a willing and full obedience to his Laws, and an absolute
subjection to the dominion of his providence; the one is holiness, and the
other is patience; that which we call Religion, is nothing else but the right
poyse of the will, or the setting of it in its due and proper place, to have
our Created wills steered and guided by the rule and measure of the divine and
uncreated will, which is the supreme reason of all things: usually the great
contest between us and God, is, Ierem. 44.28, 29.
whose will shall stand, or be supreme, his or ours; and hence come rebellious
murmurings and discontents, and all the confusions that are in the world, and
it will never be otherwise till the creature learn to keep its rank and place,
and we say with our Lord Jesus, Father, not my will, but thine be done.

This Treatise, as it deserves respect from the nobleness of the subject of
it, so for the advantage it has of other pieces of the Authors already
Printed; for whereas they were made up from his own private Notes, not intended
for public uses, and some few supplies from them who could best take after him
in preaching, this was fitted and prepared for the press; yea and as to the
greater part of it, actually Printed during the Authors life; and the reason of
its not being finished then, was be cause some things in it, especially that
which concerned the permissive will of God and our duty under it, requiring
deep consideration and great exactness, made the Author delay the publication
of it.

Now this is intimated not only to commend the Work to thy acceptance, but to
give thee some account of that disproportion which possibly may be discerned
between the former and latter part of the Book; for though the materials be
equally weighty throughout, yet the former part being printed whilst Master
Strong lived, seems to have more of luster and ornament in it.

Now the good Lord work us to a more submissive frame of spirit every day, and
accomplish the whole good pleasure of his will in our souls.

We are thine in the Lord Jesus, John Row. Tho. Manton. George Griffith.


The Table of the Scriptures.
Chap. Verse. Page. Genesis. 1 2 154 9 27 57 49 10 171 See marg. Exodus. 6 3 107
21 6 27 23 2 73 28 39 267 32 6 133 See margent. 34 29 106 Leviticus. 26 24 138
See margent. 41 93 Deuteronomy. 13 6 211 16 20 287 33 3 273 1 Samuel 2 31 92 3 18
114 9 15 77 10 27 325 16 1 108 14 291 1 Kings. 19 11 299 21 25 211 2 Kings. 9
6.8 174 10 13 102 14 ibid. 31 179 See margent. 1 Chronicles. 21 1 210 2 Chronicles. 35 21
103 22 ibid. Nehemiah. 5 8 250 Job. 1 21 98 22 21 296 Psalms. 8 6 105 10 14 93
19 13 62.283 22 15 122 24 1 95 38 10 255 40 6 27 43 4 280 5 97.255 45 7 56 56 8
141 See mar. 57 5 113 73 9 330 78 8 323 93 1 151 97 1 151 110 3 29 112 10 294
116 7 254 119 3 26 30 37 173 Ibid. 121 2 309 125 4 14 131 2 92 Proverbs. 8 30
153 16 4 97 25 28 34 Ecclesiastes. 7 14 158 See mar. Canticles. 1 4 263 6 12 58
Isaiah. 24 15 308 25 1 113 28 29 115 31 2 136 41 2 272 45 9 117 10 ibid. 49 4
122 51 20 138 See mar. 57 20 286 60 20 192 63 9 202 Jeremiah. 1 10 86 17 16 164
31 33 23.54 50 28 178 See mar. Lamentations. 3 26 249 Ezekiel. 1 0 144 18 160
19 159 See mar. 20 156.194 See Mar. 25 144 36 26 52 Hosea. 1 4 177 See mar. 2
14 57 Amos. 4 5 18 12 137 Jonah. 4 0 128.129 9 67 Micah. 6 8 19 Nahum. 3 12 89
Habakkuk. 2 1 126.306 9 176 See mar. 3 3 105 4 ibid. 9 256 Zachary. 1 8 110 9
ibid. 2 13 89 3 1 211 4 7 155 6 1 142 8 155 12 8 159 Matthew. 6 10 143 8 31 289
11 25 98 12 35 67 16 14 223 24 29 192 Luke. 12 29 255 17 2 300 24 1 John. 1 18
22 5 19 148 20 ibid. See mar. 22 144. 145 8 36 45 16 13 23. 75 Acts. 2 23 33 36
149 7 51 29 20 22 6 28 153 See mar. 21 14 10. 198 222 Romans. 1 6 44 4 20 272 7
5 262 15 66 8 14 154 See mar. 21 151 9 3 70 20 242 12 2 18. 21 32. 314 14 17
301 1 Corinthians. 10 7 133 See mar. 13 10 202 15 26 145 27 ibid. 2
Corinthians. 3 17 46 5 7 227 9 64 12 7 232 Galathians. 6 1 68 Ephesians. 1 11
32 22 147 See mar. 2 3 34 3 10 116. 316 4 18 16 19 ibid. 5 20 307 11 22 152
Philippians. 1 9 58 4 7 303. 310 1 Thessalonians. 4 11 249 5 18 307 2 Timothy.
2 4 173 See mar. Hebrews. 2 7 146 16 81 11 25 228 26 ibid. 12 23 30 13 18 64
James. 1 18 81 2 19 49 3 13 168. See margent 4 15 140 See marg. in p. 141. 1
Peter. 2 2 22 3 15 15 2 Peter. 1 19 20 2 2 149 1 John. 5 19 219 Jude. 0 11 326
Revelation. 1 13 267. 268 6 12 192 11 1 295 15 162 19 188 13 183 2 193 3. 8 185
16 181 See mar. 15 7 111 8 186 16 1 190 8 ibid. 9 293 17 3 161 13 184 17 33 19
13 107 14 112

A TREATISE Showing the subordination of the will of MAN unto the will of GOD.
Acts 21.14. And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, the will of
the Lord be done.


CHRIST'S going forth in the Gospel is compared unto the Lightning, which comes
out of the East, and shines unto the West, Luc. 17.24. That is, Repent,
suddenly, unexpectedly, when there was the saddest and darkest night upon the
world; when the world in wisdom knew not God, 1 Cor. 1.21.
then did the Light of the glorious Gospel break forth. Celeriter, swiftly, the
Gospel did pass through the world with incredible speed, as Lightning out of a
Cloud, as an Arrow out of a Bow, Rev. 6.2. Psalm. 45.5. that they were subjected
to it ere they were aware. Vniversaliter, generally; the Lightning is not seen
in one place only, but it inlightens the whole heavens: so it was with the
Gospel, it spread over the whole world, Romans 10.18. Irresistibiliter,
irresistibly: its observed of the Lightning, Arist^d^ Meteor.
it is (...), it is of a kind of spiritual nature, of which there is no
resistance; if it meet with a subject that yields, it will insensibly pierce it
without prejudice; but if with a subject that opposes, it will melt it; so it
is with the Gospel, the word of the Kingdom, wheresoever the light of it shines
forth.

A very glorious accomplishment of this Scripture we have set before us in this
book of Acts, which contains the labor and travels, the sufferings and
successes of those blessed Instruments which the Lord did first employ to
spread the savor of his knowledge in every place.

But Paul being the most eminent instrument, and as it were a chosen shaft in
the Lords hand, Esaias 49.2. 1 Cor. 15.10.
for he labored more abundantly then they all: therefore in this book chiefly
his Preachings, Travels and Sufferings are recorded, concerning whom (looking
upon that as a Motto, spiritus Pauli, exemplum Ministri) before I come to the
words of the Text, I cannot pass by four things which I find by Chrysostom.
observed.

De laudibus Pauli. (...), and (...), etc. (...), etc.
his spirit he describes in two things. 1. He feared nothing but sin; to
displease God, and to dishonor him, was only terrible unto him. 2. He prized
nothing in comparison of the love of Christ and Communion with him; he chose
rather the lowest condition with his love, then the most eminent condition
without it; to see his face was his heaven, and it was even hell to him to be
deprived thereof.

His sufferings for Christ were his pleasures, his delights; he could take
pleasure, in infirmities, (...); and the more he did suffer, the more was his
spirit enlarged unto suffering, and he came out of every trial with a new
resolution and readiness of mind unto suffering: when we have escaped a danger,
we commonly resolve to take the more care for time to come, and so by every
cross our fear is increased; but Paul, (...).
by every cross his courage was raised, and he came off from suffering with a
new desire and readiness to suffer again.

the aim and bent of his spirit was, (...).
not only to offer up himself, body and soul as a living sacrifice, but his
constant aim and daily labor was to offer up to God the whole world as a
sacrifice; and therefore labored in the conversion of so many several Nations
unto God, preaching the Gospel where Christ was not named.

unwear^ed in it, for the happy accomplishment of that end, he was abundant in
the work of the Lord, (...).
he went over the greatest part of the world as if he had wings, and labored
without cessation, as if he forgot whether he were in the body, setting no
bounds to his labor but his life.

This glorious instrument in the hand of the Spirit, was in an eminent manner
guided by the Spirit in all his ways, carrying him to those places where he
had any service to employ him in; and when the work was done, by the guidance
of the same Spirit he was removed to another place: Sometimes the Lord sends
him from Jerusalem, that he might bear his name before the Gentiles: Act. 22.18.
and sometimes the Spirit forbids him to preach the Gospel in Asia, and when he
did assay to preach the Gospel in Bithinia, the Spirit suffered him not, Acts
16.6, 7. Then he has a vision, Acts 16.9.
in which a man of Macedonia says, come down and help us. Thus he spent his
days in planting and confirming the Churches.

At this time, by the direction of the same Spirit he was engaged to go to
Jerusalem, Behold now I go bound in the Spirit, Non levitate vel temeritate
quadam motus eo proficiscor, sed fortiter a spiritu sancto impulsus: acsi
vinculis quibusdam injectis co traherer. Sicut per vincula iniquitatis
spiritualis peccati captivitas notatur. Glass. Rhet. sacr. p. 414. Spiritus
valide me impellit, sicut nubes agu^tur vento ut ei alligatae videantur. A lap.
in loc.
Acts 20.22. That is, by special direction from the Spirit, a Spiritu
impulsam, as if the Spirit went with me thither, and I were bound up with the
same Spirit: As watery vapors bound up in the Clouds, are carried about with
them, so was Paul bound up in the Spirit, who is the Prorex in the government
of Christ, and has an eye to the affairs of his Kingdom all the world over.
This Spirit having clearly revealed Gods mind unto the Apostle concerning this
service, and by a strong impulse subdued his heart thereunto, he is therefore
said to go bound in the Spirit to whatsoever service or suffering the Lord
would call him.

But this instinct and motion of the Spirit met with great opposition.

came to Tire he met with certain Disciples that did say to him by the Spirit,
Fratribus istis quid futurum sit, Dominus revelavit: interea vero quid postulet
vocatio Pauli nesciunt: non eo usque extenditur doni mensura etc. Call. 1 King
13.18. Facilis fuit ad credendum ignoto Prophetae, and inexcusabilis erat quia
dimisit certum, and adhaesit. incerto. Cajet. in loc.
that he should not go to Jerusalem. The Spirit of Prophecy was not then
ceased in the Church; therefore I conceive with Calvin, they did not barely
pretend the Spirit, but that he did many times speak by them, though in this
they followed their own spirit. The Lord in this trying the Apostle, as he did
the young Prophet coming from Judah to Bethel, and was by the like pretended
Message from God deluded and overcome: But the Apostle cleaves close to the
Commandment that he had received, and is not by this suggestion diverted, or
turned out of the way.

Cesarea, Quem Dorothaeus ait unum fuisse e 72. Discipulis Christi. Qui and
famem su^ Claudio praedixit, quae etiam accidit, etc.
he met with a Prophet who came down from Judea, named Agabus; and he told
Paul, that when he came to Jerusalem, the Jews should bind him and deliver him
up to the Gentiles. He well knew both the rage of the Jews, and the malice of
the Gentiles, if he once fell into their hands: Act. 11.28. Luke 10.19.
yet this does not turn him out of the way of Duty. If he must walk upon
Serpents and Scorpions, difficulties discourage him not, but raise up his
spirit to higher resolutions; Periculum est par animo Alexandri, Job 17.19.
The righteous holds on his way.

tender heart: Paul walked in a high degree of love to the Brethren, willing in
every thing to satisfy them, wherein he might not dishonor or displease
Christ: For as the way of glorifying the Father is in his Son, and of
glorifying his Son is in his Spirit: So a high way of honoring the Spirit is
in the Saints. Now when he came to Cesarea, his Friends, and Companions in
travel, Sopater, Aristarchus, etc. cap. 20.4. together with the Inhabitants of
the place besought him, that for the glory of God and the sake of the Churches,
he would not go up to Jerusalem, to venture himself on so eminent a danger,
upon whom the good of the Churches did so much depend.

Thus even godly men may dissuade from Duty out of self respects, and that is a
great temptation. For as the Lord is loath to deny the requests of his people,
so are the Saints; for the same spirit works in their hearts also. This melts
the heart of Paul, and yet elevates his grace, and quickens his resolution for
Christ and Duty. Their entreaties divert him not from his purpose, and he goes
forth as the Sun shining in his strength. And Paul's Grace thus acting, draws
out their Grace also. There is a Sympathy in Graces as well as in Instruments;
touch one string in one, and the same string in another will sound. Paul's
resolution draws out their submission: And when he would not be persuaded, they
said, The will of the Lord be done.

From this Context, six special Truths are to be observed.

1. That the best men meet with variety of diversions in the best services.

2. There may be great snares laid in the best men and the best means: Who
would have feared any thing in a Prophet? or suspected any thing in a Saint?
Satan has his devices; (...). 2 Cor. 2.11.
and he had need be a discerning Christian, that shall be able to discover them.

3. A godly man must deny his best friends rather then the least motion of the
Spirit. Luke 14.26.
He must hate Father and Mother that will be Christ's Disciple.

4. An upright heart is resolute, and is not by difficulty turned out of the
way of Duty. Cant. 8.6.
The love of Christ is the Flame of Jah, and the less fuel it has, the hotter
it burns. Its only base Kitchenfire that is put out when the fuel is
withdrawn, which is not maintained by an heavenly influence.

5. The soul is then in a good temper, when that which diverts others, and
turns them out of the way of Duty, does the more strongly engage it; drawing
forth to higher and more glorious actings.

6. It is a good sign when Grace acting in others, does draw forth acts of
Grace in us also, as Iron sharpens Iron: and one stick kindles another. And so
much for the occasion of the words.

In the Text are two things mainly to be considered.

1. A gracious submission of their will unto Gods will: Before they knew what
the will of the Lord was, they would have had their own will to have taken
place (for that is the great contention in the world, whether God's will or our
will shall stand.) But when they saw the Command that he had received from God,
and the impression that it had taken upon him, then they conclude, Surely it is
the will of the Lord, and it must stand, and our wills shall stoop thereunto.

2. A blessed quietness and calmness of spirit following upon this submission:
Will the Lord have Paul to go up to Jerusalem, and by the malice of the Jews
there deliver him unto the wills of the Gentiles? if he suffer under them, and
thereby we and the rest of the Churches be deprived of so great a mercy, it is
not for us to dispute with God, let his will be done. So much is intimated in
the word (...), as will appear when it shall be afterward explained.

First, From the submission of their wills unto the will of the Lord, arises
this Observation.

The power of Grace consists mainly in the submission and conformity of our
will unto God's will. This I propound, the rather to let you see, that in
absoluto and facili stat aeternitas. Hilar. de Trin^. 10. jurta finem.
The things that absolutely concern eternity are short, and brought into a
narrow compass. If we look to most of the controversies of the present Age,
they are but outworks, things upon which godly men do not live; for in those
all the Saints agree, that differ most in Forms, and Externals; wheresoever
Grace is, it says, Sinc summo bono nil bonum.
there is nothing good without regeneration: And sad it is to see men that live
upon the same Truths for the main, and expect an Interest in the same
Inheritance, that they should be at such distances as they are, for things
circumstantial; yea, even to side with others barely for Opinion sake, whose
principles in the main they abhor, and whose ends they fear. It was good to me,
when Christians could meet together, Fast and Pray together, delight themselves
in the image and approaches of God each to other, feeding their souls with
nourishing Truths, and not puzling their judgments, and tickling their Fancies
with nice and unpractical curiosities. It was good counsel that of Nazianzen
(whose honor was, (...). Orat. 29.. 14.
that he was no over-confident and daring Divine) His direction is this, (...).
Keep the Commandments and walk according to the light that ye have received;
action is the way to raise a man's contemplation. He that will do my will, shall
know of the Doctrine; and the end of all our Disputes will be this, To fear God
and keep his Commandments, this is the whole man. Eccles. 12.13.

For the opening of this Doctrine, four things are to be spoken of.

1. Man is to walk by Rule.

2. That the will of God is unto man this Rule of duty.

3. This will of God, as a Rule, is manifested unto us.

4. In a submission of our wills, unto this will of God, does the power of
godliness consist.

First, A man must walk by Rule, a Christians walk must be regular, which shall
be manifested in five things.

1. The Lord does promise no blessing, but to such as walk by Rule; and the
Saints are Heirs of blessings, Gal. 6.16. (...).
As many as walk according to this Rule, peace be to them. Here is the only
Canonical Obedience; when a man's heart and ways lie level with the Rule of the
Law, he shall be blessed in his deed. Jam. 1.25.

2. Sin is (...), a digression from a Rule, Heb. 2.2. a turning aside out of
the way that is called holy. Esaias 30.11. (...) Via quae in gyros more Serpentum
torquetur.
Therefore Sinners are said to walk in crooked ways. Psalm. 125.5. They have
their diverticula's; departing from the Rule, by which they ought to walk.

3. Est unica fidei and cultus norma in hoc scculo, secundum quam Christiani
judicabuntur in suturo. Daven. de Judice. cap. 11.
If a man walk not by Rule, he can never tell when he is out of the way; for
rectum est index sui and obliqui. By this means the duty of Examination would
be made utterly void. 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself. If there be an
examen, it must be according to a Rule, by which all Errors and aberrations may
be discovered and reproved; for by these same we are to judge our selves by
which God will judge us at the last.

4. Psalm. 37.14. and 125 4. (...) Casu, ex accidente, contingentia. Levit. 26.
Septem vicibus tantum invenitur. Marin. Brixian. in arc. Noe.
Unless men walk by Rule, there can be no upright walking. He that walks
uprightly walks surely, Pro. 10.9. which no man else can do, all others walk
at an adventure, Levit. 26.25. And the ground of the uncertainty of God's
walking toward us, is our unsteady walking toward him; for with the froward
he will show himself froward, Psalm. 18.26.

5. Else we can never give an account of any of our actions: For an account is
to be given by a Rule upon which there must be a mutual agreement. For if two
Parties differ in the Rule, there can be no account given, and so no
satisfaction, the Rule being the Standard to judge between both.

There is a double account which every Saint is in this life bound to give:
First, To his Brother. Confessio and desensio verae religionis spei voce per
Metonym. significatur. Gomar. Romans 14.12.
Be ready to give a reason of the hope that is in you, 1 Pet. 3.15. That is an
account of the Rule, and of the conformity of your Actions thereunto. Secondly,
An account to God: and this every man should give daily, that he may appear
(...) approved, 2 Cor. 13.7. Besides that last account, 2 Cor. 5.10.
when we must all be made manifest before the Judgment Seat of Christ: And then
also will the Lord judge us by a Rule There is one, Joh. 5.45.
that judges you, even Moses, in whom ye trust: Joh. 12.48. Romans 2.16.
he will judge the secrets of all men according to my Gospel. By the same Rule
will he judge us, by which he would have us judge our selves: And to give an
account unto the Rule daily, is daily to give an account of our selves unto God.

Secondly, This Rule of Duty is the will of God.

There are abundance of false Rules by which men guide their way: Such as the
wisdom of the flesh propounds to them. For there are two things in men mainly
corrupted, Ephesians. 4.18.19. First, (...), that is, the seat of principles, there
is a corruption of the very Rule in the man. Secondly, (...), which is the seat
of the discussive faculty, and the conclusions drawn from those principles. In
the first of these, our Actions are corrupted, as in the Fountain or
Foundation, and by these most of the world are deceived: The only right Rule of
Duty being the will of God, as will appear by these four demonstrations.

1. This will of God was the ground of the creation of men and Angels, Revel.
4.12. And that which was the cause of their being, must be the Rule of their
Acting. Its said of the Angels, Psalm. 103.20.
They do his Commandment, and hearken unto the Voice of his Word: He does Rule
them by the same will that he did create them. This is the great Office of the
Spirit to act them according to the will of God, Ezech. 1.20. Its said of them,
whether the Spirit was to go, thither their Spirit was to go; and for the
Saints, Romans 8.26. He makes intercession for them according to the will of
God. Therefore Christ teaches us to pray, that his will may be done on earth
by us, as by the Angels and Saints in glory; with the same readiness and the
same exactness; even his whole will.

2. A Christian must have this general intention in all his ways, that he may
please God and walk with him, (...), unto all well pleasing, Col. 1.10. Now
there can be nothing pleasing unto God; but what is agreeable unto his will,
Acts 13.22. I have found David my servant, a man after mine own heart, who
shall fulfill (...) all my wills; therefore after his own heart, because he
fulfilled all his wills.

3. The great evil of sin lies in this, that a man does his own will, and not
the will of God, Ephesians. 2.3. fulfilling (...) the wills of the flesh and of the
mind. In the most religious Duties, when men take not Gods will for the Rule,
it is will worship, (...). Matthew. 19.6.
Col. 2.18. whereby men unlord the Law of God, making it of none effect; for if
the will of man be set up, then the will of God is put out of its dominion. Ita
vobis placet, quos non bona men's, sed malus vester agit and transversos abripit
spiritus. Tarnov.
Therefore this is their charge, Amos 4.5. This likes you well oh house of
Israel; they took more care what would please themselves, then what would
please God: and what was agreeable to their wills, then to his most just and
holy will.

4. Nothing can be a Rule of Duty to the Creature but this, because this will
is only good, Voluntas Dei bona est, quia nobis utilia praecipit; accepta est,
quia Deo grata praecipit, and perfecta, quia nihil superaddi debet. Glass.
meditat. in Epist. part. 1 p. 35^.
Romans 12.2. Proving what the good and the acceptable will of God is. Truth and
goodness in all the Creatures do consist in a Conformity to something without
and above themselves. As therefore in intellectu divino est primum verum, so in
voluntate Divina est summum bonum. The understanding of God, is the Rule of
Truth; and the will of God the Rule of goodness. God does will nothing because
it is good; but it is therefore good, because he wills it. I cannot therefore
approve of that distinction which some of the Schoolmen give, there are quaedam
volita quia bona, and quaedam bona quia volita. Because if any thing be willed
of God, because it is good, then it is antecedently good, to the will of God,
which is the only cause and Rule of goodness. There can therefore be no Rule of
Duty to the creature but that which is good, and there is nothing Originally
good but the will of God; therefore in a conformity thereunto, all goodness in
the creature does consist, and by it it is to be measured.

Thirdly, The will of God as far as it concerns man's Duty, is manifested and
made known: which will appear by these five particulars.

1. This the Lord himself affirms, Mica. 6.8. He has showed thee O man what is
good; and what does the Lord requre of thee, but to do justly and to love
mercy, and to walk humby with thy God. The Original word (...) has the same
root with (...) which signifies a Captain or a Leader; so that the Lord has
set forth his word as our Leader, the guide of our way. Therefore its called a
Lanthorn unto our Feet, and a light unto our paths, Ps. 119.105. And a light
shining in a dark place. 2 Pet. 1.19. Because it shows a man how to walk in the
way that is called holy.

2. Luke 16.29. Vt in Republica ignorantia juris neminem excusat, ita nec in
Ecclesia. Daven. de Judice. c. 11.
It could not be a Rule to us, unless it were promulgated and made known. Our
Divines affirm against the unwritten Traditions of the Papists, norma debet
esse nota and omnibus promulgata, or else we could never be blamed for the
transgression of that Law that was never revealed to us. We make not the secret
will of God the Rule of Duty; neither is a man an offender because he does not
act according to Gods secret will; Deuteronomy. 29.29 Deus apud se secr^ta continet,
quae scire nostra nihil interest, neque expedit. Calv.
for secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but those things that are
revealed belong unto us, and to our children for ever, that we may do them.
They never belong to us to do them, until they be revealed: That known
Instance of Aliquando bona voluntate homo vul^ aliquid quod Deus non vult:
tanquam si bonus Filius Patrem velit vivere, quem Deus bona voluntate vult
mori. Rursus fieri potest, ut hoc velit homo mala voluntate, quod Deus vult
bona; velut si malus Filius velit Patrem mori; volit hoc ^tiam Deus. Ille vult
quod non vult Deus; isle vero vult quod vult D^us; and tam^n ^onae voluntati
Dei pietas illius potius consonat quamvis aliud volent^s^q. am bujus idem
volentis impietas. Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 101.
Augustine makes this manifest: A sick Father had two Sons; one prays for his
Fathers life in Duty; the other wishes his death, to enjoy his Lands; the Lord
had decreed that he should die; yet he that prayed according to the secret will
of God, sinned therein; whereas the other praying according to the will of Gods
precept, is accepted, though it were contrary to the secret will of God. We
have a higher instance in Abraham praying for the conversion of Ishmael, O that
Ishmael might live in thy sight, though it were contrary unto the will of Gods
purpose; for he intended that the Son of the Bondwoman should be cast ont, and
not be Heir with the Son of the Freewoman: Yet it being according to the will
of his precept, he did his Duty, and was accepted in it.

3. It cannot be obedience, unless the Rule of it be made known. Obedience must
be voluntary; and the will cannot consent to any thing but what the
understanding dictates to be the Rule of Duty. It must be (...), reasonable
service, Romans 12.2. Rationalis est cultus de quo rationem reddere possumus.
which it cannot be, unless the Rule thereof be first made known. Some do
expound that word by the 1 Pet. 2.2. (...) which we render the milk of the
Word, Ita Basi^ius rational^m cultum opponit (...), apposite satis, licet no^
^^a Bezaevidetur.
according to that acceptance, that which is translated reasonable Service,
may be rendered Word Service. This is the happiness of the Saints, that in
matter of Duty they are not left to ambiguous Disputes, doubtful inquiries, to
say, who shall ascend up into Heaven, or who shall descend into the deep? but
the word is nigh them, in their mouth and in their heart: They know what is the
Rule of Duty, and when they walk before God unto well pleasing, Romans 10.8.

4. Christ came from the bosom of the Father, to reveal unto man the Rule of
Duty. He had a Law written in his heart in his creation, but that is utterly
obliterated; there remans not not one true principle of holiness and Duty;
therefore Pilius in finu patris esse dicitur, in aeterna generatione, in
arctissima unitate, in ardent^ssima d^lectione, in secretissimorum
communicatione. Glass. Rhet. sacr. p. 119.
the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared
him. Joh. 1.18. The bosom is the seat of secrets, as well as of love; and to
reveal these secrets, to open that sealed Book, is a great part of Christ's
prophetical Office. And the Spirit has undertaken also to lead us into all
truth, to bring these Revelations of Christ unto our remembrance, Joh. 16.13.
which is not to be limited unto the Apostles only, Fateor hunc locum non ita
solos Apostolos spectare, quin ad alios etiam fideles pastores possit extendi.
Deducuntur in omnem veritatem non absolute, sed in omnem veritatem necessariam.
Daven. de Judice. p. 98. Ephesians. 5.15. (...). Sylburg.
but belongs in common unto all the Saints; as the exigency of Duty, and the
necessity of their calling does require.

5. Unless the Rule of Duty were revealed, there could be no judging of a man's
self. Now it is commanded, Judge your selves that you be not judged of the
Lord, 1 Cor. 11.21. All judgment must be according to a Rule; and he that has
a Rule to judge by (that being a reflex act) must beforehand have a Rule to
walk by. Thus we see that the will of God as the Rule of Duty, is made manifest
unto men.

Fourthly, In a complete and full subjection of the will of man unto the will
of God, thus manifested, does the power of godliness mainly consist: Which I
shall manifest by these six demonstrations.

1. 2 Cor. 3.23. Heb. 8.10.
Grace is nothing else but the Law written in the heart, Jerm. 31.33. what is
the writing of the Law in the heart? Haec Metaphora tria continet. 1. legis
perfectam dilectionem; cor est abrasa tabula. 2. perfectam animi conformitatem;
non enim opus legis ut Romans 2.15. sed lex ips^ scribitur. 3. Prepetuitate;
l^tera scripta manet; scribere est firmiter infigere. Jer. 17.1. Quid sunt
leges Dei in cordibus scriptae nisi ipsa praesentia spiritus Sancti, qui
digitus Dei est? Quo present dissanditur charitas cordibus nostris, quae
plenitudo legis est and praecepti finis. Aust. de spirit. and lit. cap. 21.
when there are suitable impressions upon the will, agreeable unto the Rule of
Duty. When the will is cast into the mould of the Word. Romans 6.17. The word may
take a great place in a natural man, it may go far into his understanding,
conscience, affections; but this is only taking the Outworks: the Castle holds
out, till the will be won. And Satan will at pleasure catch away the good seed
that was sown, because the man is still under his power, and led captive at his
will. For all men subject their wills either to the will of God or of the Devil.
2 Timothy 2.26.

2. Preston of the New Covenant. p. 76.
Grace is the greatest subjection of the Creature unto God. For therein is the
foundation laid of all Obedience. Now there is no subjection that is worthy of
God, unless the will be subject: Satan being the god of this World, Joh. 8.44.
(...).
never judges himself honored as a God unless he rule the will. Its nothing to
have men subject their actions, to be captivated by a forced submission, when
the heart relucts and strives against it: but to have the will conquered and
subdued, is an honor that becomes a God. Therefore the relations in which we
stand to God mainly require this; Joh. 1.1.2. Psalm. 18.1. Hose. 2.19.
we are said to be servants of God, and under the second Covenant to be married
unto Christ, for the covenant is matrimonial: and in them both, Ad virum
defiderium tuu^; hoc est, eam non fore sui juris, sed ex authoritate and
potestate mariti tota pendeat, ut ne quid appetat aut velit quod marito non
allubescat. Merc. in loc.
the subjection of the will is properly required. The woman must not only
subject her wit, but her will to her husband: Thy desire shall be subject to
thy Husband, and he shall Rule over thee, Genesis 3.16. And a servant should be
but a living Instrument, he should have no will of his own. Aristotle observes
a servant should be (...), he should not only work for his Master, but his will
should be concluded under his Masters will. God is a Spirit, and the subjection
of our will unto him absolutely, is an honor that becomes none but God. God
only rules the will.

3. It is the act of the will that is the act of the man; Actus voluntatis est
actus suppositi. Therefore the Lord never accounts a man to obey till his will
does yield. Mallet si fieri posset, non esse quod timeat, ut libere faciat,
quod occulte desiderat. Aust. de natura and great. c 57. Non fit in cord quod
fieri videtur in opere; quando mallet homo non sacere si possit impune. Aust.
contr. Pelag. Epist. 2. l. 2. cap 9.
There is many a man that does abstain from the sin he loves, and does practice
the duties that he hates. For it is with ungodly men in respect of Duties, as
it is with godly men in respect of sins, They do the things they would not. As
they love sins when they practice them not, so they hate Duties while they do
them: Therefore all that forced subjection, which from a principle of an
enlightened conscience is yielded unto God, he rejects, as rather an act
forcibly wrought upon them, then any thing done by them. (...) significat and
probavit and elegit; electio est praecipuus actus voluntatis, and ex
comprobatione eligere.
But Grace says, I have chosen the way of thy Commandments, thy judgments
have I laid before me, Psalm. 119.30. That which a man does electively with
freedom of will, and that if he were to choose, he would choose again; that is
properly the act of the man, when it is with a man toward God and his Law, as
with some of the servants of the Israelites in the year of Jubilee, who said, I
love my Master, and therefore would not go free, though they might; when a man
is left at his liberty, to choose another Rule to walk by, yet because there is
none in which he sees so much truth and goodness as in the will of God,
therefore he would choose no other to be the guide of his ways. Perfectissima
servitus and obedientia Patri a Filio incarnato praestita signicatur. Messiah
autem in duali de auribus suis loquitur, ad eminentiam spiritualis suae
servitutis notandam. Glass. Rhet. sacr. p. 107.
So it was with Christ, Psalm. 40.6. But mine ears have thou boared: It is
conceived to be an expression alluding unto that custom, Exodus 21.6. The
servant that would not go free, his Master was to boar his ear through with an
Awl, and he was to serve him for ever. God boared Christ's ear, as an expression
of voluntary and perpetual subjection. And whereas under the Law, the servant
had one ear only boared, Christ speaks it in the plural, Mine ears have thou
boared; and all to show that he did choose obedience unto God, Esaias 50.4.5.
and the will of God as his Rule to walk by: and if he were left to his
liberty, he would not go free. As respect of sin to will it, is more then to
act it, according to that Rule of Gregory, Gravius est peccatum diligere quam
facere; So in respect of Duty, it is more to will then to do, 2 Cor. 8.10. You
have begun not only to do, but also to be willing a year ago.

4. The main power of sin lies in the will; and therefore the main power of
Grace must lie there also. Ephe. 4.22, 23.
Sin and Grace must have the same subject, the image of God and the image of
the Devil. Now it will appear that the main power of sin lies in the will,
because this of all faculties is most desperately shut against God and Christ.
Therefore in all ungenerate men, the blame is still laid upon the will; Mat.
23.37.
I would have gathered you, but you would not. Joh 5.40. Psalm. 81.11. Jer.
44.16.17.
Ye will not come to me, that ye may have life. Israel would none of me. The
Word that thou speak to us in the name of the Lord we will not do, but we
will do whatsoever proceeds out of our own mouths. And usually when the
understanding is convinced, and the conscience silenced, yet the will holds
out, and therein the power of sin does mainly consist.

If the will write its fiat for sin, it carries it through the whole man; if the
will give Duty its non placet, all the faculties are becalmed; none of them
acts for God while the will resists. Act. 7.51.
Therefore men are said to resist the holy Ghost. For hardness is that a thing
does not yield to the touch. Forma duritiei est resistentia seu vis resistendi
tactui ut plane non cedat, vel difficulter cedat, cum exploratio fit per
contactum mediatum vel immediatum. Wendel. phy. sic. part. 1. page 548.
Durum est quod non cedit tactui; the main hardness lies in the will, the stone
of the heart is there. So Augustine confesses of himself, Cui rei ego
suspirabam ligatus, non ferro alieno, sed mea ferrea voluntate. Velle meum
tenebat inimicus, and inde mihi catenam fecerat, and constrinxerat me. Confess.
l. 8. cap. 5.
that this was the great impediment in his conversion; his conscience was
convinced, all his reasonings were answered, and yet the speaking of the will
was noli modo, I will, but not now, and so I remained, says he, bound with the
Iron Chains of my own will.

5. The main work of the Spirit in the omnipotency of it, lies in the will to
subject it unto the will of God. There is says the Apostle, an exceeding
greatness of power, Ephesians. 1.19.
(...), that works in them that believe. Populus erit maxim voluntarius,
liberatissimo ingenio praeditus, quali summos principes esse decet.
And this power is mainly put forth upon the will, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people
shall be willing in the day of thy power (...) It is both in the abstract and
in the plural, Very Christiani habent Christi ingenium, ut ille sponte sua
patri obediebat. etc. Tar. in Psalm. passion.

Victorque volentes per populos dat jura, etc. Virgil. de Aug. 1 Cor. 5.17.
Ephesians. 2.10.


oblationes voluntariae, so rendered, giving themselves to God as
Free-will-offerings: But this is an act of the Spirit in the day of his power,
when he puts forth that exceeding greatness of power upon the soul. Now where
the main work of the Spirit is, there the power of his Grace is principally
seen: But that is mainly upon the will (though there be a new creation in the
whole man) therefore the power of godliness is chiefly there.

6. Godliness does especially consist in a conformity of our will to the will
of God, because when this conformity shall be perfected, then shall our Graces
also be perfected. We read Heb. 12.23. Of the souls of just men made perfect.
In Heaven there shall be a perfection of all the faculties; but the glory of
the Saints is expressed by this, Math. 22.30.
that they shall be (...) as the Angels of God in Heaven. Now the glory of the
Angels does not consist so much in the perfection of their knowledge (though
they behold the face of God continually) but in the perfect subjection of their
wills. Matthew. 18.10.
Therefore Christ does not teach us to pray that we might know so much as the
Angels, but that we might do his will, Matthew. 6.10. Ad modum adimplendi
voluntatem Divinam refertur, scil. prompte, perfect, and perpetuo. Cajetan.

Splendidissime, celerrime, efficacissime. A lap. 1 Cor. 13.12.


as it is done in Heaven, with the same readidiness, and with the same
subjection of will as they do, going and coming like Lightning, Ezekiel. 1.14. And
when we come to Heaven, though our knowledge shall be perfected, for we shall
know as we are known, yet if there were a rising of will in the least degree
against the will of God, the soul were not made perfect: And in this did the
perfection of the Vaction of Christ consist, (...). Sept. in Esaias 9 6. Joh.
6.38. Joh. 4.34. 1 John 2.20. Psalm. 133.2. A Christo Christiani dicimur. h^e.
unctionis sanctae (...). Ps. 45.7. Heb. 1.9 non ^nim titulum gerunt sine re;
sed qui dicuntur vere Christiani (...) ctiam obtinent. Glass (...) p. 144.
that as he was the Angel of the great Council, and knew perfectly the will of
his Father, so his will came freely and fully off unto it; I come to do the
will of him that sent me, and to finish his work; and it was his meat and drink
so to do. We partake with Christ in the same Unction; the Oil poured upon him
as the head, ran down unto the hem of his garment; that which was therefore the
perfection of his Unction, must be also the perfection of ours.

That I may further open this truth to you, there is a double distinction to be
observed: Voluntas Dei una tantu^ est, quia unus est Deus per sua^ (...)
volens; tamen diverso respectu multiplex est. Zanch. de not. Dei. l. 3. c. 4. q
3.
First, of the will of God: Secondly, of the will of man.

1. The will of God here spoken of, is threefold, (not that there are three
wills in God, for his will as himself is but one) But there is a threefold
consideration of the same will.

Voluntas praecepti; quam Deus velit fieri a nobis, cujus objectu^ Officium
est. voluntas Metaphorice dicta.
There is his commanding will, commonly called the will of his precept, that
which concerns man's duty, which God would have us to do. This is the good and
the acceptable will which we must prove, Romans 12.1, 2. This is the will of God,
even our Sanctification, 1 These. 4.3.

Voluntas propositi; quam Deus velit facere de nobis; cujus objectu^ eventus
est. Voluntas proprie dicta. A. quin. p. 1. q. 19. a. 11.
There is his effecting will, what he himself will do in the actings of his
providence, and in the Government of the World. For, he works all things
according to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. This also is in a great
measure revealed unto us in the Promises and Prophecies written in the
Scriptures of Truth: But especially since Christ took the sealed Book out of
his Fathers hand, Zanch de not. De^, l 3. c. 4 ^einolds in Hose. 14. p. 75.
and loosed the Seals and opened the Book, Rev. 5. Thereby declaring unto his
people the several designs that he has upon the World and for his Church until
the time of the end.

permitting will, Voluntas permittens est qua Deus vult malum fieri voluntate
transeunte in rem permissam, cujus objectum peccatum est.
which concerns all the evil actions of the Creatures, which though they
effect, yet God does permit. They that crucified Christ, did act according to
Gods determinate Council: that is, what his will had before determined to
permit them to do, Acts 2.23. When the Devil did seduce Ahab in his false
Prophets, Deus neque vult mala ficri, neque vult mala non fieeri; sed vult
permittere mala fieri. Aquin. p 1. q. 19. a. 9. Quod Deus non impedit, ideo
evenit quia non impedit; and si cut nihil boni potest esse aut fieri, nisi Deo
faciente; ita nil mali potest caveri nisi Deo impediente. Perk. ab eo dicitur
voluntas generalis. Twisse vindic. l. 2. p. 127. 140, etc. Aug. de civit. Dei.
l. 11. c. 17. de great. and lib. arbitr. c. 20.21.
he did it by the permitting will of God, who said, thou shall persuade him and
prevail, go forth and do so. When the ten Kings who make up one body with the
Beast, in reference to his Civil power, did give their Kingdoms to the Beast,
it was to fulfill Gods will, Rev. 17.17. It was their sin, and has been the
great cause of all the sufferings that have befallen the ten Kingdoms ever
since, and yet there was an act of Gods permitting will therein, for the
accomplishment of the great designs that he had upon the World. Now the power
of Grace lies in a submission of the will of the Creature to Gods will in all
these.

2. The will of man which is to be subjected to this will of God, is twofold.

First, (...).
There is voluntas peccati, The will of the flesh and of the mind, Ephesians. 2.3.
which is nothing else but the will of the Devil in the man; Joh. 1.13. Ex
voluntate carnes est ex propriis viribus intellectus and voluntatis; quae non
nisi caro est, h.e. corrupta.
for his lusts sinners do, Joh. 8.44. This will of man standing wholly in
opposition to the will of God, and being at emnity and irreconciliable
thereunto, is utterly to be rejected, and absolutely to be denied.

Secondly, There is Voluntas naturae, which was in Christ when he said, Ex
voluntate viri, h.e. ex conatibus, desideriis extra Christum, etiam illorum qui
pro viris in mundo, sc. sapientissimi and sanctissimi habentur. Glass. exegesis
Evangelic. part. 1. p. 593.
not my will, but thy will be done: The will of Nature sought his preservation:
and that is lawful, so it be subordinated unto the will of God, which is to be
unto the creature the highest Rule of goodness. Gods will is not to be
coordinate unto any: Though it be good in it self, it is not to be set up
equal with Gods will. The supremacy is to be placed there alone.

I now come to speak distinctly unto each of these particulars.

First, The power of Grace is mainly seen in the subjection of man's will unto
the commanding will of God. And so Grace in the will subjects it unto the will
of God, in these four Acts thereof.

1. Consensus, the consent of the will. Consentire est cum aliis sentire and in
alterius sententiam descendere; and hoc voluntatis proprium est; importat non
solum determinationempassivam, sed activam. Ante consensum praecedit consilium,
etc. Capreol. l. 1. Sent. did. 1. q. 2. conclus. 5. Aquin. 1. 2ae. q. 15. a.
2.3.
That is, when the will of God is manifested as the Rule of Duty, the will does
not stand up in a way of emnity and opposition against it, but approves it as
good and the Rule of goodness. Thus it was in Christ, Psalm. 40.8. I come to do
thy will, thy Law is in the midst of my bowels. It was indeed a difficult
service, for he came to be a sacrifice, and yet his will consented unto the
will of God therein: I lay down my life, This commandment I have received from
my Father, Joh. 10.18. This submission also was in Paul, I consent to the Law
that it is good, Romans 7.12. Every unregenerate man, when he does the will of
God, Lex quamvis bona auget prohibendo desiderium malum, and per hoc fit non
absolutionis adjutorium, sed vinculum criminis. Aug. de spirit. and lit. cap.
4. Jam. 2.8.
consents not to his will; he wishes there was no such Law, looks upon the ways
of God as unequal, his Commandments grievous: This is a hard saying, who can
bear it? The consent of their will, falls not level with the Law as the Rule of
Duty: But when a man's will consents to the Law, not only for the soeveraignty
of it, as it is a Royal Law, but for the goodness of it, I consent to the Law
that it is good, then is the will of man subjected unto the commanding will of
God.

2. Electio est and finis and mediorum: (...) finis po^a ur pro finc ult^^o in
communi, de co non est d^liberatio: ergo nec electio: at si de fine ultimo in
particulari ut Deus (...) v^sin Dei, de hoc datur deliberatio and deinde
electio. Medina in 1. 2ae q 13. a. 3.
Electio, the choice of the will: having once consented unto the goodness of
the Law, the will does choose it as that which is best, and best for him, as the
only way to happiness and the only Rule of life. This act of submission David's
will puts forth, Psalm. 119.30.173. I have chosen thy precepts. The word in the
Original (...) does signify both examinavit and elegit, to try and examine,
and upon trial to choose. Every man does choose what God he will serve, and by
what Rule he will walk. The Lord will not force himself upon any man; he does
deal with a reasonable creature in a Covenant way, Deuteronomy. 26 17. Electio
sequitur judicium quo aliquid reputatur me^^us in ordine ad finem. Aquin. 1.
2ae. q. 13. a. 3.
unto which the Election and the Consent of the Creature is essentially
required: The Lord does not only give them a Law: for that is an act of
Sovereignty and binds, whether the Creature consent or no: but in a Covenant,
the consent of the Creature is necessarily included. Burg. vin. dic. legis, p
121.
The terms of the Covenant are offered to him and subjected to his choice.
Neither dare I embrace that Doctrine that Adams consent was not necessary unto
the first Covenant, because he was bound to accept what God did require; for he
was bound freely to consent to the terms of the Covenant, as he was bound
freely to obey the precepts of the Law; but yet his consent did constitute a
Covenant between God and him, which else had remained a Law only. That God did
indent with Adam as a public person, the word is clear; and that Adam knew
upon what terms he stood; or else he was ignorant of the nature of his
Covenant, (which were dangerous to affirm) and so did neither know the
necessity of his obedience, nor the danger of his fall. Now when the soul does
choose the will of God as best, and best for him; herein does his subjection to
the commanding will of God further consist.

3. Intentio est in aliud tendere; and inde pertinet ad id quod movet ad finem;
est ergo actus voluntatis. Aquin. 1. 2ae q 19. a. 7. Intent^o and electio sunt
idem motus; fed in (...) distinguuntur, quod intentio primo sertur in finem,
deinde in media; electio vero primo attingit medium, and deinde finem. Medina
1. 2ae. q. 12 a. 4. Psalm. 17.3. Acts 11.23.
Intentio, The intention of will: The Law being consented to as good and chosen
as best for us; then the aim and the bent of the will is to walk in all things
according to this Rule. It is that which he intends in his whole course. Paul
proves the goodness of his conscience by this. Heb. 13.18. That he was willing
in all things to live honestly: This was the constant intention and bent of his
will, and when the Saints do otherwise, it is praeter intentionem; for they are
steadfastly purposed to keep his Precepts, and with full purpose of heart they
cleave to God; when they fall, they are overtaken, Gal. 6.1. It is by way of
surprise, as that which they intended not. I do that which I would not, Romans
7.19. Therefore the regenerate part which is born of God, does not sin. It may
be overborn by the flesh, and led Captive, but it consents not to it. The bent
and intention of the will is against it all the while. Daven. in col. 1 10.
Sufficit quod praecesserit illa intentio; and in habitu retineatur, licet in
singulis actibus non cogitetur, etc.
Some of our Divines do distinguish between an habitual and an actual
intention, and they say though there cannot be always an actual intention of
God and his glory, yet there must be always an habitual, a constant purpose of
obeying God, and submitting to his Law in every thing: for the power of Grace
cannot stand with a purpose of sinning.

4. Imperium, Homo non agit ex necessitate naturae sed libere, sc. modo
rationali, hoc est, modo imperii. Ad imperium requiritur dictamen ultimum
intellectus practici; and stante efficacia imperii voluntas libere movetur.
Cumel. de volunt. p. 50.
The power and the command of the will; The will is the leading faculty, it
has a strange ruling power over the man: it commands all the faculties of the
soul Imperio politico; all the members of the body Imperio despotico. It
commands the understanding to search, the memory to retain, the affections
which are as it were the ebbings and flowings of the will, to go out, toward
those objects the will is set upon. If the will move toward any object, the
eye looks, the hand works, the feet haste toward it, with all manner of
readiness and unweariedness, because the will commands it.

We have all known how powerful the commands of the will were, and how
unwearied in ways of sin, Mich. 7.7. (...) (...) (...) Ad malum manus (...)
reddun, sc. apta^ peritas, (...). Merde. (...). Sept.
when we did evil with both hands earnestly, fulfilling the wills of the flesh
and of the mind. Therefore Romans 7.5. Sin is compared to a Husband, and the Soul
to a Wife, because the will of sin is the law of the soul. And as it is in sin,
so it is in Grace also; Grace being the Law of the mind, Romans 7.23. And the end
of the Law is Obedience. Now though Grace be in the whole soul, yet the
Commanding power of it is chiefly in the will. For Grace does act in the soul
according to the nature of every faculty. In the understanding searching into
the will of God as the Rule of Duty; in the memory laying up the Commandments
as the greatest treasure; I have hid thy Law in my heart. In the affections
also, the soul goes out to it; Oh how do I love thy Law! thy precepts are my
delight, I hope in thy word, I have rejoiced in thy Testimonies more then in
all riches. But the commanding power over all these, comes from the will;
therefore the Law of the mind is mainly seated in that faculty which commands
the man. Now when this imperium of the will is exercised over the whole man
(for the Law of God brings all into subjection thereunto as the Rule of Duty)
then is man's will brought into a perfect and complete subjection unto the will
of God.

If the power of godliness does mainly consist in the subjection of our will to
the commanding will of God: This serves as an Exhortation mainly to place your
Religion therein. Godliness consists not in reasoning and Disputing, but in
willing and doing; when there is much inquiry what the will of God is, with a
resolution of will not to do it, that the Lord hates; as they did in Jeremiah
42.5, 6. The Lord be a true and a faithful witness between us, (say they to the
Prophet) If we do not according to all things for the which the Lord thy God
shall send thee to us, whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will obey
the voice of the Lord our God; and yet after so solemn calling God to witness
upon their souls, they say, Jer. 44.16. The word that thou have spoken unto to
us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken to it; but we will certainly do
whatsoever goes out of our own mouth. To enquire what the will of God is as a
Rule of Duty, to no other end but with the greater obstinacy to oppose it, and
neglect it, is the greater abomination, and the Lord abhors it.

To enforce this Exhortation of subjecting our wills to the commanding will of
God, we may take these considerations.

1. Consider: The Commands of God are the highest testification of the
sovereignty of God. The Lord has an absolute sovereignty over the Creatures.
He is the only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6.15. And
this sovereignty lies mainly in two things: In his Decrees, appointing the
Creatures to their ends, and in his Laws, prescribing their ways; and the
subjection of the will of man, or a receiving of the Law into the will, is the
highest honor to the Law, and the greatest acknowledgement of the sovereignty
of the Lawgiver; Sub lege factus est quia sponte se interposuit ad eam patri
co^pensationem reddendam, nec solum formam servi accepit ut subesset, sed etiam
servi mali ut vapularet. Parker de descensu. l. 3. 52. Gal. 4.4.5.
we see it in the Lord Jesus Christ: he was in his person not bound to the Law,
therefore there was a superlegale meritum that followed upon his obedience: yet
his subjection unto the Law was the highest honor done to the Law, and his
receiving the Law into his will (Psa. 40.8. Thy Law is in the midst of my
heart) was the greatest acknowledgment of the sovereignty of God; for
whatsoever honors the Law, exalts God, and sets him upon him his Throne, which
is never done till the Law commands the will, which is the commanding faculty
of the soul.

2. Herein the power of the Law is most gloriously seen, in that it can subdue
the will; for till then, the man is never overcome: you may kill him, but you
cannot conquer him. There may be a kind of force and violence offered unto the
other faculties; the understanding may be overcome with light, which though it
would it cannot keep out (for there is a principle in all men to be willingly
ignorant, 2 Pet. 3.5.
and to imprison Truths in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18.
because they hate the light:) The conscience also may be awakened, though men
endeavor to their utmost to speak peace to themselves, Esaias 50.11.
to kindle a fire of their own, and compass themselves about with their own
sparks: but the will is so free, that no kind of violence can be offered to
it. Therefore the conquest of the will is always by its own consent; as a woman
by her own consent comes into subjection to her Husband: this subduing of the
will, is that wherein the power of the word mainly consists; its called the
power of God to salvation, Romans 1.16. That is, it is the instrument by which he
puts forth the exceeding greatness of his power; though there be a great power
put forth in the common works upon the other faculties: yet when Omnipotency
works by the word, it appears mainly in this, it subdues the will.

3. Herein properly the liberty of the soul consists. If the Son make you free,
you shall be free indeed, Joh. 8.36. Liberty therefore is a privilege which
the Saints receive by Grace. Now this liberty of a Christian, though it be
radicaliter in intellectu, yet it is formaliter in voluntate: The proper seat
of Liberty is the will. Now this Liberty does not consist in an absolute
indifferency either to choose or refuse without a respect to the end. There is
an indifferency indeed servato ordine finis, Voluntas eo liberior estquo
gratiae Dei subjectior fuerit. Aug. Epist. 89.
with a continual respect to the utmost end, the chief good; now what is the
way that leads to this chief good? what is the Rule that directs to this utmost
end? is it not the word of God? Melior est cum totus ad haeret atque
constringitur incommutabili bono, quam cum inde vel ad seipsum relaxatur.
Gibeu. de libert. creat. l. 1. cap. 3. Libertas est amplitudo ex adhaesione ad
Deum, quae tanto major and illustrior, quanto propius ad Deum accesserimus.
Therefore this the soul is to be acted by, and therein its liberty consists:
when the will is acted by any inferior Rules, so long the man is under
bondage. Therefore when we come to Heaven, our wills shall be acted wholly by
Gods will; therefore our Liberty shall be perfected; where the Spirit of the
Lord is, there is liberty (says the Apostle) 2 Cor. 3.17. The reason is,
because where the Spirit is, the soul is enlightened by the word of God, and the
will subjected thereunto; in which properly does consist the Liberty of the man.

4. The subjection of our will unto the will of God does pro hoc statu perfect
our obedience. Our best Services are mixed with many imperfections, Lava
lachrymas meas Dominc. Aug. Job. 1.1. (...) vide Caryl in loc.
that our prayers had need be perfumed, our tears washed, and a sacrifice
offered daily for the iniquity of our holy things; yet is there a kind of
perfection in the obedience of the Saints in this life. Ignorantia and
infirmitas vitia sunt quae impediunt voluntatem; nunc delectatur, nunc non
delectatur, ut noverit non suae facultatis esse sed divini muneris. Aug. de
peccat. merit. and remiss. l. 2. c. 17.
The Philosopher observes that there is Duplex aequalitas, rei and voluntatis;
now though in respect of the thing, we shall always fall short of the Law, yet
the subjection of the will makes the Law and the heart even, though in the
actions there are many defects. Romans 7.19.20. 2 Cor. 8.10.12.
And the Grace of the Gospel accepts the will for the deed.

5. It is the subjection of our will to the commanding will of God, Matthew.
11.30.
which only makes the ways of God sweet, and the commands of God easy. David
says, The Law was sweeter to him then the honey. Christ says, Psalm. 19.10. 1 John 5.3.
My yoke is easy, and my burden light; The Commandments are not grievous; and
it is the subduing of the will works all this. Omnia quippe fiunt charitati
facilia; cui uni Christi sarcina levis est; aut ea una est sarcina ipsa quae
levis est: Durae sunt timori, leves amori, etc. Aug. l. de not. and great. c. 69.
What a man does willingly, he does with ease and delight: Whereas a small
thing done against the will, is looked upon as a very burdensome service: It
was no great labor for Haman to lead Mordecai's Horse, yet it was a very
burdensome and an offensive service, because his will was against it.

6. It is willingness that brings the reward. Esth. 6.13.
A Dispensation of the Gospel was committed to Paul: and if I do it willingly
(says he) I have my reward, (...). Arist. Ethic. l. 4. cap. 1. Libenter and ex
animo, ipsum amans Evangelium and fructum Evangelii quaerens. Est.
1 Cor. 9.17. Some preach Christ of Envy, and some of good will, and they only
have the reward of their service, Phil. 1.15. Therefore the Apostle exhorts
those that feed the Flock of God, and have the oversight of them, to do it not
by constraint but willingly, 1 Pet. 5.2. And Paul would have Philemon to grant
his request, not of necessity, but willingly. Philem. 14 And the reason of all
is this, because if we do it willingly, we have our reward: But unwilling
services are neither accepted nor rewarded.

There remain three great questions concerning the commanding will of God, very
necessary to be spoken of, before we conclude this point.

Quest. 1. Some will be ready to say, I find it very hard, yea impossible to
nature to bring my will into subjection unto the will of God; Quis coram Deo
innocens invenitur, qui vult fieri quod vetatur, si subtrahas quod timetur? Ac
per hoc in ipsa voluntate reus est, qui vult facere quod non licet fiert. sed
^de^ non facit quia impune non potest fi cri. Nam quantum (...) ipso est mall^t
non esse justitiam peccata prolnbentem, atque punientem. Et u^^que si mall^^
non esse justitia^; quis dubitaverit quod ctiam si posset auferiet? Ac per hoc
quomodo justus est, justitiae talis inimicus; ut eam si potestas detur
praecipientem auferat; ne comminant^^ vel judicantem ferat? Aust. Epist. 144.
Lex carer est spiritualis and vere infernus; conclusus non odit peccatum, sed
carceren odit, and ex cord dolet sur se non liberum esse and posse furari.
Luth. in Gal. 3.22. Psalm. 2.3. (...). Sylburg. Etym.
my understanding is often convinced, my Reasons answered, my Conscience over
awed; and yet my will does rise against my own convictions; that though I am
forced to acknowledge, that it is the truth of God, yet I would not have it so;
but that is duty which I would not have a duty: and that is a sin which I would
not have a sin, and therefore I hate the Law of God; and if it were in my power
I would blot it out of the Book, that it might never stand upon record against
me: It is with me in this as it is with the Devils, Jam. 2.19. They believe and
tremble; The word (...) exhorrescunt, notes a high degree of horror and fear,
which does proceed from a high degree of conviction; and yet the opposition of
their wills is as great against the Law of God, as ever it was; And their
conviction does raise up their spirits to a direct opposition; that their faith
serves to no other end, but to raise the malice and strengthen the obstinacy of
their wills. I do many times abstain from sin in the act, which my soul loves,
and I do perform many acts of duty which my heart is not in, but draws back
from God in the whole performance; and so as Austin observes, In ipsa intus
voluntate peccat, qui non voluntate, sed timore non peccat: Spira did complain
of a wound upon his will; which is the greatest plague that follows upon sin,
and the greatest Judgment of God inflicted upon the sinner: Seeing therefore
there is in my will such a continued opposition; how should a man get his will
brought into subjection, and into a full and complete submission unto the will
of God?

Ans. Ephesians. 2 3. Job 34.37. Esaias 40.12. Ezeck 2.3, 4. Gen 49 6. Jer 44.16.
Luke 19 27. 2 Timothy 2.26.
Whosoever shall seriously consider the wills of the flesh, that are in a man,
the rebellion, stoutness of heart, selfwilledness, though against reason, and
in all this from the snare that Satan has upon the wills of men, leading them
captive according to his own will, he may well sit down discouraged and say,
How can these things be? how is it possible that ever the will of man should be
subjected unto the will of God? Sub lege est qui timore supplicii quod lex
minatur, non amore justitiae se sentit abstinere ab opere peccati: nondum liber
nec alienus a voluntate peccandi, in ipsa enim voluntate reus est, qua mallet
si fieri posset: non esse quod timeat, ut libere faciat quod occulte desiderat.
Aug. de not. and great. cap. 57. Nihil erat aliud quam velle ^re, sed velle
fortiter and integre, non semisanciam hac atque hac versare and jactare
voluntatem, partem assi^ gentem cum alia part cadente luctantem. Multa
faciebam quae aliquando volunt homines and non valent. Facilius obtemperabat
corpus tenuissimae voluntati, quam ipsa sibi anima ad voluntatem suam magnam in
sold voluntate perficiendam. Aug. Conf. l. 8. cap. 8.
some compulsory submission there may be by a spirit of Bondage, and from a
principle of slavish fear: some lazy velleity unto duty there may be, from the
common convictions of the spirit; grounded upon hopes of happiness and heaven,
and thereby may be raised a languid and incomplete will; yet it is ever with some
secret exceptions and reservations; but to have the will brought to a total and
cheerful submission, to an universal resignation to the commanding will of God,
surely this must be the finger of God, and the work of an Almighty power, which
works both the will and the deed, Phil. 2.13. Si Deus per gratiam non dederit
voluntatem, nunquam potest homo in Deum velle credere. Fulg. And as it is a
work of Almighty power, Cor pr^mum nascentibus in utero formari trad^t Plin. l.
11. c. 37. primo ammari, Va. les. l. 2. contr. medi^ c. 6. Hebraet totum reg
men ham^n^ (...)buunt and ow^^^^ (...) (...) mam in cord^ coll^care vid^ntur.
Flac. clavis scrip. part. 1. page 176. Math. 19.26.
so it is a work that God has undertaken; I will take away the heart of stone,
and I will give an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26. What is meant by a heart of
stone? we are to understand voluntatem in vitiis obfirmatam, a will hardened
and obstinate in evil: and by a heart of flesh voluntatem gratia and spiritu
docilem and renovatam: A will renewed, subdued, and made pliable by the Spirit
of Gra^e. This is only Gods gift, Gods work, which though it be impossible to
man, yet with God all things are possible.

Now the way which commonly the Lord takes to subdue the will of man to his
commanding will, is by these steps and degrees. Jer. 31.33. 2 Co^ 3.3. Ephesians.
1.17. (...). Arist. Ethicl. 1. cap. 13.


1. There is an act of spiritual illumination, inlightning the understanding,
seriously and savingly to apprehend the truths of God, and the things of
eternity: For the will being in its own nature potentia coeca, it can choose
nothing without a dictate of the understanding going before. I conceive it
therefore a truth, that the will does necessarily follow the ultimate 1.
Voluntas a sola simpl ci apprehensione non movetur, sed ult^^ius requiritur
ju^licium pract. cum. Aquin p. 1. q. 83 and 1. 2ae. q 77. Medina 1. 2ae q 9. a.
1.

2. Judicium practicum distinguitur in jud cium denunciativum and executivum.
Navarret. controv. to.. 1.

3. Vltimo d^ct ^mine posito. voluntas necessario determinatur, and t^men
libere mov tur. c^nt. ^uarez in Metaph. disp. 19. sect. 6. Cumel. de voluntate,
c l. 1 page 63.


dictate of the mind, which being once thoroughly enlightened, and seriously
possessed with the adequate truth and goodness of things spiritual, these being
propounded to the will, it cannot reject them; for the liberty of the will is
not a blind and a brutish head-strongness, but a rational perfection. The mind
being spiritually enlightened, and thereby elevated and actuated from Heaven,
this is called the teaching of the Father, Joh. 6.45. The conviction of the
spirit, Joh. 16.8.11. The spirit of wisdom and revelation, Ephesians. 1.17.
Collyrium ocu^orum medicina est, and ad spiritualis coec. tatis nost^ae medelam
eleganter transfertur. Gloss. Rhet. Sacra. page 340. Imo^tra a Deo clarum
conspectum mysteriorum Dei, and reram futuraru^. Grotius in Apocal. (...).
Sylburg. in (...).
The eye salve, Rev. 3.18. This puts the Law of God into a man's inward parts,
that he sees a truth and a reality in those things which before he only saw in
the notion. That which formerly he heard by the hearing of the ear, now his eye
sees; for as sin came in by the understanding, (...) proprie ad intellectum
pertinet. unde (...).
The woman was deceived, 2 Cor. 11.3. 1 Timothy 2.14. Genesis 3.13. by the same way
God will bring Grace into the soul; for he will not invert the order of the
faculties, Vocatio alta est and secreta, qua fit ut legi atque doctrinae
accomod^mus assensum. Gratia praevenit hominis voluntatem bonam, nec eam
cujusquam invenit in cord sed sacit. H^mines ad s^ips^ omnipotentissuna
voluntate convertit, ac v^lentes ex notentibus secit. Aug. Epist. 107. De great.
and libero Arbit. cap 16. C^r est camera omnipotentis r^g^^. Corda fideli^
caelum sunt. Aug. sermon. de redempt.
but they shall all act according to their natural subordination.

2. From hence there follows a thorough and effectual determination of the
will, to embrace the ultimate dictates of an enlightened understanding, choosing
spiritual truths as its own portion, which compleats the writing of the Law in
the heart, Jer. 31.33. which is not only the putting of spiritual and saving
light into the understanding, but putting a suitable principle also into the
will, framing and fashioning it to accept and embrace those truths, which the
understanding was fully prepossessed of, Praebendo vires efficacissimas
voluntati. Aug. making a man with full purpose of heart to close with and
cleave to God. The will is the chief seat of the soul, The chamber of the great
King; therefore the main residence of Grace is in it; so that though by a
natural impotency in us, the executive power is suspended, yet a man can say to
will is present with me, when I find no strength to perform, Romans 7.18. Its
true that Grace does not in this life take away In voluntate manet
resistibilitas connata, adnata, and actualis. Gratia non tollit
resistibilitatem connatam quae est propria passio voluntatis; nec adnatam ex
voluntatis depravatione, qua gratiae resistere potest and solet; nec
resistentiam actualem, sed actuatem resistentiam vincentem. Ward. concio ad
C^erum in Philip. 2.12.13.
omnem resistentiam actualem, sed vincentem; the will does actually resist, but
Grace overrules it, that in its resistance it does not overcome; it resists
quoad pugnam, non quoad victoriam; to a conflict, not to a conquest. Grace is
judgment brought forth to Mat. 12 20. Si vere volumus defendere liberu^
arbitrium, non opponemus unde fit liberum. Qui oppugnat gratiam illuminante^,
qua nostrum ad declinandum a malo and faciendum bonum liberatur arbitriu^, ipse
arbitriu^ suum adhuc vult esse cap tivu^. Aug. Epist. 107.
victory in the end. Neither is this determination of the will by Grace
contrary to its liberty; it sets it at liberty rather, because it is done by a
precedent light in the understanding. If indeed the will had an object forced
upon it, which the understanding did not dictate to be best pro hic and nunc,
then there was violence offered to it; but for the will to choose that which the
understanding does determine it unto as best, in this does the liberty of the
will properly consist. The Spirit of Christ being a Spirit of Liberty, Eccles.
12.3. Extrema^ visus imminutionem; quam indigitat per obscurati^nem videntium
per fenestras. Joan. Coch. in Eccles. Anima est secundum suam essentiam toto
corpore and tota in qualibet part. Joan. Scharf. Physic. l. 6. c 1. 7.
does act every faculty modo sibi proportionato, according to its place and
subordination in the soul; as the soul hears in the ear, works with the hand,
looks out at the windows of the eyes: so the Spirit of Grace works in the
understanding to apprehend the things of God, and in the will to choose them,
acting every faculty toward spiritual objects according unto its nature for
spiritual ends.

3. There follows in the soul strange secret allurements of the Spirit, which
are a great means to sweeten the choice and make the will more cheerful, and
full therein. For the Spirit of Grace is the (...) dicitur, id quod causam dat
summi gaudii. Joh. 15.11 and 17.13. Grot. in Heb. 1.9.
Oil of gladness, not only in Christ but in all the members of Christ, Psalm.
45.7. that they choose freely, and with delight things spiritual, and afterward
rejoice and glory in their choice: That if a man were set free and left to his
liberty, he would make the same choice to eternity. As Paul does, Phil. 3.8. I
count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ my
Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things; and he did not repent of
the bargain, but adds, and I do count them but dung that I may win Christ. As a
woman that loves her Husband, Pelliciam ad me blandis verbis, and conabor
persuadere ut relictis amatoribus mecum redeat in gratiam, Mercer. (...) Duobus
verbis redditur a Sept. (...). Exodus 22.16. (...) and (...). Deuteronomy. 11.16.
Conrad. Kirsher. Neque est nulla notionum convenientia; est enim stoliditas
illa, qua quis mendacio applaudit, cordis nimis late patentis supinitas, quod
debet arcte custodiri. Coccei. in Job 31.
is so fully satisfied in her choice, that she says, If I had all the world
before me, I should choose no other. Therefore we read of the persuasions of
the Spirit, Genesis 9.27. The allurements of the Spirit, Hos. 2.14. The word in
both places is (...) which signifies to persuade, or entice, or blandiendo
decipere, to deceive one by fair words. It is used sometimes in a good,
sometimes in an evil sense: Sometimes for the allurements of Satan in ways of
temptation, though he does meet with the will of man wholly determined by a
principle of evil, as it is in all unregenerate men; yet to act this will, he
has his persuasions and enticements. Job 31.27. If my heart has been secretly
enticed: Besides the determination of a man's will to sin, there are allurements
of Satan, which act this will with more cheerfulness, and delight. So it is
with the Spirit of Christ, he has his secret persuasions and allurements,
which facilitate the work of the will, which is in a great measure determined
to good before hand. Cant. 6.12. Or ever I was aware, my soul set me in the
Chariots of my willing people. For so much the word that we render Amminadib
does signify, when the heart is caught up, and stolen away after Christ, fully
and freely, we know not how. This is a further way that the Lord uses to make
his people willing in the day of his power.

4. By giving a man an experimental taste of the comfort, peace, sweetness, and
security that is in holiness and the ways thereof. Therefore we read in
Scripture of spiritual senses of the Saints. They are said to have their senses
exercised (...), Quid est isle sensus spiritualis? est spiritualis rerum
divinarum expe rientia; qua in nobis ipsis per gratiam Dei sentimus and
gustamus in cord nostro bonitatem and amorem Dei; ex qua quam vera certaque
sit tota divina sapientia experimur. Zanch. in Philip.
Heb. 5.14. And the Apostle prays, Phil. 1.9. That they may abound in all
knowledge (...) and in all sense. Experience is nothing else, but the bringing
of things to sense, and thereby tryng the truth and goodness of them. Therefore
what we have brought to sense, we call an experiment. Spiritual experience
therefore is a bringing of things to a spiritual sense: And this is a very
glorious work of the Spirit, thereby bringing on the will to choose the things
of God, and to go out to them more abundantly, in which it has formerly found
so much sweetness and contentment: And though there be a taste that
unregenerate men have let into the soul by the common works of the Spirit,
tasting the good Word of God, and the powers of the world to come, Heb. 6.4.
Yet this taste is but of the good things that come by them, not of the goodness
that is in them. Now there is nothing in the world does carry the bent of the
will toward an object with greater eagerness then this, that it has tasted,
and knows what is in it, and that the man is not deceived. It is so in the ways
of sin; an experimental taste of the sweetness of it does draw out the heart,
and engage the will, much more then the bare notion and contemplation could do.
As Plutarch reports of the Gauls, when they had once tasted the sweet Wine of
Italy, they were never satisfied till they had conquered, Vini, olei and
liquaminis exportatio lege Imperiali interdicta est; ne Barbari gustu illecti
promptius invaderent fines Romanorum. Leg. 1. Cod. quae res exportari non
debeant.
and possessed that Land, where such excellent Vines grew. And for that cause
the Lord sent searchers before into the Land of Canaan, that the people tasting
the precious fruits of that good Land, of which they had such clear and
manifold promises, they might be the more encouraged and quickened at the
command of God to enter, what hardships or oppositions soever they met withal
in that enterprise.

The Historian therefore has observed of the Inhabitants of Chyna; Exteri in
loca regni interiora non admittuntur; Boterus in Catalogo Imperiorum.
tantum in oris maritimis conceditur commericum. They admitted none to Trade in
the heart of the Kingdom, but only upon their Borders, and in maritine Towns:
least the goodness and riches of their Land being discovered, should stir up in
the Neighbor Nations a desire to invade them. It is therefore generally made
by Interpreters, an impolitike vainglory in Hezekiah, to show his Treasures
unto the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon, 2 King. 20.12.13.
thereby to inflame their desires to become Masters and Owners both of his
Land, and of his Treasures, which shortly after they did. Whosoever he be,
whose heart does rise against the Law of God, and whose will does not submit
thereunto, look up unto the Spirit of Christ, for the putting forth of these
acts upon the soul: For the more or less the Spirit does exercise these, the
more or less is the will brought into a conformity unto the will of Christ. And
this is the main ground of the differing degrees of Grace in the Saints, which
does consist in a conformity of our will unto the will of God.

Quest. 2. It may be further said, that there remains corruption in the best
men, and that in the will as well as in any of the other faculties. The Law of
the members comes forth from the will, as well as the law of the mind. A godly
man finds in himself a twofold will, that he cannot do the things he would,
Gal. 5.17. Godly men may sin presumptuously; therefore David prays against it,
Psalm. 19.13. The word in the original (...) signifies a superbis, so that
presumptuous sins are made up of two things:

1. They are sins against knowledge, in which the will is engaged; it is sinning
wilfully, not ignorantly.

2. When the Law of God opposes a man in this way of sinning, and his heart
does rise against it, through pride and contempt of the Authority of God. And
the word (...) keep back, notes a proness thereunto in the best men, if if they
be not restrained by Grace. They may sin with deliberation, consent, delight.

How then should a man know whether he does sin with the whole consent of will?
How should a man discern that there is Grace in the will, when there are
constant risings and oppositions against the will of God? How should a man be
able to say, my whole heart is not in it? though I sleep yet my heart wakes;
how should a man be able to discern Grace in the will even then when there are
the strongest actings of the will for sin?

Answ. It is true while we live here, there will be a mixture of corruption in
the will, as well as in any other faculty. For Grace and sin are mixed in the
same soul, as wine and water in the same cup; there is no part of it perfect
wine, or perfect water. Hereafter indeed the will shall be perfectly set free
and determined only unto good for ever, as it is in the Angels and the souls of
just men made perfect. For that is Liberty which comes nearest to the nature of
God, who is the most free Agent. Therefore that which the Schoolmen call
Libertas contraria confisting in a posse velle bonum vel malum, a power to will
good or evil, this is not properly liberty, neither did the liberty of Adam in
his Creation consist therein. Quid erit liberius libero arbitrio, quando jam
non poterit servire peccato; quae futura erit homini, sicut facta est Angelis
sanctis, merces meriti? prima libertas erat posse non peccare; novissima autem
erit multo major, non posse peccare. Aug. de cor. and great. cap. 11. Liberum
arbitrium est eadem facultas cum voluntate, idemque objectum sortita est. At
objectum voluntatis est bonum. Objectum ergo liberi arbitrii bonum est.
Potentia peccandi neque libertas est, neque pars libertatis. Gibenf. de libert.
creat. l. 1. cap. 31.
For liberty is a perfection, it is in God, in Christ, in the Angels; but a
posse peccare, a power to sin, is an imperfection, which shall be taken away in
Heaven, and the soul determined perfectly to that which is good for ever. Yet
while we live here there will be a double principle in the will, and sin will
act therein as well as in the rest of the faculties; yet a man that will
observe, may discern the actings of Grace, in his will even in the midst of the
workings of corruption; and that by these three rules.

1. Before the sin; the intention of the will of the Saints is in all things to
please God, Act. 24.16. 2 Cor. 1.11.12.
Heb. 13.18. Angelicam perfectionem non assequor; (...) saltem habeo; studium
serium honest conversandi in omnibus actionibus vitae. Par. Gratia in renatis
est habitualis intentio placendi Deo in omnibus; nec in eodem cord moratur cum
proposito peccandi. Daven. in Col. 1.10.
We trust, (...), we are persuaded, or we are confident that we have a good
conscience in all things; upon what is this persuasion grounded? he adds (...)
willing in all things to live honestly, 2 Cor. 5.9. We labor (...) ab honoris
appetitu originem trahit; usu tamen traductum est, ad omne id quod magno studio
and contentione agimus. Grot. in Romans 15.20.
(...), we ambitiously labor, that whether present or absent, we may be
accepted of him. That is, this is the constant bent of our soul, (...). Chrysostom.
in loc. (...). Oecum.
the serious intention of our will, always to walk worthy of God unto all well
pleasing, Col. 1.10. And in this does sincerity property consist; that
whenever a godly man sins, he is surprised and overtaken, Gal. 6.1. contrary
unto his general purpose, and the habitual bent of his will, as has been
formerly mentioned.

2. In the very act of sin; there is a principle in the will that does rise
against it, that does not approve of what is done, (...). Chrysostom. in Romans
6.12.
though by the power of temptation and corruption it be overborn. Romans 7.15,
16, 17. The good that I would, I do not; but the evil that I would not, that do
I. There is something in the will that does rise against it, even when a man
does it. Indeed in the very act of sinning, it is hard to discern it. As in
water hot on the fire, though by reason a man knows that there is a principle
of cold in it, yet at present it is hard to discern it: So, there is a
principle, a bent of the will for God even when its led captive. For the will
is not overcome. For if there were a total and an universal resignation of the
will to sin, it were no more a captivity, this would constitute sin in
dominion; but when a man is under force, that he can say, my will did never
wholly consent to it; for that which is born of God does not sin, the
regenerate part does never sin, or consent to sin, even when sin is acted by
the unregenerate part; but he can say, though I sleep, yet my heart wakes,
Cant. 5.2. Therefore it is not I that do it, Aliud est non habere peccatum,
aliud non obedire; Aliud est implere quod praeceptum est, aliud est per quendam
conatum saltem id agere quod scriptum est. Non sic manet peccatum ut ejus non
sit facta remissio; sed manet superatum and peremptum si non illicitis
consensionibus reviviscat. Aug. de peccat. and remiss. l. 2. c 28.
but sin that dwells in me, I am not wholly overcome. It is but a forced
subjection, my whole will is not in it.

3. (...). Chrysostom. in Romans 7.
After the act, the man allows not what he has done, Romans 7.15. What I do,
Iallow not; (...) I know not with the knowledge of allowance and approbation.
Sin may so far by the power of temptation overcome the will, as to lead it
captive to conceive, and commit with some kind of consent and delight, but post
factum scelus agnoscitur. After the act, a godly man allows it not. The
temptation for the present may prevail, and after the sin committed, he may
seem for a while to approve the act; we see it in David, Vitium iracundiae
objecerat Deus; Jonas sibi in sua insania indulget. Quum talis contumaciae
exemplum cernimus in sancto viro; quanto magis quisque nostru^ metuere debet?
Calvin.
and Jonah, cap. 4.9. who justified his present passion, against the
expostulations of God, I do well to be angry even unto the death, but he lay
under the power of the temptation all the while, and was not yet come to
himself after sinning; but when a man comes to himself, he reviews the sin with
more self displacency and abhorrencie then ever he was carried after it with
love before. As we see in Peter, he went out and wept bitterly; and in David
(though the matter of Vriah was the great blemish of his life, 1 King. 15.5.
He was upright in all things save in the matter of Uriah) yet afterward it
cost him broken bones before he recovered his peace. For Grace in a godly man's
heart is as a Fountain, Matthew. 12.35. Jer. 6.7.
A good man out of the good treasure of his heart (...) casts out good things.
The metaphor is taken from a fountain casting forth of water. If you cast mud
into a Fountain, (...) significat vel ruptum resarcire, redint^grare, Matthew.
4.21. Mar. 1.19. omnibus numeris absolutum reddere ut nihil desit aut rodundet,
vel membrum luxatum suo loco reponere. ^eza.
it will never cease till it work it self clear again, Gal. 6.1. (...) set him
in joint again. A godly man under sin, is as one that has a bone out of joint,
always in pain till it be set again in its own place. These are the Rules by
which a man may know, whether there be an habitual conformity in his will unto
the commanding will of God, even then when the actings of the man fall contrary
and cross thereunto.

Quest. 3. But some man may say, I bless God my will is subdued unto the will
of God, that I am ready to say, be the command never so difficult, be the
service never so unpleasing and unacceptable to flesh; speak Lord for thy
servant hears, Here I am, send me, Isay 6 8. But while we live here, we know
but in part; there is a great blindness in our minds, (...). 15.
that we know not what the will of God is; veritas in puteo; In some cases the
will of God lies deep. Nazianzen, Orat. 29. branches all things under three
heads: 1. Some things we know: 2. Some things we daily study and endeavor to
know: 3. Some things are reserved for glory in the life to come.

By this means I am many times at a loss in my own thoughts, my way is hid, I
know not whether to turn aside to the right or the left hand. In such cases how
should I do to know what the good and perfect and acceptable will of God is?

Answ. Herein I shall give you first some general Rules; secondly, some more
particular directions.

First, The general Rules are clearly laid down in the word, and they are these:

1. I must not do the least evil to promote the greatest good; which is the
Doctrine of the Apostle, Romans 3.8. Because there is no good that can recompense
the evil of sin, that being the greatest evil. If there could any good come by
sin, that could recompense the evil of it, that might be embraced; but Ad
sempiternam salutem nullus ducendus est opitulante mendacio: non enim malis
convertentiu^ moribus ad bonos mores convertendus est. L. ad Consentium de
mendacio. c. 21. Mallem mundus a peccato Gehennam intrare quam pollutus in
coelum.
Austin has determined, that if the salvation of the world might be procured
by one officious lie, Co^ditionaliter intelligendu^ est, and hoc moderamine, si
id salva pietate liceat. Glass. Rhet. Sacr. p. 477. Dilectionis hunc esse
perpetuum limitem ut ad aras usque procedat; quod si ergo in Deo, non extra
Deum diligimus, nunquam erit nimius noster amor. Call. It is not to be
understood of a separation from the Spirit and Grace of Christ; but from the
glory and the comforts of Christ. If he had desired the first, he had sinned;
for we should not desire to be in a sinful condition to save all the world.
Buroughs Moses choice, p. 523. 524.
the world was rather to be destroyed then the sin committed. And Anselm
professes he should count Hell a good peniworth, if exchanged for a sin. Hell
being only contra bonum creatu^, Sin contra bonum increatum; The one against a
created, the other against an uncreated good. Neither can I look upon that
Interpretation as strained of that place, Romans 9.3. I could wish my self
accursed from Christ for my kinsmen according to the flesh; That is to be
separated from him in happiness, though not in holiness. Its true, happiness
and holiness cannot be separated, neither could Paul be separated from Christ
in either. And that Rule of Luther is true, Amor extatious procedit etiam ad
impossibilia. Love may carry a man to desire things impossible, but not things
unlawful. But for the Apostle to have wished himself to have been separated
from Christ in holiness, had been a sinful wish, and therefore not to be
desired for the highest good whatsoever.

2. The greatest evil of suffering is to be chosen, rather then the least evil
of sinning. Therefore it is made a fruit of Moses Faith, that he chose rather
to suffer then to sin, Heb. 12.25. And its made a great part of their
wickedness to choose iniquity rather then affliction. Job 36.21. (...) cum (...)
dilectionem rei denotat in comparatione alterius minus dilectae, cum animi
affectione and complacentia. Cocceius in loc. Nemo potest convincere aliquando
esse mentiendum, nisi qui poterit ostendere aeternum aliquod bonum obtineri
mendacio. Sed tanto quisque ab aeternitate discedit, quanto a veritate
discordat. Aug. de mendac. cap. 7.
If there be any thing that does appear to be a sin, we must say with Cyprian,
In re tam sancta nulla est deliberatio, I am concluded under the will of God, I
cannot do this great wickedness and sin against him.

3. Non omnes leges quas Magistratus condit subditorum obligant conscientiam;
non tantum obedire recusant Apostoli; sed etiam declarant se teneri ad non
obediendu^; est minister Dei, est (...) non igitur obligant leges ad ea quae
Deus declaravit illicita; and quod in legibus Reip. declaratu^ est injustum
atque iniquu^. Caspar Streso com. pract. in Act. Prove. 29.25.
We must in all things obey God rather then man, Acts 4.19. If the command of
man does fall cross to the will of God; then you must not be the servants of
men. Therefore were the people of Israel oppressed and broken in Judgment,
because they willingly walked after the Commandment of their Rulers, Hosea.
5.11. I confess the fear of man is a snare; but whenever it is objected, we
are to sanctify the Lord God in our hearts, making him our dread and our fear.

4. In ambiguis licet charitas semper deligat meliorem partem: tamen vitio non
caruit Rebeccae dolus; sciebat immutabile esse decretum quo electus and
adoptatus fuerat Jacob; cur non patienter expectat, dum reipsa confirmet Deus
quod e caelo pronunciavit? Calv. in Gen 27.5. Saepe fieri potest ut hoc velit
homo mala voluntate, quod Deus vult bona, etc Aug. enchir. c 101. Deus non
tantu^ jusserat ut tolleret idololatriae authors, veru^ etiam ipsam
extirparet; ille caede contentus alteram mandati divini partem prorsus
neglexit. Ita quod a Jehova praecipitur a Jehu efficitur, sed non ex eodem
principio, non eodem animo and intention. Tarnov.
Good intentions will not justify bad actions, neither will good actions bear
out evil intentions. For the intention is not the Rule but the Commandment;
and if that be transgressed, it matters not what our intentions are. Rebecca
had a good intention in putting Jacob upon an unlawful way of getting the
blessing. For the Lord had said, the elder shall serve the younger; but her
good intention does not justify her action. And on the contrary, Jehu did a
good action, but with an evil intention: Therefore as from him, the Lord abhors
it. Reformation in Rulers upon Politic principles, subjecting the things of
God unto secular ends, though the action be good, yet it is rejected of God,
because the intention is evil.

5. Sinete sapientes hujus mundi alta sapientes and terram lingentes sapienter
descendere, in infernum. Bern. de vit. solit. Ipsa est professio vestra
quaerere Deu^ Jacob non communi hominum more, sed quaerere faciem Dei quam
vidit Jacob. Bern. ibid. (...). Chrysostom. Illud Grotii dilutum est, fruatur
quisque sua sententia, Romans 14.6.
We must not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2. The word (...) does
signify either quantitatem continuam, or discretam, either magnitudinem or
multitudinem. Thou shall not follow great men to do evil, for there is no
example will bear a man out against the command of God. Or, thou shall not
follow a multitude. Man being as a drop of water emptied into the Sea, carried
to and fro as the Tide goes, this also will not bear a man out, when the will
of God is manifested to the contrary.

6. In doubful cases, via tutior est eligenda, its good to go the safest way;
whatsoever a man does, he ought to be well persuaded in his own heart. For,
whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, Romans 14.5.6. It is dangerous for a man in
the things of God, not only to act with an erring but with a doubting
conscience.

Secondly, The more particular directions for a man that desires to know the
will of God in doubtful cases, are these:

1. Be renewed in the spirit of your minds, Romans 12.2. For it is the spiritual
man only that has spiritual discoveries. Psalm. 25.14. Job 29.4. (...) ad
arcanum consilium refert quod inter socios ejusdem regni aut Reipub. consortes
tractari soleat. Proprietas illa secreti indicare videtur internam quandam
divinaru^ re^u^ contemplationem, colloquia secreta, etc. Pined. 2 Pet. 1.19.
Ps. 73 16.17. Hoc est in coetum in quo sonat verbum Dei, and ubi causae
ostenduntur cur Deus Ecclesiam velit esse cruci subjectam, and impios in hac
vita florere patiatur. Mallor. Dan. 9.1.2.
It is unto him only that the Spirit has under-taken to be (...) the guide of
his way. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. And there are
secrets of his Covenant, and secrets of his Providence. God takes delight to
reveal himself to his people in the day of their streights. Schola crucis est
Schola lucis. But it is otherwise with the ungodly men; the Lord suffers them
to grope in the dark, as though they had no eyes. And in difficult cases, he
does not only hide his own face, but he hides their way also from them.

2. Search the Scriptures of truth, Joh. 5.39. For they are a light shining in
a dark place. And the more we are in the dark, the more need we have to have
recourse to this light. David met with a passage of providence that he could
not satisfy his spirit in; now he goes into the sanctuary of God where the
Word was read and opened; there he understood the end of the men and the
matter. Daniel consulted the Scripture concerning the return of the Captivity;
and whenever the people of God have been in the dark, they have had recourse
unto this light.

3. Lay aside all received Traditions whatsoever. For he must have nothing to
do with the will of man, that comes to enquire the will of God. For he that
enquires of God, and sets up his Idols in his heart, Ezeck. 14.4. Veniat verbum
Domini, veniat and submittemus etiamsi nobis essent sexcenta colla, etc.
Baldass. Ep. ad Oecolampad.
the Lord will answer him according to the multitude of his Idols. Your
understandings must not be blended with contrary impressions, nor your hearts
biased with former intentions; you must come clean paper to the Lord, that he
may write what he will; you must lay apart all malice and guile, and
superfluity of naughtiness, that you may receive the word with meekness, James
1.21. Perit omne judicium cum res transit in affectum. The judgment is bribed
and so blinded, when the affections are pre-engaged.

4. Have an eye of Faith upon that promise, Joh. 16.13. The spirit shall lead
you into all truth. It is not made to the Apostles only, as some of our own
Interpreters have well observed, but it belongs unto all the Saints; Into all
truth, non absolute, as if they should know all truth, Daven. de judice and
norma fidei, p. 98. Promissio haec ad eos solos pertinet qui fese subjiciunt
magisterio spiritus.
for here the best know in part, but in omnem veritatem necessariam, into all
truth needful for the guide of their way. Observe therefore and attend unto the
secret hints and speakings of the Spirit. For this promise shall be fulfilled
unto none but those that subject themselves unto the guidance and direction of
this same Spirit.

5. Be much in Prayer, to seek a way. Thus did Ezra in a great straight, Chap.
8. v. 21. We fasted and prayed to seek of him a right way for our selves, our
little ones, and all our substance. So does David, Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do
thy will, teach me thy Statutes: Let thy good Spirit lead me, etc. There are
strange intimations that the Spirit gives to the Saints as a return of prayer.
And it is a strange boldness that they have in prayer when they go unto God
upon this ground. 1 Samuel 23.10.11.12.
As we see in David, Shall Saul come down to Keilah, and shall the men of
Keilah deliver me up? I beseech thee tell thy servant. And 1 Samuel 9, 15.
Occulte revelaverat; sic enim in aurem dicimus quod ecccultu^ esse volumus. A
Lap. Aurem revelare est aliquid indicare. 1 Samuel 20.2. Job 36.10.
The Lord told Samuel in his ear: As friends use to impart secrets each to
other; God did of old appoint unto his people the Vrim and Thummim, that they
might enquire of him and receive directions Number. 27.21. 1 Samuel 28.6.
from him in doubtful cases. That means Ezra 2.63. Nehe. 7.65. Vox submissa de
caelo delapsa, unde futura didicerunt; quae post Prophetiam semper audita fuit
tempore Templi secundi. Matthew. 17.3. Act. 9.4. Jo. 12.28. Schindler in (...) Ad
dexteram Dei sedet amictu sacerdotali; sacerdotalis enim Baltheus fuit. Rev.
1.13. Bright.
ceased through the sin of the people in the Captivity of Babylon, and was
afterward sometimes supplied until Christ's time by a voice from Heaven, which
the Hebrews did call (...) These extraordinary ways of revealing the mind of
God to his people are ceased; but in the substance of them they remain. We have
still a high Priest over the House of God, and he wears the Vrim and Thummim
upon his Breast Plate, which remains unto his holy Ones unto this day. And with
this high Priest we are to consult in all the difficulties and doubtful cases
that we meet with in our way.

6. If yet thy heart be doubtful, be not over hasty in acting, but having
sought direction from God, be willing to wait for a return. Esaias 30.18.
For the Spirit is a free agent, and will be as well waited for in the point of
direction as of consolation. Judicium significat quid tempus postulat; quid
conveniat personis and circumstantiis. Eccles. 8.5.6. Joan. Coch.
It may be the Lord will not give an answer presently, but thy darkness shall
continue, as Paul's Thorn in the flesh, after he had besought the Lord thrice.
He that believes, in this case also makes not haste: So blessed are those that
wait for him: Misericordiam exercet Deus juxta aequitatis leges. Farer.
Thou shall afterward be clear in that, of which now thou doubtest: and thou
shall act with quietness and comfort in that, in which now thou can not see
thy way. Which you are the rather to observe, Spes longanimitatem, unanimitatem
charitas, fides magnanimitatem operatur. Bern. de ascent. Dom. Sermon. 5. Omne
consilium in festinatione captum, stultitia est. Proverb. Hebr.
because what you do in haste without sufficient direction, you may with Spira
repent by leisure.

And so much for submission to the Commanding will of God.

We now come unto the second consideration of Gods will, which is effecting;
and the observation is:

That the power of godliness is seen much in subjecting the will of man to the
effecting will of God.

And herein we must speak unto these three things.

First, The Rule of Gods acting is his own will.

Secondly, That godliness in the Creature does conform his will thereunto: And
wherein these acts of conformity do consist.

Thirdly, The grounds or Arguments why our will ought in this also to be
subjected unto the will of God.

1. God works all things according to to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians.
1.11. The will of his precept is the Rule of all our actions; Decretum est vel
providentiae, sc. de rerum omnium creatione, conservatione and gubernatione.
Vel decretu^ praede. stinationis,
the will of his purpose the Rule of all his actions. There is a double Decree
of God. First, general, which is the purpose of God for the ordering of all
things: For nothing comes to pass at an adventure: Secondly, special, which is
the purpose of God concerning men and Angels. sc. de ereaturarum rationalium
statu aeterno. Alting. loc. com. part. 1. p. 58.
But there is nothing comes to pass but it falls under a Decree, which being an
act of his will, this is the Rule of all the actions of God, Psalm. 135.6.
Whatever the Lord pleases that does he in Heaven and in Earth, in the Sea, and
in all deep places.

This effecting will of God does extend

First, Unto Election and Reprobation; Seeing we were all made of the same
clay, and yet one makes a vessel to honor, and another unto dishonor. When
Jacob and Esau came out of the same loins, yet he says, though Esau was Jacobs
Brother, Dei beneplacitum est prima regula omnis justitiae moralis in Deo erga
creaturas ut and bonitatis and misericordiae. Rhaetorfort. exercit. p. 332.
Electio proprie non est actus misericordiae, nec reprobatio actus justitiae,
sed Dominii.
yet I loved Jacob, Mal. 1.2. He will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy.
There is no resisting his will: All is attributed unto the sovereignty thereof,
Romans 9.18.

Secondly, unto Vocation and effectual calling, when all men were alike born
dead in trespasses and sins, that some should be called out of the world, that
the Lord should catch Heb. 2.16. (...) est eos apprebendere qui in summo
versantur discrimine, and eos injecta manu asserere. Cameron Myroth.
after some, when he let others go, Heb. 2.16. the word (...) signifies: That
the Lord should in this manner catch after some, Genesis 17.21. Foedus Deinil
aliud est quam divina declaratio de ratione percipiendi amoris Dei, and unione
ac communione ipsius potiendi. Coeceius de foedere and testam. Dei these. 1.. 5.
Si ad effectu^ plantationis Evangelii and rigationis aspicitur, aliud actum est
cum eis quorum exteriores aures corporali voce pulsatae sunt: aliud in iis
quorum interiorem sensum Deus aperuit, and in quorum cord posuit fidei
sundamentum, dilectionisque fervorem. Prosper ad Capitul. Gallor cap. 5.
when he lets others fall into perdition; that he will establish the Covenant
with Isaac, but not with Ishmael, though both in the Father had an equal Title
to it: it is only of his own will, that he begets us, Iam. 1.18. Ioh. 1.13. We
are born, not of bloods, (it is spoken of our new birth,) nor of the will of
the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of the will of God.

3. In giving of the means of Grace: Ephesians. 2.14.
If he will enclose the Church in the Garden of Judah, fence them about, Lex
Mosaicae instar septi erat, quo populus Judaicus custody batur, and paries
intergerinus quo a Gentibus seperabatur. Gloss. Rhet. Sacr. page 388. In voce
(...) est Metonymia; and causam inimicitiae denotat, ob quam Gentes ab
Israelitis spernchantur. Grot. in loc.
keep out all other people by a Partition Wall; his name shall be only known
amongst them: but as for the Heathen they shall have no knowledge of his Law;
In Jury is God known, and his Name is great in Israel. (...) verbum Sept.
usitatissunum. 1. Dissimulatienem denotat, cum quis dissimulat quasi non
videat. Deuteronomy. 22.1, 3 4. (...). etc. Zach. 1.12. (...), etc. 2. contemptum.
Deuteronomy 3.26. (...). Psalm. 78.62. (...), etc. Consule Grot. in loc. Caryl in Job
3.4.
To them he has committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3.3. But for the Gentiles,
the times of that Ignorance he did wink at, suffering all Nations to walk in
their own ways, Acts 17.30. And as for the calling of the Gentiles unto the
fellowship of the Church, it was a mystery hid in God from Ages and
Generations, which was the reason that the Jews did so much stumble at it,
forbidding them to preach to the Gentiles, to fulfill their sins always, that so
wrath might come upon them to the uttermost. It was only hid in the breast of
God, and there can be no reason given for it but his will. We are to sit down
and admire the depth of his wisdom, and his counsels which are past finding
out. And now the Gospel is preached all the world over, that the Lord should
cause it to rain upon one City and not upon another, to carry the word about as
Clouds, Amos 4.7. Vt ostenderet, nihil in hac re fortuitum esse, nihil casu,
nihil temere fieri; si nihil ommino pluisset, de providentia Dei minus
cogitassent. Drus. in loc.
that they might drop fatness, to set it up in a place, and thereby exalt that
place to Proverbialis est locutio Graecis and Latinis, pro eo quod est rebus
florentibus and illustri loco esse; Cui contrarium est (...), sc. ad infima
loca; quo fortunarum eversio significatur. Grot. in loc. In sublimiorem aliquem
honoris and potestatis gradum eveni. Mede in Apoc. 11.12.
Heaven, Math. 11.23.
and-then to remove it again, forsake his Tabernacle and thereby bring them
down to Hell: to take a people to himself, as he did the seven Churches of
Asia, and the Church of Rome, and afterward to call them Hose. 1.9. Ecclesia
non est uni loco aut populo affixa; siquidem qui modo erat Dei populus, sua
infidelitate ac impietate illo nominis honor se reddit indignum. Tarn. in loc.
Non relicti sunt a Deo ut relinquerent Deum: sed reliquerunt and relicti sunt;
ex bono in malum propria voluntate mutati sunt. Prosper ad capit. Gallor. cap.
3.
Loammi: To remove first the Ordinances, and then the Church, to pluck down the
hedge thereof, and let it be trodden down, and the people to be left in the
same darkness in which before they were; To set a (...) est (...), Gal. 4.26.
Heb. 12.22. (...); id est, Ecclesia Christiana; quam etiam caeli nomine
designat Apocal. Stellae sunt qui Doctorum officio funguntur. Stellae cadentes
sunt Doctores a veritate deficientes. Grot. in Math. 24.29. Rev. 1.20.
Star in such an Orb, and then to remove him to another place at his pleasure;
That some should have abundance of means of Grace, while others sit in
darkness, and the shadow of death: And which is strange, that the Lord should
give the means to one place, and deny it to another, which he did foresee
would have reaped more fruit by it if they had enjoyed it. As we see in
Notandum hoc; non semper in hac vita contingere ut male sit Evangelti
contemptoribus, severius enim actum est in hac vita cum Sodomitis, Ty^^s and
Sidoni^s quam cum harum urbium civibus, etc. Cartw. De poenitentia intelligi
debet in ordine ad poenam temporalem; solet enim Deus parcere and poenas
avertere resipiscentibus, ut Nin^^tis. Par. in loc.
Capernaum, Thou art exalted up to Heaven, thou shall be brought down to Hell.
For if the mighty works that have been done in thee, had been done in Tire or
in Sodom, they would have repented; and yet Capernaum repented not. To cause it
to rain upon the Wilderness, and not upon the furrows of the Field, herein the
will of God must be submitted to.

4. In respect of natural parts and abilities of body or mind. When all men
were alike corrupted in Adam, and therefore did deserve to be given over to the
same fruits and effects of sin. Adam in paradiso expers peccati, capax Dei, cui
crat orbis sub^ectus, nullus infestus, l^b^^ an^mus, and visibilis Deus.
Prosper de vita contemplat. l. 2. cap. 18. Si quod Ad^m perdid^t, posteritas
non amisit, ipsum solum laesit peccatum ejus, and non genus humanum; sed emnes
in eo peccaverunt: and praevaricationts merit, tota ejus propago damnata est.
Omnes igitur quod Adam perd^dit, perdiderunt. Prosper ad excepta Genuens. ad
dub. 3.
For in Adam the sin of all men is equal; and where sin is equal a man would
think in reason, the fruits and effects of sin should be so also. Now for one
to have great, high, improveable parts, and these beautified with gifts
infused, and many acquired habits; another man to have a dark soul, low parts,
a weak apprehension, a dull fancy, an injudicious mind, a frail memory, a
feeble body, when another shall be able with Achitophel to give Counsel like an
Oracle of God, and with Herod to speak as if he had the tongue of an Angel, it
is only the effecting will of God that puts the difference.

5. For one to be called to a high place, to be born to a Kingdom, to be
exalted above his Brethren, as Diamonds above Pebbles, as Gold above the common
dust of the Earth; And another man to be born upon a Dunghill; one bred up in
scarlet, Lam 4.5.
and fed delicately; another man set with the Dogs of the flock, digging up
Mallows by the bushes, and eating Juniper roots; Job 4.30. Act. 17.26. Vt eo
modo v^hementius commendaretur societatis unitas vinculumque concordiae, cum
non tantum naturae similitudine, verum and cognationis affectu homines
necterentur. Augustine. de civit. l. 12. c. 21.
it is only the will of God that makes the difference: for he has made of one
blood all Nations that are upon the face of the whole earth.

6. 2 Chronicles. 7.20. Hic non extolli ipsos homines, etiamsi sint very caelestis
Doctrinae Ministri: sed testatur Deus tantum esse authoritatis in verbo suo, ut
sibi subjiciat quicquid altum est in terra^ne Regibus quidem exceptis. Call.
Deponit Reges, disponit regna. Dan. 4.17.
The Lord does plant Kingdoms, and pluck them up by the roots, as he threatened,
I will pluck you up by the roots out of the good land that I have given you.
And Jer. 1.10. I send thee to pluck up, to destroy, to build and to plant. He
was the Messenger to deliver the word, but it was God that would do the work.
He takes the most flourishing Kingdom; (for Nebuchadnezzar was the head of
gold) and breaks it and makes it to give place to a second that was inferior to
it self, the breast of silver. Sometimes he does destroy the greatest Families,
cuts short a Psa. 76.12. (...) Ad verbum est vindemi at spiritum, sc. fastum ac
superbiam, vinitoris instar: vel vitam; suorum causa, ubi opus est, principibus
ipsis vitam adimit. Muis.
the spirits of Princes, smites Amos 3.15. Mos olim Regum erat; habebant duas
domos, aestivam unam, and alteram hyemalem. Jer. 36.22. Judge 3.20. Drus. Esaias.
5 9. Esaias 30.25.
the winter, the summer house; lays many houses desolate, great and fair
without an Inhabitant; lays his hand upon the great Ones of the Earth; and the
Mountains skip, the Towers fall: many that are in high place and esteem, men of
great Authority, their right hand shall wither, and their right eye shall be
put out. The Lord will raise the poor out of the dust, and lift the beggar from
off the dunghill, Zach. 11.17. per brachium intelligitur robur, per oculum
prudentia, ubi maturum tempus advenerit, palam fore comm flagitia ita ut in
ipsorum faciem conspuant omnes, ut sint omnibus detestationi. Calv.
and set them amongst Princes, and make them inherit the Throne of glory.
Because the pillars of the Earth are the Lords, and he has set the world upon
them, 1 Samuel 2.8. The bows of the mighty are broken, and they that stumbled
are girt with strength; they that were full, have hired out themselves for
bread, etc. What is the ground of all this? Only this is his good pleasure, He
does whatsoever it pleased him in Heaven and in Earth, in the Sea, and in all
deep places.

2. Our wills ought to be subjected unto the will of God in all these, and
herein the power of godliness does in a great measure consist; not only in a
subjection of our wills to Gods commanding will, but unto his effecting will
also, in whatsoever he does in the World; and the acts subjecting of a man's
will to the will of God herein, ought to be such as these.

1. We ought to acknowledge and admire his wisdom, justice and sovereignty in
them. That which the Apostle speaks of the rejecting of the Jews and the
bringing in of the Gentiles, which wrought as great a change in the world as
any thing you have seen, Horu^ mysteririorum judiciorumque causas. pius and
doctus Magister maluit ad altitudinem suspendere, quam subtractum ab humana
cognitione sec^ctum temeraria inquisitione discutere; nihil omittens de his
quae non oportet ignorari, nihil contrectans de his quae non licet sciri.
Prosper devocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 13.
and a far greater; and the Love of the Apostle to the Jews was as great as
yours can be to any person or party whatsoever; yet he is so far from reasoning
and disputing against it, that he admires it, adores the wisdom and Justice of
God in it, * Romans 11.33. Oh the depth of the wisdom and the knowledge of God!
The Lord does proceed against men, so as his Judgments are a great deep, so
that a man cannot see them; His paths are in the great Psalm 77.19. Miraculum
describit in mari siccato; his verbis autem significat, Deum semper ita
gubern^e Ecclesiam, ut vesligta eju^ a mundo and ratione non conspicia^^; nec
quemquam posse illa sequi, nisi Deum ductorem habeat, etc. Moller.
waters, and his footsteps are not known; but yet they are always just when
they are secret, Quod non ideo iniquum est quia occultum est, (...) aequum est
quia judicium Dei esse non dubium est. Prosper de vocat. Gent. l. 1. cap. 17.
judicio occulto sed semper justo. Augustine. When you see Captains like great
Grass-hoppers in a Sunny day, De Assyriis dicitur Judaeam vastaturis. 1.
propter multitudinem. Judge. 7.12.2. Propter vastationem. Exodus 10.15.3. Propter
fugam subitaneam; simulac ortus est sol, celeriter avolant. Mede Coment.
Apocal. cap. 9. Psa. 76.5. Nahum. 3.12.
Nahum. 3.19. the men of might cannot find their hands; when you see Cities
made like ripe figs, falling into the mouth of the eater, men falling into the
Pits that they themselves dug, and wicked men snared in the works of their
own hands, then say, righteous art thou O Lord, and true are thy Judgments.

2. Hold your peace, (...) Interjectio est imperantis silentium. Jerome. and
silentium ex metu significat. Nemo Deo audet impune obmur. murare, ne. dum
resistere; conticescant jam omnes tumultus, etc. Tarnov. Quando consurgit ad
vindictam, evigilare dicitur ex habitaculo; id est vel e Templo, vel e coelo.
Drus.
do not dispute do not murmur, that is the command, Zach. 2.13. Be silent O all
flesh before the Lord, for he is risen up out of his holy habitation. It was a
great turn to see the power of the Persian Monarchy broken, which the Lord did
threaten he would do, and see such a Mountain: to become a Plain, there is no
doubt but there were high and hard thoughts of heart upon such a change as
this. But the Lord commands them silence, for you are but flesh, and you look
upon things with an eye of flesh; and all that you can oppose it with, is but
an arm of flesh, which will profit nothing and therefore be silent before the
Lord. Non est ei dispensationis hujus revelata justitia; nec ad inspectionem
secreti latentis admissus est; sed ut a discutiendis Dei judiciis absti. neres,
opposita est ei bonitas miserantis and volentis potestas. Prosper de vocat.
Gent. l. 1. cap. 17.


1. Do not Dispute. Remember the reproof Romans 9.20. Who art thou O man that
disputest with God? is there any contending with him in Judgment? If not in
matters of eternal Election and Reprobation, much less in temporal
Dispensations. Bring forth your strong reasons, Esaias 41.21. (...) Argumenta
fortissima, robora, litis vestrae. Ossa vocat, quia sunt veluti ossa and nervi
in corpore. Farer. (...). Theodor. Hoc itaque tenete fratres mei, nemo vos de
fide excutiat and de sana doctrina; qui secit in caelo Angelum, ipse fecit in
terra vermioulum. Expavescis in minimis, lauda magnum, totum attend. totum
lauda, etc. August. in Psalm. 148.
Is there any man, or power able to make war with him? Or is there any man able
by force of Argument to maintain his cause against him? Audaciam exististimo de
bono praecepti divini disputare. Tert. Its high presumption to Dispute any of
the commands of God whatsoever he requires us to do, much more to call him to
an account before the bar of humane judgment for what we see he himself has
done. Keep silence, because the Lord has done it. They are not men that govern
the World; Therefore all reasonings and disputings should be laid aside: We
live in a disputing age, as if men did Rule the World: Its true, it is good to
reason concerning our own Duty; but concerning the Lords doings, disputations
are dangerous.

2. Do not repine: bear it patiently, and acknowledge the sovereignty of God.
What though the cause, or the party, that thou art engaged in, Magna silentii
laus est, quo confessus est Aron justo Dei judicio extinctos esse, and ita se
cohibitum fuisse ut cum Deo rixari non auderet. Ad animum enim refertur, ut
Psalm. 39.3. Psalm. 62.1. Calv. in loc. Ephesians. 2.12. Qui extra foedus est, (...)
est, sine Deo a se culto, a se amato eoque and propitio; nonbabet (...), jus
sibi vendicandi, postulandi, possidendi quod est filiorum Dei. Coc. de foeder.
and Testamento Dei. These. 1.. 7.
prevail not: let not thy heart rise against it. Aaron had a great trial,
Levit. 10.13. He lost two Sons, by an immediate stroke of Gods hand, in an act
of sin, and yet Aaron held his peace. A higher trial had Abraham, O that
Ishmael might live in thy sight! The Lord answers, my Covenant will I establish
with Isaac. Abraham knew that there was no salvation out of Covenant, and that
this Covenant should not be established with Ishmael, and yet he sits down in
silence under the hand of God. If once the will of God be manifested, the soul
ought to acknowledge it, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. This
was the blessed temper of Ely, when he heard of the miseries that should come
upon his house: I will cut off thine arm and the arm of thy fathers house; and
there shall not be an old man in thy house for ever; 1 Samuel 2.31. Brachium ipsa
materia cogit ut de fortitudine vitali sermonem esse intelligamus. Cajet.
Descriptio est eripiendi sacerdotii; quod illius familiae robur erat and
firmamentum; dignitatem and authoritatem tuam Pontificiam auseram etc. P.
Martyr. A Lap. Se tantis opibus spoliatos prae dolor deficiant, and propter
excitati animi dignitatem invidia contabescant.
and he that is left in thy house, shall be to consume thy eyes, and to greive
thy heart; yet he answers it is the Lord.

3. Exercise a weaned heart toward thy present enjoyments. It may be thou have
lost an estate, thy friends fail, thy hopes are fallen; God has blown upon all
the projects that thy heart did fancy to thy self for thy own advancement; thy
heart ought to be as a weaned Significat se nullius rei esse sollicitu^,
infantis instar, quem matter lacte alere desut; ille tamen a matris cura pendet;
sic se omnem eventum Deo committere, etc. Muis in loc.
child, Psa. 131.2. Its spoken in reference to his dependencies, that as
children look only to their mother, they have no projects for themselves, so it
is with me; I wait only upon God, look unto him only. Homines qua^ par est
sapere and providi esse appetunt. Calv. Men are prudent and provident
creatures; but my heart is taken off from the dug of all my former comforts; my
dependencies are upon an immediate providence for supply; I project nothing for
my self. The poor leaves himself with thee, Psalm. 10.14. So much the word (...)
does fignifie; (...) Est ita quempiam relinquere, ut eum juvare aut tueri
prorsus dimisit. Psa. 22.1. Job 39.14. Ezech. 8 12. His verbis signific. dandum
esse tempus Providentiae, ut pii homines curas in Dei finum rejiciant. Deo
igitur relinquit quisquis in ejus fidem se ita consert, ut fidele depositorium
esse persuasus, maturum redemptionis tempus placide expectet. Call.
a man puts himself out of his own protection into the hands of God, with an
exclusive resolution, I will seek no farther, I am willing to be in that
condition in which he will set me, take the provision the Lord will make for
me. If he will make me a Shepherd or a King, my heart is ready. Vis me pastorem
ovium? vis me Regem populorum? ecce paratum est cor meum; as Bernard brings in
David so speaking of himself.

4. Accept the punishment: That is the expression Levit. 26.41. If their
uncircumcised heart be humbled, and they (...) Significat, consentit, Psa.
50.18. and acceptavit. Eccles. 9.7. and hinc (...) derivatur. Avernar. A Sept.
reddit per (...). significat etiam placavit and expiavit. Esaias 40.1. and inde
sensus est, ad poenam tanquam meritam consentire, ut propitiam and utilem,
aequo and grato animo far. Videtur etiam subjicere studium placandi Deo;
alludit enim ad sacrificia quibus se Deo reconciliabant. Calv. Esaias 39.8. Lam.
3.22. Genesis 32.10.
accept the punishment; the word signifies to be well pleased with it, to
acknowledge it to be less then their iniquities deserve, Ezra. 9.13. As when
the Lord threatened a grievous punishment upon the house of Hezechiah, He
accepts the punishment, saying, good is the Word of the Lord, that there shall
be truth and peace in my days. And when they were in Babylon, they
acknowledge, it is the Lords mercy that we are not consumed: And if a man
should accept it for himself, I conceive it also a Duty to accept the
punishment for others, and not to have his spirit to rise with impatient
frettings, as if the Lord had dealt with others in a way of rigor, and paid
them beyond their deserts. Surely, there ought to be a complacency of soul in
all the dealings of God toward our selves or others. An humble heart is less
then the least of all Gods mercies. And a man should bless God, that he is not
brought into the lowest condition of men, that he sees any creature below him.
As when the two Cardinals were riding to the Luther in tertium praeceptum. Ecce
hanc bestiam, bufonem intuitus; tam eximiam creatura^ fecit ^e Deus, and
nunquam gratias egi quod me quoque tam deformem bufonem non fecerit; hoc est
quod amare fleo.
Council of Constance, they heard a man in the way weeping and wailing greatly;
asking him what he alled, they found him looking upon an ugly Toad, and his
heart was melted with the consideration of this mercy, that God had not made
him such a creature, who was made of the same clay with it: Which made one of
them cry out, well said the Father, Surgunt indocti and rapiunt coelum, and nos
cum doctrinis nostris volutamur in carne and sanguine. Aug.

5. Judge it to be best: now the will of God is manifested, or else thou do
prefer thy will above Gods will. Blush at such an unworthy thought, that when
God has declared what his will is, thou should think, that if it had been
thus, it had been better; for herein thou do make thy will the Rule of
goodness, and do prefer it unto the will of God. Surely, The Psalm. 24.1.
principes non cogitent se dominos esse terrarum, sed constitutos esse tantum
vicarios. Hospitiae etiam nusquam sanctis defutura: Domini enim terra est and
plenitudo ejus. Cum etiam clarificatur Dominus, annuntiatur in fidem omnium
Gentium, and universus orbis terrarum fit Ecclesia ejus. August. in Psalm. 24.
Earth is the Lords, and fullness thereof: The Government belongs to him.
Therefore it was a gracious and wise admonition that Luther sent to Melancton,
who was much troubled at the present affairs of the Church: Ibi quoque vis est
and facultas ea dirigendi and gubernandi, quibus providere dicitur; nam in
rebus invenitur non modo natura eorum, sed ordo quo sibi invicem connectuntur,
and una in aliam tendit ut eam adjuvet, sive ut ab illa perficiatur, and
utroque pacto res been institutae sunt quoad seipsas sigillatim, quaeque dictae
sunt bonae, and generaliter quoad ordine^ valde bonae. Petr. Martyr loc.com.
Provid. Romans 8.28. Pet. Martyr.
Monendus est Philippus, ut desinat esse rector mundi, That he would leave off
to govern the world; for we are no more able to Rule it, then we are to create
it.

6. With thankfulness and faith expect the good that the Lord will bring out of
it. If thy design had gone on, be it what it will, it had been but particular,
to have served a present turn; but the Lords end is general, and suits with all
the glory of his other actions in all times, and in all Ages past and to come.
And the order of those must not be inverted, nor the glory of them defaced for
thee. Therefore say, surely, all things shall work together for good for those
that love the Lord. God in all this does but carry on his own design, the plot
of his eternal Counsel. De operibus Dei non est judicandum ante quintum actum.
And the rather we are with thankfulness to expect, what God will bring to pass,
because he has in the book Rev. 5.1. Liber intus and foris scriptus and septem
sigillis obsignatus est; Codex satidicus seu consiliorum Dei, quo scries and
ordo rerum gestarum ad sccundu^ illu^ and gloriosu^ Christi adventu^
pertexebatur. Mede.
of the Revelation foretold us all the designs that he has upon the world
until the end thereof. The Lord made all things for himself. Prove. 16.4.
Quamvis Deus nihil propter utilitatem propriam fecerit (eo quod nullo indiget)
tamen omnia propter semet ipsum ut ultimu^ fine^ operatus est. Cajet. in loc.
Psalm. 43.5. (...) teipsum deprimes. Mont. (...) tumultuaberis. Vt quid me
conturbas anima, ita vertit August. Mentes nostras ad gratiae absconditae
intuitum procul evehit; os sibi in praesentia sat^tur obstructum esse; spem
suam in ^ongum tempus extendit, and sibi promittit quod non apparet. Calv.
that is, for his own ends, and he does rule all things so as may accomplish
those ends. As therefore in spiritual dispensations the Lord does sometimes
lift up the light of his countenance upon his people, and sometimes he does
hide his face from them, their hearts are cast down, or as the word signifies,
they do cast down themselves: the heart makes a noise or there is an uproar or
tumult in the soul, not being pleased with the present dispensations. This is a
man's fault that he should reprove and reason his soul out of, from a principle
of faith, saying I shall yet praise him; that is, not only the Lord will turn
to me again in mercy, and remove the affliction; and when his hand is changed
toward me, he will give me matter of praise, as now I have matter of sorrow:
But there is this farther in it, that though in this present dispensation I can
see nothing but matter of trouble and sorrow, yet I shall see God working all
things so, for his glory, and my good, (which are bound up together) that this
which is now to me matter of grief, shall be unto me in time to come, Laudo
Deum, ut qui hactenus mecum egerit liberalissime, nunc etiam pro liberrinia
potestate inculpabiliter. Cocceius in loc. We have so much blessing in our
affliction as we can bless God for our affliction. Caryl.
matter of praise.

There are two famous instances of it in the Scripture. Job. 1.21. Blessed be
the name of the Lord. He does as well bless God for taking, as for giving. Now
as we love God because he loved us first, so we can never bless God for any
thing, but when we do apprehend that there is in it a blessing from God unto
us. And the Lord does as well bless by taking, as by giving; therefore we
should bless him in both, who is blessed for evermore. The other instance is
that of Christ, Scipsum and nos secum Christus attollit ad considerandum Dei
occultum judicium, quod adorat and praedicat, ne nos illud sub examen vocare
audeamus; in quo filius Dei se acquiescere testatur, and quo Patri gratias
agit. Par.
Matthew. 11.25. I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes. He
does thank God for hiding as well as revealing. To let the greatest part of the
world to walk in their own ways, to live without God in the world: to have no
taste or savor of the great things that he has wrought, that Christ has
purchased; and these many of them men of the greatest parts, the highest place,
the most improved abilities; yet laid aside Liberatur pars, hominu^ part
percunte; latet discretionis ista ratio, sed non latet ipsa discretio; quid
calumniamur justitiae occultae, qui gratias debemus misericordiae manifestae?
Laudemus and veneremur quod agitur, quia tutum est nescire quod tegitur.
Prosper de vocat. Gent. l. 1. cap. 15.
as vessels in which there is no pleasure: Those upon whom the Spirit of God in
his common works has bestowed so much cost, a man would think it sad to
consider: but when the will of the Lord is manifested, it is the duty of the
Saints as it was of Christ, not only to be silent and submit to it, but even to
bless God, and to be thankful for such dispensations. He that abounded in his
(...), or loving kindness to mankind, he that sought their salvation above his
life; yet if the Lord will hide the things of salvation from the wisest of
them, he is not only well pleased, but, it being the will of God to glorify
his Justice in the one, as well as mercy in the other, he does bless God for
hiding as well as revealing.

7. Take heed of standing in the way of God when he is going forth in
judgment. Whatsoever God has a design to effect, take heed how you seek to
hinder and set your selves in a way of opposition. For if he will work, none
can let; all those that stand in his way to hinder his purpose, though it be
with harmless and simple (nay it may be) with honest intentions, they shall
surely fall in them. Populus Israel non satis muris and munitionibus suis
fidens, auxiliares copias hastatorum and sagittariorum sibi adesse optat,
quibus hos^^bus possit resistere; has videbis sp narum ac veprium nominibus
sign^ficatas. Forer.
For it is but setting the briers and thorns against him in battle; he will go
through and burn them at once. Isay 27.4. The Lord is gone forth against
Jerusalem, and they will go down to Egypt for help, and they glory in the
strength of Egypt; now the Egyptians come in to their assistance, and they
think surely that will turn the scales; the Lord says they shall prevail as
much as when a Lion greedy of his prey comes to a sheepfold and takes away a
Lamb out of the flock, and the shepherd comes unto its rescue; will the Lion be
affrighted, Leoni sese comparat potentissimo animali and praedae avidissimo.
Calv. Non habet terra magis notae audaciae, cui se comparet Dominus Forer.
or shall the Lamb be delivered? No, he will hold on his course, and will not
abase himself for their noise. And they that are taken in for their help shall
be so far from succouring them, that the Lord will rise up against the help of
them that work iniquity, and they that help, and they that are helped shall
fall together. So that if God be going forth in Judgment against a Person, a
Family, a Nation, its very dangerous for any man to come in for their succor,
and think to turn God out of his way; they shall be so far from prevailing for
them, Artifices vanitatis Judaeos vocat, quod inani praesidio se adversus Dei
manum vindicem munire cogitarent illicito auxilio Aegyptiorum. A lap. Minatur
tam iis qui auxilium ferent, tam iis qui little auxilio utentur. Calv.
that in their very assistance they shall perish; For the Lord will not only
rise up against them that work iniquity, but all those that come in for their
succor, and join themselves with them. And this is the speediest way to perish
with them. For as he that partakes in their sins, shall partake in their
plagues: So shall he that comes in for their succor also, Isaiah 31.2, 3, 4.
There are two famous instances of this in the Scripture. One of Ahaziah King of
Judah. Joram the Son of Ahab made War against the Assyrians, Duo Reges
comprehensi tenebantur in nassa Dei, nec amplius erat ad evadendum locus, etc.
Pet. Martyr. Justum congruu^que suit hoc Dei judiciu^, qui eos congregavit in
agrum Naboth, ut in eo caederentur. Achaziah enim erat ex part matris Athaliae
nepos Achab. A lap. in loc.
was wounded, and returned unto Jezerel to be cured of his wounds: Ahaziah King
of Judah in courtesy and civility came down to visit him because he was sick, 2
Kings 8.29. But he took such a time, when the Lord was going forth in Judgment
against the House of Ahab: therefore Jehu, who was the Instrument of Gods
vengance, being in his march, came upon Ahaziah and he dyed for his courtesy,
by the same hand that Joram did. And in the same way of complement, the
brethren of Ahaziah lost their lives also, 2 Kin. 10.13, 14. Another instance
we have that is yet more remarkable, and that is of Josiah, a gracious Prince,
and one that had wrought the most glorious and thorough Reformation in Judah,
of any of the Kings of Judah: The Lord had appointed Pharoh Necho King of Egypt
to execute Judgment upon Carchemish, a City belonging to the Babylonian or
Assyrian, which lay by the River Euphrates and by the Egyptian Conquest there,
to make way afterward for his own ruin, (for there in a few years after was
Necho himself slain, and there the glory of Egypt fell) Judah being the nearest
passage, Pharoh desires Josiah to give him leave to pass through his Country,
promising him security, not to injure, nor molest him, telling him that God had
commanded him to make haste, and therefore he should forbear from meddling with
God, who was with him. 2 Chronicles. 35.21, 22. Jerome says, (...). Quaest. and
Respons 79. I believe that this religious and virtuous Prince Josias was not
stirred up only by politic respects to stop the way of Nccho, but thought
himself bound in Faith and Honor to do his best, in the defense of the
Babylonian Crown, whereunto his Kingdom was obliged, either by Covenant or by
the gift of such part as he held in the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes. Sir Walter
Raleigh Hist. of the world. page 1. l. 2 cap. 28.. 2.
that Pharoh had this discovery of the mind of God from Jeremiah the Prophet,
per oraculum non scriptum sed viva voce editum: A lap. goes the same way, and
Justin Martyr. And that Josiah did not in this obey the voice of Jeremiah the
Prophet, who commanded him from the mouth of the Lord, That he should not go
forth to meet the King of Egypt in Battle; Josiah had formerly had sufficient
experience of the falsehood of the Egyptian, and of his oppression, being a
Neighbor, and he was in League and Covenant with the King of Babylon, owing to
him fealty and allegiance: Now should he falsify his word? should he break his
Oath? forget his Covenant? become a Traitor to his Prince? thus he goes forth (
fatali ferocia, says Peter Martyr; Bello temere suscepto, so Dr. Usher Josias
contra Neconem bello tem^re suscepto, in co^valle Megidduntis occisus est.
Annals vet. Test. p. 117. M^rtuo principe optimo, cujus vita tutum reddebat
populu^ a captivitate Baby^m^c^i, malorum Iliacte jam ingruente, superioris
anni Jubilas versus est in threnodiam. ibid. 2 Kin. 22 20 Z^ch. 12.11. 2 Chronicles.
35.24, 25.
) against Pharoh Necho, and would not be persuaded to turn from him. But shall
Josiah turn God out of the way of his Judgments? No; this gracious Prince
after so glorious a work of Reformation must perish in his own obstinacy,
because his will is not subjected unto the will of the Lord, though it be for
the Lamentation of Judah afterward by a Statute for ever. It is dangerous
therefore for our wills to rise against Gods will, so as to stir us up to stand
against God when he goes forth in Judgment against a person or a people; for
you cannot by all your opposition turn God out of his way, but in your way of
opposition you shall perish.

8. Psalm. 8.9. Heb. 2.8. Ezech. 1.26, 27, 28.
Endeavor to see Christ glorious in all his goings forth in the world. For he
is as well King of Nations as King of Saints; and his glory is as well seen in
his providential as in his spiritual administrations. So do the Saints see him
with a spiritual eye, even then when he does arise to shake terribly the Earth,
Hab. 3.3, 4. Its spoken of the Lords going forth for his people, in their
deliverance, and for the destruction of their Enemies. Manus pro actionibus
quae manibus ut plurimu^ perficiuntur. 2 Samuel 22.17. Esaias 20.2 Hag. 1.1. Glass.
Rhet. Sacr. p. 9. Cornu significat 1. Robur and potentiam; ita Calv. in hunc
locum, potentiam Metaphorice per cornua designat, sc. splendorem hunc cum
potentia conjunctum fuisse. 2. Radium cornui sunilem, rutilantem; cornua radii
sunt quales emittere solent cornua spendentia. Drus. Tarnov.
His brightness was as the light, and he had horns coming out of his hands;
there was the hiding of his power: By these hands of the Lord, is meant his
administrations, dispensations, and actions in the world; the hand being the
instrument of action; therefore all things below are called the work of his
hands, Psalm. 8.6. The horns that come out of his hand, are interpreted to be
radii, or splendores, rays or beams of light which were as it were horns. The
same word is used of Moses, Exodus Dicit potentiam ejus absconditam esse, quia
nolebat Deus promiscue per totum orbem virtutem sua^ palam facere, sed
peculiariter populo suo: Quemadmodum dicitur, Ps. 31.19. magnitudinem bonitatis
ejus absconditam esse solis fidelibus: qui eum timent and reverentur. Calv.
34.29. His face did shine, the word (...) signifies horns, and so the vulgar
renders it, quod cornuta esset facies ejus. So that the Lord in all his
dispensations was glorious. His works had a luster, beams, a brightness that
went with them, and yet there was the hiding of his power: That is, he does so
work by instruments, and second causes, that his hand is not seen but by a
spiritual eye; yet to him that has such an eye, the hand of the Lord is
exceeding glorious. There are horns come out of it, but there is a latibulum
potentiae in all the dispensations of God toward the men of the world. Now to
see horns in the hand of Christ, to see him glorious in his administations,
even when his power is hid from the rest of the world under instruments and
second causes, this is the duty of all the Saints. So does the Church, Isaiah
63.1, 2. Non agit de Christo patiente and iram Dei placante, sed de Christo
Rege suos potentissime ab hostibus externis liberante and contra cos
defendente, etc. Tarnov. exercit. Bibli. p 418. etc.
Who is he that comes from Edom, with garments died from Bosrah glorious in his
apparel? etc. To see the Lord clothed with a Vesture dipped in blood, and his
name called the word of God, Revel. 19.13. His name was the Word of God
Antealudibrio pene habuit verbum Dei, acsi tantum essent magnifica verba; sed
sub phiala septima mysterium Dei consummatu^ erit, and tunc maxim florebit
Divini verbi authoritas, co^stantissima ejus veritate in singulis perspecta.
Brig. in loc.
from the beginning: but then he was the Word revealing and discovering the
promises, and the truths of God: but now he is the Word of God fulfilling and
accomplishing of them. A place parallel to it is Exodus 6.3. By the name Jehovah
I was not known to them: The Lord was known by the name Jehovah, when he did
give a being to the promises; so Christ was then called the Word of God; but
then, he did manifest himself to be Jehovah, when he did fulfill these promises.
To see the Lord glorious in his administrations, however they be clothed by
instruments and second causes; to rejoice in all appearances of Christ, is our
duty, though they be terrible to the rest of the World: Whatsoever Amictus
quidam gloriae Dei in ultione adversus hosts. Metaphora ab Hero armis induto
and in arenam adversus hosts descendente, desumpta. Glass. Rhet. Sacr. p. 160.
Esaias 63.1.
apparel he goes forth in, he is infinitely glorious.

9. When the will of God is manifested, the soul should keep it self from all
disquieting passions, all unpleasingness of spirit whatsoever: When I once see
it is the will of God, I will not grudge at it, I will not mourn under it as if
I would have it otherwise; only I will mourn for my sin that has been the
cause of it. This was David's case for his child, his heart was set upon him, 2 Samuel 12.20.21. David acquiescit sententiae, qua^ definitivam facto ipso
intellexit; agnita voluntate Dei acquicscunt sancti. Lavit se David ut
ingrederetur Templum D^mini; ille percusserat, non tamen eu^ habuit pro host
suo, sed acced^t, and eum adorat supplex, etc. Petr. Martyr.
and he prayed earnestly for him, with fasting; yet the child must die: and
as soon as he saw the will of the Lord was manifested, he mourns no more, but
with a submissive spirit stoops under it. A man should not continue the
disquiet of his spirit when the will of God is manifested, but with all
meekness acknowledge his wisdom and submit to his will. It is an evil that the
Lord reproves in Samuel, 1 Samuel 16.1. How long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing
I have rejected him that he should not reign over Israel? The sentence of Saul's
rejection was gone forth from the Lord, and made manifest unto Samuel, V^detur
quod illicitus fuit iste planctus, nisi Samuel ignorasset reprobationem Saulis.
Pro hoc lug^h^t Sam^^l, quia defini^^at Deus eum ab^icere; noluiss^t tamen
Samuel qu^d (...) Saul; Lititus tamen fuit, quia lagebat solum ex quadam
compassione, ut patet de poenis damnatorum aeternaliter, quia nulli licet pro
^is orare; ^^^tum autem est pro illis dolere, nihil orando. Tostat in 1 Samuel
15.9.41.
though he was not as yet removed from the Government of the Kingdom, no not in
many years after. Now Samuel mourned for him, because he was rejected of God:
but when the will of God was made manifest, for him to disquiet and trouble
himself therein, as if all the future happiness of Israel depended upon this
one man, and that he did not rather look out, Audiverat Samuel Domini sentenam
de Saul exauctorando; tamen non potest primo intuitu quinam id fiat
animadvertere. Agnoscens unctum Samuel Dei mandato, non potest repent
reverentiam illi abjicere. Non satis in peculiari hoc facto animadvertit, quid
a se Deus postuinret, sc. Deum ut agnosceret velle Saulis abrogare imperium,
quod dederat, quia ipsius voci non obtemperasset. Calv. homil. in 1 Samuel 16.1.
Pro toto corpore, pro statu regni non debuit orare, quoniam sciebat jam actum
esse de populo illo. Calv.
or seek to God for one more faithful to succeed: this was Samuels sin, and for
this the Lord reproves him. Nay, when the sentence is gone forth from the Lord,
he forbids his people to pray, Jer. 7. Pray not for this people, for I will not
hear thee. The will of God being manifested, a man should be so far satisfied
with it, that he should not pray against it, though it be the greatest misery
that can befall the Church of God in this life; As that of the captivity was.
For our prayers should be according to the will of God, as it is revealed; and
if the Lord has once revealed his will, we should not pray against it; neither
should our spirits rise against it, but we should strive for a holy and sweet
composure of heart under it, and not be indulgent to sullen and discontented
mournings, as if I would it had not been so, or as if I would have had it
otherwise.

10. When the Lord does manifest his will, be you instrumental and co workers
together with him; for that is our duty in reference to the effecting will of
God. So do the Angels: When the man among the Myrtle Trees goes forth,
immediately the whole heavenly Host are on horseback behind him, Chrisius
specie humana ad tempus assumpta, insidebat equo, ut celeritas auxilii and
majestas dominii indicaretur, cujus stipatores sunt Angeli, aliique Majestatis
divinae Ministri, qui Christo Regi, ut Equites instructi inserviunt, sive ad
judicia impiis praestanda, sive ad beneficia piis conferenda maxima cum
celeritate. Tarnov. Effusio Phialarum significat ruinam Bestiae
Antichristianae, and Septem phialae totidem sunt istius ruinae gradus; est enim
effusio irae Dei. cap. 15.1. Mede.
Zach. 1.8, 9. As soon as Christ appears, when he does advance, so do they for
the Churches deliverance. And when Jesus Christ goes forth against Antichrist
(whom he will surely destroy with the brightness of his coming, and all the
powers on Earth shall not be able to cure him the deadly wound given him under
the Vials already poured out;) There are Angels that join with him in the work.
For the Vials are filled with wrath, Revel. 15.7. by the prayers of the Saints:
And by one of the four Beasts (spoken of, Chap. 4.) given unto the Angels the
Actors with God in this work: Called Angels (as I conceive) not properly
because heavenly Angels, those ministering Spirits: though it is true, all is
done by the conduct and assistance of the Angels: or they are Principalities
and Powers in the Government of the World under Christ; Angeli sunt homines
purioris Ecclesiae cives, ut apparet e^ loco unde prodeunt and amictu; sunt
enim vestes filiorum Aronis Exodus 28.42. Brightm. Quae multorum manibus
peraguntur, Angelo tanquam rei gerendae praesidi and Duci tribuuntur, quoniam
Deus Angeles a dhibet providentiae suae administros, in rerum humanarum
conversionibus ciendis and gubernandis. Mede.
but these Angels are men: not individual persons, but men joined together in a
body to effect this work: For they are described to be clothed with linen,
and their breasts girt with golden girdles, that is, amictu Sacerdotali ornati;
they had the Ornaments of the Priests upon them, because they are called and
anointed of the Lord unto this service, and because they are made Priests unto
God by Jesus Christ. These Angels do come in their order, and do pour out their
Vials; and when the Lord is pouring out any of these (and that he is now
eminently doing it, is confessed by all our Divines) it is good for a man to be
instrumental, to be of the number of these Angels, to bear our part by prayer
and pains, or whatsoever else we may contribute unto this work, saying, if the
Lord will destroy the man of sin, I will be so far from having a hand in
supporting of him, that I will put forth my hand also toward his ruin. For
this is the Amaleck with whom the Lord will never have peace from Generation to
Generation. And when Antichrist shall be subdued, and all Antichristian powers,
there will be found Armies following of Christ upon white horses, Exercitus non
tam ad praelium instrui videdetur, quam ab triumphum. Bright.
a token of triumph and victory, Revel. 19.14. And no man shall ride with
Christ in triumph when the victory is won, who has not rode forth with him
against Antichrist unto the Battle.

3. A great part of the power of godliness does consist in a submitting of our
will unto the will of God in his ordering, effecting, disposing of the things
of the world. And the grounds of it are these:

1. Godliness is nothing else but exalting of God in the soul; as it is the
abasing of God in the soul that is properly ungodliness, low thoughts and vile
apprehensions of God; and therefore the lusts of men's hearts are called ungodly
lusts, Jude 19. (...), Hebraismo significante quotidianam vitae consuetudinem.
Est (...). Est in abstracto, and abstractum denotat essentiam: Cupiditatis
essentia in aversione a Deo consistit. Est etiam vice Epitheti, sicut civitas
sanctitatis est sanctissi ma, and populus anathematis, sc. summo anathemati
devotus, ita cupiditates impietatum, est plane impiae, vel impientissimae.
Gloss. Gram. sacr. p. 110. Grotius in loc.
God is said to exalt himself, Psalm. 57.5. Psalm. 21.13. Psalm. 148.13. Be thou
exalted in thy own strength: And we are said to exalt God though he be the most
High, Isai. 25.1. Thou art my God, and I will exal thee. Potentia infinita in
se exaltari nequit sed respectu nostri cum fortitudinem suam potenter nobis
ostendit. Exaltare dicimur, cum quempiam ad dignitates ascendere facimus, cum
laudibus aut veneratione eve^imus, etc. Forer. Vnde (...) ab^^tio est, quia in
altum elevatur dum offertur, and quod offertur Deo ad elevationem. Aven.
Preston of man's uprightness. page 36.
God exalts himself by his works, and the Saints exalt him in his worship: and
it is in these high apprehensions of God that godliness does mainly consist.
Now in this submission of will, God is very highly exalted in the hearts of the
Saints.

First, Hereby we acknowledge his sovereignty, that he alone has right to
govern the world, because they are all the works of his hands: Deus unus in
potestate habet regnum dare and auferre; Deus verus hoc agit occulto judicio,
non continuo beatos facturus quibus terrenum regnum dederit, nec continuo
miseros quibus ademerit, sed temporalia regna quibus voluerit, and quando
voluerit, secundum praedestinatum ordinem seculorum, vel sinendo, vel donando
distribuit. Aug. de consensu Evangel. l. 1. cap. 11.
He is God over all; all are in his hands as clay is in the hand of the Potter.
He only did give the Creatures their being, he only can give them a Rule, and
appoint them to an end: therefore let God alone with the Government of the
world. He is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: He builds and destroys, he
plants and plucks up at his pleasure, and gives no account of any of his
matters. He deposes Kings and disposes Kingdoms; and this God will have men
acknowledge as the great honor that is due to him, that the most high Rules in
the Kingdoms of mortal men. Dan. 4.17. Therefore does the Lord great things,
and works great changes in the world, that men may acknowledge his Sovereignty.
In this did the holiness of Ely appear, 1 Samuel 3.18. He is Hoc nomine Dei, 1.
(...). 2. creaturarum a Deo dependentiam. 3. Dei aeternitatem. 4.
immutabilitatem. 5. omnipetentiam. 6. veritatem significat. Flac. Illyric.
clavis script. part. 2. p. 612. Domus magna qualis Deo est hic mundus. Grot.
Caeterum non convenit inter Interpretes an domus magna Eeclesiam solam, an
totum mundum significet: contextus huc potius ducit ut de Ecclesia
intelligamus. Cavl.
Jehovah, one that has an absolute sovereignty over all the Creatures, and
unto his authority I submit; let him do what seems him good. The world is but
the Lords house, 2 Timothy 2.20. As in a great house there be some vessels to
honor and some to dishonor; so it is in the world; let God alone with the
Government of his own Family.

Secondly, (...) mirificatus est, arduus and excellens ultra captum nostrum;
sc. ardua sunt consilia quae homines nequaquam assequi potuissent, and juxta
consilia ardua magna opera. Forer.
Hereby we subscribe to his wisdom that he only is able to govern the world:
For he is wonderful in counsel and excellent in working, Isai. 28.29. Though we
cannot see the reason of his actions, yet the soul can say he only is wise, and
there is no searching of his understanding. And when the Lord shall have
perfected his work, and this rude draught of things shall be finished, there
will then appear a glorious harmony in those things that for the present seem
to be nothing else but as the Earth was at its first creation without form and
void. But as the Lord then drew out each creature in its order and degree
until he brought forth this glorious Fabric, that men and Angels admire: So
he will do in the works of his Providence also. For there is as great wisdom of
God seen in works of Providence as in the work of Creation: Sometimes his ways
are in the Sea, and his paths in the great waters. (...). Chrysostom. (...), etc.
Oecum. Vide quantus honos hominum, quod haec arcana consilia per ipsos Deus
innotescere Angelis voluit: Multa and magna mandata suerant Angelis data,
sednullum huic par. Grot.
His ways are mysterious, and he makes it his glory to out-wit the Creatures,
as he did go beyond the wisdom of the Angels in the work of Redemption, and so
(if I may so speak) he set them to School again, Unto them is made known by the
Church, the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10. So he deals with his Saints in
the ways of providence also. Therefore as the Angels do, so likewise do the
Saints admire his wisdom in the work, even when the reason of it they cannot
comprehend: And they do not think it strange that God in his ways should go
beyond their apprehensions: As in the answer of their prayers he is able to do
above whatsoever we are able to ask or think; Ephesians. 3.20.
so likewise in the Government of the world, and in the ordering of all things
here below; there is a woe pronounced against him that strives with his maker;
Isai. 45. v. 9. 10. There are two things the Lord cannot take well from the
Potsheards of the Earth. That they should say, Si ad disceptationem veniendum
sit, tam firmas ac solidas habebit rations, ut convictos obmutescere cogat;
neque vero compescit hominum proterviam, quod ratione destituatur: sed hanc
sibi potestatem vendicat ne ab hominum figmentis vocetur ad rationem reddendam.
Call.
What make thou? what begettest thou? Or, what have thou brought forth? That
is, the Lord will not be called to an account by the Creature, but men are to
acknowledge his wisdom, and to stoop to his will even when the reason of it is
hid from them. And therein properly is grace seen. As it is reported of one
Cassianus l. 4 c. 24. Vbi and monet Monachos, ut praeter Abbatis mandatum,
nulla penitus voluntas vivat in eis, etc. Obedientia manca est quae subjicit
superiori voluntatem non intellectum, manum non animum. A lap. in Mal. 1.8.
Johannes Abbas that he was commanded by his Confessor to go some miles every
day to water a dry stick, Obedientia est perfecta abnegatio propriae animae and
corporis, mors voluntaria, vita sine sollicitudine, navigatio sine damn,
sepultura voluntatis; est iter facere dormiendo, onere suo aliis impositio.
Climachus grad. 4.
which he did out of respect purely to the command, and he disputes not the
reason of it. Should not we much more acknowledge the wisdom of God, though we
are not able to comprehend the grounds of it? Secondly, that the thing formed
should say to him that formed it, he had no hands. Extremam apponere manum,
Calv. is to finish a work. And to say he had no hands, is to object that he
left his work unfinished, Opus tuum impolitum est and inform, acsi pedibus non
manibus esset elaboratum. A lap. in loc.
or that he was not able to bring it to pass. And it is all one as to object
ignorance and impotence unto God.

Thirdly, Hereby we manifest that we delight to see God work his own glory out
of all the cross actions of the Creatures. There is but one thing that the
Saints take care of, which is the great end of all their desires, the scope of
all their endeavors, which they would secure more then their lives, and that
is Gods glory, for which they account not their lives dear. This glory of God
is twofold, Gloriam Dei praedicat Scriptura 1. (...), and essentiam denotat and
proprietates essentiales. 2. (...) gloria Dei in operibus ejus gloriosis
elucens; sic terra gloria Dei plena est. 3. (...), celebrationem and agnitionem
illius Majestatus. Gerh. loc. com. 2. sect. 18. p. 317. Glass. Rhet. sacr. p.
46. Periculosum est sibi placere cui cavendum est superbire. Ille autem qui
super omnia est, non extollit se; nobis namque expedit Deum nosse, non illi;
unde patet quod Deus suam gloriam non quaerit propter se sed propter nos.
Aquin. 2. 2ae. q. 132. ad. 1um. Eo fortior adversus ^aeli minas surge, and cum
mundus undique exarserit, cogita te nihil habere de tanta m^le perdendum. Sen.
q. not. l. 2. c. 59. Psa. 76.10. Necesse est omnes homines quantumvis feroces
and furentes tibi cedere, and si quid furoris adhuc vertet, ita coercet ut
erumpere non possit. Muls. (...) Sym.
either essential, and so his glory is himself, which no man has seen nor can
see; or manifestative, the shining forth of his excellency, in the discoveries
of his Attributes. Now that the glory of the Lord might shine forth as the Sun,
though all the Stars be eclipsed, he is well pleased. If the Lord please to
make me a footstool that he himself might be exalted, into his own Throne, I
rejoice in my own abasement. If he will get himself a name by the shaking of
the earth and heavens, by the overthrows of Kingdoms, as he will do by the
general conflagration of the world at the last day, a Saint can with rejoicing
stand upon the ruins of all things and say, I have lost nothing, my end is
secured: God that made all things for himself, he rules all things for himself;
he will provide for his own glory in the midst of all the tumuls and turnings
that are below. Now if he will cause light to shine out of darkness, and win to
himself glory by working a harmony out of the discords of the Creatures, Finis
solus in mediis amari debet; ergo finis solum est ratio motiva voluntatis, and
media qua talia tantum terminativa. Scot. disp. 3.8. Gibeuf. de liberate
creat. l. 1. cap. 11.. 2.
in this I can and will rejoice. This is indeed the great happiness of a Saint;
though in his inferior ends he may miscarry, yet he is always secured in
reference to his utmost end. Whereas all ungodly men, as they many times fail
in their subordinate ends, so they always miss of their utmost end, and
therefore must needs be miserable; for the rule is, finis ultimus perficit tam
agentem quam actionem. Omnis finis secundarius ex ultimo acquirit perfectionem.
Keker. log. de fin. c. 18.
Therefore nothing can make a man happy but the securing of his utmost end: And
nothing can make a man miserable but his missing of his utmost end. While a man
therefore sees that to thrive and prosper, God answering cardinem desiderii, as
Austin speaks of prayer, though he fails in many other things, which he in his
judgment conceived necessary means conducing thereunto, yet he is fully
satisfied and well pleased.

2. The power of godliness consists much in self resignation unto God; and the
happiness of the Saints is, Fuerunt aliis hominibus cum Ethnicis tum
Christianis loca quaeda^ exstructa, and reditus constituti ad pauperum
relevandom miseriam; and is cui haec provincia demandata fuit dicitur (...),
cum parvuli vel parentibus erant orbati, vel public expositi, and a parentibus
non agniti. Greg. Tholoss. Synt. juris, l. 15. c. 28. Pupillus est 1. Qui omni
hominum praesidio caret, and open humana destituitur. 2. Qui suae ignorantiae,
nuditatis and inopiae conscius est. 3. Qui se totum curae tutoris sui
committit, ac proinde humilis est and a tutoris metu and mandatis solus
pendens. Tarnov. in Lam. 5.3. Zanch. in Hose. 14.3.
to be in themselves fatherless, to be put out of their own protection and
provision, Hosea, 14.3. The Church is described leaning upon her beloved, Cant.
8.5. her support is out of her self, there she takes up her repose, Psalm.
10.14. The poor leaves himself with thee, they commit their souls unto him in
well doing, 1 Peter 4.19. And they commit their ways, Psalm. 37.5. to him in
the issues and successes of them. Now a man that does commit all his own and
the Churches affairs into the hands of God, brings all to him, and leaves them
with him, let him do what seems him good, which way soever God casts it, his
soul is satisfied, and he is quiet under his dispensations. Grace makes a man
solicitous for nothing but duty, as it makes a man to fear nothing but sin; It
is never troubled about events; but when the duty is done, though the event
answers not his desires, he can as well quiet his soul in God, as if he had had
all the success in the world. So does the Lord Jesus Christ, Isai. 49.4. (...)
signinificat laborem cum singulari molestia conjunctum. A Septuag. redditur per
(...), uti Hab 2.13. (...) Est humor nativus in quo vigor and robur corporis
consistit: qui a laboribus assiduis and indefessis deficit and exarescit.
I have labored in vain: one word signifies to labor with a man's might, with
his utmost diligence, even unto faintness and weariness: and the other word
does signify humidum radicale: It is the same word that Christ uses Psalm.
22.15. My strength is dried up like a Postsheard, and yet even in that labor
the event and the success is expressed to be (...) for confusion, which he
intended for preservation, and for destruction which he intended for
edification; yet my work is with the Lord, and my reward with my God. Bis
glorificatur Deus si votis successus respondeat; sed ubi nihil omiserint verbi
ministri, non est cur eos poeniteat Deo placuisse. Calv.
A soul by reason of this self resignation can sit down satisfied and give up
himself to God as freely, having done his duty, as if the success had answered
his desires. So may a faithful Minister lie down in his grave, and yield up his
soul, 2 Cor. 2.15. (...). Chrysostom. Vterque Deo gratus est odor, and quo electi
recreantur in salutem, and quo reprobi enecantur. Et si Deo suavis est odor,
nobis quoque esse debet, and abunde sufficere si justam reprobis damnationem
afferendo Dei gloriam promoveat. Calv.
with as much comfort as if the people had been gained. So may a gracious
magistrate, as if the people had been preserved and established. And in this
mainly does the power of grace consist, it enables a man to resign all things,
The state of Churches, Kingdoms, Families, into the hand of that God unto whom
he has committed his soul; and he is as truly quieted in Gods disposing of the
one as the other.

3. The power of godliness is mainly seen in a man's submission unto the word.
(...) significat doctrinam Evangelicam instar typi cujusdam esse cui innitamur
ut ejus figurae co^formemur. Beza. Ita (...) sumitur. Heb. 8.5. Grot.
A gracious heart is molded to it, as it was begotten by it, Romans 6.17. And
the word is the Scepter of the providentiall, as well as of the spiritual
Kingdom; the Lord rules all things by his word in the world, as well as in the
hearts of the Saints. For as he has stretched forth the expansum of the
Heavens over the natural, M. Tho. Goodwin. Ep. Dedicat. to the return of
prayers. Psalm. 149.9. Judicium scriptum intellige mandatur divinum, quod iis
arma haec pro liberate seu potius pro regno Christi propugna^do and
amolificando induit. Non suae rationis sed Dei jud. cum scriptum exequi debent.
Jer. 1.10. Vendicat Deus summum imperium sermoni suo; tantae est virtutis and
potentiae, ut emineat supra omnes mortales nedum supra unam gentem. Calv. Rev.
19.15.21. Verbum gladio comparatur propter vim pentrandi, Heb. 4.12. and
propter vim nocendi, Mat. 10.34 Glass. Rhet. Sacr. p 397. Edvardus sextus
Angliae Rex, cum coronationis die tres gladii ei offerrentur in signum quod
brium regnorum Monarcha esset, respondit, unum gladium adbuc deesse, sc.
volumen sa^rorum Bibliorum; ille, inquit, gladius spiritus est and omnibus his
long anteserendus. Wolfius lect. memoral. cent. 16. An. 1550.
so he has the expansum of the word over the rational world: As appears by
comparing, Romans 10.18. with Psalm. 19.23. Now as they rejoice to see the word to
run and be glorified in the souls of men when they believe, which is Christ's
spiritual Kingdom; so likewise when great things are accomplished by it, in the
world which is Christ providential Kingdom. We see Psalm. 29. the great effects
of the Word in the dispensations of providence in the world. The word of the
Lord is powerful, it is full of majesty, it breaks the Cedars, it makes the
mountains to skip like a calf: Lebanon and Syrion like a young unicorn, etc.
Therefore in all the great changes that Christ makes in the world, when he has
accomplished them all, then his name is called the word of God, Revel. 19.13.
And the sword by which he destroys his enemies is the sword that goes out of
his mouth. The Saints delight to see the word of God prosper and prevail, Dan.
9.12. (...) He has caused his word to arise, when the word does not lie
despised, but is exalted by the wonderful effects that are wrought by it, the
Saints receive therein abundance of satisfaction, because they are the Rules of
this word into which their hearts are molded. Not only as governing the
spiritual, but also the providential Kingdom.

4. The power of godliness lies mainly in emptying a man of his own ends. Sin
lies mainly in ends, and in that also does the main of godliness lie. Romans 14.8.
Now a man that is Gods servant, (...), Vobis tantum and vestro commodo
spectatis, non quomodo mihi obsequamini, sed tantum quomodo vestro morem
geratis animo. Yarnov.
must have no ends of his own. As he must do his masters work, so he must aim
at his masters end, or else he is his own servant, his own will he does and not
his masters. As it appears in the instance of Iehu, and in their fasting, Zach.
7.5. When you fasted, did ye at all fast to me, even to me? did you not fast to
your selves, and eat and drink to your selves? God owns nothing as a sacrifice
unto him in which his end is not sought. Now a man that has no ends of his
own, how will he be pleased to see Gods ends prosper, and to be effected? and
there is nothing makes a man's spirit bitter, when Gods work is finished, but
when a man has missed his end in it, Hab. 2.1. I will stand upon my
Watchtower and see, etc. Every godly man has a Watchtower. Militis personam
gerit; consisto super munitionem, id est, verbum Dei a mea part stat, quo
confido, and cui credo, unde and loquo^ and aliis praedico. Si enim ille
nutaverit, qui verbi dux and adservator esse debeat, tum actum est, vexillum
succumbit, and vigil interemtus est. Luth. S^abo in specula mea, id est, in
prophetiae meae sublimitate. Jerome.
Some understand it to be verbum Dei. I will look into the word, and observe
there how God accomplisheth all things, and brings them to pass, and how his
works are a fulfilling of his word. But Si quis propius expendat rationem
Metaphorae, facile intelliget speculam esse recessu^ mentis, ubi a mundo nos
subducimus, etc. Si non statim apparuerit aliquid spei, tamen non frangar animo
neque deseram staione^ meam. Calv.
others understand it to be recessum mentis, a man's own retiring thoughts and
meditations, the observations of a gracious heart. The Saints by the word can
discern what purposes and designs God has upon the world, and they observe how
by his works he does go on to effect and accomplish these designs. Now to stand
by, Hoc sanctis Angelis gaudium affert quod diabolo regnum minuitur, Deo vero
regnum augetur; vide quanta sit humana malitia and iniquitas propter quoa
Angeli benedicunt Deo and laetantur, homines murmurantes invidia flagrant.
Stella in loc. 15.10.
to retire a man's self, and observe how in Gods workings thorough all the
confusions of the world, he does accomplish his own purposes, and that they are
all turned about to bring to pass what he has determined should be done; thus
to see Gods ends accomplished, a Saint can exceedingly rejoice in it: This is
the very joy of the Angels and Saints in Heaven; and whosoever has no ends of
his own, he must needs rejoice to see God in his workings bring to pass his
ends.

reproves all those that profess godliness, and yet their wills are exceeding
opposite unto the will of God and his dispensations in the world. God works,
but they cannot approve it; they would have it otherwise if it were in their
power: And this is a temper of Spirit that may befall a gracious man. We see it
did Jonah, chap. 4. God had caused a gourd to spring up in a night, and it was
a present convenience unto Jonah, for it was a shelter unto him from the Sun,
and he sat under the shadow of it; this gourd the Lord smote by a worm at the
root and it withered: For this act of God Jonah is angry, Non ignorant Deum
loqui, and tamen non deponit animi serociam; cum semel excaecatae sunt hominu^
mentes aliquo praepostero affectu, etiamsi Dominus e coele fulminet non
exaudiunt, and adhuc violenter occurrere non desmunt. Calv.
and he would justify his passion before God, he did well to be angry even
unto the death. If there be a slight advantage, a small convenience, that a
man's heart is set upon, as it was in this instance (for it is said, he was
exceeding glad of the gourd,) he is very apt to rise in discontent against any
of the acts of God that shall deprive him thereof. And this is the true
occasion of all the grudgings and murmurings in the soul: Every man's heart is
full of bitterness, repinings, and discontents; the tidings they hear of the
several workings of God in the world is to them as Vinegar is to the teeth, and
smoke to the eyes, according as their party is concerned in it: It is a terror
to hear the report. The evil of such a frame of heart I shall set forth by
these ensuing considerations.

1. It is a sin, and a great provocation against God. The Lord came to Jonah
and did reason the case with him, do thou well to be angry? Ex usu sanctae
linguae talis interrogatio negat vehementissime, sicut contraria quam maxim
affirmat. Tarnov. in loc.
The interrogation is both a vehement negation and a sharp reprehension: He did
not well in so doing. And this should be enough to any gracious heart, who
ought to tremble at sin more then Hell. And it is a sin that a man is exceeding
prone to, yea, even the best men: For who could have thought, that Jonah who
was so lately in the Whales belly, which he calls the belly of Hell, and was so
greatly humbled under the mighty hand of God, and so graciously and
miraculously delivered, but that he should have been well pleased with
whatsoever God should do? so a man would think of those also that have been
greatly afflicted, and now gloriously delivered; yet after all this Jonahs
spirit is discontented for a trifle, he is angry though it be but for a gourd.
But let such persons consider, the Lord himself will reprove it as an evil, he
will not suffer it in his own people. Therefore ask thy soul in the midst of
its bitterness, what shall I answer when the Lord reproves? Is this a frame of
spirit which I am able to justify before God, or shall I say with Jonah, I do
well to be angry, and so add iniquity to iniquity?

2. It is not only a sin, but it is a high degree of sinning; it is sinning
against God with an high hand, which will appear in two things.

1. Hereby a man does exalt his will above Gods will, and makes his will the
rule of goodness: As if the will of the Lord were evil, and his will good,
which is the highest pitch of Atheism that the Devil himself can be guilty of;
Now when the Lord has manifested his will, that there should be such speakings
in the heart as these. But I should have judged it better if it had been
otherwise; what is this but to say, If my will had been done it had been
better? for my will is the rule of goodness and not Gods will; contrary to the
frame in Ely, Let him do what seems him good; for that is good which is so in
his account, that which agrees unto his will, and not unto mine. Secondly,
Hereby a man does put God out of the throne of Government, and takes upon
himself the Government of the world, saying with Absalom, Oh if I were made a
Judge and a Ruler in Israel, I would do you justice. So these, if the
Government of the world were in my hands, it should be far better with the
world then it is: If it were in my power, if I had the ordering of all things;
so that though the Lord sits in Heaven, and his Kingdom rules over all, yet as
man in every sin denies the wisdom and the equity of his Law, as if he could
make a better Law; so in all such discontents and murmurings, he denies his
Sovereignty in Government. And if it were in his power, his will is to take the
Government out of his hand into his own, and then things should be better
ordered, and there should not be such distresses upon the Churches, and such
confusions in the world as now there are.

3. Hereby thou make thy self wiser then God; for he that will undertake to
correct another man's actions, must therein at least suppose himself to be wiser
then he. And therefore men that would bring in new institutions into the
worship of God, and will not be content with those that he has appointed, they
do charge God with folly, and make themselves wiser then God. And therefore
some of our Divines observe, that it is a greater sin in Gods sevice, to do
what we should not, then to omit what we should. For by the one we show the
difficulty of the Law, (...). Chrysostom. hom. 2. in Romans Miles potestati obediens
hominem occidit, etc. unde punitur si fecerit injussus, inde punietur nisi
fecerit jussus. Quod si ita est jubente Imperatore; quanto magis jubente
creatore? Aug de Civi^. l 1. c. 26.
but by the other, we charge the Law with folly. In the one we manifest our
weakness to do the will of God, in the other our impudence to control the
wisdom of God. And as it is in the institutions of God, so it is in his
operations. He that says I would not have it thus, or thus, if it had been
thus it would have been better, does nor only set up his own will against Gods,
but exalts his own wisdom above Gods. But it will be found in this as in
matters of institution, Vain man would be wise. But howsoever we may account it
as part of our wisdom, it will be found to be but as mimicall dancings, (...)
est puerorum more ludere. Talis ab usus sacrificiorum erat apud Gentiles ex
sacrificio epulum ex epulo facta est potatio; ex potatione comus, ex como
ludus, etc. Epicharm. apud Athanaeum. l. 2. Surrexerunt ludere, intellige
sacrae scripturae, verecuudiam; lusum nisi impudicum non denotasse. Tertul. de
jejunio contra physicos, etc.
and as Childrens plays before God in the end. And so the word 1 Cor. 10.7.
does signify, Exodus 32.6. The people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose
up to play. But men say, we think this would be better for Gods glory: that is
as much as to say, you take more care for the glory of God then he does
himself. But if you took so much care of the glory of God, you would have
respect to his Commands, and not sin against him out of pretense of zeal for
his glory. And it is as much as to say you know ways that will make more for
the glory of God then he himself does. If the Lord would put the business into
your hands, you could find out a way to secure his glory far better: that God
does not take a right course to glorify himself, but were it in your power you
would do it: As John the Baptist under a pretense of humility, I have need to
be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? And Peter, Lord, Thou shall never
wash my feet; did show forth the highest pride, in making themselves wiser then
Christ. But you will say it would be better for the Churches: What is this but
to charge God with want of love, tenderness, and faithfulness, as if the
Churches were dearer to you, then they are to him? Chrysostom. brings in a man
complaning of the afflictions of the Saints. There was such a man that did use
to give much to the poor, was very beneficial to the Saints, but he fell among
Thieves, and was robbed of all that he had, or suffered shipwreck and lost a
great estate, and now the bowels of the poor are deprived of their former
refreshments. Oh what pity was it that the hand of such a man should be
straightned to whom the Lord had given so large a heart! (...), etc.
(...). Have you more care of the poor, then God their Maker? He brings in the
Example of Job, who says he did not eat his morsels alone, but the poor were
nourished with his bread, and clothed with his Fleece, and their bowels did
bless him in the streets. But now his Estate is wasted, his Flocks and Herds
are consumed, by which so many poor were supported. Had it not been better that
he had had his Estate still, that did so much Good with it while he had it?
Nay, (...), etc.
he brings in Job speaking, Though for my part I was unworthy to enjoy an
Estate, yet the Lord should have spared it for the poors sake upon whom I did
expend it.

But he says no such thing, thinks no such thing, (...). He was not so
glorious and eminent, when he fed the poor with his abundance, as when he did
bless God and gave thanks in the loss of all things. Nay, he brought a greater
glory to God, and gave a greater wound to the Devil by his example of suffering
and patience, and became of far greater use to the Church and to the Saints,
then ever he could have been by his Estate if he had enjoyed it. Jam. 5.11.
We have heard of the patience of Job, and what end God made with him; had it
not been for his sufferings, we should hardly ever have heard of Job or of his
patience. But now the Lord has set him forth for a pattern to his Saints in
all after Ages.

4. In all your discontents, is this the way to prevail with God? Non faciet
recedere, non revocabit, sed perficiet quod verbo minatus est. Est Miosis. A
lap.
Will this make him change his hand? or call back his word? Isa. 31.2. (...) He
will not call back nor make void his word. His counsels being set, it is not
all frettings of your hearts against them that will cause him to take other
counsels, or will turn him out of the way. Psalm. 33 11.
The thoughts of his heart are from everlasting, and therefore it is your
wisdom, much rather to strive to bring about your wills to his will, for there
is no hope of bringing his will to yours. Jam. 1.17. Balaam in stead of
dissuading the King from his evil enterprise, God having formerly forbidden him
to curse the people, he attempteth under the color of Religious actions,
building Altars, and offering Sacrifices, to change the mind and counsel of
God, and to obtain his favor to curse his people. Ainsw. in Numb. 23.1.
In him there is no variableness, nor shadow of change. You may change your
course as Baalam did, and try if upon this mountain you can find God to change
his mind, and go from one high place to another, and think to prevail, but you
do but deceive your selves, lose your labor, and the Lord does deride all such
vain enterprises of men; for the thoughts of his heart endure throughout all
Ages.

5. This is the way to provoke God to go forth in displeasure, and to cross thy
will so much the more. If the Lord go forth in a way of judgment, Te pares ad
sustinendum impetum irae meae, aut ut occurras mihi vera resipiscentia and
emendatione. Drus.
the means to pacify him, is to meet him, as we are commanded, Amos 4.12.
Prepare to meet thy God O Israel. Not to meet him in a way of opposition, to
set up thy will against his, to set the battle in array against him, Esaias 27.4.
for that is but to set briars and thorns against him in battle, but thou must
meet him in a way of submission, as Abigal met David, when he was coming down
to destroy Nabal and his House, 1 Samuel 25.32. So when we are under the hand of
the Lord, and our spirits stoop and say, It is best Lord, best for me, and for
thy Churches. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good; this is the only
way to prevail with God. But if men be like a wild Esaias 51.20. (...) his tantum
legitur sacris bibliis, hoc in loco and Deuteronomy. 14.5. a Sept. redditur per (...),
and (...) bovem sylvestrem significat, est animal superbum, and ferox, 1. Quod
jugum far nequit, 2. Quod se circumscribi non patiatur, and ideo derivatur a
(...) Limitavit, per antiphrasin. 3. Quod illaqueatum and irretitu^ cunu^ and
venatoru^ furori sit expositum. 4. Quod omnibus in platea spectandu^
proponitur. (...)
Bull in a net, when they are full of the fury of the Lord, and like a raging
Sea, that cannot rest, this is the way to provoke God, to go on in displeasure.
Nay, it is a very great Argument that he intends to go on, Si non eruditi
fueritis mihi. Montan. ut castigati, ut redeant.
Levis. 26.24.

If a man be not corrected to him, he will punish him seven times more until
he has destroyed him. And God does every thing by weight and measure, makes
every thing glorious in its time; at the last day (which shall be a day of
revealation) the Books shall be opened, the Book of Providence as well as the
Book of Life; and we shall see a glorious harmony in all the works of God: Yea,
those works which ye would have had otherwise, you shall see how necessary they
were to come in their places and seasons; and then what shame would it be to
you, before men and Angels (if the Saints could be ashamed at the last day)
that the whole plot of God should have been changed, and the glorious order,
and beautiful agreement of all his Providence been defaced, that so your will
might be accomplished to serve a particular end, some low and inferior design?
as if the whole order of the Creation should be perverted for us. And we may as
soon expect, that God should change the works of Creation, as the works of
Providence, and as soon find out a better order in the one, as in the other.

fretting, and without murmuring; do not rise up against the mighty hand of
God, but humble your selves under it, and in due time he will exalt you, 1 Pet.
5.6. It may be sometimes the Lord orders things so, that they do act contrary
to your desires and expectations; sometimes the Clouds give their rain
unseasonably, and the winds unseasonably blow; the stars by their influences
seem to fight against you, and sometimes after all your labor, the Earth does
not yield her increase, but thorns do grow instead of wheat, and cockles
instead of barley. It may be the Lord denies thee the fruit of the womb, or else
gives a comfort, as he did a Guord to Jonah for a day, and he blasts it at
night; though it be the desire of thine eyes, and the joy of thy heart; it may
be the Lord does set up the right hand of thy Adversaries, and they that hate
thee, triumph over thee; and the Church is broken in the place of Dragons, and
covered with the shadow of Death: Now say with a heart melted, into the will of
God, Let the will of the Lord be done: Math. 26 42. Distinguitur in Christo vo
luntas ut est natura quae dicitur (...), voluntas ut est ratio, quae dicitur
(...), Aquin. p. 3. q 18. a. 3.0.
He is the Lord and his will is the Rule of goodness. And although the will of
nature would seek its own preservation, yet let it stoop unto the will of Duty:
And say, while the Lord is pleased to have it so, I do not desire to have it
otherwise. We are to pray with submission unto his will in our works, Jam.
4.15. If the Lord will, we will do this or that; (...). Chrysostom. hom. 84. in
Math. Voluntatem nostram voluntati divinae plenissime unire, sine retractione
cordis cum quadam complacentia mentali medullium in omnibus adversis quae
contingere possunt ut divinum beneplacitum fiat ei summum, de^^^rium sive sint
adversa exteriora, persecutiones, divisiones, scandala; sive interiora, ut
subtractiones gratiae, divinae influentiae, consolationis aternae; sive
obnubilationes mentis vel infrigidationes affectuum sive tentationes, Harph.
Theolog. Mystic. p. 570.
and therefore we are to submit to his will in all his works, and say, If the
Lords will be so, we have no will of our own, we will not the contrary. Now to
bring a soul into such a frame, there are these ensuing considerations which
the Saints may find useful in all these great concussions and shakings of
Kingdoms and Nations.

1. Whatsoever the Lord does, he does by counsel. It is not barely an act of
will, but of will guided by counsel, Ephesians. 1.11. He works all things according
to the council of his own will: And this council is taken from eternity. Psalm.
56.8. Psalm. 139.16. Est liber providentiae Dei generalis omnes creaturas
concernentis, a quo deleri est morti tradi, Exodus 32.32, 33. Est and liber
vitae, qui catalogus est, sive singularis illa salvandorum cognitio. Glass.
Rhet. Scar. p. 157.
The Lord has a book of providence, as well as of life; In thy book are all my
members written. And that book in the Revelation that was sealed with seven
Seals, is not the book of Gods Election, but the Book of Gods dispensations in
the world, Liber fatidicus, the Book setting forth the counsels, and designs of
God upon the after Ages of the world. They are not Counsels taken up De novo,
or as occasion serves, upon a particular interest, and for a particular end,
but they were counsels taken up in reference unto the general frame and
ordering of all things, and that from everlasting. Therefore Zach. 6.1. the
Instruments of vengeance are said to be Chariots that came forth from between
the Mountains of Brass; Non dubium est quin per montes intelligat providentiam
Dei vel arcanum consilium, quo omnia decreta sunt ante creationem mundi. Calv.
Montes duo sunt, sapientia and decretum; dispositio and definitio; potentia and
providentia Dei; praeordinatio, and executio. A lap. Judicia Dei abyssus multa;
quapropter Angeli qui ea exequuntur, prodeunt e profunda valle inter duos
montes, sc. ex cujus abdito firmissima and ineluctabilia consilia. Drus. Tarn.
in loc.
which is to be understood of the Decrees of Providence, which are as Mountains
of Brass, unchangeable. Therefore should not my will stoop? Should I submit
unto the Decree of God, in reference to my eternal estate, and shall not my will
be subject unto his Decree, in ordering of Providence in respect of the things
below? all which do conduce unto that eternal end. Shall not the Lord have what
designs upon the world he pleases? when the Earth is the Lords and the fullness
thereof; of him are all things, as the first cause, and therefore to him should
all things be as the last end.

2. He has committed all things in the matter of Government unto the Son. He
has laid the Government upon his shoulders, not only in the spiritual, but in
the providential Kingdom also; which some Divines call a Kingdom of power,
which is exercised over all men and all creatures, and a Kingdom of Grace which
is exercised over the Church; Assemblies Catech. p. 53.
both which are intended in that petition, Math. 6.10. Thy Kingdom come; for
therein we desire, That Christ would so Govern all the creatures, Dr. Vshers
Sum of Christian Religion. p. 361.
both in the natural course of things, and in the Civil and Domestical
Government of men; yea, Hen. Scudders Key of Heaven. p. 153. Mr. Tho. Goodwins
Sermon. the Interest of England, p. 44.
in the Rule of Devils themselves, in such sort as they may serve for the good
of his Church: And therefore he is called King of Nations, in reference to his
works, Jer. 10.7. as well as King of Saints, in relation to his worship, Rev.
15.3.

This will clearly appear out of the word under these considerations: Propheta
non tantum in Coelo Deum regnare docet, verum moderari res terrenas, and hac
ratione extendit ejus potentiam per quatuor mundi plagas, etc. Calv.


1. That the Rule and Government of all the creatures in Heaven and Earth is in
the hand of the Son, Ezekiel. 1. We have set forth the order, and subordination of
causes in the Government of all things: The Wheels note, the changes and
turnings of all things below, but these are governed by the the living
creatures; the Lord making use of the Ministry of the Angels in the ordering of
all things; for the spirit of the living creatures is in the Wheels. But ver.
See the Exposition of Mr. w. Greenhil of this Vision.
25.26. is a Throne above that of the Angels, Over the heads of the living
creatures a Firmament: upon the Firmament the likeness of a Throne, and upon
the Throne the likeness as the appearance of a man. That this is to be
understood of Christ, is granted generally by Interpreters, and that the Throne
notes a Kingly power, and that the voice from the Firmament, unto the living
creatures, was to order and command them in their Administrations. And the same
is set forth plainly, Joh. 5.22. The Father judges no man, Judicium pro
Imperio and potestate accipit secundum phrasia linguae Hebraicae. A Patre
Christo traditu^ estregnu^ ut arbitrio suo Caelu^ ac Terra^ moderetur. Nec
sensus est quasi Pater prorsus se abdicarit a judican li potestate and
authoritate, sed quia judicat cum Filio, in Filio, and per Filium. Calv.
Kemnit. Pater in sua propria persona neminem regit, sed per Filium; Ita tamen
ut Christus est vicarius Patris, ab co dependet and ci in regiminis
administratione subordinatus est. Calo. 2. c^it. sac. c. 5.. 283.
but he has committed all judgment to the Son. Judgment is after the manner
of the Hebrews, put for the Government and Administration of all things, as is
it used, Jer. 23.5. and 33.15. and the same is intended which the Apostle
speaks of, 1 Cor. 15.26, 27. He has put all things under his feet; and in that
he says all things, its manifest that nothing is excepted, but he that did put
all things under him: Not as if the Father had put himself out of Authority;
but two things are here plainly set down, as Paraeus has well observed. 1.
That all things in Heaven and Earth are by the Father subjected unto Christ, as
the Ruler of them all. 2. That they are so by the Father given into the hands
of the Son, as that the Father still retains the Government in himself; Christ
being in the Kingdom but the Fathers servant. The same is plainly asserted Mat.
28.18. Joh. 17.2.

2. This Kingdom and Rule over all the works of God does belong unto Christ,
not only as he is the second Person, and so equal with the Father; but being
God Man, Pedibus subjicere est in potestatem tradere; and pedious conculcare
est hostibus insultare. Glass. Rhet. sacr. p. 349. Super Angelos constitutum
accipimus unigenitum F^^ium, and nulla creatura subjecta non erit, cui primates
spiritus subj^ciciuntur. Aug. in Psalm. 8.
having undertaken the Office of Mediator, so was the Government put into his
hands immediately, which is evident. 1 From the manner of the derivation of
this Kingdom; it comes unto Christ by donation, and therefore must come under
an Act of Will, which as he was God he could not do. Joh. 5.22. It is (...), he
has given all Judgment to him, (...) Heb. 1.2. Whom he has appointed or put
heir of all things, (...) Heb. 2.7. which signifies to set a man in an office,
to constitute a man to an employment, Act. 6.3. Tit. 1.5. Math. 24.47. And so
much is plainly expressed, Joh. 5.27. He has given him authority to execute
Judgment, because he is the Son of man. 2. From the time of its resignation;
for the Kingdom is but Oeconomical, committed to Christ by way of Office, and
for a time, and then he is to deliver it into the hand of the Father, that God
may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.24, 28. Potestates legitimas a Deoque ordinatas
comprehendo; sicut finem accipiet mundus, ita and Politia and M^gistratus, tum
in Coelo principatus Angeizci, tum in Ecclesia cessabunt M^nistr^^^ and
praefectura^, etc. Call. in loc.
But first he must put down all Rule, and Authority, and Power, which has been
substituted by him; either Ecclesiastial Officers in the Church, or Civil in
the State; yea, I conceive it to be extended, even to the Principality of the
Angels also, which as it began under the Mediatory Kingdom, so it shall end with
it.

3. The Lords intent in setting Christ over the Kingdom of Providence, was,
that he might Rule and over rule all things for the good of his Church; for
whose sake he undertook it, for whose good he administers it, and when their
number is fulfilled, he will deliver it up, as having finished the work that
was given him to do, and therein accomplished all his Fathers ends, Joh. 17.2.
Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to
as many as thou have given him. And Ephesians. 1.22. He Magna consolatio quod tantum
Imperium habet is, qui id exercet Ecclesiae bono, sicut caput consulit corpori.
Grot. God of his grace has not only given us a head, but such a head to whom
all things are subject. Baines in Ephesians. 1.
has put all things under his feet, and given him to be Head over all things
to the Church, which is his Body, etc. And there is required of us a subjection
unto Christ, as King, in both these Kingdoms, committed unto him by the Father;
and to submit unto him in the one and not in the other, is to deny Christ that
honor which God the Father has invested him with. Now Christ is God the
Fathers servant in the Government, Esaias 42.1. As he is called Gods King, Ps.
2.6. He rules from him, he rules for him: And as Christ is his Fathers servant,
so should we be the servants of Christ. Christ serves all the plots of his
Father; all Joh. 5.19 20 Pater niml facit nisi per Falium; and Filius nihil
facit, nisi quod Pater per ipsum operatur. Ostendit Patrem esse authorem eorum
quae Filius facit; simul and Filium esse agens intelligens qui videt and
cognoscit quae Pater cum ipso and per ipsum operatur. Nec dicit alium n^v^^ mun
lum, sed quod videt Patrem in p^^fenti faciente^, hoc Filius una cum Patre
facit. Kemnit.
his eternal Counsels are made known unto him, he does only accomplish what God
the Father has decreed. So should we also be the servants of Christ, to serve
all his ends and designs, as Christ does his Fathers. Now there is a double
engagement lies upon Christ in reference to this Kingdom of Providence.

First, Ratione Officii, as there is a trust put in him by God the Father; and
so we may rest assured he will be faithful unto him; For he has accomplished
all things, and has not spared his own life; he loved it not to death, in
reference to his spiritual Kingdom; therefore he will be faithful also in the
providential Kingdom, which is given him not only as part of his Office, but as
a part also of his reward, being set at the right hand of God; and thereby
being made both Act. 2.36. Christus fuit Rex and Dominus ex quo coepit esse
Mediator, and non demum factus est post resurrectionem; sed locus intelligi
debet de solenni declaratione quae tum facta est cum Christus consedit ad
dextram Patris. Maccov. These. Theolog, par. 3. disp. 15.
Lord and Christ.

Secondly, Ratione Dominii; for he did purchase all the creatures. There was
not only a debt which he paid, but there was a purchase which he made, and that
was of all the creatures, Constituit Christum haeredem omniu^, Heb. 1.2. Sumus
and nos cohaeredes Christi, Romans 8.17. Cujus haeredes sumus? Dei, cujus and
Filii. Quae Dei haereditas? Omnia sunt Dei; omnia igitur nostra quae Dei sunt;
sumus enim haeredes ex ass, 1 Cor. 3.21. Haereditas Christi gemina est;
gloriae and dominii; in utramque partem nos ut fratres recipit. Par. in Romans
8.17. Christus meruit nobis omnia bona supernaturalia and omnia auxilia, sive
praevenientia, sive subsequentia; ac universa illa bona et si bona sint nobis
extrinseca, quae rationem induunt mediorum ad nostram salutem. Vincent.
Asturicens. de habit. Christi great. praelect. q 5. p. 259. Reinolds in Psalm.
110.4 p 455.
for the Churches service; he bought the services of some, and the persons of
others: He bought some as sons, others as servants: Which may be the meaning of
(though it be commonly otherwise interpreted,) 2 Pet. 2.2. They denied the Lord
that bought them. In both these respects we may be sure, as a purchase made by
himself at a dear rate, and as an office committed to him by his Father, he
will order all things so, as they shall be to his own glory, and his Fathers
ends: And therefore we see that all the changings and shakings in the world are
attributed to Christ, Heb. 12.25, 26. See that ye refuse not him that speaks
from Heaven, Relativum ^ non possumus refer nisi ad (...), hoc est ad
Chrislum quem Mosi opposuit. Par. Illud non ad coelum speciatim refertur sed ad
rem totam. Magnas antehac fcci rerum mutationes, sed restat long major. Grot.
whose voice then shook the Earth, etc. It was Christ that did shake the Earth
in the giving of the Law. And it is he that is said once more to shake not only
Earth, but also Heaven.

3. Christ has made his Providential Kingdom subordinate unto his spiritual
Kingdom: Propter Ecclesiam in mundo durat mundus, alioquin uno momento
conflagraret coelum and terra, quia mundus non est dignus uno grano tritici;
siquidem plenus est blasphemiis and impietate. Nisi oratione and doctrina
sustentaret Ecclesia mundum, uno momento perirent omnia. Luth. in Genesis 30. and
34.
he does rule all things in the world only for the good of his people; It is
for their sakes the world stands, and therefore it is for their good and in
subordination thereunto, that the world is governed.

For first, All creatures made for man's use were at first put under man's
Covenant, and therefore when man sinned, his curse did reach unto them also,
Genesis 3.17. If there had not been a second Covenant revealed, man had perished,
and all the creatures for his sake.

Secondly, It is by the Covenant of Christ, and under the Government of Christ
that they are at this day established, Esaias 49.8. I will give thee for a
Covenant of the people to establish the Earth: It must have the same extent
with the people to whom he is given as a Covenant; but that was not to the Jews
only, and therefore it cannot be restrained only to the Land of Judea. Psalm.
93.1. and 97.1. is commonly expounded of the Kingdom of Christ.

Thirdly, The creatures for this cause, wait to be delivered from the bondage
of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21. The
Vanity which I conceive the creature is subjected to, is a Vanity of service to
the lusts of Satan and Sinners; and the reason why they are by God subjected
thereunto, is, because the Lord has a number of Sons to be carried through the
Wilderness of this World and when they are perfectly delivered from corruption,
then shall the creatures be delivered from the bondage of corruption.
Quemadmodum mundus propter hominem conditus est, and propter lapsum illius
corruptus, ita ad gloriam electorum dissolutus restituetur. Gomar. in Romans 8.

Fourthly, The continuance of the World is only to advance the ends of the
Kingdom of Christ: Its attributed to the patience of God, 2 Pet. 3.9. Romans
9.22. but all the attributes of God are exercised by Christ in his Government,
and it is for to bring men to repentance, which only belongs to the second
Covenant, and till the Kingdom of Christ be perfected, the World is reserved by
the Word of God, and then shall the ancient curse be executed, All things shall
be dissolved; the Earth and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. And
for this cause, Ephesians. 11.22. it is said, he is made head over all things unto
the Church In b^num Ecclesiae ^^tinet hoc I^p^r^um G^o^. in loc. Ephesians. 1 23.
Rev. 21.9. Jer. 12.7.
. He is the head of the Church, and over all things, for the Churches sake. The
Church is his body, the Lambs wife, the dearly beloved of his soul; therefore
seeing it is for their sakes that he has undertaken the Government of all
things, surely all things shall be so ordered, as they shall turn to their
spiritual good and advantage in the end. Consider how dear the Church is unto
God the Father Joh. 16.27. (...) apud Graecos ultroneum significat, sc. Pater
ultro vos diligit, etiam nemine rogante, Erasm. unde Nonnus vertit (...).
, that he did commit it as a depositum unto Christ to keep. They are therefore
styled Those whom thou have given me Jo. 17.11. Act. 20.28. Quam heminibus
impossible est, mixtum fermentum separare a pasto, tam impossible est diabolo
Christum ab Ecclesia sua separare. Luth.
. And consider how dear the Church is to Christ who has purchased it with his
own blood: Therefore if the Father will trust him, and if he be so far engaged,
that he shall loose all his sufferings if the Church miscarry; we may trust him
much more. He will surely order all things in a way of Providence, so as shall
tend to their advantage, though it may be for the present they cannot see it:
For he is the Wisdom of God, and the glorious Artificer, that the Lord does and
will use in the accomplishing of all things. And therefore he is called (...) a
cunning workman, Prove. 8.30. Duo habet significata. 1. Artificem probatum. 2.
In sua art excellentem Jer. 46.25. and 52.15. Nah. 3.8. Septuag. vertunt
(...). Glass. Onomat. p. 61.
The word does signify Artificem art sua excellentem, and it is so rendered,
Cant. 7.1. Therefore as when ye are strangers to the Mystery of an Art, and
look upon some curious Artist, ye wonder what he is doing, and how he will
bring about his end: but yet ye trust him with it, and say, Let him alone, we
are to confide in him in his own Art: and ye can take pleasure to stand by and
look on; so should ye do unto Christ in the Government of the world, trust him
with it, for he will effect all that (...) in his heart. He is the cunning
Artist, able to do above what you can ask or think.

4. The Lord Christ has substituted this Spirit as his Prorex. The Spirit does
govern for him both in his providential Ephesians. 2.22. 2 Cor. 3.18.
Romans 8 14. Spiritus sanctus replet totum orbem terrarum; aliter autem replet
sanctificante gratia, sicut sanctos, aliter attestante atque ordinante
praesentia, sicut omnia. Aug. ad Simplician. l 2. q. 1. u Spiritus sanctus
nunquam otiosus est in piis, semper aliquid agit, quod pertinet ad regnum Dei.
Luth.
, and in his spiritual Kingdom. Christ dwells in the hearts of his Saints by his
Spirit, and he rules all the affairs of the world by the same Spirit. It was by
the Spirit that the world was created; the Spirit moved upon the face of the
waters: The word (...) Sicut aquila super pullos suos alas motitat, ill^s
sovens and sustentans, etc. Mercer.
signifies to move upon them as the wings of a foul move upon her young, to
bring them forth. The same Spirit that moved upon the creatures in their
creation, does by the same wings in a way of providence move upon them to
perfection. And therefore when the Angels Ezeck. 1.12.20. Spiritus non
accipitur pro animo vel consilio, nec pro voluntate aut anima hominis, prout
Calv. Sed spiritus Dei est, aequabiliter impellens tam rotas quam animalia.
Caeli ac mundus sunt quasi currus Dei praesidentis spiritus; per Angelos gyrat
Coelos, tempora and omnia creata; caque suavissime ac fortissime regit and
movet. A lap. Greenhil in loc.
act the wheels, the Spirit of Christ moves them; which way the Spirit went,
thither their Spirit was to go, Ezekiel. 1.20. Therefore Zach. 4.7. Spiritum vocat
virtutem a Dei spiritu manantem, qua animi eorum confirmabantur and
excitabantur ad opus faciendum, uti Ezra. 5.1. and Hag. 2.5. Drus.
It is not by power nor by might, but by my Spirit; The Spirit wrought it in a
providential way, by raising up the spirits of men. Zach. 6.8. Per vocem
spiritus quidam vindictam Dei intelligunt, quae cum ad satietatem effusa sit,
tum spiritum Dei vindictae cupidum sedare, vel facere acquiescere dicuntur.
Pemble, etc. Traditum est mihi ab Hebraeis, quod Alexander and omnes Macedones
qui egressi sunt post Medos and Persas requiescere secerunt Spiritum
prophetalem, eo quod Dei voluntatem contra Medos impleverint. Jerome in loc.
They that are gone out into the North Country have quieted my Spirit in the
North. There was a great design of God to accomplish, and the Spirit would
never be pacified; he was restless as it were, till this work was fulfilled.
For the Spirit is as truly engaged in it, being the Spirit of Christ Mediator,
as Christ himself is engaged unto God the Father.

5. The Lord has erected another subordinate power, which is that of the
Angels. For the Wheels do not move alone, but the Spirit of the living
Creatures is in the Wheels. Ezech. 1.20. Omnino hoc verum est quod Deus mundum
hunc visibilem gubernat non tantum per homines sed etiam per Angelos. Lu there
in Genesis 19. etc. Angelorum officium duplex est; superius canere gloriam in
excelsis Deo: Insertus erga nos and creaturas est vigilare, gubernare,
militare, etc. in c. 32.
Now the living creatures are the Angels, Ezech. 10.20. And for this cause they
are said to be ministering Spirits for the good of the Elect. And they not only
minister to the Saints, but they minister to Christ also, in all his works in
the world, for the Saints sake: Therefore in Revel. 8.1. and 16.1. the Trumpets
and the Vials, are said to be given into the hands of the Angels. They being
the Instruments chiefly used in them; and all other persons shall be acted,
moved by their ministry. Now we know they are holy Angels, they know the will
of God as they see the face of God: and they are faithful unto Christ, unto
whom as Servants they are subjected. For he was made lower then the Angels,
Heb. 2.7. (...) but for a little time; Col 2.10. 1 Pet 3 22.
but now he is exalted a bove Angels, and Principalities, and Powers, and they
made subject to him; and we know that Christ is their head, and they make up
one body in Christ with the Saints, for there is an (...) of things in heaven
and things in earth, Metaphora ducta est a re oratoria. Camer. Est era in
summa colligere; ut Romans 13.9. Per Christum tanquam caput. Grot. (...). Oecum.
Sicut mali Angeli and diaboli invisibiles insensiores hosts sunt, quam
visibiles; ita opti^^ and constantissuni amici sunt Angeli invisibiles, qui
fide and benevolentia and ^mnibus officiis amicitiae visibiles amicos long
superant. Luth. in Genesis c. 24.
Ephesians. 1.10. We are all servants of the same Family, and brethren. The Angel
himself acknowledges, Rev. 19.10. I am thy fellow servants and of thy brethren.
Now we need not doubt but they will order all things for the Churches good,
knowing the mind of God fully in all his works, in which they are employed;
which makes them to go and come like lightning. When therefore the Spirit
works, and the Angels work, and all of them concur; should man repine? should
man resist?

6. The motions of providence in ordering the affairs of the world, are
sometimes cross and perplex motions, going beyond the reach of the ablest and
most skilful men. There is as it were a Wheel in the midst of a Wheel, Eze.
1.16. Complexio transversa; they move like the motions of Watches, Cur duplices
fuerint Rotae videndum est; nempe quia Deus non videtur tenere rectum cursum,
sed habere varias conversiones and quasi inter se contrarias, acsi
distraheretur agitatio ubi inspirat vigorem credturis, etc. Calvin in loc.
Rotae erant implicatae, ne speremus illarum motionum rations a nobis percipi;
si secundum humanam rationem de operibus Dei and eventis judicamus, tanta est
preplexitas, ut nos explicare non possimus, etc. Lavat.
crosswise, one Wheel acts another by a cross and a quite contrary motion, so
that the greatest Statesmen, the wisest Politicians are puzzled by it, they know
not what mysteries there are in Providence. They cannot discern whether the
Wheels move forward or backward. As sometimes when the Scots molested this
Nation, the Inhabitants called in the Saxons for their Affistance, but they did
effect that, which they did intend to avoid, for they conquered and subdued the
Nation to themselves. The motions of Providence are so perplex and various,
that it comes not within the compass of the wisdom of man to gather any certain
Conclusions from them. The Lord will not have man to find any thing after
Eccles. 7.14. sc. Vt nihil divinarum praerogativ^rum homo sibi arrogare possit.
Cocc.
him.

7. The Wheels are sometimes lifted up from the Earth Multa saepe videmus fieri
intempestive, nostro judicio; sed sciamus Angelos peragere suu^ officium, and
ipsorum motu vel inspiratione rapi, quae per se nullum motum haberent. Calv.
, Ezech. 1.19. God does many times go out of the way of his ordinary
Providence, and does raise the Spirits of men, and enable them to unwearied
services; he that is feeble shall be as David Erit alter David, hoc est bello
fortis ac summus; and qui infeliciter egerit, futurus sit Davidi similis, sc.
foelix and fortunatus, Drus. in loc. Jer. 37.10 (...) transfossi. Cum de
sanctissimis viris Johanne Huss and Hieronymo Prag^nsi cogite, cum summa
admiratione hanc ipsam animi magnitudinem intueor. Qui duo se totius mundi
judiciis opposuerunt. Luth. in Genesis cap. 7. Lutherus odium and impetum totius
orbis sustinuit. Sleidan. Dei gratia hoc insigne donum expertus sum, ut contra
Caesaris, Pontificis, Principum, Regum, and totius fere mundi voluntatem,
docendo and seribendo Jesum Christum liberrime confessus sum, etiam inter mill
pericula vitae, Luth. Tom. 4. p. 404. Nihil est humanis viribus laboratum, quod
non humanis aeque viribus destrui possit, quontam mortalia sunt opera
mortalium, Lactan. l. 7.
, Zach. 12.8. That is, as valiant in War as David; and the house of David (So
the Saints and the Faithful Ones of God are called) shall be as an Angel of
God; their Spirits elevated even to Angelical strength and courage. The Lord
did never so settle any Nation or People, but he did reserve to himself a power
of alteration. He did never so exalt any man, but he did reserve to himself a
power of degradation. Ezech. 21.10.26. Remove the diadem, take away the crown,
it shall be no more. Deponit Reges, disponit Regna; and the sword, shall be the
Instrument by which it shall be effected: It is the (...) Tribus Judah quae
hactenus contempsit virgam qua a Deo castigata fuit, desinet esse regnum.
Lavat. (...) enim tribus est. Gladius Chaldaeorum sceptrum, hoc est, regnum
Filii mei, sc. Israelis; succidet facilius omne lignum, sc. omnem alium
populum. A lap. Sed haec interpretatio optime quadrat. Gladius Chaldaeorum est
virga vel sceptrum Filii mei contemnens omne lignum. Psalm. 17.13. Esaias 10.5.
rod of my Son, contemning every tree; and no tree shall escape, not the Cedars
of Lebanon; for it is the Scepter of my Son; men may make a great difference
betwixt Cedars and shrubs, but the Sons Scepter makes no such difference.

8. Ezech. 1.18. Et Rotae and cherubim erant oculis pleni circu^, sc. non in
unico tantum loco sed undiquaque, omni ex part; hi oculi signi ficant 1.
Circumspectionem and vigilantiam in orbis regimine. 2. Motus vel rerum eventus
esse certissimos, licet instabiles and impliciti nobis videantur. 3.
Pulcherrimos esse, sc. ocellis quasi stellis lucidissimis ornatos. Calv. A lap.
He has discovered to us in his word what ends he has to accomplish in and
upon the world; and we know he carries on all things for the accomplishment of
those ends. For the Wheels are full of eyes; Non caeco feruntur impetu; they
are not carried on barely by the force, and according to the wills of second
causes, but by counsel; and though we see not how they tend to the effecting of
these ends, yet they shall surely be accomplished, and in this our hearts ought
to rest; the ends are these.

1. What ever men's ends are, Per terram hujus mundi regna intelligo, leges and
constitutiones, cum bellicis tumultibus replentur cuncta, uti Hag. 2.22.23, Et
per Coelum cultum intelligo and religionis statum in Ecclesia Christiana, sc.
dogmata fidei, media cultus, Minstros ordinarios, etc. uti Dan. 8.10. Tali
concussione ad primum Christi adventum viam paravit, talt etiam ad secundum.
Magnas antebac fetit rerum mutationes, sed reslat long major. Grot.
the Lord intends by these shakings to remove the things that are made, Heb.
12.27. whatsoever has been brought into the Church or State, as an invention
of man for politic ends, shall be destroyed; and he will shake both, to that
end that he may remove them, That the things that cannot be shaken may remain.

2. Rev. 17.13. Nisi pon^if^x Romanus redigatur in ordinem, actu^ est de omni
re Christiana. At quis in ordmem rediget? Christus illustratione adven. tus
sui, and non alius. Qui habet aures audiendi audiat, and a bello Turcico
abstincat, donec nomen Papae sub Caelo valedixit. Luth. Tom. 2.
That he may thereby make way for Antichrists ruin, who was set up by made
things only; the Kings of the Earth giving (...) their force of arms, and their
power of Laws unto the Beast; and so far as the Laws and Government of any
people are blended with this power of Antichrist, so far will the Lord shake
that people, that thereby he may make way for Antichrists downful, ruining him
by the same means he arose.

3. Pro regnis cornua posui^; hanc habet sancta scriptura consuetudinem ut
regnu^ semper interpretetur in cornibus. Hieron. 1 King 22. 11. Dan 7.7, 8,
21.24, and 11.20. Jer. 50.28.
That he might take away the horns by which his people have been pushed, Zach.
1.21. And this he will do, though it be by a power that shall afterward perish,
if they prove horns also; as the Assyrian was destroyed by the Persians, who
afterward when he advanced his horn against the Church, was also to perish by
the Grecian; for the vengeance is the vengeance of the temple.

4. That the Kingdom and Dominion under the whole Heavens may be the Lords
Christus Mayestatem sua^ visibilem qu^d^^ (...) ^ps^ (...) fingend^ ^o^da, ut
co^ r^^^ suas and ^reptra ont^ pedes ein^^^^ (...), Bright. In fine sexti
^all^^^^^ ^nni mal^^^^ ^mnis (...), and regnet per annos ^^ll^ jusintia, suque
tranqu^ll^as (...) a labor^^u^, quos mundut jam d^^ perpessus est. Lacta^t. de
Divino (...) cap 14.
. To that end he does take unto himself his great power and reign, Revel.
11.15. But here comes in a case necessarily to be answered, which will arise in
the minds of mo^^ it being the great scruple and stumbling block of these
times, and ^^e cause why men fall not in with the present Acts and
Administrations of God in the World. Or, Dan. 11.33. Inter multos Apostatas
praedicit sore quosdam qui in puro Dei cultu retinebunt populu^. Quanquam hoc
non praecise restringo ad sacerdotes, tamen non dubito quin Angelus ab ipsis
incipiat. Et tanta est Spiritus gratia in fulciendis doctoribus, ut non
succumbant, quamvis cum gladio, igne and exilio pugnandum est. Calv.
if this be not the true cause (as there is reason to suspect it in many) yet
this is the great pretense that is held forth. Men say, did I know that this
were the will of God to effect, yet that is not to be my rule, for there is
voluntas propositi which is the rule of Gods actings; he works all things
according to the counsel of his own will: but this is not to be looked upon as
the Rule of what God would have us to do. It is voluntas praecepti that we are
in all things to have respect unto. As the Lord many times will have his people
to be afflicted, distressed, imprisoned, yea, and many to fall by the sword, to
try them and purify them, and make them white unto the time of the end, Dan.
11.37. For whatsoever Prophesies there are which the Lord has spoken,
Ecclesiae figura ^olumba est, quae cum omnium injuriis pateat, non tamen reddit
injuriam, sed patitur. Luth.
he will surely effect. The vision shall speak and not lie, it shall come and
not tarry, he will not call back his word. It is no good argument then, that
because God will afflict his Church, therefore I should desire that the Church
should be afflicted, Psalm. 122.6. Esaias 62.7. Esaias 33.20.
and should desire to be an Instrument in the hand of God therein. The rule
given me is this, that I should pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and that God
would make it 1. Est Ecclesiam gloriosam reddere, ut illiuc materia laudis
Ecclesiae effu^geat. 2. Vt eam merito omnes Gentes laudent and toti orbi sit
Ecclesia in laudem and gaudium. (...) 1. Diem afflictionis and calamitatis quem
iis praedico, non optavi eis; sed cum dolor cogor eum praedicere, quia tu
D^mine id mihi jubes. A Lap. 2. Diem doloris, vel diem anxium redditur; ita
vocat militiam illam quae manet omnes veros pastores, and ad munus propheticum
tantum restringit. Calv.
a praise in the Earth, and a quiet habitation; and the promise is, they shall
prosper that love thee; and therefore though Jeremiah in Obedience unto God
must pronounce the woeful day, and tell them what the Lord will do, yet he does
profess he does not desire the woeful day, Jer. 17.16. He did speak it as being
commanded by God, but not as a thing desired by him, though he did tell them
from the mouth of God what he would do: yet it was not that which he would have
a hand in to effect. His rule of duty was, to seek the good of Jerusalem, and
pray for the peace of it, till the Lord forbid him, pray no more for this
people, for I will not hear thee, Jer. 7.16. Voluntas Divina ad quam se
conformare d^bet voluntas humana, est voluntas praecepti; quippe quo docetur
quid Deus v^lit esse nostri offic^t ut ^aciamus; non autem est voluntas
decreti, quo ipse apud se slatuit, quid velit fieri, five sinendo ut fiat, sive
ipse factendo. I wisse vindic. l. 2. p. 175.
. It is not therefore the effecting will of God that is to be my rule in
desiring or acting; it may be a sin in me, to join in that which I know God
will effect, 2 King. 8.10, 15. when Benhadad was sick, he sent unto Flisha the
Prophet to enquire whether he should recover of his disease; Duae sunt parts
oraculi; in prima de vita ex aegritudine respondit, in altera de Regis vita
absolute. Morbus tum non est lethalis; ex hoc morbo non morieris; absolute
tamen morte morieris; quia priusquam a morbo conva^escat ab ipso Hazael occisus
est. Pet. Martyr. Ca^etan.
he told him that his disease was not mortal, but that he might recover: but
yet the Lord had showed him that he should surely die. This he uttered as from
God unto Hazael his Messenger; yet Hazael did wickedly, to take a thick cloth
and dip it in water, and spread it upon his face, thereby to smother him, and
to hasten his death. And we know, that though God be not the Author Resp^ctu
Dei bonum esse dicimus, ut mala fiant; and quomodo bonum? duntaxat in genere
conducibilis ad illustrandam gloriam De^. sc. gloriam divinae justitiae
punientis, and misericordiae parcentis. Et ut fiant mala; a quo? Non a Deu, sed
duntaxat ab homine. Et quomodo ut fiant? sc. Deo duntaxat permittente, non
autem efficiente aut in agendo deficiente. Twisse vindic. lib 2. p 175.
, yet he is the Orderer of sin, and he does accomplish great things oftentimes
even by the sins of men; yet this is only by the permitting, and not the
effecting will of God; Though the Lord does permit that it shall be done, yet he
hates the act, and is displeased with the Actor; As the Lord employed
Nebuchadnezzar against Jerusalem; he says, he is my servant, and I send him
against an Hypocritical Nation, the people of my wrath; and I give him a
Bisariam praecipit Dous; v^l voluntate patefacta per verbum hominibus traditum,
vel voluntate occulta, quae est providentia sive decretum arcanum, quo sic
omnia moderatur ut sine eo and contra illud nihil possint sacere aut omittere.
Hoc sensu ^^rbum praecipiendi sumitur, sc. pro ord^^are and d^cernere. 2 Samuel
16.10. Esaias 5 6. Jer. 33.22. Ursin. Calv. etc. vide Pet. Martyr (...) 2 Samuel
16. quaest. An Deus sit author peccati, and quomodo illud praecip^^ p. 275.
charge to take the spoil and the prey, and to tread them down as mire in the
streets, Isa. 10.6. And yet all this was but the permitting will of God. So the
ten Kings, the Lord did put it into their Rev. 17.14. Fontem ostendit unde
Imperatores forent per ta^ longum inter vallum adeo obsequentes; ab eo
proficiscitur in cujus manibu^ sunt c^^da R^gum; hic justo judicio quos vult
occaecat. Bright.
hearts to give their Kingdoms unto the Beast, that Antichrist might be set up,
which has been the ground of all the miseries that have been brought upon the
Christian Churches ever since: yet i^ was their sin, and only the permitting
will of God. He did neither approve the act, nor acquit the Actors. So the Lord
will have Ahab to fall a^ Ramoth Gilead: Satan offers his servic^ to persuade
him, and to be a lying spirit in the mouth of his Prophets, and the Lord says,
thou shall persuade him and prevail, go forth and do so. Satanae voluntas
semper est iniqua, sed potestas nun. quam injusta. Gregor. Deus iratus dat
amanti quod male amat: Multi enim miseri sunt habendo quam carendo. Amando res
noxias miseri, habendo sunt miseriores. Augustine in Psalm. 26.
Yet it was only Gods permitting will; the Act and the Agent were both hateful
unto God, as not doing that which was good in his sight.

How therefore should a man know whether Gods effecting will and commanding
will be the same? And that what I do, be done in submission unto both, whether
it be Gods permitting will only? (For the Lord may suffer evil Instruments, yea
he may suffer good men in an evil way, as appears in Jacobs getting of the
blessing.) Or, whether it be the effecting will of God, so as he allows the
act, and approves the Actor. If I had Rules for this, then I could rest
securely in respect of all the dealings of God in the World.



1. That all prejudiced and pre-engaged wills be laid aside. There is a meekness
of spirit with which the Word is to be received, Jam. 1.21. called the meekness
Status regimiais apud Hebraeos causam denotat, and sensus est, manfuetudo a
sapientia provenions vel effectum denotat, and sensus est, verae sapientiae
effectum and (...) est prudens mans^^^^^o. Glass Gram. sa^^. p. 101. etc.
Gomar. in loc.
of wisdom. Jam. 3.13. The words of the wise are heard in quiet Si audiantur
animo tranquill^ and non perturbato. Co^h.
, Eccles. 9.17. more then the cry of him that rules among fools. Advice given
with a calm, humble, and submissive spirit, and received with a mind free from
passion and pre-engagements, prevails with men much more, and sinks deeper then
the proud, confident, and censorious dictates of men, whose affections engage
and bias their judgments. In all cases of difference a man should fear
himself in this, least he should shut his eyes against any truth delivered. It
was that which Luther found by experience. Hoc mea experientia disco quod non
habeo tam magnam timendi causam extra, quam intra me. Therefore be jealous of
your selves, especially, in those things wherein ye have received prejudice
beforehand, and know it is one of the greatest judgments that can befall a
man, to be given up to believe a lie, to have his heart deeply engaged in a
wrong cause, and to appear much for that which will prove a falsehood at the
last day. And it is a most dangerous sign that thou art so, the less fearful
that thou art of thy self in it, with the greater confidence and gloriyng of
Spirit that thou do go on; and with the more bitter, violent, and censorious
spirit toward others that are not of thy mind and judgment; Ne pergas
quaerere quid cor durum sit; si non expavisti, tuum est. Bern.

2. I desire you not to expect from me State-considerations belonging, to the
conventions of Kingdoms and Nations, or the municipal Laws of the Commonwealth.

First, It being but an Ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2.13. therefore different in
several States and Kingdoms, all being not bound unto the same constitution.
God gave unto the Jews their judicial Laws; and therefore says he was their
King; for the Legislative power he reserved unto himself, though the executive
power he did commit unto Officers under him. But that Commonwealth being
dissolved, though for the moral equity all people should have respect unto
those Laws, yet the Lord has left the Legislative power unto themselves to
choose the Laws by which they will be ruled, and unto which they will submit:
And as they are different in several Kingdoms, so they may vary in one and the
same Kingdom, as the Nation shall find them prejudicial unto that body, for
the good of which they were at first intended. And though after the Captivity
the people of the Jews were governed by Kings no more; for the Lord had said
that in Zedechiah the Kingly form of Government should cease, Ezeh. 21.25, 26.
Thou profane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day is come, when inquity shall
have an end. Thus says the Lord God, Remove the Diadem, and take off the
crown, this shall not be the same; exalt him that is low, and abase him that is
high. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall he no more, until he
come whose right it is, and I will give it him. And yet when Kings ceased, the
Scepter departed not from Judah Equidem ego sceptrum esse nil aliud nisi
Majestatem imperii opinor, eam nempe quae ipsi reipublicae assidet: Quare
quorum respublica est, little and Sceptrum dici debet. Non recessit sceptrum,
etsi mutatus reipub. status sit, ac penes Optimates modo Pontificesque summa
fuerit. imperii. Nimis inepte faciunt, qui hic in arctum desilierunt, and
nominis hujus honorem haud pertinere nisi ad Reges autumant. Quicunque enim
populus sua quadam republica suisque legibus utitur, is recte gloriari de
imperio deque sceptro potest. Cunaeus de repub. Heb. l. 1. c. 9. Ejecto regio
nomine, juris statuendi potestas in senatum translata est, and ei omnia jura
and insignia regum data, legesque Regum in contemptum abiere. Et Majestatis
crimen est, quod adversus populum Romanum vel adversus securitatem ejus
committitur. Ulpian. l. 1.. 1. F. ad legem. Jul. majest.
. Genesis 49.10. After the Captivity it is no more termed a Kingdom, but the
Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12. and yet while they are governed by their
own Laws, and their own Officers (though their Monarchy was changed into an
Aristocracy) the Government still remains for substance the same, under a
different Form; and when they have no King, yet the Scepter remains with them
still.

Secondly, The Lord has established two Dr. Vshers Speech in the Castle
Chamber concerning the Oath of Supremacy. p. 3.
distinct powers upon Earth, and will preserve them distinct unto the end of
the World; the power of the Sword, and the power of the Keys; and he has
appointed two distinct Officers for the management of both these, the
Magistrates, and the Ministers. The Institutions of Christ his Word, Seals and
Censures, these properly belong unto the Ministers; and when they meddle out of
these, they may fear to hear that question of Christ, who made thee a Ruler or
a Judge? and if Jesus Christ being a Minister of the Circumcision, would not
take it upon him, (though as Mediator the Government of the world did belong to
him) how much less should any Officer under him take upon him to decide
controversies, and determine Titles in matters Civil, which I dare not arrogate
so much to my self as to understand, much less to contradict Authority, and to
engage the people therein. The power of the sword belongs to the Magistrate;
And if the Magistrate will with Vzziah, undertake the Institutions of Christ,
he must be content to hear, it appertains not to thee to burn Incense, but to
the sons of Aaron that are consecrated thereunto, 2 Chronicles. 26.18. If Peter also
(...) bold to draw the sword, he (...) to hear, Put up thy sword (...) place.
He is commanded to (...) as a weapon that he has no (...) to use. And truly it
has be (...) just with God that the (...) Office has been so much (...) by
others, because they have (...) so much beyond their own pale in the execution
thereof. And to me the Institutions of Christ, which are the proper subject of
our commission, are of that vastness and extent, that we stand in need of no
such 2 Timothy 2.4. No man that warreth intangleth himself with the affairs of
this life. Milites instituti obsequiis non deputabantur, nec privata usdem
negotia ^^andabantur: siquidem incongruum videbatur unperatoris militem, qui
(...) and annona publica p^scebatur, utilitatibus vacare privatis. Vegetius
cere milit. l. 2. Graviter commoti summus ego and collegae mei qui praesentes
aderant, cum cognovissemus, quod Geminius victor de saeculo excedens, Gemintum
Fausinum Presbyterum tutorem Testamento suo nominaverat, quando singult divino
Sacerdotio honorati and in Clerico ministerio conflituti, non nisi altari and
sacrificits deservire and precibus atque orationibus vac^ne debeant. Nemo
militans Deo obligat se molestiis saecularibus: quod ^^m de omnibus dictum sit,
quanto magis molesti^s and laqueis saecularibus o^^gart non debent, qui divinis
rebus and spiritalibus occupati, ab Ecclesia recedere, and ad terrenos and
saeculares actus vacare non possunt: ut qui operationibus divinis insistebant,
in nulla re avocarentur, nec cogitare nec agere sacularta cogerentur? Cyprian.
1 p 66. Dominum Jesum, in cujus nomine securus haec dico, testem invoco super
animam meam, multo mallem per singules dies certis horis aliquid manibus
operari, and caeteras horas habere ad legendum and orandum, aut aliquid in
divinis literis agendum liberas quam tumult ^sissimas perplexitates causarum
alienarum ae negotiis saecularibus pati, etc. Augustine de opere Monarch. cap. 39
excursions.

To come now to the Answer it self: There are several considerations according
to the Rules of the word to be offered to you.

1. In closing with, or joining our selves to any party; we must not make this
our Rule, the ends and intentions of the party with whom we join, so as to say,
I will join with such, because I am persuaded their ends are good. And I will
not join with such, because I fear their ends are naught. This Rule I have from
the instance of Jehu, 2 Kings 9.6, 7, 8. He was appointed by God, to be King
over Israel, on purpose that he might destroy the house of Ahab, and avenge the
blood of the Servants of the Lord. In executing this commandment of the Lord,
he meets with Is viso Rege, benedixit ei, hoc est saluta^ vit, hona and fausta
precatus est, and gratulatus et de ^ebus praeclare gestis adversus sceleratos
and Idololatras. Pet. Martyr in 2 R^g 10. Benedixit ei, sc. benedictione
laudis, pr^ vindicta adversus domum Achab tam profanam, etc. Cajetan.
Jonadab the Son of Rhecab, a holy man, and he gives him the right hand of
fellowship in the work, rides with him in the same Chariot, without ever
questioning what ends Jehu had ^n it. Its true, he had an intention to
establish the Kingdom upon himself and his Posterity, and therefore so much as
would conduce unto that end, he would do, and no more. He was Ahabs Executioner
for his Idolatry, and yet he was Ahabs Successor therein. His person therefore
was not accepted in the service, neither was the act approved by God as from
him; and yet it was not only lawful, ^ut a duty for all the faithful in the
Land as well as the Army Deus tantam illi conciliavit au^ thoritatem ut illico
sit pro rege habitus and confirmatus. In ^entem quippe veniebant familiae
Achabi scelera, Helianum oraculum, and vaticinium postremi Prophetae, quae
omnia Deus in animis illorum efficacia mirum in modum reddebat. P. Martyr.
Principes and milites divinitus excitati regnum ei detulerunt. A lap.
to join with him therein, because the work was Gods, what ever his end was,
who was Gods instrument in the execution thereof.

For first, Ends are secret things, and none can judge of them, but he that
knows the heart. For the intents of the heart lie deepest, and it is a hard
matter to know them in our selves, much more in others.

Secondly, because I am sure Gods ends are right, what ever men's are. God did
it in justice, though Jehu did it in policy; and a gracious heart may do the
same action to a holy end, and his person and service be accepted; which an
ungodly man does to a corrupt end: And the action (though good in it self)
proves a sin to the man, and is so accounted by God. For any therefore to say,
men do what they do, not for a public good, but they aim barely at setting up
themselves in the Government to destroy one way of Tyranny that they may
establish a greater, that they may add to the peoples yoke, and make their
little fingers heavier then the loins of the former Governors; whoever do so,
the Lord will surely find them out; and it will appear that they have coveted
an evil Covetousness Hab. 2.9. Lucrum malum domui suae, declarat eam avaritiam
familiae ipsius pernitiem allaturam. Drus.
to their house, which will prove like a coal in the Eagles nest, as it has
been to them that the Lord has cast out before them In aliis horrent quod in
se semper admittunt, mirum in modum and accusatores eorundem criminum and
excusatores; exsecrantur public, quod occulte agunt, etc. Salvian de gubern.
l. 3 p. 92.
. For God will surely visit the blood of Jezerel upon the house of Jehu. Hos.
1.4. Fuit caedes illa respectu Jehu and latrocinium; respectu Dei fuit justa
ultio. Ego quidem illud mandavi, sed in alium finem retulit ipse injunctam sibi
vindictam; fuit igitur potius latro; neque scelera punivit, quia eadem
perpetravit. Call. in loc.
Whatsoever a man does, though by the Command of God, to a corrupt end, shall
be numbered among his sins at the last Day, and shall add to his Plagues. This
is a sure Rule, Whosoever having power in his hand, does punish or depose
another for any way of sinning, and does live in the same way himself, God will
certainly plague him for punishing that in another, as if he had done the
greatest act of cruelty and injustice in the world. If Jehu will take away the
life of Ahab and his Family for Idolatry, and will himself continue in the same
sin, Hoc loco intelligi debet caedes a Jehu perpetratas esse, quando Achabum
cum suis interficiebat, quoad externam speciem juxta verbum Jehovae; intus vero
in cord long aliud spectabat. Tarnov. Magistrates must take heed of living in
the same sins which they punish in others. See Mr Buroughs in Hos. 1. p. 42.
though it were never so deserved in Ahab, yet it is but Murder in Jehu, and
God will deal with him as a Murderer, avenging upon him the very blood of
Ahab, which he himself commanded to be shed. But yet it is only God that can
discern and judge of these ends; He only can deal with men according to them;
It cannot be the Rule by which we must judge or act; And though the end of the
Instrument be never so vile, yet if the Work be of God, I not only may, but am
bound (...) join therein.

^.We are to (...) the thing (...) ansco^ (...) me: (...) Deus (...) ^ quid
(...) a^; P^^ (...) and per (...) and hoc mod (...) number dumaxat vult; and
impro^rte and (...) altud, sc. propter bonum quod inde sequitur; nullo modo
dici potest Deus velle malum proprie, sed potius dicendus est perm^ttere sed
v^lens, non au^^m invitus, (...). Z^nch. de (...) Del. l. 3. c. 4 (...) De
natura Perm^s^^^ ut ^^^tre, and (...) quoad (...) voluntatis eli^^um and
unperatum, (...) Vind^^. Digress. (...) p. 17.
will (...) only conver^^^ (...) ^vill: But ^f the (...) good (...) ^^^^ing
will Omne horum (...). As C^rus was (...) Lord for the destruction of that
cruel and oppressing Nation, the hammer Jer. 50.23. (...) percussit (...)
contudit totam terram, (...) aut ejus actum sustinere poss^. A Lap (...) Sacr.
p. 404.
of the Earth, as the Babylonish Monarchy (...) called; and to avenge the cause
of the Church. And therefore the wrat^ poured upon it is called the vengean^ of
the Jer. 50.28. Vindicta Templ. (...), qua Deus ulciscit^^ contumeliam Templo
suo illatam: and (...) Templo prov^n^ hoc est, precibus Sanctorum impetratu^.
Calv. Bright
Temple. The Lord says, f^^ Jacob my Servants sake, he shall perform all my
pleasure, saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built; and to the Temple, Thy
foundation shall be laid. Isai. 44.28. The thing was in it self good, and
therefore it was not only lawful, but a Ezra 6.22. Neh. 2.18. and 4.6.
duty in the Saints to rejoice in it, and to give their uttermost assistance to
further the Work. So Jehu: the thing was good that he was employed ^n, the
rooting out of a wicked, cruel, and idolatrous Family. The Lord gives him this
Testimony, 2 Kings ^0.31. Thou have done that which was ^ight in mine eyes, and
all that was in my heart. He did approve Deus non modo eum provexit ad regnum,
sed etiam probavit quae fecerat, et promisit ei liberos quartae successionis in
regno permansuros. Pet. Martyr.
the ^ct as good, and rewarded it. Therefore thy Children unto the Fourth
Gene^ation shall sit upon the Throne of Israel. The Act therefore in it self
was good, and belonged unto the Effecting will of God, though it were an evil
in the ^an, being blasted unto him by a cor^upt intention. Now it is a good
thing that the public Liberties of a Nation be asserted, and that against ^he
highest Opposers. It is good that justice be executed, and that upon the
greatest Offenders. Rex Rex de jure mutare non poterit libertatem primo
concessam; habet in potestate sua leges and constitutiones regni provisas,
approbatas and juratas; ipse in propria sua persona observet, and a subditis
suis faciat observari. Est enim corona Regis facere justiciam and judicium fine
quibus corona consistere non potest. Hen. de Bracton de legibus and
consuetudin. Angliae. l. 2. c. 24. Non est Rex ubi voluntas and non lex
dominatur. Ibid. (...). Brisson. de regno Persarum, p. 36.
debet esse sub Deo, et sub Lege, quia Lex Regem facit. It is good that a
Magistracy be maintained, that Tyranny be suppressed, that men be not left like
the fishes of the Sea that have no Ruler; that if one Government be taken away,
no other must be accepted; but Magistracy (though an Ordinance of God) must be
wholly cast off; as the Persians at the death of their Kings had (...), a
lawless liberty for five days, in which every man was to do what was right in
his own eyes, and he should never be questioned for it; that they finding the
mischief of living without a government, might prize authority the more. Had
the reins been let loose at first, when the late King deserted the government
of this Nation several years together, had then all inferior Magistrates given
up, into what an immediate confusion had this Nation been cast? And if after
his death all Authority had been laid aside, had we not immediately fallen
under the power of the Sword, that no man should have been secure of life? It
is good to oppose and discountenance Popery in all the Forms thereof. And there
are many men that receive the mark Rev. 13.16. Character summatim comprehendit
omnem illam rationem qua quts ullo modo Bestiae devincitur. In dextra, Vt pro
virili pro Bestia propugnent: in front, ut omnibus palam sit cui deberetur
obsequium. Bright. Allusum est ad morem veterem, quo servi Dominorum in front
milites Imperatoris sut nominibus in dextra inscribi solebant.
of the Beast in their right hand, and do in a high degree maintain Popish
Principles and Interests, and yet never wear the mark in their foreheads. All
these things I look upon being done, as good, as things which God does approve;
but if the persons do them not in obedience unto God, but upon corrupt
Principles, and unto corrupt ends, or if they degenerate into the same evils,
and build that which they before pretended to destroy, God will have a time to
call them unto an Account, and reckon with them afterward. Neither does it
follow that Jehu did not that which was right in the sight of the Lord against
the House of Ahab, because he doing it with an evil intention, and barely for
Politic Ends, God did afterward visit the blood of Jezerel upon the House of
Jehu. I am herein to look if the thing be good in it self, and to the intention
of my own spirit in doing it; and I need not question but I shall be accepted
and rewarded for doing that in obedience to God, and in sincerity of heart, for
which another man who did it upon corrupt Principles, and unto corrupt Ends,
shall be sure to be punished.

3. When the Ends of God are carried on, and that not coeco impetu, but
professedly as the intention of the Actors. It is true, all ungodly men do
accomplish Finis operis and operantis. Isai. 10.7. Si pro arbitrio suo scrvi
dominis obtemperant, ne in iis quidem in quibus obtemperaverint obsequuntur.
Quando enim servus ex domini jussis ca facit tantummodo, quae vult facere, jam
non dominicam voluntatem implet sed suam. Salv. de guber. Dei. l. 3. p. 79.
Gods Ends, even when they miss their own: but they do not intend the End which
they effect. But when men profess they aim at Gods Ends, and I have ground to
hope that many of them do it in truth, though corrupt Ends will creep into the
hearts of the best men; much more into Bodies and mixed multitudes of men: yet
it is my duty, rather to wish well unto these, and to join with them, then with
any other that act quite contrary to Gods Ends, and the Designs which his Word
tells us that he has upon the World.

The Lords ends at this time are main^y these two: We may speak it, for he ha^h
not seft us without a word ^s (...) of it.

(...) will (...) Heaver and Earth, (...) may (...) that are (...). (...)
abun(...) of the (...) of men (...) of States (...) only. (...) read of tw^
(...) 13. the Lord thereby (...) A^^^christ according unto (...) C^aim that he
makes. 1. He (...) a Temporal power and headship over Kings and Kingdoms: And
the Western Empire being by the Goths (...) broken, the ten Kings receiving
th^^ their power as Kings, did with one ^onsent put themselves and their
Kingdoms under the power of the Pope: and so together with the ten Kings he
makes up the first Beast there spoken of, which is but the Image of the former
Empire of Rome in the West, set up by the Pope: sc. Imperium Romanum per
Pontificem crectum and stab^litum. And that the German Empire was set up by
him, Bellarmin himself takes a great deal of pains to prove in three Books
written of purpose de translatione Imperii Romani, wherein he undertakes
(though with great favor to his own Party) to manifest, 1. Leonem Tertium
solum, aut praecipuum ac primarium authorem translationis Imperii fuisse, eique
Germanicam nationem Imperium acceptum refer debere: that Leo the Third
translated the Empire by his authority alone unto Carolus Magnus. 2. That
afterward Otho de Gente Saxonum was raised to the Empire by Pope John the
Twelfth. 3. That the seven Princes Electors of Germany were constituted by Pope
Gregory the Fifth. If Antichrist did take to himself such a power as to
translate and conferr Kingdoms at his will, it cannot seem strange that they
should give their Kingdoms to the Beast, who did receive them from him, and
that under a pretense of his being an Officer appointed by Christ unto that
very End. They gave to him therefore (...) Rev. 17.13. their power of Arms and
of Laws, that in all the ten Kingdoms he enacted what Laws he would for the
support of his own Authority: so that Glossa de regulis juris has this Rule,
Quando de eadem re contrariae inveniuntur leges, Imperatoriae and Pontificiae,
abrogatur lex Imperatoria per Pontificiam, quia non poterat servari sine
mortali peccato: which the Emperors did, being for the Popes greater security,
bound to him by an Oath of Allegiance and Fidelity, as to their sovereign Lord.
And I doubt not but its very easy unto men skillful in the Laws to set forth
what an influence the Pope has had from time to time upon the Politic
constitution of this Nation, in framing or limiting them as was most for his
own advantage: many of which Laws remain unrepealed unto this day. This
therefore is that Beast upon which the Whore is said to sit, Rev. 17.3, 7, 8.
which was, and is not, and yet is. sc. the Roman Empire, set up by the Pope as
the Head of the ten Kings united into one Body under him, as a learned man of
late has well observed. Meretrix seu Anti-Christus huic Bestiae dicitur
insiaere: licet enim rei fundamenta quaedam jacta fuerint, veteri Imperio in
ruinam paulatim inclinante: tamen potissimum ibi completum est, cum imago haec
Imperii Romani in Germania fuit excitata; tum vere coepit Anti-christus huic
Bestiae insidere and ejus potentia ad stabiliendam suam tyrannidem abuti,
decreta sua per omnes Imperii parts firmare, Imperatorum consilia pro arbitrio
suo atque ad suam utilitatem moderari, etc. Robert. Jans, Dissertatio de
vision. cap. 13. and 17. Apocal. p. 29. etc. And all Powers erected by him, and
all laws made in favor of him, or by his Authority, the Lord will surely shake
the Nations till he has removed: All these God will certainly shake that he
may remove. There are also many Inventions of men brought into the Ordinances
and Institutions of Christ. There is a smoke in the Temple, Rev. 15.8. by which
Interpreters commonly understand three things. First, The glorious presence of
God in his Church, owning his People, during the time of the pouring out of the
Vials: for they make it an Allusion to the manifestation of the presence of God
at the Dedication of the Tabernacle and the Temple. Exodus 40.34. 1 King. 8.10.
2. Chron. 5.13. So Mede, Grot. etc. 2. It notes the displeasure of God against
his Enemies in the Church; for smoke is in Scripture irae divinae symbolum,
Isai. 14.31. Glass. Rhet. sacr. p. 244. And so Mr. Brightman, Docet testari
Deum praesentiam suam manifestis excandescentiae argumentis etc. in hosts etc.
3. It notes a darkness and an obscurity in reference to the Truths and
Ordinances of God, arising from the Corruptions and Innovations which
Antichrist brought in. For though it be said to be from the glory of the Lord,
and from his power: yet it was from God judicially only: And so smoke is taken
for corruption of Doctrine and Worship: and thereby a darkning of Truth. Rev.
9.2. And this does appear, because this smoke did hinder that the Tabernacle of
the Testimony in Heaven was not opened, and that men could not see the Ark of
the Testament. Rev. 11.19. But when the Vials are poured out, and Antichrist
thereby destroyed, and all this smoke dispelled, then there should be this
clear sight and discovery even of the most hidden things, the Ark of the
Testimony which was within the vail: for that appears, as Mr. Mede has
observed, to appertain non ad initium, sed eventum Phialarum. And concerning
this smoke, the Spirit tells us, 1. That it should last and continue during all
the time of the Vials: so that Antichrist has brought, through the just
judgment of God, that darkness and obscurity into the Temple and things of
God: and that it will never be dispelled till he be utterly overthrown: for the
Temple is not opened till the seventh Trumpet sound, Cap. 11.19. 2. The Effect
of this smoke, is, that by reason of it no man should be able to enter into the
Temple: Which has a double sense given of it, but may fitly be put into one.
1. That no man by reason of the darkness of the smoke should be able to see and
understand the mysteries of the Gospel: for intrare in adytum est Dei arcana
discere. Psalm. 73.17. Grot. 2. By this smoke the evidence and glory of the
mysteries of God was so darkened, that none comparatively, that is few, should
be converted to God, and added to the Church: For the great Harvest of the
World shall be under the seventh Trumpet, sc. the conversion of the Jews, and
the fullness of the Gentiles. Hic fumus non omnes electos ex Gentibus, sed
tantum Judaeos and plenitudinem Gentium ab adytis prohibet. Brightman. So then,
during the continuance of Antichrists kingdom, there shall be a darkness upon
the things of God: And this darkness shall hinder the discovery of the truths
of God, and a recovery of the souls of men; And when the Servants of Christ
have to their utmost labored to clear the things of God, and to dispel the
darkness that is upon them, yet they shall never be perfectly cleared till all
the Vials be fully poured out. And till then the Lord will shake Churches, that
the things that are made in them also may be removed. Now who are they that
serve Gods Ends in this? Either they that labor to remove them, or they that
labor to continue them according to the commandments and Traditions of men.

2. The Lord is pouring out the Fourth Vial upon the Sun, Rev. 16.8.
which is the highest light in the Romish Hemisphere, whether it be in Church
or State. In the pouring out of the Vials, it is generally observed by
Interpreters, 1. That the subject upon which all the Vials are poured, is Rome
Antichristian; For the Commission given, is, to pour out the Vials of the wrath
of God upon the Earth. Rev. 16.1. Earth in this Book is sometimes opposed unto
Heaven: and then as by Heaven is meant the true and pure Church of Christ, as
Rev. 4.1. and 12.1. so by Earth is meant the false Church, an Earthly and
corrupt Church, under Antichrist as an Head: And so it is the kingdom of
Antichrist upon which all these Vials are poured out. 2. That the Vials are but
so many several degrees of wrath upon this false Church, and so many steps to
its ruin. For as Rome was not built in a day: so the Lord will not have it to
fall in a day. 3. That the Lord sets forth this Antichristian State by a
Resemblance of the World, as he had done before in the Trumpets, in which all
things (as Earth, Sea, Rivers, etc.) are mystically to be understood, of
something which resembles these. 4. That the Angels which are the Instruments
of vengeance in the pouring out of these, do come out of the Temple, sc. the
Reformed Churches (the vengeance being that of the Temple, and procured by the
prayers of the Saints there) and that they shall be godly men, or at least
generally so reputed. For they are clothed with pure and white linen, and
having their breasts girded with golden girdles. 5. Whatever any Vial is poured
out upon, it is for its ruin: and upon whatsoever in this Antichristian State
the Vial is poured out, the Lord does so manage things in providence, that they
do all work for the ruin thereof: And all the Powers of the Earth shall not be
able to support it under a Vial poured out.

These things being premised, we are to observe that the Sun being the greatest
light in the natural world, does resemble that which is the greatest in this
mystical and Antichristian world: sc. the highest power and the greatest
authority therein, as cap. 6.12. Isai. 60.20. Mat. 24.29. which some understand
to be the German Empire, unto whose root the ax has now been laid for thirty
years together. Others observing that the Empire is but an image of the former
beast set up by the Pope, and that he gives life to it; they say that the Pope
is the greatest light in the Antichristian World: Both which may stand together
(for, Subordinata non pugnant.) It is Antichrist and his power that is wholly
struck at in the Vials: And though through all the Ten Kingdoms there are
several chief lights in their own heavens (for, they received power as Kings
the same hour with the Beast) and upon all these this Vial is poured: yet the
main wound is given to Antichrist in their downfall. For the Judgment upon them
is but so far as they hold of and relate unto Rome, as far as they have
correspondence with Rome. The whole current of the Book of the Revelation runs
this way. I cannot consent that God is now pouring out the fifth vial upon the
Throne of the Beast, Mr. John Cotton upon the fifth vial.
which some holy and learned men affirm.

1. First, Because it is evident, that the overthrow of Episcopacy (which is
conceived to be meant by the throne of the Beast) was not the main thing
intended in this destruction; for it was overthrown but as an appendix to
Monarchy, as that which upheld it, and so hindered the Vial upon the Sun.
Pontifices Romani, illi quoque Romani Imperii caput sunt, non quide^
simpliciter quae Episeopi Romani, sed qua habenas sive gubernacula Monarchiae
Rom^nae, ^^rbis nimiru^ and orbis Christiani ad (...) pertraxerunt, atque in
hoc Imperio a superiori potesta^^ non dependent, ne^ ullius supra se Imperium
in terra ^gnoscunt. De quo cap. 17.10. alter nondum venit; and cum venerit,
oportet eum breve tempus manner; eatenus breve tempus manner oportet
pontisiees, quatenus Imp^^^^ Romani caput sunt and politia^ istam dominatu suo
complectuntur, non vero qua Episcopi Romani; hoc enim posteriori modo
confid^rati, sat^s d^^ duraverunt. Disse^rtatio Rob. Iansenii. P. 9.


2. Secondly, Because that Rome which is the feat of the Beast, is called his
throne, Rev. 13.2. But I never find Episcopacy so called: and the Spirit of God
does use to speak agreeable to himself: that which he had before called the
throne of the Beast, upon that is the vial to be poured out. Now if these be
the ends that God is accomplishing, so far as Gods ends are carried on, I am
bound to wish well to the Instruments employed by God therein, and in all
lawful ways in my place endeavor with them to promote these ends.

Thirdly, When there does something appear above the power of man, raising the
spirits of the Instruments in the hand of the Lord for the effecting of these
ends: causing the worm Iacobt othresh the mountains, Isa 41.14. Z^ch. 12.8. Sc.
in bello fortis, fortunatus, and divina virtute erectus. Tarnov. Drusius, etc.
Ezech. 1.20, 21. per rotas intelligit ho^^ines rationales, qui se Angelorum
ju^^u duci permittunt. Lavat. Rotas Deus per Angelos regit furtissime and
suavissime; sive ^^abant, providentia Dei ordinaria aguntur, sive sese a terra
elevabant, sc. providentia inusitata and ins^^^a Psalm. 76.5. Nahum 3.12. Judge.
7.13.
making the weak as David, lifting up the wheels from the earth, acting men
beyond the ordinary temper of the spirits of men, taking away the hearts of the
enemies, that the men of might cannot find their hands; their cities prove like
ripe figs, falling into the mouth of the eater; a barley cake to overthrow a
tent, then we are to say, It is the Sword of the Lord and of Gideon; Digitus
Dei hic est. Surely these are signs of the effecting Will of God, and not
barely of his permitting Will. These things I desire may be seriously
considered upon these three grounds.

1. There should be no good business which God has on foot in the world but I
should desire to have a hand in it. A good man has an eye upon all the work
that God has to do in the world, and would be acting in it. Says he,
whatsoever God is doing, I would gladly be a worker together with God in,
either in my practice, my purse, my prayers, or some way or other.

I would be very loath to misplace my prayers, and to set my prayers in
opposition to the Will of God. Herein is much of the happiness of the Saints
and Angels in heaven, that they pray for nothing but what God will grant. God
is very observant of his peoples prayers. Pray no more, says he to Jeremy. If
there be a person or business which the Lord will not prosper, he will put it
out of the hearts of his people to pray for it; your prayers are the choicest
actions of your life, and if they proceed from a sincere heart, (though that
particular thing which thou desire may not be granted, yet) God will answer
thee some other way: yet a good heart would be loath to lose his prayer.

3. I would be loath to lose my reward; the Spirit of God teaches a man not
only to act Grace, but to expect a reward of it. No man shall ride with the
Lamb in triumph after Victory, that did not join with him in the Combat and
Opposition: And those that suffer with him in the Conflict, shall certainly
after the Victory ride with him upon white horses, and have a share in the
triumph, Rev. 19.14. For if Jehu and Cyrus be rewarded of God, for joining with
him in his effecting will, even from a corrupt principle, unto a corrupt end;
how much more shall they who desire to know what God is doing, and in sincerity
desire to further his ends in the doing of it? Who not only do Gods work, but
aim at his end: surely not only a temporal reward is reserved for them, but it
shall add to their eternal glory, and make their Crown more massy, at the last
and great day, Luke 18.

Let us now come to the last particular, and that is the permitting will of
God. If the Lord will bring the Apostle to Jerusalem, and there deliver him by
the malice of the Jews, Hoc fraeno cohibendi sunt omnes nostri affectus; ne
quid tam acerbum sit, vel trisle, vel durum, quod non mitiget ac emolliat Dei
voluntas, Calv. Psalm. 39.9.
into the hands of the Gentiles; if he will suffer them to execute their rage
upon him, and thereby the Churches of God be deprived of so glorious an
Instrument, though we should gladly provide for the Churches preservation, and
edification: yet if the Lord will in this manner deliver him up, he is not
bound to Instruments, he has with him the residue of the spirit: and though
men's graces accompany them to glory, being given them for their own salvation;
yet they leave their gifts behind them; 1 Pet. 1.25. 1 Cor. 13.8.
Prophesies shall fail, tongues shall cease, knowledge shall vanish away, 1
Cor. 13.8. These fall from the best men, as Eliahs Mantle did from him, when
they are taken up into glory. As therefore when an ungodly man dies, he leaves
his estate behind him; because it is this worlds goods: so when a godly man
dies, he leaves his gifts behind him, because it is the Churches treasury. If
the Lord will thus deliver up the Apostle, and so deprive the Church, Let the
will of the Lord be done. And some conceive it mainly to be spoken here in
reference unto Gods permitting will, though I have taken in all three of them
intended by the spirit; there being such clear and evident footsteps of them
all, in the before mentioned story. Hence the last Observation is:

That where Godliness is in the power of it, (...) brings a soul to an humble
submission unto the permitting will of God.

In the handling of this, I must show

First, What the permitting will of God is, and the several branches wherein it
does consist.

Secondly, Prove that godliness brings about the soul of a man unto a
submission thereunto.

Thirdly, Show you the grounds thereof, what there is of godliness manifested
in such a submission.

Fourthly, The several acts of the soul in its conformity unto the permitting
will of God, and wherein this conformity does consist.

First, What the permission of God is; Here I must give you these distinctions.

First, There are some things that the Lord does of himself work by his own
immediate power; and stays not for any humane concurrence, but does them of
himself and by himself. If he does work, Isaiah 43.13. and Psa. 135.6.
None can let it, he does whatsoever pleases him, and so he governs the world,
and preserves and maintains it. He suffered all Nations to walk in their own
ways. He did not incline them to walk in their own ways; he did not command
them, but he did leave them to themselves, and in the hands of their own
Counsels: And is therefore said to suffer them; Mala sinit fieri, non facit;
bona vero ipse facit; sed nolens mala sinit, and volens bona operatur; being in
himself a free Agent, he concurs with the creature when he pleases, and as far
as he pleases, Lumb. lib. 1. Sent. 45.

Secondly, we are to consider, that the permitting will of God, only respects
the reasonable creature, to whom properly his commanding will belongs. It is
true, that all the Creatures come under his will, For he rules all things
according to the counsel of his own will: He does whatsoever he will in heaven
and in earth, Rev. 4.11.
in the sea, and all deep places. It is by his will that they are created, and
it is by the same will, by which they are preserved and governed in their
being. Ex necessitate naturae and ad ultimum potentiae.
But all other creatures being to act necessarily, no permission can belong to
them: but God either acts them, or suspends their Acts at his pleasure, not by
a permitting, but by a powerful effecting will. Only the reasonable creatures,
seeing they were created to act out of choice and election, the Lord rules them
Modo proportionate, according to their own nature: therefore he has not put a
Law in their natures, which shall necessarily and infallibly carry them to
their ends; but he rules them in a Covenantway, and they are voluntary in all
their actings; neither shall any of them be confirmed or made impeccable but by
grace, in which the Lord would have all the vessels of mercy to stand; as they
were chosen in Christ, so by him they are to be confirmed: That as they ^^nor
God the Creator, in ordine naturae, so they should honor the Son, as Mediator,
in ordine gratiae: And for this cause, whereas the Lord could have confirmed
Men and Angels in the day of their Creation; as he has now the Angels in
heaven, and the souls of just men made perfect; yet he will not, but reserves
it as a blessing that should come in by the Government of his Son, in a way of
grace, by whom the beatifical vision is bestowed upon the Saints. And therefore
I conceive Christ is called The Angel of Gods face, that is. Qui faciem Dei
quasi conspicuam populo fecit, Isa. 63.9. Now the face of God in Scripture is
put for three things. 1. For a full Revelation of his will, They shall see his
face, and his name shall be written in their foreheads, Rev. 22.4. 2. For a
full manifestation of his favor; So the Church is said To seek the face of God:
And the Lord is said to cause his face to shine upon his Saints, Psalm. 67.1. 3.
A perfect vision of his glory, and so heaven is a seeing of God face to face, 1
Cor. 13.12. And in ^ll these respects Christ is said to be the Angel that
discovers the face of God unto the Saints. And it is by this last manifestation
that they are made impeccable.

Thirdly, The permitting will of God is only conversant about the sins of the
reasonable Creatures: in all their good actions the Lord does concur, and act
them, by an efficacious and a working will; so as it is rather Gods work then
theirs, 1 Cor. 13.10. Yet not I but the grace of God that was with me;
Cooperando perfecit, quod operando incipit. Aust. But for evil actions, God
cannot have a hand in them as the Author or Efficient cause; for he is light,
and in him is no darkness at all; he is goodness it self, and in him is no
evil, neither can any evil come from him, James 1.13, 14. The case is decided,
that God is not the Author of Sin, neither can be; for he that forbids all sin,
cannot work any; darkness cannot proceed from the Father of lights, and yet
against his will sin cannot be; Non fit aliquid nisi Omnipotens fieri velit vel
sinendo, vel faciendo. Aust. Sin could not have come into the world, if God
would have kept it out; he could have created all the creatures impeccable, if
he had pleased.

There is a threefold order to be observed concerning the decrees of God.

1. The same Sovereign Lord that did elect some to life, did decree to pass by
others, and not to confer the same grace and favor upon them. For we teach no
absolute Reprobation, but a preterition only, and nonelection, or which the
Schoolmen call Reprobatio negativa, which as Suarez has well observed, opusc.
lib. 2. page 175. Non est poena, sed solum negatio gratuiti beneficii quod Deus
ut supremus Dominus negare potest.

2. Unto these he does resolve and decree not to give grace; but to leave the
other to the instability of their own wills.

3. He does decree, that he will for their sin cast them off for ever, and
eternally destroy them. So that the Lord decreed to leave the creature unto
that strength which he had received in his Creation, and then falling, he did
decree to damn him for that sin, which he did of himself voluntarily commit.
Thus God did from eternity decree to permit sin to come into the world, though
it be the act of the Creatures, and not of God. And hence it was, that sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, Romans 5.14.

4. The Lord in his permission does withhold his grace, and does not bestow
that which should keep a man from sin, but leave a man to walk in his own ways,
to act according to his own counsels, and does not effectually determine his
will unto that which is good, but leaves it to be freely carried away to that
which is evil. Therefore permission is as it were the removing of the
impediment, and no more: As Twiss. Vindic. part. 2. page 28. has well
observed, Ex remotione impedimenti effectus interdum sequitur, cujus causa non
est removens impedimentu^, sed aliquid aliud. As if a stone being staid from
falling, you remove the impediment, then it falls immediately, the stop being
taken away; but the taking away of the stop, is not properly the cause of its
fall, but its own natural form which has a tendency to its center. So when
there is restraining grace upon a man, an impediment put in the way of sinning,
his way is hedged up; but when the Lord removes the restraint, the man
immediately falls into sin: And yet the taking away of the restraint is not the
cause of his sinning, but his own natural propension and inclination of Spirit
thereunto. The Lord does by permission but remove the impediment, take away the
restraint. As a man taking his hand from a glass, it breaks; not because he
takes away his hand, but from its own brittle nature: so there is a Divina
manutenentia, which the Lord takes away: As a man that does loose an Anchor,
and lets a Ship drive into the Main, when by the Wind and the Sea its dashed
against the Rocks: thus the permission of God is but a removing of the
restraints that are upon the spirits of men. In sinful and holy actions three
things are to be distinguished.

1. The action it self; so the Lord does concur unto both by a common
Providence unto both the beings and the motions of the Creatures. They must
depend a primo motore; For in him we live, and move, and have our being.

2. There is also the quality of the action, either good or evil. And here is a
different concurrence of God. 1. To a gracious action, the Lord concurs not
only in the substance of it, but in the goodness and rectitude of it: For we
have no sufficiency of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, 2 Cor.
3.5. When we turn to him, it is he turns us first; when we make our selves a
new heart, it is he first gives us a new heart; when we work with him, he works
our works in us and for us. The Lord concurs to it with a gracious and
efficacious will. It depends more upon the act of God, then upon the act of the
creature. But in the evil and obliquity of an action, the Lord concurs by a
permitting will only, leaveing the creature to act according to its own rules,
and to walk after its own imaginations, taking away the powerful determination
of grace, and all the restraints that were before laid upon them. Now the act
is of God, but the obliquity and the defect of the action is from the Creature
only.

3. There are the ends of the action, and the Lord does appoint them also: Of
good actions, the end is his glory, according to the intention of the Agent;
and of evil actions, the end is his glory, though it be praeter intentionem
Agentis. As an Artificer uses natural causes unto artificial ends: as we see
the Loadstone that naturally draws Iron, how it is made use of in the Art of
Navigation; and we commonly use the natural enmity of a Dog or a Hawk to
accomplish our end on some other of the creatures, else unserviceable to us. So
does the Lord overruled the natural enmity of the creature, and orders it unto
his own ends, the glory of his own Wisdom, Power and Justice: As we see in
Nebuchadnezzar, though he as an instrument in the hand of God, intends no such
thing, he thinks not so, Isa. 10. And in these properly does the nature of
permission consist.

Now let us see the permitting will of God, being conversant only about sin,
and that only the acts of the reasonable creature, in what particulars it is
exercised, what it is that the Lord does permit in them. And they are these
especially.

1. God leaves remainders of sin in the best of his people. This belongs unto
his permitting will, that though they be sanctified, it is but in part. He does
suffer sin to remain in them, that if the best men say they have no sin, they
deceive themselves, and the truth is not in them: Sin dies a crucified death,
it has only received its deaths wound, and dies by degrees: There is in the
best, a Law of the members, as well as a Law of the mind; which makes them cry
out, Unclean, undone, wretched man that I am! Non peccare in via praeceptum
est, in patria praemium. It is in this life our Law, and in the life to come it
shall be our reward; it is here our duty, then our glory. Peccatum in
renascentibus remittitur, in proficientibus minuitur, in resurgentibus
tollitur. Aust.

2. He suffers Satan, both as a tempter, and as an accuser; and it is for these
ends that he has not yet his full torment. He knows the time is not yet full
come, Art thou come to torment me before the time?

First, The Lord suffers him as a Tempter; this was a great part of the
humiliation of Christ, the King of Saints, that he was not only made fin by
God, but he was tempted unto sin by the Devil. And he suffered being tempted,
that he might be able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2.18. All the
Saints are there called those are tempted, and tempted as we are. Heb. 4.15.
and the people of God had need of succor, not only in their sufferings, but
especially in their temptations. And there is no possbility for them to stand
out against them without succor from Christ. Sometimes Satan comes upon them
by his own immediate injections, which the Apostle calls fiery darts, because
they are apt to take shot as Grenades and Wild fire into the Camp of an enemy:
So it is said, Satan did move David to number the people, 1 Chronicles. 21.1. The
word does signify, to persuade by force of Argument, and by a vehement and
continual importunity, to take no denial. And herein properly does the strength
of a temptation lie, in the strength of the Arguments, and the reasonings of
it, and the importunity of it from day to day. Its used in Deuteronomy. 13.6. if a man
does persuade and entice his friend secretly to other Gods, gives him reasons
and arguments to persuade him thereunto. Its the same word that is used of
Iezabel, 1 Kin. 21.25. Whom Iezabel his wife stirred up: She provoked him by
earnest persuasions, by continual importunities. And sometimes he makes use of
the Creatures, and there is no creature that Satan will not make use of, to
withdraw from God, and to draw to sin: A Disciple, a Friend, a Wife; God made
her a rib, Satan a dart.

2. He permits him as an ac cuser; for he is called the accuser of the
brethren. And as he does move us against God in a way of sinning; so he does
move God against us in a way of Judgment. And therefore, Zach. 3.1. Its said,
Satan stood at Joshua's right hand to resist him. Some say, as an accuser, the
manner being to set the accusers on the right hand of the person accused:
Others take the right hand for the instrument of action, and so it was
effectually to hinder Joshua in his work. So Job 2.3. the Lord faith, Thou have
moved me against him without a cause; the same word is there used, of his
moving God against Job, as before he had moved David against God: in the one as
a tempter, in the other as an accuser. And there is as great fear of Satan in
the one, as in the other. Now it is by the permitting will of God, that it
should be so, that the Saints should in a great measure lie under the power of
this envious man; first to entice them, and afterward to accuse them.

3. He suffers the lusts of Godly men to arise, and they are many times led
captive under the Law of sin; yea, even sometimes to gross and scandalous sins,
which do vastare conscientiam, though they cannot excutere fidem. As Sampson to
a way of uncleanness; David to Murder, and that plotted; Solomon to Idolatry,
and that continued; Peter to the denial of his Master, and that with the
bitterest execrations, cursing himself to Hell, as the word (...) signifies, if
ever he knew the man: yea, and God does leave them to harden their own hearts
in a way of sinning, and go on frowardly in it, Isa. 57.17. Why have thou
hardened our hearts from thy fear? Isa. 63.17. We hardened our hearts sinfully,
being by God left to our selves: And God does harden them judicially, which is
the greatest judgment, that can befall a Saint in this life.

4. God does suffer wicked men to thrive and prosper in an evil way: In ways of
cruelty and oppression. Nebuchadnezzar gathered the riches of the Nations like
eggs, that none did move the wing or peep. He rules over the people of God with
rigor, shows them no mercy, but upon the ancient he does heavily lay the yoke.
The Ploughers plough upon their backs, and make long furrows; and wicked men
oppress those that are more righteous then themselves: And yet the Lord seems
to stand by, and look on, and lets him thrive and prosper in it, as if he had
forsaken the earth: So the ten Kings shall give their kingdoms to the Beast;
the power of laws, and the power of arms, and thereby set up Antichrist; and he
shall grow to that power, That all kingdoms, and nations, and languages shall
worship him: and shall say, Who is able io make war with the Beast? And he
shall make war with the faints, and shall overcome them: And this ordinarily
the Lord does, that his people should come and cry to him to awaken him; for he
seems as a man asleep, and as regarding nothing, but leaving all in the enemies
hand: Awake Lord, why sleep thou? Now all these belong unto the permitting
will of God, which is conversant only about the sins of the reasonable creature.

2. There is very much of Godliness seen in a man's submission of his will unto
this permitting will of God: For the proof of it I shall give one Scripture for
each of them.

First, Submission unto the permitting will of God in regard of sin and the
remainders thereof. Though a godly man look upon it as his burden, as his
misery, esteems sin worse then death, worse then hell: Yet seeing God will
have it remain in him, if he must still bear this weight, draw this clog after
him; if he will still have them to wear their Grave-cloaths, the Saints are
content to wait for the resurrection of the just. No man was more sensible of
the remainders of sin, then Paul, as appears by his own expression of himself,
The greatest of sinners, and the least of Saints: therefore he cries out, who
shall deliver me? Romans 7.24. Yet he considers deliverance is begun, I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord: And therefore sin shall never prevail either to
condemnation or dominion. And with this deliverance the Apostle sits down, and
submits unto the will of God until the day of his full redemption shall come:
though he knew that while he lived here, while with the mind he did serve the
Law of God, yet he should with his flesh serve the Law of sin.

2. For scandalous Falls, though they be such as those that the people of God
should fear and pray against, as being such by which they cause the name of God
to be blasphemed, by which they become spotted of the world, a blemish to their
society, and leave an ill name behind them; and they are set forth by God as
examples for us to take warning by, to take heed we fall not into the like: yet
when the Lord has suffered us to fall into them, we must not rise up and
quarrel with him, but we must say he is just and holy, even in those things
wherein we are wretched and sinful, Matthew. 26.33, 34. Peter had an admonition
from Christ, of a very dangerous fall that was near him, and he answers, Though
all men forsake thee, yet will not I; Christ tells him, that before the Cock
crow, thou shall deny me thrice. It was Peter's duty not in a presumptuous
manner to have told Christ in confidence of his own strength; no, you are
mistaken in me; if I die with thee, I will not deny thee: but to have said,
Lord, if it be thy will, I had rather die with thee, if by thy grace thou will
assist me; I had rather undergo the greatest sufferings, then commit such a
sin; this was Peter's duty before hand. And after the will of God was manifested
to permit him to fall as he did, he should have said, Thou have suffered me
thus to fall; it was my great sin thus to deny thee: But since my proud and
carnally confident spirit in thy wisdom must thus be brought down, and my own
weakness must be discovered for my further humiliation, thou might deal with
me as it seemed thee good; I have no reason to quarrel with thee, thou actest
righteously even there where I have acted sinfully. And as this was Peter's
duty, so it is the duty of all the Saints whose actual Falls have manifested
that it was the will of God to humble them by this means: And indeed the Saints
when they come to read over the story of their lives, and shall see therein
Omnes actiones ad se pertinentes and circumstantias actionum, as Suarez says
they shall see in heaven, they will find they had as much need of their sins,
as they had of their sufferings in this present life; and all things shall work
together for good: Et si omnia, quia ni peccata? though I confess there be
three ways which the Lord does use to humble men by:

First, by letting in his love into their souls, the beauty of grace, the
excellency of holiness; and then the soul looking down upon it self, is as a
man that has looked upon the Sun, he can see nothing. So did the Lord humble
Job by further discoveries of himself; so he did humble Isaiah: This is the
highest, and sweetest way of humbling: who an I that the Lord should show in me
a pattern of mercy? to me the greatest of all sinners, is this grace given, etc.

Secondly, He does humble men by sufferings; by afflictions he does keep man
from his purpose, and hides pride from his heart.

Thirdly, But the worst way, and the most uncomfortable way of humbling is by
sin, when the Lord is pleased to leave his people to great sins and scandalous
falls: And yet this has been the condition of some of the most eminent Saints,
as David, Solomon, Sampson and Peter, etc.

3. The Lord does suffer his people to lie under the power of the temptations
of Satan: which I confess is a very great misery, so to be subjected unto an
unclean spirit, that he should have access unto our spirits, and a man's heart
should be as an Anvil for the Devil to form and fashion his lusts upon. It was
one of the greatest abasements of Christ, that his holy and gracious Spirit
should be subjected at least to the cursed and blasphemous injections of Satan:
but the Prince of this world came, and found nothing in him; but he does seldom
come near us, but he does touch us, 1 John 5.19. tactu qualitativo: for there
is nothing that Satan can suggest, but there is a seed and a principle in us;
and so far as it takes with the seed, there is something in us that winds with
it; it is as well Partus cordis, as Seminarium hostis. And therefore although
it be a distinction which some Divines do use, that if there be no consent on
our part, it is our misery, but not our sin: yet I conceive it is a hard thing
for a soul to satisfy himself in this, that there being a corrupt principle in
men which does close with every thing that Satan ca^ inject, that there is
nothing in me tha^ does close with such a temptation (...) and its so much the
more misery, because it is an act and fruit of that ancient selling of our
selves unto Satan, and therefore it is just with God, in a degree, to leave the
best of the Saints under his power: for, Quod venditu^ transit in potestatem
ementis. But seeing it is the will of God, and a man's duty to submit, and to
gird himself unto the battle, though we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but
with spiritua^ wickedness in heavenly places, Ephesians. 6.12. yet we are to fight
the good fight of faith; go forth under the banner of Christ, who has promised
to tread Satan under foot shortly, Romans 16.20. Christ was led of the Spirit
into the wilderness: How did the Spirit lead him? by sweet and secret motions.
Christ having received the Spirit as an unction, this same Spirit was the guide
of his way, the orderer^ of all the acts of his humane nature; so he is also
the guide of our ways, and the guidance of this Spirit Christ does follow; and
though he meet with a temptation, yet does he submit to the permitting will of
God therein.

4 If the Lord will let wicked men rule over you, if he will leave you in their
hands, will let out their rage and malice upon you, that they shall show you no
mercy, Tread you down as mire in the streets, as Nebuchadnezzar is said to
receive a command to do to Jerusalem, Isa. 10. yet it is your duty to conform
your wills unto the permitting will of God. If the Lord luster the Caldeans and
Sabeans to plunder Job of his goods, and leave him poor to a proverb, He must
say, The will of the Lord be done; the Lord has given, the Lord has taken,
blessed be the name of the Lord: If the Lord will suffer Shimei to curse David
in the day of his extremity, and to rail upon him as a bloody man, David must
say, Let him alone, the Lord has bidden him; and if so, Who shall say, why
do thou so? 2 Samuel 16.10. Though the Lord be not the author, yet he is the
ordere^ of sin; and its he has now let ou^ this evil: therefore look not at
the instrument in it, but at the hand of God: so does Christ, if the cup may
not pass from him, but he must be delivered into the hands of men, and be
crucified: holy Father, not my will, but thy will be done. And this same is the
case in the Text concerning Paul, if the Jews shall take him and deliver him
unto the Gentiles, and they shall put him to death; surely they could not do
any such thing, if the Lord did not suffer it; therefore our will must not
oppose Gods will, but we ought to say, The will of the Lord be done.

3. Now we come to the grounds and reasons of the point, that we may from hence
see what of godliness there is in it, to have our will brought into a
conformity unto the permitting will of God.

1. The more self-denial there is in any thing, the more of the power of Grace
there is expressed in it; for self-denial in any man is the measure of all the
grace that is in the man, as self-seeking is the measure of all the corruption:
for the body of siune in a man is nothing else but self-exalted above God.
Therefore Christ rule is, Matthew. 16.14. Let a man deny himself, Penitus
abneget; self must be denied in every consideration, in every respect;
therefore Jesus Christ that was the pattern of all grace, he was the great
pattern of self-denial, and has left us a Copy therein to write after him, 1
Pet. 2.21. He came not to do his own will, nor to seek his own glory, but as a
Servant to be wholly at the will and the command of another. Now Divines
commonly say, that there is a threefold self that is respectively to be denied.
First, there is Self as corrupted sinful Self. Secondly, Self as created
natural self. Thirdly, Self as renewed moral religious self. Now to deny
self-natural is more then to deny self-sinfull, because that is not absolutely
to be denied, but in comparison: to deny moral-self, is more then to deny
natural self, because that is not to be denied, but when it comes in
competition. Now this conformity of our will unto the permitting will of God,
exercises self-denial in all these. First, a man must deny natural self. If God
will have a man subject it under the power of wicked men, or will leave him to
be hurried in his person or estate, by the power, and according to the lust of
the devil, and the Lord will suffer it, stand by, and look on, and not come in
for his his help; Now a man may lawfully, yea he is bound in duty to seek his
own preservation as Christ, that he might not be delivered into the hands of
unreasonable men. He prayed to his Father, and yet the Lord did not deliver
him, and he gave them power to apprehend him, and did not interpose. Now the
will of nature gives place unto the will of duty; and Christ says, Not my will,
but thy will be done. Its God that has given Satan this power to men, and
therefore who am I, that I should say, Why do thou so? Secondly, A man must
deny renewed-self: and truly grace in the man is dearer to him then his life;
he would be content to lose his life, that he may maintain and perfect his
grace. It is the divine nature, the Image of Christ begun in the soul, unto the
carrying on of which he makes all things subordinate, and subservrent. Now
there is nothing an enemy to renewed self, but sin: therefore all the lustings
of the Spirit are against the flesh, and the lustings of the flesh are against
the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. for they are contrary one to another; for a man to deny
the holy desires of regenerated self, so as to be willing to stoop in them,
because the Lord will have it so, and will lead him under the remainders of
sin; therefore even gracious self in the desires of it must stoop, and be
content with such an inmate (as a Fuller, and a Collier, dwelling in the same
house, what the one whites, the other soils) until a full redemption; it is
the highest act of grace in this life to deny a man's self, in reference to the
being of sin within him. As it was the highest act of self-denial in Christ,
that he that was the beauty of holiness, should be made sin, reputed a sinner
by man, and have sin imputed to him by God, to confess our sins as his own, My
iniquities have taken such hold upon me, that I am not able to look up, Psa.
40.12. So for a man to know what sin is, that it deprives him of Communion with
God, defiles his soul, is worse then hell it self; and yet in obedience to God
all his days to lie under the rifings and remainders of it, it is the highest
act of grace that a godly man does put forth in this life: Though this may seem
a small thing to an unregenerate man, who sees no evil in sin, it is the
element he lives in, and that by which the comfort of his life comes in.

2. The higher act of Faith a man puts forth, the higher act of grace: for it
is suitable to a man's faith, that all his grace does rise. The life of faith,
is the life of the new man. Gal. 2.20. The life that I now live, I live by the
faith of the Son of God: Now the highest acts of faith, are those wherein there
is the least of sight; for 2 Cor. 5.7. We walk by faith, and not by sight; so
that sight and faith are opposed; the less there is as matter for sight, the
more there is as matter for faith. As it is made the honor of Abraham's faith,
Romans 4. that he considered not the dryness of his own body, nor the deadness of
Sarahs womb, but be believed in hope against hope, when he saw nothing for the
present promised any such thing: So it is here, for a man to be under the
remainders of sin, the Law of the members leading him captive, defiling his
soul, breaking his peace, wounding his conscience, blotting his name, and yet
for his spirit to stoop to it out of faith, because Gods will is the rule of
goodness, and he will not only turn this to his own glory, but he will turn it
to my eternal good in the end, that out of this eater shall come meat, and out
of this strong enemy sweetness. Truly, as the highest acts of Gods grace upon
us in this world, are in turning our sins to good, and working good in the end
out of that which in it self is nothing but evil, so the highest acts of grace
in us, are those that do rest upon God for a holy fruit, even of our failings,
and continual defilements; for there is less evil in sufferings, then there is
in sinning: that is a rule laid down in the new man; therefore the Saints
choose much rather to suffer affliction, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin,
Heb. 11.25, 26. There is less of faith to believe good out of suffering, then
there is out of sinning. Now when a man sees sin in it self is nothing but
evil, and in his present sense of it, there is more evil in it then there is in
any other thing in the world; it is evil in abstracto, that is, in the essence
of it, its evil and only evil; and yet that God will work good out of it, it is
the highest act of faith that a man puts forth in this life, to rest upon God
in turning his sins to good, and to be content, not with sin it self simply,
but with the will of God suffering it to be. For a man to conflict with a hard
heart, a blind mind, a stupid conscience, wrestling against them, looking upon
them as more bitter then death, and to be willing to die with all his heart to
be rid of them, and to count death for sin as a good exchange, and yet out of
faith to stoop unto the permitting will of God, saying. Surely sin is not so
the greatest evil, as God is the greatest good; for he can turn sin into good,
and work his own glory, and the good of the creature out of it, or else he
would never have suffered sin to have come into the world. He can cause light
to shine out of darkness, temper a poison into a wholesome medicine: therefore I
can say with Austin, Mala non sunt bona; tamen ut mala sint bonum est: Its the
highest act of Faith, that the man does put forth in this life.

3. There are several extremes that require a great deal of grace to avoid in a
man's Christian course. It is the manner of Satan to carry men from one extreme
to another, and it is very hard to escape them: A man must cut at a thread; he
must be a skillful Pilot to sail between two dangerous Rocks, and not grate
upon the one or the other. The work of grace in the heart, as it is very
spiritual: so it is very curious and exact; which will appear, if we consider
these particulars.

First, For a man to hate sin in the being of it, and to keep that principle up
in the soul, that he would not have sin reign, nay he would not have it to be
in his mortal body. He desires to be purged from all filthiness, both of the
flesh and spirit, and yet in obedience to God in this mixed estate to submit,
and not to murmur while God will so continue him to endure so cursed an Inmate:
For a man to have Mortem in desiderio, to be content to die, that he may be rid
of sin, and yet to have vitam in patientia, to be willing to live, though while
he does live he knows sin will be: It is a hard matter for a Christian to walk
aright between these two extremes, Phil. 1.23. I desire to be dissolved; he is
willing to die, to be rid of sin, and yet content to live with the remainders
of sin, out of the love of service; to abide in the flesh is more profitable
for you; because it is the will of God, that pro hoc statu, that it shall be
so, and to be in duty content to be out of glory the while, it is a very great
curiosity in the work of grace in the Saints.

Secondly, For a man to pray against temptation earnestly, as being the most
miserable subjection that can befall him, to be liable unto the unclean
investings of such a wicked and malicious enemy; That he should have such an
immediate access to our spirits from day to day, that we should wrestle with
principalities and pewers for life concerning heavenly things, and yet humbly
to be content because it is the will of God that a man should lie under them,
and to wait Gods time for his deliverance, and to say, if the Lord will not
deliver me all my days, let his will be done. There are some temptations that
come upon the soul with a great deal of horror: terribilia de fide, horribilia
de divinitate, as Bernard speaks: motions and injections to Blasphemy, Atheism,
Self-murder. As Luther says, he had such a temptation once came upon him with
that impetuousness, that he was forced for some hours to do nothing but repeat
that commandment, Thou shall do no murder. It may be the thorn in the flesh,
was an immediate messenger from hell sent unto Paul, with some such violent
temptation as this; even the very motions that are in the damned souls in hell,
such as Spira had, I would I were above God; for I know he will not have mercy
upon me, 2 Cor. 12. It was some horrid temptation which was to be a cure of
Paul's pride; it was given him that he might not be lifted up through the
multitude of Revelations. Whereupon Austin breaks forth, Quantum sit superbiae
venenum quod non potest nisi veneno curari? Now Paul was mightily awakened by
this temptation, he looked upon it as a terrible affliction, as a thorn in the
flesh that did hurt him and gall him from day to day, and therefore he prayed
thrice. It expresses both his frequency and his fervency. But the Lord told
him it was his will that he should lie under that temptation, which permitting
will of God, being made manifest, Paul must not slack to pray against it, or to
be afflicted with it, and yet Paul must be content to lie under it so long as
it was the will of God to suffer it to lie upon him.

Thirdly, If the Lord will leave a man under the hands of wicked men, to be
content to let the Ploughers plough upon his back, and make long furrows, and
from a Principle of Faith not to make haste, Isa. 28.16. Faith is commended
from the excellent fruit of it; it keeps the soul in a continual calm, in a
quiet condition, that though a man earnestly desire deliverance, whether for
himself or for the Churches, pray for it daily; it pities him to see the stones
of Zion to lie in the dust, yet his bow with Joseph's abides in strength, his
heart is not overcome by the continuance of the affliction, so as to make him
to take any evil course for his own or the Churches hasty deliverance, but he
is content to stay Gods time, until the time of the word comes, Psalm. 105. The
Word of the Lord tried him. While the Lord would have the oppression to lie on,
he will leave his people under the hands of their Adversaries; till he has
wrought his own good work upon Sian, he is content to stoop unto this
permitting will of God, and wait the Lords leisure for his deliverance.

Fourthly, For a man to be earnest in prayer, and yet submit unto the will of
God, if his prayer be delayed; Christ tells us there is an importunity in
prayer, (...), a holy kind of impudence. And St James says there is a fervent
prayer, (...) an active and a working prayer. There is a double importunity in
prayer, One from the Flesh, when a man is very earnest for the thing he would
have, and cannot be content without it. So many a man howls upon his bed for
carn and wine and oil, Hos. 7.14. from a principle of flesh, there is many
times a great deal of earnestness put into a man; but there is an importunity
that rises from duty, that a man can be earnest in duty, though he attain not
the thing desired, yet his importunity is held up, and for all that he can be
content to stay Gods time for the thing, and yet pray as earnestly for it from
a principle of duty, as if it were granted. It is a very difficult thing for a
godly man to be able to do this in his whole course. It was one of the great
difficulties in Christianity that Luther found, dilata sperare, for to keep up
his hope, and hope will keep up a man's prayer even in the greatest delays of
God. For a man to pray against sin, against temptation, to pray for deliverance
of the Churches from the hands of ungodly men, for the Lord to suffer sin to
remain, the temptation and persecution to continue, and yet for a man's
importunity in prayer to be held up, when he is at the same time contented to
submit unto the permtting will of God, while the Lord will suffer sin and Satan
continually to vex him; its a very high pitch of Grace, and a great deal of
curiosity there is in this, to be able to cut at a thread, and to be able to
keep between these extremes. Now it is the subjection of our will unto the
permitting will of God that keep, the heart within compass, that it runs not
out either of these ways.

4. What kind of acts of submission must there be in us unto the permitting
will of God?

1. There must be a deep apprehension of the Justice of God in his permitting
will. So it was in David, though it was wicked in Shimei to curse the ruler of
the people (and some conceive) even Paul confessed his error therein, when he
said unto Annas the high Priest, God shall smite thee thou painted wall. I wist
not (or I considered not, that he was the high Priest. Sure it could not be
that Paul being a Jew, should not know him so to be. But David looks not at the
injustice of the Instrument, but at the Justice of God in it. The Lord has
said unto him, Curse David, and he did acknowledge in that Gods permitting
will. So does Jeremiah, chap. 12.1. Righteous art thou O Lord, and just are thy
judgments; yet let me reasonwith thee, why does the wicked prosper? And
wherefore are they happy that deal treacherously? God did suffer wicked men to
prosper in a way of sinning; it was an act of his permitting will, which though
Jeremiah understood not, yet his will did submit to it as just, because he did
acknowledge the will of God to be the rule of Justice.

Secondly, We must acknowledge his wisdom therein; so does David also; the Lord
will surely requite good for his cursing this day. He knows how to turn sin to
good, and how to make advantage to the Saints by their worst temptations, their
greatest sufferings, and their most dangerous falls. He knows how to perfect his
grace in their weakness, and to temper the deadliest poison into a most
excellent medicine, how to profit his people by their lying under the power of
ungodly men, making them the Scullions to wipe them even as a man would wipe a
dish. He knows how to refine them by that fire which they thought would have
consumed them, and he does sit by as a refiner, and he will suffer them to lie
in the fire no longer then till they are refined. He knows how to work his own
end out of all these permissions: For all the permissions of God are in design
for a time, till he has accomplished his own purpose, Isa. 10.12. Till I have
wrought my good work upon Sion. And be assured, the permissions of God shall be
means to destroy sin, as well as his Sanctification; and the Enemy shall be as
well destroyed by his permissions, as by his executions; Cu^ off in their own
malice, ensnared in the works of their own hands. The Lord will surely
accomplish the ends of his permissions, but they shall never accomplish their
ends, and determinations. There is nothing the Lord permits, but he will bring
good out of it, and he knows how to do it. His permission of sin was an
occasion of bringing in a better Covenant, a more glorions head, a higher
righteousness, a greater Sonship, a more excellent name, and he that can bring
so much good by the permitting the worst of evils, we need not fear, but he can
bring very great good also out of the temptations, and out of the sufferings of
the Saints.

3. A man should not fret and be impatient, but labor for a calm and quiet
spirit under it, because it is the will of God to suffer it, and had not he
suffered it, it had never been. There is as truly a principle of quietness in
the permitting will of God, as there is in the commanding and effecting will of
God; do not impatiently and discontentedly reason, why does the Lord suffer it
to be thus? It was that which David did quell in his followers, when they would
presently have taken off Shimet's head, he answers, the Lord has bidden him,
and who shall say, Wherefore have thou done so? 2 Samuel 16.10. Therefore Psalm.
37.7. his counsel is, Fret not because of the man that prospers in his way,
against the man that brings wicked devices to pass. God suffers Satan to
infest thee, and wicked men to oppress thee; take heed of an unquiet Spirit
under it; for the permitting will of God acts as truly for the good of his
people, as his effecting will. And it is part of that portion which the Lord
does make over to them when he says, I will be thy God; whatever is in God is
theirs, and works for them, though for the present it seems to make against
them. David in this bewails his own folly, that his soul was not quieted under
the permissions of God, and therefore does set himself before us as an example
afterward for a pattern of patience to be imitated, and a pitch of patience to
be attained, when as he was before in his distemper foolish and as a beast
before God.

4. A man should not only desire that the commanding will of God might stand,
but his permitting will also, and a man should desire only to be delivered
with a subjection to his will. So Christ says in his subjection to the will of
God in Pilats condemnation of him, John 19.11. Thou could have no power over
me, unless it were given thee from above. It is only the permitting will of my
Father which has put this power in thy hands, and if it be his will, that I
shall be delivered into your hands, I do not desire that this permission of God
should be taken off until his time is. I can with satisfaction and contentment
lie down under it; If it be not his will that this cup pass, his will be done.

Use. Let us then endeavor that the power of grace in us may appear in
submission unto the permitting will of God. There should be no testimony of
Godliness in the power of it, but a Godly man should search to find it in
himself; and if he does not find it, he should labor after it. James 1.4. Let
patience have its perfect work. There is a perfect work of grace in the hearts
of all the people of God; not perfect in this life as it is in heaven, but yet
there is a fullness of the age of the stature of Christ in this life. Now look
what power grace has had in any man's heart, the same we should desire it might
have in ours, not only subduing our wills to the commanding, but also to the
permitting will of God in all things. For it is true we know in part, and many
things we do not, beause we know not. A Gracious heart, his care is to keep his
eye open for every new discovery of truth, and he carries with him a resolution
to walk answerably thereunto, when once it is made known to him by the Spirit
of Revelation. Now the arguments to enforce it are these.

1. As it comes from God it is good. For the will of God is the rule of
goodness, and it is only good. It is true that the things willed are not good;
and therefore as it is sin, the Lord does not will it, but suffer it; but yet
though sin be not good, yet it is good that God should glorify himself, and
work his own ends not only out of the services, but also out of the sins, and
the contrary actings of the Creatures.

2. To be given over unto a contradicting spirit, to dispute against any part
of the will of God, is one of the greatest plagues that a man can be given up
to. Who art thou that replyest against God? Romans 11. Either against the will of
his purpose in his decrees, or else the will of his precept in his commands, or
against the withdrawings of grace in his permissions; there is scarcely a
greater plague then to be given over to a gainsaying spirit. To call the
actions of God into question in either of these, it is a sin that is commonly
reproved, Isa. 1.5. All the day long I have stretched out my hand against a
disobedient and gainsaying people. And its the Judgment that the damned in
hell are given up to; they are acted by a gainsaying spirit. Therefore Luke
16.29, 30. Abraham says, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them;
But Dives says, Nay Father Abram, if one rise from the dead again, they will
repent. The best way to bring them to Repentance, says Abraham, is to hear
Moses and the Prophets. Nay says Dives, the best way to bring them to
repentance is by one rising from the dead again. And if an Angel or a Saint
from heaven should preach to men, they would dispute and resist. So men do
against the permitting will of God. Why does God suffer this? he can hinder
sin, if he would. Qui non vetat peccare cum potest, jubet. He that does not
hinder sin when it is in his power, does after a sort further it. Therefore why
does God punish man for sinning, when he might if he had pleased have kept man
from sinning? It is a great Judgment to be given up to dispute the will of God
in this manner; for men much to exercise their wits in calling the word of God
and the ways of God in this manner to give an account at the bar of their
reason.

3. You pray that the will of God might be done, which is, that his whole will
might take place, and that there may be wrought in your wills a conformity unto
the whole will of God. Now a man should look for the fruit of his prayers in a
conformity of his will. Mercies given in answer to prayers are double mercies.
Its not only a good thing that is given, but it is given as a fruit of a
promise, and as a testimony that a man has received the Spirit of
supplication. For there is nothing ascends up to heaven but that which comes
down from heaven. There is no prayer heard of God, but that which does proceed
from the Spirit of God acting in the man. Now as you have this testimony of the
return of your prayers, that your wills are subdued unto the commanding and the
effecting will, labor for the same also in respect of the permitting will of
God. And till this also be wrought, you have never a full answer unto that
petition.

4. The permitting will of God toward the Saints, is but for the time of this
life; for it has respect only unto sin: Now when sin shall be done away, then
the permissions of God, and the forbearance of God shall have an end. Therefore
the Saints in heaven and the souls of just men made perfect, the Lord does no
more suffer sin to be in them, nor them to be under the power of Satan,
tempting and accusing; They are no longer under the power of wicked men,
neither fear they any more to be given over unto scandalous falls, it is but
for the time of this life. As you are to glorify the patience of God, because
it will last but for a time, and then cease; so you are to glorify the
permissions of God also. Seeing therefore it is the way which the Lord has
chosen to himself to glorify himself for this present state, a man should
resolve to set himself to it. There is a different way of honoring God here
and in heaven; our care should be, that we might honor him according to that
way which he requires of us while we are here: for this is bringing forth fruit
in the season thereof. So that as I say, improve Ordinances because that they
shall last but for the time of the dispensatory Kingdom of Christ: Do you act
patience and Godly sorrow; for they are but for the time of this life, and then
they shall cease. And the way by which the life of grace is now maintained,
shall be no more: therefore get what benefit you can by them while you do enjoy
them. So it is also in the permitting will of God; give God the glory of it,
during the time of the acting thereof: it is but for the days of thy vanity
and no more, therefore be content to submit unto it.

5. From the glorious ends that God does accomplish by his permissions.

1. Hereby the grace of Christ is magnified, and the Saints have a continual
ground for recourse unto the fountain for the washing of sin and uncleanness,
because the Lord leaves them unto daily defilements.

2. Hereby his mercy is exalted in pardoning their scandalous falls, and
restoring them again after they have to the utmost destroyed themselves, and
that they shall gain as it were a new conversion thereby. When thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren.

3. Hereby a constant war is maintained; and a man's Crown shall be proportioned
to his combat. Majora certamina majora sequntur praemia. A man's greatest enemy
is within, and the sorest battails are fought betwixt Flesh and Spirit in the
same heart. For the power of grace as well as of Corruption is mainly drawn out
by opposition; Gratia vexata seipsam prodit. Hereby we have experience of
Christ our Advocate pleading our cause before the Throne of grace, and rebuking
Satan our accuser: as he is brought in, Zach. 3.1, 2. The Lord rebuke thee; the
Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee. And hereby when Christ and the
Saints shall judge the world, the last act of the Kingdom of Christ will be so
much the more comfortable to them.

5. Hereby we shall be purged from those remainders of defilement; for this is
all the fruit, to take away their sin, Isa. 27.9. when the Saints are left
under the power of ungodly men, it is but to try them, and to purge them, and
make them white unto the time of the end, Dan. 11.35.

6. This will sweeten heaven for ever. The consideration of all those miseries
we are delivered from, which by the permission of God we had experience of.

We now come to the fruit and consequence of such a temper of Spirit submitting
to the will of God; which is expressed in the word (...) we ceased. This word
is variously used both in sacred and profane Authors, and I find in them all
that it commonly signifies these three things.

1. An inward quietness and tranquillity of mind; for there is a silence of the
soul, Psalm 62.1. My soul, keep silence unto God. Therefore it is for a man to
be quiet without any inward turnings or risings of spirit, to have a spirit
quiet like the calm sea; a man that is delivered from an unquiet spirit, and
freed from those turbulent affections that do disquiet other men; therefore the
Septuagint do thus render the word, to which interpretation we are most to give
heed in the interpretation of the word in the New Testament. In Lam. 3.26. It
is good for a man to wait quietly: the word is the same with that in my text.
It is an inward quietness of Spirit in waiting for the salvation of God, 1
These. 4.11. study to be quiet. Make it your ambition to get an inward quiet
calm spirit; look upon it as matter of your duty and of your Glory to attain
such a spirit that you may be free from all turbulent inward distractions.

2. The word signifies a silence of speech as well as a silence of soul, Nehem.
5.8. So they held their peace, (so the Septuagint render it) they had not a
word to answer, Acts 11.18. When Peter declared to the Church the conversion of
the Gentiles, they held their peace and glorified God, (...).

3. The word signifies a quiet behavior, a Cessation from work, as a man
without business, or (as one translates it) it is as much as to keep holy day.
So it is rendered, Luke 23.56. and I think all these three senses are meant
here: and then the meaning is this.

When we understood that this was the mind and will of God that Paul should go
up to Jerusalem, our minds were quiet under that dispensation; we spoke no more
against it; they acted no more that they might turn Paul from it.

And in all these senses I conceive the word is here to be taken, that their
minds are quieted and calmed under the dispensations of God; seeing the Lord
would have it so, therefore they do forbear either to speak or to act against
it.

So that the Observations are three, according to the word's threefold
acceptance.

Doct. 1. A man's heart being once truly and fully concluded under the will of
God, there does follow in the soul a sweet peace and holy tranquillity of
Spirit, a great inward quietness of mind.

Doct. 2. The mind being thus quieted, does silence the tongue, that a man
dares not speak against such dispensations of God.

Doct. 3. The soul being thus sweetly calmed under the will of God, dares not
act in any thing tumultuously in a way of opposition.

So it was with these men here, they held their peace, they did forbear to
dissuade Paul, or to do any thing that might hinder him from the enterprise
which they saw it was the will of God he should undertake, what difficulty or
hardship soever he under-went in it, or whatever the success of the work may be.

Doct. 1. An heart once truly and fully concluded under the will of God, there
does follow an holy tranquillity, a blessed quietness and serenity of mind.

In the handling of it, I will show you,

First, That there is a quietness and tranquillity in the inward man, which
every heart is to labor for, for serenity as well as sincerity in the inward
parts.

Secondly, That its the concluding of our will unto the will of God, that is
the only ground of this tranquillity of mind.

Thirdly, What there is in this submission of our wills to Gods will that is a
ground of this inward quietness.

Lastly, the application hereof to our selves.

1. That there is an holy quietness and tranquillity which every Saint is to
labor for. I say, an holy quietness of mind: For there is a sinful quietness,
which is a sin, and the fruit of sin proceeding from senselesness and
stupidity, when men's hearts within them are as a stone, like the dead sea moved
at nothing; when men dwell without care, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 47.8. and
hear the Word of the Lord, ye careless Daughters, Isa. 32.9. when men are not
troubled or afflicted with any thing. As there is an evil conscience which is
pacatamala, and that man is in the most danger of all, being in judgment given
over to a spirit of slumber; so there is in the mind in respect of all the
dealings of God, a sinful quietness from a careless principle. As there is a
natural patience in some, and a kind of natural meekness, which is not a grace,
but a sin, as all the natural virtues of the Heathen were; And therefore
Lipsius does pray, Da mihi patientiam Christianam. So there is a natural
quietness of spirit proceeding ever from carelessness and stupidity; Some
persons being of such a temper they can be troubled at nothing. But this is not
that quietness of an heart that must be grounded upon the subjection of our
wills to Gods will, and upon known rules of duty.

This David calls upon his soul for, Psalm 116.7. Return unto thy rest, oh my
soul. Which some expound of God, who is indeed all in all to his people, their
resting, their dwelling place.

But Mr Calvin takes rest here to be put pro tranquillo and been composito
animi statu. He had been in great affliction, the sorrows of death had
compassed him, and the pains of hell took hold of him, and there had followed
in his soul great perplexity and unquietness; he now calls off his soul from
those unquiet motions and agitations of Spirit, to return to rest, to a calm,
quiet, serene frame again. This is a distemper of Spirit, that David complains
of, Psalm 38.10. Circumivit cor meum, my heart went up and down, to and fro,
like a Merchant; it was in a continual unquietness, never settled or at a stay.
So Psalm 43.5. Why art thou cast down O my soul, and why art thou disquieted
within me? The word (...) does signify fremuit, tumultuatus est. His Soul was
in a tumult, he had an uproar in his own spirit: which Christ expresses, Luke
12.29. by (...), Be you not as a Meteor, which is not fastened in any orb, but
subject to various, doubtful and uncertain motions: This is to live in careful
suspense; a Christian should labor for settled motions of Spirit, as the fixed
stars. This is the frame of Spirit which is in the sight of God of great price,
1 Pet. 3.4. Let there be what troubles there will below, they shall not reach
the soul to disquiet it, though they may the outward condition, yet the soul is
kept as the upper region of the air, always serene without clouds. This did
Habakuck obtain, Chap. 3.9. He makes my feet like Hinds feet; that is, to walk
with ease and fearlesness, per montes, per rupta, though those ways of
difficulty would have distracted other men; And he sets me upon high places,;
that is, Libere and absque metu incedere in locis excelsis: that be the
difficulties what they will be, yet he is as man that is set aloft out of
Gunshot, he does not fear; his mind is no more disquieted by it then he would
be that is out of the reach of danger. This is a qualification of spirit which
every Christian should labor for, and we see by this instance may be obtained;
that as the Saints in heaven, whatsoever the Lord does pleases them, because
their wills are molded and framed into his will, therefore they are not
disquieted at any of his dealings; so we should strive in our measure to attain
such a frame of heart, thereby to keep a constant calmness and serenity of
Spirit, whatever the dealings of God be toward us, or in the world.

2. When the soul of man is brought into a full and perfect subjection to the
will of God, then is there a constant quietness and tranquillity maintained in
it, which will appear by these demonstrations.

1. Sin did invade the throne of God, and sinful self having as it were deposed
God in the soul, now takes unto it the Godhead, so that all the subjections
that be due to God, sinful self does claim. Men shall be lovers of their own
selves, 2 Timothy 3.3. Now the honor of God is, that his will should rule in the
world; all things are created by his will, Rev. 4. ult. And by the same will
all things must be governed, Ephesians. 1.11. So long there fore as self is the God
in the man, so long an opposition will be maintained by self in the soul
against God. So far as self is deposed, so far God is exalted; when self shall
be perfectly deposed, then shall God be exalted alone; but in this life so far
as there are remainders of self in the man, there will be opposition maintained
against God. And this opposition must needs be the greater, the greater the
thing is that is contended for. If two Kings contend for a Crown, it will cause
a great deal of disturbance in the Kingdom. And this is the ground of the fight
between the flesh and the spirit, in the soul of the Saint: flesh contends for
the Godhead of Self, and Grace for the Godhead of God; each of them strive for
a Godhead, therefore their contention must needs be exceeding great.

2. Sin is nothing else but the opposition of man's will to Gods will, and this
is properly a seat of sin, Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity to God, it is
not subject to the Law of God, neither can be. For as Corruption does deifie
reason in a way of wisdom, so it does deifie the will in a way of liberty, and
loves not to have any power over it, that may control, correct or restrain it.
Therefore men look upon the Law of God as cords and bands which they cannot
bear, Psalm. 2.3. But they kick at them with the feet of pride and contempt. And
upon this ground it is that every unregerate man is called a turbulent, unquiet
spirited man, never at peace and rest within himself, because of the opposition
of his will to the will of God. Though therefore there may be some velity
wrought upon the will of unregenerate men, an imperfect and incomplete will,
that they may hear gladly, and do many things, yet there is some point of
strictness in every unregenerate man's case, which being set home upon him, he
stumbles at it, and says, Durus est hic sermo: his will stands out, and the
treaty betwixt him and God thereupon breaks off. Therefore there is many a man
that goes far, parts with much, comes to an almost I am persuaded to be a
Christian, but yet in the very ultimate act of Regeneration, he plays the part
of an unwise son, and stays in the place of the breaking forth of Children,
Hos. 13.13. and so is never new born to God. Thus all the unquietness of the
spirit, and the offense that a man takes at the Commands and ways of God,
proceeds from nothing else but the non-subjection of his will to the will of
God; were that brought about, that a man had respect unto all the Commandments,
the work were done, and all this unquietness of the soul taken away.

3. The will of God is the Center of all the wills of the Creature, unto which
they are all created and ordained to act and move. There is a double motion or
tendency of the creature toward the will of God. One is natural; so the
Creatures without reason move toward it; for they are all his servants, Psalm.
119.91. But as for reasonable creatures, God does act them according to their
nature in a voluntary way, and so the will of God is the center of their will.
The Angels are therefore said to do his pleasure, and to harken to the voice of
his word, Psalm 103.20. So the Saints; David my servant has fulfilled all my
wills, Acts 13.22. Now if any thing be taken from its Center, it is unquiet,
moves disorderly and with a disturbed motion. Let the needle that is touched
with the Loadstone, be shaken from its place, it is always trembling and
unquiet, till it return to the place of its former rest. Let any earthly matter
be by the heat of the sun exhaled, and we see how it is tossed to and fro in the
air till the earthly matter with violence return again unto its center. Nothing
is at quiet out of its proper place. The waters are made naturally to cover the
earth, but God has by a decree laid them up in heaps; he has laid up the deep
as in a treasure-house; hence comes all the unquietness and turbulency that is
in the vast body of the sea. So it is with the soul of a man in a voluntary
way, as it is with the creatures in a natural way. God is the center to which
it was created, and it is always unquiet, till it rest there. Inquietum est cor
meum, donec requiescat in te. Aust.

4. The will of man in a state of sin is not only in an opposition to the will
of God, but to it self also. The wills of the flesh and of the mind, Ephesians.
2.3. There are diverse lusts and pleasures, Titus 3.3. and they do very often
fall cross and contrary one to another; and no man can serve two Masters that
give cross and contrary commands, without a great deal of trouble and
disturbance. That which will gratify a man's pride, will not serve his profit;
and that which will fit his sensual ty, will not suit with his Hypocrisy:
Scelera dissident, the Heathen man observes. As all truths agree among
themselves, so do all duties; but Error multiplex, Corrupt doctrines may, and
do cross one with another, and so do also corrupt ways. Now when the soul of
man is desirous to please and content them all, he would serve them all, it is
no wonder if the man be in a continual unquietness in his own spirit. If the
water did always run one way, it would run smoothly; but when the tide comes in,
and the waters in their streams cross one another, then the waves are lifted
up, each one tending to their own motion.

This said to be a man's wife, or we are said to be married to sin, Romans 7.5.
now if a man had many wives, and he uxorious and desiring to please them all,
and they have contrary desires and opposite wills, the man should never be
quiet either in his house or heart. And such an uxorious husband every sinner
is, that though every man has some darling, some Dalilah that he would chiefly
please, there yet is an unquietness in him all the while, because he does
displease the rest of his Paramours.

5. The Spirit of God has undertaken the guidance of the Saints, and therefore
they are said to be led by the Spirit. Christ gives us a manuduction into the
presence of the Father by way of mediation. By him we have (...) an access to
the Father, Ephesians. 3.12. But the Spirit gives us a manuduction in point of
direction in our whole course. Now the Spirit works in the soul, in a sweet and
effectual way. When a man receives the Spirit, he is anointed with the oil of
gladness, Psalm 45.7. it makes him go readily and cheerfully on. Non tardat
uncta rota: Draw us, and we will run after thee, Cant. 1.4. The Spirit is said
to draw, because its motion is powerful; and yet we are said to run, because
our motion is voluntary. Trahitur animus and amore: There are no cords that
draw so effectually as the cords of Love. Now the guidance of this Spirit is
wholly according to the will of God. As he does make intercession in us
according to the will of God, so he does work subjection in us according unto
the will of God. And when the soul is brought into a subordination, then all
contention cease. Subordinata non pugnant. Now every unregenerate man being
acted by the spirit of Satan, does act in a way of opposition; Satan being a
turbulent and unquiet spirit, never at rest, goes about like a roaring Lion, is
always compassing the earth; therefore where he bears rule, the soul is full of
unquietness, and for ever restless. When an evil spirit came upon Saul, how
unquiet was he continually! As the man possessed with the Devil, there were no
chains could hold him; he dwells among the tombs, he does continually cut and
wound himself. So it is with the soul in whom Satan rules, because he acts it
in ways of opposition unto the will of God. If the Lord would give Satan
leave, and give him power of the winds, he would raise nothing but tempests and
thunders, and blustering in the world; as appears, Job 1.19. there came a wind
from the wilderness and smote the four corners of his house. We hear of Witches
that sell winds to Merchants by the permission of God. If the Lord would give
Satan leave and power over the soul, he would raise nothing but winds and
tempests there. If the Lord would suffer him to blow upon the great sea of
corruption, that is, the man, there would be nothing but waves and billows; for
he loves nothing more then to disturb and disquiet the soul, because he acts
men in opposition unto the will of God, whereas the Spirit of God acts them
sweetly and quietly, because it is in ways of subordination thereunto.

6. It does plainly appear in this, because when the soul of the creature is
subjected fully unto the will of God, there is no disquietness in any thing
which either the Lord commands or effects, but a constant calmness and serenity
of Spirit. We see it in Adam, so long as he continued in his integrity, in a
conformity to God, in a righteousness and holiness of truth, and his will
subjected unto the will of God in all things, he had none of those disquieting
affections at any thing commanded or wrought by God; he was able to delight
himself in the whole law of God, and rejoice in all the works of his hands. And
so it is with the Saints in glory, the souls of just men made perfect, they
freely submit unto Gods commanding will, and they do truly rejoice in his
effecting and permitting will, because their will is wholly melted into the
will of God, and they have no private interest apart from God; therefore
whatsoever he do, pleases them. They take pleasure in all his works, Psalm.
111.2, 3. And the same is true of the Angels, they obey his voice, they do his
pleasure without any unquietness or reluctance. They go and come like
lightning, Ezech. 1.19. The Angel Gabriel did fly swiftly, Dan. 10. They do it
speedily, they do it cheerfully. Were there nor a conformity in their will unto
the will of God, this could not be. For that is the ground of all the droopings
of the Saints in all their services; they drive heavily because their will is
not fully subjected unto the will of the Lord. So it was in the Lord Jesus
Christ, he had the will of God manifested toward him in the most unpleasing
manner to flesh, for he must deny the will of nature, and that must stoop unto
the will of duty, and yet if it be to take flesh with the infirmities thereof,
that in that nature he might lay down his life, he says, Lo I come to do thy
will O God. He had no unquietness of spirit in him from a principle of
opposition, though in point of satisfaction he says, My soul is heavy unto
death. Therefore Rev. 1.13. he is said to be girt about the paps with a golden
girdle. Though I conceive Christ does appear in heaven as he is the Churches
high Priest, Amictu Sacerdotali. And among other priestly ornaments, the
curious girdle is one, Exodus 28.39. yet I conceive they had all a spiritual
signification, and this does note the suppressing of all inordinate motions and
affections in the soul. It is said, Justice and Faithfulness should be the
girdle of his reins, Isa. 11.6. But it is now described to be about his paps.
Mr Brightman gives the reason, because under the Law there being less grace
poured out, the lusts of men were restrained in a more legal way, by principle;
of fear, Coercebantur cupiditate. But under the Gospel, more grace being poured
out, the breasts being the seat of Love, all unruliness and unquietness of
Spirit being in a way of love suppressed and kept under, therefore he is not said
to be girded about the loins, but about the paps with a golden girdle. After
the same manner also it is spoken of the Saints; for there was not only a
girdle made for Aaron, but for his sons also. So were the Saints to be girt
about the breasts, Rev. 15.6. They do partake in the same honor with him, and
grace in them has the same power over them. Thus we see that when the will of
man is brought into a full and complete subjection to the will of God, then all
unquiet and unruly passions and motions in the soul are done away, and there
follows an holy calmness and tranquillity of spirit, all unquietness arising
from no other ground but the opposition that is in our will unto the will of
God; we would have our will stand, and not Gods will; and because his will does
cross ours, therefore our spirit is full of tumult and disorder.

3. What is there in the subjecting of our wills unto the will of God that can
be a ground of this inward quietness and tranquillity of mind?

There are two things that are the main causes of all disquiet in the soul;
disquieting reasonings in a way of disputation, and tormenting risings in a way
of passion. Now our subjection of our wills unto the will of God, does calm the
raging seas in a man in both these, and then there must needs follow a great
calm.

1. There are in the soul disquieting reasonings which do proceed from a man's
fleshly will. For reason in the man is the Wills privy Counselor, whose
directions and dictates it follows; and while the will is unsubdued, the man is
full of disputings and gainsayings: sometimes against the Counsel of God, his
decreeing will, Romans 9. Seeing he hardens whom he will, and we cannot help it,
because none can resist his will, why does he yet find fault, and lay the blame
upon us? Sometimes against his commanding will. When the Lord commands Moses to
go to Pharaoh, he objects, how shall I go to Pharaoh? I am a man of (...) slow
tongue, and the people they will not believe me: And if I say, the God of
Israel has sent me, and they ask me what is his name, what shall I answer? So
John the Baptist when Christ came to be baptized of him, he disputes the case,
saying, I had need to be baptized of the^, and come thou to me? Sometimes
against his effecting will, Isa. 45. The clay says to the Potter, Why have
thou made me thus (...) and the thing begotten says unto hi^ Father, What have
thou begotten? and to his Mother, What have thou brought forth? Censores
Divinitatis dicentes, Non sic debuit Deus, and sic magis debuit; consultiores
sibimet videntur Deo. Tert. in Marcion. lib. 2. cap. 2. And so it is against
the permitting will of God. Lord, why do the wicked prosper, and wherefore are
they happy that deal trecherously? Jer. 12.1. Wherefore look thou on, and
hold thy tongue, when the wicked devours the man that is more righteous then
he, and make men like the fishes of the Sea that have no ruler? Hab. 1.13,
14. O quam sapiens argumentatrix sibi videtur arrogantia humana, praesertim cum
aliquid de gaudiis metuit amittere! Tert. And these kind of reasonings fill the
soul with abundance of disquiet, when the heart of man shall dare rise up
against the will of God, disputing against the equity of it, saying, The Lords
ways are not equal. But when once the will of man is concluded under the will
of God, then the reasonings of the soul are calmed; the fleshly wisdom disputes
no more, but obeyes. As the poor woman in the book of Martyrs, said, I cannot
dispute, but I can burn. So the Christian says, I cannot dispute, but I can
obey; upon this ground, because it is the will of God: Arrogantiam existimo de
bono divini praecepti disputare; nee quia bonum est oscultare debemus, sed quia
Deus praecepit. There be two difficult commands that God gave to Abraham; one
to forsake his Country and his Kindred, and to go into a Land in which he was a
stranger. But it is said, the Lord called him to his foot, Isa. 41.2. that is,
subdued his heart unto the call, to follow the Lord in all the ways in which
he should go before him. Though he might have much disputed, yet the subjection
of his will did silence his reason, and suppressed his disquieting thoughts,
which otherwise might have risen within him. Then the Lord gave him another
command, to offer his son, his only son. Much might have been said against it
from the Law of God, and the light of Nature; but his will being concluded
under the will of God, it is said, Romans 4.20. (...) he staggered not, he did
not dispute it pro and con with himself, but the will of God being manifested,
immediately he did obey, and rose up early in the morning to the service to
which he was appointed: It is said of all the Saints, Deuteronomy. 33.3. that they sit
down at the Lords feet to receive his word. It is an expression after the
manner of Scholars among the Jews, they sat down at the feet of their Tutors,
as Paul did at the feet of Gamaliel. And they are not to dispute their
Instructions, but receive them. So it is with the Saints, when the will of God
is manifested, they are not to argue, but to believe. And when the will of man
is concluded under the will of God, it is upon these two principles.

1. A man receives all things from Gods will as wise, for it is a will guided
by Counsel: He does not work barely by will, as men many times do, but he works
all things according to the Counsel of his will, Ephesians. 1.11.

2. He looks upon it as good It is the good and acceptable will of God, Romans
12.2. good in it self, and good to us, even the rule of goodness: whenever
the soul receives the will of God under these notions, it must necessarily
follow, that disquieting reasonings in the soul must be suppressed.

2. The soul is strangely disquieted by tormenting passions. The affections of
men are of two sorts; some are chearing and comforting, as Love, Hope, Joy;
some are afflicting, as anger, sorrow and fear: therefore when in Scripture a
man is commanded to afflict his soul, the meaning is, to raise up and to act in
his soul these afflicting affections; for it is by them that the soul is
disquieted, and so afflicted. Therefore in heaven, though the affections
themselves shall not cease, because they are of the nature of the immortal
soul, yet all the acts of them shall cease, that a man shall never sorrow more,
never fear more. As in hell all the chearing affections of the soul in their
actings shall cease, a man shall never love more, hope more, joy more. Now in
the souls of just men made perfect in heaven, they being freed from the actings
of these tormenting affections, there is nothing that does or can disquiet
them, therefore there must needs be a continual calm. These only cloud the
souls of men below; now if all the clouds were removed and dispelled, there
would be nothing to hinder the sun in its brightness from shining constantly
forth. So it would be with the soul, at quiet, and at peace, when all the
affections that distract and disquiet it, are removed. Now when the soul is
concluded under the will of God, it is disquieted by none of these. For he
delights to do the commanding will of God. It is the joy of his heart, his meat
and drink. He delights to be under the effecting will of God in what kind
soever. Si vis constituere me Pastorem ovium, aut Regem Populolorum ecceparatum
est Cor meum. He can sing in a prison, take with joy the spoiling of his goods,
and cheerfully part with his choicest relations. Per calcatum perge patrem,
ficcis oculis ad vexillum Crucis evola. He is never vexed with tormenting
cares. We are not careful to answer thee in this matter. For he has cast all
his care upon him that cares for him. If he be called before Rulers, he takes
no thought what he shall answer, or what the event or success shall be, it
shall be given you in that hour. He is not disquieted with vexing fears. I will
not fear what man can do unto me. Though an host of men were encamped about
me, I will not fear. What ever befalls him in the way of duty, Fides famem non
timet. The instance of Luther in going to Worms to the disputation, makes that
manifest. I will enter Worms in the name of the Lord, though there were as many
Devils as there are tiles upon the houses. He is never tormented with thoughts
of despair. But he says, though I fall, I shall rise, though I sit in
darkness, the Lord will be a light about me. I shall yet praise him. Now a man
that never grieves, never fears, never cares, what should hinder this man from
a constant calmness and serenity within himself? Now when our will is subdued
unto the will of God, all these disquieting passions must be subdued upon a
double ground.

1. Because the soul does conclude that Gods will is Gods pleasure. When Christ
did the will of his Father, it is said, the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper
in his hand, Isa. 53.10. Now nothing should grieve me, but that which grieves
the Lord; I should fear nothing but that which offends him, I should be angry
for nothing, but what displeases him. Now all the Acts of his will, he is
pleased with them, therefore I should be quieted under them.

2. If the will of God be my end, the will of God shall be my reward. God has
made over all his attributes to his people in that glorious promise, I will be
thy God; and answerable to a man's obedience to any Attribute, such shall his
comfort that comes from that Attribute be. And if I work for Gods will, surely
the same will, will in all things work for me, and the Lord will do nothing but
what shall be as truly for my good, as it is for his own glory. And therefore
the soul is not angry at any thing that God will do: is not vexed or disquieted
at any thing, but sits down under it with a holy tranquillity of mind. For his
commanding will he says, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears, Jube quod vis.
For his effecting will he says, It is the Lord, let him do what seems good in
his eyes. The world is his great house, and the Government of it belongs to
him, the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof.

Use. Let this serve by way of exhortation to press the former Doctrine that we
be perfectly concluded under the will of God from this blessed fruit and effect
thereof, that it will free us from that unquietness of mind which is the great
misery the Saints groan under. For as we should truly strive to keep peace with
God, and to maintain peace with men, so we should also strive to maintain a
peace in our own spirits. For in this respect also Christ is the Prince of
Peace.

And to enforce this Exhortation, I shall first show you the sinfulness of an
unquiet spirit under any of the dispensations of God.

Secondly, The dangerous use that the Devil makes of such a distemper.

Thirdly, What excellency there is in a calm and a quiet mind.

Fourthly, How such a frame of spirit may be obtained.

First, The sinfulness of an unquiet spirit.

1. Hereby thou sinnest against thine own soul. That is the expression, Numbers
16. They are sinners against their own souls. Now the soul of man in its
creation was such for the glory of it, that the sun in its brightness is not to
be compared to it. But there is a double excellency in the soul, in wh^^^ the
beauty and the glory of it d^^h consist.

First, In its purity, and so sin fights against the soul, for it defiles it,
which nothing but sin could have done.

Secondly, In the serenity, and so sin has disquieted and disturbed the soul,
which nothing else could have done. Do not destroy your own souls; and the soul
is destroyed either by the polluting of it, or by the disquieting of it, which
is of that value and worth, that all things below should be esteemed beneath
it, as that which is too little to ransom a soul. All the creatures are not
worth one disquieting thought of the soul, it is of so great an excellency. And
the greater the sin is, because a man himself is the instruemnt thereof. To
trouble himself, torment himself, be a burden to himself, as every unquiet
spirited man is, Psalm 43.4, 5. Why art thou cast down O my soul, and why art
thou disquieted within me? There are two words used, the one signifies to lay a
thing wast as a wilderness, as void of comfort, as if a man were in a barren
Wilderness, where there is nohing to be had to refresh him: But how comes the
soul to be thus like a desolate howling Wilderness? the word signifies that he
himself was the instrument thereof, the means of the devastation of his own
Spirit: And the word signifies to prostrate a thing, depress it to the very
ground, which word is in such a conjugation, and does signify that the man did
cast down himself; the soul is the instrument in its own dejection. All murder
is sinful, but no murder so great an evil, or so uncomfortable as
self-murder, and no self-murder, like unto soul-murther; for a man to go
about to debase and bring down the glory of his soul, which he should endeavor
to beautify with the highest qualifications, and look upon it as his only
glory; for the qualifications of the soul are the only excellencies of the man.

2. A man may take a measure of the sinfulness of his spirit, by the
unquietness of it; for the unquietness of the spirit does proceed wholly from
the opposition of the will unto the will of God. Now as the power of Godliness
does lie in the subjection of our wills unto Gods will, that when grace shall
be perfected in glory, there shall be a perfect subjection; so the power of
sinfulness lies in the opposition of our wills unto Gods will; and the more
fully thou stand in opposition, the greater is the measure of thy
corruption: If therefore unquietness of spirit does rise from opposition of
will, then the more unquietness there is, the greater opposition: The devil
being in the highest opposition unto God, and they that sin against the Holy
Ghost, it being direct enmity; whereas other sinners are but enemies to God in
a collateral way: their opposition is the greatest, being revenge against God,
doing despite unto the spirit of grace; therefore they are most unquiet.
Though in a temptation, there is an unquietness of spirit, that may arise upon
the best men, as it did upon David and Jonah; yet if that be a man's ordinary
and constant temper, it argues he has much of the devil in him: the meekning
and melting of a man's spirit into the will of God is the measure of his grace;
and the opposition of a man's will unto the will of God, and his unquietness
thereupon, is the measure of his corruption. Men that are always fiery, and ad
oppositum, now this does not please them; and now they fret at this instrument,
and by and by are discontented at that dispensation. If Niniveh be not
destroyed, Jonah is angry; if the Gourd be not spared, he is angry; it is an
argument there is but a little grace, and a great deal of corruption. And as
grace does increase, subduing the will unto the will of God; so surely will the
quietness of a man's spirit increase. Grace in a man ripens as fruit does; at
first, there is a great deal of sourness and sharpness mixed with it, but then
it is green; the riper it grows, the more mellow and the more sweet it is.

3. The more pride there is in any sin, the greater that sin is; for to sin
against God with a high hand, is proudly to sin against him. Now as humility is
the measure of all grace, so pride is the measure of all sin; therefore, Psalm.
19.13. David does express presumptuous sins, which are in degree next the great
transgression, by a word which signifies Ab insolentibus: so Montanus, Ab
superbiis, so others. Now is there a higher pride in the world then this, for a
man to stand it out with God, Whether Gods will or his will shall stand?
Whether God shall command as he pleases, or I obey as I please? Whether God
shall Rule the world, or I shall rule the world? Either what will please God,
or what will please men? And therefore the Prophet resolves all opposition unto
the will of God, unto this, Ier. 13.17. If you will not hear, my soul shall
weep in secret for your pride. There cannot be a higher discovery of pride in
any of the sons of pride then this, therefore the greater the sin is.

4. This shows that there is but little dominion, or authority, that grace has
in the soul: Grace sets up the Kingdom of Christ in the heart where it is, and
Christ's kingdom is mainly exercised over the spirits of men: It is not in meat
and drink, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost:
therefore, Prove. 16.32. It is said, He that rules his spirit, is better than he
that wins a City. Men generally strive for authority, though few use it well
when they have it; there is a government, that all should exercise a rule over
your own spirits. Now so much grace as there is in any man, so much authority
and rule that man has over his own soul: he that has no rule in himself, but
it breaks forth into contention and disorder upon all occasions, that man has
no grace in him. Grace calls first for a wel-ordered soul, and afterward for a
well-ordered conversation. And if it be so great a matter to rule the tongue,
that he that seems to be religious, and bridles not his tongue, that man's
Religion is in vain; it is much more to rule the spirit, to set up the
government of Christ in the inward man.

5. It is the Devils way of sinning, and it is the Judgment he is given up
unto, he is a restless and unquiet spirit, goes about like a roaring Lion,
always acting in opposition unto God in way of revenge, always fretting at the
dispensations of God, in the government of the world, Matthew. 12.33. He seeks
rest, and he finds none: Ever restless under any of Gods dealings; and this is
his Judgment, and the greatest torment that now he has (beside a certain
expectation of Judgment) that the Lord has given him over to a spirit of
opposition, and that in a constant and a restless way; and this is the Devils
Hell. Toll propriam voluntatem and non erit infernus. So Bernard, therefore on
the contrary, Uno posito ponitur and alterum. Set up a man's will against Gods
will, and deliver him over thereunto, and it will be an hell unto that man.

6. It is a fearful Judgment from the Lord, for to be as the troubled sea,
that cannot rest, Isaiah 57.20. There is no peace, says my God, unto the
wicked. It is spoken upon occasion of the return of the people out of Babylon,
as appears verse 14. Cast, cast ye up, prepare the way of my people, take away
the stumbling block: the Lord will not contend for ever, neither will he be
always wrath. Being returned, the Lord does promise to send them the Gospel, the
Messengers of Peace, the Ministers of God shall now speak peace to them, who
did before speak error, and the fruit of it shall be a constant peace and
quietness in their own consciences; for God would create the fruit of the lips,
peace, peace. The repetition notes excellentiam seu abundantiam, Ier. 7.4. The
temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, that excellent Temple, where the
Lord promises his presence should be for ever, and it should be called by his
name, Isa. 28.16. Behold, I lay in Zion, Musad, Musad, a foundation, a
foundation; a glorious, an excellent, a sure foundation: And the repetition
also notes, Continuationem. Deuteronomy. 16.20. That which is Justice, Justice shall
thou follow: That is indesinenter sectaberis: Thou shall wholly, constantly,
and continually follow that which is just. So here he will create the fruit of
the lips, peace, peace, it notes a glorious and an eminent peace that God would
give them in their own spirits; and it should be a constant and a settled peace,
not to be disquieted any more: But after this return when the Lord should speak
this peace to his own people, yet the hearts of wicked men should have no
peace, they should be like the raging sea that cannot rest. It notes their own
inward unquietness, Affectibus suis and afflatu malorum Spirituum agitati
floret. After they are returned out of the captivity, and there was peace to
the Saints, even then there should be no peace to the wicked. Though they be
not disquieted by enemies, as winds from without, yet as the Sea they shall
disquiet themselves by their own inward motions and estuations. There is an
offense that men take sometimes at the word of God, sometimes at the works of
God. At his word, Hos. 14.9. There is a path that the upright shall walk in,
and transgressors shall fall in. There are some passages in the word, that the
Saints themselves do sometimes stumble at in scandalum: This is a hard saying,
who can hear it; but ungodly men stumble at them in ruinam. There are also some
works of God, at which men are offended, stumbling Providence: either when
they are above men's apprehensions, the wheels being lifted up from the earth;
or beyond men's expectations, Matthew. 13.21. When persecution arises for the
words sake, by and by they are offended. So Christ says, Matthew. 11.6. both in
respect of his word and works, Blessed is he that shall not be offended in me.
There are as great snares of Satan, and as great Judgments of God laid in
scandals, as in any thing in the world beside; and therefore men ought to take
heed how they take offense, because there is a bait in it, in which they may in
judgment be ensnared and taken. It is an observation much to be confisidered,
that if Satan woul instill in the hearts of men any evil impression, concerning
any truth of God, he does usually bring it in by some Providence of God that
men may take offense at; we see it in the Gaderens Math 8.31. If thou cast us
out, suffer us to go into the heard of swine. Ut eos jactur a porcorum ad
maledicendum Christo impelleret, that they may never desire his company, and
preaching more that brought so great a loss upon them and though it was the
devils desire; yet the Lord does sometimes grant it, as he did his request
against Job, for his own just and great ends, thereby to try and prove the
obedience of the Saints; such works are a stumbling block unto ungodly men: and
thereby a great difference is put betwixt them and others. It is as great a
judgment to stumble at the works as it is at the word of God.

2. We are to consider the dangerous use that the devil makes of an unquiet
spirit; he loves it, being unto him a suitable habitation, Ephesians. 4.27. Let not
the sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the devil. If once a
man's spirit be in a disturbed frame, there is a door set open for Satan to
enter at, and the use that he does make of such a frame of spirit is commonly
this.

1. He does hereby keep the soul in a continual tumult, that a man shall not be
able to make a supplication unto God: it shall disturb him in all his duties.
See it in Jonah, chapter 4. v. 2, 3. when his spirit was in an unquiet frame, see
what an angry pecvish prayer he made, and offers up unto God. No man is fit to
have communion with God, that has not the command of his own spirit.

2. Another use the devil makes of it is this, to imbitter a man against God,
and all the Instruments that God does use. This we find to be in Saul, 1 Samuel
16.14. The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the
Lord vexed him: So that all the actions that afterward he did, were by the
impulse of the evil Spirit. It is observed by Interpreters, that this was a
perverse and melancholy, temper, into which Saul was cast by Satan, through the
just Judgment of God. It was, says Peter Martyr, something more then natural,
Vel si antea in eo fuerit, a bono Spiritu reprimebatur. It is reported of
Dioclesian the Emperor, out of mere melancholy and discontent, he gave over
the Government of the Empire, and be took himself to a private life, because he
could not root out the Christians, whom with the uttermost violence he had
persecuted. This was the Judgment that befell Nebuchadnezzar, for seven years
he lived the life of a beast, and was banished the society of men, secundum
imaginationem suam, though not secundum imaginem. And therefore Jerome
observes, his figure and shape was not changed; for he says, My understanding
returned unto me. Ostendit non formam se amisisse sed mentem, he lost not the
shape, but the understanding of a man, being given up to a melancholiness and
madness, delivered over to a delusion and rage of the unclean spirit. Suitable
to which, the Lord threatens, Deuteronomy. 28.28. The Lord shall smite thee with
madness, and with blindness, and with astonishment of heart: To be delivered
over to the discontents of a man's spirit, is the next way thereunto. There is a
degree of madness in all the ways of sin: There is madness in the heart of a
man while he lives, Eccles. 9.3. And these were not Judgments proper and
peculiar to those times, but such as the Lord will inflict also in all Ages,
suitable to their discontents. But in an especi^^ manner, this is to be taken
notice^^ in the fourth and fifth Vial, when the Vial is poured out upon the
Sun, Rev. 16.9. Men were scorched with heat, and blasphemed the name of God.
There is no element whose torment is so exquisite as that of fire: as Herodotus
reports of the Atlantici, men that live under the South Pole, qui omnibus diris
solemn execrantur, because they are scorched by it, therefore it is called the
Torrid Zone. The Holy Ghost notes by it, as Brightman observes, Mirae and
inusitatae erunt acerbitates; a strange kind of bitterness of spirit shall be
poured out upon men in Judgment. So in the fifth Vial, which is upon the Seat
of the Beast, Men shall gnaw their tongues for pain, and blaspheme the God of
heaven: Gnaw their tongues, prae rabie and furore; their grief and rage shall
be such, as they shall gnaw their tongues and gnash their teeth, as wicked men
in hell are said to do; yet this is the plague that shall follow, they shall
blaspheme the God of heaven. Non est existimandum apertam fore blasphemiam. It
shall not be open direct blasphemy; but as Antichrist does open his mouth
against God, his name, his worship, his tabernacle, his Church, and his Saints,
they that dwell in heaven. To be given up to either of these is the common use
the devil makes of all the discontents of the spirits of men, at any of the
dealings of God.

3. Satan makes use of it to this end, to make their lives uncomfortable, for
they have no peace in their days, no comfort in their callings, because their
wills are engaged against the will of God, and God carries on things against
them, and they cannot attain their end, but every thing in providence falls
cross, and therefore they are exceedingly displeased, they have no joy in their
lives: for men may rise up to such discontent that their very lives may be a
burden to them. Psalm 112.10. The horn of the righteous shall be exalted with
honor; the wicked shall see and gnash their teeth and melt away. The word in
the original signifies to melt by degrees, not all at once, but by little and
little. It is the same word that is used of the melting of wax before the fire.
Psalm 68.3. So that men's rage and discontent shall consume them. It shall be
such a constant grief and vexation of spirit. And this shall be the misery of
those that are enemies to the two witnesses. Revel. 11.12. having been brought
to a low ebb, they shall lie dead for three years and a half, and then they
shall ascend up into heaven, that is, be exalted unto the highest honor, by a
voice from heaven, that is, supremi magistratus jussu, and their enemies shall
behold them. The devil could not wish a man a worse mischife then that his
heart should be engaged against any work of God that he will carry on, and be
greived to see it prosper. Acts 4.2. It is said that they were greived that the
Apostle taught the people. There cannot be a greater mischief befall a man
then this which is the ground which inrages the devil himself, and is the
cause of all the blasphemy in hell, that their minds are contrary to the will
of God, which yet they cannot withstand.

4. Satan makes this use of it to keep men off from receiving direction from
God; let God speak what he will, the soul is in a disturbance, cannot hear; as
it is to speak to a man in a tumult, so it is with the noise and the rising
that is in a man's heart. Exodus 6.9. It was a welcome message a man would think
to men in affliction, that God would deliver them, and that they should inherit
the promise made to their fathers; yet they hearkened not to Moses because of
the anguish and bitterness of their spirits. This is the use that Satan intends
to make of it, that men may neither receive counsel from God or man, being
unfit for either, which is one great use that he makes of the discontents of
men's spirits at this day.

5. It keeps men from communion with God; for God will have no fellowship with
the spirit that stands in opposition to his will. Job. 22.21. Acquaint thy self
with God and be at peace. The words in the original are rendered Assuesce te
cumillo, accustom thy self with him. Now that you may be accustomed to
communion with God, he exhorts you to be at peace, that is ut Spiritus deprimat
insolentes. So Zanchius. Let all those heart risings and unquiet dispositions
be suppressed; else you can have no communion with him, neither can you attain
any blessing from him.

6. It is to keep a man in a continual bittterness against the instruments,
and to break forth against them. As when God would rent the Kingdom from Saul,
and an evil spirit from the Lord came upon him, then he brake forth into all
manner of violence against David, whom he looked upon as a competitor in the
kingdom, whereas Jonathan seeing it was the mind of God sat down quietly,
saying, Thou shall be King, and I shall be next thee. So it was with Araunah;
It is conceived that he was king of Iebus before they were conquered by David;
and yet his spirit submits to David, saying, Wherefore is my lord the King come
unto his servant? This temper of spirit will make a man lie in wait to revenge
himself, and greedily to take it, though it be to his own ruin. As it was with
Shimei his spirit was imbittered, he did but wait for an opportunity, and
having gotten it, though it were against his own life, yet with how much
bitterness did he vent himself?

7. That it may tend at last to direct blasphemy and revenge against God; for
that is the end the devil aims at in all his temptations, and unto which they
all come, if not here, yet in hell. 1 John 5.19. The devil is said to touch
men, and it is for no other end then to leave an impression of devilishness
upon them, to make them as far ar may be equally guilty with himself; And the
soul habituated unto rage and constant opposition against God, is fitted by
Satan for such a devilish design.

3. What is the excellency of such a temper of spirit, to be always calm and
quiet, not given up to disturbances within it self?

1. This is in the sight of God of great price. 1 Peter 3.4. Because this is
agreeable unto the nature of God. And to this end was the vision given to Eliah
when his spirit was in a passion. 1 King. 19.11, 12. It was to instruct him, as
Peter Martyr has well observed; First in this, that the way of Gods dealing
with sinners, is not by and by to destroy them, with a wind, with an
earthquake, or with fire, but that he shows much patience toward them, and
takes them away in a more still and secret manner. Occulta and tacita media non
defutura suae providentiae. Secondly, to let him know what manner of prayer
would take with God against sinners, and prevail. Deum non commoveri affectibus
and perturbationibus incitari. Men think when they have prayed in passion, and
have vehemently stirred themselves, that God is so much moved as they; but he
does not appear in an earthquake, nor wind, or fire, but in a short still
voice, when he is sought unto from quiet sedate affections.

2. This is agreeable to the spirit of Christ, who appeared in the form of a
Dove. Animal non fell amarum, non morsibus saevum, non unguibus violentum.
Cyprian. Therefore surely the more unquiet any man's spirit is, the less of the
Dove there is in that man. For as the Dove is simple and without guile, so it
is without gall also. Sine fell sine dolo.

2. The excellency of such a temper of soul will appear in the sutableness
thereof unto a Christian. First by this every Saint as he is appointed unto a
Kingdom (for so Christ says, I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my father
appointed unto me) so he has the Kingdom of God erected and set up in his own
soul, for the Kingdom of God is within you. Luke 17.2. There is regimen
spirituale, that the Lord sets up in the man. And the more any man's spirit is
ordered and subjected unto the will of God, the more he is acted by the spirit
without reluctance, so much the more the Kingdom of God is exalted in the man's
heart. In regno Dei omnia sunt sic ordinata ut quod est in homine praecipuum
imperet caeteris non reluctantibus. Aust. The more a man is led by the spirit,
the more ductile and easy to be led he does show himself to be; the more the
Kingdom of God is set up in him. Isaiah 11.6. A little child shall lead them;
when the Spirit of God becomes as it were the forma informans of the man, that
the soul obeys the dictates of the spirit, as the body subjects it self unto
the rule of the soul, then is the Kingof God set up in the man. Confusion,
tumults, and uproars, may be suitable unto the kingdoms of men, the mountains of
prey, the habitations of cruelty; but they are every way unfit for the Kingdom
of God. Secondly, one special ingredient in the Kingdom of God is peace. Romans
14.17. The Kingdem of God consists not in meat nor in drink, but in
righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. It is understood here of
the Kingdom of Grace and Glory. The Kingdom of Grace consists not in externals,
meat and drink, neither will the observation of these bring a man unto the
Kingdom of Glory, but it consists in something within. Now it is Austins
observation that some are pacifici in senetipsis, men that keep a constant
peace and quietness of spirit within themselves, keep a constant Sabbath to God
in their own souls, intus in cord Sabbatum nostrum. Luther in one of his
Epistles to a German Divine, writes thus, Dominus tua omnia faciat and tu nihil
facias, sed sis Sabbatum Christi. Let your hearts rest and keep a Sabbath in
you, and you in him; and it is in this rest and quietness of spirit that the
main of a Christiau Sabbath does consist. Therefore the Sabbath here is a type
of Heaven. There remains yet (...) a Sabbatisme for the people of God. It is
true, in glory there shall be an external rest, they rest from their labors;
but the main shall be the inward rest of the soul; the spirit shall keep a
Sabbath to God eternally, when all sinful, unruly, inordinate actings of the
spirit will be no more, but the soul enjoy perfect peace and quietness in the
Lord. Now this is the peace in which the Kingdom of God does consist. Vera pax
est a voluntate Dei non dividi, and in his solis quae Deus diligit delectari.
Harph. And this is properly the rest of the soul in God, which every gracious
heart should strive unto.

3. In this quietness and tranquillity of spirit, there is a guarding and
securing power, Philip 4.7. The peace of God which passes all understanding:
As it is with the truths of God, the natural man cannot receive them, and
apprehend them, 1 Cor. 2.14 so it is with the peace of God, it is not to be
understood of any man but he that feels it; the sweetness of the Gospel is not
to be known, but by experience, which is a spiritual sense in those that have
their senses exercised to discern betwixt good and evil. Heb. 5. and the last.
And this peace, says the Apostle shall keep your hearts and minds,
Philippians. 4 7. The word (...), signifies to keep as in a garrison, to keep
down tumults within, and to keep out enemies from without: that neither
temptations from without be let in, nor the deceits of the heart be let out; so
as to carry a man away with them, and deceive him, but the heart by this peace
and tranquillity is strongly guarded against both these; therefore it is an
excellent observation that Chrysostom has, Mentem Spiritus Sanctus quam replet
obumbrat: The Holy Ghost does overshadow the soul where he dwells, and keeps it
in a quiet and calm frame, that neither unruly lusts break forth from within,
nor temptations take with the soul from without to make it unquiet in it self.
A Spirit thus quieted in obedience unto the will of God, is the surest guard
that a man can have in this world.

4. Hereby a man enjoys himself, which one of an unquiet spirit cannot do; In
patience possess your souls. A man is not master of himself that is carried
about with every passion, he has no command of his own soul, Prove. 25. and the
last verse, A man that has no rule of his own spirit, is like a City broken
down, and without walls; if an enemy come, he may invade and spoil as he will,
for there be no walls to defend it; so it is with him that has no restraint
upon his own spirit.

5. Such a man shall be able to judge clearly of any matter in difference which
another cannot, whose spirit before is engaged or imbittered. Radius solis non
cernitur, nec turbatus fons respicientis reddit imaginem. It is a hard matter
to see what is at the bottom of troubled water. Perit omne judicium cum res
transit in affectum. A blood-shot eye sees all things of the same color: A
bribe blinds the eyes of the wise, because the affections bribe the Judgment;
that I should never much value the judgment of a man in a point of difference,
whose spirit I know was violently engaged before hand.

6. A man is never nearer to the mercy he desires, or the deliverance he
expects, then when his soul is brought into such a temper. David was never
nearer the Kingdom, then when he became as a weaned child; and we are never
nearer the end of any affliction, then when it brings forth the quiet fruit of
righteousness, Heb. 12.11. The fruits of righteousness are wrought by quietness
in the soul; for the wrath of man will never work the righteousness of God.

7. This quietness of spirit in a will concluded under the will of God, will
make a man in all things cheerful, in all things thankful. First, it is a
man's duty always to be cheerful under all the dispensations of God: Rejoice in
the Lord always, and again I say rejoice, Phil. 4.4. The Spirit which the
Saints receive, is the oil of gladness, and with this unction you as well as
Christ are anointed. Hab. 2.1. I will stand upon my watchtower, that is,
Mentis recessus, says Calvin, the retiring of the soul into it self; and being
thus in his Watchtower, though he does suppose, The fig tree should not
blossom, and there should be no fruit in the vine, yet he will rejoice in the
Lord, and triumph in the God of his salvation, Hab. 3.18. A man that is in his
Watchtower, has a quiet recess into his own spirit, he can see himself secure
in the midst of danger, and can laugh at destruction. At famine and destruction
thou shall laugh, Job 5.22. There is a holy laughter from a principle of
confidence, and security. Genesis 17.17. The promise of a son was made known to
Abraham, and he fell upon his face, and laughed; from a confidence of the
accomplishment of the promise, his heart rejoiced in the Lord. Thus a godly man
can laugh at danger let it be never so great, and let it threaten never so
much, yet it does not disquiet his spirit, it does not abate, but rather draw
out his joy.

Secondly, It makes a man in all things thankful, because his will is
concluded under the will of God. This is a man's duty. 1 These. 5.18. In every
thing give thanks, for this is the will of God concerning you. In every thing,
in every condition, in prosperity, in adversity, in health, and sickness, in
poverty, and plenty, in honor, and dishonor, when God seems to act for you,
and when he seems to act against you, in the drawings near of God, and in the
desertions of God, in life, in death, it is the will of God, that a man should
always have his spirit in a thankful frame. Ephesians. 5.20. Giving thanks
always, and for all things unto God the Father, in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ. First, because Gods will in all things is the rule of goodness; and to
see that fulfilled, should be matter of joy to the Saints, even when it does
cross their own wills. Secondly, because there is no condition but has some
good in it: For it is true in a spiritual sense in this life, non dantur purae
tenebrae. Utter darkness is reserved for the life to come. Isa. 24.15. Glorify
the Lord in the fires; some render it fires, some valleys, both of them in
Scripture expressing an afflicted condition. If the Lord cast you into the fire
to try you, you are to glorify God in it, by giving him thanks. Now a man can
never be thankful, whose spirit is not quieted and subdued unto the will of
God. We love God because he loved us first. We apprehend his love, and we bless
God, because he has blessed us first, and we apprehend his blessing. Gaudentes
est gratias agere. It is the cheerful man, that is the thankful man; and no
man can be cheerful, but full of bitterness, and sullenness, whose soul is
not subjected to the will of God. These are the excellencies of a spirit
quieted and calmed, and concluded under Gods will as the rule of goodness.

4. How should a man attain such a quiet frame of spirit, that he may keep his
soul always calm? The directions are these.

1. Consider it is Gods gift, he gives unto his beloved sleep. Psalm. 121.2. By
sleep is not meant that of the body, but of the soul. Fideles etsi vitam agant
laboriosam, compositis tamen and tranquillis animis in fidei silentio se
continent ac si dormirent. They have a great deal of rest and quietness in all
their labors, and this is the gift of God.

2. We must obtain it of God in his own way, and that is in the way of prayer;
for as faith is the pacifying grace, so prayer is the quieting duty. Hannah
after she had prayed, though her spirit was unquiet before, yet she went away
and did eat and drink, and wat no more sad. And David though he did begin many
Psalms with a troubled spirit, yet he concludes with comfort, being quieted,
and cheared under all the dealings of God with him. Phil. 4.6, 7. In all
things, let your prayer and requests be made known unto God: and the peace of
God which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts: There is a double
peace of the Saints, one wrought for us without us, and this is reconciliation
with God: the other is peace within us, which is given unto the Saints as a
return of prayer; the Spirit of supplication becoming afterward a Spirit of
consolation.

3. Consider the condition of the Saints, while they are in this life, Isa. 33
46. He shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the munitions of
rocks, bread shall be given him, and his water shall be sure. There is no
affliction that can hurt thee, that does not disquiet thee: Men may plunder
thee of thy goods, but let them not rob thee of thy patience. So it was with
Job; Satan could not hurt him till he did disquiet him: though he did fire his
house, yet he could not fire his spirit. So it was with the Christians in the
primitive times, Amiserunt omnia; nunquid fidem, nunquid pietatem! hae sunt
opes Christianorum.

4. Be much in acts of reliance and self resignation unto God, considering the
relation in which thou stands unto him. To whom should the children fly but
to the father, and on whom should he cast his care? Do children lay up for the
parents, or rather the parents for the children? Cast therefore thy care upon
him, for he cares for thee. With him the fatherless find mercy. Thou never
put thy self out of Gods care, till thou beginnest to take the business out
of Gods hands, and to take care for thy self. Trust in the Lord for ever, for
the Lord Jehovah is a rock of ages. Isa. 26.3.

5. Reason it out with thy own soul. This was David's remedy. Why art thou cast
down oh my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? We should call our
souls unto an account, examine the reason and the ground of our disquiet.
Commune with your own heatrs upon your beds, and be still Faith does as much
work by sanctified reasoning, as by any other way of acting whatsoever.

We come now to the two last particulars, which are included in the word (...).
And for dispatch sake, I shall put both into this one observation.

Doct. When the will of God is manifested, it is the duty of the Saints neither
to speak nor act against it, they are to cease from both.

In the opening hereof I must show, First, that the will of God, as manifested,
is to be the rule of our wills and ways. Secondly, That when it is manifested,
it is the duty of the Saints neither to speak nor act against it: Thirdly, Give
the grounds thereof: And lastly make an application of it to our selves.

1. The will of God manifested is to be the rule of our wills and ways. And
here we are to consider three things.

1. No man is to speak or act according to his own will. It is a state of sin
that fulfils the wills of the flesh and of the mind. Ephesians. 2.3. A man's own
will in opposition to the will of God, is the will of the devil. 2. Tim. 2.
and the last; we are said to be led captive by him at his will. This therefore
cannot be a rule unto any man either for speaking or acting, but unto him who
has no other god but the god of this world. Christ himself does not make his
will the rule of his actions. I came not to do my own will, but the will of him
that sent me. Ioh. 6.38. The Angels do not their own wills. The Angel Gabriell
was sent; at the beginning of thy supplication the commandment came forth, and
I am come to show thee, Daniel. 9.23. The Angel did not go without a command.
Ezekiel. 1.25. There is a firmament over the head of the living creatures, and a
voice from the firmament, unto which the Angels did attend in all their
motions, and when they stood they let down their wings. The will of God was the
rule of all their actings, and cessation from actions.

2. It is the will of God as manifested that is the rule of all the actions of
the creatures. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Things revealed are to us and our children for
ever. This is a constant rule of all their motions for ever; there will never
be a time in this world, when the scripture which is the revelation of the will
of God shall be laid aside as of no use, for they belong unto us to do them.
Therefore in the 12. of the Romans. 2. we are exhorted to prove what the good
and acceptable will of God is. The word (...), does signify 1. sedulo
explorare, diligently to try and search. 2. approbare and vitam conformare, to
approve and conform our lives thereunto. Now it must be revealed, or a man can
never discern it, or approve it, or conform his will or way unto it. God will
have our services to be reasonable services, which must be an obedience to his
will as manifested or made known unto us. Men require not obedience unto any
law, so long as it is in the breast of the lawgiver; it never binds the subject
till it be published, and proclaimed that all may take notice of it. So it is
with the Lord who is the great and the only lawgiver.

3. The will of God is revealed and made known both by his word, and by his
works, which are nothing else but as it were a comment upon his word.

First, By his word, which is therefore called the counsel of God, the mind of
Christ. 1 Cor. 2. and the last. I have written unto them the great things of my
law. Hos. 8.12. declaring the whole will of God concerning the creatures
obedience.

Secondly, By his works; for the works every thing according to the counsel
of his own will. Ephesians. 1.11. Therefore whatsoever he does in the world, it is
but to discover the counsel of his will to the Saints. Therefore when David's
child was dead, he takes it for a manifestation of the will of God, and his
heart is quieted under it. There is a double book which God has given to the
Saints to study in this state of distance, till they come to behold his face;
the book of nature, and the book of Scripture; and there are three things the
Saints have mainly to do in this life. 1. To obey his precepts. 2 To believe
his promises. 3 To submit to his providence. The Angels in heaven behold his
face in glory, which is to them Cognitio meridiana, as the Schoolmen speak; yet
they study the word and the works of God, and know much of the will of God by
them. Unto Angels and principalities and powers is made known by the Church,
the manifold wisdom of God. Ephesians. 3.10. They are indeed present in our
assemblies, and therefore women are exhorted to have power upon their heads,
because of the Angels. 1 Cor. 11.17. They do not come to our assemblies to be
instructed, by any of our ordinances; for they know much more then any of the
Saints do; We know in part, and prophecy in part; but by the Church is meant,
By the works of God toward the Church, and his several dispensations therein.
And this is their Cognitio vespertina; the knowledge which they get by their own
experience, and observation of the works of God in the world, but especially
toward the Church.

2. This Will manifested, being the rule of duty, the Saints ought neither to
speak nor act against it.

1. A man must not speak against the will of Gods as manifested. First not
against his commanding will; a man must not dispute any command of God; for God
only is the Lord of his own law; and therefore every thought and reasoning of
ours, must be brought into subjection thereunto. 2 Cor. 10 5. Here an implicit
faith is only necessary to obey when a man sees no reason for it; Therefore the
Apostle condemns those (...). ^ Tim. 6.5. perverse disputings of the commands
of God, by men of torrupt minds, destitute of the truth.

Not against the effecting will of God, when God has done any work, and
therein manifested his will, we must not speak against it, Levit. 10.^. Aaron
held his peace. And David ^ept silence because it was the Lords do^ng. Hab. 2.
last. Zach. 2. last. Be ^lent oh all flesh before the Lord. It is ^poken of the
effecting will of God in the Churches deliverance. The Lord will inherit Judah
his portion, in the holy land, and again choose Ierusalem^ Against this there
was like to be (...) great deal of reasoning, and murmu^ring, and that from the
Saints, a^ well as from the enemies; but the Lord puts it to silence, when he
w^^ do the work; do not dispute, do no^ rail, do noit reason againstit. 3. No^
against the permitting will of God if he will suffer the Caldeans to plund^ Job
of his substance, and Satan to b^reave him of his children, and giv^ him power
over the winds to the end; yea if he will give him pow^^ over his body, so as
to smite him wi^ plague-sores (for the same word (...) used that is used of
Hezechias sicknes^ which by the medicine of a bunch (...) green figs, is
guessed by interprete^ to be a plague sore) yet he must (...) reply against it,
not speak a wo^ but with thankfulness submit un^^ the will of God as manifested
therei^ If God will suffer Shimei to curse D^vid, he must not so much as say,
W^^ have thou done so? 2 Samuel 16.10. therebe a messenger of Satan to buffet
Paul, so as he must fight it out with a champion sent from hell immediately,
and if the Lord will have it to continue upon him, and will not grant his
prayer for the removing of it, he must not speak against it, but sit down and
say, Thy grace is sufficient for me.

2. As the Saints must not speak against the will of God, when it is
manifested, so they must not act against it. We have in Scripture three famous
instances hereof. First, when the Lord had declared his will, that he would
give up Jerusalem and the King thereof into the hands of the King of Babylon.
Now the will of God is manifested, may they not use all lawful means for their
defense, and stand it out to the last man? they can but be delivered into his
hands at last; but when the will of God is made known, Zedekiah must not
oppose, but he must go forth to the King of Babylon, yield up himself, give up
his City; and then the promise is, Thou shall live, thou and thy house, Ier.
38.17, 18. verses.

2. The Lord had manifested his will for the destruction of the house of Ahab,
that wicked and idolatrous family; Jehosaphat joins with Ahab in a War, that he
might (contrary to the revealed will of God) preserve him and his house from
ruin, 2 Chronicles. 19 2. the Lord sends a prophet to reprove him; Should thou
help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon
thee from the Lord; for he will rise up against the house of evil doers, and
against the help of them that work iniquity. If his will be manifested to
destroy a family, let not the best men interpose, and act against the will of
God as manifested; for they will be so far from recovering it, that they will
perish with it; proud helpers shall stoop before him.

3. When the Lord is accomplishing his own great work against Babylon, Mystery
Babylon the great, the mother of harlots, against all humane inventions, under
all forms, the worship of God, as taught by the precepts of men, and when the
will of God is manifested by the pouring out of several vials; after all this
the kings of the earth shall be gathered together to the great battle at
Armageddon, for Antichrists restitution and establishment, Rev. 16.16. This
gathering together and rallying their scattered troops, is their sin, and shall
be their snare and ruin. For if the will of God be manifested, it will be the
downfall of all that come in to join with them in ways of opposition against
it.

3. The grounds of this doctrine are these.

Reas. 1. The will of God has a majesty, and a soveraingty goes with it; for
he is the great, the only potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; none
governs by will, as an absolute monarch but himself. And therefore Austin
commends those Princes as happy men, qui potestatem suam divinae majestati
famulam faciunt. And if there be a sovereignty, then every disobedience unto
this will, and every opposition against it, whether in word or action is
rebellion, 1. Sam. 15.23. There is a rebellion against God, because his will
has a sovereignty in it, and his law is a royal law. Therefore the Lord calls
the Babylonians, who were a disobedient people, the land of rebels, Jer. 50.21.
For to speak or act against the will of God as manifested, is a rebellion
against the Lord. Ier. 28.16. The Lord says, I will put an iron yoke upon the
neck of these nations, and they shall serve the king of Babylon; but Hannaniah
the Prophet comes and tells them it should not be so, and therefore they should
stand it out and defend themselves as long as they could. A man would have
thought this had been good counsel, and courage. No, the will of the Lord
being manifested, he must die and be cast off from the face of the earth, for
teaching them to stand out against the Sovereignty of God, and he is therefore
said to teach rebellion against the Lord.

Reas. 2. There is an omnipotency in the will of God; for his will created all
things, Revel. 4. last, and it is the same omnipotent will that rules all
things. Now shall a creature speak or act against such a will, and thereby
become a fighter against God? Acts 5.39. If the thing be of God it shall stand,
do not oppose it.

Reas. 3. Thirdly, whatsoever savours of stubborness and a gainsaying spirit,
the Saints of God must abhor: there be some sins that men commit out of
ignorance, because the will of God is not clearly made known to them: But there
are some sins committed out of knowledge, and there the will is engaged; this
act of stubborness proceeds from a gainsaying principle. In Psalm 78. v. 8. a
Metaphor taken from a beast that will not be guided by the rider: and says a
learned interpreter, it notes stubborness and pride, in a way of opposition
against God. Now I pray consider seriously, the more a man does manifest a
stiff neck, the greater the evil is, and should be the more carefully avoided
by the Saints: but when the will of God is discovered, then to go against it,
must needs proceed from a stubborn and gainsaying people. When the hand of the
Lord is lifted up, they will not see, Isa. 26.11.

Reas. 4. Fourthly, Its a great evil in the Saints of God to be heady, 2 Timothy
3.4. to be heady, violent, hasty men: when their will is engaged against the
will of God, nothing can stop them; there is a natural and judicial madness;
there is a sinful madness in the heart of man by nature. But a judicial
hardness is when God gives a man over to it in judgment; he makes himself mad
sinfully, and God makes him mad judicially: 2 Pet. 2.16. The dumb ass speaking
with man's voice, forbad the madness of the Prophet. Wherein did Balaams madness
lie? that he desired to go when he had such earnest entreaties, though the will
of God were manifested to the contrary. Its true, here was Balaams wickedness,
but where lay his madness? when God had shown him so many things to make it
appear that his way was perverse before him, his ass stumbles and runs his foot
against the wall; yet he replies to him again, and goes on in his way: here was
his madness, that when the will of God was so gloriously and remarkably
discovered, for all that to go on his way.

Reas. 5. Fifthly, this makes a man in Gods account to become a son of Belial:
that signifies as Hierom observes, a man that is without a yoke, a lawless man,
a name given to the devil upon that account; the worst reproach that can be
laid upon a man, is to be the son of Belial; Its the worst word he could have
used: a child of the Devil, says Paul to Elymas, not by nature, but by image:
on what ground does God give a man hat title? when his will is manifested, and
thou opposest it, thou art become a child of Belial. It is a very remarkable
place, 1 Samuel 10. last verse, there were sons of Belial that despised Saul, and
brought him no presents. Saul was made a King, but by Gods permitting will:
They set up kings but not by me (says God) by my permission, not by my
approbation: he gave them a king in his wrath, and took him away in his anger.
Saul was made king but by Gods permitting will; yet those that did not stoop to
the very permitting will of God, when it was manifested, the text says, they
were sons of Belial.

Reas. 6. Lastly, thou will surely perish in thy own opposition: he that either
speaks or acts against the will of God manifested, will perish in his own
opposition: Jude 11. They perished in the gainsaying of Corah. God had
gloriously manifested his will for Aaron: But Corah and his company will usurp
the priesthood; but now the text says, they perished in that gainsaying: so
Christ told Paul, it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks; in thy
gainsaying thou will perish. And so much for opening and explication of the
Doctrine. Now for application.

Use. There is but one use that I will make of it, and that is of admonition,
with which I will close the text; and I desire you, nay according to that
liberty of speech that the Gospel has given us, I charge you to take notice
of it: In all things wherein God shall manifest his will, do you look upon that
will, both as sacred and sovereign; and therefore do not dare to speak or fight
against it; take heed you be not found fighters against God; do not oppose any
thing that God will have stand: give me leave to take the application apart.

First, do not speak against it: the Apostle says, the tongue is a world of
evil, full of deadly poison. Its a great evil for a man to be given over to a
poisoned tongue: the fire of hell is in that man's heart that does so constantly
fire his tongue: this is an evil that godly men may fall into, men that
otherwise are of a meek and quiet temper, Psalm. 106.32. They provoked Moses
spirit, the meekest man of all the earth: and what follows now? verse 33. he
spoke unadvisedly with his lips; that is the ordinary fruit of an imbittered
spirit; there are times of speaking, and seasons of silence: there are two
times especially wherein men should be silent. First do not speak when you are
in passion, when your own passions are up. Moses had been a great deal better
to have held his peace, then to have spoken unadvisedly, when his spirit was
imbittered: passion is an ill counselor, and truly as ill a speaker.
Secondly, do not speak when God is angry: oh remember Ier. 8.14. Let us enter
into the defenced cities and be silent, for our God has put us to silence; he
has made us to drink of the gall, because we have sinned against him. When the
will of God is manifested, do not speak against it.

Now there are six directions herein that I must give you.

Direction 1. First, when the will of God is manifested, cease your disputings,
silence your reasonings; do not say, why do the wicked prosper, and why does
God suffer men to do this and this? why does such a party prevail, and not the
other? why has this success, and not the other? remember when the will of God
is manifested, let not the potsherd call the potter any more to account: let
this be enough to silence thee, which did the Lord Jesus, even so father, for
so was thy good pleasure.

Direction 2. Secondly, cease your lying; be silent in that, to put away lying,
says the Apostle, let every man speak truth to his neighbor; not only the way
of lying among men, and whispering against their brethren; that's not the lying
I now intend: but there is a lying against the Lord, put it away: and what is
that you will say, Ier. 5.12. They believed the Lord, and said, it is not he;
take heed of that lying: Its an evil to belie men, and you will find it so one
day: take heed, do not belie the Lord.

Direct. 3. Thirdly cease your mocking, silence them too; the assembly of
mockers is the worst society of men you can fall into, and the chair of the
scorner is the worst seat you can sit down in. Be no more mockers, lest your
bands be made strong, Isa. 28.22. Truly mocking proceeds from a high pitch of
pride, and pride goes immediately before a fall.

Dir. 4. Fourthly, silence your railing, reviling, and bitter speeches. David
says, some men's tongues cut like a sharp rasor; and that is a remarkable place
Psalm. 73.9. They set their mouths against heaven, and their tongues run through
the world: what is that? their mouths against heaven, that is, says a learned
Interpreter, when men speak proudly concerning God and the things of God, the
ways of God, the works of God, and the Saints of God: they stretch their mouths
against heaven, and their tongues run through the world; they have to do with
all persons, with all employments; all the world over their tongues walk.
Solomon I remember says, Pro. 14.3. in the mouth of the foolish is a rod of
^ride, he never is without a rod. Its ^he pride of a fool that sets his tongue
on work to scourge the persons, and their actions, that are wiser then himself.

Direct. 5. Fifthly, cease your boasting, speak no more so proudly against God,
1 Samuel 2.3. The very boasting of men, glorying in an arm of flesh, has caused
the Lord many times to let them to seek their own graves. When Pharaoh once
said I will pursue and overtake them, and satisfy my lust upon them, what
follows then? He hastens to make his own grave in the red sea.

Direct. 6. Lastly, in some kind let me say, cease your praying, when the will
of God is manifested; take heed, let not your prayers stand in opposition to
Gods will; when once the Lord had discovered to Jeremiah, that he would
certainly deliver Jerusalem into the hands of the king of Babylon, he did not
dare to pray any more; and so David, till God manifested hi^ will for the
child, he prayed; but David's prayer was ended when God will was manifested.
Pray consider whoever he be that goes and engage^ in prayer against Gods
revealed will, he may both lose his own comfort, and the sweetness of it; that
is the first admonition.

2. Secondly, be admonished not to act against it, when God has manifested his
will: neither be thou an assistant of those that act against the revealed will
of God; and to enforce it, take these considerations for a close.

Mot. 1. First let your oppositions and contrary actings be what it will be,
when God has manifested his will, he will carry on the work: if you make the
greatest opposition that heaven or earth could make, yet he will carry it on.
Isa. 31.4. The Lord led them into captivity; they call to Egypt for help, but
says God, their horses are flesh and not spirit: you come out against me as a
company of ^epherds against a young Lion that ^ath taken a lamb out of the
flock; ^ou cannot make him fasten his pace; ^ake a noise, but not come near.

Mot. 2. Secondly, the more emi^ently the Lord has manifested his ^ill, the
more evil there is in thy oppo^ition, and the greater the hardness of ^y
heart, when Gods will is manifest^d signally and in an eminent way. Consider I
pray, the Lord says, Pharaoh ^ould let the children of Israel go. The Lord
wrought several wonders and ^gns in the land of Egypt to manifest is will
eminently; and yet Pharaoh esisted his will, and acted against it: his made it
an act of greater stubborn^ss and hardness of heart.

Mot. 3. Thirdly, it is the greatest ^udgment that can befall a man in his
^cting for God, to be given over to en^age against the manifest will of God.
^ts the devils plague, though he know his is Gods will, and he shall be worsted
(...) it, and has experience of it from day to day, though God frustrate h^
designs never so often, yet by a^ by he has great expectation from every cloud
that it will present rain.

Mot. 4. Fourthly, you will ce^tainly in a way of opposition to Go^ will, meet
with your destruc^ on; if thou art a godly man the wilt meet with judgment.
Isa. 27.^ Who is it, says God, that se^ briars and thorns in battle again^ me?
When Gods will is manifeste^ all opposition is but as briars a^^ thorns in
battle. God will go through and burn them at once: and let (...) tell you this,
the Lord has said, A^ iniquity shall stop her mouth. G^^ uses to stop ungodly
men's mout^ two ways; sometimes by the holine^ of the lives of his people, and
so^ times by his own just judgment.

Mot. 5. And for a conclusion, (...) not act against the will of God; for^ you
submit not to the will of God (...) one thing, the Lord will heighten the
judgment upon you in another. If you will not submit to yokes of wood, truly
God will make you yokes of iron: remember what he has said, and I conclude
with that, Hos. 10.11. I passed over upon her fair neck: he speaks it of Judah;
and says the Lord, I will put a yoke upon her fair neck, and Judah shall
plough, and Jacob shall break the clods. God will carry it on, notwithstanding
all your opposition; and so much for this text. We ceased, saying, the will of
the Lord be done.

FINIS.
(...) Bellarmine, what he labors to prove concerning the German Empire. p.
184. Book of Providence God has, as well as of life. p. 141. Book double God
has given to the Saints. p. 315 Business good, there should be none, which God
has on foot in the world, but you should desire to have a hand in it. p. 195.
C.
CArdinals two, what they heard, riding to the Council of Constance. p. 95.
Christ's going forth in the Gospel, what its compared unto. page 1. Christ has
a double engagement lying upon him in reference to the kingdom of providence.
p. 148. Christ has made his providential Kingdom subordinate unto his
Spiritual Kingdom. p. 150. Christ is called the Angel of Gods face. p. 201.
Chrysostom, what he speaks of. p. 134, 135. Church, by it, what is meant. p.
316. Chynaes Inhabitants, what is observed of them. page 60. Commands two
difficult God gave to Abraham. p. 272. Conformity to Gods permitting will,
exercises self-denial three ways. p. 224. Counsel, by this the Lord does
whatsoever he does. page 141. Covenant of Christ, by this all creatures are
established. p. 150. Creatures reasonable, are ruled by God according to their
own nature. p. 201. Creatures reasonable, what it is that God permits in them.
p. 208. Creatures have a double motion, or tendency toward the will of God. p.
260. See Will.
D.
DEcree of God is double. page 79. Decrees of God have a threefold order to be
observed of them. p. 203. Dioclesian the Emperor, what is reported of him. p.
291. Discontents are not the way to prevail with God to change his mind. p.
136. Devil, his way of sinning. p. 285. Devil, for what end he is said to touch
men. p. 298
E.
EArth in the Book of Revelation, what is it opposed unto, and what is meant by
it. p. 190. Ends, a man's own, in emptying himself of them, lies mainly in the
power of godliness. p. 125. Ends, what they are, God has discovered in his
word he intends to accomplish in, and upon the world. page 160, 161. Ends are
secret things. p. 175. Ends of God mainly are two. p. 183. Exalting of God in
the soul, is godliness, p. 113. Extremes several there are to avoid, that
require a great deal of grace. p. 229.
F.
FAce of God in Scripture is put for 3. things. page 202. Faith, the higher act
a man puts forth of it, the higher is the act of grace. page 226. Faith, why it
is commended. page 233. Fret, why a man should not. p. 239.
G.
GOd, the rule of his acting is his own will. p. 79. Godliness, the power of it
lies mainly in man's complete subjection of his will to Gods will. page 11, 23,
113. Godliness, those that profess it, and yet have their wills opposite unto
Gods will, reproved. p. 127. And the evil of such a frame of heart set forth.
p. 129. Godliness in the power of it brings a soul to an humble submission unto
Gods permitting will. p. 198. Godliness, much of it is seen in a man's
submission to the will of God permitting. p. 214. Gospel, what is it compared
unto. page 2. Glory of God is twofold. p. 119. Grace in the will subjects it
unto the will of God in Acts 4. p. 35. Grace acts in the soul according to the
nature of every faculty. p. 41. Grace in the will, how it may be discerned when
there are the strongest actings of the will for sin, page 64. Grace, the Lord
in his permission withholds it. page 204. Grace is to be labored for in the
power of it unto Gods permitting will. p. 242. See Will. Graces, in them there
are a sympathy. p. 9. Government, in the matter of it (...) things are
committed to the Son. p. 143. Government immediately put into Christ's hands. p.
146.
H.
HAnd-right, what is it taken for. p. 211. Hands of the Lord, what is meant. p.
105. Happiness much of the Saints and Angels in heaven, wherein to be seen.
page 195. Heart of man once truly and fully concluded under Gods will, there
follows, 1. Quietness. page 252. 2. A constant quietness p. 257.
Honoring of God here and in heaven, are in a different way. page 246 Ho^^s
that have pushed at Gods people, shall be taken away. page 162. Hamble men to
do this, God takes three ways. p. 218.
I.
IMpatient a man should not be. p. 239. Intention between an habitual, and an
actual, some Divines do distinguish. p. 39. Intention of God in setting Christ
over the Kingdom of providence, what it was for. p. 147. Johannes Abbas, what
is reported of him. p. 117.
K.
KIngdom and Rule over all the works of God belong unto Christ. p. 145.
L.
LAw, the writing of it in the heart, what is it. page 23. Lightning, what is
observable of it. page 2. Lusts of ungodly men, God suffers to arise. p. 212
Luthers Rule, what it is. p. 70. Luthers Admonition to Melancthon. p. 96.
Luthers great difficulty in Christianity. p. 235. Luthers instance in going to
Worms. p. 276.
M.
MAn must walk by Rule. p. 13. Man, how he makes himself wiser then God. p.
132. Men, in them two things mainly corrupted. p. 16. Mercies given in answer
to prayer, are double mercies. p. 244. Mouths, to stretch them against Heaven,
what is that. p 330.
N.
NAzianzens direction. p. 12.
O.
OFences, men sometimes take at 1. The Word of God. p. 288. 2. The Works of
God. p. 288.
Officers two, distinct, God has appointed, p. 172.
P.
PAssions disquieting must be subdued, p. 277. Passions tormenting, by these
the soul is disquieted. p. 274. Paul, Chrysostom has observed of him 4.
things. page 3. Paul, though bound in the Spirit to go to Jerusalem, yet met
with six great oppositions. p. 6. Peace of the Saints is double. p. 310.
Permission of God what is it. p. 199, 205. Persians what had they at the death
of their Kings. p. 180. Plutarchs report of the Gauls. p. 60. Powers two,
distinct, God has established upon earth. p. 171. Pray we ought with
submission unto Gods will in our works. page 140. Prayer has a double
importunity in it. p. 234. Prayers of Gods people, he is very observant of. p.
195. Providence, as great wisdom of God to be seen in it, as in the works of
Creation. p. 116. Providence, motions in ordering the affairs of the world are
sometimes cross. p. 157.
Q.
QUietness holy there is, which every Saint is to labor for. p. 253. Quiet,
See Spirit.
R.
REasonings disquieting are in the soul. p. 269. Reprobation absolute is not
taught. p. 203. Resignation of a man's self unto God; herein consists much of
the power of godliness. p. 121. Rest, what is it taken for. p. 254. Rome
Antichristian, is the subject upon which all the vials are poured. p. 190. Rule
of duty is the will of God. page 16.
S.
SAints all are in this life bound to give a double account. page 15. Saints
take care but of one thing. page 118. Saints have mainly 3. things to do in
this life. page 316. See Happiness. Satan is suffered by God. 1. As a Tempter.
p. 209. 2. As an Accuser. p. 211.
Satan's temptations, God suffers his people to lie under them. page 219.
Self-denial, the more in any thing, the more of the power of grace is
expressed. p. 222. Self respectively to be denied, is threefold. Ibid. Silent
be O all flesh before the Lord. p. 90. Sin, how a man should know whether he
does with full consent or no. p. 62. Sin what it is. p. 258. Sins presumptuous
are made up of two things. p. 62. Sins of the reasonable creature. See will.
Sins remaindery, God leaves in the best of his people. p. 208. Sinfulness, the
power of it wherein it lies. p. 281. Smoke, the effect of it. p. 188. See
Temple. Souls disquietness, two things are mainly the causes of it. p. 269.
Soul has a double excellency in it. p. 279. Sovereignty of God over the
creature mainly lies in two things. p 43. Speak. See Will. Spirit is
substituted by Christ as his prorex. p. 154. Spirit of God teaches a man not
only to act grace, but to expect a reward. p. 196. Spirit, how he led Christ
into the wilderness. p. 220. Spirit contradicting, to be given over unto, is
one of the greatest plagues. p. 242. Spirit of God has undertaken the Saints
guidance. p. 263. Spirit unquiet, its sinfulness. p. 279. Spirit unquiet, the
use the devil makes of it. p. 290. Spirit quiet, its excellency. p. 298. In its
sutableness. p. 300. In its cheerfulness. p. 306. Spirit quiet, how a man
should attain to it. p. 309. Subjection of the will. See godliness. Submission
of will, by this the Saints highly exalt God in their hearts. p. 114.
Submission, the kinds of its acts that must be in us unto Gods permitting will.
p. 236.
T.
TEmple, by the Smoke in the Temple, What interpreters understand. p. 186.
Temptations Some come upon the soul with a great deal of horror. p. 231. See
Satan. Things all put under his feet. What is means by that. p. 145. Things.
Some there are that God works by his own immediate power. p. 199. Times two,
when men should be silent. p. 328.
V.
VIal fourth God is pouring out upon the Sun. p. 190. Vial fifth, now pouring
out upon the throne of the beast is not consented unto. p. 193. Unction of
Christ, the perfection of it, wherein it consists. p. 31.
W.
WAlk of a Christian must be regular. p. 13. Wicked, God suffers to thrive and
prosper in an evil way for a time. p. 213. Will of God as far as it concerns
man's duty is manifested and made known. p. 19. Will of man subjected to Gods
will. See godliness. Will of God is threefold. p. 32. Will of man is twofold.
p. 34. See grace. Will of ours to subject it unto Gods commanding will, several
considerations. p. 42. Will of man; how the Lord subdues it to his commanding
will. p. 52. Will of God good, perfect and acceptable, rules to know what it
is. p. 69. Will of God in doubtful cases, particular directions to know it. p.
73. Will of God effecting extends it self. p. 80 Will of man subjected unto
Gods will by several acts. p. 87. Will of man not subjected unto Gods will,
sins against him. p. 129. and that in an high degree. p. 130. Will of God
effecting and commanding, how to know they are the same. p. 167, 174. Will of
God permitting what it is. p. 198. Will of God permitting, respects only the
reasonable creature. p. 200. Will of God permitting, is only conversant about
the sins of the reasonable creature. p. 202. Wills prejudiced and engaged must
be laid aside, p. 174. Will of God, is the rule of goodness. p. 242. Will of
God permitting, is but for the time of this life. p. 245. Will of God
submitting, the fruit of such a spirit expressed by a Greek word, variously
used. p. 249. Will of man when concluded under Gods will, its under two
principles. page 273. Will of God manifested, is to be the rule of our wills
and ways. page 312. Will of God is made known, both by his word and works. p.
315. Will of God being manifested, Saints must not, 1. Speak against it. p.
227, 317. 2. Act against it. p. 319. 3. The grounds of it. p. 321. 4. The
directions not to speak against it. p. 328. 5. The considerations not to act
against it. p. 332.
Wisdom of God must be acknowledged. page 237. Word of God, in submission to
this lies mainly the power of Godliness. page 123. Worlds great Harvest, when
it shall be page 189 Worlds continuance is only to advance the end of Christ's
Kingdom. p. 152 Works of God. See Kingdom.
FINIS.

