Conscience THE BEST FRIEND UPON EARTH OR, The Happy Effects Of Keeping A Good
Conscience. Very Useful for this Age.

By HENRY STVBBES, Minister of the Gospel.

Acts 23. 1. I have lived in all Good Conscience before God until this day.
London, Printed and are to be sold by John Hancock at the Sign of the Three
Bibles in Popes Head Alley in Cornhill. 1677.

To the Readers CONSCIENCE.
COnscience; how thou will take it I know not: however I have adventured to
write a few lines unto thee, because I know thou art well acquainted with my
Reader, and can do much with him if thou will; and if thou be a Good
Conscience thou will. Naturally good I know thou art, I would hope that thou
art Spiritually good, purged from dead works by the Blood of Christ, Heb. 9.
14. and made good by the power of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3.
21. and art able to give a reason by thy hope to be saved, 1 Pet. 3. 15, 16.
and that thou stand upon thy watch and ward against Sin, Satan, and the
World, 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19. However thou art naturally good; something thou have
retained since the Fall, all is not lost: Reason, Knowledge, and the power of
Reflection thou have; and to speak according to thy Knowledge, and to tell
every one with whom thou have to do the truth how it is with them, is thy
essential property. Even those ( John 8. 6, 9.) that tempted Christ, that they
might have something to accuse him of, were convicted of their Consciences;
their Consciences dealt plainly with them, and told them the truth, that they
were not without sin.

Conscience, thou art the Candle of the Lord searching the inward parts, the
most secret thoughts, desires, and intents of the heart, Prove. 20. 27.
according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 11. What man knows the things of
a man, save the spirit of a man within him? Thou did tell Pharaoh that he was
wicked, Exodus 9. 27. and Joseph's Brethren, that they were guilty, Genesis 42. 21.
and Judas that he had sinned in betraying innocent blood, Matthew. 27 3, 4. I
pray thee do as much for my Reader if thou see cause for it. It may be thou art
a well read Conscience in the Law of God, enlightened and rightly informed: If
thou be so, thou know my Readers estate Godward, whether good or bad, in the
state of Grace or Nature. Thou must needs know, for thou art always at home
with him, and there is not a thought in his Heart but thou art privy to it, nor
a word in his tongue but thou hear it, nor a work of his hand but thou see
it. God has made thee his Spy and Overseer, that so thou may be a true
Witness for or against him.

Conscience, thou can tell whether my Reader be a Child of wrath, as he was
born, Ephesians. 2. 3. or whether he be born again, and so be a Child of God by Faith
in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3. 26.

Thou can tell whether he be as yet to this day in the gall of bitterness and
bond of iniquity, as he Acts 8. 23.

Thou can tell whether he be in the flesh, and do live after the flesh, or no.

Whether he be the same that ever he was, or whether he be a new creature, the
workmanship of God by a second creation, born of God and of the Spirit,
sanctified throughout, cleansed from filthiness of flesh and spirit.

Whether he worship God in spirit and truth.

Whether he have only the form of godliness, or the power also.

Whether he be a Christian outwardly only, or inwardly also.

Whether a hearer only, or a doer also.

Whether he have only a name to live, or be alive indeed.

Whether he be barren and unfruitful, or fuitful in every good work.

Whether his Knowledge be effective and operative, and so saving.

Whether his Faith be unfeigned, the Faith of Gods Elect, working, purifying,
conquering.

Whether his Repentance be Repentance unto life, bearing the fruits of
Carefulness, Clearing, Indignation, Fear, Vehement Desire, Zeal, Revenge, 2
Cor. 7. 11.

Whether his Obedience be universal.

Whether he esteem all Gods precepts concerning all things to be right, and
whether he hate every salfe way, Psalm. 119. 128.

Conscience, thou can tell whether my Reader have laid aside all malice and
all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speakings, as he is required,
1 Pet. 2. 1.

Whether he desires the since^e milk of the word, that he may grow thereby,
ver. 2.

And whether he do grow or not.

Whether he be contented with what he has attained, or whether he press
forward, after Paul's example, Phil. 3. 13, 14.

Whether he make Religion the greatest business he has to do in the world.

Whether Gods Word be his Rule in all.

Whether Gods Glory be his end in all.

Whether he seek his own things, or the things of Christ, most.

Whether his Heart be Godward, Christward, Heavenward.

Whether his Conversation be in Heaven, and his Affections upon things above.

Whether he have oil in his vessel as well as in his lamp.

Whether he can prove his Union with Christ.

Whether he has made his Calling and Election sure.

Whether he be yet made meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light.

Whether he love the appearing of Christ.

And Conscience thou can tell me whether my Reader does live by the Faith of
the Son of God, as Paul did, Gal 2. 20.

Whether he show out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom,
Janies 3. 13.

What work and labor of love he has showed toward the Name of Christ,
whether he have ministered to the Saints, and do minister, Heb. 6. 10.

Whether he fulfill all the Wills of God, as David did, Acts 13. 22.

Whether he follow God fully, as Caleb did.

Whether he be righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord blameless, as Zechary and Elizabeth, Luke 1. 6.

Whether he be holy in all manner of conversation, as he is required to be, 1
Pet. 1. 15.

Whether his Conversation in this World be in simplicity and godly sincerity, 2
Cor. 1. 12.

Whether he be zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14.

Whether the zeal of Gods House do even eat him up.

Whether he be contented to be nothing that God may be all, and to be accounted
vile so God may be honored.

Whether he deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow Christ, Matthew. 16.
24.

Whether he rejoice in hope, and be patient in tribulation, and continue
instant in prayer, Romans 12. 12.

Now (Conscience) I have an earnest request to thee; and seeing thou always
lodgest in the bosom of my Reader, thou can not want an opportunity to do
what I shall request of thee. My Request is this, That thou would deal
honestly with my Reader, and tell him the truth of his estate what it is.

If he be a child of wrath, and in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity,
tell him so, and say to him as Peter to Simon Magus, Acts 8. 23. I perceive
thou art in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, a child of wrath, and
the wrath of God will come upon thee if thou continue so, Ephesians. 5. 6.

If my Reader do live after the flesh, (and sure thou can tell whether he
does so or no.) Good Conscience, tell him that he does so, and that if he shall
continue so to do, he shall die; and show him Romans 8. 13. and bid him read it.

If my Reader do the work of the Lord negligently, deceitfully; if he offer to
God a corrupt thing when he has a male to offer, tell him of the curse which
hangs over his head, and make him read Jer. 48. 10. Mat. 1. 14.

If he have no prayer in his Family, cause him to read Jer. 10. 25.

If he remember not the Sabbath day to keep it holy, give him no rest, till
thou have gotten him to read and ponder upon what is written Jer. 17. 27.

If he be an idle, slothful, unprofitable servant in the Lords work, show him
Matthew. 25. 30.

If he be an unfruitful tree in the Lords vineyard, prevail with him (for thou
can do it) to read again and again the words of Christ Luke 13. 7* 8* 0. show
him also Matthew. 7. 17. and Heb. 6. 7, 8. Say to him, Why do thou not take the
Bible and read it?

Conscience, if my Reader believe not in Jesus Christ, if he do not
obedientially rest upon him alone for salvation, tell him that if he do not
believe the sooner he must be damned, Mark 16. 16.

If he have not repented, if he have not confessed his sin, and mourned for it,
and turned from it unto God; tell him he must do it or perish, and show him
Luke 13. 3, 5.

If he be unrighteous, good Conscience tell him, that if he continue such, he
shall never inherit the Kingdom of God. Compel him to read 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

If he be unholy, tell him, that he shall never see the Lord; and let him not
be quiet till he has taken the Bible and read it in Heb. 12. 14.

If he be unregenerate, tell him, he cannot, (if he continue so) see the
Kingdom of God. Put the Bible into his hand, and bid him read John 3. 3^5.

Conscience, if my Reader be a neglecter of that great Salvation proffered in
the Gospel, and continue so, tell him that he cannot escape damnation, and show
him Heb. 2. 3.

If he turn away from him that speaks from Heaven to him, tell him that he
cannot escape the wrath of God; and show him Heb. 12. 25. and Acts 3. 23. and
ask him whether he be not afraid of destruction?

And if he shall still refuse to hearken, and still pull away the shoulder, and
stop his ears, and make his Heart like an Adamant stone, tell him that great
wrath will come upon him, Zech. 7. 11, 12.

Conscience, if my Reader be one of that black catalogue 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. or a
doer of the works of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. tell him, that he shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. And if he ask thee what warrant thou have to say
so, refer him to the forecited Scriptures.

Conscience, if my Reader should be fearful, unbelieving, abominable; if he
should be a Murderer, a Whoremonger, a Sorcerer, an Idolater, a Liar; tell him
that if he continue such, he must have his part in the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone: and make him read Rev. 21. 8.

Conscience, if my Reader be a proud person, tell him from God, that God is
able to abase him, Dan. 4. 37. and will be above him, Exodus 18. 11. and bring
him down, Psalm. 18. 27. and low, Prove. 29. 23. even to destruction, Prove. 16.
18. and 15. 25. Get him also to read Isa. 2. 11. to 18. and Isa. 3. 16. to the
end.

If my Reader be a covetous person, good Conscience, let him know from the Word
of God,

1. That he is a troubler of his own house, Prove. 15. 27.

2. That he is in Gods account an Idolater, Col. 3. 5. Ephesians. 5. 5.

3. That he is hated and abhorred of God, Psalm. 10. 3.

4. That he is sorely threatened Isa. 5. 8. Isa. 10. 1, 2. Job 20. 15, 19, 20.
and 27. 16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 6. 10. And get him to read 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.

And (Conscience) if my Reader be a voluptuous person, an adulterous unclean
person, I must entreat thee to send him to the Bible, and to see that he read
and consider these following Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; Prove. 2.
18, 19. Prove. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6, to 14. Prove. 6. 26, 32, ^3. Prove. 7. 21. to the
end of the chap. Prove. 22. 14. Prove. 23. 27. Prove. 29. 3. Eccles. 7. 26. 1 Cor.
5. 9. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. Heb. 13. 4. Rev. 21. 8. and 22. 15.

Good Conscience, be at him again and again, and never leave him till thou have
gotten him to go into his Closet, and there to spend one quarter or half an
hour in pondering on these Scri^^^^^.

Conscience, do thy office; thou art Gods Deputy, fail not to be faithful.

Possibly thou may say, That thou have done it again and again, but they
will not hear, they are deaf to me as well as to you. But Conscience, if thou
be a good Conscience, speak louder, speak not with so low a voice, lift up thy
voice like a trumpet, for thou art ordained a Preacher to show my Readers their
transgressions and sins.

Be not silent whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, yet speak
unto them. I know my Readers, many of them, will endeavor to silence and stop
thy mouth; they do not love to be told of their faults, or what their estate
is: but Conscience be not thou rebellious, but do that which is thine Office to
do. I know thou have much to charge my Readers with.

Some of them (thou know) do neither read the S^riptures, nor pray in their
Families, nor Cathechize them that are committed to their charge.

Others pray not in their Closets, nor do they commune with their own hearts
about their spiritual estates; they examine not themselves, whether they be in
the Faith, or whether Christ be in them; they compare not themselves with the
Word of God, to know how it is with them.

Some spend their time and strength, and Estates in Rioting and Drunkenness, in
Chambering and Wantonness, in Strife and Envying

Some trifle away their precious time in Taverns, Alehouses, Play Houses
Coffee-houses.

Some embrace this present World with Demas.

Some are lovers of Pleasures more then lovers of God.

Some acknowledge God in their words, and in their works deny him.

Some have left their first love.

Some are lukewarm, neither hot nor ^^ld.

Some say, Lord, Lord, but will not do the things that he says unto them.

Some believe not with their Hearts what with their Mouth they say they do
believe.

Some confess sin with their lips, but do neither mourn for it, nor hate it,
nor turn from it with their Hearts.

Some pray for that they would not have.

Some hear the Word, but will not do it.

Some love in word and tongue, but not in deed and in truth.

Some fashion themselves according to this world, yet would not be thought to
be of the world.

Some Dedicate and Devote their Children to God, to the service of that one God
who is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and when they have so done, they alienate
them from his service to the service of the World, Flesh, and Devil, breeding
them np in Idleness, Pride, and Wantonness. Never, or never to any purpose
minding them of their Baptis^al Covenant and Engagements, to be ^holy and only
the Lords.

Some neglect relative Duty, (as thou Conscience know very well.)

Are not some Husbands bitter to their Wives, and some Wives disobedient to
their Husbands?

Do not some Parents provoke their Children to wrath? and do not some Children
dishonor their Parents?

Do not some Masters deny that which is just and equal to their Servants? and
are not some Servants unfaithful to their Masters? Do thou not know all this
to be true, Conscience? Doubtless thou do, and doubtless thou do often
nip and twinge them for it. But good Conscience make them feel, make them
smart, let them not go on in peace, disturb them, hannt them continually, tell
them their own, and take a fit time and season for it.

My Reader does frequently, or some^imes at least, hear Sermons. Sermons of the
necessity of the New Birth, Faith, Repentance, Holiness. Take this opportunity,
Conscience, of telling him the truth. Say to him, Hear thou what the
Preacher says? has he not clearly proved the necessity of New birth, Faith,
Repentance, Holiness, unto Life Eternal. What will thou do, Man, Woman? Thou
art not Newborn, thou have not believed nor repented, thou art not Holy. Sure
thou can not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. 3. 3. Sure thou must be
Damned, Mat. 16. 16. Sure thou must perish, Luke. 13. 3. Thou can not see the
Lord to thy comfort in that unholy Estate thou art now in Heb. 12. 14.

My Reader prays constantly, or sometimes at least, and says, Lord give me a
better Heart, a new Heart, a clean Heart, a soft Heart, a single Heart. Lord,
write thy Law in my Heart, plant thy Fear in my Heart, put thy Spirit into me,
cause me to walk in thy Statutes. Now, Conscience, tell h^^ the truth; say to
him, Thou drawest ^igh to God with thy lips, but thy Heart is far from him. Thy
Lip does ask these things of God, but thy Heart does not desire them; thou art
well enough satisfied and contented, though thou be denied.

My Reader is sometimes busy in his Calling: Conscience, go to him and say, O
how busy thou art for back and belly! what provision make thou for thy soul?

My Reader is sometimes at a Feast, or at his own Table: go to him, Conscience,
and say, O how sweet this meat is to thy taste! when shall the Word of God, and
the meat indeed, and the drink indeed, be as sweet?

My Reader is sometimes in a Tavern, Alehouse, or Coffee-house. Conscience,
when he has done his necessary business there, go to him and say, Is not thy
Family, or Closet, a fitter^place for thee to be in?

Sometimes he is walking in the fields: Conscience, go to him and ask him what
^e is meditating on, and put him in mind of Isaac's practice, Genesis 24. 6.

My Reader is sometimes sick: go ^t him, Conscience, and say, This is the just
hand of God upon thee: and bi^ him take his Bible and read Jer. 4. 18*

Sometimes my Reader takes Physic* go to him, Conscience, and say to him* When
will thou be at so much cost for thy soul? when will thou spare so much time
from thy business for thy soul? when will thou keep thy Chamber a day or two
for thy souls health?

Possibly my Reader has lately been recovered out of a dangerous fit of
sickness: go to him, Conscience, and put him in mind of ^is sick^bed prayers
and purposes, and say to him, Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.

Conscience, have but a very little patience more, and I have done. Some of my
Readers, thou know, have lain under the means of Grace a long time
Unconverted; would I could persuade thee (...) force them to read Heb. 6. 7, 8.
Jer. ^ 29. Ezekiel. 24. 13, 14. Mat. 23. 37, 38. Luke 19. 41, 42. 2 Cor. 13. 5.
and not let them be quiet until they have mused a while on each. Conscience, I
am in care and fear about my Readers, lest that dreadful Message be sent to
them, that once was sent to Israel of old, Isa. 6. 9, 10. with Romans 11. 18. I
beseech thee, Conscience, suffer them not to eat, drink, or sleep in quiet,
until they have fixed their thoughts a while on this Message after the reading
of it. Conscience, I am out of hopes of my Readers welfare, unless thou be the
more vigilant, a^^gent, and faithful in doing thy office. Wherefore I beseech
you, nay I charge you, as once Paul charged Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 1. before God
and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick, and the dead at his
appearing and his Kingdom; preach the Word to my Reader, be instant in season,
out of season; Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort him, and continue thy speech to him (as
once Paul did to his Hearers Acts 20. 7.) until midnight, rather then fail of
prevailing with him. There are a few other Scriptures, which I desire my Reader
might peruse, viz. 1 Samuel 2. 25. 2 Chro. 25. 16. Pro. 29. 1. But, Conscience,
if thou will not by earnest and continual urging compel him, he will not bestow
the time, nor take the pains to do it. In hope thou will be faithful to my
Reader, I shall add no more save only the promise of my prayers that thou may
be so.

SERMON I.
JOB 26. 7. My Righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my Heart
shall not reproach me so long as I live.
MY Righteousness I hold fast. His Friends would have robbed him of it, would
have persuaded him out of it, would have argued and disputed him out of it, but
you shall not do it says Job; I stand up in the defense of it, I hold it fast,
I will not let it go^ Say what you will, do what you can, I will maintain my
Integrity, I am not an Hypocrite as you would have me think I am; I am not an
unrighteous man as you would speak me to be, and as you would have me take my
self to be; no, my Righteousness I will hold fast, I will not let it go; pull
while you will, I will hold it fast. Take we up the like Resolution: there are
some that pretend to be friends, pretend friendship and kindness, but act the
part of Job's friends here. Oh how many are there that would spoil us of our
Righteousness! The World, the Flesh, and the Devil, pull to take it away; Hold
we our Resolution not to let it go. Should I let it go, (says Job) my Heart
would reproach me, would upbraid me; my Conscien^e would accuse me of wrong
done to my self, which is worse then doing wrong to others. It is bad to wrong
others much worse to wrong our selves: therefore he is resolved, My Heart shall
not reproach me, no not so long as I live. In which words you have Job's Holy
resolution, My Heart shall not reproach me. My Heart, that is, my Conscience,
for so Heart is to be understood; If ou heart condemn us, ^ John 3. 20, 21.
Go is greater then our heart: And if our heart condemn us not, etc. that is,
our Conscience. So that by Heart you must here understand Conscience.
Conscience! Is there any such thing in the World? Sure one would think that
Conscience had been dead long ago, and that there was no Conscience now alive
in the World. But (Sirs) it will have a Resurrection assure your selves, for it
is of an Immortal Nature; and though it may seem (...) die, it will have a real
Resurrection. Sleep is the image of Death, and Conscience may for awhile be
asleep, but as sure as ever thou did awake when thou wast asleep, Conscience
will awake ere long; and when it shall awake it will make you look about. My
Conscience shall not reproach me, shall not upbraid, shall not accuse me of any
wrong done to mysel^, nor of any omission of what is my Duty, nor of any
commission of what is. Transgression, it shall not accuse me, either for
omitting what God has commanded, (and God has commanded me to preserve my own
Integrity, and to seek my own peace and quiet;) or accuse me for committing
what God has forbidden. God has forbidden me the wronging of my self, and
Conscience shall not accuse me for doing what God has forbidden, so long as I
live. Hitherto his Conscience accused him not. O Excellent Job! A man more
righteous then his Neighbor. Indeed he was one that had the Commendation of
God himself; no wonder he does stand up in his own justification, being a
person that had Gods so great commendation: Job 1. 1. There was a man in the
land of Vz, whose name was Job, and that man was perfect and upright, one that
feared God and eschewed evil. And a further Commendation the Lord gave him ver.
8 Have thou not considered my serva Job, that there is none like him in the
earth? etc. No wonder that he stands upon his own justification. Hither to I
have so lived that my Conscience cannot accuse me, and he was resolved so to
live. I will have a care (whatever I suffer) to have Conscience on my side; I
will have Conscience to be my Friend; I will not do any thing that shall
occasion Conscience to be my Foe; for I were better to have all the World, yea
if there were ten thousand Worlds, it were better for me to have them all to be
my mortal enemies, than to have Conscience to be mine enemy.

Now it will be needful to consider what Conscience is that is so great a
Friend or Foe: it will be the best Friend, or the worst Enemy, according as
your carriage toward God and Man shall be. I shall show, 1. What Conscience
is. 2. About what it is employed. (...) is implo*
And then when I have so done, I shall tell you and prove it, that it should be
your greatest care so to live, that Conscience may not reproach you whilst you
live; and then give you reasons of it, and then Apply it.

1. General. What Conscience is.

Briefly, Conscience is a man's Judgment of himself: i.e. Of his Estate and
Actions; this is Conscience. Or thus, if you will; Conscience is a Power of the
Soul; for the Soul is endowed with Noble Powers and Faculties, Understanding,
Conscience, Memory, Will, and Affections: and Conscience is not the least of
them. I say, Conscience is a Power of the Soul taking notice and bearing
witness of all a man's Thoughts, Words, and Actions; and as it finds them,
either to agree or not agree with the Rule, it accuses or excuses, absolves or
condemns comforts or torments. This is Conscience. Do you think there is any
such Inhabitant in you? It may be some have taken no notice of any such
Inhabitant in the House of their Soul, whether there be any such Power of the
Soul, or no. I say it again, Conscience is a Power of the Soul, taking notice,
and bearing witness, (it takes notice that it may bear witness) of all a man's
Thoughts, Words, and Actions; and as it finds his Thoughts, Words, or Actions,
to be either agreeing or not agreeing with the Rule, so it does excuse or
accuse, absolve or condemn, comfort or torment. This is Conscience.

1. It is a Power of the Soul; it is called Heart 1 John 3. 20. For if our
heart coudemn us, etc. and Eccles. 7. 22. For oftentimes also thine own heart
knows, etc. It is called likewise the Spirit of a man, Prove. 18. 14. The
Spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities, but a wounded Spirit who can bear?

2. Conscience is a Power of the Soul taking notice; it is a most Curious
Observer. Conscience is very quick sighted. It is continually prying, though we
do not observe and take notice of it; yet so it is. What is said of God Psalm
139. 3, 4. is true of his Deputy: Who is that? It is Conscience. Conscience is
no mean thing, it is Gods Deputy, and what is said of God in that place is true
of Conscience: Thou compassest my path and my lying down, and thou art
acquainted with all my ways, for there is not a word in my mouth, but lo, O
Lord, thou know it altogether: Thou have beset me behind and before. So that
a man cannot stir but God sees and Conscience sees, and knows and takes
notice of it; and one would wonder how Conscience will revive what was done
seven years, and three times seven years, ago. Conscienc^ will whisper in your
ear, this was your heart, and this was in your tongue, and this was in your
hands, this was thought by you, that was spoken by you, and that was done by
you; that which we had utterly forgotten. How fresh many years after does
Conscience bring it to mind? Conscience took notice of it, and did well observe
it. Thus Conscience is a Power of the Soul taking notice.

3. And bearing witness, it takes notice that it may bear witness, if it
should not take notice it could not bear witness. Can a man bear witness that
which he never knew, which he never saw, nor heard? Romans 2. 14. The Apostle
speaking of the Gentiles says, Having not the Law, they do by nature the
things contained in the Law: these having not the Law, are a Law unto
themselves, which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their
Conscience also ^^eiring witness. It is an old Prover^ial speech, Conscience is
a thousand Witnesses; nay it is more then a thousand or ten thousand Witnesses;
that one Witness is enough to cast us. If Conscience be a Witness, there is no
need of any further Witness. As they said of Christ, What need we any further
witness, we have it from his own mouth? So will the Lord say to the Sinner,
What need any further Witness, his own Conscience is Witness? You read of the
Testimony of Conscience, sometimes it is for, and sometimes against.

1. It is sometimes for us, as 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing (says the
Apostle) the testimony of our Conscience, that in all simplicity and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world.

2. And sometimes against us, and then it is a Hell above ground, a Hell on this
side Hell.

3. It further follows, that Consc^ence is a Power of the Soul takin^ notice
of, and bearing witness of a man's Thoughts, Words, and Actions, so that the
Thoughts shall not escape Consciences observation, nor shall a Word escape
Consciences hearing, nor a Work Consciences recording. And as Conscience finds
the Thoughts, Words, or Actions, either agreeing or not agreeing with the Rule,
it will excuse or accuse. Conscience cannot be a Witness of our Thoughts,
Words, and Actions, whether they be according to the Rule, or contrary to it,
whether they agree with the Rule, or warp from it, unless it be a strict
Observer. And if it find our Thoughts, Words, and Actions to agree with the
Rule, it excuses; if not to agree with the Rule, it accuses: Romans 2. 15.
Their thoughts in the mean while accusing or excusing one another.

4. And then it follows, absolving or condemning. For the truth is, Conscience
is a Judge, a Deputy Judge, which God has set up and given Power to, that
according as it finds Thoughts, Words, and Actions, to be according to Rule, or
not according to Rule, it may either acquit or condemn.

5. And then, it comfort or tormenteth also, as it finds thoughts, words,
and actions, either to agree or not to agree with the Rule. 2 Cor. 1. 12. This
is our rejoicing the Testimony of our Conscience; there is the comfort of
Conscience. And Mark 9. 44. It is a Worm that never dies; there is the torment
of it. Thus you see Conscience is a Power of the Soul, taking notice and
bearing Witness, of all a man's thoughts words and actions; and as it finds them
either agreeing or not agreeing with the Rule, it excuses, or accuses,
absolveth or condemns, comfort or tormenteth. This is called Conscience
(...) It is called Conscience some think ^^cause it is a Knowledge with oth^^
Pray observe God knows, Angels know, Devils know, Men know, and all these
witness, and Conscience knows and witnesses with them. 1. God knows if you
read Job 16. 19. My witness is in Heaven, my record is on high. There is one in
Heaven that knows, and one in Heaven that can witness; though the husband does
not know, though the wife does not know, and father and friend does not know,
yet God knows, and there is one on earth knows, and that is Conscience. God is
my witness, says Paul, Romans 1. 9. God does know it, and can witness it. All
things are naked and open to him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 13. It is a
notable Scripture, Hos. 7. 2. And they consider not in their hearts, that I
remember all their wickedness. Whoever forgets it, and though they themselves
forget it, yet I remember it well enough. They do not consider that I remember
all their wickedness, their own doings have beset them about, they are all
before my face, even what is not be fore the Husbands face and the Wifes face.
God knows what things are acted behind one another backs; all is before Gods
Face, he knows it, Psalm. 139. begin.
and takes notice of it. 2. Angels know it too; the Angels are Ministering
Spirits about some; they are employed here on Earth, though we take no notice
of it. They are in our Congregations and Meetings, and they observe how we
carry our selves there. For this cause ought the Woman to have power on her
head, because of the Angels, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 10. i.e. The Woman
is to be modest in the Congregation because of the Angels. The Lord return
Modesty home again, for Modesty seems to be banished from among us. But do
Angels know? do the good Angels know? Yes, when we do well the good Angels
rejoice: if a Sinne^ be converted, if the lost Sheep be found, Luke 15. 7, 10.
there is joy among the Angels; therefore they know it. 3. The bad Angels know
too, they go about as Observers. You cannot go to the Congregation, but the
Devil makes one there. The Sower goes out to sow the good Seed, then comes the
Enemy, the Devil, and steals it away, Matthew. 13. 19. He also goes about as a
roaring Lion every where, 1 Pet. 5. 8. He goes to and fro in the earth, and
walks up and down in it, Job. 1. 7. observing what People do; for he is the
Accuser of the Brethren, and he will when time serves remember people of what
they have done, though done by his instigation and temptation: see Zech. 3. 1.
Poor Creatures are tempted to destroy themselves; well, God delivers them, and
now they are ashamed. O what ^ shame is this (says the Devil) that thou have
attempted to destroy thy self? how can thou look any body in the face without
shame? go and destroy thy self. This was the case of a poor Creature that I
have twice spoken with: once she attempted to drown her self; I spoke with her,
and gave her the best counsel could: she answered me, I am ashamed, I am
ashamed, I cannot go about any thing. Not many days after she went into a Wood
to cut her own Throat, but God delivered her: but this poor Creature is still
under discontent, the Devil does remember her. I beseech you consider how many
Witnesses there are of all that you do; you think to sin in the dark, and to do
it so that no Eye shall see you, you think to draw the Curtains, and then none
can see you; but you deceive your selves, it is Noon Day with God still, and so
it is with Angels, and with the Devil too; there is nothing hid fra^ them. 4.
Men know, they are (...) Observers. Some have their ey^ (...) their heads, and
see that which should make their eyes weep and trickle down with tears, and if
they have any Zeal for God, the sight of their Eyes will affect their Hearts.
And besides this Conscience also knows, and therefore called Conscience (as
some think) because it knows with others. It knows with God, with Angels,
with Devils, and knows it to be all true which God lays to our charge, and what
the Devil lays to our charge; so that Conscience is a Knowledge together with
others. Romans 9. 1. My Conscience bearing me witness. My Conscience
co-witnessing, my Conscience witnessing together with God; God knows it, and
does witness it; and my Conscience knows it, and does witness it; and my
Conscience together with me knows it.

There is a double Act of the Understanding; there is a Direct Act whereby we
know a thing, and there is a Reflect Act whereby we know that we know it. And
this is the Action of Conscience. Isa. 59. 12. For our transgressions are
multiplied before thee, and our sins they testify against us; for our
transgressions are with us, and as for our iniquities we know them, we know
that we have sinned. So that Conscience is a recoiling or a reflection of the
Soul upon it self; according to that of Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 4.

II. General. I come in the next place to show about what Conscience is
employed* it is employed about the whole man and all his actions. It has a
Commission thus to employ it self about the understanding, how that does act,
about the memory to observe how that does act, about the will how that does
act, and the Affections how they do act, it is employed to observe whether the
man be sanctified or not, and it is employed about his Actions whether they be
good or bad, about our actions toward God or Man, toward our selves or
others. And it is employed about every thing that is either a Sin or a Duty.
Conscience is employed to observe how you eat and drink, it is employed to
observe how you dress and habit your selves, how you buy and sell, and deal and
trade in the World, it is employed to observe how you read the Scripture, pray
in your Family, in your Clozet, and in the Congregation, how you sanctify the
Sabbath, receive Sacraments, how you spend your time, how long you lie a Bed in
a morning, how late you set up at night, and about what; to observe how you
carry your selves alone, and how you carry your selves in Comyany, to observe
what you do in the Streets, or in the Field, in this place or in the other
place, in this Company or in the other Company; it goes along with you, and it
will never leave you. God help me to mind this. I hope you will make the same
prayer for your selves, that I make for my self.

III. General. How Conscience is employed. From the Description of Conscience
which I have given you, you may understand that Conscience has several
Offices, the Office of a Notary or Register, the Office of a Witness or
Accuser, the Office of a Judge or a Condemner, the Office of a Comforter or a
Tormenter; Conscience is employed in such Offices as these are, and Conscience
will first or last be faithful in the execution of them, and it will do it is
Office to purpose

1. It is employed as a Notary or Register to write down all we do; to write it
down as with the Point of a Diamond, to Book it down, and Seal it up, that it
may come to Light again.

2. It is employed as an Accuser when we do amiss, when we warp from the Rule.

3. It is employed as a Judge, to pass sentence of life or death. Oh, Sirs, how
many poor souls are condemned by their own hearts? Their own Consciences tell
them, thou art a Damned Creature, thou art an undone soul; it may be Conscience
as yet does not set in Judgment, it is not Sessions or Assizes time with you,
it may be it is adjourned and put of to a longer time. But assure your selves
the time will come, the time is at hand.

4. Conscience is also employed as a Comforter, as an Acquitter and Absolver if
we do well. 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, etc. we have had our
conversation in the world. What greater rejoicing then this? When Conscience
shall acquit me in the prescence of God, when Conscience shall be able to say
as Hezekiah, Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth and with
a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. Oh what a
comfort will it be when Conscience shall reflect upon it is believing in Christ,
upon it is confession of sin, repentance and tears, sighs and groans for sin.
This is my rejoicing, the testimony of my Conscience; that I have been alone in
a corner in my Clozet, with tears in mine eyes and sorrow in my heart, that I
have rolled my self on Christ, and cast all my ca^e upon him.

5. Then as a Tormenter Conscience is employed. When Conscience shall recoil
and thus reflect upon a man. When thou shoulds^ have been in thy Clozet thou
wast here or there in the Street or in the Field, in the Coffee House or
Taverns; when thou should have been with God alone, thou have been elsewhere.
Thou could lie down and rise up without having God be^fore thine Eyes; thou
could eat and drink without fear and without rule, and buy and sell, and
habi^ thy self without fear. There is a^ much danger in habiting and dressing
our selves as in eating and drinking; O what if this dress should be a snare,
what if this should occasion the committing of Adultery, He that looks upon a
Woman to lust after her, (says Christ) has committed Adultery with her
already in his heart. Says one, There is a fine clear skin, and so says a
second, and a third; but do you know what temptation may lie in a naked skin:
the Lord help us to take heed of it. I would commend you a little Book, it is
but 3 pence price, it is called The Hairy Comet, very fit for an Hairy Age.
This is indeed an Hairy Age; God deliver us from False Hearts, for we can see
almost nothing but False Heads every where. Assure your selves, Conscience will
have a bout with men for this another day.

Conscience will not let this go unobserved; Conscience does write down this,
and will hereafter find a time to read it to you, It may be the Wife will say I
must please my Husband, and the Husband will say I must please my Wise. But
have a care I beseech you to please Conscience, that it may not be against you
another day. See that Conscience be for you, and that Conscience may have no
cause to upbraid you, and torment you another day. Let Jobs care be your care;
let not Conscience reproach you so long as you live. I beseech you earnestly,
let it be your great care to have A Conscience void of offense toward God and
toward Man; toward your selves and others. And if you so do, you will have no
cause to repent your being here to hear this Lesson.

SERMON II.
JOB 27. 6. My Righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my Heart
shall not reproaoh me so long as I live.
THis was Jobs Resolution, why should it not be ours? Those that have felt the
Reproaches of Conscience once, would be loath to feel them a second time. The
very bruit Beasts; when once they have been either in the mire, or in the fire,
will take heed how they come there again. You can hardly force them into a Bog
wherein they have been mired, they will turn this way, and that way, and run
back again upon you, rather then run into the mire wherein they have been
already. A wounded Conscience who can bear? They that have felt that wound, and
have gotten it healed, will take heed how they make another.

The Proposition I gave you was this; It should be our greatest care so to
live, that our Consciences may have no occasion to accuse or reproach us while
we live. Some do so live that their neighbors can have no occasion to reproach
them; some there are that so live, that the very worst have a good word for
them, I have known some that have been so unblamable, of such a sweet
disposition, so kind and courteous to all, and have lived so inoffensively,
that the worst have had a good word for them. But where are they that have or
do carry themselves so, that their Consciences have no occasision to accuse
them, or to reproach them? Commend me to that person if you can. I have already
showed you what Conscience is, and about what it is employed, and how it is
employed.

I come now to the Proof of the Doctrine. This was Jobs care you see; he was
resolved upon it, that he would so walk and so watch that Conscience might have
no occasion to reproach him. And has Job no Fellows? yes many; the Scripture
speaks of such as have made it their care so to walk, that Conscience might
have no just occasion to reproach them. David was one of them, as appears by
what he says Ps. 16. 8. Ps. 119. 3, 112, 113. although there was a time when
he gave Conscience too great occasion to reproach him, and his Conscience did
reproach him to purpose at last. Ah poor David! what broken bones had he? This
was Hezekiah's care, else he could not have had the testimony of his Conscience
for him as he had. Remember (says he, Isa. 38. 3.) O Lord, how I have walked
before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good
in thy sight. Perfect heart, that is, an upright heart; perfection, not of
degrees, but of parts, is there to be understood. There are many such other
places in Scripture, as in the Book of Psalms, Mark the perfect man, and behold
the upright; where you find one word to explain the other. This also was Paul's
care, else could not he have had the testimony of his Conscience as he had.
This is our rejoicing, (says he) the testimony of our Conscience, etc. 2 Cor.
1. 12. it was Paul's exercise, Acts 24. 16. And herein do I exercise my self, to
have always a Conscience, void of offense, toward God and toward Man.

Reason I.
The grounds and Reasons of it follow. One reason why we should take all
possible care that Conscience may have no occasion to reproach us is, because
if occasion be given; these reproaches are unavoidable; I say, these
Reproaches, Vexations, and Accusations of Conscience will be unavoidable there
is no escaping from them: we may give occasion to others, and possibly there
may be some avoiding that which we give occasion of; but here is no avoiding or
escaping in this case. Conscience may be asleep, and Conscience may say nothing
a great while, but at last it will awake and do it is office, in accusing and in
judging, condemning and tormenting. David's Conscience was asleep for a great
while, but afterward Nathan comes to him from the Lord, and rouzeth
Conscience, and then Conscience set most violently upon him; as appears by the
Ps. 51. where he complains of broken bones, and prays that the bones which
were broken might rejoice. So Joseph's Brethren, they heard nothing of
Conscience a great while, but at last Conscience twinges them, at last
Conscience put out his envenomed sting; (no such sting as the sting of
Conscience) at last Conscience takes them by the throat, Genesis 42. 21. And they
said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning [the Blood of] our
Brother, etc. though men do with the Harlot for a great while wipe their
mouths, and say, What evil have we done? As Joseph's Brethren, they sold their
Brother Joseph; Conscience said never a word to them, let them alone a great
while: they came and told their Father a lie, and Conscience said never a word
to them, when they told their Father that Joseph was slain; they saw their
Father Mourning as if he were going down into the Grave, Conscience says
nothing all the while: a Famine comes upon the Land, Conscience yet says
nothing to them: at last they come down into Egypt, there they meet with hard
usage, and are in danger of imprisonment. Now Conscience begins to rouse up
itself like a Lion, to tear and devour; then they cry out, Verily we are guilty
concerning the blood of our Brother. You see Conscience had an awakening time,
though it had been asleep; the Morning came for its awakening. So Judas his
Conscience was asleep for a great while; and one would wonder that it should
ever be so fast asleep as was. Mat. 26. 15. you may read there some passages of
it. He goes to the Chief Priests and makes a Bargain; What will you give me,
and I will deliver Jesus to you? and they covenanted with him for thirty pieces
of Silver: there he makes a bargain for a little Silver to sell his Lord and
Master, and to betray the innocent blood: Conscience says never a word to him.
Further, he sought for opportunity to betray Christ, yet Conscience says
nothing to him, v. 21. when he was come into the presence of his Master, he
came with the Disciples to the Passover, yet Conscience says nothing to him
all the while: when he was at the Passover and eating, Christ tells his
Disciples that one of them should betray him, yet Judas's Conscience says
never a word to him, but lets him alone all this while. Nay further, when
the Disciples at these words were exceeding sorrowful, and began to say every
one of them, Lord, is it I? yet Judas's Conscience says nothing to him. And
Christ said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall
betray me: yet his Conscience was asleep all this while. Further, ver. 24.
Christ pronounces a Woe to that man by whom he should be betrayed; yet the
denunciation of that Woe did not awaken Judas's Conscience; Woe to him; it had
been good for that man he had never been born. It is matter of admiration and
amazement, that his Conscience should be so fast asleep; the Devil entered into
him, and rocked Conscience asleep, till he might be sure to do him mischief
enough; ver. 25. Then Judas, which betrayed him, put the question and said,
Master, is it I? Methinks his Conscience should have flown in his face like a
Mastiff. Nay further, says Christ, Thou have said; thou art the man: and yet
for all this Judas's Conscience was not awake. This is indeed matter of
admiration, that a man's Conscience should be so fast asleep. But how many
Instances of such sleepy Consciences does this very age afford? But does
Judas's Conscience sleep always? No. Then Judas, which betrayed him, when he
saw that Jesus was condemned, he brought again the 30 pieces of Silver to the
Chief Priests and said, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed Innocent blood.
But miserable comforters were those Christ-Buyers, they bought him to be
crucified; they did reply to him when he said, I have sinned; What is that to
us? see thou to that. And he cast down the thirty pieces of Silver in the
Temple, and went and hanged himself. And now his Conscience was so awake that
it would not suffer him to live. I assure you howsoever Conscience may be
asleep for a great while, yet the time will come that Conscience will do it is
office; and therefore it does greatly concern us to take great care that
Conscience may have no occasion to reproach us. O happy Judas if thou had
never made a bargain to sell thy Master, and had never sought opportunity to
betray him! O happy, if thou had never accompanied the Band of Soldiers,
that came to apprehend him! But he came along with the Band of Soldiers, and
gave them the Sign, The Man whom I shall kiss is the Man, hold him fast: yet
Conscience did not reproach him. But let Men do what they can to stop the mouth
of Conscience, it will speak at last and they will be biting words. Carnal
Reasonings cannot stop it, Carnal Pleasures cannot bribe it, nor any variety of
diversions silence it. Cain, you know, he was quiet awhile, Gen* 4. 13. But
after a while Cain's Conscience did reproach him, would not let him alone.
Belshazzar, he is merry a while with his Courtiers and Companions in drinking
Wine in Bowls, but after he falls a trembling, and his knees smote one against
the other, and he grew pale when he saw the hand writing on the wall.
Conscience will fee an hand writing not on the wall, but in this book. I have
spoken with some poor Souls, that could say, This word is against me, and that
word is against me; there are words enough in this Book against you. Conscience
will one day awake and reproach, and will not be bribed, will not have its
mouth stopped. This is one great reason why we should be careful so to live, that
Conscience may not reproach us while we live, for the reproaches of Conscience
are unavoidable.

Reason II.
Another reason why we should take all possible care that* Conscience may have
no occasion to reproach us, is because the reproaches of Conscience are
Intolerable, there will be no bearing of them. A wounded Spirit who can bear?
None are able to bear it. Many instances might be given; you may read Job 7.
13, 14, 15. When I say, my bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my
complaint; then thou scarest me with dreams, and terri^iest me with visions, so
that my soul chooses strangling, and death rather then life. Oh Sirs, what a
case will the terrors and accusations of Conscience bring the poor creature
into? Job 10. 1. My soul is weary of my life; I will leave my complaint upon my
self, etc. Psalm 32. 3, 4. When I kept silence my bones-waxed old through my
roaring all the day, etc. All this was occasioned through the reproaches of
Conscience. I might add, Prove. 12. 25. Heaviness in the heart of a man makes a
man to stoop. I have known those that have been bowed together by reason of the
agonies of Conscience. I knew one, at whose Eyes and Ears Blood has gushed
forth by reason of the Agonies of Conscience. Prove. 17. 22. A merry heart does
good like a medicine, but a broken spirit dries the bones. You know Judas did
choose rather to die than endure it. Bilney and Baynham (after they had abjured)
felt such pangs, such a Hell in their Consciences, till they had openly
professed their sorrow for it, as they would not have felt again for all the
World. Daniel chose rather to be cast into the Lions Den, then to carry a Lion
in his bosom, viz. an enraged Conscience. Richard the Third was a terror to
himself after he had murdered his two innocent Nephews. Charles the Ninth of
Fran^e, after that bloody Massacre by which his Conscienc was enraged, could
not endure to be awakened in the night, without Music or some other diversion.
Thus much for the Reasons of the Point: I proceed to the

Application.
Use 1. Of Reproof. The first Use shall be for Reproof of those that take no
such care to avoid the Reproaches of Conscience, but do that which will be cast
by Conscience as a Reproach upon them another day. How do some for many years
together heap up Fuel to keep a Fire burning within them? No sooner is some
Fuel spent, but there is more Fuel heapt on again; fresh sins are committed,
and after a while these sins come to remembrance, and set the Fire a burning.
It may be a man may weather it out a little, but then more sins come to light,
and that sets the Fire a burning again, and so there is no end. Conscience has
not forgotten any thing done many years ago, but remembers it as if it had been
done but yesterday. You that cannot endure to be reproached, that cannot endure
to hear others reproached, that cannot bear the Reproaches of Men, whenas it
may be they reproach wrongfully; how will you bear (not the false, but) true
Accusations of Conscience? Men may reproach falsely, but Conscience will
reproach truly. Men may reproach thee, and yet thine own Conscience may clear
thee when they accuse thee; but if Conscience reproach thee, then who shall
clear thee? Men may grow weary or ashamed of reproaching thee, but if
Conscience reproach thee, will that grow weary or ashamed? No, never. If some
men reproach us, others may clear us; but if Conscience reproach us, who then
can clear us? This should humble us, that we have given Conscience occasion to
reproach us. 2 Samuel 24. 1. If you have not taken this care to avoid the
Reproaches of Conscience, it will reproach you as it did David, whose Heart
smote him after he had numbered the People: and David said unto the Lord, I
have sinned greatly in that I have done; I beseech thee (O Lord) to take away
the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly. David's Heart smote
him, now his Conscience, now his Conscience, smites and cuts him to the very
Heart. Though his Conscience were quiet a great while, Psalm. 73. 21, 22. yet
afterward he thus complains; Thus my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in
my reins: so foolish was I and ignorant; I was as a beast before thee. If you
neglect Conscience when it points with the finger, and gives direction; assure
your selves, Conscience will have a time to smite with the fifth, and to give
correction, and then there will be no enduring of it: as it was with David when
his Heart smote him, Psalm. 69. 7. If shame covered David's Face when men
reproached him, Oh what shame will cover our Faces when Conscience shall
reproach us! Reproach has broken my heart, (says he) and I am full of
heaviness. I looked for some to take pity, but there was none, and for
comforters, but I found none. Ver. 20. This will be your case and your
complaint when Conscience shall reproach you. Reproach has broken my heart.
They gave me Gall for meat, and Vinegar to drink; says he, Ver. 21. Conscience
will give Gall and Vinegar to us, unless some course be taken for the quieting
of it; if you make it not your care so to live, that Conscience may not
reproach you. To be able to say, For Gods sake I have born reproach, Psalm. 69.
7. will be a comfort: but if for our Lusts sake we bear reproach, what a
Torment will that be? When Conscience shall say, This is for the sake of that
proud Lust, this is for the sake of that drunken Lust, that wanton Lust of
thine; this is for that Passion of thine, that froward and fretful Spirit of
thine: when Conscience shall say, This is for the sake of such a Lust which
thou did indulge, and kept as a sweet morsel under thy tongue,
notwithstanding the persuasions of all Gods Ministers to the contrary; how will thou be able to bear it?

Use 2. Of Exhortation. Take care that Conscience may not have occasion to
reproach you while you live. The Reasons before mentioned may serve as Motives.
The unavoidableness and intolerableness of these reproaches of Conscience,
these are Motives enough to engage us to take all care that Conscience may not
reproach us. Let it be your care to have a Conscience void of offense, (Prove.
15. 15. 2 Cor. 1. 12.) and then Conscience instead of accusing will excuse,
instead of condemning it will acquit you. If you hearken to the voice of
Conscience informed and guided by the Word of God, it will be a continual feast
unto you, Prove. 15. 15. and your daily rejoicing. This is our rejoicing, (says
the Apostle) the testimony of our Conscience that in simplicity and godly
sincerity not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world. When a man has Conscience on his side, this will be
a Cordial in any condition whatsoever, in a Prison, a Cordial in a Dungeon, a
Cordial in a strange Country, and a Cordial in the worst of sufferings that we
(...) meet with. Keep Conscience void of offense, and so live that Conscience
may not reproach you, and all will be well. How may we so live, you will say,
that Conscience may not reproach us while we live? or if we have so lived, that
Conscience has had cause to reproach us, how may we get those reproaches wiped
off, and get Conscience quiet again? That I shall reserve for another
opportunity.

SERMON III.
JOB 27. 6. My Righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my Heart
shall not reproach me so long as I live.
HAving already showed you what Conscience is, and about what it is employed,
and how it is employed, and given you several reasons why we should make it our
great care so to live, that Conscience may not reproach us while we live; and
having made some Use of the Doctrine, I now come to resolve two questions or
cases.

1. The first is, how may we so live, walk and act, and carry our selves, that
Conscience may have no cause to reproach us another day?

2. If we have so lived, so walked, so acted, and so carried our selves, that
Conscience has had just cause to reproach us, and does reproach us; what is to
be done, that the reproaches of Conscience may be wiped off, that Conscience
may be quiet, and cease to accuse and condemn, cease to vex and torment? These
are the two cases I am to answer.

Case 1. How may we so live, walk, act and carry our selves, that Conscience
may have no cause to reproach us? You see that Job did so live and carry
himself, that though his friends did reproach him, his Conscience did not
reproach him; though his friends did charge him, yet his Conscience did
discharge him, though his friends did condemn him, yet his Conscience did
acquit him. He did so live, that he was able to maintain his Integrity and
Uprightness; and doubtless it is not a thing impossible, but we do not set to
it, we do not set about it in earnest. If we be Christians indeed, and not
almost Christians, we might so live as Conscience might have no just cause to
reproach us. O Sirs, Relations may reproach us, Wives may reproach Husbands,
and Husbands reproach Wives, Children may reproach Parents, and Servants
reproach their Masters, and one Neighbor reproach another; but it is possible
so to live, that Conscience all this while may be at peace, and not reproach
us. Possibly you may be ready to think and say within your selves, Would we
could tell how we might so live, pray let us have some directions how we may so
live that Conscience may not reproach us. But before I give counsel should not
I know of you whether you will follow it? And in case you will not follow it,
why should I give it? Ask your selves therefore, if the Minister shall give us
no other counsel then what God himself gives us, should not I follow it? Sirs,
if I give you any other counsel then what God in his holy Word does give you, I
would entreat you not to follow it; nay, if you set it at naught I shall not be
offended. Consider what Jethro said to Moses, Exodus 18. 23. If thou shall do
this thing, and God command thee so; so say I Therefore consider whether God
say as I say, whether God command you so; if so, pray take heed how you do set
at naught the Counsel of God. Now the first Direction which I shall give you is
this.

Direction I.
Set God always before you. And this will be a means so to live, that
Conscience may not reproach you. Assure your selves there is no time wherein
Gods Back is turned, no time wherein Gods Eye is not upon you: if you can find
a time when God is absent, you may take your liberty and do what you list. You
know of what force the Masters presence is among the Servants; of what force
the Parents presence is among the Children to restrain them; of what force the
presence of a Minister, or a grave, serious, and holy Christian, is to restrain
People from what otherwise they would take liberty to do: Sure Gods Presence
should be of greater force to restrain us, if we did but live in the
Apprehension thereof. O if we could but set God always before us, what manner
of persons should we be in all holy Conv^rsation, all holy cogitation, and in
all holy communication too! David did set God always before him, and why should
not we do so too? Psalm. 16. 8. I have set the Lord always before me. O then it
was, that David was a man after Gods own heart; then it was that David was such
a Praying man, and such a Praising man, and such an Holy and Heavenly man, when
he did set the Lord always before him. You know how persons will carry
themselves in the sight of Men, if they have any thing to do in the sight of
others, how they will do it; O that we could do all we do as in the sight of
God. This was the charge that was given to Abraham by God himself, Genesis 17. 1.
Walk before me, and be thou perfect; that is, upright. There is no such way to
be upright. as to live in the Apprehension of the Presence of God, and to have
this always run in our thoughts, God hears, God sees, and God knows. O that
this were written upon your Desks and Shop Boards, God sees; O that this were
written upon your Tables, God sees; Oh that this were written upon your Looking
Glasses, God sees; O that this were written upon all your Attire and Dresses,
God sees; and O that this were written upon your Naked Breasts and Shoulders,
God sees, and upon your Faces and Foreheads too. I do assure you (Sirs) that
God does see you; O that you would live in the continual Apprehension of it.
God sees thee, God knows what all your thoughts are, what all your designs are,
what all your sayings and doings are. Be ever thinking, God knows, God hears,
God sees. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths, Prove.
3. 6. This will make you careful to keep Gods Precepts, if in all your ways you
look upon God as your Observer and Overseer. This was that which made David
careful to observe Gods Precepts, Psalm. 119. 168. I have kept thy precepts and
thy testimonies. O blessed David, how did thou do this! He tells you in the
next words, For all my ways are before thee. I could heartily wish that you
would often and seriously read and consider these three or four scriptures; Job
34. 21, 22. For his (...) are upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goings.
There is no darkness or shadow of death, where the Workers of iniquity may hide
themselves. There is no hiding from God, be sees all our goings; we cannot set
one foot before another but God sees it. Alas, alas, if a man do but go out of
doors God sees it, if he goes into the Field God sees it, if he goes to other
Houses God sees it, if he goes to his own House God sees it too. Prove. 15. 3.
The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good. Prove.
5. 2. The ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his
goings. I desire you once a week to read over the former part of the 139 Psalm;
if I should desire you to read it once a day, it would not be lost labor. You
will see there is no going out of the sight and presence of God. Verily (Sirs)
to set God always before us, and to live in the Sight and Apprehension of the
Presence of God, this would have such an influence upon our Thoughts, Words,
and Works, that it would make them pleasing to God; and if so, Conscience would
never reproach us for them; for Conscience will not reproach us for doing that
which is pleasing to God. Thus much for the first Direction.

Direction II.
Set up Gods Will revealed in his Word as the Rule of all your Thoughts, Words
and Actions; as the rule of all you do in your general calling, and of all you
do in your particular calling; as a rule of all your natural, civil, and
religious Actions; set up the Will of God revealed in his Word, as the rule of
your all. Let it be the rule of your carriage toward God, of your carriage
toward men, toward your selves, and toward others. This is Scripture direction,
the Counsel which the Holy Ghost gives; therefore I beseech you seriously
consider of it and follow it. Psalm. 119. 6. The shall not I be ashamed, when I
have respect unto all thy Commandments: and in the 9th. verse a Question is
put Wherewithal shall a young man cleans his way? (the answer follows) By
taking heed thereto according to thy Word; doing all according to Rule What
has a Child a Copy for, but to write after it? and what has the Mason a Line
and a Plummet for, but to build by it? Let the Word of God be thy Lamp and thy
Light. Psalm. 119 105. Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, wild a light unto my
Path. Order your steps according to the Word of God, as David prayed, Psalm.
119. 133. and then you will not stumble, nor give Conscience any occasion of
reproaching you: You are careful, when you walk in the Street, to keep out of
the Chanal, to keep out of the way that may pollute and defile you; Oh Sirs,
why do we not order our steps according to the Word of God* Why do we not keep
the path? Why go we out of the path? Poor David did so sometimes; therefore the
prays, Psalm. 119. 176. I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy Servant,
for I do not forget thy Commandments. Would you not be willing, that Mercy and
Peace might be upon you? Gal. 6. 16. As many as walk according to this rule
peace be upon them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Beware, my friends,
of setting up false rules, to your selves, and I beseech you, let not these
directions which I am giving you be out of mind when I am out of sight. I pray
beware of setting up false rules; I shall name sour, which we are very prone to
walk by.

1. Beware of setting up the practice of others whether great or good for your
rule; the practices of good men are not always agreeable to the rule as they
should be. Ministers and others may step aside, and too often do; therefore
beware of setting up the practice of others, whether great or good, to be your
rule, Remember you are to follow others as they follow Christ. You will say,
this was the practice of such a Minister, this is the practice of such a
Professor; but do they walk as Christ walked? If they follow Christ thou may
follow them; but if they do not follow Christ, we must not follow them, be they
who they will.

2. Beware of setting up the opinions of others, be they never so learned, for
your rule, though they be the greatest Doctors in the World, and called Rabbi
never so much. Set not up the Opinion of any for your rule, any further then
they have the Word of God for their Opinion. When God speaks we must consider
who, but when Man speaks we must consider what; I say when God speaks we must
not consider what but who, but when Man speaks we must not consider who but
what. We know God cannot err, but we know that Man may err*

3. Beware of setting up the Customs of the times and places you live in for
your rule. Oh this is the Custom of the time, and this is the Custom of the
place, and what shall I be like no body? Do not make this your rule. Tell me
where in all the Bible does God allow this for a rule, to walk according to the
Custom of the times and places wherein we live?

4. Beware of setting up the Multitude for your example, follow not a multitude
to do evil. Let not this fatisfie you, nor serve your turn, to say, Why, every
one does so; it is general and common, the Multitude does it; what shall I be
singular, like no body in the World? Assure your selves that a Multitude is not
a Law and Rule for you to walk by. I appeal to you, Sirs, whether this be not
good counsel, whether it would not be a great help to, and furtherance of, the
peace and quiet of your Consciences, to set up the Will of God revealed in in
his Word for the rule of your all.

Direction III.
Set up Gods Glory as the end of all. If you would not have Conscience to
reproach you another day, set up Gods Glory as the end of all that you do.
Often say to thine own soul, How does this tend to the Glory of God? will God
be Honored by this? will God be Glorified by this? When you are upon any
undertaking, or when you are about any natural, civil, or religious Action,
think seriously with your selves, What do I aim at? what is my design in doing
this or that? Is it the Glory of God? O Sirs, if it be the pleasing of your
selves, Conscience will be displeased; if it be the pleasing of the flesh,
Conscience will be displeased to purpose; if it be the pleasing of the World,
the pleasing of one another, and not the pleasing of God, Conscience will be
displeased another day: for Conscience is never pleased when the Glory of God
is not designed. 1 Cor. 10. 31. that Scripture should be considered by my self
and you. Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the Glory of
God; do all that God may be honored. Sirs, You are not your own, for you are
bought with a price: glorify God with your Bodies, and with your Spirits,
which are Gods. I appeal unto your Consciences, whether this would not be the
way to keep Conscience quiet, that it should have no cause to reproach you, if
you did but set up the Glory of God as the end of all. Certainly all we do will
be never the less profitable or pleasurable, contentful or satisfactory, to us,
for making Gods Glory the end of all; but a thousand to one, it would make
every thing by so much the more profitable, pleasurable and satisfactory to us,
by how much more we make the Glory of God the end thereof. O Sirs, how sweetly
will that meat go down that is eaten with an eye to the Glory of God? How
comfortable will those dealings and trading in the World be, that are done with
an eye to the Glory of God?

Direction IV.
If you would so live, that Conscience may have no occasion to reproach you,
Set up an Inquisition Court in your own souls. You have heard talk of an
Inquisition in Spain, and in other Popish Countries; Oh that you would set up
an Inquisition Court in your own souls. We have Courts of Inquiry among us; Oh
keep a weekly, nay a daily, Court of Inquiry in your own hearts. Commune with
your own hearts every day, according to the Example of David, Psalm. 4. 4.
Examine your selves often, be not seldom in the work of self-examiniation. 2.
Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves, prove your own selves, whether you be in the
Faith: know ye not that Christ is in you? Except ye be Reprobates or
unapproved: whether you be reprobate Silver, that is, not current. Examine your
selves, prove your own selves. Ps. 119. 59. I thought on my ways (says David)
and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. Oh think on your ways, say often to
thine own soul, What am I? what do I? how live I? whether go I? what will be my
condition through all Eternity? Will such questions do you any harm? I appeal
to your selves that are able to Judge. O that I could get you to reckon often
with your selves, and to keep a Petty Sessions in your own souls, and sit as
Judges in a Court of Inquiry upon all your thoughts, words and Actions, saying
to them, Come hither my thoughts, come hither my words, come hither my works,
come let me examine you, come let me compare you with the rule; would not this
prevent the accusations of Conscience if you did but reckon with your selves
once every day, if it were but one quarter of an hour in the day? See Jer. 8. 6.

Direction. V.
Set open your ears to the voice of Conscience, when it is enlightened and
directed by the Word of God. When Conscience has information from the Word of
God, set open your ears to its voice, hearken to the voice of Conscience; as
Abraham once by Gods command hearkened to the voice of Sarah, Genesis 21. 12. And
God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the Lad,
and because of the Bondwoman: In all Sarah has said unto thee hearken unto
her voice. Why so say I to you: in all that Conscience informed by the Word
shall say unto you, hearken unto its voice. Be subject for Conscience sake, is
the Command, Romans 13. 5. This Subjection for Conscience sake to those that are
in Authority God has commanded; Conscience will clamor, upbraid, and
reproach, if Gods Commands be not obeyed. Hearken to the voice of Conscience,
hearken to the Directing voice, and the Reproving voice, of Conscience. Ps. 16.
7 My reins instruct me, etc. that is, my inmost thoughts and secret motions do
instruct me. Hearken to its Directing voice when it says, This is the way,
walk in it, Isa. 30. 21. When thou hear a voice behind thee, saying, This is
the way, walk in it; hearken also to its Reproving voice, to its Correcting
voice. Thus David expostulates, Psalm. 4. 2. and 43. Why art thou cast down, O
my Soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? Trust still in God. Why art
thou thus diffident? why art thou thus distrustful? Thus David reproves
himself, and chides himself. Psalm. 77. 10. And I said, this is my infirmity.
But I will remember the years of the right hand of the most high. And I said,
this is my infirmity, this is my frailty; I am to blame. Thus he checks
himself, and hearkens to the voice of Conscience.

Direction VI.
Set your selves against all sin; both great and small. Fight against all sin,
oppose all sin; allow not your selves in the practice of any known sin, nor in
the omission of any known Duty. Paul was very careful herein, Acts 8. 23. And
Paul earnestly beholding the Council said, Men and Brethren, I have lived in
all good conscience before God unto this day. And how came he to live in all
good Conscience? it was before God. If we could well remember the first
Direction, we should the better live in all good Conscience. And herein (says
the Apostle) do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of offense
toward God and toward Men, Acts 24. 16. Pray for us (says the Apostle) for we
trust we have a good Conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. Mark,
in all things; so Psalm. 119. 101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way,
etc. Verse 128. I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right,
and I hate every false way. Pray observe here are three Universals: if you
would not have Conscience reproach you, set your selves against all sin,
against the Commission of all Sin, and against the Omission of all Duties both
great and small. If you be not faithful in the least, you will not be trusted
in the greatest. Luke 16. 12. Make Conscience of evil Thoughts, of idle and
unsavory Words and seeming Oaths; and according to the Rule abstain from all
appearance of evil, from all semblance of evil, 1 These. 5. 22. Take heed of
Deceit, and of every thing that has the show and semblance of evil. Take heed
of Wanton Dresses; take heed of ensnaring Attire: I am confident that many poor
Creatures have been caught as it were in a Snare and Trap by the Habit and
Dresses of the Professors o^ our Age. Alas, what Inventions have we to draw
Eyes, both behind and before, to this part of the Body, and to the other part
of the Body? The Lord be merciful to us, is this the way to escape the
Reproaches of Conscience? O Friends, take heed of Deceit in your dealings; take
heed of Lying for advantage; take heed of the Husk and Kernel of the Grape;
though we drink not the Wine, may we not eat the Grape? If not the Grape, may
we not eat the Husk of the Grape? And if not the the Husk, yet may we not eat
the Kernel of the Grape? No. Number. 6. 4. This is the Law of the Nazarite, All
the days of his Separation he shall eat nothing that is made of the Vine Tree,
from the Kernels even to the Husk. He must not drink Wine, that was the Law of
the Nazarite* That he might not be ensnared no^ under a temptation to drink
Wine, he must not meddle with any thing coming of the Vine, not the very Husk
or the Kernel, lest he be ensnared. Our first Mother Eve was drawn to Eating by
Seeing: O take heed of Temptations and Snares, and be not a Snare or Temptation
unto others; but make Conscience of all sin, whether great or small. Nay
further, if there be any question or doubt about any thing, whether it be a sin
or no, what shall we do then? Some say it is a sin, and some say it is not a
sin; and possibly some good men may say it is not a sin, and some good men may
say it is a sin; what shall we do in such a doubtful matter? I shall quickly
resolve you; Take the surest side. In such a case when the matter is doubtful,
the surest way now is not to make or meddle at all with it.

Was there not Meat enough for them to eat in the Primitive Times, besides that
which did give offense? Some doubt whether it was lawful to eat of this or that
meat; what need we eat of it? Paul says in such a case* I will never eat flesh
while the world stands, rather than offend a weak brother. It is not lawful,
says one; I will do it for all that, says another. They are not of Paul's
Spirit. And as for Dresses and Habits, are there not enough besides those which
are questionable, and which both Ancient and Modern Divines have all condemned
as sinful? Possibly some will assume a greater Liberty, and we are now
generally grown to a greater Latitude; but tell me, Is there not enough of
other sorts, but we must use such Habits and Dresses as are doubtful,
questionable, and offensive? God help us to consider of it. In all matters
doubtful and questionable, still take the surest side* If you do that which is
questionable and doubtful, you may sin, and possibly it may be found to be a
sin at the Day of Judgment; and if so, what will you do then? It was the speech
of Mr. Bolton concerning Long Hair; You say the wearing of Long Hair is not a
sin, but what if it be found at the Day of Judgment to be a sin? You will then
wish, O that I had left it off, or never used it. Men are not infallible,
Ministers are not infallible, no not the best of them; you are not to ground on
them as if they could not be mistaken; therefore in all doubtful cases choose
the surest side. There is Meat enough to eat besides that which is doubtful;
and there is Apparel enough to wear besides that which is offensive and
questionable. If you would so live that Conscience may have no cause to
reproach you, my Counsel to you is, Take always in doubtful matters the surest
side, which is not to meddle or make with it at all; for if you do it you may
sin, and at Judgment it may be found to be sin. But if you do it not, you are
safe and free.

Direction. VII.
Set up Christ as your pattern. If you would have Conscience not to reproach you
another day, take Christ for your example. 1 Pet. 2. 21, 23. For even hereunto
were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us leaving us an example, that
ye should follow his steps, etc. We should pace after him, we ought to walk as
Christ walked. If you would have Conscience not to reproach you, make Christ
your pattern; think, speak and do, as you are persuaded Christ would, were he in
your case, were he in your place on earth: speak, think and do, as you think he
would; ask your selves, Would Christ neglect his Fathers business as I do?
Would he mis-spend his time, and tritle it away, that went about continually
doing good? Would Christ have served one Lust, and another Lust, as I do, and
have made provision for the flesh to fulfill the Lusts ^hereof? Would he give
himself to ri^^ing and drunkenness, to chambering and wantonness as I do? As
you would ^ot have Conscience to reproach you, make Christ your Pattern and
Ex^mplar.

Direction VIII.
Sit under a Powerful Ministry. If ^ou would prevent the reproaches of
Conscience, love and like that Mini^er best that speaks to Conscience ^ost; do
not hate him that rebukes, ^s they Amos 5. 10. but say as Da^id, (Psalm. 141.
5.) Let the righteous nite me, it shall be a kindness; and ^t him reprove me,
it shall be an excel^nt oil, that shall not break my head. Let him smite me, I
will not be of^ended with him, I will not smite a^ain; when he fmites me, it
shall be ^s a precious Ointment. The mean^ng is, Let him smite me with
Re^roofs, let him reprove me, deal ^ithfully and plainly with me. And (Sirs) I
fear that my self and many of my Brethren in the Ministry may have much to
answer for another day* for that we do not deal more faithfully, more plainly
and downrightly with Souls. Ministers are under a Temptation to please their
Hearers, as well as others, and are loath to offend them; but God forbid that
Christ's Ministers should be Servants of Men, or Men-pleasers, or
Women-pleasers. Let them look to it, that they please their Lord and Master
Christ.

Direction IX.
Set upon nothing, on which you cannot, on which you dare not, pray for a
blessing. Never undertake any thing, never be employed about any thing, upon
which thou do not dare to pray for a blessing. 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5. Every thing is
sanctified by the Word and Prayer. I must have a Word to be my Rule for it, and
I must make a Prayer for a Blessing on it, else I can not except that it should
be sanctified and blessed to me. Now (Sirs) how many things are there that we
do, that we dare not pray to God for a Blessing on? It may be you spend two or
three hours at the Looking Glass, can you pray for a Blessing upon the time so
spent? can you pray for a Blessing upon your dressing and attiring your selves,
and habiting your selves in the way and manner that you do? can you pray, O
Lord, let this way of habiting and dressing my self be for thy Glory, and for
my Good, and for the example of others? Dare any of you go and make a prayer to
God foe this? Adventure not upon any thing upon which you dare not pray for a
Blessing.

Direction X.
If you would not have Conscience to reproach you, Set about all in the name
and strength of Christ. For that is the rule which the Apostle gives, Col. 3.
17. And whatsoever ye do i^ word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Do all according to the will and the command of Christ, do all by the
strength and help of Christ, and do all to the Glory of Christ.

1. Do all according to the will and command of Christ. In Mat. 18. 20. The
name of Christ signifies his command.

2. Do all by the strength and help of Christ. In this sense also is the name
of Christ used, Luke 10. 17. and Psa. 44. 5. Luke. 17.

3. Do all to the Glory of Christ, which is sometimes to be understood by his
name, as Psalm. 31. 3. Oh that People would ask themselves, Is this according to
the will and command of Christ that I am now a doing? can I expect the strength
and help of Christ in that I am now a doing? is this for the Glory of Christ
which I am now ^ doing? When thou art about (...) Duty, say to Christ, all our
sufficien^^cy is of thee, we have none of our own, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Joh. 15. 5. Say
as Paul, I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me, Phil. 4.
13. And thus I have given you ten Directions how you may so live that
Conscience may not reproach you.

Case II.
I come now to speak a little to the second case. What if we have neglected
these rules and directions which have been laid before us. If you have
neglected to walk according to rule, and have given Conscience just cause to
reproach you; and if Conscience does reproach you, and if you ask me, How may
we get the reproaches of Conscience wiped off, and get Conscience quiet again?
I answer in two words, Repent and Believe.

1. Repent of that before the Lord which Conscience reproacheth you for, mourn
for it, be ashamed of it, judge and condemn your selves for what is past,
resolve against it for the time to come; this is a good course* If we confess
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from
all unrighteousness, 1 Cor. 11. 31. For if we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged; and if we acknowledge our transgressions, and accept of the
punishment of our iniquity. Read Lev. 26. 40, 41, 42. There is not a better way
to wipe off ^he reproaches of Conscience, then by the tears of repentance.
Follow the example of that Woman that came behind our Lord and Savior, and
washed his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. A
service perhaps that you would be loath to put your hair to; but, Sirs, if you
would have Conscience to be quiet, then seriously set upon the work of
Repentance.

2. Believe. By Faith set Christ's Blood on work, to wipe off the aspersions and
reproaches of Conscience, to purify and pacify Conscience, get Conscience
sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, Heb. 9. 14. You read of one Mat. 15. 28.
that set the Pity and Power of Christ on work to make her Daughter whole. Jesus
answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is thy Faith! Be it to thee even as
thou will. Christ seemed not to regard her a while, but she followed him, and
set his Pity and Power on work. Faith will set the Blood of Christ on work, to
wipe of the reproaches of Conscience. The Centurions Faith set Christ on work
to heal his Servant, Lord (says he) my Servant lies at home sick of the
Palsy grievously tormented. And Jesus says unto him, I will come and heal
him. The Centurion answered and said, Lord I am not worthy that thou should
come under my Roof, but speak the word only, and my Servant shall be healed.
And Jesus said unto the Centurion, Go thy way, and as thou have believed so be
it done unto thee. And his Servant was healed in the self same hour Mat. 8. 13.

The Lepers Faith did set Christ on work Mat. 8. 2, 3. And there came a Leper
and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean. And
Jesus put forth his hand and touched him, saying, I will, be thou clean: and
immediately his Leprosy was cleansed. The Father of the Child that had a deaf
and a dumb Spirit, his Faith set Christ on work, Mark 9. 23, 24, 25. Jesus
says unto him, If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that
believes. And straight way the Father of the Child cried out with tears,
Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief. The Faith of the Woman diseased with an
Issue of Blood set Christ on work, Mat. 9. 21. For she said within her self, If
I may but touch the Hem of his Garment I shall be whole. And it follows, the
Woman was made whole from that hour. The Faith of the poor Leper set Christ or
work, Luke 17. 19. And Jesus said unto him, Thy faith has made thee whole.

And likewise the Woman's Faith ( Luke 7. 48.) set Christ on work for the pardon
of her sins; he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven thee. And (ver. 50.)
Christ tells her, Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace.

And likewise the Faith of blind Bartimeus (Mar. 10. 51, 52.) sets Christ's
Power and Pity on work, and obtained Healing. And the Faith of the two blind
men in Matthew. 9. 27, 28, 29, 30. Christ touched their eyes and said, According
to your faith, so be it unto you. And their Eyes were opened.

O if you could but (according to these Examples) set Faith on work for the
healing of your Souls, Conscience would be quiet. Thus bespeak and expostulate
with thine own Conscience, and say, It is true (Conscience) I have sinned, and
deserved to be reproached and condemned, but I fly to the Blood of Christ for
cleansing, and I apply that by Faith. Nay (says Conscience) if thou fly to
that City of Refuge, I can then no longer pursue after thee; thou art safe
enough from me. If thou make the Blood of Christ thy Refuge, thou art then
secured from all the Storms, and Terrors, and Reproaches of Conscience. If you
would not have Conscience upbraid you, accuse and condemn you, set about the
work of Repentance and Faith, and then whatsoever cause you have given
Conscience to reproach you, it will reproach you no more, it will be quiet and
at peace with you; always provided that you set about this work of Faith and
Repentance seriously and in good earnest. Consider what has been said, and the
Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.
Books printed for and are to be sold by John Hancock, at the Sign of the Three
Bibles in Popes Head Alley in Cornhill.
TWelve Books lately published by Mr. Tho. Brooks, late Preacher of the Gospel
at Margarets New Fishstreet.

1. Precious Remedies against Satan's Devices, or Salve for Believers and
Unbelievers Sores: being a Companion for those that are in Christ or out of
Christ.

2. Heaven on Earth (...) a Serious Discourse touching a Well-grounded
Assurance of Man's Everlasting Happiness.

3. The Unsearchable Riches of Christ held forth in 22 Sermons.

4. Apples of Gold for Young Men and Women.

5. A String of Pearls, or the best things reserved till last.

6. The Mute Christian under the Smarting R^^^ with Sovereign Antidotes against
the most miserable Exigents.

7. An Ark for all Gods Noah's in a stormy day.

8. The Crown and Glory of Christianity, in 48 Sermons on Heb. 12. 14.

9. The Privy Key of Heaven, or a Discourse of Closet Prayer.

10. An Heavenly Cordial for such as have had or escaped the Plague.

11. A Cabinet of choice Jewels, or a Box of Precious Ointment, containing
special Ma^^^ Rules, and Directions, in order to^^ (...) clearing up of a Man's
Interest in Christ, and his Title to all the Glory of another World.

12. Londons Lamentations.

^ The Godly Man's Ark, in several Sermons. To which is added M* Moors Evidences
for Heaven. By Edmund Calamy, B. D. at Aldermanbury.

Christ's Communion with his Church Militant: by Nich (...) ^ckyer.

Sin the Plague of Plagues: by Ralph ^enning.

A true Narrative of those two never be forgotten Deliverances, one from ^he
Spanish Invasion in 88, the other from the Hellish Powder Plot, Nov. 5. ^605.
by Mr. Sam. Clark.

The Accurate Accountant, or London Merchant: being Instructions for ^ceping
Merchants Accounts. By Tho. Brown, Accomptant.

Short Writing the most (...) Exact, Lineal, and speedy (...) that has ever
yet been obtained. By Theophilus Metcalfe.

Also a Book called a Schoolmaster to it, explaining all the Rules thereof.

A Word of Advice to Saints, or a choice Drop of Honey from the Rock Christ

(...) Matthews Legacy to his Chil^^^^ (...) full of good counsel.

(...) ^^^t Description of New York.

^INIS.

