THE Miraculous Conformist: OR An account of several Marvailous CURES
performed by the stroaking of the Hands of Mr VALENTINE GREATARICK, WITH A
Physical Discourse thereupon, In a Letter to the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire
With a Letter Relating some other of His Miraculous Cures, attested by E.
Foxcroft M.A. and Fellow of Kings-Colledge in Cambr: BY HENRY STUBBE, Physician
at Stratford upon Avon in the County of Warwick.

Non ideo negari debet quod est apertum; quia comprehendi non potest quod est
occultum. OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for Ric: Davis,
1666.

To his very worthy and Learned Friend Dr THOMAS WILLIS, Doctor in Physique,
and Professor of Natural Philosophy in OXFORD.
SIR,
I Doubt not but the fame of the performances of Mr GREATERICK may have raised
in you a Curiosity to be better informed about the reality thereof. I have
given Mr Boil an hasty account thereof in a Letter, which I send now to you,
that you may not be ignorant of it. It may seem improper to Dedicate that to
one which is sent to another: but whether it be that I am too busy, or too lazy
to Write more: or that I manage my friendships with less of ceremony and
formality then usual; I have resolved upon this course: and I am confident
that if I am in an error you have goodness enough to pass it by: The
suppositions I go upon depend so much upon the Doctrine of Fermentation, that I
could not but think of you when I writ it: and who is a more competent judge of
the Subject here debated, then the best of Philosophers, and Physicians? It may
seem equitable that I tell you why I call the Gentleman the Miraculous
Conformist: many strange reports have and do run of him; but he is reclaimed
from all that is fanatique; and this gift of Healing was bestowed on him, since
the Restoration of his Sacred Majesty, and the restitution of the Doctrine and
Discipline of the English Church: God dealing with him, as the Shepherd in the
Parable, who expressed more kindness to the lost sheep, being found; then to
the ninety-nine that had not strayed. I have admired much in him, that Diseases
carrying so great a resemblance in their Nature, as to be thought the same, and
to reside in the same part, are stroaked out diverse ways! That he should be
able to tell, that upon his first stroaking the Patient should be worse, and
cured by a second: as he did in the Lameness of Mr Thomas Porter, my very
worthy and good Friend: He told him, he could not set his Leg anew; but that
he would Cure his pain therein; yet at first it would seem worse then before
his touch: which proved true; and yesterday I was with him in Worcestershire,
and found him able to walk three miles without pain. You see how here his touch
strengthened a part, that was incurably weakened by being broken, and ill set: so
that the painfulnesse seemed inseparable from the misfortune occasioning it. I
submit all my explication of the accident to you: if you read it over twice,
you do more then ever I had the patience to do: I know many imperfections will
occur in it, some whereof were voluntary, knowing that the Learning of the
Person I writ to, needed not to be troubled with petty Illustrations: Some
defects have happened thorough haste and inadvertency; it being all written
with one impetus of thoughts and pen, just as I came from Ragly. It is
nothing to say, some have already approved the Discourse, if Mr Boil, and you
dissent. I have only time to tell you, that, without the noise of much talk,
and frequent addresses and applications, I shall never cease to admire you, and
to be

Straford upon Avon Febr: 17. 1665. Sir, Your very humble Servant Henry Stubbe.

SIR,
SInce the best and most agreeable retribution I can make you for the honor
you do me in your remembrances, and all your other signal favors, is but to
gratify your curiosity with any remarkable intelligence that may advance either
Physic, or Philosophy; I shall endeavor to be as generous in my
acknowledgments to you, as you have always been in obliging me. Since my last
unto you, my Lord Conway did me the honor particularly to invite me to his
House and acquaintance, giveing me withal a fair opportunity of conversing
with Mr Greatericks, and beholding several of those performances, the report
whereof as it gives just causes of astonishment to you that are more remote, so
the effects fill with admiration, the most learned or suspicious beholders. In
truth they are such, that he is not at all obliged to the ignorant for the
esteem he has acquired, nor is it possible for the most tender or
superstitious and censorious Zealots to destroy his repute. He is a man of a
graceful personage and presence, and if my phantasy betrayed not my judgment,
I observed in his Eyes and meene a vivacitie and spritelinesse that is nothing
common. As far as I could inform my self by a long and private discourse,
he is a man of a very good life, of tender and charitable Principles, as
extensive as the effects of his goodness are. He professes Conformity unto
the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, yet without that
censoriousnesse whereby some signalise themselves; his thoughts concerning
himself are modest and humble, and he presumes so well of others, that even in
some colorable circumstances, he regulates his apprehensions by the revealed
mercies of God, and not the severity of men. In fine, without prejudice to this
Age be it said, he seemed to me by his faith, and by his charitablenesse, to
include in his soul some grains of the Golden Age, and to be a relic of
those times when Piety, and Miracles were sincere. I am more full in this
Character of him, because some will be very inquisitive herein: though
otherwise the gift of healing be a gratia grati; data, not gratum faciens; and
such as may be conferred, on Judas, (going to Samaria) and others, who at the
day of judgment shall say, Lord, have we not Prophesyed in thy Name? and in thy
Name have cast-out Devils: and in thy Name done many wonderful works. I
enquired of him, how he came by this miraculous gift of healing; And he
replied, that it was the grace of God in him; which he understood at first by a
strong and powerful impulse in him to essay it: and this motion was so
prevalent upon him, that it incessently run in his mind, nor could any
business, how serious or religious soever, divert him from those cogitations:
insomuch that even his life seemed burdensome to him thorough the violence of
the supposed temptation. He imparted this trouble to his Wife, who condemned
those resveries, and desired him to abandon them: in this perplexity, he heard
frequently a voice within him (audible to none else) encouraging to the trials:
and afterward to correct his unbelief, the voice aforesaid added this Sign,
that his right Hand should be dead, and that the stroaking of his left Arm
should recover it again: the events whereof were fully verified to him three
Nights together by a successive infirmity and Cure of his Arm. Hereupon he set
himself to the charitable improvement of that talent which God had given him;
cureing at first only Cancers in Women's breasts, and the King's Evil: after
which, by the suggestion of his accustomed impulse, he attempted the Cure of
other Diseases, according as he found himself prompted thereunto from within.
He was, and is still a stranger to all Physique and Surgery: In the Cure of
some Tumors, he uses incision, though that process be but lately taken up,
after that he observed that the power of his touch did not discuss all, but
ripen some humors. The fame of his performances spread all over Ireland and
England, and multitudes went from Bristoll unto him. Hereupon the Right
Honorable the Lord Conway employes Deane Rust to enquire into the truth of
these Accidents, and finding matter of fact to justify the relations from
excessive verity, he procures him to come out of Ireland, to try if he might
give any ease to that excellent Lady of his, the pains of whose head, as great
and as unparalleld as they are, have not made her more known or admired at home
and abroad, then have her other endowments. Although his hand proved not so
fortunate to that Honorable Lady, as was wished (he not being able to
alleviate or remove that headache, which had eluded the greatest skill, and
most effectual remedies, that England or France yielded) yet did, he during his
stay at Ragly, atchieve those things which caused him to be followed and
admired by many thousands, who if they can say he sometimes failed, yet ought
not represent him as an Impostor. I do not relate unto you the reports of
interested Monks and Friars concerning things done in Monasteries and private
Cells; An infinite number of the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy of VVarwick-shire
and Worcestershire, persons too understanding to be deceived, and too
Honorable and Worthy to deceive, will avow, that they have seen him publicly
cure the lame, the blind, the deaf, the perhaps not unjustly supposed
Daemoniacks, and Lepers: besides the Asthmas, Falling Sickness,
Convulsion-fits, Fits of the Mother, Old aches and pains. I know you expect not
from me the Narratives of what others have seen and told me: I shall therefore
confine my Discourse to my own observations. Although I had not the opportunity
of seeing him till I came to my Lord Conwayes, yet I found convenience to visit
many that had been touched by him; some I observed to have received no help by
him at all; some I observed to have found a momentany benefit from his touch:
and some as yet continue so well, that I think I may say they are Cured. This
variety of success amused me something: yet I recollected with my self, how
there were some diseases, as well as Devils, which even the Apostles could not
cast out: and I could not persuade my self that Trophimus was the only man, or
Miletum the only place, where Paul left any sick. I considered this man to be
no Apostle, and therefore thought it injurious to expect that from him, who
propagates no new Gospel, which was not to be found in those extraordinary
Envoyes of Heaven. I saw no incongruity in admitting, that God, who
distributeth various gifts amongst the Sons of Men, might issue out the same
gift to several persons in a different measure or proport^on. There are
differences of administrations, but the same Lord: there are diversities of
operations, but it is the same God, which works all in all, 1 Cor: 12. V. 4,
5. Besides, I thought that how powerful soever the gift were in Mr Greatarick,
yet the sins of the patient might sometimes frustrate the effect of his
hands, as well as the prayers of the most prevalent Saints, Moses, Noah, or
Daniel. I was apt to believe, that at Corinth, there wanted not the gift of
healing, nor an effectual anointing with Oil, (James 5: 14.) yet did the
misdemeanors of some draw upon several there irrecoverable Sickness and Death,
1 Cor: 11. v. 30. However, I did not understand that God parted so away with
his gifts, as not to reserve a paramount command over them still; and I though
the might as well glorify himself in the continuance of some blind, as in
causing some to be borne so, without regard to their particular sin, or that
of their Parents. These faylours in our Thaumaturgus, ought rather to make men
look upon, and take notice of the omnipotency of God, then censure the
deficiencies of a limited Creature. From these reflections I posted on, to the
consideration of the real and undeniable performances of his hand. I saw him
put his Finger into the Ears of a man who was very thick of Hearing; and
immediately he heard me when I asked him very softly several questions. I saw
another whom he had touched three Weeks ago for a Deafness in one Ear, whom
I had known to be so many years: I stopped the other Ear very close, and I
found him to hear very well, as we spoke in a tone no way raised beyond our
ordinary conversation. I saw him lance a Wenne that covered the Eye of an old
man; there issued out abundance of matter in smell, and consistence, and
color, resembling a rotten-Egge; after which he crushed out the less digested
matter, which resembled the Brains of any Creature: which being done, he
stroked the place gently, and the flux of blood, and pain (which was great by
reason of his crushing it hard) presently ceased.) I saw yesterday another
Woman, in whose Throat, just by the Windpipe he launced a Wenne, and having
crushed out the digested and indigested matter, and stopped the pain and
effusion of blood by some strokes of his hand, he bad her put nothing to it but
a linen Cloth: when I saw it, the Wenne was perfectly gone, and the baggs or
skin encompassing it so shrunk up by nature, that there remained nothing but
the skarre after incision. I asked him concerning Wennes, whither upon his
crushing and launcing them so, they would not fill again: he answered me, No:
but that Nature, as she does in other Tumors, would so shrink and contract the
skin encompassing the VVenne, that there should remain no sign of it, no
not a wrinkle, which I was apt to believe, from what I had seen. I saw a Child
brought to him, whom he had stroked before, and it was much amended; but one
Tumor upon the right Arm (near the Elbow) was extremely painful and
inflamed: he Stroked it, and launced it, and crushed out all the matter, even
the indigested cores; and Stroking it, the pain and inflammation ceased
immediately, not one drop of blood issuing out after that. I saw another Leg,
that upon his Stroking, had very much abated the swelling: the whole Foot to
the Ankle was swelled and inflamed, many holes there were in it, but there
issued little or nothing from them: he took it and crushed it extremely
bringing out much blood, and indigested matter in cores as big as nutmegs: and
then stroaking it, all the pain and flux of blood ceased: but the weakness
being habitual to the part, was not removed at that instant. I saw a Woman
taken with a violent fit of the Falling Sickness; he came to her, and causing
her breast to be opened, and chafed her Stomach with his Hand a while,
presently her paroxysme abated; and he asked her whither the pain was gone;
she pointed to her Throat; and indeed she seemed as if she were in danger of
being strangled there* he Stroked her Throat lightly, and asked where her pain
was? she poynted to her Breast; he stroked that; and then she made signs that
it was returned to her Throat: whereupon he Stroked with his hand upwards her
Breast and Neck, and she began to belch wind with such a vehemence, that is
scarce to be imagined; and withal st^eyning as it were to vomit, she brought
up some crude phlegm, with an infinity of wind, and then rose up well to her
thoughts. These were the principal things I saw him do, he being then upon his
departure for London: but I received from himself, and others sufficient
accounts, that he had Cured almost all manner of distempers, even
Quartane-Agues, and Feavours: and whosoever shall seriously consider the things
he does perform, will not find in reason any thing to stop his Credulity.

I might now end this Letter, and leave You, and those other worthy members of
the Royal Society to determine concerning these Effects, which I apprehend
miraculous: but since the Freedom, You allow me with you, permits me to speak
any thing, I shall, without derogating from the power of God, and with all due
Veneration to so extraordinary Characters of his Goodness, propose unto You
some Thoughts, which occurred to me hereupon: as confused as they are, they may
administer to others some occasion of greater Enquiries.

I considered, that there was no manner of Fraud in the performances, that his
Hands had no manner of Medicaments upon them, (for I smelled to them, and
handled them, and saw them washed more then once after some Cures, and before
others,) nor was his Stroaking so violent, as that much could be attributed to
the Friction.

I observed, that he used no manner of Charms, or unlawful words; sometimes he
Ejaculated a short Prayer before he cured any, and always, after he had done,
he bad them give God the Praise.

I did not remember, that ever the Devil did cure any Diseases; no not when his
Glory was concerned in it, as in the Magicians of Pharaoh, upon whom the Boil
was, Exodus 9 11. wherein you cannot object any particular interposition of God,
any more then in the other accidents, whereby the Magicians were suffered to
try their skill against Moses. I knew, the Devil went about seeking whom he
might destroy; that he plagued Job with Botches: but where are the Examples of
his Cures, or when did he ever do any Good, and ascribe the glory unto God?

I reflected upon the Performances of King Pyrrhus, who cured Diseases with his
Finger: so did Vespasian cure two by touching them, as Tacitus and Suetonius
avow: so the Kings of England, and, some years after them, the Kings of France
have not been doubted generally to cure the Kings-Evill. Queen Elizabeth did,
for some time, discontinue the Touching for the Kings Evil, doubting either the
Success, or Lawfulness of that way of Curing. But She soon quitted that Fit
of Puritanisme, when the Papists defamed her, as if God had withdrawn from her
the gift of Healing in that manner, because she had withdrawn her self from the
Roman Church. There are some who think, that God has bestowed upon all Kings
some such Character or Gift, to show, how particularly he is concerned for
them, and differenceth them from other men; but they know it not.

From these cogitations I descended to the Alexicaci, Salutatores, or
Be^sedevios, of which the Roman Casuists and Physicians speak much: I must
refer you to Delrius for your farther information; for my memory fayles me
so, as I cannot give you an account of them so full as I would. They cure by
Anointing with their Spittle, by breathing and stroking of the patient.
Rodericus a Castro medic: polit: l. 4. c. 3. allows of the verity of their
Cures, by replying nothing to this objection in favor of them: In
confirmationem adducunt experientiam and varia curationum genera mire
frequentia, and praxin quotidianam militum qui solo afflatu, osculo, aut nudi
lintei applicatione sanant etiam atrocissima vulnera, qui omnes dono sanitatis
in variis morbis se praeditos gloriantur.

In Turkey also, and Afrique, they have persons of the like qualifications,
which they boast to have received from the favor of their Prophet Mahomet. But
undoubtedly God has permitted all Religions (though not the Protestants, till
now) to have their real Miracles, that men may learn to try Miracles by the
Truth, and not the Truth by Miracles.

I considered likewise the Nephritick and Eaglestones, and several other
Amulets and Periapta, whose operation is certain and undeniable: yet could not
all these Considerations instruct me further in the Explanation of these
Miraculous Accidents, then to conclude,

That God had bestowed upon Mr. Greatarick a peculiar Temperament, or composed
his Body of some particular Ferments, the Effluvia whereof, being introduced
sometimes by a light, sometimes by a violent Friction, should restore the
Temperament of the Debilitated parts, re-invigorate the Blood, and dissipate
all heterogeneous Ferments out of the Bodies of the Diseased, by the Eyes,
Nose, Mouth, Hand, and Feet.

I place the gift of healing in the temperament or composure of his body;
because I see it necessary that he Touch them, or otherwise rub their Eyes
with his Spittle. Besides, the right Honorable the Lord Conway observed one
Morning as he came into his Lordships Chamber, a smell strangely pleasant, as
if it had been of sundry Flowers: and demanding of his man what sweet water he
had brought into the Room, he answered, None: whereupon his Lordship smelled
on the hand of Mr. Greatarick, and found the fragrancy to issue thence; and
examining his Bosom, he found the like scent there also. But this is
observable, but at some times, for I could observe no such scent in his Hands.
Deane Rust observed his Urine to smell like Violets, though he had eat nothing
that might give it that scent. Sr Amos Meredith who had been his Bedfellow,
said, that in the Night he had observed the like agreeableness of smell in M^
Greataricks Body, at some hours.

I place it in the temperament of his Body, because I have the precedent of
Ancient Miracles, and Modern ones, wrought by the efficacy of a Corporal
Touch. Besides it is evident how several Diseases are contracted that way: and
why may not some benign and wholesome effluvia be communicated in the same
manner? As there are some, who are said to fascinate by their Aspect, so
Rodericus a Castro Med: polit: l. 4. c. 1. says, e converso quosdam esse
quorum Oculi creduntur habere vim beneficam ad res inspectas: vulgo
Benzedeiros. I remember the Presbyterian Assembly of Divines say that nothing
more kindly restores decayed Nature, then the Embraces of an Abishag, of a
young, spritely and Beautiful Damsel, as you may see in their large Notes
upon the first Chapter of the first Book of Kings.

To explain the nature and manner of Mr Greataricks working upon the patients
for their Cure, I shall premise some things.

First, That all the Diseases and distempers Mr Greatarick meddles with, have
their essence either in the mass of Blood and Spirits (or nervous Liquour) or
in the particular Temperament of the parts of the Body.

Secondly, That of the Diseases and Infirmities which he meddles with, he Cures
none wherein there is a decay in Nature, but only such as wherein she seems
only oppressed by some Heterogeneous Ferment, either exciting an Ebullition and
pain, or Coagulating and fixing the blood and spirits. This is a confessed
truth by him, he refusing still to touch the Eyes of such as their sight is
quite perished: so for Ears that are Deaf upon any such accident that has
extinguished the Natural faculty of the part. And there being the same reason
for inward distempers as to their causes, his failing as to many, and the
relapse of many after a momentany amendment is to be ascribed to this cause: as
I shall show further by and by.

Thirdly, It seems to me very imaginable that there may be given by God such a
Natural Crasis and Effluvia consequentiall thereunto, that the stroaking with
his Hand for some space so as to communicate the Virtue may restore the Blood
and Spirits to that vigor and strength which is natural to them, and
resuscitate the contracted imbecility of any part. That which makes me to
conceive this, is, that I observe that there are things outwardly applied which
by their opposition to particular Ferments do destroy several Distempers, not
only inwardly taken, but outwardly applied: as the Cramp rings and small
Manati-stone the Crampe: the Nephritic-stone drives out gravel, and the Stone:
Peony-roots gathered in due time, the Epilepsy: There are several things which
outwardly applied revive oppressed Nature, not only as Odours, but by
friction, and outward application: this needs no Illustration. Having these
grounds to confirm me in the manner Medicaments may operate, methinks I can as
easily comprehend that there may be a Medicament (and whether that be a Man, or
a Stone, or a Plant, it is all one) which may invigorate the blood and spirits
so as to continue that work of Circulating, Depurating, and Sanguifying, as
before the oppression they did: provided there be no essential distemper
contracted, but that Nature be oppressed only, not destroyed wholly, or in
part: for so far as Nature is mutilated and destroyed, the reparation of that
essential damage is possible only to God, or such as he has obliged in a
more eminent manner then Mr Greatarick pretends unto. This last imagination of
mine cannot seem more irrational to any man, then the Learned men of the
last Age both Divines and Casuists, thought all sorts of Amulets: and I am sure
I can bring for Mr Greataricks more Experiments then all this Age can show to
justify the received Amulets, and Cataplasmes: for if I argue from visible
effects, no Amulet or Periapt ever produced more evident Testimonies of its
force, then Mr Greataricks has rendered of his Efficacy. And if they go to
explicate the ways and means whereby those Amulets work; the notion I have
concerning Mr Greataricks is the most facile, for I imagine no more to be in
him, then a particular Temperament, or implanted Ferment, which upon his
touching and stroking shall so far invigorate the blood, spirits, and innate
temperament of the part (Nature being only oppressed) that they perform their
usual duties: This being done, it is Nature Cures the Diseases and distempers
and infirmities, it is Nature makes them fly up and down the Body so as they
do: they avoid not his Hand, but his Touch and stroke so Invigorateth the parts
that they reject the Heterogeneous Ferment, 'till it be outed the Body at some
of those parts he is thought to stroke it out at.

Considering that our life is but a Fermentation of the Blood, nervous Liquor,
and innate constitution of the parts of our Body, I conceive I have represented
those hints and proofs which may render it imaginable that Mr Greataricks by
his stroking may introduce an oppressed Fermentation into the Blood and Nerves,
and resuscitate the oppressed Nature of the parts. I now proceed to show that
those effects which are so admired, upon the stroaking of Mr Greataricks Hand,
viz: that the pains fly before his Hand, until he drive them out at the
Fingers, Mouth, Eyes, Toes, etc. are the effects of Nature in vigorated, and
not immediately of his Touching.

I saw him Stroke a man for a great and settled pain in his left Shoulder,
which rendered his Arm useless: upon his stroking it the pain removed
instantly into the end of the musculus Deltodes: being Stroked there, it
returned to the Shoulder again: thence (upon a second Stroking) it flew to the
Elbow, thence to his Wrist, thence to his Shoulder again; and thence to his
Fingers; whence it went out upon his last stroking, so as that he moved his
Arm vigorously every way. I asked Mr Greaterick about the Courses, pains, and
diseases took, to go out of the Body: he told me, he could not tell what course
any pain or Disease would take to go out: that the ways of God were
unsearchable: that, it was not in his power to force them any way, but that he
followed them only, and if the party could not tell where the pain was (for
such are only stroked out) he could not cure them, nor were they cured, but
eased if it came not out. Of this I saw an instance in a Woman, whom the
Falling Sickness by its long continuance (joined with Melancholy) had
infatuated so as that being out of all Fits, she could not tell what ayled her:
she falling into her Fit there, he opened her Breast and with a few strokes
reduced her to her self, but she not being able to tell what was become of the
pain she had felt, he could proceed no further then to remove that Paroxysme.

How Nature may cause those irregular motions of pains backward and forward
shall be my next enquiry. Where bold and commanding Medicines are not made use
of, it is Nature, not Physique that cures Disease: we are but Servants to
Nature, to remove impediments, or strengthen her that she may effect the work:
upon this account it was that the Ancient Physicians were so cautious to
distinguish the times of Diseases, and to instruct Practitioners what they were
to do at the several times, when to moderate the dangerous symptoms, when to
Purge by Stool or Urine: they were to attend unto Concoction, and not to
meddle much before, except in case of Turgency. When they proceeded thus
warily, there were several Translations or removals of Diseases and pains
((...)) which are now scarce observable by reason of the Minoratives, the
Purges, the Vomits, and other Physique which is given, not because it is best,
but because in fashion. In those times when Nature was so left to her self, I
observe several Translations or removeals of Diseases which came into my mind
when I saw the effects of Mr Greataricks Stroking. Hippocrates in his Epidem:
l. 6. part. 3.. 34: tells us that the Gout cease if a man fall into the
Colique, and that fit of the Colique abates as his Gout increases. Thus Nature
removes the pain. So in his Aphorisms he tells us that long Fevers
Terminate in swellings and pains of the Joints. And elsewhere, That a Dysentery
suppressed creates an Apostemation in the Side, Bowels, or Joints. That
swellings of the Spleen and Bowels, or inflammations thereof, frequently
terminate in Ioynt-aches. So Quartane-agues often Terminate in the Gout. It
were infinite to relate out of Hippocrates the Translations and removals of
pain which he relates, viz. of Coughs, and Asthmas, falling into the Joints,
and Testicles: of Ulcers and outward distempers which have removed into the
Head and Bowels. All the Prognostics illustrate this: nor can any man be
ignorant of the translations of Humors and pains from noble to ignoble parts,
and from ignoble to noble ones, nor of the alteration of distempers upon such
translation of the Morbifique Matter, as of Asthmas and Coughs turning to the
Gout, or Tumor of the Testicles: of Agues turning into pains in the Joints; of
Feavours ending in a Parotis, or other abscessus. Not to mention the vagrant
nature of Humors in the beginning of Diseases, when they are Turgent, and
continually vary their station.

These Considerations made me think that God had been pleased to bestow upon Mr
Greataricks such a Complexion and Temperament, that his Touch or Stroking
should instantly maturate Diseases, or render them Turgent, whereupon the part
touched being strengthened, and the blood and spirits Invigorated, the
Heterogeneous Ferment or pain (which if not occasioned by some evident and
external cause, is caused by an Heterogeneous Ferment) is expelled from the
corroborated place to some other more weak: that being corroborated, it is
driven upon another, and so on, till it be quite ejected. If the Disease be
such as lies in nothing but a Dyscrasy of the part, it is cured without any
such removeall of pain: and so for such Coagulations of the Nervous liquor (as
in Palsyes, etc.) there is no such removeall of pain and pursuing it: either
because they are not Dolorifique, or that they Transpire in the part.

There remain yet two things to be debated, viz:

1. How comes it to pass that these Heterogeneous Ferments removing thus by
the force of Resuscitated Nature, do not terminate in Apostemes, or issue out
in some gross Body; but go out in a vapor and invisibly?

2. How comes all this to happen in so short a time?

To the first I answer; That it is not unusual for Nature to discharge her
self of Heterogeneous Ferments by insensible Transpiration, as well as
Apostemes, Sweat, Diarrhaea, and Urine: so the Mesels are cured: so many Crude
and hard Tumors: and in this Plague few swellings broke, yet were they cured.
Nor is it to be said, that the matter occasioning those Tumors was discussed
so as to be reimbibed in the blood again: for in the Plague the recurses of
the Pestilentiall Ferment are Mortal: and such as took Powders and Antidotes
gently promoting a Diaphoresis, (not sweat) escaped: they who did not, dyed
with those Bubones. It is an affect of prejudice occasioned by the
contemplation of the usual effects of Nature, and not of Reason, to imagine
that the Morbifique cause consists in a gross Body, because it is often
evacuated so: It is usual for those subtle Ferments so to commix themselves,
and to occasion that transposition of Parts and Texture, that Nature cannot
eject the one without the expense of the other. Thus we see that Beer or Ale in
its Fermentation or Working casts out abundance of Barme, yet is not that Body
the Ferment, but it is implicated and incorporated therewith, for with it there
issues out abundance of Bear, so that the Brewers either pover the same, or
new in again to fill up the Barrel. If the same Ferment be precipitated by
Vinegar, or Allome, there is not the like diminution. So Kergerus Kerger. de
ferment. sect. 2. c. 8. p. 139.
says, that in Germany they put common Salt, or cold Water into their Bear,
and precipitating the Ferment make it potable presently. Many such instances
are to be found in Dr Willis and Kerger; which sufficiently evince that the
Ferment is distinct from the gross Body it comes out in. So in Diseases,
however some have vainly imagined to themselves a maturation of them, and that
the Morbifique matter being concocted issued out in that white Hypostasis at
the end of Diseases; yet is it no such thing, nor is there any such concoction
in Nature as they phansy: but the Morbifique matter or Ferment, being
intimately commixed with some good and profitable parts of the Blood and
Humors, is ejected together with them, according to the nature of the
Eumuctory, by which the Crisis or Metastasis is made, or the nature of the
Bodies constituting that humor. Nature dealing therein just as she does in the
Fermentation of Beer and Wine, in the aforesaid Kerger, and Dr Willis: whence
proceed their ways of curing Agues by Precipitation of the Morbifique Ferment,
without any such Evacuations of gross Bodies. This Paradox appears further by
the several Crises of Diseases, sometimes by Vomit, sometimes by Stool,
sometimes by bleeding at the Nose, and Sweat. In all which circumstances the
Urine show one sort of Concoction, whilst the Morbifique Ferment issues out
several ways in several Bodies. Nor is it to be doubted I think that all
gross bodyed Ferments have their Virtue and efficacy from a subtle Body which
is no more in that gross Body, then the Spirit of Sugar is in Sugar: of which
See Angelus Sala's Saccharologia: many other instances might be given, as that,
if the grand Ferment were a gross Body, how comes it to evaporate (as I have
seen in the Distillation of Sugar, Sugar-cance-juyce, and other Liquors
Fermented for Spirits) without any diminution of the Liquors? From all which it
appears that one may conceive how upon the efficacious Touch of Mr Greataricks,
he refuscitating the Blood and innate Temperament, the Morbifique Ferment may
be ejected; and the remaining gross Body, by a Transposition of its Texture
and a new impregnation of Vitality be reimbibed into the Blood, and become
nutritious. Thus he cures Asthmas, all the obstructions from impacted phlegm
in the Lungs being discharged, and the phlegm Naturalised. But if the gross
body of the Morbifique matter be Incorrigible and Preternaturall, then the
efficacy of his Touch does not discuss them, but the strengthening the part and
Nature, the whole collection is separated and ripened, as I observed: which
appears in Wenns, and scrophulous Tumors, some whereof he maturates, and
others are discussed.

To the second Question, how all this happens in so short a time? I answer,
that it is the efficacy of the Ferment implanted in Mr Greataricks Body. We are
not to deny powerful causes proportionate effects. We are all Indians and
Salvages in what we have not accustomed our senses: what was Conjuring in the
last Age, is Mathematiques in this. And if we do but consider the sole effects
of Gunpowder, as it is severally to be used, and revolve with our selves what
we would have thought if we had been told those Prodigies, and not seen of
them; will we think it strange if men think the actions of extraordinary
Ferments impossible? Here I might instance in the effects of Poisons, from
Macastar, and Brasil: but the acts of sensation, of pain, sufficiently show
the effects of sudden causes: that Lipothymies and shivering should happen
upon a fright, a touch of cold Water, or a pinch: that Tumors should in an
instant imbody to a great bulk: that in such as are Planet-struck (or said to
be so) all or any of their Limbs should be taken away: these are such events
(that if we could not allege Amulets and outward applications to produce a
sudden alteration for the better) would make it seem credible that there may
be as powerful means for man's Recovery, as his Sickness. I forbear to mention
the sudden effects of Sleep and Waking, Freezing and Thawing: or of Heat and
Cold; all which would illustrate the sudden and powerful motions of Nature.

SIR,

I shall now draw to a Conclusion, having given you by these impertinencies a
greater trouble, then my self in Writing them: I knew not how to entertain my
self better, nor you worse: But I am sure that the suppositions I have made
agree exactly with the Phenomenon of Mr Greataricks Cures. And from hence it is
easy to judge why some are not Cured; others find but a momentany alleviation,
and some are perfectly recovered. All which are undenianbly true: let any man
salve these accidents more agreeably then I have done, -- Et Phyllida solus
habeto. It is worth consideration, Whether such as come unto him ought not
first to advise with a discreet Physician, what their Distempers are, and where
Originally seated; the better to direct him in his Stroking. For it is not
unusual for the Disease to be seated in one place, and to discover it self in
another by the Symptoms, in regard to which they have recourse to him only:
for in such cases, if they have no better success then such have who meet with
ignorant Physicians, that go about to cure Symptoms without regard to the
principal cause, it is no marvel if they are not Cured. Thus I have observed
some, who upon a giddiness, and qualmes of the Stomach, occasioned by
Hystericall vapors, have been stroked by him several times (without any, or
inconsiderable benefit) in the parts sensibly affected. So in the King's Evil, I
have observed some that have received only a momentany advantage; only
because that such Diseases affect the Mesentery with glandulous Tumors, as
well as the outward parts: and if the whole Morbifique Ferment be not expelled,
the Disease recurres: paululum fermenti totam massam fermentat. Another thing
to be considered by the Patient to be stroked, Valles: Method. Med. l. 3. c. 3.
is, that there may be a complication of Diseases, in which the Cure of one may
be impeded by another: as in the Spleen and Scurvey, Eugalenus and others
observe: so in Sore-eyes occasioned by the Evil; or a suffusion proceeding
from an Acid or Nidorous quality in the Stomach: and many Diseases whereto
Malignancy is joined. In these cases the Heterogeneous Ferments may be united
in a looser way, and upon his Touch separate, and whilst the one is driven out,
the other may remain in the Body, and by unloosing the Texture of the Body of
the blood, and other Humors, give opportunity for more formae subjugatae (of
the same kind with the former) to discover themselves. In like manner, it is
possible that where the Morbifique Ferment is not sufficiently united and
imbodyed, so as that one part ejected by way of Similar Attraction (I confess
I must favor that Philosophy, from the Phenomena of Physique and Nature too)
his Touch may disunite those incoherent Corpuscles, and the patient not
regarding the smaller and scarce sensible pains (the which depends upon the
parts and Humors the Ferment incorporates with) may direct him to pursue the
most afflicting pain (which may not be the greatest) whilst the other
remains in the Body, and afterward occasions the same distemper: or perhaps
another whose pains may so resemble the former, that we may take it for the
same: as our senses discern not betwixt the Salt of one Plant and another, or
betwixt the cauteriseing with Iron, or Gold; but there is a difference herein,
which by effects a diligent and curious observer may discover. Concerning these
intimations I discoursed with Mr Greataricks, who seemed well satisfied with
them; and did thereunto willingly ascribe several miscarriages and Faylours.

Another thing I proposed unto him, was, whether after that he had touched
several persons, and diminished the Preternaturall Ferment, or diverted it,
(and put the Humors into a Turgency) whether it might not be convenient to
Vomit, Purge, and take those courses Physique directs us unto. And from this he
was so little averse, that in my hearing he recommended to a Gentlewoman the
taking some Cochiae Pills, after he had touched her Eyes. I asked also if after
he had dissipated and repelled a settled Humor, it might not be convenient to
corroborate the Part with Topics; which he approved of, and though but to few,
I saw him give Eye Salve to some Patients. You know what pains we Physicians
take in Revulsions and Derivations of the Humors Morbifique from several
Parts: and do not you think a great part of our work were done, could Mr
Greaterick's miraculous Touch remove (or put into motion) those Humors we
cannot repel, or stir? Let us, Sir, be just and ingenious; and confess that
this Antichrist of Physicians may be of the greatest service to them in the
World, if they prefer the recovery of their Patients before their Credit, or
Rules of Art. Rara non sunt artis. You have observed how great things Nature
does, when alleviated; and the effects of that principle of Restitution, when
the prohibiting causes are removed.

As to the allaying of pains after crushing of sores, or bruises: and the
miraculous stanching of Blood: I think both them depend upon the restoration
of the Temperament of the part and Blood: As to pains it is easy to grant this.
And as to the effusion of Blood, you know there is a Balsame in it which heales
it self: to illustrate which, I recommend to you a Note of Plateru^ in his
Observations (I want my Library) how an Hangman of Basil cut off men's Hands,
and stopped the Bleeding of the Veins and Arteries by slitting the Arse of an
Hen, and thrusting the Hand into it. If this do not convince you, the
Discourses of Sympathetique Cures may do it: especially an Observation of
Panarolus, may convince you that such steemes (as vapors) may effect it; which
is the reason why I assign not one Ferment to him, but think there may be
more: which yet may not produce their effects in every case, nor exert their
influences in all cases no more then the Menstruum upon a disagreable occasion
produce all its effects. This needs not to be illustrated to you.

I think I have now rendered you a tolerable account of this Miraculous man, of
whom I dare make that Proclamation which a Roman Emperor did upon the occasion
of the Ludi seculares, or sports celebrated once in an hundred years. Come, and
behold, what no man living has seen, or shall see again. I would not be
understood to derogate from this miraculous Gift; not yet ascribe more unto it,
then I ought, lest I should hear the reprehension in Job; Will you tell a lie
for God?

There are a sort of men (if they were only Women, it were tolerable!) that
think it not lawful to have recourse unto his Cures. Though I have already too
much cause not to entermeddle with Divinity, or cases of Conscience any more,
yet I cannot but take notice of their Principal Objection: for to say that
Miracles are ceased is a groundless folly, if not a difingenuous impudence in
giving the Lie to several Histories of various Religions.

They say, Whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin: that it being impossible for
them to be convinced, that this man works by the immediate gift of God; they
cannot repair to him lest they be found to repair to a delusion of the Devil.
But I reply; That the principle of doing nothing that is not of Faith, is
sufficiently invalidated by M^ Hooker in his Church-Policy: and it is a
Principle has occasioned so much of Troubles in our State, that I wonder it is
not laid aside. In Moral Philosophy (which is not established on
demonstrations) and Physique I am sure it will put us all to confusion; for who
knows the efficacy of things Natural? how Purges and Vomits etc. do work?
Nay, who knows whether second causes have any effect, but that God does
operate ad praesentiam causarum secundarum? as the admirable Durandus held. And
may not the Devil do so? How shall this be reduced to Faith? I am sure, and
have seen things ascribed to the Devil, that it is now confessed have another
Original. Did all that came to Christ, believe in him? you know the story of
the ten Lepers: if to come to Christ, were not to believe in him further then
that they thought he could Cure, since they saw him Cure, how is it in Mr
Greataricks? The thing they come for, is good; such as may be begged of God:
there is nothing evidently unlawful practiced about them: where is their
Charity, that thinks no Evil? where is their Divinity, that think a good and
perfect work should come elsewhere then from Heaven? If the case be not to be
tolerated, because not ordinary: as there is but one Mr Greataricks, so there
is but one Sun. To be extraordinary, hinders it not from being consistent
with Faith; but to be unlawful, or absolutely impossible: as to
impossibilities, we know not what is impossible with God, or Nature. And for
the unlawfulness thereof, let Mr Greatarick's works bear witness of him. If
he does the things that never man did, except Christ and the Apostles etc.
judge what we are to think.

I conclude with this Apology for my recommending some Physical directions
after his Stroaking: that it takes not off from the Miracle, no more then that
God gave the gift of Tongues to the Apostles, yet needed they Rhetorical
instructions to imbellish their Language. St Paul was balbus sermon: and you
know that the polite style of St Luke evinces the imperfections of the Language
in the other Writers o^ the New Testament; as Isaiah disgraceth Amos in the
Old. All things are not given to all men in perfection: but the gifts that are
given to every man, are given them to profit with. I beg your pardon for the
tediousness as well as rudeness of these lines; since by them I express my
self to be

Your affectionate humble-servant HEN: STUBBE:
Stratford upon Avon Feb: 18. 1665.
The account of a Leprosy cured by Mr Greatarick in the presence of the Lord
Conway.
A Boy about fourteen years Old, Son to a Prebend of Gloucester, recommended
to the Lord Conway by the Bishop of Gloucester, came with a Letter to Ragly: he
was afflicted with a Leprosy judged incurable; and had been so ten years. At
his coming to my Lords, he found Mr Greatarick touching people in the Field;
whereupon he pressed upon him, and got him to stroke his Body all over: this
happened upon Wednesday: on Friday Morning the Boy came* to my Lord, and
delivered his Letter: whereupon my Lord sent for him up to his Chamber, and
causing him to be stripped, they found that the moist Salt and brinish Humor
which caused a moist Leprosy was dried up, and in some places Scaled off, the
Skin under it was Red (as under all crusts falling off) there was no itching
or pricking at all, nor Heat: with which Symptoms he had been formerly
troubled. Mr Greatarick stroked him again, and rubbed his, Body all over with
Spittle, My Lord ordered the Boy to return, if he were not Cured: but he came
no more.

Proofs that he revives the Ferment of the Blood.
Mr Bromley's brother of Upton upon Severne after a long Quartane Ague had by a
Metastasis of the Disease such a chillness in the habit of the Body, that no
Clothes could possibly warm him: he wore upon his Head many spiced Caps, and
ten pounds weight of Linen on his Head: Mr Greatarick stripped him, and
rubbed him all over, and immediately he sweat, and was hot all over, so as that
the Bath never heated up as did the Hand of Mr Greataricks: this was his own
expression. But Mr Greatarick causing him to cast off all that multitude of
Caps and Clothes; it was supposed that it frustrated the happy effect; for he
felt the recourse of his Disease in some parts rendered the Cure suspicious.
But as often as Mr Greataricks came and rubbed him he would be all in a flame
again for half an hour: the Experiment whereof was frequently practiced for
five or six days at Ragly.

Of the Metastasis of Diseases.
A Woman of Worcester having a pain driven into those parts which modesty
would not permit her to let Mr Greatarick stroke: she went away as if she had
been cured, but is since sick of an intolerable pain there. Such consequents
are usual, when the Disease is not stroked out.

HAving been lately requested by the Learned Dr Henry Stubbe of Stratford upon
Avon, to set down in VVriting some few of those very many observables I had
seen in the Cures, or Attempts of Mr Valentine Greatarick, since his coming
into England; in order to a design wherewith that knowing Physician intends
shortly to oblige the Curious: I could no ways refuse his so just demand.
Wherefore wholly quitting all Philosophical Researches, and disquisitions to
the framers of new Hypotheses, or at least to those who are better verst in
such as are already extant; I shall barely relate matter of Fact in four or
five of the most eminent instances whereof I have been an Eyewitness.

Thursday Feb: 1.
1. Mris Reynolds a Shopkeepers Wife of Alcester in the County of Warwick,
having been ever since Hay-harvest disabled in her Arms and Hands, in so much
as she was not able to use them, or even to undresse her self, was that day,
and twice afterward touched by Mr Greataricks: she found them considerably
strengthened at the first time, and much more after, so that she could put them
behind her Back, comb her Head, and use her Needle, and thus she continues to
this day.

The same day (in the Town Hall) I saw two Women delivered of the shaking
Palsy, which was driven out at their Toes ends.

Tuesday Feb: 13.
2. I accompanied Mr Greatericks to the City of Worcester, and lodged with
him in the House of Mr VVithie an Attorney; We had not been there full an
hour, when (beside a multitude of infirm people) there came to him one Mris
Bickeridge (dwelling within half a mile of Tewxbury) bringing with her four of
her Children, two Sons, and as many Daughters; The elder of the youths is now
two and twenty years of Age, and about two years since was stricken with the
dead Palsy, which in continuance of time has so disabled him, that he can
neither stand or feed himself, I saw little or no effect upon Mr Greataricks
stroking him, either that night, or the next day.

The other three, the remaining Son, and two Daughters (by the report of their
Mother) fell all down in the street, as they were coming along with her to Mr
Greataricks.

These had all been troubled with Convulsions, or fits of the Falling Sickness
for about four years. The Youth upon the application, and short chafing of Mr
Greataricks Hand was restored; I saw him well the next day in the Citty-Hall,
and the next after heard that he continued so, and was seen playing in the
Street.

Susan, one of the Girls, (as her Mother told me) was so thickly pursued with
her Fits, that of a Twelve month before, she had not spoken above once in a
Month: And Margaret the other Girl had lay'n utterly Speechless for three
Weeks last past.

Both these after somewhat a longer chafing, were soon freed, and restored to
Speech, and ability of walking up and down the Room; but they both relaps't
into their Fits, and became again Speechless.

Margaret lay in that condition (for twelve hours) that she could neither speak
or stand. On Wednesday morning (Feb. 14.) her Mother brought her into the
City-Hall, and within ten Minutes She was restored to Speech, but her Pain held
Mr. Greataricks Hand in play near an Hour after. Being thus returned to her
speech, she was willed by Mr. Greatarick to move her Hand upon the place, and
point wheresoever her pain removed, he being presently ready to apply his Hand
to the part affected: she did so, and forthwith it avoided his Touch, skipping
exceeding swiftly from one part of the Head to the other; as from the Forehead
to the Crown, from thence to the Pole, then to the Right Side, now to the Left,
into the Neck, Shoulder Arm, Hand, the opposite Hand; to the Thigh, calf of the
Leg, Anckle, Foot, and from thence (as quick as thought) to the head again,
where shifting according to the former or like Order, he was sometimes fain to
apply both his Hands, but then many times the Pain got between the interstices
of his Fingers, from whence, upon a fresh Application, it flew to other parts,
as before, and always with such incredible speed, that it much amazed the
Bystanders, and Mr. Greataricks would often affirm, that, in his Opinion, it
was some Evil Spirit gotten into the Body of the Child. At length having vexed
it from part to part, for (as I guess) the best part of an Hour, it passed out
at her Toes.

Thursday Feb. 15.
The next day the other Sister, Susan, was brought in speechless; She was
restored to her Speech, and freed from her pains in like manner, but with far
less ado, and in much shorter time: We heard no more of them after.

On Wednesday, Feb. 14. in the City-Hall at Worcester.
Mris VValling, a School-Mistress, dwelling upon Mavern Hill, fell into a most
horrid Fit of the Falling Sickness; her Motions were exceedingly vehement, and
Convulsive, with so much violence and impetuosity, as if her Limbs had then
been rending in sunder: I never saw any Hysterical Paroxysm half so dreadful;
all her Joints seemed to be crampt, and sometimes so distorted, as if She had
been upon the Wrack. Mr Greataricks, by stroaking her Breast, (for that purpose
first bared,) soon restored her to such Sensibility, as that she was able to
speak, and direct him to the place whither her Pain shifted, which it often did
with inexpressible Agility, from one extreme part of her Body to another: And
it was very observable, that whither soever her Pain retired, that part was (as
it were) crampt, and seemed by her Motions, Cryings out, and Shrieks, to be
affected with intolerable Dolor; sometimes it was in her Throat, and then it
nigh choked her, and there ensued excessive Belchings, (as I have also often
observed in sundry Asthmatical, and Pthisical Persons stroaked by him.) And in
this case was he fain to leave her for that time, Night growing on, and an
infinity of diseased people pressing upon him for help.

The next day being Thursday Feb. 15:
Whilst we were (at Mr. VVithies) sitting at Dinner, word was brought to Mr.
Greataricks, that one was fallen in his Chamber; and (as at other times he was
wont to quit all things, to afford relief in this sad Distemper) He immediately
(and I with him) left the Table; we were no sooner gotten into the Chamber, but
we found it was the same Mris VValling, fallen into a new Fit, which was now
rather more vehement then that of the day before; it now sometimes affected her
in the Eyes, and sometimes in her Nose, and that with such anguish, as she
seemed oftimes ready to tear it off: Upon the removal of her Pains, she often
gave such Shrieks, as if her Heart had been bursting in sunder. Mr. Greataricks
was also persuaded, that this Woman was possessed with a Devil; but she seemed
much troubled and aggreived at that his opinion; saying to him, That however
God might permit her to be afflicted with Bodily Distempers, yet she trusted,
and was full of confidence, that he neither had, or would give up her Body to
be inhabited by the Devil. Her Acquaintance testified, that she had been of an
unblameable life, and conversation: and that her Education has been more
Liberal, then is ordinarily found in that Sex, may appear by what follows. For
to a Gen^leman, standing by Mr. Greataracks (a good while during her Fit,) and
saying to him, Credo quod obs^ssa sit, she suddenly, and very brusquely
replied, Sic credo, sic credo, at non Diabola, sed vento. In fine, she
continued under his Hand betwixt three and four Hours, and was at length freed;
her pains being chaced by him out at her Toes.

February 15.
4. The next Instance is of one Hester Jordan, dwelling at Bidderly under the
Clee-hill side in Shropshire; who (as her Friends related) having in her
Infancy, at three years of age (by what mischance I know not) taken Poison,
presently lost both Speech and Hearing, and so has continued ever since; she
now being 22 years Old. The same Thursday at night, at a Gentleman's House,
within the precincts of the College at Worcester, by the application of Mr
Greataricks Hand to her Tongue, and Ears, both speech, and hearing were
recovered in a few minutes. And although her speech were not very Articulate,
yet one might easily understand* she (intelligibly enough) imitated any word
spoken in her Ear; For when Mary was spoken to her she returned Maa. For
Father Faa, for Mother Moa, etc.

February 16.
On Friday Mr Greataricks, having the night before been summoned to Court by an
express from the Right Honorable the Lord Arlington; set out toward the
Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Conway's house at Ragley; and in his way
thither alighted at a Worshipful Knight's in VVarwick-shire; where, amongst
many others, we met with a Gentleman of Kin to the Lady of that Family, who
seemed much to slight, and utterly to disbelieve the efficacy of Mr Greataricks
hand; but within a while he was convinced by very painful experience; For
having complained to a Lady then present, that he of long time had had a
dimnesse in his left Eye (though indeed it looked as fair as the other, and
therefore he was forced to make several protestations, ere he could gain any
belief, but) being once credited, he was soon advised by the Lady to essay Mr
Greataricks hand. He made very dainty of it at first, and Mr Greataricks also,
affirming that he would Touch none who was not desirous he should. In fine both
(at length) overcame by the importunity of the Ladies, submitted, the one to
touch, the other to be touched: His Eye accordingly being touched, the
Gentleman straight protested, that he saw much more clearly with it then
before, and so stood by: soon after, he complained of a pain, and heaviness
in his Head (he had before been much troubled with a Paralyticall Humor, and
for that cause had several successive years repaired to Bathe) upon a new
application of Mr Greataricks Hand; he said his pain was now gone: and so went
aside again: soon after he complained that he was sick at Stomach, and seemed
to be in a very vomiturient condition; Mr Greataricks caused him to unbutton,
and slip off his Shoes, and Stockings, and with his hand chased that illness
of Stomach down into his Leg, and after out at his Toes; so that he said, he
now felt nothing: Not long after he again complained of a pain in his Head. Mr
Greatericks strok't it down into his Eyes, which watered extremely, and the
Lids were in continual Trepidation, and by his complaints, and gestures, they
appeared to be very full of pain: After a while they began to mend: Mr
Greatarick strokes his Head again, and by so doing, brings a fresh supply of
Humors into them again, which caused the like unpleasing Phenomenon as before:
And this recourse from Head to Eyes was repeated at least twenty times, as
sundry Persons of Honor, and Integrity, who were then present, can testify.

Feb. 22. 1665/6.
The truth of these Narrations is attested by me E. Foxcroft M. A. and one of
the Fellows of the Kings-Colledge in Cambridge.
FINIS.

