An Ague, Which hitherto amongst all sorts has been accounted the Physicians
shame, both for definition and cure, (thus far has ignorance prevailed) but
that the contrary is manifest, appears sufficiently by this following
definition: and shall be cured whether Tertian, Quartern, or Quotidian, by me
AARON STREATER, Physician of Arts in Oxford approved by Authority: the Kings
Majesty's Servant in Ordinary, and dwelling against the Temple, three houses up
in Chancerie-Lane, next house to the golden Anchor.

printer's or publisher's device

At London Printed 1641.

An Ague,
IS either interpolate or continual, engendered of a melancholic humor, or a
splenitick effect, whose rigor is in the beginning not vehement: but like the
cold, men feel in most vehement Frosts, which in process of time augmenteth,
that the parties are like a stone, or other cold thing, which is the cause of
so much intermission, why this day, and that day, and not continually: nature
working out this coldness, causes generally a most vehement heat, which being
over, the Parties rest in ease, until such time, be it longer or shorter, the
melancholic humor, putrified in the vessels, has the predominance, and so
returns to his old biace again.

Upon the obstruction of the liver, by an abundant of choler, proceeding from
a salt rhewme that comes from the brain, converted into a putrified phlegm
oppressing the stomach, and putrefying the empty veins adjoining to the heart;
and well may they be so, when as the liver for obstruction sake cannot send his
vital and Spring blood, to nourish and revive the most vital part, the heart;
whereupon lies a fast baked putrified matter, some green, some black, some
yellow, as experience shows: and until this be dissolved and taken away, help
cannot be expected, for if the rhewme be salt, the liver obstructed, the
stomach oppressed with phlegm, the adjacent veins to the heart putrified, the
spleen decayed, the kidneys by their salt gravel wasted, the stone in the
bladder engendered, the legs by the salt humor falling down, swollen; whereby
the Dropsy, and Gowt are engendered, with many more diseases.

Say not therefore it is but an Ague, but a Fever, I shall wear it out: upon
some violent Medicine, or three or four Fi^ts, some times by the great help of
nature it may depart: but if it has continued longer, and no remedy found, as
thou love thy health and life dally not with this disease.

We must much condemn those that stick not to say, an Ague is a spirit; for
Agues and Fevers were diseases our Savior cured, and so no spirit.

Here we condemn all Charms in this case, with all those that go to
Sorcerers, Witches, Cunning men, or Cunning women, as they are called, with the
seventh son: for in thus doing, they leave God in his ordinance, and embrace
the devil himself. For be assured, i^ you use lawful means in this disease,
you may expect as fully and as really cure and health, as in any other sickness
or disease what ever: so far forth as it shall stand with Gods glory, and
your good.

One word more by the way, but yet to the purpose, let Italians and French let
blood as they please in their hot Countries: but for our English that are
there, and desire to see home again, I say let them beware of loss of blood,
lest they come home by weeping cross, fall into dead Palsies, which is a
customary thing for our Nation to do; and to frequent our own Nation here, by
their often letting blood.

Let neither any English Physician, Italian, French, Dutch, Doctor, or else,
persuade you in an Ague or Fever, to be let blood, ^xc^pt th^re be a most
eminent appearance of Death it self, which a juditious, and honest Physician
will soon descry. Nor in any other disease but as seldom as may be, if you
desire comfort and health in Age.

And what is here written, I take God to record, is not written for vain glory
sake, as to be seen of men; but only out of a grownded and experienced good
success I have had in the curing of them that have had Fevers of long and
short continuance; and as violent a^ ever were, or I believe can be; yet did
never draw blood, except it was by Leaches, until it was so, that the parties
were recovered, their blood well purified, and bodies settled; then a week or
fortnight after I have opened a vein, that they might stand in their more
perfect health.

And the reasons of this my good success, I shall be ever willing and ready to
give unto any Doctor, or Patient that shall require of me.

Gloria tibi Domine.
BEing carried down from London to South-hampton by Master Thomas Mason
September 1640. word was brought me of a Maid dead, 16 years of age: and being
requested to see what Disease she dyed of, I took my Surgeon with me, and
went, And after section or search, I found as follows, a gallon and a half
of green water in the belly, that stunk worse then carrion; under the lyver an
Impostume as bigg as my fist, full of green black corrupted Matter, and the
lyver black and rot: The spleen and kidneyes wholly decayed; and the place as
black as soot: the bowels they were fretted, ulcerated, and rotten. In the
chesse was two great handfulls of black burnt blood in dust or powder: the
heart was all sound, but not a drop of blood in it: nor one spoonful in the
whole body.

Here was an Annatomy indeed, skin and bone: and I verily believe, that there
was no brain left, but that she lived while that was moist: the sent was so
ill, and I not well, that I forbore to search it.

God that knows the secrets of all hearts, knows this is a truth, and nothing
else here written.

Arthur Fauset, Surgeon at South-hampton, was the man I employed to cut her
up, as many there can witness that were present.

And what of all this may some say: why this? An eight weeks Ague in the
neglect of (...), breeds all these Diseases, and finally Death.

FINIS.

