A DISCOURSE OF THE Pope's Supremacy.

PART I.

In Answer to a Treatise entitled, St. Peter's Supremacy faithfully discussed,
according to Holy Scripture, and Greek and Latin Fathers. And to a Sermon of S.
Peter, preached before her Majesty the Queen Dowager, on St. Peter and St.
Paul's Day, by Thomas Godden, D. D.

IMPRIMATUR.

Liber cui Titulus, A Discourse of the Pope's Supremacy.

H. Maurice Rmo. in Christo, P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris.
Junii 7. 1688.
LONDON: Printed for Richard Chiswell at the (...) and Crown in St. Paul 's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXVIII.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Pope's Supremacy.
THOUGH the Pope's universal Pastorship is a Claim so groundless, and the
Vanity of it has been so exposed, not only by Protestants, but by some learned
Men of the Church of Rome, that he had need have a Roman Confidence, who shall
now think to impose upon us, by a pretense so miserably baffled; yet because it
is by many still insisted upon with as much Assurance, as if nothing had been
said in Confutation of it, it may not be amiss to enquire whether any thing new
has been produced in defense of this good old Cause of the Church of Rome, by
her late Advocates Nubes Testium. St. Peter 's Supremacy faithfully discussed,
according to holy Scripture, and Greek and Latin Fathers. A Sermon of St.
Peter, preached before her Majesty the Queen Dowager, by Thomas Godden, D. D.
The Pope's Supremacy asserted from the Considerations of some Protestants, and
the Practice of the Primitive Church; in a Dialogue between a Church-Divine and
a Seeker, in Vidication of Nubes Testium.
.

The first of those Discourses quoted in the Margin, has already received an
Answer; and I think it needless to repeat what has been said by the learned
Author of it. The other three I intend to examine; the two former of them
jointly, because there is no Argument offered in the Sermon, that we do not
also meet with in the Treaties of St. Peter's Supremacy; the third (which is a
Reply to the Answer to the Nubes Testium) shall be considered distinctly and
apart.

The Discourse of St. Peter's Supremacy was written (as the Author informs us)
in Confutation of some Advertisement to the Reader.
Papers he received from a Protestant Divine: having never seen those Papers,
and having great reason upon many accounts to suspect that what he quotes from
them is not fairly represented, I shall take no notice of them; but whatsoever
I find in his Book that is pertinent to the main Question, and has but the
show of Argument, shall be duly considered. What he has offered, is (he tells
us) as well performed as his Abilities would permit; and his Abilities, we may
presume, were none of the meanest, after he had given the Fathers a due
Discussion, and applied himself to the modern Authors of both sides; that he
himself had no low opinion of his Performance, we may reasonably conclude, in
that he thought it worthy the Approbation and Protection of her Majesty the
Queen Regent; I therefore expected great matters, beyond what I had formerly
met with; but no sooner had I read a few pages, but my Expectation flagg'd, and
upon the Perusal of the whole Book, I scarce ever found my self more
disappointed.

The first Part is wholly spent upon other Points (excepting part of chap. 1.
concerning St. Peter's Successor) it being, as he himself tells us, but
Prefatory, and introductive to the main Design he aimed at, which Part. 2.
chap. 1.
in the second Part he applies himself to, and his whole Discourse in the
second and third Parts, may be reduced to these two general Heads.

I. St. Peter's Supreme Authority over the Universal Church. II. That the
Bishop of Rome succeeded him in this Supremacy.
CHAP. I.
I. THAT St. Peter was invested with supreme Authority over the Universal
Church. This is the Supremacy he means: a Primacy of Order is not denied by
Protestants, but that will not satisfy the Pope and (...) Friends; that which
they contend for, is a Suprema^^ (...) Power over all Christians, not excepting
the (...) themselves. Now that St. Peter had this Supremac^ he attempts to
prove by several Texts of Holy Scripture, and by the Testimonies of several
Fathers, which he quotes as he goes along, to confirm the Sense he gives of
those Scriptures.

The Scriptures he produces, he was put to no pains to search for, they being
no other than those common Texts, which have, I think, been pressed upon the
same Service, by every Romanist that has ever written upon this Subject, viz.
Matthew. 16. v. 17, 18, 19. John. 21. 16. In the first he supposes that Christ
promised this Supremacy; in the second, that he conferred it.

SECT. I.
I begin with the first, whence he argues, as his Predecessors in this
Controversy have ever done, from the double Promise Christ made to St. Peter:
The one in these Words, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my
Church: the other in these, And I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, etc. But before he proceeds to discourse of these, there are two
things he supposes as the reason and Foundation of this special Honor
conferred on St. Peter Part 2. c. 1, 2, 3.
.

First, That at the time when he made this Confession, he alone knew the
Divinity of Christ; the rest of the Apostles being as yet ignorant of this
great Mystery.

Secondly, That he knew this by a special Revelation from God the Father.

I shall therefore first, examine his Foundation, because if that fail, the
Supremacy built thereon, will of it self fall to the Ground.

It has not without Reason been questioned by some, whether by the Son of the
living God, St. Peter meant any more than he did by the Christ; not only
because the former Expression is in other Texts of Scripture expounded by the
latter, but because St. Mark, speaking of this very Confession of St. Peter,
makes it no more than this, Thou art the Christ Mark 8. 29.
: And St. Luke, that he was the Christ of God Luke 9. 20.
: Yea, the Discussor himself supposes, that Peter confessed no more than what
Christ afterward strictly commanded his Disciples to conceal, as too sublime to
be divulged Page 79.
: And that we find ver. 20. was no more than this, That he was Jesus the
Christ. And if St. Peter's Confession amounted to no more, it cannot then be
denied, but that St. Andrew long before him confessed as much, when he said, We
have found the Messiah John 1. 49.
: And that Nathanael's Confession was no way inferior when he said, Thou art
the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel John 1. 49.
.

But be it granted, that St. Peter by the Son of the living God, meant that he
was the Son of God by Nature, (as the Fathers generally expound it) yet that
the other Apostles were not at this time ignorant of this Mystery, but knew it
as well as St. Peter, will be sufficiently cleared,

First, By Scripture. Secondly, By what the Discussor himself grants. Thirdly,
By the Testimonies of the Ancients. And, as an unanswerable Argument ad
hominem, Fourthly, By the Testimonies of those modern Romanists he quotes for
the contrary.
First, By Scripture. Of those many Texts that offer themselves, one may
suffice, it being so plain and full to the purpose. Many of Christ's Disciples
being offended at his Doctrine, they thereupon forsook him; upon this he said
to the twelve, Will ye also go back? The Question was propounded not to Peter
only, but to all the twelve, though Peter alone returned the Answer (as he did
to this other Question) To whom shall we go? Thou have the Words of eternal
Life; AND WE (...).
BELIEVE AND HAVE KNOWN, THAT THOU ART THE CHRIST, THE SON OF THE LIVING GOD
John 6. 69.
. The Discussor grants that St. Peter here undertook, by answering for the
rest, to give an account of their Faith Page 83.
. Now this Confession is expressed in the very same Words with that under
debate, nor does the Discussor himself deny it to be of the same import. And
that of these two Confessions, this in which he grants St. Peter spoke in the
Name of them all, was first in time, Dr. G. has proved to be manifestly
evinced from the series of the Acts of our Savior's Life, recorded by the
Evangelists Sermon. of St. Pet. p. 10.
. And that the said Doctor took this Confession before-made, to signify as much
as this latter, of which we dispute, appears by the Question he propounds, and
the Answer he returns to it. But why was not St. Peter then presently honored
by our Savior, with a BLESSED ART THOU SIMON THE SON OF BARJONA? To this, says
he, Theophylact answers, That our Lord suspended praising him then (tho he
deserved it) lest being at a time when others deserted him, it might seem done
out of design, and a piece of Artifice to retain him with him. But Euthymius,
says he, more probably thinks it was, because he answered not for himself only,
but in the Name of all, among whom there was one so far from being worthy of
Praise, that our Savior presently after, to rectify Peter's Mistake, told them
he was a Devil Ibid. p. 15.
.

It is therefore certain that either the rest of the Apostles at this time knew
the Divinity of Christ, or that St. Peter was mistaken in the account he gives
of their Faith. The Discussor indeed says, St. Peter committed a great Mistake;
and Dr. G. that he found he had been mistaken. But how does that appear?
Because, says the Discussor, Christ told them, that that was not the Belief of
all of them, one of them being a Devil St. Per. Suprem. p. 94.
. And to the same purpose Dr. G. quotes Euthymius. Be it granted that our
Savior excepted one, in that he excepted no more than one, it plainly follows,
that all the rest, that is, ten to one, knew him to be the Son of God
incarnate. The Conclusion then is unavoidable, that Peter was not the only
Apostle, to whom this Mystery was then made manifest.

Secondly, The same Conclusion follows from what the Discussor himself grants:
He dares not exclude the blessed Virgin, nor St. John Baptist, no nor the
Devils, from the Knowledge of this Mystery; and he grants, that Joseph, Zachary
and Elizabeth, Simeon and Anna the Prophetess, who were honored with
Revelations and Visions, filled with the holy Ghost, and had the Gift of
Prophecy, if they did not fully know his Consubstantiality, they had at least
some (...) obscure ways of it Page 92, 93.
I need not make Reflections upon all these: It will be sufficient to show,
that if John the Baptist, and the Devils knew it, the Apostles could not be
ignorant of it. And,

First, That it follows from the Knowledge of John the Baptist, and that several
ways.

1. Because St. John could not but think himself in Duty bound, to impart this
Knowledge to his Countrymen. His Office was to bear Witness of Christ; and what
more worthy to be witnessed concerning him, than the Divine Excellency of his
Person? He was by his Testimony to prepare the way, to dispose Men to believe
on him; could he then without Unfaithfulness omit that which above all other
Arguments would be of Power to work Faith in them? He who was so careful to
confirm his Disciples in the Belief, that he was the true Messiah Matthew. 11. 2,
3.
; can it be supposed, that he would not acquaint them with that, which would
above all other things, render them steadfast in this Belief? And if he
published this in his popular Discourses, who can imagine that it never came to
the Ears of the Apostles?

2. The same is clearly inferred from the means, by which the Discussor
supposes John the Baptist arrived at this Knowledge, viz. the Voice from Heaven,
at Jesus's Baptism. He who heard a noise from Heaven, by a Celestial Herald
promulging him to be the Son of God: He who saw the holy Ghost effigiated in
the Form of a Dove (that may be questioned) descending from above, and lighting
upon him, may very well be imagined to be instructed who he was Page 92.
: If so, may it not as well be imagined, that the Apostles might be as well
instructed, by the Report of this Noise from Heaven, they received from John?
May not a Man understand as much by hearing a thing at second hand, (and as
firmly believe it too, if he hear it from a Person of unquestionable Credit) as
if he heard it at the first? And that John the Baptist bear record of this, St.
John the Evangelist has told us John 1. 32.
: And can any considering Man persuade himself, that the Apostles of our
Savior should be ignorant of that, which the Baptist openly proclaimed to all
the Jews?

3. St. John the Baptist gave yet more pregnant proofs to his Hearers of
Christ's Divinity. He bear record, that he was The Son of God, by way of
eminency, so as never any other Man was, ((...) with an Article) if this be not
thought enough, he loudly testified, that he had a real being, before he was a
Man. For John cried, this was he of whom I spoke, HE THAT COMES AFTER ME IS
PREFERRED BEFORE ME, FOR HE WAS BEFORE ME John 1. 34.
: In which Words (as a learned Bishop of this Church has observed) first, John
takes to himself a Priority of time, speaking of Christ, He that comes after
me. For so he came after him into the Womb at his Conception, into the World at
his Nativity, etc. 2dly, He attributes to Christ a Priority of Dignity,
saying, He is perferred before me. -- 3dly, He rendereth the reason or cause of
the great Dignity that belonged to Christ, saying for, or rather because he was
before me. As if the Baptist had thus spoke at large: This Pearson on the
second Article of the Creed. p. 218, 219. of the first Edit.
Man Christ Jesus who came in to the World, and entered upon his Prophetical
Office six Months after me, is notwithstanding of far more Worth and greater
Dignity; even so much greater, that I must acknowledge my self unworthy to stoop
down, and unloose the Latchet of his Shoes: And the Reason of this transcendent
Dignity, is from the Excellency of that Nature, which he had before I was; for
though he comes after me, yet he was before me.

Again, St. John the Baptist prefers Christ before himself in this, that
whereas he himself had his Original from the Earth, Christ came from Heaven,
and was above all John 3. 31.
; thereby signifying that Divine Nature by which he existed in Heaven, before
he was conceived in his humane Nature of the blessed Virgin. Can it then be in
reason supposed, that the Apostles knew not this Mystery, which John so freely
published to his Hearers? especially considering, that some of the Apostles
were the Disciples of John, before they were the Disciples of Christ. But,

4. If the Baptist knew the Divinity of Christ, the Apostles we may conclude
knew it much rather; since besides what they had heard from John concerning it,
they had learned much more from their Master himself by his private
Instructions, and his public Preaching. Among other things they could not but
have observed, that he had frequently discovered Men's secret Thoughts and
Reasonings; that he had affirmed himself to be Lord of the Sabbath, and that he
had power on Earth to forgive Sins. They had no doubt heard him say, that God
was his own Father, and knew that the Jews accused him of Blasphemy for saying
so, because thereby they concluded he made himself equal with God. These and
many other matters of the like import they had heard from his own Mouth, of the
Truth of which they were abundantly satisfied, by seeing him do such Miracles,
which no Man before ever did, in confirmation of what he said. The Argument
then lies thus; If John the Baptist knew Christ to be the Son of the Living
God, the Apostles of Christ much more knew him to be so, because they had not
only all the same Arguments that he had, but many more from the Words and
Actions of Christ himself to assure them of this great Truth.

Secondly, The same Conclusion is as strongly inferred from what the Discussor
grants of the Devil's Knowledge, and the ways by which he attained to it. How
the Devils arrived to this Knowledge, Opinions, he says, are various: Three of
which he mentions.

The first seems to be of no weight, viz. That when he was a glorious Angel in
Heaven, God revealed to him that his Son should assume humane Nature, and that
Man should be exalted to the hypostatic Union with the Word Page 93.
. That God revealed this to him, when he was a glorious Angel, there is not the
least proof; and in case he did, yet unless he revealed also, that this Jesus
of Nazareth was the Man that was exalted to the Hypostatic Union with the Word,
it will not reach the Point to be determined. And he must be a Man of a
wonderful fancy who can imagine that this was revealed to the Devil, when he
was a glorious Angel in Heaven.

As for the other ways he mentions, the Devil had by them no advantage of the
Apostles. For the next opinion he cites, is that of Theophylact, viz. that the
Thief stole this Knowledge from the Voice from Heaven. And why might not the
Apostles also get it the same way? For though they heard not this Voice
immediately from Heaven, yet they had the report of it from John the Baptist,
and as firmly believed it, as if they themselves had at first heard it.

The third opinion is that of St. Austin, viz. That it was made known to the
Devil by the operation of so many Miracles wrought by the Finger of God, which
the Devil knew did transcend his, and all Angelical Power.

And in this the Apostles who were Christ's constant Attendants, and the
Eyewitnesses of his Miracles, were not inferior; but if there was any
difference, it may be presumed the Advantage lay on the Apostles side. For tho
they knew not how far the Power of Apostate Spirits might reach, and whether
some of his Works were such as exceeded their Power to effect: yet there were
others of them, (and they the far greater part) that could leave no ground for
any such Suspicion, but were such unquestionable Effects of a Divine Power,
that all Mankind have concluded, they could be wrought by none but the Finger
of God.

If then by these means the Devil came to know the Divinity of Christ, might
not all the Apostes as well know it, having the same means of knowing it? Let
us now see what was the Judgment of the Ancients in this point.

Thirdly, The same Conclusion is also confirmed by the Testimonies of many more
Fathers, than are alleged by the Discussor for the contrary. He produces
three, viz. Hilary, Cyril of Jerusalem, and Basil of Seleucia. Let these be
yielded to him, what will they signify, when they are over-voted by a far
greater Number?

The Discussor himself grants, that the Fathers incidently say, that the other
Apostles knew Christ to be the Son of God, before St Peter's promulging him so:
But then he says, they meant thereby his nominal, not his natural Filiation.
Let us therefore see whether he truly represents their meaning. He instances
only in St. Ambrose, whom he finds in one place to affirm, that the other
Apostles knew Christ to be the Son of God as well as St. Peter; and in another
to seem to appropriate it wholly to him Page 90.
. In the one then he roundly affirms, that the other Apostles knew it; in the
other he does but seem to deny it. The place, he means, in which he affirms it,
is, I presume, in the sixth Book of his Comments on St. Luke, c. 9. Now the
Question is, whether St. Ambrose in this place meant, that the Apostles knew
the Divinity of Christ, which no Man that impartially reads the Text, can so
much as question (and therefore it was wisely done of the Discussor, not to
tell his Reader where it was to be found) for St. Ambrose there commenting upon
St. Peter's Answer, as it is recorded by St. Luke, Thou art the Christ of God,
says thus; If it was sufficient to the Apostle Paul, to know nothing but Jesus
Christ, and him crucified; what more should I desire to know than Christ? for
in this one Name, is the Expression both of his Divinity and Incarnation, and
the Faith of his Passion. And therefore THOUGH THE OTHER APOSTLES KNEW IT, yet
Peter answers rather than the rest, THOU ART CHRIST THE SON OF THE LIVING GOD;
he therefore comprised all, who expressed both his Nature and his Name Nam si
Paulo Apostolo satis est nihil scire nisi Christum Jesum, and hunc crucifixum,
quid amplius mihi desiderandum est seire quam Christum? In uno enim hoc nomine
and Divinitatis and Incarnationis expressio, and fides passionis est. Et ideo
licet caeteri Apostoli sciant, Petrus tamen respondet prae caeteris, Tu es
Christus, filius Dei vivi. Complexus est itaque omnia, qui and naturam and
nomen expressit, in quo summa virtutum est. Ambros. Comment. l. 6. in Evang.
Luc. c. 9. col. 116. Edit. Paris. 1614.
. Can any thing be more plain than (...) what St. Ambrose here says, the other
Apostles knew, was, what was expressed in the Name Christ, viz. his Divinity
and Incarnation? And what St. Peter answered, when he said, Thou art Christ,
the Son of the living God, in which is contained both his Name and his Nature?

So far was St. Jerome from thinking the Apostles ignorant of it, that he
thought the rude Seamen knew his Divinity, otherwise he spoke absurdly in
opposing their Confession to that of Arius Ad unum signum tranquillitate maris
reddita, quae post nimias procellas interdum and casu fieri solet, Nautae atque
vectores vere filium Dei confitentur, and Arius in Ecclesia pradicat Creaturam.
Hieron. Comment. l. 2. in Matthew. c. 15. v. 33. Edit. Bas. 1553.
.

St. Chrysostom says, When Peter said, AND WE HAVE BELIEVED, Christ excepts
Judas out of the number of Believers (...). In cap. 7. Evang. Johan. Hom. 47.
; thereby plainly signifying, that all of them save Judas believed Christ to be
the Son of the Living God. The same says Cyril of Alexandria.

Add to these all those Fathers who tell us, that Peter answered not for
himself only, but for all the Apostles, which, as Maldonate confesses Comment.
in Matthew. cap. 16. ver. 16.
, was the Judgment of St. Chrysostom, Jerome, and St. Austin; and Barradius
cites for it St. Augustine, Ambrose, Jerome, Anselm, and St. Thomas Comment. in
Concord. and hist. Evangelic. tom. 2. l. 10. c. 22.
. Yea the Discussor himself tells us, that St. Jerome acknowledges, that Peter
did profess this Truth, ex persona omnium, in the person of them all. That St.
Cyprian in his 55th Epistle declares, that Peter answered for all of them. That
St. Austin fancies, he only answered to preserve Unity, unus pro multis dedit
responsum, unitas in multis, etc. Page 85.
And in confessing this, does he not fairly pull down with one hand, what he
labors to build up with the other? For what the reason was, why he answered
for all, is not now the question; it suffices, that he did so; since if he did,
no Man can reasonably deny, but that he knew what he answered, was the Belief
of them all.

But this Opinion, says the Discussor, reflecting upon Dr. Barrow and Dr.
Cave, seemed to me very thin and silly: The reason why it seemed so to him,
follows, viz. that Christ should propound a Question to a dozen Persons, which
he knew any of them could solve, and make honorable Promises only to him that
should speak first, seemed to me, says he, a childish Fancy, and beneath the
Conceptions of a Doctor.

He here forgot his good Friend Maldonate, who was of the same silly Opinion.
But is it indeed silly to think, that Christ should propound a Question to a
dozen, which he knew any one of them could answer? That Question which just
before this he propounded to the same dozen, (Whom do Men say, that I the Son
of Man am?) did he not know, that every one of them could answer it? and so
indeed they all did, or at least so many of them as pleased: That other
Question propounded by Christ to all the twelve sometime before this, (Will ye
also go back?) did he not know, that every one of them could answer it, so far
as it concerned himself? And was not one Answer returned to it by St. Peter, in
the Name of them all? as the Discussor himself grants.

But that Christ should make honorable Promises only to him that should speak
first, seemed to him a childish Fancy. But if we may believe St. Ambrose, these
honorable Promises were not made to him only; for what is said to Peter, says
he, is said to the Apostles Denique audi dicentem, Tibi dabo claves regni
Caelorum; and quodcunque ligaveris super Terram, erit ligatum and in Caelo; and
quodcunque solveris -- Quod Petro dicitur, Apostolis dicitur. Enarratio in
Psalm. 38.
: Or if the Promises were here made to him only, the same were afterward made,
and the Reward promised was given to all the Apostles. The Lord says to Peter,
says St. Cyprian, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church;
And I will give thee the Keys. -- And although after his Resurrection he gives
equal Power to all his Apostles Loquitur Dominus ad Petrum: Ego dico tibi
inquit, quia tu es Petrus, and super istam Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam,
and portae Inferorum non vincent eam. Et tibi dabo claves regni Caelorum. -- Et
quamvis Apostolis omnibus post resurrectionem suam parem potestatem tribuat,
and dicat, sicut misit me Pater, etc. Cypr. de Unitat. Ecclesiae, p. 254. Edit.
Paris.
. Has Peter received those Keys, says St. Austin, and has not Paul received
them? has Peter received them, and has not John and James received them, and
the rest of the Apostles Nunquid istas claves Petrus accepit, and Paulus non
accepit? Petrus accepit, and Johannes and Jacobus non accepit, and caeteri
Apostoli? August. Sermon. 30. de Diversis.
? And that the Promises were made to the other Apostles, as well as to Peter,
is not only the Opinion of the ancient Church, (as I shall afterward more fully
show) but of many great Men of the Church of Rome Ellies du pin de antiq.
Eccles. disciplina dissertat. 4. p. 307. Simon vigorii ad respons. Synodal.
Council. Basil. Comment. c. 6. and de Monarch. p. 10, 11, 12, etc.
.

But since the Doctor's Opinion seemed to him a childish Fancy, let us see what
Man-like Reasons he has produced for the contrary. Peter is said to answer for
the rest, not as if he spoke or knew their Opinion on this Point. Now what are
his Reasons for this? For the Question Page 87.
was asked by our Savior on a sudden; and it does no where appear that the
Apostles had any precedaneous Conference or Consultation about it. Are not
these wise Reasons for a Man to give, who had just before censured the Doctor's
Opinion as silly? Grant the Question was sudden; did the Suddenness of it
render Peter ignorant of what he knew (as I have already showed) before the
Question was asked? Or needed he to consult the Apostles for that Answer, which
he had sometime before, upon occasion of another Question, given in their Name?
John 6. 69.

But what then was the true Reason, why Peter is said to answer this Question
for the rest? Because his Answer thereto was Orthodox, they were obliged to own
and embrace it, as the common Belief of the Church Ibid.
. Wiser yet; Is a Man said to answer for all those, who are obliged to own his
Answer, because it is Orthodox, whether they indeed own it, or not? What if the
other Apostles had been Heterodox, and disowned this Answer? Could he then have
been said to have answered for them? If not, then the reason why he is said to
have answered for them, was not because his Answer was Orthodox: But if he
could, then behold here a compendious way of reconciling all Heretics to the
Church of Rome. It is but putting one Romanist in the Head of them, and then
proposing the Questions in Dispute; for the Romanist returning an Orthodox
Answer, he speaks for them all, and so without any more ado, they are all good
Catholics. Had this Expedient been proposed a little sooner, it might have
saved the Bishop of Meaux and the Representer a great deal of needless pains.

He next produces Jansenius and Abulensis to vouch for him, but (as his manner
is) misrepresents them both: Jansenius expressly says, that Peter as the Mouth
of the Apostles, answered for them all -- Tanquam os Apostolorum pro omnibus
responder, dicens, tu es, etc. Comment. in Concord. Evangel. cap. 67.
. And again, -- Hence it appears, that he answered for all, which Chrysostom
also plainly asserts -- Hinc enim apparet ipsum pro omnibus respondisse, quod
aperte etiam Chrysostomus asserit, etc. ibid.
. And accordingly he is quoted by Cornelius a Lapide, Barradius and others, for
this Opinion. In answer to a Question he proposes we find indeed afterward,
the Words recited by the Discussor. The Question is this, Why Christ now
pronounced Peter alone blessed, when all the Apostles, or almost all, seem to
have had the same Faith, and when he seemed to have answered in the Name of
them all? To which he returns this Answer, Peter, IF WE SPEAK PROPERLY, did not
answer for them all, as he had done, John 6. when his Answer was not so much
approved, as corrected by Christ; but professed his Faith for himself, as one
that could not know the Faith of others, because he could not search the
Secrets of the Heart, etc. Ex quibus etiam pater, quid ad secundam Questionem
Principalem sit respondendum; nimirum Petrum si proprie loquatur, non
respondisse pro omnibus, etc. ibid.
If this seems to contradict what he says before, I leave it to the Discussor
to reconcile him to himself. In the other Passage of Jansenius he leaves out
the most material part; he thus recites it, Cum Chrysostomus and alii eum
vocant Os, and nomine omnium respondisse; non sit accipiendum, quasi
responderit id quod omnes sentirent, sed quia solus responderit quod omnibus
respondendum fuisset page 88.
. Whereas Jansenius his Words are these, Quod autem Chrysostomus and alii
nonnunquam dicant Petrum fuisse Os Apostolorum, and omnium nomine respondisse,
non sic accipiendum, quasi id responderit quod omnes sentirent, sed quia CVM
OMNES INTERROGATI ESSENT, ipse solus responderit, QVOD OMNES SECVM AVT PENE
OMNES SENTIRE PVTABAT; and quod omnibus respondendum fuisset. Who may not now
see, that the Words he has left out, do plainly contradict that for the Proof
of which he brought the rest?

He yet more grossly abuses Tostatus: For he says not absolutely, pro se solo
respondit; but delivers it as a matter doubtful: For as much, says he, as it
does not appear determinately, whether Peter answered in the name of all, IT
SEEMS thence more agreeable to the letter, that Peter answered for himself
alone De secundo dicendum, quod determinate non constat, an nomine omnium
Petrus responderit, unde videtur magis convenire literae, quod Petrus pro se
solo responderit. In Matthew. cap. 16. Quaest. 57.
. For which he gives four reasons, which may be all easily confuted. And a
little after, IT SEEMS this is to be said, that Peter now answered for himself
alone Dicendum videtur, quod Petrus pro se solo nunc respondet, ibid.
. But in case he answered for himself only, as Tostatus thought, yet he
peremptorily determined, that he said no more than what they all believed, and
that every one of them would have said the same, had every one answered singly
for himself (as shall presently more fully appear.)

It follows Page 88.
: If the other Apostles did equally (whether equally or unequally is not now
the Question) know it with Peter, and he only spoke their Sense for them, I
shall with Maldonat ask this Question; What Question? Si pro omnibus Petrus
loquebatur, cur non omnibus dictum, Beati estis? Cur non omnibus mutata nomina?
cur non omnibus dictum, Vobis dabo, etc. Is all this but one Question? Another
Man would have made it three, without the etc. and whosoever consults Maldonat
will find, that that contains one, if not two more, viz. Cum omnes Christus
interrogasset, cur non omnes responderunt? praesertim, cum paulo ante
interrogante eo quem se homines esse dicerent, non solus Petrus, sed omnes, aut
quicunque voluerunt, responderint Maldonat Comment in Matthew. 16. Col. 350.
. Though the Questions are many, yet a few words may suffice in answer to them
all.

Quest. 1. Why was it not said to them all, Ye are blessed?
Answ. Because Peter alone had spoken for them all, therefore to him alone
Christ's Reply is directed. But that it was applicable to them all is manifest;
because the reason of it (for Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee)
agreed to them all equally, (as I shall presently show.)

Quest. 2. Why were not all their Names changed?
Answ. Peter's Name was not now changed, but long before; and therefore this
Question stands upon a false Foundation. He did not, as St. Austin tells us,
then receive this Name, when Christ said to him, Thou art Peter; but then
rather, when it was said to him, thou shall be called Cephas, which is
interpreted Peter, etc. De Consensu Evangelist. ib. 2. cap. 17.
Or, if you please, I will answer it by another Question. Whether his Name was
changed to Peter, because the other Apostles did not know equally with him,
That Christ was the Son of the living God?

Quest. 3. Why was it not said to them all, I WILL GIVE YOU THE KEYS?
Answ. This has been answered already.

Quest. 4. Since Christ put the Question to them all, why did they not all
answer it? Especially considering that a little before, when he asked them,
WHOM DID MEN SAY THAT HE WAS? not only Peter, but all the Apostles, or as many
of them as pleased, returned an answer.
Answ. I answer in the Words of Gaudentius, When Peter alone speaks, the Faith
of the rest of the Believers is by no means excluded; but a meet order is kept,
while the first place is deservedly given to the Prince of the Apostles; lest
it should seem a sort of Tumult, rather than an Answer, had they all answered
together, or striven which should have answered first Solus ergo cum loquitur
Petrus, nequaquam reliquorum credentium fides excluditur; sed congruus ordo
servatur, dum Principi Apostolorum primus loquendi locus jure defertur, ne
tumultus quidem magis quam responsio vide retur, si tunc universi certatim ac
pariter respondissent. Tractat. quem prima die Ordinat. ipsius quorund. Civ.
Not. exceperunt. B. P P. tom. 4. p. 826.
. And the reason why all, or many of them answered to the other Question, was,
because they had a different Answer to return to it; one, one thing; and
another, another thing, according to the different Opinions they had heard of
the People. I proceed now,

Fourthly, To the Testimonies of those modern Romanists, the Discussor quotes
for the contrary Opinion. They are three, viz. Tostatus, Maldonat, and
Jansenius. The two former of which, though they deny, that Peter answered in
the name of all the Apostles; yet they as plainly express, as ever any
Protestant did, that the other Apostles had the same Faith, and in case they
had spoken, would have returned the same Answer, that Peter did.

Tostatus proposes this Question; Whether the rest believed what Peter
answered, and would have given the same Answer, had it been necessary for them
to answer Primum est, an id quod Petrus respondit, crederent caeteri, and illud
responsuri essent, si oporteret respondere? In Matthew. 16. Quaest. 57.
? To which he answers; That it must be said, that all of them held the same
Confession that Peter did; and if Christ had asked their Votes singly, every
one of them would have given the same Answer De primo dicendum, quod necesse
est dici omnes tenuisse eandem confessionem quam Petrus; and si sigillatim
Christus vota little scrutaretur vel peteret; idem singuli responderent, ibid.
. For which he gives four Reasons, which I shall not stay to transcribe. A
little after he says, Peter prevented the rest, and spoke what he thought, but
the rest seeing that Peter said that which they would have said, held their
Peace -- Praevenit Petrus caeteros, and dixit quid sentiebat; caeteri vero
videntes, quod Petrus dixerat id quod illi dicturi erant, tacuerunt, etc. ibid.
. And about a dozen lines after he adds, in answer to a Passage of Cyril, When
Cyril said that Peter prevented the rest, and was the Mouth of the whole
College; it must be said, that he was the Mouth of the whole College, not in
speaking for them all, but in speaking that which they all would have spoken;
because it happened that the opinion of Peter and the rest of the Apostles was
the same Cum vero dixit Cyrillus praevenit Petrus caeteros, fitque os totius
Collegii. Dicendum, quod suit os totius Collegii, non quidem loquendo pro
omnibus, sed loquendo id, quod omnes locuturi erant; quia accidit eandem esse
sententiam Petri et caeterorum. ibid.
.

Maldonat having before confessed, that some ancient Authors, viz. St.
Chrysostom, St Jerome, and St. Augustine, thought that Peter answered not for
himself alone, but for all the Apostles; to refute the opinion of the
Calvinists (that is the opinion of these Fathers) he proposes those Questions I
have before answered; and then adds, Therefore all other Authors thought
better, that Peter answered for himself only; not that the other (Apostles) did
not believe the same thing, and would not have said it, if Peter had not
prevented them; but that Peter by a stronger Faith, first broke out into
Confession Melius ergo omnes alii senserunt Auctores, Petrum pro se uno
respondisse; non quod alii idem non crederent, ac dicturi etiam fuissent, nisi
Petrus praevenisset; sed quod Petrus majore fide in Confessionem primus
eruperit. Comment. in Matthew. 16. v. 18.
. But then lest the Calvinists should have the Honor of having these famous
Fathers, St. Chrysostom, St. Jerome, and St. Austin on their side, the Jesuit
adds, And this only is that which these Authors would signify, who have said,
that he answered for them all, and who have called him the Mouth of the
Apostles Atque hoc tantum indicare Auctores illi voluerunt, qui dixerunt illum
pro omnibus respondisse, quique eum os Apostolorum appellaverunt, ibid.
. That is, he is said by them to answer for them all, because having a greater
Faith, he first burst out into that Confession which they would have made, had
not he got the start of them. Which is a manifest Contradiction to that reason
the Discussor gives, why the Fathers say, he answered for them all.

From this passage of Maldonat, I shall observe three things. 1. That Maldonat
makes these two to be distinct Propositions, which the Discussor confounds,
viz. (1.) That Peter answered for them all. (2.) That what Peter answered was
the Faith of them all. The first of these he denies; the second he grants. 2.
The Questions propounded by Maldonat, to overthrow the first of these
Propositions, the Discussor produces, as if he had designed them, for the
Confutation of the second Proposition; which is a notable Instance of his
Sincerity. 3. Since Maldonat also thought, that Christ in these Words, Upon
this Rock, etc. promised something great and singular to Peter as a Reward of
his Confession Praeterea cui dubium est, Christum his verbis, aliquid magnum et
singular, tanquam fidei confessionis proemium Petro concedere aut promittere
voluisse? ibid. col. 349.
. He thought it no childish Fancy, and beneath the conceptions of a Doctor,
that Christ should propound a Question to a dozen persons, which he knew any of
them could solve, and make honorable Promises only to him that should speak
first.

To these cited by the Discussor, I shall add a few more, whose names are
famous in the Church of Rome. The other (Apostles) says Salmeron, had the same
Faith, otherways they themselves would have declared their Faith, and Christ
would have asked and rebuked them, and would not have commanded them all to
keep Silence Alii tamen eandem fidem habebant; alioqui et ipsi depromerent suam
fidem, et Christus quaereret et increparet eos, et non praeciperet omnibus ut
tacerent. Salm. tom. 4, 3. a part tractat. 1. page 383.
. He is said to have answered for the rest of the Apostles, says Barradius,
because he answered first, what they would have answered Dicitur tamen pro
caeteris Apostolis respondisse, quia quod illi fuerant responsuri, respondet
primus. Comment in Concord. Hist. Evangel. Tom. 2. l. 10. c. 22.
. Peter (says Tirinus) as he was first constituted by Christ in the College of
the Apostles, so surmounting the rest in Dignity and Zeal, nothing doubting, as
well IN THE NAME OF THE REST, as in his own Name, as the MOUTH OF THEM ALL, He
presently, most plainly and boldly answered, THOU ART CHRIST, etc. In Matthew.
16. v. 16.
.

What shall we say, if Bellarmine himself asserts, that the other Apostles knew
this Mystery, as well as Peter? So he plainly does: For in answer to an
Objection of Illyricus he says thus, The Faith or Confession (viz. of Peter)
may be considered two ways; either absolutely in it self, or with relation to
Peter. The Adversaries seem to resolve his Faith to be the Foundation of the
Church the first way, but they are certainly deceived; for if it were so, the
Lord would not have said, Upon this Rock I WILL BVILD, but I DO BVILD, or I
HAVE BVILT my Church. For many had already believed, that he was the Son of the
living God; as the ancient Prophets, the blessed Virgin, Simeon, Zacharias,
John the Baptist, THE APOSTLES, AND OTHER DISCIPLES Respondeo, fidem five
confessionem duobus modis posse considerari; uno modo absolute, secundum se, ac
sine relatione ad Personam Petri; altero modo cum relatione ad Petrum etc. de
Romans Pontif. l. 1. c. 10.
. I know Bellarmine afterward makes it one of Peter's Prerogatives, that he
alone knew this Mystery by a peculiar Revelation De Romans Pontif. l. 1. c. 19.
. But who can help it, if he contradicts himself?

But what shall we say, if the Discussor himself grant, what he so stoutly
denies? viz. That the rest of the Apopostles knew Christ's Divinity. This I
think he does, in going about to prove that they did not equally know it with
Peter Page 88.
. For to say that they did not equally know it, plainly implies that they
indeed knew it.

It is also observable, how wisely he says; Now if the other Apostles did
equally know it with Peter, and he only spoke their Sense for them. As if he
could not speak their Sense, unless they not only knew it, but equally knew it
with him: And as if to speak their Sense, were the same thing, as to answer for
them. For though he could not answer for them, unless he spoke their Sense; yet
he might speak their Sense, though he did not answer for them, as Tostatus,
Maldonat, Salmeron, Barradius, etc. have determined.

His distinction of nominal and natural Filiation Page 90.
, has been already considered, and also his Quotations out of S. Ambrose. Of
the rest of the Fathers, whom he finds acknowledging, Peter first to know, and
first to confess Christ's Divinity Page 91.
; there is not one of them, except St. Hilary, who says, That he first knew it;
but only, that he first confessed or published it; and in saying, that he first
confessed it, they imply, that the other Apostles knew it.

I have said enough, yea too much to expose the vanity of this first Conceit.
The prime foundation therefore being razed, the other which depends upon it,
falls of it self. However I shall bestow a few Lines upon it, that the
Discussor may not pretend that he is not answered.

SECT. II.
The second ground he lays of St. Peter's Supremacy is, That he knew Christ's
Divinity by a special Revelation. For tho Peter 's Confession did exceed that
of others, yet this, says he, was not the sole reason of his Preferment and
Honor; but because the Father singled him out of the Apostolic Society,
illuminating him with a particular Revelation, etc. Page 80.
And again, The Father and the Holy Ghost cull him out of the whole Body of the
Apostles, and honor him particularly with a Revelation Page 81.
. And again, I will never be induced to believe otherwise, than that St. Peter
's Revelation did discover to him more than either what he or they knew before,
otherwise it had been of no import Page 90.
. And so again and again, as if he thought he could make up what was wanting in
proof, by the frequent and impertinent repetition of it.

I know not any that would induce him to believe otherwise, than that God
revealed this to St. Peter; that this Revelation discovered to him more than
what he knew before; that all the forces of Man's Wit, all human Wisdom,
Industry and Sagacity, could never have arrived to it, without a Revelation.
Nothing of this is the matter in dispute; but whether this Revelation was
peculiar to Peter. And,

1. I have already showed, that it was not so, by proving that his
fellow-Apostles knew the same thing, and by consequence had the Revelation of
it as well as he. And whereas he says, we may find the Fathers assert this, by
the following Quotations. Therefore,

2. I have carefully read over all those Quotations, and cannot find, that so
much as one of the Fathers quoted, assert it: They say indeed, that Peter had
it by Divine Revelation, which is no more than our Savior plainly tells us;
But they do not say, that he only had this Revelation, or use any such Words as
exclude the other Apostles. I shall instance in two or three of his Quotations,
that the Reader may see how pertinent they are. Peter was declared blessed,
having spoken the things of God Page 80.
. Is not this much to the Purpose? Again, he pronounces Peter blessed, because
he received his Knowledge from the Divine Grace. And is not this every-whit as
much? Once more; As the Prince of the Apostles witnesses, who was thought
worthy to be proclaimed blessed, because the Father revealed it to him. But is
it said, the Father revealed it to none but him? The Discussor perhaps may say,
this is implied, though not expressed. How so? because they mention Peter only.
The reason of that is, because our Savior directed his reply to Peter only;
and there was good reason why he should do so, though he meant it to the whole
Company, because Peter alone had returned the Answer to his Question; but as he
answered not for his single self, but for them all, so Christ's return to him,
must be extended to all. For since they all knew it, (as has been proved) and
since they could no other way attain to this Knowledge than by Revelation, it
might therefore as truly be said to James and John; Blessed art thou James, and
blessed art thou John, for Flesh and Blood has not revealed this unto thee,
but my Father which is in Heaven. And,

3. This is no more than what Origin plainly asserts. If this saying, [I will
give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven] be common to the rest; why shall
not likewise all those things be common to all, both which are spoken before,
and which follow after, as spoken to PETER Tract. 1. in Matthew. 16.
? Of the same Judgment must all those Fathers beforementioned be, who were of
Opinion, that the other Apostles had the same Faith, and would have made the
same Confession, had not Peter prevented them. For since they knew, that this
Article of our Faith could not be known, but by Divine Revelation; they must of
Necessity hold, that all they that knew it had such a Revelation of it. To
which I may also add, All those who affirm that the Promise of the Keys was
made not only to Peter, but to all the Apostles, which (as I shall afterward
show) was the general Opinion of the Fathers.

I might here fairly dismiss the Discussor, for his Foundation failing,
whatsoever is built upon it must of it self tumble down. And were indeed both
his Suppositions true: Were it true, that the other Apostles were ignorant of
Christ's Divinity, and that Peter attained to the knowledge of it by a
particular Revelation; yet he must be a Man of rare Art, who can superstruct
his Supremacy upon such a bottom. For what connection is there between these
two Propositions, Peter first knew the Divinity of Christ by special
Revelation, therefore Peter has supreme Jurisdiction over the Universal
Church? Is not this Consequence altogether as good, Andrew knew him to be the
Messiah before Peter, therefore Andrew was Peter's Superior? And this is
somewhat better, St. John lay in Christ's Bosom, or had the uppermost place
next after Christ at Meals, therefore St. John is the Prince of the Apostles?
Are not these admirable Consequences? And yet I fear we shall find no better
proofs for Peter's Supremacy.

But because some perhaps may say, It is not much material whether these
Hypotheses stand or fall, since the direct Proofs he afterward produces, both
from Scripture and the Ancients, are a Foundation that can never be shaken; I
shall proceed to examine the remainder of his Discourse, though not in his
preposterous Method. It is an absurd thing to talk of the Pope's Supremacy, as
St. Peter's Heir, unless St. Peter's Supremacy be first made out; I shall
therefore begin with that, and in case it appear, that St. Peter was invested
with this paramount Power, it will then be fit to enquire, whether it descended
to the Bishop of Rome as his Heir.

The Proofs he produces of St. Peter's Supremacy are (as I said before) no
other than those two Texts of Scripture, commonly pressed by the Romanists to
serve in this cause, and the Sayings of some Fathers to confirm the sense he
gives of these Texts. In the first of these (viz. Matthew. 16. 18, 19.) he
fancies he is furnished with a double Argument; one from these Words, Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church: The other from these Words,
And to thee will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, ver. 19.

CHAP. II.
HE first insists upon these Words, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I
build my Church: Upon which he bestows three Chapters. In so long a Discourse
upon a Rock, one might well expect to find something at least of solid
reasoning; but alas the whole, from the beginning to the end, is so sandy, so
incoherent and inconsequent, that I am at a great loss to find any thing that
does but look like an Argument. For if at last all should be granted to St.
Peter, that he would hence infer, it will in no wise conclude that Sovereign
Dominion he contends for; as will plainly appear by taking a survey of his 4th,
5th and 6th Chapters.

SECT. I.
He grants that Christ is the primary and principal Foundation of the Church,
on whom not only every true Christian, but the Apostles and St. Peter himself
is mystically superedified Chap. 4. page 100.
; (by the way, were not the Apostles and St. Peter true Christians? If they
were, does not the Discussor speak absurdly, when he says, Not only every true
Christian, but the Apostles and St. Peter himself, as if they were not included
in the number of true Christians) Need he have quoted St. Austin and St. Cyril
for this? Was it ever denied by Protestants? Nay does he not say, that
Protestants traduce them, as if they went about to despoil our Savior of this
Honor? But to show his reading in the Fathers, he produces their Testimonies
for what we affirm, as well as for what we deny. He might also have spared his
pains in proving, that things subordinate combat not one with another, but
suppose one another Page 101.
; were it not, that we should not then have seen his Learning in the
distinction of fundamentum (...), and fundamentum (...).

But lest his liberal Concessions to our Savior, should seem to derogate from
St. Peter's Glory, he puts in this caution to secure it, That Peter is not
hereby excluded, (by no means, for then the Pope is excluded too) but is
likewise the Rock, but in Subordination and Inferiority to Christ Ibid.
. And this also, if it will please him, is granted by Protestants; and
therefore he is uncivil to the Fathers, in summoning them again to bear Witness
to it. But though he cites the Fathers to no Purpose, it may not be impertinent
to note two things from those here cited.

1. He quotes, Tertul. Lib. contra Marc. Page 103.
as if it were but one single Book; whereas Tertullian has written five Books
against Marcion, each of them consisting of a great Number of Chapters. As
exact is he in the Words cited. Tertullian enquiring the reason, why Simon's
Name was changed to Peter, his Words are these; Sed and cur Petrum? Si ob
vigorem fidei, multae materiae solidaeque nomen de suo accomodarent. An quia
and Petra et lapis Christus? Siquidem et legimus positum eum in lapidem
offendiculi et in Petram scandali; omitto caetera. Itaque adfectavit carissimo
Discipulorum de figuris suis peculiariter nomen communicare Advers. Marc. l. 4.
c. 13.
. Which he thus recites: Christus Petrum ita vocat, quia lapis and Petra ipse
est, itaque affectavit carissimo discipulorum de figuris suis peculiariter
nomen communicare. But I presume he took it upon trust, and therefore may be
excused.

2. Three of the four Fathers he quotes, give a reason of this name, and the
reason given by two of those three, is as applicable to the other Apostles, as
to Peter. So is that of St. Austin, Consortium meretur nominis, qui consortium
meretur et operis. And so is that of St. Ambrose, Recte quia Petra Christus,
Simon nuncupatus est Petrus, ut qui cum Domino fidei societatem habeat, cum
Domino habeat et nominis Dominici societatem. Now since the reason they give of
it, is common to them all, we may hence reasonably conclude, that they thought
this illustrious Title, as truly applicable to the other Apostles, as to St.
Peter.

But one thing I may not omit, lest the Discussor should think it unanswerable.
Upon a Quotation out of St. Basil, Hom. 28. de Poenit. to show, that Peter's
being the Rock, does not exclude Christ from being so, he makes this Remark.
It Is very observable here, that this Father acknowledges Christ, to have made
the other Apostles LIGHTS, SHEEP, and PRIESTS; but he mentions but ONE ROCK,
WHICH IS PETER P. 103, 104.
. This Criticism, he adds, may be observed in St. Ambrose, lib. 6. Lucae; Ego
sum inquit lux Mundi, etc. And St. Jerome likewise accords herein in his
Comments on Abdias, etc. Page 104.
.

It is pity this critical Observation should be lost, and yet who can help it?
for when these Fathers in the places quoted, express Rock and Disciple in the
singular number; as he made a Rock, says St. Basil (...).
. He denied not to his Disciple the favor of that Name, says S. Ambrose Petra
erat Christus, etiam Discipulo suo hujus vocabuli gratiam non negavit. Comment.
lib. 6. in Evang. Luc. c. 9. tom. 3. col. 117.
. And the Rock gave to Peter, that he should be a Rock, says St. Jerome Ipsa
Petra donavit Petro, ut Petra fit. Comment. in Abd.
. The utmost they can mean, is no more than one of these two things, or both
together: 1. That these words, Upon this Rock, were directed in particular to
St. Peter. Or, 2. That this Title (Rock) was given to him as his proper Name,
though as to its meaning, it might be as truly ascribed to the other Apostles.
For so far was St. Ambrose from denying that the other Apostles were Rocks,
that within two lines after the words quoted by the Discussor, he supposes that
every Christian may and ought to be a Rock, for the same reason as St. Peter
was. For having said that Christ gave him this Name, because he had from the
Rock solidity of Constancy and firmness of Faith, he adds, Therefore do thou
endeavor that thou also may be a Rock; therefore seek the Rock not without
thee, but within thee Petra est Christus, eiam Discipulo suo hujusvocabuli
gratiam non negavit, ut et ipse sit Petrus, quod de Petra habeat soliditatem
constantiae fidei firmitatem. Enitere ergo ut and tu Petra sis: itaque non
extra te sed intra te Petram require etc. Ambros. lib. 6. in Evang. Luc. c. 9.
col. 117. Edit. Paris. 1614.
. But to have added this, would have defeated his design in quoting the rest.
St. Jerome expressly says in the plural Number, That Christ is the Rock, who
vouchsafed to his Apostles also, that they should be called Rocks, saying, Thou
art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church Petra Christus est, qui
donavit Apostolis suis, ut ipsi quoque Petrae vocentur: Tu es Petrus, et super
hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Comment. lib 3. in Amos. c. 7. v. 12.
tom. 6. page 102. Bas. 1553.
. Where from these words, Thou art Peter, etc. he infers, that Christ the Rock
bestowed not only upon Peter, but upon the other Apostles, that they should be
called Rocks. What is now become of this Observable?

We may without danger grant that Exposition of St. Austin he contends for P.
104, 105.
; and therefore have no reason to court him cap in hand for the other. But when
he says, that by his varying from his former frequent Explication he deviated
from St. Ambrose who baptized him; he says not true, if the Comments upon the
Epistles be St. Ambrose's which the Discussor quotes as his; for he there
expounds the Rock to be the Confession of the Catholic Faith made by Peter
Unde dicit Dominus ad Petrum, Super istam Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, hoc
est, in hac Catholicae Fidei confessione statuam fideles ad vitam. Comment.
Epist. ad Ephesians. c. 2. Tom. 3. col. 498.
, which is in effect to expound it of Christ. But I grant those Comments to be
none of his. Whether St. Austin changed his former Exposition upon a Mistake;
or whether he were no good Hebrician Page 106.
, is not here pertinent to be enquired. In what sense he calls Peter Head of
the Church, shall be afterward showed. That in most perspicuous terms he
acknowledges in several places of his Writings PETER's SVPREMACY Page 107.
, has not so much as shadow of proof in any of the places produced by the
Discussor.

But St. Austin declares them Wretched, and Heretics that disown him to be the
Rock: Thus Agon. Christ. he calls them miseri, dum in Petro Petram non
intelligunt. This is grossly to abuse St. Austin, had he considered either the
Words that go before, or that follow those he has cited, he might have seen
that St. Austin could not by the Rock in this place mean Peter; for he tells us
just before, that Peter sustains the Person of the Church, and that the Keys
are given to the Church, when they are given to him. To the same purpose are
the words that immediately follow De Agone Christiano, c. 30, 31.
. Now could he bear the Person of the Church built upon the Rock, and at the
same time be the Rock it self upon which it is built? St. Austin therefore by
the Rock meant Christ himself; and by Peter the Church of Christ, as he plainly
expresses himself in other places. This Name Peter, says he, was imposed upon
him by Christ, that by that figure he might signify the Church; for because
Christ is the Rock, Peter is the Christian People Sermon. 13. de Verb. Dom.
secund. Matthew.
. Again, The Rock was Christ, upon which Foundation even Peter himself is
built; for other Foundation can no Man lay, besides that which is laid which is
Christ Jesus. The Church therefore which is founded in Christ, received from
him the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven in Peter, that is, the power of binding
and of loosing Sins. For that which properly the Church is in Christ, that by
signification is Peter in the Rock; BY WHICH SIGNIFICATION CHRIST IS UNDERSTOOD
TO BE THE ROCK, PETER TO BE THE CHVRCH Petra erat Christus, super quod
fundamentum etiam ipse aedificatus est Petrus; fundamentum quippe aliud nemo
potest ponere praeter id quod positum est, quod est Christus Jesus. Ecclesia,
ergo quae fundatur in Christo, etc. Tractat. 24. in Evang. Johannis.
. And that this was St. Austin's notion of the Rock in this place, will farther
appear if we consider the Scope of his Discourse, which was to prove that
remission of Sins is to be obtained in the Church. Let us, says he, not hearken
to them, who deny that the Church of God can remit all Sins. Then follow the
words quoted by the Discussor, Therefore those wretched Persons, while in Peter
(that is, the Church) they do not understand the Rock (that is, Christ) and
will not believe that the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are given to the
Church, they themselves have lost them Nec eos audiamus qui negant Ecclesiam
Dei omnia peccata posse dimittere. Itaque miseri, dum in Petro Petram non
intelligunt, et nolunt credere datas Ecclesiae claves regni Coelorum, ipsi eas
de manibus amiserunt. De Agone Christiano. c. 31.
. They themselves have lost the Keys, because they will not believe that they
were given to the Church. And why will they not believe this? because in the
Church they do not understand Christ in whom the Church is founded, who has
committed the Keys to her.

The next Passage is quoted out of St. Austin contra 5 Haeres. I suppose he
means his Oration de quinque Haeresibus, in which there is no such Passage, and
in case it were, it would be altogether as impertinent as the former.

But that which comes next, he is confident must gag us, and make us as
silenced Ministers, as if the Wolves had first seen us, viz. that St. Austin
makes the Succession of the Bishops of Rome, to be the Rock, contra partem
donati. Numerate Episcopos ab ipsa sede beati Petri, ipsa est Petra, quam non
vincunt superbae inferorum Portae Page 107.
.

It is well for them, that this must silence us, they will then for the future
be no more troubled with disputing, which is a Work they are very awkard at.
But if this will silence us, how comes it to pass that we were not silenced
long since, this place having been often produced against us. The truth is, so
far is it from stopping our Mouths, that it furnishes us with a new Argument
against Peter's Supremacy; which when the Discussor shall consider, he may
perhaps be silenced himself; or sneak away as (it is said) those Wolves do,
that are seen first by Men. Though if I should deny it, the Discussor will not
be able to prove, that by the Rock is here meant the Succession of the Bishops
of Rome; yet as I have been all along liberal in my Concessions, so should I
for Argument sake grant him this also, it will make nothing to the Advantage of
his Cause. For,

1. If it be granted; yet before the Discussor can hence infer the Bishop of
Rome's, or Peter's Supremacy, he must prove, that the Foundation of the
Building is ever the supreme Lord of it.

2. If it be granted; yet the Succession of the Roman Bishops, cannot by Virtue
of these Words, be the sole Rock, or any more the Rock, than the Succession of
Bishops in any other Apostolical Church. This will appear, by restoring to the
Text one little Word (vel) which the Discussor was so prudent as to leave out.
St. Austin's Words are these. Numerate Sacerdotes VEL ab ipsa sede beati Petri,
et in ordine illo Petrum, quis cui successit videte. Ipsa est Petra, quam non
vincunt superbae inferorum portae. From which Words these things are plain.

(1.) That St. Austin here uses the very same Argument against the Donatists,
that Irenaeus, Tertullian, and several other Fathers had used before, against
the Heretics of their times, to prove the Catholic Doctrine, viz. The
Succession of Bishops in the Apostolical Churches Iren. l. 3. c. 3. and l. 4.
c. 63. Tertul. de Praescript. c. 32. Cyprian Ep. ad Lapsos Edit. Pamel. 27.
.

(2.) That he proposes the Church of Rome only as a single Instance, instead of
all those Apostolical Churches, that might have been mentioned; As Irenaeus
before had done, who because it would have been tedious to enumerate the
Successions of all Churches, brings for an example, that of Rome, which was the
greatest and most famous Sed quoniam valde longum est in hoc tali volumine
omnium Ecclesiarum enumerare successiones, maximae and antiquissimae, and
omnibus cognitae, etc. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Is. Casaub. Exercit. 15. p. 310.
. And therefore he says not simply. Numerate Sacerdotes ab ipsa sede beati
Petri, etc. But numerate Sacerdotes VEL ab ipsa sede, etc. Which is in effect
to say with Irenaeus, Because it would be too long to reckon the Successions of
Bishops in all those Churches, in which the Catholic Doctrine has been
preserved ever since the Apostles; consult at least the Succession of the
Church of Rome, from the first Founder of it St. Peter. And therefore,

3. And consequently, if it be the Succession of the Bishops of Rome, that he
here makes the Rock, he implicitly affirms the same of any other Apostolical
Church, in which there had been a continued Succession of Catholic Bishops;
which is further confirmed, in that he elsewhere arguing against the same
Donatists, joins the Church of Jerusalem together with that of Rome, and makes
the Chair of the former, no way inferior in Authority to the latter. If (says
he to Petilian) all the Bishops through the World, were such as thou most
falsely accusest them to be; yet what has the Chair of the Church of ROME
done, in which Peter sat, and in which at this day Anastasius sits; or of the
Church of JERUSALEM, in which James sat, and in which at this day John sits,
with which we are joined in Catholic Unity, and from which you by a cursed
Fury have separated your selves Veruntamen si omnes per totum orbem tales
essent, quales vanissime criminaris, Cathedra tibi quid secit Ecclesia Romanae,
in qua Petrus sedit, and in qua hodie Anastasius sedet: vel Ecclesiae
Hierosolymitanae, in qua Jacobus sedit, and in qua hodie Johannes sedet, quibus
nos in Catholica Unitate connectimur, and a quibus vos nefario furore
separastis? Contra Lit. Petiliani, l. 2. c. 51.
? And therefore,

4. Nothing can hence be inferred for the Supremacy of Peter, more than for the
Supremacy of James, or any other Apostle.

If any shall ask, why St. Austin, in case he did not ascribe some preeminence
to the Church of Rome, should mention that rather than the Church of Antioch of
Jerusalem? Or why he did not choose to instance in the Church of Carthage,
rather than in any other? The Answer is obvious. To the first, because the
Church of Rome was at that time the most famous, and of greatest esteem of any
Church in the World: To the second; because the Donatists objected against the
Church of Carthage, and other African Churches, that the Succession of Bishops
had been in them interrupted by Traditors; whereas they could not pretend this
against the Church of Rome Is. Casaub. Exercit. 16. n. 149. P. 540.
.

SECT. II.
All that the Discussor contends for in the next Chapter is, that those Fathers
who assert St. Peter 's Faith to be the Rock, do not thereby exclude his Person
Page 108.
. Though it were easy to show (if their sense be expressed by their Words) that
some of them do; yet I may grant him this also. And is it not pity, that so
much Labor should be lost, as he has spent in the Proof of it? That
Theophylact, Epiphanius, St. Hilary, St. Chrysostom, St. Cyril, St. Ambrose,
St. Basil, St. Jerome, St. Cyprian, Tertullian, should be all summoned to bear
Witness to that, which is not denied?

Though I cannot foresee any advantage he can take against Protestants from
this Concession; yet when he says, That to affirm the Church to be built on
Peter 's Faith, is not to bar or disclude his Person, but to signify the CAUSE
why it was superedified on him Page 110.
: Since I have already proved, that the same Faith was common to them all, it
plainly follows, for the same cause, that the Church was built upon them all,
and not upon Peter only. And the meaning of those Fathers, who chose rather to
affirm, the Church to be built upon St. Peter's Faith or Confession, than upon
his Person, was not to assign the REASON, why our Savior made choice of him
above the rest, to build his Church upon (as Dr. Tho. G. tells us) Sermon of
St. Peter, p. 18.
: Since those very Fathers (as I have showed) were of opinion that the other
Apostles had the very same Faith, that St. Peter made Confession of.

Though all his Quotations are here impertinent, because that is so, for the
proof of which they are brought; yet because there may be some such Words or
Expressions in some of them, as show these Fathers were of Opinion, not only
that the Church was built upon Peter's Person (which is that, for which he
alleges them) but (as the Discussor may pretend) infer their Belief of his
Supremacy, I shall therefore examine those which make the fairest show this
way; which are one Passage of Theophylact, another of St. Chrysostom's, and
those Titles which some of them give to St. Peter, such as Prince and Head of
the Apostles, etc.

Theophylact, he says, introduces our Savior, calling St. PETER, the next Rock
of the Church after himself Page 111.
. Though the Word next, be not in Theophylact, yet suppose it were, it would do
him no Service. For might not Christ call him the next to himself, for that
Priority of Order he had in the College of the Apostles, tho he had no
Jurisdiction over the rest? That Stone which lies next to the chief
Cornerstone, has it by virtue of its place, any Dominion over the other
Foundation-Stones? Had the Discussor considered, how Theophylact stood affected
toward the Bishop of Rome's universal Monarchy, he would have been so wise as
not to have mentioned him, for fear of suggesting to his Reader an Authority
against it: For whatsoever opinion he may be supposed to have had of St.
Peter's Supremacy, it is certain he could have none of the Pope's: for as he
was contemporary with Michael Cerularius, who excommunicated the Pope with the
whole Latin Church, for adding the particle Filioque to the Creed (as Barronius
has proved Ad an. 1071. n. 15, 16, 17. etc.
;) so it appears by his Comments, that he sided with him in that Controversy.

But he says St. Chrysostom confesses his universal Jurisdiction: How does that
appear? Because he says, God set Jeremy over one Nation; but Peter over all the
World Page 111.
. A learned Romanist shall answer this. Chrysostom, says he, (Hom. 55. on
Matthew.) says, that Peter was to be the Foundation, in that sense, that he was
to be the Pastor of the Church, and the Preacher of the Gospel: But when the
same (Chrysostom) says, that Peter was set over the whole World, the meaning is
not, that he was set over all Churches simply; but that he was not to preach
the Gospel to one People only, as Jeremy, but to every Nation Chrysostomus Hom.
55. in Matthew. Petrum futurum esse dicit eo sensu fundamentum, qu^d Ecclesiae
Pastor futurus sit and Evangelii praedicator: Cum vero idem ait Petrum
praepositum esse universo terrarum orbi, sensus non est, quod omnibus omnino
Eccles^is. sit praepositus, sed quod non uni Populo, ut Jeremias, sed omni
genti Evangelium esset annuntiaturus. Ellies du Pin de antiq. Eccl. Discipl.
dissert. 4. p. 307.
.

But methinks the Discussor who quotes St. Chrysostom so often, might have
remembered what he says of St. Paul; The care of diverse Nations, says he, was
committed to the Angels, but none of them so governed the Nation entrusted to
him, as Paul did the WHOLE WORLD (...). De laudibus Pauli Apost. Hom. 2. tom.
5. p. 502. Edit. Front. Duc.
. To MICHAEL was committed the care of the Jews, but to PAUL the Earth, and the
Sea, and the inhabited World, and the Desert (...), etc. ibid.
. He had not, says he, the care of one Family, but also of Cities, and of
Peoples, and of Nations, and of the whole World (...). In 2 Epist. ad Corinth.
c. 11. v. 28.
. Can St. Peter's Diocese be of greater extent? Had Chrysostom thought him
Paul's Superior, would he not only have affirmed Paul to be of equal Dignity
with him, but plainly intimate that he was in honor to be preferred before
him? as he does in his Comment upon Galat. 1. 18.

Had St. Chrysostom taken Peter for the Monarch of the universal Church, would
he have set St. James above him in the Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem? as
every one will see he does, who will but take the pains to read his 33 Homily
on the Acts of the Apostles. In short, no Man can imagine, that St. Chrysostom
did not think, that every other Apostle had a Province as universal, as that of
St. Peter, who considers, that he makes them Rulers, who had not received
Nations, and several Cities, but had all of them in common the whole World
delivered into their Hands (...), etc. De utilitat. Lect. Script. Tom. 5. page
590. Edit. Front. Duc.
. This is I think enough, to unveil those imposturous Gulleries (to use the
Discussor's learned Words) which several misguided Writers (the Discussor for
one) obtrude on their easy Readers, under the umbrage of this eminent Author,
by depraving his Sense, and contorting his meaning Page 114.
.

As for those honorable Titles, which in some of these Quotations are bestowed
upon St. Peter (as Prince of the Apostles, the Head of the Apostolic Quire,
etc.) I shall have a more fit occasion of speaking to them in the next Section,
to which I shall therefore refer them.

SECT. III.
I proceed to the sixth Chapter, where (if any where) we have reason to expect
something to the purpose: His Design here is to show S. Peter's Preeminence, as
he is the Foundation of the Church above the other Apostles. And yet,

1. He grants, that all the Apostles in reference to their Apostolic Power,
had equal Authority of founding Churches in any part of the World; in Relation
to their Doctrine, were equally Orthodox and Infallible: As to what concerned
their Writings, they were alike Canonical; and what appertained to the
Government of all other Christians, they were equally PASTORS, HEADS, and
RECTORS Page 118.
. This is a large Concession; if in what appertained to the Government of all
other Christians, they were EQVALLY PASTORS, HEADS and RECTORS; then one would
think, Peter had not a more universal Pastorship than they. But we Heretics
are, it seems, mistaken; For notwithstanding they were all equal Foundations in
these Aspects, St. PETER was here the only sole Rock, on which Ibid.
Christ promised to build his Church: the only and the sole Rock too. But in
case he were here the sole Rock, if elsewhere the other Apostles are Rocks too,
what Preeminence does this give him above them? But perhaps he did not intend
to lay any Stress upon the word here: Well then, they were equally Foundations,
but St. Peter was the only Rock; that is to say, every one of them was a Rock
as much as he; and yet none of them was a Rock but he. Not so; for they were
equally Foundations, in respect of all other Christians, whereas Peter was the
sole Rock of the Church. Were not then all other Christians the Church? not the
whole, but only part of it; for the Church did consist, NOT ONLY OF ALL
CHRISTIANS WHATSOEVER, BUT EVEN OF THE APOSTLES THEMSELVES: Then the Apostles,
it seems, were no Christians, since besides all Christians whatsoever, the
Church consisted of the Apostles too; that is, it consisted of such as were
Christians, and such as were no Christians.

It will be said, by all Christians whatsoever, he means no more, than all
other Christians whatsoever, besides the Apostles. Be it so; the Apostles then
were built upon Peter, but all other Christians, upon Peter, and the rest of
the Apostles jointly. But how could the Apostles be built upon Peter, seeing
they were built (were both Disciples of Christ, and Apostles) before this
Promise was made to Peter, whereas nothing was built on him, but what was to be
built after it.

He adds, If they (viz. the Apostles) were Foundations, they were sub Petro, et
post Petrum. If they were Foundations sub Petro, then Peter was built upon
them: let it be therefore post Petrum, whom our Savior to preserve Unity,
chose out of the Apostolic College, and with his own Hands, laid NEXT TO
HIMSELF Page 118
. Christ then as the Foundation of all (even of Peter too) is laid first, Peter
is laid next to Christ, the other Apostles are laid upon Peter, and one upon
another in their respective order; let us suppose, in the order, in which they
are mentioned by St. Matthew, Andrew is laid next to Peter, James next to
Andrew, John next to James: Now in this order, as Peter is the Foundation of
the other eleven Apostles, so Andrew is the Foundation of ten, which are laid
upon him, James is the Foundation of nine; and so at last, Peter's being the
sole Rock upon which the Church was built, amounts to no more than this, that
one Stone more was laid upon Peter than upon Andrew, and two more upon Peter,
than upon James. Again; If the meaning of the Churches being built on Peter and
his Successors, is, that he and they are supreme Heads of the Church Page 131.
. Then the universal Church, all save Peter, being built upon Andrew, Andrew
was supreme Head of all, save Peter himself: And all except Peter and Andrew
being built upon James; James was supreme Head of all, except Peter and Andrew,
etc. And so the Church had as many supreme Heads as there were Apostles. And is
this at length all that Excellency of Power they ascribe to St. Peter?

The Reasons he gives, why Christ made Peter the only Rock are, 1. Because he
did HERE engage himself by Promise solely to him, to build his Church on him,
upon his peculiar Confession of his Divinity, which the Apostles till they had
learnt it of him, were ignorant of. The Foundations of which reason have been
already razed. 2. That what our Savior replied to his Confession (to pass over
those Elegancies vicissim (...)) was reciprocally directed to him only (the
Pronouns Tu and Tibi excluding Plurality and Partnership) not only as an
Approbation, but as a Reward. From the Pronowns Tu and Tibi, no more can be
inferred, than that he in particular was entitled to these Promises; not that
the other Apostles were excluded; nor is there one word to exclude them in
those sayings of St. Chrysostom and St. Cyril he afterward quotes to this
Purpose. It is one thing to say, Christ here promised Peter only to build his
Church upon him; another thing to say, Christ here promised Peter, that he
would build his Church on him only, and no other. Though the Promise was here
directed to Peter only, yet nothing is more manifest, than that what is here
promised, was afterward conferred upon the other Apostles. Instances of a like
nature frequently occur in the Holy Scripture.

But what if this Gentleman presently contradicts himself, and yields, that
Peter is not the only Rock? This he certainly does, if he grants there are
other Rocks beside him; and he must of necessity grant this, when he says, God
did destine him to be in a more peculiar excelling manner the THE ROCK, on whom
he would build his Church Page 121.
. For could he be the Rock, in a more excelling manner, unless there were other
Rocks whom he excelled? Thus after his bold Advance, he cowardly retreats: The
sole Rock, is now put the more excelling Rock; Christ promised to build his
Church not on him only, but on him more eminently, or on him in a more signal
and remarkable manner; as he also expresses it Page 119, and 123.
.

And in this Dr. Tho. G. concurs with the Discussor. For having before given
St. Jerome's Paraphrase upon the Words, he adds, By which it appears that our
Savior, when he gave to SIMON the Name of PETER, that is, a ROCK, made him the
Rock on which he would build his Church, and that in a more eminent manner,
than any other of the Apostles. Sermon of St. Peter, p. 23.
. By the way, if he made him the Rock, when he gave him the Name of Peter, then
he made him so before, and by consequence not at the same time when he said to
him, Thou art Peter, etc. as the Doctor affirms in the Page immediately
foregoing; for it is certain he gave him that Name before; Mark 3. 16. John 1.
42. But let us see what their proofs are, I fear we shall find nothing of the
solidity of the Rock in them.

1. The Doctor says, That this is every where affirmed by the same holy Doctor
(St. Jerome) giving him the Titles of PRINCE, CHIEF, HEAD, and GREATEST OF THE
APOSTLES. I grant, that St. Jerome gives him these Titles; but absolutely deny,
that he meant thereby that Christ built his Church more eminently upon him,
that is (as he interprets it) gave him a Preeminence of Power over the other
Apostles. The Reasons of my denial are these; 1. Because in that very place
where he says Peter was constituted the Head, he also says, What is said of
Peter (Matthew. 16. 17, 18.) is in another Text affirmed of them all, and that
the strength of the Church is established upon them EQVALLY Ar dicis, super
Petrum fundatur Ecclesia, licet id ipsum in alio loco super omnes Apostolos
fiat, and cuncti claves regni Caelorum accipiant, and ex aequo super eos
Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur: tamen propterea inter duodecim unus eligitur, ut
capite constituto Schismatis tollatur occasio. Advers. Jovinian. l. 1. c. 27.
p. 35. Ed. Basil. 1553.
. And if equally upon all, then not more eminently upon St. Peter than the
rest. And though he gives the first place to Peter, by Reason of his Age Aetati
delatum est, quia Petrus senior erat, ibid.
: Yet he tells us, that he was only an Apostle, (and by Consequence had no
Jurisdiction over the rest) and that St. John the youngest, was upon several
accounts to be preferred before him: PETER, says he, was an Apostle, and JOHN
was an Apostle; but PETER was an APOSTLE ONLY, John was AN APOSTLE, AND AN
EVANGELIST, AND A PROPHET Petrus Apostolus est, et Johannes Apostolus: maritus,
et virgo, sed Petrus Apostolus tantum, Johannes et Apostolus, et Evangelista,
et Propheta, ibid.
. 2. Because St. Jerome so explains his meaning, when he calls him the Prince of
the Apostles, as to exclude all pretense to Authority over them. For as Plato,
says he, was the Prince of the Philosophers, so Peter was of the Apostles Quid
Platoni et Petro? Ut ille enim Princeps Philosophorum, ita hic Apostolorum
fuit, super quem Ecclesia Domini stabili mole fundata est. Advers. Pelag. l. 1.
c. 2. Tom. 2. p. 265.
. Now I appeal to the Doctor, whether Plato had Dominion over the rest of the
Philosophers. In such a large sense, did St. Jerome (and the rest of the
Fathers) use the Title Prince, so as to denote any sort of Eminency. And the
utmost he could mean by it, was no more than this, that Peter was the first of
the Apostles, Princeps and Primus in ancient Authors, being Words of the same
Signification, (as many learned Men have showed Casaub. Exercit. 15. Diatrib.
12. p. 271, 272. Edit. Franc. 1615. Forbes. Instruct. Historico-Theolog. l. 15.
c. 1. Suiceri Thesaur. Ecclesiast. in voce (...).
.) This the Discussor will be forced to grant, who once and again renders (...)
(the first of the Apostles) by the Prince of the Apostles Page 112. and 114.
. To the same sense are the other Titles, chief and greatest of the Apostles,
to be understood, and therefore it is needless to say any thing of them
distinctly.

2. But St. Paul being to prove, that Christ our Lord transcended all the
Quires of Angels in the EXCELLENCY OF HIS NATVRE, thought it a convincing
Argument to allege, that he had obtained a more EXCELLENT NAME THAN THEY,
forasmuch as our Lord had said to HIM, and to none of THEM, in the second
Psalm, THOU ART MY SON, THIS DAY HAVE I BEGOTTEN THEE. And those must think
this Argument of St. PAVL to be of no force, who when they hear our Savior say
to SIMON THE SON of Jonas, and to none other of the Apostles, THOU ART PETER,
AND UPON THIS ROCK I WILL BVILD MY CHVRCH, can think that some SINGVLAR
PREROGATIVE was not meant by it, to be communicated to him, in which he should
EXCEL the rest of his Brethren Sermon. of St. Peter, page 23.
. Would then the Doctor prove, that Peter transcends all Orders of Men in the
excellency of his Nature, as Christ did all the Quires of Angels? No, but in
some singular Prerogative. But if the Apostle concluded from the excellency of
Christ's Name, the transcendent excellency of his Nature, I cannot apprehend
(such is my dullness) how by virtue of the Apostle's reasoning from the
Excellency of Peter's Name, follows a singular Prerogative.

But be it so, that a singular Prerogative is hereby meant to Peter, (though it
does not follow from the Apostle's Argument) must it be this of universal
Headship? Why not some other of those twenty eight Prerogatives enumerated by
Bellarmine? Particularly, why not the 13th, that he first preached to the Jews,
after the Descent of the holy Ghost, and by that first Sermon converted 3000?
De Romans Pontif. l. 1. c. 22.
Or why not the 14th, that he wrought the first Miracle for the Confirmation of
the Christian Faith Ibid.
? Or why not the 17th, that he first preached to the Gentiles Ibid.
? Especially considering, that as preparatory to this, he had that Vision, in
which it was said to him, Arise Peter, kill and eat, which seems to some Men a
plain Proof of his Headship: For it being the Property of the Head to eat, and
by eating to transmit the meat to the Stomach; hereby is signified, that Peter
AS HEAD OF THE CHVRCH, was to convert Infidels, and make them Members of the
Church Nam capitis est manducare, and per manducationem trajicere cibum in
stomachum, et illum sibi incorporare. Significatur enim hac metaphora Petro
convenire, ut ipse tanquam Caput Eccesiae Infideles convertat, et efficiat
membra Eeclesiae. De Romans Pontif. l. 1. c. 22.
.

And why must, Thou art Peter, etc. denote some Prerogative to be communicated?
Why not some Excellency already communicated? Why must Rock be referred to
Dominion, and not rather to some inherent Property of a Rock, as it always is,
when in the Scripture and by the Fathers, it is used in a metaphorical sense
Is. Casaub. Exercit. 15. Diatrib. 13. p. 291, 292.
?

And yet after all, I see no more reason to conclude, that any singular
Prerogative was hereby meant to be communicated to Peter, than to James and
John, when our Lord surnamed them, and no other of the Apostles BOANERGES. If
it be said (as I know it is) that this was to them a surname only. I answer; so
was the name Peter, a name only superadded to his former, Simon; for he ever
retained that name, and therefore frequently after this, is called sometimes
Simon Peter John 13. 6, 9, 24. John 18. 10, 15, 25. John 20. 2, 6. John 21. 2,
3, 7, 11, 15. 1 Pet. 1. 1.
: Sometimes simply, Simon Matthew. 17. 25. Marc. 14. 37. Luke 22. 31. Luke 24. 34.
: And Peter is expressly said to be his Surname Acts 10. 5, 18, 32. Acts 11. 13.
. And the reason why we do not find the Sons of Zebedee afterward called by
that name Boanerges, may be, because it was given in common to them both, so
that they could not thereby be distinguished the one from the other, as Simon
was from all the rest of the Apostles by his name Peter.

Again, suppose Christ said here to Simon, and to none other of the Apostles,
Upon this Rock I will, etc. Can any singular Prerogative be hence concluded, if
at another time he said the same in effect to every one of them? as he
certainly did, when he said to every one of them, Go teach all Nations,
baptizing them, etc. Matthew. 28. 19.
Go into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature Mark. 16. 15.
. But I think I need ask no more Questions, to expose the weakness of this
Argument.

Which because the Discussor has improved by some additional Strength, I shall
therefore consider what he says, before I proceed with the Doctor.

There can be, says he, no other Reason assigned, why Christ of all his
Disciples, changed only Peter 's Name (he did not change it, but only added
another name to it) for a name that did denote a ROCK, but that by this
Antonomastical, (I wish this hard word do not fright the Reader) Appropriation
of that Word to him, he did destine him to be in a more peculiar excelling
manner THE ROCK on whom he would build his Church St. Peter 's Supremacy
faithfully discussed, p. 121.
. What? can there be no other Reason assigned, when within less than four lines
after, he himself says, I find that there be two especial reasons, why Peter
had this new Name; one is for his firm Faith. He is the most lucky Man at
contradicting himself, that ever I met with. And this other Reason he here
assigns, is that which is commonly given by the Fathers: For to St Chrysostom,
whom he alleges for it, I could add (were it needful) a great many more.

But the chiefest Reason, says he, (and therefore not the only Reason) why he
was called so, was because by that name, Christ discovered his Intention of
building his Church on him Page 122.
. This is not the thing to be proved, but that Christ hereby discovered his
Intention, of building his Church more eminently upon him, than on any other of
the Apostles. And this he fairly slips over, and of all the Fathers (viz.
Cyril, Origin, Jerome, Hilary, Tertullian) whom he here quotes, not one of them
has so much as one Word that gives the least Intimation of it.

But what follows next, is, he tells us, not undeserving of an Asterisk Page
122.
. I am the more heartily glad on it, because we have met with nothing hitherto,
but what has deserved an Obelus. The other Apostles are called (...), which is
communicable as well to PETER as to any of the rest; but he besides that Name
common to him with the other, had his new Name PETRVS appropriate to himself.
But what is it in this Observation, that renders it so considerable? It Is this,
(...) signifies a Foundation in general, it may be of Wood, Wool-Sacks, Straw,
Hay, or any such evaned matter, and accordingly the Sees of the other Apostles
have been detriumph'd, stooping to the insulting Conqueror, and yielding to the
Pollutions of undermining Heresy: But PETER signifies such a Foundation as is
fixed on an inexpugnable. Rock, etc. Page 122.
. In which passage I observe several things, which (to use the Gentleman's own
Word's) are not undeserving of an Asterisk.

1. We have here a Foundation of Straw or Hay. A new sort of Foundation for a
House, which he has not borrowed from his Master Bellarmin; let him therefore
have the honor of the Invention.

2. That all the other Apostles were Foundations of Wood, Straw, or Hay; for he
gives this as the Reason why their Sees have been detriumph'd, stooping to the
insulting Conqueror. This methinks does not well agree with St. John's
Description of the Christian Church, (whose Writings he yet grants are as
Canonical as St. Peter's) for he represents none of the Apostles as a Log of
Wood, or a Bundle of Hay, but every one as a Stone, as a precious Stone in the
Foundation of the Wall of the New Jerusalem. And if in respect of all other
Christians (as he grants) the Apostles were equally Foundations, then St. Peter
himself was a Rock in respect of the Apostles only, but a Foundation of Wood or
Straw, with respect to those other Christians that were built upon him.

3. How can this be the Reason why the Sees of the other Apostles have been
detriumph'd, seeing they were not only founded severally upon their respective
Apostles, but all of them jointly upon Peter himself? For tho the other
Apostles were Foundations with respect to other Christians; yet they were but
the Superstructure (as he would have it) with respect to St. Peter who was the
Rock upon which the Apostles themselves were built, and by consequence all the
Christian Churches that were built upon them.

But it may perhaps be said, Tho Peter was indeed a Rock, yet a Foundation of
Straw being laid upon him, this intermediate Foundation failing, the
Superstructure must fall too. True. But may we not as wisely argue, Though
Christ was indeed a Rock, yet Peter was but a Foundation of Straw, laid upon
him the primary Foundation, since his See has been so often detriumph'd,
yielding to the Pollutions of undermining Heresy; witness Pope Liberius,
Honorius, and other Heretical Popes. And therefore if what he next asserts be
true, I see nothing to the contrary, but Peter himself may be as evanid a
Foundation as any of his Fellow-Apostles. For,

4. Peter, he says, signifies such a Foundation as is fixed upon an
inexpugnable Rock. Peter then is not now the Rock it self, but only a
Foundation fixed upon it. And why may not a Foundation of Wood be so? And yet,

5. In the next words Peter is again transubstantiated into a Rock, and such a
Rock as is not only able to repel the foaming Surges of the aspiring Sea, but
can walk on the back of its towering Waves Page 123.
. This is really an egregious surpassing Rock. A Rock that can walk! A Rock
that can walk upon the back of Waves; A Rock that can walk on the back of
towering Waves! And which makes the wonder still greater, a Rock immovable! an
immovable Rock, walking on the back of towering Waves. If Peter be such a Rock,
I grant him to be the sole and only Rock of this kind. And who can question but
such a Rock, is able to evacuate all the Plots of Hell's Divan, and naufragate
all the luxid Designs of impoisoned Heretics. Old excellent!

But briefly to show the vanity of this Criticism.

1st, The difference he makes between (...) and (...), has not so much as any
seeming Foundation in Scripture.

2dly, It is plainly inconsistent with the use of these words by the Fathers.
For as they commonly call Peter (...), so they give the name (...) (Rock) to
the other Apostles. The Author of the Homily of the twelve Apostles attributed
to St. Chrysostom, calls them all the Rock of the Church (...), etc. Sermon. in
Sanct. Duod. Apost. tom. 6. Edit. Front. Duc.
. St. Jerome, in the place forecited, says, Christ is the Rock, and he gave to
his Apostles, that they should be called Rocks Petra Christus est qui donavit
Apostolis, ut ipsi quoque Petrae vocentur. Comment. in Amos 6. v. 12.
. And upon these words, The Rocks were rent. The Rocks, says he, were the hard
Hearts of the Gentiles. Or, the Rocks were the Predictions of the Prophets, who
both themselves with the Apostles received the name of a ROCK from the ROCK
Christ Et Petrae scissae sunt, dura corda Gentilium; sive Petrae, universa
vaticinia Prophetarum qui et ipsi a Petra Christo cum Apostolis Petrae
vocabulum acceperunt, etc. Hieron. Hedibiae Quest. 8.
. Nor is this name given to the Apostles only, but Chrysostom calls St.
Stephen, the rational Rock (...).
. Yea this Title is not only by Origin, but by other Ancients applied to every
sound Believer: As by St. Ambrose (in the place before-quoted). And Greg.
Nazianzen gives a reason why they are called by this name (...), etc. Orat. 28.
. It is therefore no dismounting of Peter from his due Honor, to say the other
Apostles were Rocks. But,

4thly, I ask, what is the meaning of (...), when Peter is so called? Does it
signify sometimes a Rock-Foundation, sometimes a Foundation of Wood, sometimes
of Straw, or Hay? No surely, when St. Peter is called by this Name, it ever
denotes a Rock, an immovable, an inexpugnable Rock. And why not so, when it is
absolutely without any lessening adjunct, without any note of distinction,
attributed to the other Apostles? When the twelve Sons of Jacob are called the
twelve Patriarchs (as the twelve Apostles are called the twelve Foundations)
would not he deserve to be laughed at, who shall say, that the name Patriarch,
when attributed to Reuben, signifies a Princely Father, but when ascribed to
Simeon, denotes a Subject-Father? And is not he as ridiculous, who shall say,
that by this word Foundation, when affirmed of Peter, is meant a Rock, when of
James a Wool-sack, when of Andrew a Hay-mow? I need say no Sermon. of St. Pet. p.
24.
more to expose the folly of this groundless fancy. I shall therefore return to
the Doctor.

3. The Apostles themselves, he says, understood it to be so. This he dares not
stand to, and therefore adds, at least after the coming of the Holy Ghost: Why
not before the coming of the Holy Ghost, if our Savior meant it by these
Words, Thouart Peter? etc. It seems his meaning was so obscurely expressed,
that it could not be understood without the help of a Miracle. But how does it
appear, that the Apostles understood it so after the coming of the Holy Ghost?
The four Registers left us of their Names, are so many Authentic Testimonies
to inform us; the first by St. Matthew. c. 10. v. 2. The second by St. Mark, c.
3. v. 16. etc. For although St. ANDREW were before St. PETER in diverse
respects, etc. Yet PETER by all the foresaid Evangelists, is evermore set
before ANDREW, and the rest of the APOSTLES. But if St. Paul's Testimony be as
Authentic as that of the Evangelists, then this Argument is as good against
Peter's Supremacy, That St. Paul when he names him with other Apostles, never
puts him first, but sometimes last; As the Brethren of the Lord and Cephas 1
Cor. 9. 5.
. I am of Paul, I of Apollos, I of Cephas 1 Cor. 1. 12.
. How vain this Argument is, we may learn from a Gentleman of the Roman
Communion: It is (says he) with very little Reason, that they make an Argument
of this, to prove his Royalty in the Church. In SPAIN where the most honorable
walk the last, they will not fail to allege those Places where St. PETER is
named the last; as in that Passage, where it is said, I AM THE DISCIPLE OF
PAUL, AND I OF APOLLOS, AND I OF CEPHAS. For I remember that at PARIS, where
they a little better understand Divinity than in SPAIN, a good Bishop and an
Abbot that did maintain, that the Passage where it is said that James Peter and
John are reputed Pillars of the Church, proved well the Primacy of St. PETER:
For said the Bishop, when three worthy Persons walk together, they always put
the most honorable in the middle. This is what is commonly said, that an
Advocate well paid, always finds the cause of his Client good Ainsi c' est avec
bien peu de raison que l'on fait un argument de cela pour prouver sa rogaute
dans l'Eglise. En Espagne ou les plus honorables marchent les derniers, on ne
manqueroit pas de alleguer les lieux ou S Pierre est nomme le dernier, comme
dans le passage out il est dit. Je suis Disciple de Paul etc. Moyers surs et
Honnestes pour la Conversion de tous les Heretics, p. 16, 17.
.

But St. Matthew not only puts him in the first place, but expressly gives him
the Title of PRIMVS, etc. And there is another remarkable Circumstance in the
aforesaid Catalogues, that whereas the other Apostles are never named in order,
but differently, not only by different Evangelists, but by one and the same,
etc. Yet PETER is every where set in the Head of the Catalogue, and preferred
before them all; which certainly cannot be imputed to CHANCE, or the WILL of
the Writer, but to the particular Direction of the Holy Ghost Sermon. of St.
Peter, p. 24, 25, 26.
. We do not impute this to Chance, or to the Will of the Writer, but suppose
there was a special Reason for it; but this Reason we say, was his Primacy of
Order, not any Superiority of Power over the rest of the Apostles. He is Primus
who has the first place in any Society, and for that Reason is expressly so
called, and put in the Head of the Catalogue, as the Doctor very well knows.
And this place St. Peter enjoyed while our Savior lived on Earth, but after
his Ascension to Heaven, James the Brother of our Lord was set above him: For
he (as Eusebius and St. Jerome tell us, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 1. Hieron.
de Script. Eccles. in Jacobo.
) was chosen by the Apostles, yea by Peter himself as well as the rest (as
Clemens of Alexandria tells us Clement. Hypot. l. 6. apud Eusebius. l. 2. c 1.
) Bishop of Jerusalem, and preferred before them all. And therefore after this
we find them ranked in this order, James, Peter, and John; James first, as the
Brother of our Lord, and Bishop of Jerusalem; Peter next, as the first of the
Apostles under James, as he had been before the first under Christ; and John
next; as the beloved Disciple. The like order was observed in the Synod of the
Apostles at Jerusalem; For as it was the Custom in such Assemblies, for him
that was first, to speak last; so we accordingly find, that James as President
of that Council spoke last, summed up all that Peter had said before him, and
gave the final Determination, (...), Wherefore I judge, or give Sentence Acts
15. 19.
. Hence it was, that the Synodical Decree was drawn up in the words of St.
James; hence also, that when Peter was delivered out of Prison by an Angel, he
commanded the Disciples to show it unto JAMES and the Brethren Acts 12. 17.
. And that when St. Paul came to Jerusalem, he went the next day to James Acts
21.
. Now though I think it may be convincingly proved, that this James, was James
the Son of Alpheus, yet I need not insist upon that, because if it was not he,
but another of the second rank of the Apostles, (as some contend) the Argument
will be yet the stronger against St. Peter's Supremacy.

It is an Argument that the Fathers ascribed no such Authority to St. Peter, in
that what he produces from them for the Proof of it is nothing to the purpose;
as will appear by the recital of it. When St. Paul says of himself, Gal. 1. 18.
that he went to Jerusalem on purpose to see PETER, St. AMBROSE, (or the Author
of the Commentaries, etc.) gives this reason of it; because he was PRIMVS INTER
APOSTOLOS, CVI DELEGAVERAT SALVATOR CVRAM ECCLESIARVM, The FIRST AMONG THE
APOSTLES TO WHOM OUR SAVIOR HAD COMMITTED THE CARE OF THE CHURCHES Sermon. of
St. Pet. p. 26, 27.
. What Is here, that looks toward a Supremacy? Is it, that Peter is called the
first among the Apostles? The Vanity of this has been already showed. It is,
that the care of the Churches was committed to him? This is no more than what
was committed to every one of the Apostles. Nay, so far was this Author from
asserting this, that within six lines after the words quoted, he speaks of St.
Paul as (Co-apostolus) fellow-Apostle with St. Peter Veniens ergo ad eum,
hospitio receptus est, et apud eum mansit dies quindecim, quasi unanimus et
Coapostolus. Comment. in Epist. ad Galat. c. 1. v. 18.
. And in his Comment upon the 7th ver. of the next Chapter, he has these
words: He (viz. Paul) names PETER only, and compares him to himself, because he
had received the Primacy to found the Church; but he himself also was in like
manner chosen, that he might have the Primacy in founding the Churches of the
Gentiles: Yet so, as that Peter also might preach to the Gentiles, if there was
cause for it, and Paul to the Jews, for we find that both of them preached to
both: But yet full Authority is acknowledged to be given to Peter in preaching
to the Jews, and Paul 's perfect Authority is found in preaching to the
Gentiles Petrum solum nominat, et sibi comparat, quia primatum ipse acceperat
ad fundandam Ecclesiam: se quoque pari modo electum, ut primatum habeat in
fundandis gentium Ecclesiis: ita tamen ut Petrus Gentibus praedicaret, si causa
fuisset etc.
. Is this spoken like one who took Peter for the Sovereign of the universal
Church? I desire the Reader to consult his Comment upon these Words, When
James, Cephas, and John who seemed to be Pillars, etc. And, to avoid
tediousness, shall recite but one passage upon these Words: But when Peter was
come to Antioch, I withstood him to the Face, etc. Who durst, says he, resist
Peter the first Apostle, to whom the Lord gave the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, BUT ANOTHER SVCH AS HE, who in confidence of his Election, knowing
himself NOT VNEQVAL TO HIM, might constantly blame what he had unadvisedly done
Nam quis little auderet Petro primo Apostolo, cui claves regni Coelorum Dominus
dedit, resistere; nisi alius talis, qui fiducia electionis suae sciens se non
imparem, constanter improbaret, quod ille sine consilio fecerat?
? I leave it now to the impartial Reader to judge, whether this Author took
Peter to be Paul's Superior?

As little to the purpose is it, that St. Chrysostom reckons Peter the Prince
of the Apostles, as has been already showed: And less yet, that he calls him
their Mouth, as might be largely showed, were it not intolerably irksome to
insist upon such Impertinencies. And whereas St. Austin says, that he
represented the whole Church propter primatum Apostolatus, by reason of the
Primacy of the Apostleship. St. Austin himself tells us in another place, what
Primacy he means; Peter, says he, the FIRST IN ORDER of the Apostles Ipse enim
Petrus in Apostolorum ordine primus. De Verb. Dom. in Evang. secund. Matthew.
Sermon. 13.
.

I shall conclude this with the words of two late Authors of the Roman
Communion. The first acknowledges, that the Primacy of St. Peter was that of
Order or Place only; the second that this Primacy gave him no Dominion over the
other Apostles. In every Society of Men, says a learned Sorbonist, some Order
ought to be kept, and it is necessary, that among many there be some first: It
is not therefore to be questioned, but that in the College of the Apostles,
some one was first; but the Evangelists testify, that this one was Peter, who
when they enumerate the Apostles, not only place Peter, the FIRST IN ORDER, but
affirm that he was first Ellies Du Pin Dissert. Hist. 4. p. 311.
. And again; The Question, whether Peter had the FIRST PLACE among the Apostles
is Historical, and may be proved by the Testimony of Writers, both of the same,
and of following Ages Dissert. 4. S. 2. p. 313.
. They say also, says another Romanist, that he is sometimes named the first,
but if it had been always so, this would not prove, that he had Authority over
the others, as the Pope assumes it over Bishops: Among the Presidents a Mortier
the first has no Power over the other; nor amongst the Electors of the Empire;
the Elector of Mentz who has the first place, has not any Authority over the
other Electors, and so in every Society, the Primacy does not carry Dominion
with it Ils disent aussi qu'il est quelquefois nomme le premier, mais s' il ne
l'est pas toujours cela ne leur peut servir de rien. Mais quand il l'auroit
toujours ete, cela ne prouveroit pas qu' il eut authorite sur les autres, comme
le Pape en prend sur les eveques, etc. Moyens surs et Honnestes pour la
Conversion, etc. p. 14, 15.
.

But though it does not appear by what the Doctor has alleged, That the
Apostles after the coming down of the Holy Ghost, understood Christ's words in
the Roman Sense; yet by many other Passages in the New Testament it is obvious,
that neither St. Peter himself, St. Paul, or the other Apostles had any such
sense of them. For if St. Paul had, would he have affirmed, That he was in
nothing behind the very chiefest Apostle 2 Cor. 12. 11.
? would he have rebuked Peter publicly, before them all Gal. 2. 14.
. If the other Apostles had so understood them, would they have taken upon them
to send Peter to Samaria Acts 8. 14.
? should not they rather have been sent by him? If S. Peter himself had so
understood them, would he have done nothing Authoritatively, and as their
Prince, but have acted all by the common consent of the Apostles? as St.
Chrysostom observes (...), etc. In Act. Apost. Hom. 3.
. Having done with the Doctor, I now return to the Discussor. And,

4. He next produces the Sayings of some Fathers, to prove the Church more
eminently built upon Peter, than on any of the other Apostles St. Peter 's
Supremacy, etc. p. 123.
. Such Sayings, he imagins, as may be a sufficient Collyrium to open our cieled
Eyes, and fetch off those Scales, which have obstructed our visive Faculty Page
125.
. Tho we make not the Sayings of the Fathers, but the Holy Scripture, the Rule
of our Faith; and if in this, or any other point, we should refuse to stand to
their Judgment, the Romanists cannot blame us, without condemning themselves,
since no Men pay less respect to the Fathers than they, when they find
themselves pinched with their Authority; yet so far are we from declining their
Judgment, in this, or any other matter in dispute, between us and the Church of
Rome, that we confidently appeal to them.

The first he produces is St. Jerome, who on Isa. 2. having compared them (viz.
the Apostles) to Mountains, says, Super unum montium Christus fundat Ecclesiam,
et loquitur ad eum, dicens, Tues Petrus, et super hanc Petram, etc. that is,
upon one of the Mountains Christ founds his Church, and speaks to him, saying,
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I will build my Church. That Christ founded
his Church on Peter, is not the thing to be proved, but that he more eminently
founded it on him, than on any other Apostle. He will say perhaps, this is
implied; How so? Because in saying, Christ founded his Church upon one of the
Mountains, he implicitly excludes all the rest. If so, then he excludes all the
rest, not from being more eminently, but from being simply Foundations; whereas
he himself grants, they were all Foundations, in saying Peter was more
eminently so. But whosoever shall impartially read the Context, he will
conclude it was far from St. Jerome's meaning, to exclude the other Apostles
from what he here attributes to St. Peter, for but six lines before, he says,
This House (viz. the Church) is built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, who also themselves are Mountains, as Imitators of Christ Haec domus
aedificata est super fundamentum Apostolorum and Prophetarum, qui and ipsi
montes sunt, quasi imitatores Christi.
. But why then does he here say, that Christ founds his Church upon one of
them? I answer, the plain reason is this, These Words being directed to Peter
alone, and none other, St. Jerome was of Opinion, that Christ in this place,
made him alone the Foundation of the Church, but that elsewhere he made all the
Apostles Foundations equally with him. This he as expressly and plainly asserts
as Words can do it, in the place before-quoted out of his first Book against
Jovinian, c. 27.

But what follows, must needs confound all the Enemies of St. Peter and his
Successors, but such as have their face cased in triple Brass Page 123.
. A Case very much in fashion with them, whose Head wears the Triple-Crown;
otherwise they could never so impudently outface the Truth, as they daily do.

But what is this which must of necessity confound us? That St. Jerome, besides
his owning him to be the Rock, he calls his Cathedra at Rome likewise so, in
his Epistle to Damasus; Ego Beatitudini tuae, id est (says he) Cathedrae Petri
communione consocior, super illam Petram aedificatam Ecclesiam scio. I can
perceive nothing in this Testimony so confounding, as to need a Case of triple
Brass to fence us against it. For,

1. Suppose that by the Rock Jerome meant S. Peter's Chair at Rome, (though
Erasmus was of opinion, that he meant thereby the Faith Peter professed Non
super Romam ut arbitror, nam fieri potest, ut Roma quoque degeneret, sed super
Fidem quam Petrus professus est.
) yet he meant his Chair as then possessed by Damasus, who had hitherto stood
firm as a Rock against those Assaults of Heresy which had prevailed over the
Eastern Church. But he was far from thinking, that all his Predecessors had
done so, or that it was necessary that all his Successors should do so, as is
sufficiently intimated in this very Epistle: For when he says, NOW in the West
the Sun of Righteousness arises, but in the East Lucifer which fell has set
his Throne above the Stars Nunc in Occidente Sol Justitiae oritur, in Orient
autem Lucifer ille qui ceciderat, supra Sydera posuit Thronum. suum.
. That rising Now necessarily implies that he thought this Sun had either set,
or at least declined some time before: And this he elsewhere plainly expresses
when he tells us, that Pope Liberius subscribed to Heresy Catalog. Scriptor.
Ecclesiast. in Fortunatianus. tom. 1. p. 297.
: For in case Liberius did not (as some Men in contradiction to the clearest
evidence would persuade us) yet it is certain that St. Jerome thought he did;
and therefore as certain, that he did not believe, that the Chair of St. Peter
was then the Rock, upon which the Church was built; unless he thought the Chair
was more infallible than he that sat in it. And as he believed that Heresy had
got into the Chair formerly, so he thought it not impossible, but it might do
so again; yea, that even Damasus himself might fall into the Arian
Perfidiousness; else why does he in this same Epistle so earnestly deprecate
it? Jungatur cum Beatitudine Ursicinus, cum Ambrosio societur Auxentius. Absit
hoc a Romana Fide.
Had he foreseen the Council of Trent, he would doubtless have foretold the
time, when this Sun would come to suffer a dreadful Eclipse in the Roman
Horizon.

2. That these words (Super illam Petram aedificatam Ecclesiam scio, Upon this
Rock I know the Church is built) are not to be confined to Peter, or his See
only, Jerome himself has also taught us. For upon these words, Her Foundations
are upon the holy Hills, he says, Who may we say are the Foundations? the
Apostles: In them were the Foundations, there the Faith of the Church was first
placed, and there the Foundations were laid Fundamenta ejus in montibus
Sanctis. Quos nos possumus dicere Fundamenta? Apostolos. In illis erant
fundamenta; ibi primum posita est fides Ecclesiae, and ibi fundamenta sunt
posita. Comment. in Psalm. 86.
. Does he say St. Peter was the only Foundation, or more eminently the
Foundation? No, but without making a difference, or preferring him before the
rest, The Apostles were the Foundations. In his first Book against Jovinian,
written eighteen years after this Epistle, he expressly asserts, That the Church
is equally founded upon them all. Once more, St. Jerome makes all Bishops, how
much soever one may exceed another in Wealth, to be of equal Worth, and of the
same Priesthood, because they are all Successors of the Apostles Ubicunque
fuerit Episcopus etc. ejusdem meriti, ejusdem est et Sacerdotii. Potentia
divitiarum and paupertatis humilitas vel sublimiorem vel inferiorem Episcopum,
non facit: caeterum omnes Apostolorum successores sunt. Epist. ad Evagrium.
. And could he have argued the equality of Bishops, from their being the
Apostles Successors, had he not taken it for granted, that the Apostles
themselves were equal? I shall add this only, That in case Jerome had been of
opinion, that Peter had Authority over the other Apostles; yet that he
acknowledged no such Authority in the Pope over other Bishops, we need go no
further than this Epistle to prove, in which he calls the Egyptian Confessors
his Colleagues Ideo hic collegas tuos Aegyptios Confessores sequor.
.

When I reflect upon the Premises, I cannot but a little wonder, that this
Saying of St. Jerome should leave such a deep Incision in this Gentleman's Mind,
that he needed to repair to any Doctor, much less, to so great a Doctor as Dr.
Stillingfleet, for a (...) to heal it; yet supposing him so deeply wounded, I
do not wonder that he found himself defeated of his desired Satisfaction. For
is it likely that Patient should meet with a Cure, who throws by all the
principal Ingredients of the Medicine prescribed, and makes Application but of
one, and the most inconsiderable of them all? Those Words he quotes, as if they
were all the Doctor had said, are such as the Doctor himself lays no Stress
upon, for after them, he adds, But setting aside what advantages might be
gained on that account, to weaken the force of this Testimony Rat. Account l.
2. c. 1. p. 31^
. And then goes on for more than two Pages together, in showing to how little
Purpose this Testimony is alleged, which the Discussor has the Face to say he
would fain shift off, by making it a Piece of Flattery or a Complement to
Damasus. Behold the Virtue of triple Brass! And yet had the Doctor insisted
upon it, that it was a Complement to Damasus, he had said no more than what one
of the learnedest Romanists of this age has said Quod vero ait, Super illam
Petram aedificatam Ecclesiam scio, quicunque extra hanc domum comederit Agnum
prophanus est, etc. dictum est officiose, and per exaggerationem. Du Pin.
dissertat. 5. c. 2.
.

His next Proof is taken out of St. Cyprian. Ecclesia quae una est super unum
qui claves ejus accepit, voce Domini fundata Page 125.
. It Is strange he should think to find any thing for the Pope's Supremacy in
St. Cyprian, who (to use the Words of a learned Author Dodw. Disc. concerning
the one Altar, etc. c. 9. p. 253.
) makes all Bishops equal, to have the same Power in solidum, to be absolute
Judges of their own (...), and to be accountable to none but God; and that
there was but one Episcopacy among them all, which notwithstanding was
possessed by each of them, not in parcels, but entirely. How inconsistent is
this with that Supremacy, which is challenged by the Pope over all the Bishops
of the World? However it is certain, that this Passage also, proves either too
much, or it proves nothing. If when he says the Church is founded upon one, it
be understood exclusive of the other Apostles, it proves too much, viz. that
the Church is founded not more eminently upon Peter, but upon him alone. If one
be not exclusive of the rest, it proves nothing: And that Cyprian intended not
to exclude the rest, from an equal share with St. Peter, is also manifest, in
that he says, The other Apostles doubtless were that which Peter was, endowed
with equal Fellowship of Power and Honor Hoc erant utiquc and caeteri Apostoli
quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis. de
unitat. Eccles.
.

To reconcile St. Cyprian to himself, a learned Romanist gives us this account,
why in one place, he says the Church is founded upon one, and in another place
upon many: Cyprian, says he, in the first Exposition, (viz. that the Church is
founded on Peter) seems to exclude the second (that it is founded on all the
Apostles) but in Truth he does not exclude it, if his Scope be considered. In
the first he writes, that the Church is founded on ONE PETER, that against the
emergent Discords of Christians in matters of Religion, he might commend the
Unity of the Church. In the second, he says, the Church is constituted on
Bishops, that the same Unity of the Church he had commended in ONE PETER, he
might commend in the MANY SVCCESSORS OF THE APOSTLES. As if he he should say,
whether it be one Apostle, or many Apostles upon whom the Church is built, but
ONE Church is built, and not MANY. Wherefore in the first Exposition he
disputes against those who would rend the Church by Schism; in the second he
reproves the lapsed, who also had written to Cyprian himself, of the usurped
Peace given them by Paul the Martyr Cyprianus in Expositione prima
secundamvideturexcludere, sed revera non excludit, si scopus operis attendatur.
In prima super unum Petrum aedificatam esse scribit Ecclesiam, ut adversus
emergentes Christianorum in Religione discordias, unitatem Ecclesiae
commendaret. In secunda constitutam esse super Episcopos dicit Ecclesiam, ut
quam Ecclesiae unitatem in uno Petro commendaverat, eandem in pluribus
Apostolorum successoribus commendaret, etc. Launoy Epp. P. 5. Ep. ad Voellum.
.

But to clear up St. Cyprian's meaning, I shall speak a little more distinctly:
His Sense in this matter, may I think be comprised in these Propositions, which
I shall now barely mention, and if occasion require it, shall hereafter fully
confirm.

1. That our Savior when he spoke these Words, Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church, promised to Peter alone, and no other, that the
Church should be founded on him. Hence it is, that he says, the Church is built
upon one.

2. Whatsoever in these Words he promised to Peter, he afterward conferred the
same, and in the same Degree upon the other Apostles. Hence it is, that he
makes them all equal in Honor and Power with Peter.

3. That he promised this at first to Peter alone, to recommend that Unity he
designed to have in his Church, and to make him the Pattern of it; so far was
he from thinking of any Power over the rest here promised to Peter, that he
never so much as intimates it.

4. That the Unity he made him the Pattern of, was not that of the universal,
but of particular Churches; he promised to build his Church upon one, to show
that in every particular Church he would have but one, that should be the
Principle of Unity, the Foundation upon which all the rest should depend.

5. That the Bishops as Successors of St. Peter, are this Principle of Unity,
and the Foundation, every one in his own Church, upon which all the rest
depend. It never entered into his Thoughts, that any one Bishop, was to be the
Principle of Unity to all other Bishops and Churches in the World. Nor did
Stephen Bishop of Rome, in his Contests with Cyprian, ever pretend this; which
doubtless he would have done, had any such Prerogative been then claimed by
Stephen, or granted by Cyprian; since this, without any more ado, must have
brought Cyprian to a Submission to him. And therefore,

6. He supposed these Words, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, etc. were as
applicable to all Bishops, as they were to St. Peter himself; and accordingly
they are by him so apyly'd, and the Rights of all particular Bishops
established upon them; so far was he from finding in them any peculiar
Prerogative of the Bishop of Rome. And what is there now of St. Peter's
Sovereignty in all this? or of the Churches being built more eminently upon
him, than upon the other Apostles? Not so much as one word that looks that way.

I presume he quotes the next words out of Cyprian, Navigare audent and ad
Petri Cathedrane, atque ad Ecclesiam principalem, unde Vnitas Sacerdotalis
exorta est; for these two reasons: (1.) Because the Church of Rome is here
called the principal Church. (2.) Because Priestly Unity is said to arise from
thence. But neither of these are to his purpose. Not the first, it being called
the principal Church, because it was constituted in the principal City; as
Rigaltius notes upon the Words, and quotes the 28th Canon of the Council of
Chalcedon to confirm it In urbe principali constitutam. Can. 28. Council.
Chalced. etc.
. Not the second, because by Priestly Unity, he means no more than the
Presidency of one Bishop in one City, which he says is derived from the Church
of Rome, because that was the Sea of Peter, who was the Pattern of this Unity.
And by this he aggravates the crime of Felicissimus and his Accomplices, who
having set up another Bishop at Carthage in opposition to Cyprian, durst make
their Appeal to Rome, which was the example of Episcopal Unity to other
Churches See Mr. Dodw. dissertat. Cypt. dissert. 7. p. 161
. I may here again be allowed to admire this Gentleman's Discretion or
Sincerity in the choice of his Testimonies.

Nothing can be imagined more directly contrary to that Papal Supremacy he
contends for, than this very Epistle of St. Cyprian, out of which this Passage
is taken; in which the good Father most severely condemns Appeals to Rome;
asserts that every one's Cause ought to be heard where the Fault is committed,
that to every Pastor a portion of the Flock is assigned, which he rules and
governs, as one that is to give an Account to God alone, etc. But it may be
presumed the learned Gentleman knows nothing of this, nor ever saw any more of
the Epistle than these two lines, which he found quoted by some other Author,
as wise as himself. Had he perused the whole Epistle, he would not have dared
to quote one word out of it, lest the Reader by examining that, should take
occasion to read all the rest.

His next Testimony from Greg. Nazienzen says, That of all the Disciples of
Christ, Peter is called the Rock, and entrusted with the Foundations of the
Church Page 125.
. Which has been already more than sufficiently answered. Had he looked back
no further than the Oration immediately foregoing Orat. 25.
, he might have seen, That this Father assigns to every Apostle his particular
Province, independently on St. Peter; and by consequence did not suppose that
the Church was built more eminently upon him than the rest.

His last Quotation is out of S. Basil's 6th book against Eunomius Page 115.
; Why did he not quote the 16th Book? he might have done so, as well as the
6th, there being no more than five Books against Eunomius, in St. Basil's
Works: but this is more than he knew, and therefore he is to be pardoned.
However the place he refers to is, I suppose, in his 2 d book, where speaking
of Peter he has these words, (...); that is, who for the excellency of his
Faith, took upon himself the building of the Church; which is no more than what
may be truly affirmed of St. James, St. John, or any other Apostle. If the
Reader please to compare the words cited by the Discussor, with those in St.
Basil, he will further see that he is not wont to consult the Authors he quotes.

And now at last, that I may, if possible, oblige the Discussor, I will grant,
what he has not proved; that in some respect it may be truly said, the Church
is built more eminently on St. Peter. As 1. Because by his preaching
especially, the first Christian Church was gathered among the Jews. Peter
standing up with the eleven, lift up his Voice, and said, Ye Men of Judea, etc.
Acts 2. 14.
Peter with the eleven: what means it, says St. Chrysostom? They uttered one
common Voice, and he was the Mouth of them all; the eleven stood by, bearing
witness to those things that were spoken by him (...). Chrysostom. in loc.
. And by this Sermon three thousand were converted, which together with the
Disciples beforementioned, made up the first Christian Church. 2. Because he
first preached the Gospel to the Gentiles, as we find in the story of
Cornelius, Acts 10. He is called the Rock, because he first laid the
Foundations of Faith among the Gentiles Petra enim dicitur, eo quod primus in
nationibus fidei fundamenta posuerit.
, says an ancient Author, in a Homily fathered on St. Ambrose.

In the remainder of this Chapter, which is spent in answering several
Objections made by his Adversary, I find nothing but what either needs no
answer, or what has been already answered; Though I confess there are many
things that deserve an Asterisk; particularly the first part of his Answer to
this Question; What Inconvenience would arise from expounding this Rock to be
Christ? To this, says he, I answer, Though I grant Christ to be called a Rock,
yet it is very irrational to interpret the word ROCK of Christ, wheresoever you
find it expressed in Scripture; our Savior being not really a Rock, but only
called so by a metaphorical locution Page 129.
: This, he says, is observed by St. Austin. A notable Observation!

CHAP. III.
I Think I have said enough to satisfy every impartial considering Reader, that
St. Peter's Supremacy is not founded upon this Rock, and therefore must fall to
the Ground, unless some other Foundation be found to support it. I proceed
therefore to the other Promise here made, (And I will give unto thee the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, etc.) upon
which they also tell us this vast Fabric is solidly superstructed.

Now the whole of their Discourse from hence, that is pertinent to the present
Question, may be reduced to these four Propositions

1. That this Promise of the Keys was made to Peter alone.

II. That he alone immediately received them, and the other Apostles
derivatively from him.

III. That the Power of the Keys communicated to the other Apostles, was
inferior and subordinate to a higher Degree of it in St. Peter.

IV. That by the Keys thus promised to and received by St. Peter, is meant the
supreme Power of governing the Church.

Proposition I.
This Promise, says Dr. G. our Savior made to St. Peter, and to him alone
Sermon of St. Peter, p. 28.
. And you see, says the Discussor, Christ addresses his Reply to Peter only,
the Words Tu and Tibi shutting out all Partnership St. Peter 's Supremacy, p.
18.
. To which it will be sufficient to return these two things.

1. Suppose the Reply addressed to Peter only, and the Promise here made to him
alone; does it hence follow, that Christ intended to give the thing promised to
none else? Had Christ said to Peter, to thee only will I give the Keys, this
would have followed; but it no way follows, from Christ's saying only to him, I
will give thee the Keys. From the Promise made to him in particular it only
follows, that he in particular should have them; not that none others should
have them besides him.

2. Nothing can be more plain, than that at another time Christ made the same
Promise to all the Apostles indefinitely. Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye
shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on
Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven Matthew. 18. 18.
. But says the Doctor, however we read, that the Power of binding and loosing,
which is an Effect of the Keys, was promised to all the Apostles in common;
Matthew. 18. 18. yet it was not till after the Keys had been promised to Peter,
Matthew. 16. 19 Page 29.
. What then? does before or after make any Difference in the Promise it self?
If the King promise to day a Commission to one Man in particular, and promise
to morrow the same Commission to him, and ten more together with him, has that
one any Power given him over the other ten, by having his Commission first
promised him? But it is not any where read in Scripture, that the KEYS
THEMSELVES the proper TOKEN and BADGE of the supreme Stewardship over the
Church, were promised to the rest, but to PETER alone. But does not the Power
suppose the Badge? Or if it does not, is there any need of it? Since it is not
the Badge, but the Office alone, that we are concerned for See Dr. Hammond 's
Answ. to Schism disarmed, Sect. 7. n. 12, 13, 14.
. If it be granted, that all the rest have equal Power with Peter, let Peter by
my consent, have the sole Honor of carrying the Keys. And yet does he not say
just before, That the Power of binding and loosing, which is an effect of the
Keys, is promised to all the Apostles? And if so, then surely the Keys
themselves, since the effect ever presupposes the Cause.

But the truth is, as loosing and binding are the effect of the Keys, so the
Power of loosing and binding are the Keys themselves. The Church which is
founded in Christ, says St. Austin, received from him the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven in Peter, that is, the Power of binding and loosing Sins Ecclesia
ergo quae fundatur in Christo, claves ab eo regni Caelorum accepit, id est,
potestatem ligandi solvendique peccata. In Evang. Johannis, Tractat. 124.
. This is the very definition your Schoolmen give of them. The Power of binding
and loosing, says Aquinas, is called the Key Clavis dicitur potestas ligandi
and solvendi. Aquin. suppl. Qu. 17. Art. 2.
. The spiritual Key, says Biel, is thus described, It is the Power of judging,
that is, of loosing and binding, by which an Ecclesiastical Judge ought to
receive those that are worthy, and exclude those that are unworthy from the
Kingdom of God Sic describitur clavis spiritualis, est potestas judicandi, id
est, solvendi and ligandi, etc. Eiel in quartum Sentent. Did. 18. Qu. 1.
. And therefere to suppose that Christ promises the power of binding and
loosing, and not the Keys, is to suppose a contradiction.

This therefore is not to argue like Dr. G. though it very well becomes the
Discussor, who also talks at the same rate. It cannot, says he, be proved out
of the Scripture, that the Keys in EXPRESS WORDS were given to any, but to him
(viz. Peter Peter's Supremacy, p. 160.
) in express words; It may then, it seems, be proved by Consequence; and is not
that as well? But unless (as he goes on) you can show me some place in the New
Testament where our Savior says to his Disciples JOINTLY, IWILL GIVE YOU THE
KEYS The Discussor's word are, conjunctim, Vobis dabo claves.
, or to any of them in particular, I WILL GIVE THEE THE KEYS His words are,
particulatim, tibi dabo claves.
; he has the best Plea and Title to them. The best Plea, this is poor and
sneaking, a plain giving up the cause; for should he have the best Plea, that
does not hinder, but they may have a good Plea, since his Title is no way
inconsistent with theirs, it being such a Privilege as might be equally enjoyed
by them all. And yet I cannot conceive how his Title can be better than theirs,
though it be no where said to them jointly, I will give you the Keys, if that
be said to them jointly, which necessarily imports the same thing, as it is.

To these Texts, Mat. 18. 18. Joh. 20. 21. quoted by his Adversary, to prove
the other Apostles had the Keys, he gives this Answer; That it cannot clearly
be inferred from either of these Places, they had them, the word KEYS being not
so much as mentioned there Ibid.
. Not clearly inferred; it is granted then, that it may be truly inferred, tho
not clearly. And why not clearly? because the word KEYS is not mentioned there:
Very wisely. If what the word Keys imports, be clearly mentioned in those
places, may it not be as clearly inferred, as if the word Keys were it self
mentioned? and that it is so, as it is manifest by what has been already said,
so it is the common Opinion of the Fathers Tertul. de pudicitia. c. 21. Cypr.
Epist. 23. ad Jubaian. et de Unitat. Eccles. Hilary. l. 6. de Trin. col. 74.
Hieron. l. 1. advers. Jovinian. August. Sermon. 108. de diverse. Bed. Hom. de
Sanct. Petro.
, and of many learned Men of the Church of Rome Barlaam. de Primat. Papae. l.
2. Pet. de Alliaco Qu. in suis Vesp. n. 20. Ejusd. lib. de Eccles. et Cardinal.
Authoritate part 1. c. 1. Tractat. Cancel. Parisiens. de Potestat. Eccl. et
Orig. Juris Consid. 5. Richer. de Ecclesiast. et Polit. Potest. n. 2. et 6.
, and is no more than is taught by the Roman Catechism, in citing Mat. 18. 18.
and Joh. 20. 23. together with Mat. 16. 19. to prove that the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven are committed to the Church Catechis. Romans part 1. de decimo
Symb. Artic. S. 4.
; all which for brevities sake I remit the Reader to in the Margin, and shall
transcribe no more than the words of the Sorbon Doctor before quoted: This
Power, says he, of the Keys which Christ promises here to Peter, he afterward
in the very same words promises to all the Apostles, Mat. 18. 18. and after
that gives it to them all, Mat. 28. and John 20. They are very much mistaken
who think the Keys were given to Peter alone; but the Ancients were not of this
Opinion, who with unanimous Consent teach, that these Keys were in the Person
of Peter given to the whole Church Hanc enim potestatemclavium quam Christus
hic Petro promittit, iisdem deinde verbis omnibus omnino Apostolis promittit,
Matthew. 18. and deinceps cunctis largitur, Matthew. 28. and Johan. 20. Illi igitur
oppido falluntur, qui soli Petro datas claves esse autumant. At non ita
Antiqui, qui unanimo consensu tradunt claves istas in persona Petri totae
Ecclesiae datas. Du Pin dissertat. 4. c. 1. p. 307, 308.
.

But he says, If it be granted that the Apostles had the Keys by virtue of
these places of Scripture, yet it does not follow they had them in the same
sense and amplitude that Peter had Page 160, 161.
: Does it follow, that they had them not in the same sense and amplitude? But
this is not now the Question, but whether they had them; and that they had them
by virtue of these Texts, every Roman Priest will be forced to grant, or to
break that solemn Oath he has taken to interpret Scripture according to the
unanimous Consent of the Fathers Bulla Pii 4ti super forma Juramenti.
.

To his Question, If either or both these Places, were equivalent to dabo tibi
Claves, what reason will you give why Peter should have both a particular and
general Promise of them? Page 161.
If by a particular Promise, he means a Promise to St. Peter in particular; and
by a general Promise, the same Promise made to him, and all the Apostles
together with him, S. Cyprian shall return the Answer. He first gave the Keys
to Peter alone, to manifest that Unity he would have in his Church, and to make
him the Original and Pattern of it Nam Petro primum Dominus super quem
aedificavit Ecclesiam, and unde unitatis originem instituit and ostendit,
potestatem istam dedit, ut id solveretur in Caelis, etc. Epist. 73. ad Jubaian.
. Or if St. Cyprian's Authority be thought too little, let him take it from
Pope Leo I. That is not in vain commended to one, that is intimated to all; to
Peter therefore singly this is committed, because Peter's Pattern is proposed
to all the Governors of the Church Transivit quidem in Apostolos alios vis
istius potestatis, sed non frustra uni commendatur, quod omnibus intimetur.
Petro ergo singulariter hoc creditur, quia cunctis Ecclesiae Rectoribus Petri
forma proponitur.
. Our Savior therefore having served this design, in making the Promise first
to Peter singly, he afterward makes the same Promise to them all. If he shall
ask why he promised them to Peter again, when he promised them to all? It is as
wise a Question, as if he should ask, why a Universal includes each Particular
contained under it.

But that which follows next is most admirable; that whatsoever was meant by
either of those Texts, they being spoken conjointly to the twelve, Peter had
certainly as large a share in them as any (he need not fear, but he is so far
in the right) but having (over and above his Portion in this joint Promise) a
particular one apart to himself, in which the rest were immediately no Sharers,
it cannot be disproved, (but by virtue of this singular separate Promise made
to him personally in the Presence of the rest) that he had the Keys either
alone, or if the Power of the Keys was afterward given to the rest, that he
was supreme in it. If by this particular, this singular Promise, this Promise
made to him personally, he mean a Promise of any particular or singular Power,
besides that which was promised to the rest, he supposes that which he should
first have proved, and which I have already confuted: If he means that Promise
made to Peter particularly and singly, which was afterward made to all the
Apostles, at what an absurd rate does he talk? A Promise is made to twelve
jointly; the very same Promise, neither more nor less, was before made to one
of these twelve apart; therefore this one, has either himself alone, that
which is promised to all the twelve; or if the rest have it, he has it in a
higher Degree than they: Or thus; If a Promise be first made to one Man singly,
and the same Promise be afterward made to this one and many more together; the
making the Promise to him first singly, either excludes all the rest from any
share in it, or gives him a greater share in it than they. For instance; the
King promises to A in particular, to give him a Captains place, he afterward
promises the same Preferment to A, B, C, D, E, F, together; A, because the
Promise was first made to him alone, must either alone be made Captain, and B,
C, D, E, F, excluded; or if B, C, D, E, F, be made Captains, A, because it was
first promised to him, must be made their Colonel or General. These are good
Consequences by the Discussor's Logic; and therefore he spae more Truth than
perhaps he was aware of, when he said, that Disputation was an Employment, not
only discordant to his Temper, but surmounting his Abilities. I have said
enough to ruin the first Proposition.

Proposition II.
The second is this, that Peter received the Keys immediately from Christ, but
the other Apostles from or by him; Peter says he, did not receive them, so as
to retain them solely to himself, but to communicate them to the other Apostles
Page 162.
. And again; they then may be said to receive the Keys secondarily,
derivatively, participatively, by their associating, adhering, and
communicating with him their Head Ibid.
. The Falseness of which is so manifest, that one would think none but a Man
who had never read the New Testament, could have the Face to offer it to those
that have; for can any thing be more evident than that these words, Whatsoever
ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc. were spoken by Christ
himself immediately, to all the Apostles? And when that Power was actually
conferred, that was here promised, was it Peter or Christ that said to them, As
my Father has sent me, so send I you, etc. Whose Sins ye remit, they are
remitted; and whose Sins ye retain, they are retained? Was it not Christ that
said to them immediately, Go into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every
Creature? But instead of multiplying Proofs from Scripture, I shall rather send
him to his Master Bellarmine, whom in this Point he deserts. That the Apostles
received their Jurisdiction immediately from Christ, and not from St. Peter, he
proves by four Arguments: 1st. By those Words of Christ, As my Father has sent
me, so send I you. Which place, says he, the Fathers, Chrysostom and
Theophylact, so expound, that they plainly say, that the Apostles were made by
these words, the Vicars of Christ; yea, that they received the very Office and
Authority of Christ. 2dly. By the choice of Matthias into the place of the
Traitor Judas: For we read, Acts 1. that Matthias was not chosen an Apostle by
the Apostles, but his Election being begged and obtained from God, he was
numbered among the Apostles. But surely if all the Apostles had their
Jurisdiction from Peter, that ought most especially to have been shown in
Matthias. 3dly. It is proved from St. Paul, who professedly teaches, that he
had his Authority and Jurisdiction from Christ, and thence proves himself to be
a true Apostle, Gal. 1. And that he might show that he received not his
Authority from Peter or the other Apostles, he says, When it pleased him who
separated me from my Mother's Womb, and called me by his Grace to reveal his
Son in me, that I might preach him among the Gentiles; immediately I conferred
not with Flesh and Blood, etc. 4thly. By evident Reason. For the Apostles were
made by Christ only, as appears Luke 6. He called his Disciples, and chose out
of them twelve, whom he named Apostles, etc. But that the Apostles had
Jurisdiction, is manifest by the Acts of St. Paul, who 1 Cor. 5.
excommunicates; and 1 Cor. 6, 7, 11, 13. and frequently elsewhere makes Laws;
and also because the Apostolical Dignity, is the first and supreme Dignity in
the Church, as is manifest, 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. etc. I think Bellarmine has
said more than enough for the Confutation of the second Proposition De Romans
Pontif. l. 4. c. 23.
. I therefore proceed.

Proposition III.
That the Power of the Keys communicated to the other Apostles was inferior,
and subordinate to a higher degree of it in St. Peter; so says the Discussor --
I shall here only maintain the inequality, inferiority and subordination of
this Power in the other Apostles, to an higher, sublimer and compleater degree
of it in Peter Page 162.
. But that there was no such inferiority or subordination in the other
Apostles, as he vainly fancies, will soon appear, by consulting that place,
where the power of the Keys before promised, was actually given to St. Peter:
The words by which it was conveyed are these, As my Father sent me, so send I
you; and he breathed on them, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose soever
Sins ye remit, they are remitted; and whose soever Sins ye retain, they are
retained John 20. 21, 22, 23.
. In which words we have these two things.

First, That the power of the Keys is here given to the Apostle.

Secondly, That this Power is here given equally to Peter, and the other
Apostles; that is, in as high a degree to the other Apostles, as it was
promised to Peter, Matthew. 16. 19.

First, That the power of the Keys is here given, all those who own the
Doctrine and Authority of the Church of Rome (and by consequence the Discussor
himself) will be forced to grant: (1.) Because this is expressly taught by the
Fathers. (2.) Because it is also taught by the Roman Catechism, and the Council
of Trent.

1. This is no new Conceit of Heretics, but it is expressly taught by the
Fathers, whose unanimous Judgment in the interpreting of Scripture, every
Priest of the Church of Rome (as I said before) is by solemn Oath obliged to
follow. If that which is said, says Origin, I will give thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, be common, why not all the rest; BUT IN THE GOSPEL OF JOHN
OUR SAVIOR GIVING THE HOLY GHOST BY BREATHING, SAYS, RECEIVE YE THE HOLY GHOST
Tractat. 1. in Matthew.
. The Lord, says Cyprian, speaks to Peter, I say unto thee -- And although to all
the Apostles after his Resurrection he gives equal Power, and says, AS MY
FATHER SENT ME, SO SEND I YOU De Unitat. Eccles.
. All the Apostles, says Gaudentius, upon Christ's Resurrection, receive the
Keys in Peter; nay rather they receive with Peter from our Lord himself, the
Keys of the Heavenly Kingdom; when he says to them, [Receive ye the Holy
Ghost, whose Sins ye remit, etc.] Postea vero pro commisso scelere jam damnato
Juda, omnes Apostoli Christo surgente in Petro claves accipiunt. Quinimo cum
Petro caelestis regni claves ab ipso Domino accipiunt, quando ait illis,
Accipite Spiritum sanctum, etc. Tract. quem prima die ordinat. quorund. Civ.
Notarii accep.
. That ye may know, says Austin, that the Church received the KEYS of the
Kingdom of Heaven; hear in another place, what the Lord says to all his
Apostles, RECEIVE YE THE HOLY GHOST: TO WHOMSOEVER YE REMIT SINS, THEY ARE
REMITTED; AND WHOSOEVER'S SINS YE RETAIN, THEY ARE RETAINED Sermon. 108. de
Diverse.
. And Theophylact in his Comment on Matthew. 16. 19. Tho it was said to Peter
only, I will give thee the Keys; yet it was afterward given to all the
Apostles, when Christ said to them, WHOSE SINS YE REMIT, THEY ARE REMITTED,
etc. Instead of producing more of the Fathers, I challenge the Discussor to
produce one ancient Author who has said the contrary.

2. But if the Fathers should now lose their Authority (as they are wont to do
with the Romanists, whenever they contradict their new Faith) yet unless he
put on his triple case, he will not be able to resist that which follows;
passing over many private Authors (as they commonly call them, though licensed
by the highest public Authority) I shall produce only the Roman Catechism,
composed by the order of the Council of Trent, and the Council of Trent it
self. The Roman Catechism speaking of the Minister of the Sacrament of Penance,
says, He must have not only the Power of Order, but of Jurisdiction, who ought
to perform this Office. But those words of our Lord in St. John, afford us an
illustrious Testimony of this Ministry, WHOSE SINS YE REMIT, THEY ARE REMITTED
TO THEM; AND WHOSE SIN YE RFTAIN, THEY ARE RETAINED De Paenit. Sacramento, c.
5. S. 55.
. And the Council of Trent declares, that all those Opinions are false, and
Strangers from the Truth of the Gospel, which perniciously extend to other Men
besides Bishops and Priests, the Ministry of the KEYS; thinking those words of
our Lord, WHATSOEVER YE BIND ON EARTH -- And WHOSESOEVER SINS YE REMIT, THEY
ARE REMITTED TO THEM, AND WHOSESOEVER SINSYE RETAIN, THEY ARE RETAINED, to be
spoken indiffently to all the faithful, etc. Sess. 14. de Sacram. Paenit. c. 6.
By which it is plain, that the Trent Fathers, took remitting and retaining in
St. John, to signify the same thing with loosing and binding in St. Matthew.

Secondly, This Power is here given equally to St. Peter and the other
Apostles; or in as high a degree to the other Apostles as it is to Peter. This
will be cleared from,

First, The Words themselves. Secondly, The Judgment of the Fathers upon them.
Thirdly, The Concessions of many Learned Men of the Church of Rome.
First, From the Words themselves, no part of which is addressed to Peter
alone, or to Peter more especially than to any of the rest, but to all of them
jointly, without any note of Difference between them. Had our Savior been of
the Discussor's Mind, he would have spoken to this Effect, As my Father has
sent me, so send I thee Peter; and as I send thee, so do thou send them.
Whosesoever sins thou remittest, they are remitted; and whosesoever sins they
remit, in Subordination to thee as their Prince, they are remitted. Whereas we
see no such Distinction made, but as my Father sent me, so send I you, without
any Preference of Peter before the meanest of them. And accordingly (as an
excellent Divine of our own Church observes) when the Holy Ghost descended, it
was imparted to each of them alike, without any mark of Distinction. For we
read not of one Flame that crowned the Head of St. Peter, greater and more
illustrious than that of his Brethren; but the Text says, the Tongues, like as
of Fire, were divided, and sat upon every one of them singly, and they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost, Acts 2. 2, 3. The mighty Wind also wherein this
Flame came, filled all the House where they were sitting, and not only that
corner where St. Peter was placed. And so this Promise was equally performed in
common to them all, as it had been made to them all Texts examined which
Papists cite for St. Peter 's Supremacy, Part 1. p. 95.
.

Secondly, If we consult the Fathers, we may observe in them those two things
pertinent to our Purpose. 1. Not one of them intimates, that any thing was to
be found in this Text peculiar to Peter, by which he was set above his
Brethren; but whatsoever Power was here given, they supposed it given in common
and equally to them all. And some of them expressly tell us, that he gave the
same Power here to all the Apostles, that he had before given to one: so do St.
Cyprian and Theophylact. 2. The Power here given to all the Apostles, they take
to be so full, that a fuller and more ample could not be given to Peter. St.
Chrysostom says, He gave them all Heavenly Power, when he said to them, Whose
Sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. And what Power can be greater than this?
The Father has given all Judgment to the Son, but I see this all Judgment
committed to these by the Son (...). De Sacerdot. l. 3. c. 5.
. And Cyril of Alexandria (as I find him quoted by Bellarmine) says, That by
these Words, the Apostles were properly created Apostles and Teachers of the
whole World; and that we may understand that all Ecclesiastical Power is
contained in the Apostolical Authority, therefore Christ added, AS MY FATHER
SENT ME, etc. For as much as the Father sent the Son invested with the highest
Power Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 23.
. Now can there be any Power or Degree of Power, that is not contained in all,
and in the highest Power? I shall add no more, but that Pope Gregory I. by
virtue of these Words, ascribes to all the Apostles, superni judicii
Principatum, and makes them all to be God's Vicars, in retaining some Men's
Sins, and relaxing others -- Principatumque superni judicii sortiuntur, ut vice
Dei quibusdam peccata retineant, quibusdam relaxent. Hom. 26. de diverse. Lect.
Evang.
. Yea,

Thirdly, This is no more than what is acknowledged by many zealous Assertors
of the Pope's Supremacy; Of which I shall now name but three, because they may
serve instead of a thousand Witnesses, two of the three being Jesuits, and two
of them also Cardinals. The Jesuit Maldonate in his Comment upon these Words,
tells us, That the Power which Christ had received, as sent by his Father, he
gave to his Apostles, whom he sent in his stead, whom he made his Vicars. This
is manifest, says he, from the Words following; for therefore he breathed on
them, therefore he said, Whose Sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. that he
might show, that he gave as great Authority to them, as he had received from
his Father; for there can be no greater, than that of remitting Sins Quam
potestatem ipse a Patre missus accepisset, eam Apostolis dare quos suo loco
mitteret, quos vicarios suos faceret. Hoc apparet ex verbis sequentibus;
propterea enim insufflavit in eos, propterea dixit, Quorum remiseritis peccata
-- ut ostenderet se quantam authoritatem ipse a Patre accepisset, tantara illis
dare, etc.
. The Cardinal of Cusa says, We know that Peter received no more Power from
Christ, than the other Apostles; for nothing was spoken to Peter, which was not
also spoken to the others; as it was said to Peter, Whatsoever thou shall
bind.- And therefore we rightly say, that all the Apostles were equal in Power
Scimus quod Petrus nihil plus potestatis Christo a recepit aliis Apostolis.
Nihil enim d^ctum est ad Petrum, quod etiam aliis dictum non sit. Nonne sicut
Petro dictum est quodcunque super terram, ita aliis, quodcunque ligaveritis,
etc. De Concord. Cath. 2. 13.
. Yea Cardinal Bellarmine himself, having cited the Words of St. Cyprian, makes
this Inference from them. Where you see, that the same is given to the Apostles
by these Words, I SEND YOU, which was promised to Peter by that saying, I WILL
GIVE THEE THE KEYS, and afterward exhibited by that, FEED MY SHEEP. But it is
manifest, that by these Words, I WILL GIVE THEE THE KEYS, and by these, FEED MY
SHEEP, the fullest Jurisdiction is to be understood Ubi vides idem dari
Apostolis per illa verba, Ego mitto vos, quod Petro fuerat promissum, per
illud, Tibi dabo claves, et postea exhibitum per illud, pasce oves, etc. Lib.
4. De Romans Pontif. c. 23.
. What can be more plainly expressed, than that the Power conveyed to the
Apostles by these Words, I send you, was equal to that promised to Peter, in
the Promise of the Keys?

I know Bellaamine tells us, that he has elsewhere showed, that this is no
Impediment to Peter's Primacy; what, not to his Primacy of Power? Can they all
be equal in Power, and yet Peter be their Superior? But how does Bellarmine
reconcile this Contradiction? We confess, says he, the Apostles were equal in
Apostolical Power, and had in all things the same Authority over Christian
People, but they were not equal among themselves Fatemur enim Apostolos suisse
pares in Apostolica Potestate, and habuisse in populos Christianos eandem
omnino authoritatem, sed non fuisse pares inter se. De Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 12.
. Which is in effect the same with what the Discussor says; In this their
Apostolical Commission, they were all equal; but this was granted them, not in
reference to one another, but in reference to the whole World, of which they
were all Heads and Princes Page 168.
. But is not this to solve one Contradiction by another? They were all equal in
Apostolical Power; and the Apostolical Power (as he just before says) was summa
Potestas, the highest Power, and contained all Ecclesiastical Power; and yet
Peter was higher in Power than they, and had some Power which they had not;
that is, they all had and had not, the highest Power; they all had and had not,
all Ecclesiastical Power.

But notwithstanding all that has been said to the contrary, the Fathers, if
we may take the Discussor's Word, are plainly on his side; and if we will not
credit his Word, he has produced their own Words, to assure us that they are so.

I shall therefore examine the Testimonies produced, having first premised these
two things as preparatory thereunto.

1. That the Question now is not, Whether the Keys were given to Peter in
particular, or after a particularising manner: Or, whether they were given to
him alone, when our Savior said, I will give thee the Keys, etc. But supposing
them now given to the other Apostles; whether they were given to Peter in
another sense, or in a sublimer and compleater degree, (as the Discussor
speaks) than they were given to the other Apostles?

2. We shall have great reason to suspect, that this Gentleman misrepresents
the Sense of the Fathers, if we do but consider that his Friend Maldonat (who
was a little better acquainted with their Writings than he is) tells us, that
he saw all Authors (except Origin) understood the Words spoken to Peter, Matthew.
16. 19. in the same sense, with those spoken to Peter and the rest of the
Apostles jointly, Matthew. 18. 18. And by consequence, they understood the Keys
to be given in the same sense and amplitude to the rest of the Apostles, as to
Peter -- Nec enim codem sensu quo Petro atque aliis Apostolis dictum
interpretor, Quodcunque solvetis super Terram, erit solutum and in Caelis; etsi
video omnes Auctores praeter Origenem in cadem fuisse sententia. Mald. in
Matthew. 16. 19.
Which being premised, I shall now examine the Testimonies themselves.

He begins with Origin, from whom he cites two Passages. The first of which he
so grossly abuses, that had he to that one line he quotes, added the three next,
every Reader would have seen, that it is directly contrary to that, for the
proof of which he brings it. The Words he quotes are these, An soli Petro
dantur a Christo claves? How from hence he can infer, that Origin acknowledges
Peter more excelling in the power of the Keys, than the other Apostles, is past
my understanding. But if to these we add the words following, the whole Passage
is this, Were the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven given by Christ to Peter only,
and shall no other Saint receive them? But if that which is said, I will give
thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, be common also to the rest, why are not
all those things which are spoken before, and which follow, common to them all
(...), etc. Comment. in Mat. Tom. 12. p. 275.
? In which Words it is plain, that as Origin denies the Keys to be given to
Peter only; so in suposing that very Promise, I will give thee the Keys, to be
common to the rest, he must of necessity suppose, that the Keys were given to
the rest, in the same Degree they were to Peter.

In the other Passage I grant, that Origin makes no small difference between
the Promise made to Peter, Matthew. 16. and that made to the Disciples, Matthew.
18. That to Peter were given the Keys, not of ONE HEAVEN, but of MANY HEAVENS;
that whatsoever he should bind on Earth, should be bound, not in ONE HEAVEN,
but in ALL THE HEAVENS; but to them he says, that they should bind and loose
not in the HEAVENS, as PETER; but in ONE HEAVEN Non ergo modica differentia
est, quod Petro quidem datae sunt claves, non unius Caeli, sed multorum
Caelorum, etc. Tractat. 6. in Matthew.
. The Reason why he made this Difference, was, because the Word is used in the
plural Number in the first place (...).
, in the singular in the second *.

But is not Maldonate himself ashamed of this? and does he not say, that he
lost the Truth in proving it too subtly Notavit hoc ipsum Origegenes, sed
veram solidamque sententiam, nimis subtiliter probando, perdidit. In loc.
? Is not the word used in Scripture in both numbers, without any the least
difference in sense? For instance, St. Matthew says, when Jesus was baptized,
the Heavens were opened Matthew. 3. 16.
. St. Luke says, the Heaven was opened Luke 3. 21.
: Yea the same Evangelist uses them both indifferently. In the Lord's Prayer
the word is plural in the Introduction, singular in the third Petition, both in
St. Matthew and Luke, and in both used in the same sense. And so far were the
Fathers from making any difference between them, that they on the contrary
frequently express Matthew. 18. 18. in the plural Number, and Matthew. 16. 19. in
the singular, as Chamier has proved at large Panstrat. Cathol. tom. 2. de
Oecum. Pontif. l. 11. c. 13.
.

But granting his Argument to be nothing, yet it is evident from hence, says
the Discussor, that Origin did believe Peter to be more eminent, and to
surmount the rest in the Power of the Keys Page 163.
. This is not more evident, than it is from the place immediately before-cited,
that he believed the contrary. But suppose (as Maldonate says) that he was in
this a Dissenter from all the other Fathers (as in many other Points he was)
shall his sole Judgment, and that grounded upon a childish Error, be of more
Authority with us, than the more solid Judgment of all the rest? And why should
we value his Judgment in this, more than the Romanists do, in that which
immediately follows, viz. That by how much the better any Man is, by so much
the greater power he has of binding and loosing, which in the Church of Rome
is no less than Heresy.

But the Truth is, this place of Origin is nothing to the Purpose. For he does
not here compare Peter to the rest of the Apostles (to whom he supposed the
Power of the Keys was equally given, Matthew. 16.) but to those private
Christians only, who should thrice admonish their offending Brother; he
supposing the Words Matthew. 18. 18. to be directed to those alone, who told
their Brother of his fault; as will be evident to every one who shall
impartially consider the place.

The next Father he quotes is St. Hilary. And how does it appear, that he gives
a larger Portion of the Keys to Peter, than to the other Apostles? Thus, that
whereas he calls the other Apostles, Janitores Coeli, the Door-Keepers of
Heaven; he calls Peter by way of Transcendency, O Beatus Coeli Janitor, O
blessed Doorkeeper of Heaven. Is not this Demonstration? It might pass for
such with the Discussor, had not St. Hilary in another place unluckily given
the same Title (and another too as high) to all the Apostles: You O HOLY AND
BLESSED MEN, who for the merit of your Faith have obtained the KEYS OF THE
KINGDOM OF HEAVEN, etc. Vos, O sancti et beati viri, ob fidei vestrae meritum
claves regni Coeloruin sortiti, et ligandi atque solvendi in Coelo et in terra
jus adepti. de Trinitat. l. 6. Col. 74. Edit. Paris. 1631.
What is this, but to call them all, the Holy and Blessed Door-Keepers of
Heaven?

But the Discussor says, He likewise affirms him advanced above the rest.
Advanced! in what? If he speak to the Purpose, in the Power of the Keys. How
does he prove it? By these Words, Quia solus respondit caeteris Apostolis
silentibus, supereminentem fidei suae Confessione locum promeruit. But what if
the Word (locum) be not in Hilary. What shall I think of his foisting in one
Word for another? Was not the Action unworthy and disingenuous? in him
especially who pretends so much to Truth and honest Dealing? The best
Palliation I can make for him, is, that he found it in Bellarmine De Romans
Pontif. l. 1. c. 12.
. St. Hilary's words are these, Qui in cunctorum Apostolorum silentio Dei
silium revelatione Patris intelligens, ultra humanae infirmitatis modum
supereminentem Beatae Fidei suae confessione Gloriam promeruit De Trinitate. l.
6. col. 78.
. How wide is the difference between these words, and those of the Discussor?
It was pity he omitted the word Beatae, because from thence he might have
observed the transcendency of Peter's Faith. But that which I observe is, That
instead of Locum, St. Hilary has Gloriam. Now since he was of opinion (though
different from all that went before him) that Peter alone at that time knew the
Divinity of Christ by a special Revelation from God; what can he mean by this
supereminent Glory, but that he obtained the honor of confessing Christ's
Divinity, while the other Apostles were as yet ignorant of it?

But it is observable, that whereas he affirms the other Apostles to have
received the Keys of Fidei suae meritum, he asserts in his Comments on Matthew.
13. Petrum fide caeteros anteisse. From whence he infers, That he having a
greater portion of Faith, consequently had a larger power of the Keys. But
nothing can be more evident, than that Hilary does not mean by anteisse, that
Peter had a greater Portion of Faith than the rest, but that his Faith was
before theirs in time; the words immediately following, being these, For the
rest not knowing it, he first answered, Thou art the Son of the living God Nam
ignorantibus caeteris, primus respondit, Tu es Filius Dei Vivi. Comment. in
Matthew. Can. 14.
. But is it the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that a Bishop has the power of
the Keys more or less in proportion to the measure of his Faith? If so, then
supposing Peter had a Supremacy of Power, the Pope cannot succeed him therein,
unless he succeed him also in the Supremacy of his Faith: And I fear the
Discussor will be hardly put to it, to name any one Pope, whose Faith has
surmounted that of all other Bishops.

The five next Testimonies, viz. those of St. Ambrose (though no such words as
those he quotes are in Sermon. 66.) Cyril, Basil, Chrysostom, Cyprian, are all
impertinent, because they only affirm simply, that the Keys were given or
entrusted to Peter. So Ambrose, He it is that received the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven. So Cyril, Peter bearing the Keys of Heaven, etc. There is nothing of
comparison in any of these Quotations between Peter and the other Apostles;
nothing to insinuate, that he has the Keys in a higher degree than they. If
any thing be hence inferred, it must be this, That Peter had the Keys solely,
because they seem to speak exclusively of the other Apostles. But that this
cannot be their meaning, the Discussor himself grants Page 158, 159, 161, 162.
. That they cannot mean, that he had this Power in a higher degree than the
other Apostles, is as evident; because the very same Fathers make him and the
rest equal in this Power. What then is the reason why they speak after this
manner? Either, 1. Because these words, I will give thee the Keys, were
directed to Peter alone, tho meant to all the Apostles (as St. Ambrose.) Or, 2.
Because (to represent Unity) the Keys were given first to Peter only, which
were afterward given to all the Apostles (as St. Cyprian held.)

That Bid cannot mean by the Words he quotes, that Peter had any Degree of
Power above the other Apostles, is manifest, in that he expressly attributes to
them all, the very same Power of binding and loosing, that was given to Peter.
This Power, says he, is without doubt given to all the Apostles, to whom Christ
said in general after his Resurrection, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: Whose Sins
ye remit, etc. Haec potestas sine dubio cunctis datur Apostolis, quibus ab eo
post resurrectionem dicitur, Accipite Spiritum sanctum, etc. In Matthew. 16. 19.
And he says the same again presently after the Words quoted. All therefore
that he means by the Keys being given to Peter prae caeteris, is this, that
they were given to Peter first, and to the other Apostles after his
Resurrection.

He acknowledges, St. Austin affirms, the Keys to be given to the Church when
they were given to St. Peter Page 165.
. But he cannot see, that this diffringes the least ray of Claritude from his
Glory, but rather gilds it with a more radiant Luster. Yea, with a luster so
radiant, that it has quite put out his Eyes; for he must be blind who cannot
see, that this is utterly inconsistent with a Supremacy of Power in St. Peter.
Not if rightly understood, says he, for if you consult his Writings, you will
find the reason which moved him to affirm this, was because Peter represented
the Church; now in what Quality he represented it, he discovers himself in his
Tract. ult. in Johan. Cujus Ecclesiae Petrus Apostolus propter Apostolatus sui
Primatum gerebat figurata generalitate personam. And in Psalm. 108. Cujus
Ecclesiae ille agnoscitur gessisse personam propter primatum quem in Discipulis
habuit. And in Sermon. 23. de verbis Domini, Beatus Petrus figuram Ecclesiae
portans, Apostolatus principatum tenens. But by his leave, St. Austin in these
places, tells us only the Reason why he represented the Church, not in what
Quality he represented it. He did bear the Person of the Church, propter
Apostolatus sui primatum, propter primatum quem in Discipulis habuit, and
Apostolatus principatum tenens; that is, by reason of the Primacy of order, or
Precedence he had among the Apostles; for this is the Primacy St. Austin means,
as appears by his own Words, in the place quoted by the Discussor himself, in
the next Page; such a Primacy, from which not the least ray of Sovereignty can
be derived. This, he supposes was the reason, why our Savior made choice of
him to represent the Church, rather than another. But to say he represented the
Church in the Quality of its Prince or Governor, is nonsense: A Prince, as
such, cannot represent his Subjects; nor any Governor, those under his
Government. Besides, that these very places of St. Austin he produces, are a
direct Contradiction to this Conceit, as may appear by a short Reflection upon
them. The first, with the addition of those Words he has omitted, as not for
his turn, is thus in English; Of which Church PETER for the Primacy of his
Apostleship did bear the Person, the whole being figured in him. For as to what
properly appertains to him, he was by Nature one Man, by Grace one Christian,
by more abundant Grace, one and the first Apostle. But when it is said to him,
I will give thee the Keys -- he signified the whole Church, etc. In which
Words, these two -- Cujus Ecclesiae Petrus Apostolus propter Apostolatus sui
primatum gerebat figurata generalitate personam. Quod enim ad ipsum proprie
pertinet, natura unus homo erat, gratia unus Christianus, abundantiore gratia,
unus idemque primus Apostolus; sed quando ei dictum est, Tibi dabo claves --
Universam significabar Ecclesiam. In Evang. Johan. Tractat. 124.
things may be observed, each of which is destructive of the Discussor's Notion.

1. That St. Austin makes him bear the Person of the Church, neither as an
Apostle, nor as the prime Apostle; this is evident by the Words sed quando. He
was an Apostle, yea the prime Apostle, but when it was said to him, I will give
thee the Keys, he signified the Church. He did not therefore represent the
Church, as he was the prime Apostle.

2. That he bore the Person of the Church, only as he signified the Church: And
has he that signifies another, Dominion over him whom he signifies? as for
instance, the Ambassador over his Prince? The next place will give us a farther
Proof of the Discussor's fair dealing. For as some things, says St. Austin, are
said, which may seem properly to belong to the Apostle Peter, which yet have
not a clear Sense, unless when they are referred to the Church, of which he is
acknowledged to have born the Person in a Figure, by reason of the Primacy he
had among the Disciples, as is that, I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, and if there be any such like; so Judas after a certain manner
sustains the Person of the Jews, the Enemies of Christ, etc. Sicut enim quaedam
dicuntur, quae ad Apostolum Petrum proprie pertinere videantur, nec tamen
habent illustrem intellectum, nisi cum referuntur ad Ecclesiam, cujus ille
agnoscitur in figura gestasse personam, sicuti est, Tibi dabo claves regni
Caelorum, and siqua ejusmodi: ita Judas personam quodammodo sustinet inimicorum
Christi Judaeorum, etc. In Psalm. 108.
Why did he here omit the Words (in figura) unless because they were not
favorable to his Design? And why did he cut off all that concerns Judas, but
because he saw it was plainly against it? These things are here observable. 1.
That I will give thee the Keys, though spoken to Peter, yet cannot have a clear
Sense unless it be referred to the Church. 2. That there might be other such
things said to him. 3. That Christ did not promise him the Primacy, when he
promised the Keys, for he had that before. 4. That he did bear the Person of
the Church in a Figure. 5. That Judas after a manner sustained the Person of
Christ's Enemies; and in another place, he says not after a manner, but
absolutely, that one wicked Man signified the Body of the Wicked, as Peter did
the Body of the Good, the Body of the Church Tractat. 50. in Evang. Johan.
. Now will the Discussor say, that Judas had Jurisdiction over the Body of the
Wicked See Epphata. c. 1.
.

It is irksom to insist on these things, I shall therefore pass over his next
Quotation from Sermon. 23. de verb. Domini (by an error of the Press, I suppose,
put for Sermon. 13.) which is as little to the purpose, as either of the former;
and shall desire the Discussor to resolve me these two Questions.

1. Whether every one of the Apostles received the Keys as Head of the Church,
because they are all by St. Austin joined with Peter in representing the
Church. For having quoted the Words of our Savior, As my Father sent me, so
send I you: Whose Sins ye remit, they are remitted, etc. He adds, If therefore
they did bear the person of the Church, and so this was said to them, as if it
was said to the Church it self Sicut misit me Pater, et ego mitto vos -- ergo
si personam gerebant Ecclesiae, and sic eis hoc dictum est, tanquam ipsi
Ecclesiae diceretur etc. De Baptismo Contr. Donatist. l. 3. c. 18.
.

2. Whether St. John was the Primate of the Church Triumphant? The ground of
the Query is, because St. Austin in this same Tractat quoted by the Discussor,
makes St. John the Figure of the State of the Church in Heaven, as he does St.
Peter of the State of the Church on Earth.

But it tends much to Peter 's Glory, that in St. Austin 's Judgment none of
the Apostles represented the Church but he. How much soever it may otherwise
tend to his Glory, nothing of Dominion can be hence inferred. Nor is this Glory
so appropriated by Austin to Peter, but it is by him ascribed to the other
Apostles together with him (as I have showed before.) But how bright soever
this Glory may be in it self, the Discussor has here drawn a Vail over it, by
making him who before received the Keys as their Prince, to receive them now as
their Proxy; for so he adds in the same Page; He received them immediately --
They received them by a Proxy, etc. Now a Proxy, as such, has not one Ray of
Claritude, by which he outshines those whose Proxy he is.

When Optatus says, That he alone received the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
to be COMMUNICATED to the rest, he does not mean, to be communicated by him,
but by Christ (as a Roman Doctor expounds it Et claves regni Coelorum
communicandas caeteris; id est, quas Christus commendaturus erat caeteris. Du
Pin. Dissertat. 4. c. 1.
) And the preference Optatus there gives to him, consists in this, that he
alone received the Promise first, which was afterward performed to all the
rest.

As to what he adds concerning Matthew. 18. 18. That the Fathers expound it of
fraternal Correption. If he mean all, or the greater number of the Fathers, it
shows either his Ignorance or his Insincerity. Of those four he mentions,
Origin I grant does so. Chrysostom, Maldonat says, speaks obscurely, that he
knows not whether he was of this opinion or not; but in another place he, as
plainly as words can make it, applies this Text to the Apostles only De
utilitat. Lect. Script. Tom. 5. p. 590. Edit. Front. Duc.
. St. Jerome he palpably abuses, by quoting his Words on ver. 16. whereas he
expressly expounds ver. 18. of the Power given to the Church of binding and
loosing. The words cited from St. Ambrose, I know not where to find; but I
suspect he has dealt as fairly with him, as with St. Jerome.

The remainder of this Chapter is either ridiculous or impertinent, except that
he says, St. Jerome in his Comments on Matthew. 16. speaking of the Power of Keys,
acknowledges Peter to have received it SPECIATIM: Which is not, I grant,
impertinent, but that which is much worse, a downright Falsity: For in his
Comments upon that Chapter, the word Speciatim is not to be found, nor any
other of a like import, relating to St. Peter. Nor yet those Words he quotes as
following after it.

Proposition IV.
That by the Keys promised and given to PETER, is meant the supreme Power of
governing the Universal Church P. 133, 134.
. This will be dispatched in a word. If he meant Supreme in a negative sense,
viz. that Power than which there is none in the Church higher, it would be
true; but then in this sense Supreme Power was given to every Apostle. But as
he means thereby a Power superior to that of the other Apostles, by which Peter
was constituted their Governor, so it is false. For since (as has been already
proved, and as the Sorbonist before-quoted, affirms Primum est Petro promissas
esse eas ipsas claves, quae postea caeteris concessae sunt, ac proinde per
claves hic non intelligi, ut vult Bellarminus, summam potestatem in omnem
Ecclesiam. Ellies du Pin. dissertat. 4. c. 1. p. 309.
) the very same Keys promised to Peter, were afterward granted to the rest,
therefore by the Keys cannot be here understood the supreme Power over the
Whole Church.

What he produces for proof, is of no force. St. Chrysostom, he tells us,
affirms, that our Savior by virtue of his Promise of the Donation of the Keys,
did not only give S. Peter Power over the whole World, but to rise a Key
higher, EVEN OVER THINGS IN HEAVEN Page 134.
. And S. Chrysostom also says of S. Paul, That he took upon him the whole
World: And of all the Apostles in common, That not Nations and diverse Cities,
but the World was committed to them (as we have before heard.) And to rise to
the higher Key: Did not Christ give to the other Apostles the same power over
things in Heaven, when he said to them, Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth,
shall be bound in HEAVEN? And does not the same Chrysostom, speaking of these
Words, Matthew. 18. 18. say of all the Apostles, They sitting upon Earth, give
Sentence, and the virtue of their Sentence passes to the Heavens: As Emperors
sitting in some one City, give Sentence, and constitute Laws, but the Power of
their Sentences and Laws runs through all the World: so the Apostles sitting in
some one place, ordained these things; but the Power of their Laws and Bonds,
did not pass through the World only, but ascended to the very Height of the
Heavens (...), etc. De Utilitat. Lect. Script. p. 590, 591.
.

He adds the Keys likewise, Apoc. 1. 10. signify supreme Power, where our
Savior says of himself, I have the Keys of Death and of Hell; by which Phrase
absolute Dominion over Death and Hell are indigitated Page 134.
. But were these Keys in St. Peter's keeping? Had he absolute power of raising
the Dead? No, he will say he does not quote it to this purpose, but only to
show that the Keys in this place signify absolute Dominion over that which is
spoken of. Suppose they do so here, what then? Do the Keys signify as much when
attributed to Peter, as when attributed to Christ? Is there no difference
between the Keys in the Hands of the Master of the Family, and in the hands of
his Steward. A twofold difference at least must be grantend, one in the
Quality, the other in the extent of the Power denoted by them.

1. In the Quality; The Keys in the Master's Hands denote an Original,
Absolute, Supreme Power; in the Steward's, a Power delegated and subordinate to
that of the Master. Thus the Keys in Christ's Hands signify Supreme Power; but
if when given to Peter, they denote the same Supremacy, then there must be two
Supreme Powers over the same Family, which is a plain Contradiction. Yea, since
(as I have proved) the same Keys were afterward promised to, and conferred
upon all the Apostles, if they ever denote Supremacy of Power, there must be as
many Supremes as there were Apostles.

2. In the Extent of the Power; the Master's Keys extend to the whole Family
(be it never so large) the Stewards, to that part of the Family only over which
he is set: Thus for instance, the Lord high Steward of the King's Household, his
Power is limited; he has no Authority over the Officers of his Majesty's
Chapel, of his Chamber, of his Stable, etc. Now the whole Church in Heaven and
Earth is Christ's Family; that part of it in Heaven, the Discussor, I think,
will not affirm, that it is subjected to St. Peter, but to Christ immediately:
That part on Earth is subdivided into particular Churches, as so many lesser
Families, over which Christ has appointed there shall be so many Stewards, one
Steward over one part, another over another. As therefore we find not in
Scripture any one Steward set over the whole, so we read of many Stewards, with
respect to the parts. St. Paul and all the rest of the Apostles were Stewards
in this Family, as well as Peter, or else St. Paul was out in his reckoning,
when he said to the Corinthians, Let a Man so account of us, as of the
Ministers of CHRIST, and STEWARDS of the Mysteries of God 1 Corinthians. 4. 1.
. Yea, the same St. Paul supposes every Bishop, to be a Steward of God Tit. 1.
7.
. But I need not insist longer upon such little Arguments.

CHAP. IV.
THE next Chapter, I may be allowed to pass over; for it no way tends to St.
Peter's Glory, that Christ said to him, Get thee behind me Satan. I know not
who those several are, that object, as if by calling him so, Christ had
evacuated what he promised him before Page 172.
. And he might well have spared the Pains he put himself to in proving the
contrary. Nor was the Denial of his Master, a Ray of Claritude, but by the
Gentleman's own Confession an Eclipse. It was, says he, a short Eclipse, a Trip
rather than a Fall, a verbal rather than a real, a labial rather than a mental
Abnegation Page 174.
. O his excellent Faculty at ringing Changes upon Words! Of those several
Reasons the Fathers allege, why God permitted him to fall into this Offense,
in the fourth (viz. because Christ designing him to be the SVPREME Ruler of the
Church -- that he might be compassionate and favorable to poor penitent
Sinners in absolving them, etc. Page 173.
) I desire him to leave out the Word supreme, because it is not found in any of
those Fathers he quotes for the proof of it. It Is true, as Peter denied him, so
the rest fled for it Mark. 14. 50.
: But why should he cite Theophilact for this? I am apt to think St. Mark's
Authority might have been as good. Nor do I deny, but it will lessen his Fault,
If we consider the Dirity of that dreadful time, when he denied his Master: it
was, says he, when the Power of Darkness ruled with his black Scepter; it was
when the Sun was obtenebrated, the World shak'd with unusual Tremors, and
obdurate Rocks cleft asunder Page 175.
. Though by the Discussor's leave, it was not when, but after he had denied
Christ, that the Sun was darkn'd, the Earth quaked, and the Rocks rent. I shall
not enquire the reason, why he passed over St. Peter's other Faults, especially
considering, that he found an Answer prepared to his hand by Bellarmine, but
shall proceed to Chapter 5.

We are now come to those Words [Feed my Sheep] which the Discussor finds to be
strongly urged by Catholic Writers (as he calls them) in Defense of Peter 's
supreme Pastoral Jurisdiction; and impugned by Protestant Authors with all
their Force, etc. I never before heard of any Protestant that impugn'd the
Words, but only that Sense the Papists would wrest them to; which is so absurd,
that a very little Force will serve, not only to impugn, but quite to overthrow
it; as will appear by a view of the Particulars.

1. We shall not much differ about the sense of the word (...), which, he says,
signifies to rule and govern, as well as to feed. This he sets himself to
prove, both by Reason and Authority: By Authority both Christian and Heathen.
He first cites St. Austin, St. Ambrose, and Theophylact; and then interposing a
Reason, he proceeds to Suetonius, Dion, Plato, Homer, Hesiod, Cyril, Xenophon,
St. Basil. Methink St. Cyril and St. Basil come in a little odly among his
Heathen Fathers. But why does he again prodigally expend his Oil and Pains in
proving that which no Man questions? Consult all the Protestant Commentators,
and see if any of them denies, that (...) signifies to rule as well as to feed:
To what purpose then is all this waste? I must acknowledge my want of Augury to
divine, unless it be to let the World see what a Man of reading he is. And yet
after all, let the word signify what it will, it can import no more than what
belonged, not only to the other Apostles, but to all the Bishops in common with
them; for Saint Paul exhorts the Elders of Ephesus, to feed the Church of God
((...)) Acts 20. 28.
the very same word our Savior here used to Saint Peter. And Saint Peter
himself uses the same word in his Exhortation to the Jewish Elders ((...)) Feed
the Flock of God which is among you 1 Pet. 5. 2.
. Yea the Council of Trent (which to a Papist is of as great Authority as the
Holy Scripture) after it has showed what is the Duty of all those who have the
charge of Souls, admonishes and exhorts them all, That being mindful of the
Divine Commands, and an Ensample to the Flock, they would in Judgment and Truth
FEED and RVLE them Sacrosancta Synodus eos admonet and exhortatur, ut Divinorum
Praeceptorum memores, factique forma gregis, in judicio and veritate pascant
and regant. Sess. 23. de Reformat. c. 1.
. How vain then is Cardinal Bellarmin, when he says, That from this word it is
easy to demonstrate, That supreme Ecclesiastical Power is given to Peter De
Romans Pontif. l. 1. c. 15.
. Since it is certain, it is as easy from this word to demonstrate that it is
given to every Bishop.

Now though it is granted that (...) signifies to rule as well as to feed, yet
I deny the reason he gives for it, viz. To this very intent our Savior changed
the word (...), which implies not all the Functions of Pastoral Authority, but
only what appertain to feed, for the word (...), which signifies both to feed
and to rule Page 178.
. For how does it appear, that this was our Savior's intention in changing the
word? Why, this was observed by Erasmus in his Notes upon this Place: Will he
then stand to whatsoever Erasmus has observed in his Notes upon the Scripture?
If so, he must renounce several Articles of his new Roman Faith. But the truth
is, Erasmus has no such observation: he says indeed, that our Savior twice
said, (...), feed or nourish; once (...), rule as a Shepherd rules his Flock;
but he does not say, that to this intention he changed (...) into (...): so far
was he from this, that when he presently reckons up the several ways by which
the Sheep are to be fed, he does not so much as mention this of ruling or
governing. To let him see of what force his Reason is, suppose a Man should
say, that our Savior by (...) meant no more than to feed, might he not with as
much reason say, that to this intent he changed the word (...) into (...); for
as he first changed (...) into (...), so he again changed (...) into (...)
being used both in the first and third, and (...) in the second Interrogation.

Before the next Edition of his Book, I would advise him to add to the five
Tribes, five more; for by all the Accounts I have ever before met with, the
number of the Tribes of Israel was ten. And that not five only, but all of them
came to Hebron, and spoke the words, he mentions, to David, he may find, 2 Samuel
5. 1, 2, 3. 1 Chronicles. 11. 1, 2, 3. And if he please to consult 1 Chronicles. 12. from
ver. 23. to the end, he may find how many of each Tribe were then present.

2. He denies, That the other Apostles had Commission to feed and rule the
whole Flock, as much as Peter Page 179.
. For though he grants, that the other Apostles had most full and ample Power
to found Churches every where, to convert, baptize, and preach to every
Creature; yet notwithstanding all this, they did not equalize Peter -- For he
by Virtue of these our Savior's Words was created, not only chief Pastor of
all other Christians, but even of the Apostles themselves. Which because he
here only asserts, but afterward pretends largely to prove, I shall therefore
remit the Consideration of it to another place.

3. He next contends, that these Words, feed my Sheep, contain a Commission, in
Opposition to Dr. Hammond, Dr. Stillingfleet, and Dr. Barrow, who affirm them
to be an Exhortation: Dr. Hammond, (he tells us) says of this Text, All that
can by any Torture be extracted from it, is an Exhortation to a diligent
Discharge of that Office to which he was before commissioned Page 180.
. And is that all? does he give no reason for what he says? But it is easier to
repeat an Assertion, than to answer the Arguments by which it is confirmed. But
see how the Discussor proves it to be a Commission. The Words, says he, being
pronounced by a Lord to his Servant, imperatively, have no Lineaments of an
Exhortation, but of a Commission Ibid.
. Is then every Command of a Lord to his Servant a Commission? A Commission, I
thought had ever conveyed some Power, which the Person had not, before he
received that Commission. But a Lord may I hope command his Servant to do that
which he had before empowered him to do. If this be all required to a
Commission, most of St. Peter's Exhortations are Commissions, for as they are
expressed in the Imperative Form; so (if the Romanists say true) he was so
great a Lord, that not only those to whom he directed his Epistles, but the
Apostles themselves were his Servants. But I need not insist upon this, since
Dr. Hammond himself has so fully answered it. His fourth Argument, says the
Doctor, is, that Pasce being expressed imperatively, and spoken by a Lord to
his Servant, ought in all reason to signify a Command; since then every Command
of a lawful Superior gives a Commission to do that which he commands, and the
Words expressing this Command are in a particular manner spoken to Peter, it
follows, that St. Peter had by them a particular Commission given him to feed
Christ's Flock. To which the Doctor answers by denying, that every Command of a
lawful Superior gives a Commission; for it is, says he, evident, lawful
Superiors may command to exercise their Commission, after it is given. Is not
this visible in the Field every Day? The General gives his Commission, first
for the raising of an Army, then in any particular Expedition, he gives out
Commands, an hundred perhaps in a Day, and is there any Color of Probability
for each of these Commands, that it should be the giving a Commission? If there
be, it must be founded in the Equivocalness of the word Commission, so as not
only the Conveying the Power and Authority, or Office shall be meant by it
(which is the ordinary Notion) but the giving out any Order Dispatche^
dispatched. c. 7. Sect. 2.
. Thus the Doctor. I commend this Gentleman's Discretion, that he passed it
over. I fear he will be hard put to it, to show what Power was here given to
Peter, above what he had before; for he was before empowered to feed Christ's
Sheep: Yea, I have already proved, not only by the Testimonies of the Fathers,
but of Bellarmine and Maldonat, that no greater Power could be contained in
these Words, Feed my Sheep, than was before conveyed to him, and the rest of
the Apostles; by those other Words, As my Father sent me, so send I you, etc.
The necessary Consequence of which is, that they could not contain a Commission
properly so called. However, if every Command of a Master to a Servant to do
his Duty, must be a Commission, I then grant that this is so.

But he finds the Fathers looking upon these Words, as a Command, Commission,
Injunction, (he still confounds Command and Commission) as a great Trust
committed to him: No greater, than what they believed was before committed to
him. But St. Bernard calls it in plain Terms a Commission. I might tell him
that St. Bernard uses the Word in a loose improper Sense, but I need not,
because St. Bernard is too much a Child to be reckoned for; or rather too much
the Pope's Slave, to be of any Authority in this matter. But now suppose the
Fathers were all of Opinion, that these Words contained a Commission properly
so called, yet the Discussor will get nothing by it, because their joint
Opinion was, that what was here said to Peter appertained in common to all the
Apostles; and in as high a Degree to them, as it did to him.

The first Reason he gives, why Peter was sorry, seems to me as pleasant and
divertive, as the Reason his Antagonist gave, why it was an Exhortation, seemed
to him. I must tell you, (magisterially enough for a new Convert) he had little
reason to be chearly. Why? For Christ had no sooner given him his Commission,
but he allayed his Joy, by foretelling him his Crucisixion. He was grieved
before he foretold this, and therefore had no Joy to be allayed. If therefore
the foretelling him this, was any reason of his Grief, it seems a Man has
reason to be grieved at ill News, before it is told him. The reasons he gives
from the Fathers of Peter's Sorrow, do not concern the present Question, I need
not therefore take notice of them.

That the words, Pasce oves meas, include Peter's Restoration to his
Apostleship, the Discussor grants to Dr. Barrow: Tho if he fell from it, I
think he was restored to it before, when Christ said to him, together with the
other Apostles, As my Father sent me, so send I you. But this his Restoration
will not satisfy; He was not only readmitted into the society of the twelve,
but was exalted to a higher degree, so as to become the Prince and Pastor of
that Company. This, he says, is the real sense of the Fathers. If so, the
Fathers were mistaken in expressing their sense; for that this is not the sense
of those Sayings he cites from them, will appear by a short review of the
Particulars, which I shall now give you. After his Tears, says St. Ambrose, he
is taken to be a Pastor, and receives others to be governed by him, who had not
before governed himself Post lacrymas Pastor assumptus est, et alios regendos
accipit qui seipsum prius non regerat. So the words are quoted by him,
. What Is this to his being exalted above the Apostles? Were not the other
Apostles made Pastors, and had others committed to their Government as well as
he? Mark by the way, That he has changed accepit into accipit, seipse into
seipsum, and which is very observable, rexit not into rexerat, but regerat, a
word for which the Grammar has neither Mood nor Tense. He quotes these words
from St. Ambrose de poenitentia Petri, whereas St. Ambrose has no Tract so
entitled; but the words, allowing for those alterations he has made, are in
his 48th Sermon de Tempore. As little to the purpose is the other passage of
St. Ambrose: Petrus Ecclesiae praeponitur, postquam tentatus a Diabolo est:
that is, Peter is set over the Church, after that he is tempted of the Devil.
For none certainly will deny but the Apostles were Praepositi Ecclesiae, set
over Majorem gratiam reperit quam amisit, tanquam bonus Pastor tuendum gr^gem
accipit.
the Church as well as he. But S. Austin says, he found greater Grace than he
lost In Johan. 21. 23.
: That Is granted, but not greater than the other Apostles received; when it was
said to them, Teach all Nations, etc. For before his Fall, their Commission was
limited to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel; but now extended to Gentiles
as well as Jews. Tho by the way, this is none of St. Austin's, but taken out of
a Sermon falsely ascribed to him, as the Benedictins of Paris have showed.
Arnobius says, Major gradus redditur ploranti, quam aufertur neganti. It Is
true, since all that could be taken from him, upon his denial of Christ, was no
more than was before that given him; which (as I now said) was to preach the
Gospel to the Jews; whereas after his Resurrection, Christ enlarged his
Commission, but made it no larger than that of the other Apostles. But St.
Chrysostom says -- He so washed away that Sin, as to become the Prince of the
Apostles, and to have the whole World delivered into his Hands Lib. 6. contra
Judaeos.
. It is in St. Chrysostom, the first of the Apostles -- (...).
, and so he was before he denied his Master. And that every one of the Apostles
had the whole World delivered into his Hands as much as St. Peter, has been
before proved. Besides it is observable, that St. Chrysostom presently after
his Comment upon Feed my Sheep, says, that St. John as well as St. Peter
received the Government of the whole World.

The reason he gives, why our Savior asked Peter thrice, whether he loved him,
I own to be that which is generally given by the Fathers.

His next Assault is upon a Quotation out of S. Austin, and then upon another
out of St. Basil produced by his Antagonist to prove that the Words, feed my
Sheep were spoken to the rest as well as to Peter; but so feeble is his Attempt
that there is no Danger. S. Austin's Word's are, when it is said to Peter, it is
said to all, If thou love me, feed my Sheep Cum ei dicitur ad omnes dicitur,
si amas me, pasce oves meas.
. Which one would think were too plain to admit of any Dispute. But he fancies,
that he finds something to his Purpose in the Words foregoing, which he tells
us are these. Non sine causa inter omnes Apostolos hujus Ecclesiae Catholicae
personam sustinet Petrus, huic enim Ecclesiae claves regni Coelorum datae sunt,
cum Petro datae sunt; and cum ei dicitur, etc. And what now? Here, says he, you
are to understand that in his Judgment Peter only of all the Apostles
personated the Catholic Church. And what follows from hence? that the Keys are
said to be given to her, when they were given to him. This is that we say. O
but they were given to him, as to her Head, Primate, and Rector. In this only
Sense, those words which were immediately spoken to Peter, are said to be
spoken to all the rest, they being all comprised in him, as their Chief. And in
this Acceptance he grants, that FEED MY SHEEP, might be spoken to all his
Disciples Page 18^, 186.
. But where says St. Austin so, or any thing like it? He has already proved
this out of his Writings. And I have already showed that he is so far from
proving it, that the places he has produced for it, do prove the direct
contrary Vide page 91, 92, 93, 94.
. What follows next, that these words were spoken primordially to Peter solely,
is nothing to the purpose, and therefore he might have spared all the places he
quotes from St. Austin for the proof of it.

The previous words in St. Basil he would persuade us make wholly against that,
for which they are by Protestants alleged. I shall therefore set them down,
together with those that follow, and then leave it to the impartial Reader to
judge: They are by himself thus rendered in English; For a Governor is nothing
else, but one that represents the Person of our Savior; and this we are taught
by Christ, constituting Peter the Pastor of his Church after himself, for he
says, Peter, do you love me more than these? Feed my Sheep In the Original it is
constituting Peter Pastor after himself, not the Pastor, (...).
. What is there here that is so destructive and fatal to our purpose? Does this
set Peter above the rest of the Apostles? Had not Christ before created every
one of them Pastor of his Church after himself? But see now what follows, And
giving henceforth to all Pastors and Teachers an equal Power; and of this it is
a Sign, that they all bind and loose as he (...). Bas. Constitut. Monast. c. 22.
. He said in the words foregoing, that he constituted Peter after himself
Pastor of the Church; he says in these, that he conferred to all Pastors and
Teachers, not a Power subordinate, but equal to that he gave to Peter: Whereof
this is a sign, that they do all bind and loose, not in subjection to him, but
in like manner as he. See now what credit is to be given to this Man, who can
have the face to pervert so plain a Testimony as this.

That Christ spoke these words, Feed my Sheep, to Peter only, is not denied by
Protestants, and therefore all his Fathers, and all his Arguments from the
Context to prove it, are needless Page 188, 189, 190.
. But it is his way to be copious in the proof of that which is granted, and to
say little or nothing to the purpose, where there is most need of proof. But
though they were for a special reason directed to him only, yet all the rest
were equally concerned in them.

SECT. II.
In all that confused heap we have in the Remainder of these two Chapters,
there is nothing needs an Answer, but that alone which is the main thing in
Debate, viz. That Peter as supreme Pastor had Authority of feeding the
universal Church, including both the Apostles and other Christians Page 187,
194.
. This he attempts to prove by two Arguments from the Text it self, which he
pretends are agreeable to the sense of the Fathers: The first from the
Question, Love thou me more than these? The second from the Injunction, Feed
MY SHEEP. The Vanity of his Attempt will soon appear.

1. If Christ, says he, had designed him to be no more a Pastor than any of the
rest, the Question had been more rationally stated thus, Simon Jona, do you
love me AS MVCH as any of the other do? but our Savior asking him, whether he
loved him more than the rest, did by the Shape and Frame of the Question intend
him a particular Superiority above the rest Page 190, 191.
. To the same purpose Dr. Tho. G. says, to take away all Suspicion, as if he
meant not to give him an Authority above that of the rest of his Brethren, he
asked him not only if he loved him, but if he did not love him MORE THAN THEY;
manifestly declaring by the Excess of Love he required from him, a
proportionable EXCESS or Superiority in the Power that he committed to him Page
30.
. This, adds the Discussor, seems to me most serenely to be the native and
genuine meaning of of our Savior's Question, disarray'd of all Heretical
Depravation (rarely elegant!) otherwise I desire to know to what Purpose and
Designment was the Interrogation of a greater Degree of Love. I will be so
kind, as to tell him most serenely, what is the native and genuine Reason of
this. The Interrogation is of a greater degree of Love, with respect to that
Profession Peter had formerly made, tho all should be offended because of thee,
yet will I never be offended Matthew. 26. 33.
. Where Peter having professed a Love to Christ above all the rest, and yet
when he was put upon the Trial, having failed more than any of them, by thrice
denying him; our Savior therefore puts the Question comparatively, Love thou
me more than these? Art thou still as confident as thou wast heretofore, that
thou have a greater Love for me than these have? To which he now returns a more
modest Answer, professing only the Sincerity of his Love, but making no
Comparison with others, Lord, thou know I love thee: As much as to say, I
have now learnt by sad Experience, not to prefer my self before others, I will
not therefore say, that I love thee more than any of my fellow-Disciples, but I
dare appeal to thy self who know the Heart, for the Truth of my Love; thou,
Lord, that know all things, know that I love thee.

And therefore that Peter loved Christ more than any of the other Apostles,
(though it were certain that he did so) cannot be concluded from this Question,
much less, that this his egregious Love was the Motive that induced Christ to
grant him this Commission, (as the Discussor words it;) and less yet, that
Christ by commanding him to feed his Sheep, did declare him to be the greatest
Lover. Nor can it hence be inferred, as Dr. Tho. G. would have it, that Christ
required an Excess of Love from him: The feeding of his Sheep being enjoined,
as an Expression of his Love only, and not of his greater Love. If thou love
me as thou professest, give proof of thy Love to me by feeding my Sheep.

There is therefore no need to determine, whether Peter's Love surpassed that
of all the other Apostles, since all that is here upon the Profession of his
Love required of him, or (if the Discussor will have it so) the Commission here
given him, does no way exceed that given to the other Apostles; so that
supposing him never such a raging, ardent, mad Lover of Christ (as the
Discussor very handsomely renders St. Chrysostom's words) and that this Love was
the Ground of the Trust here committed to him, it cannot hence with any color
of Reason be inferred, that he was advanced to any the least Superiority over
them. And therefore all the Quotations of the Fathers to prove either of these,
are lost Labor; and I may pass over the two next Pages as impertinent, except
one Passage which deserves an Asterisk, (had we not met with something like it
before) That according to the Proportion and Measure of his Love, was the
Extension and Latitude of his Power Page 192.
. If the Pope's Power have the same measure, to what a narrow Compass will it
be reduced? For if we may judge their Love, by what their own Writers tell us
of the Fruits of it, in many of their Lives, there is no honest Curate who will
not be admitted, not only to be an equal Sharer, but to be his Superior in this
Pastoral Commission.

2. The second Argument is taken from the Injunction, Feed MY SHEEP. The words
Oves meas, says the Discussor, do impale and infold all Christ's Sheep in
general, as well the Apostles as other Christians, all were recommended and
delivered over to Peter 's Care and Presecture Page 194, 195.
. And he delivered to him, says Dr. Tho. G. the supreme Charge or
Superintendency of things in order to the feeding of his Flock, not only of his
Lambs, but of his Sheep; in which expression all the Faithful of what degree or
preeminence soever are included Page 29, 30.
. The Discussor has offered two Arguments why Oves meas must be taken in this
latitude. (1.) Because the words are delivered indefinitely. (2.) Because this
was the sense of St. Bernard, and some other Fathers. What will not Men say,
who are resolved to serve a Cause? Could any unprejudiced Person have ever so
much as dreamed, that by Feed my Sheep Christ meant, be thou Lord over all thy
fellow-Apostles? But let us consider the Reasons he gives.

1. Because the words are delivered indefinitely, in an unlimited manner, there
being no exception, restriction or distinction Page 194, 195.
. In answer to which it will be sufficient to ask this Gentleman a few
Questions.

(1.) Whether every indefinite Expression be to be understood universally. For
instance, when Christ said to Peter, Thou shall henceforth catch Men, whether
it was meant simply and without exception, all the Men in the World? Who does
not know that an indefinite Proposition is equivalent sometimes to an
Universal, sometimes to a Particular? That when its parts are not necessarily
connected, it is equivalent to a Particular only? But he thinks to defend
himself by the great Name of St. Basil, who says, That which is indefinite
comprehends all. St. Basil was too great a Master of Reason, to assert that
which every Fresh-man in Logic knows to be false and absurd; so that if these
are his words, it is certain he meant not every Indefinite, but an Indefinite
so qualified.

(2.) Whether all Nations, and every Creature be not words of as large extent
as my Sheep? Or whether the two former (being expressly universal) do not extend
to more than the later? And if so, whether every Apostle had not at least as
large a Commission as this here given to Peter? And consequently, whether this
Argument be not as good as that of the Discussor? Andrew had a Commission to go
into all the World, and to preach the Gospel to every Creature; but every
Creature includes the Apostles, Peter himself not excepted; therefore the other
Apostles, not excepting Peter, were St. Andrew's Sheep.

(3.) Whether the Flock of God be not as indefinite as my Sheep? Whether it
does not comprehend both Lambs and Sheep too? And if so, whether when St. Paul
exhorts the Elders of Ephesus, to feed the Flock of God, he gives not every one
of them Commission to feed the Apostles, and among them Peter, as well as the
rest?

(4.) If all Christ's Sheep without exception be here committed to Peter,
whether Peter be not committed to his own Government; and by consequence
whether he be not both superior and inferior to himself; his own Prince and
Subject too? Since he grants that Peter himself is one of Christ's Sheep.

(5.) Whether the Apostles were not under the immediate Conduct of the Holy
Ghost? And if so, whether it be reasonable to suppose, they were subject to the
Conduct of St. Peter. And to add but one more,

(6.) Whether St. Paul (for instance) was St. Peter's Curate? The Discussor
will do well to answer these, and several other such like Questions which may
be put to him, before he ventures to publish his second Book.

2. But this was likewise St. Bernard 's sense, lib. 2. de Conf. ad Eugenium
(he was unlucky in adding an f to Con. for I do not yet understand how Conf.
should be a contraction of Consideratione) Si me amas Petre, pasce Oves,
inquit: quas, illius vel illius populos civitatis, aut regionis, aut certi
regni? Oves meas inquit: Cui non planum non designasse aliquas, sed assignasse
omnes? nihil excipitur, ubi nihil distinguitur. Why does he not say, it was the
sense of the Infallible Judge of Controversies, Pope Innocent III? Nobis autem
in beato Petro sunt oves Christi commissae, dicente Domino, Pasce oves. Non
distingu^^s inter has oves and alias; ut alienum a suo demonstraret ovili, qui
Petrum and successores illius, magistros non recognoscerent and Pastores.
Decretal. l. 1. de Majorit. and Obed. Tit. 33. c. 6.
His Authority might perhaps have been of weight with some who think St.
Bernard's is too light; and I think it would have weighed as much with us
Heretics. And yet, which is fair, I will promise to assent to this Passage of
St. Bernard's, if he will assent but to one of ten, which, if he please, I will
produce out of the same Tract from which this is taken: Or if he will subscribe
to this one Passage in his 6th Sermon on Psalm. 90. where after he had
complained of the monstrous Corruptions of the Church of Rome, It remains, says
he, that the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, not the Day-Devil only, but the
Noonday-Devil, be revealed, which is not only transformed into an Angel of
Light, but is exalted above all that is called God, or that is worshipped
Superest ut, reveletur homo peccati, filius perditionis, Doemonium non modo
diurnum, sed and meridianum, quod non solum transfiguratur in Angelum lucis,
sed extollitur super omne quod dicitur Deus, aut quod colitur.
. Is not St. Bernard's Authority as to this Saying, as little regarded as
Luther's or Calvin's?

But be his Authority never so little, what is wanting in him, will, he may
think, be made up by the Testimonies of St. Chrysostom and Theophylact, which
he has added to him. But the comfort is he quotes nothing from them, but what
has been already answered. And therefore (though I have little reason to take
any thing upon trust from him, yet) I will not here put my self to the trouble
of examining the Originals, but will give you his Quotations as he himself has
rendered them in our own Language. St. Chrysostom says, Christ foretold St.
Peter great things, and delivered the World into his Hands. Again, Christ
delivered into his Hands the Government of the Ecumenical Church. And on
Matthew. 16. he confesses him to preside every where in the World. Hence he calls
him the Master of the Universe. Theophylact likewise in his Comments on John
21. says, Christ delivers to Peter the Government of the Sheep of all the
World. And again, Follow me, delivering into your Hands the whole World P. 195,
196.
. Now in all this,

1. It is not said, that Christ delivered into his Hands the Government of the
Apostles, or that he made him their Master.

2. Here is no more attributed to Saint Peter, than what is by the same Saint
Chrysostom ascribed to the other Apostles (as has been showed). And therefore
St. Peter's Power over them, cannot with any more reason be inferred from these
general Expressions, than that St. John or any other Apostle had Authority over
him. For the Apostolical Commission being not limited to any one Nation, but
expressed in those general Terms, Go into all the World; Teach all Nations; the
Fathers therefore reckoned every Apostle to have the universal Church, and the
whole World committed to him: So that in their account St. Bartholomew's, no
less than St. Peter's Power, was not confined within the limited Tropicks of
any particular Kingdom or Regions; but without any Boundary or Horizon to
terminate it, without any Shores or Frontiers to restrain it, was stretched and
extended over the vast Universe. Because to whatsoever part of the World any
one of them came, he had Authority to preach and baptize, to constitute and
govern Churches.

This is no more that what is affirmed by the Romanist before quoted, and by
him returned in answer to these places of Chrysostom, Theophylact, and others
of the like Nature. It is to no purpose, says he, what some Men say, that the
Sheep of the whole World were committed to Peter; As St. Leo in his 3 d Sermon
of the Assumption, Gregory in his 4th Book, and 32. Epist. Theophylact upon the
last Chapter of John, and before these Chrysostom, in his 87th Homily upon
John, and his 80th to the People of Antioch Chrysostom has but 21 Sermons to
the People of Antioch, and therefore here is an error in the number.
, also in his 6th against the Jews: For since Peter and the rest of the
Apostles had received a Power of preaching through the whole World, so that to
all and every one of them indefinitely, the Sheep throughout the whole World
were committed, they may be called Pastors of the whole World. So Chrysostom
does not scruple to call Timothy Bishop of the whole World, and Paul often,
especially in his second Homily of the Praises of St. Paul. Therefore the Sheep
of the whole World may be said to be committed to Peter, because he received
the Sheep, not of any one certain Kingdom or place to be governed by him, but
indefinitely the Sheep of the whole World to which he should come Nec refert
quod nonnulli aiunt Petro totius mundi oves esse commissas. S. Leo Sermon. 3. de
Assumptione. Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 32. Theophylact. in cap. ult. Johan. and
ante hos Chrysostomus Homil. 87. in Joan. and 80. in Pop. Antioch. -- Cum enim
Petrus and reliqui Apostoli per totum orbem praedicandi potestatem accepissent,
etc. Du Pin dissert. 4. c. 1. p. 311.
.

Yea this is no more than what is granted by Bellarmine De Romans Pontif. l. 1.
c. 11. and l. 2. c. 12.
. And the Discussor Part. 3. p. 179, 198.
, who tells us again and again, that all the Apostles were Heads, Rectors and
Pastors of the universal Church, and that the whole World was their Diocese.

Having seen that the Testimontes cited by the Discussor are of no force, I
would now have proceeded to show that the Ancients were so far from taking
these Words to contain any Power peculiar to St. Peter, that they thought, not
only that the other Apostles, but all Christian Bishops were as much concerned
in them, as he was; that the Duty inculcated by them was equally incumbent upon
them all, and that they are by them equally applied to all, without making a
Difference, or reserving any Prerogative for St. Peter. This, I say, I would
now have proceeded to, had I not found the Work already done not only by
Protestants, but many learned Men of the Church of Rome, particularly by
Vigorius Ad Respons. Synodal. Council. Basil. Comment. c. 13.
; Launoy Epist. ad Raimund. Formentin. par. 2. and ad Hadrian. Vallant. and
part quinta ad Carol. Magistrum.
; and Du Pin De Antiq. Eccles. Disciplina dissert. 4. c. 1. p. 310.
. Whom one would think, the Discussor should take himself concerned to answer,
before he again tries his Skill upon Protestants.

He next proceeds to several nice Distinctions (as he calls them) made by the
Protestant Divine, whose Papers he answers; as that Christ said Oves meas, not
tuas. That he said, pasce Oves not Pastores. That it was not said, confirma
Filios or Servos or Subditos, but Fratres. Now though there be good reason and
ground for these Distinctions, yet because there is no need of them in order to
the answering of any thing offered by the Discussor, I shall not insist upon
them.

He now hastens to conclude, but before he comes to it, he thinks fit to show
the Protestant Divine, how fair an Antagonist he has of him. To that end he
thus bespeaks him: If you can prove, that the other Apostles were none of
Christ's Sheep, I will exempt them from Peter 's Prefecture Page 199, 200.
. He need not prove this, to procure their Exemption, unless the Discussor
first prove that every Indefinite is equivalent to a Universal. But he says, If
they were his Sheep, they were under the Denomination of Oves meas, recommended
to Peter 's Shepherdly Government. If so, then Peter himself was under that
denomination recommended to his own Shepherdly Government, for he was no less
Christ's Sheep, than the other Apostles. But Christ often calls them Sheep, and
this enforces him to believe that he meant them. When Christ calls them so, he
calls Peter so too, and this will then enforce him to believe, that he meant
Peter as much as the rest. But the Truth is, by Oves meas he meant neither him,
nor the other Apostles, who as they are Apostles, are never reckoned as Sheep,
but as Shepherds, and therefore not to be fed themselves by any, but all of
them to feed others. Now that I may not be behind-hand with him in Kindness,
but may show my self as fair an Antagonist, as he is, I will make him the like
offer, by which he will perceive how concluding his Argument is. If he can
prove that Peter is none of Christ's Sheep, I will then exempt him from being
under his own Prefecture. Again, If he can prove, that Peter is no Creature, I
will exempt him from the Prefecture of the Apostles. This Argument (to speak in
the Words of a learned Divine of our own Church Conference between Rainolds and
Heart. c. 3. p. 90.
) over-masters the Discussor's, because Christ said not to Peter, feed ALL my
Sheep: But he said to the Apostles, preach the Gospel to EVERY Creature.

He will not yet let the Fathers rest, but summons them again to give in
evidence for Peter's Power over the Apostles, which he will never be able to
extort from them. St. Chrysostom, he says, interprets Oves meas on Peter 's
Brethren, which were the Apostles, Hom. 87. on St. John, (...), etc. Christ
says to him, If you love me, preside over your Brethren. And again, (...), etc.
He delivers into his Hands the Government of his Brethren Page 200.
. But why must St. Chrysostom by his Brethren mean the Apostles, and not
Christians in common? Why should he not use the word in that sense here, in
which he does elsewhere, and in which it is used in the New Testament, and by
St. Peter himself in his Epistles? Is there any thing in the Context, that
determines it to the Apostles? Nay, when he says presently after, that John as
well as Peter received the charge of the whole World, and that notwithstanding
the dear Affection Peter had for him, they could not continue to live together,
because that would be to the damage of the Church; can any one think that he
took St. John to be one of Peter's Flock? But if St. Chrysostom when he speaks
of St. Peter's Brethren, means the Apostles, then by a parity of reason, by St.
Paul's Brethren he means the Apostles; and yet no Man will believe, that when
he says of St. Paul, that he would have concealed his Revelations, unless he
had seen his Brethren perishing (...). In 2. Epist ad Corinth. Hom. 26. p. 733.
, that by his Brethren he meant Peter, and the other Apostles.

He next quotes Theophylact to as little purpose. He delivers, says
Theophylact, into Peter 's Hands, the Prefecture of all the Faithful. Because
none being excepted, in what place soever he came, they were all under his
Charge. But that he did not include St. John (nor by consequence the other
Apostles) under all the Faithful, appears by what follows. Because, says he,
(speaking of Peter and John) that great work, the preaching of the Gospel was
entrusted to them, it was not fit they should be joined, but divided, that one
might go to these, and the other to those (...).
. Again, upon these words, If I will that he tarry till I come, he brings in
Christ thus speaking to Peter: I now bring thee forth to the Government of the
World, and follow me; but let him (viz. John) remain here till I come again,
and I will bring him forth, as I do thee (...), etc.
.

But he goes on; Besides this you will find the unanimous Consent of the
Fathers, attesting Christ's whole Flock, which must necessarily infold the
Apostles, to be recommended to Peter. What will not this Man say? If by the
Fathers he means all the Fathers (as by the Rules of his Logic he must) is it
a sufficient induction to name six, without an etc.? But it is pleasant to
observe, that 1. Not one of those he quotes, says the whole Flock was
recommended to Peter. 2. Those which say the Flock was committed to him, meant
no more to include the other Apostles, than they did Peter himself; they taking
them all for Shepherds, as much as they did him.

1. Not one of them attests, that the whole Flock was recommended to him, as
will appear by a recital of them. St. Ambrose says, As a good Shepherd he
received the Flock; that he was that faithful and wise Servant, whom the Lord
set over his Family; that by the Judgment of the Lord the Flock was committed
to him. St. Chrysostom says, the Flock was by Christ entrusted to him. And
Epiphanius, that he was entrusted with the Flock. St. Basil calls him a
Shepherd after Christ. St. Chrysostom again says, That he excelled the rest of
the Apostles. Arnobius, That none of the Apostles but Peter, had the Title of
Pastor from our Savior. Where is it said, that the whole Flock, or that the
Apostles were recommended to him? But I shall not pass over these without a few
Remarks.

(1.) That the first passage he gives us from St. Ambrose, is not to be found
in the 47th Sermon out of which he quotes it; perhaps his memory here failed
him, for he before cites a Sermon of St. Austin's for the very same words. But
that I rather observe is this, that in the other Passage, immediately after the
Words he quotes concerning Peter, St. Ambrose says all the same things, and
more of St. Paul, which he fraudulently conceals.

(2.) Whereas St. Basil says only, Christ constituted Peter a Pastor of his
Church AFTER himself: He tells us St. Basil calls him, the Shepherd NEXT after
Christ.

(3.) His abuse of St. Chrysostom in Inscript. Act. Apost. is such, as equally
betrays both his Folly and Insincerity. He says Chrysostom calls Peter the Head
Pastor of the Apostles. But now if he was their Head-Pastor, he was not their
sole Pastor, they must have another Pastor over them, subordinate to Peter;
this shows his Folly. (2.) Nor is the Insincerity less egregious: For that
which Chrysostom says is this; that Antioch received the first of the Apostles
as its Pastor, (Peter having been Bishop there) His Words are thus englished.
This is one Prerogative of our City, that in the Beginning it received the
chief of the Apostles for its Teacher. For it was meet, that the City which
before all the World was adorned with the name of Christians, should receive
for its Pastor, the first of the Apostles (...).
. Judge now whether there was ever a more pure piece of Forgery than the
Discussor's Translation of those Words. Is not he, think you, a Man well
qualified to cry out upon others for culling out here and there a Line without
perpending its Relation, either to the foregoing or following matter? Ends
without Beginnings, Beginnings without Ends?

(4.) The Words produced for St. Austin's are taken out of a Book that is none
of his Quaest. Vet. and Nov. Test.
, as Erasmus has proved by unanswerable Arguments. But if his Reasons and
Authority should be rejected; Bellarmine not only says so, but that it is the
Book of some Heretic, and proves it too De Scriptor. Ecclesiast. p. 161. Edit.
Lugd. 1675.
. And Labbe says, that all Men easily consent, that it is none of St. Austin's.
De Scriptor. Ecclesiast. tom. 1. p. 137.
.

(5.) Arnobius, from whom the last Testimony is taken, is of no Authority;
Bellarmine has proved, that he was not that Arnobius who lived about the
beginning of Dioclesian's Reign, and wrote the seven Books contra Gentes De
Scriptor. Eccl. p. 88.
, which Du Pin says is so certain, that all the World agrees in it Novelle
Bibliotheque tome premier. p. 630.
; Sixtus Senensis think he was an African Eiblioth. Sanct. l. 4. p. 201, 202.
; Oudin, that he was a Frenchman Supplement. de Scriptor. p. 100.
. But it matters not whether, since what he says is nothing to our present
purpose. For suppose none of the Apostles but Peter had the title of Pastor
from our Savior, will this give him any preeminence, if they all had the
Office and Authority signified by this Title? The truth is, the Title it self
is no where given by our Savior to Peter; he commands him indeed to feed his
Flock, but if this be to give him the Title of Pastor, the same Title is given,
not only by St. Paul Acts 20. 28.
, but by St. Peter too 1 Pet. 5. 3.
, to every Bishop. And what will the Pope get by this?

2. As none of them say the whole Flock, so those of them which say the Flock
was commended to him, meant no more to include the other Apostles, than they
did Peter himself; they taking them all for Shepherds, as much as they did him.
Though this has been sufficiently cleared already, in that they thought there
was nothing contained in those Words, feed my Sheep, that was peculiar to St.
Peter; but what was applicable in common, not only to all the Apostles, but to
all Bishops that succeeded them; yet I shall plainly prove it from the Context
of two of those very places, which the Discussor has alleged for the Proof of
the contrary; viz. the one that of St. Ambrose, the other that of St. Basil.

(1.) Within less than three lines after those Words produced from St. Ambrose,
for Peter's Pastorship over the Apostles, follow those words I have put in the
margin Beatus and ille servus, qui potest dicere; lac vobis potum dedi, non
escam; nondum enim poteratis, Novit enim quos quemadmodum pascat. Quis nostrum
hoc facere potest? Quis nostrum potest vere dicere; factus sum infirmis
infirmus, ut infirmos lucrifaciam? Et tamen ille tantus ad curam gregis electus
a Christo, qui sanaret infirmos, curaret invalidos. Haereticum a commisso sibi
ovili post unam correptionem repellit, ne unius erraticae ovis scabies serpenti
ulcere, totum gregrem contaminet. Proaem. ad 5. l. de fide Edit. Paris. an.
1614.
, in which he says of St. Paul all the same things he had before said of St
Peter. As 1. That he was also that blessed Servant. 2. That he was chosen by
Christ to take care of the Flock. 3. That the Sheepfold, (not part of the
Sheepfold) was committed to him. Let the Discussor read the whole passage, and
then tell me, whether it be more clear from the Words relating to Peter, that
Paul was infolded in the Flock entrusted to him, than it is from the Words
concerning Paul, that Peter was infolded in the Flock committed to his care?
yea, whether the Advantage does not lie rather on Paul's side? For in saying,
he rejects an Heretic, lest the Scab of one wandering Sheep, should infect the
WHOLE FLOCK, he seems to imply, that St. Paul had the whole Flock under his
care, which is more than he says of S. Peter. But if the Flock must still
comprehend the Apostles, it unavoidably follows, that the Apostles were
committed to Paul's shepherdly Government, and to Peter's too; and Peter
governed Paul, and Paul governed Peter, and they were both of them at once both
Subject and Sovereign.

(2.) St. Basil after the Words cited by the Discussor, viz. That Christ
constituted Peter Shepherd after himself, adds, giving an equal Power afterward
to all Pastors and Teachers -- (...). Constitut. Monast. c. 22.
. And if to all Pastors and Teachers, then certainly to the Apostles, who were
the prime Pastors and Teachers; and if all the Apostles had equal Power with
Peter, then Peter had no Power over them, and by consequence they were not
under his Shepherdly Government.

What follows next, is a high Encomium of St. Peter; from whose personal
Excellencies, I have no Inclination to detract; though I see no reason to
advance him to the debasing of all the rest. Let him be, if he please, the most
resplendent amongst the Apostles, the most refulgent of the holy Dozen; yet to
say, that therefore he was culled out of that illustrious Society, by the
discerning Eye of Christ, as the fittest Person among them to be his Vicar, (as
if he made him alone his Vicar) betrays such unacquaintance, not only with the
holy Scriptures, but with the Writings of the Ancients, as one would not expect
from so great a Pretender to Antiquity. Christ made all the Apostles his
Vicars, when he gave them that Commission, John 20. 21, 22, 23. And St. Paul
reckoned himself, and the other Apostles his Vicars, when he said, We are
Ambassadors for Christ; We beseech you in CHRIST'S STEAD 2 Corinthians. 5. 20.
. And that this Title was anciently given to all Bishops, Mons. Launoy has
amply proved, by the Testimonies of Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, and other
learned Divines of the Church of Rome. Yea, that the Bishops of Rome were so
far from taking it to be their peculiar, that scarce any one of them till a
thousand Years or more after Christ, called himself by this name; but was
content with the more humble Title of the Vicar of Saint Peter Launoy Epp.
part 3. Ep. Michaeli Marollio.
.

He says Jerome observes on Mark 16. that the whole Flock was recommended to
Peter, ut sit una Fides, sub uno Pastore: Bellarmine, Labbe, and Sixtus
Senensis will acquaint him, that the Comment on the Gospel of Saint Mark that
passes under Saint Jerome's name, is none of his Bell. de Script. Eccl. p. 137.
Edit. Lugd. 1675. Labb. Dissert. Hist. de Script. Eccl. tom. 1. p. 440. Sixth.
Senens. Bibl. S. l. 4. p. 247.
. But having consulted three Editions of St. Jerome, I can find no such words,
nor any like them, in the Comment upon that Chapter.

Chrysostom, he tells us, affirms, that our Savior was pleased at his
departure out of this World, to entrust the care of his Sheep to Peter, as a
faithful and vigilant Guardian, and not only to him, but to his SUCCESSORS
AFTER HIM. But by his Successors he cannot mean the Bishops of Rome only, for
as he says nothing of them in the words before or after, so he includes himself
in the number of these Successors, though he was yet no Bishop, but a Priest
only. And if the reason why Christ entrusted his Sheep to Peter, was because he
found him a faithful and vigilant Guardian; as he had the same reason to
entrust them to the other Apostles, so for the contrary reason, few Popes have
been found for a thousand years, to whom he would have entrusted them.

I have now examined the Texts of Holy Scripture, and the Greek and Latin
Fathers alleged by the Discussor for the proof of St. Peter's Supremacy: And
upon a review of the whole, I think every unbiased Reader will conclude with
me, 1. That his Proofs from Scripture are not so full, but he might have been
content to have taken to their assistance, those other Scripture-proofs
produced to this purpose by some of their learned Men; such as, Christ paid
Tribute only for himself and Peter; Peter alone cast himself into the Sea;
Peter drew the Net to the shore full of great Fishes; Christ said to Peter,
SIMON SLEEP THOU? 2. That he has not steered his Course by the unerring
Pharo's of Antiquity (as he promised Page 3.
) but by new Lights, which have led him quite contrary to that Course the
Ancients steered.

No place therefore is left for the second Inquiry, viz. Whether the Bishop of
Rome succeeded PETER in this Supremacy? since Peter can be succeeded by none,
in that which he never had. Should it indeed be granted, that Peter was
invested with it, it will not follow, that the Pope has it, unless it be
proved, first that Peter was in a strict and proper sense Bishop of Rome; and
2. That all the Power Peter was invested with, was to descend to his Roman
Successors; neither of which will be ever proved. But now if Peter was never
possessed of such Supremacy himself; admit he was Bishop of Rome, and that
whatsoever Power he had, was derived to his Roman Successors, no such Supremacy
could be derived from him to them. It would be therefore an idle thing to
insist upon this, especially considering, that the Discussor himself has not
done so, but spoken of it only occasionally, and out of place; intending, I
presume, to make this the main Subject of his second Book (which he has
promised). But if he resolve to be as good as his word, and to oblige us with
another of his Books, let him first establish Peter's Supremacy upon a more
solid Foundation than he has yet done, otherwise he will but render himself the
more ridiculous, in endeavoring to erect the Pope's Supremacy upon it.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
What Supremacy is contended for; and what the Discussor supposes, as the
Foundation of it.

Sect. 1.
1. That the rest of the Apostles were not ignorant of Christ's Divinitty when
Peter made this Confession, Thou art Christ, etc. This proved, 1. By Scripture
page 7. 2. By what the Discussor himself grants, viz. 1. That John the Baptist
knew it page 9. 2. That the Devils knew it page 12. 3. By the Testimonies of
the Fathers 13. A compendious way of reconciling Heretics 18. Jansenius and
Tostatus misrepresented 19. Four Questions answered 20. 4. By the Testimonies
of those Modern Romanists the Discussor quotes for the contrary 21, etc.

Sect. 2.
2. That Peter did not attain to this knowledge by a peculiar Revelation 26. The
Testimonies of the Fathers alleged to this purpose, showed to be insignificant
27.

CHAP. II.
These words, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, etc. examined.

Sect. 1.
Christ the Primary Foundation of the Church 30. How impertinently the
Discussor quotes the Fathers ibid. The Vanity of his critical Observation from
St. Basil, St. Ambrose, and St. Jerome 32. Several places of St. Austin
answered, and the true sense of them given 33, 34.

Sect. 2.
Whether those Fathers who assert St. Peter's Faith to be the Rock, do thereby
exclude his Person page 38. A Passage of Theophylact answered 39. Another of
St. Chrysostom 40.

Sect. 3.
Whether St. Peter had any Pre-eminece as he is the Foundation of the Church,
above the rest of the Apostles 42. The Testimonies produced by Dr. Tho. G. to
prove the Church more eminently built on St. Peter, examined, and showed to
import no such thing 45, etc. In what sense St. Jerome calls St. Peter the Head
and Prince of the Apostles 46 Of the reason why Christ gave him the Name Peter
49. The difference the Discussor makes between (...) and (...) showed to be
ridiculous 50, 51. That St. Peter's Primacy was that of Order or Place only 55,
56. The Sayings of the Fathers produced by the Discussor, to prove the Church
more eminently built on St. Peter, showed to be impertinent, page 59.
Especially those of St. Jerome, page 60. and St. Cyprian 64. In what respects
the Church may be truly said to be built more eminently on St. Peter 68.

CHAP. III.
Their whole Discourse upon these words, I will give thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, etc. reduced to four Propositions 70.

Prop. 1. That the promise of the Keys was made to Peter alone. Two things
returned in answer to it 71. What meant by the Keys, what difference between
them and Binding and Loosing 72. Prop. 2. That Peter received the Keys
immediately from Christ, but the other Apostles from or by St. Peter; confuted
by Scripture, and by four Arguments from Bellarmin page 76, 77. Prop. 3. That
the Power of the Keys communicated to the other Apostles was subordinate to a
higher degree of it in St. Peter. The contrary proved from that place where the
Power of the Keys before promised, was actually given, viz. John 20, 21, 22,
23. 1. That the Power of the Keys was here given, the Romanists must grant, 1.
Because this is expressly taught by the Fathers 79. 2. Because it is taught by
the Roman Catechism, and the Council of Trent 80. 2. That the Power was equally
given to Peter and the other Apostles, is cleared from 1. The words themselves
81. 2. The Judgment of the Fathers upon them 82. 3. The Concession of many
learned Men of the Church of Rome 83. The Testimonies of the Fathers cited by
the Discussor, viz. of Origin, St. Hilary, Ambrose, Cyril, Basil, Chrysostom,
Cyprian, Bid, and St. Austin, examined and answered 85, etc. Whether the
Fathers expound Matthew. 18. 18. of Fraternal Correption 95. Prop. 4. That by the
Keys promised and given to Peter, is meant the Supreme Power of governing the
Church ibid. His Proof showed to be of no force page 96. A twofold difference
between the Keys in the hands of the Master of the Family, and in the hands of
his Steward 79.

CHAP. IV.
Sect. 1.
Of these words, Feed my Sheep 99. The sense of the word (...) 100. Whether
these Words contain a Commission 102. The Father did not think that Peter was
by them exalted to a higher degree of Power than he had before 105. A Quotation
out of St. Austin, and another out of St. Basil vindicated 107. The vanity of
his Arguments hence to prove Peter's Supreme Pastorship 109. Why Christ's
Interrogation was of a greater degree of Love 110. The folly of making Oves
meas, because indefinite, to include the Apostles, exposed by several Questions
112. The Testimonies of Bernard, St. Chrysostom and Theophylact answered 113,
114, etc. Not one of those Fathers say the whole Flock was recommended to St.
Peter, whom the Discussor quotes as saying so 120. Several Remarks from his
Quotations which show his Ignorance or Insincerity 120, 121. Those Fathers
which say the Flock was committed to Peter, meant to more to include the other
Apostles than Peter himself 122. All the Apostles were Christ's Vicars 124.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 3. for Treaties, read Treatise. P. 33. Marg. l. 1. f. ejam, r.
el^am. P. 36. l. 21. f. P^trum, r. Patrum. P. 40. l. 7. f. Barronius, r.
Baronius. P. 45. l. 10. f. put, r. but. P. 47. l. 27. after Reasoning put a
Comma. P. 50. l. 22. f. evaned, r. evanid. P. 62. l. 21. f. luxid, r. lurid. P.
55. Marg. l. 5. f. rog^nte, r. royante. l. 8. f. out, r. ou f. Moyers, r.
Moyens. P. 72. l. 30. after Peter put a Period, and begin the next word with a
Capital. P. 79. l. 2. r. Apostles. P. 83. Marg. l. 20. put a before Christo, P.
85. Marg. f. solvetis, r. solveris. P. 89. l. 18. f. of, r. ob. P. 99. after l.
28. put Sect. 1. P. 104. l. 22. r. reckoned for a Father. P. 105. l. 25. r. se
ipse.

Other literal Errors and Mispointings the Reader is desired to correct.


