A DISCOURSE Concerning the NECESSITY OF REFORMATION, With Respect to the
Errors and Corruptions OF THE Church of Rome.
AMONG the many Errors of the Church of Rome, there is one especially that puts
a ba^, not only to the Reformation of her self, but of all other Churches which
depend upon her; and that is the Doctrine of her Infallibility: If she cannot
err, neither she, nor any other Church that follows her conduct, can stand in
need of being reformed; for where there can be no Error, there can be nothing
amiss; and where there can be nothing amiss, there can be no need of
Reformation.

It Is therefore needful to remove this Prejudice, in order to the clearing of
the way to the ensuing Discourse.

When the Romanists assert, that their Church is Infallible, and theirs only;
we may in reason expect, that they should produce good Proof, that their Church
is so highly privileged above all other Churches: This they say they do, and
their Proofs they tell us are so convincing, that they may pass for no less
than Demonstrations: But, alas, when we come to examine them, we find our
selves strangely disappointed; instead of Demonstrations, we meet with nothing
that amounts to so much as Probability.

Their pretended Proofs are taken from Scripture, from Reason, and from the
Authority of the ancient Church.

I. Those from Scripture are many, but all of them as impertinent, as that of
their Angelical Doctor, to prove that all men are not equally bound to have an
explicit Faith, because it is said, Job 1. 14. that the Oxen were plowing, and
the Asses were feeding besides them. For,

First, They do not prove that any Church now in being is Infallible.

Secondly, Much less that the Church of Rome is.

First, They do not prove, that any Church now in being is Infallible. I say
now in being, because we grant, that there was a time, when even particular
Churches were in their Guides Infallible, viz. while the Apostles lived, and
took upon them the Government of particular Churches: And many of those
Scriptures which the Romanists produce for the Infallibility of their present
Church, peculiarly relate to that time, and to those Persons: For instance,
these Promises, The Comforter which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things, John 1^. 26.
and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. I
have many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now; Howbeit when the
Spirit of Truth is come, he shall guide you into all Truth, for the shall not
speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall Joh. 16. 12, 13.
hear, that shall ^e speak, and he shall show you things to come.

It Is plain, that these Promises are to be limited to the Apostles, and those
Disciples only, who personally conversed with our Savior; because they were
made to those to whom he himself had spoken, and to whose remembrance the Holy
Ghost was to bring those things he had before told them; to those to whom he
had many more things to say, which they were not yet able to bear; to those who
had been with Christ from the beginning; to those from whom Christ was now
going away, and whom he had before told of his departure; to those to whom the
Holy Ghost was to show things to come; a Privilege which the present Roman
Church does not, I think, so much as pretend to

And for those other Scriptures, which extend to succeeding Ages; tho they do
for the most part concern the Catholic only, and not any particular Church;
yet they neither assert nor promise any such thing as absolute Infallibility.

Let it be supposed, that St. Paul calls the Church the Pillar and Ground of
Truth (for these words may as well be connected with, 1 Timothy 3. 1^.
and applied to that Summary of Christian Doctrine, which follows) must the
meaning needs be, that the Church cannot err? May it not justly lay claim to
this Title. 1. If it do not actually err, tho it is fallible, and may err? If
nothing may be called a Pillar that is capable of any defect, St. Peter's Church
in Rome, will have no Pillar left to support it. Or, 2. If it does not err in
things necessary to Salvation. That may be truly called a Pillar, that upholds
all that is needful to the being of the House, tho it do not support every
little part, but suffers here and there a Tile or a Stone to fall to the
ground. Or, 3. If together with all necessary Truths it gives support to some
Errors: As we frequently see those Pillars that uphold the Building; together
with it, they also support other things, that are laid upon it, and are no
better than a nuisance and encumbrance to it. And such a Pillar of Truth, the
Romanists must be forced to grant, the Universal Church has sometimes been;
for has it not for some ages maintained those Doctrines, which the present
Church of Rome condemns as erroneous? Tho the truth is, the Church here spoken
of, was that in which Timothy was directed how to behave himself; and that was
the Church of Ephesus, (or in the largest sense, that of Asia, of Mr. Ryca^t's
present State of the Greek Church. p. 54.
which Ephesus was the Metropolis) and that this Church has fundamentally
erred, must needs be granted, there being not one family of Christians now to
be found in Ephesus.

From that Promise of our Savior, that the gates of Hell shall Matthew. 16 18.
not prevail against his Church, They can by no means infer Infallibility, till
they have first proved that the gates of Hell prevail against every society;
yea, against every person, that is not infallible: And when that shall be once
proved, the gates of Hell will be so largely extended, and those who enter in
at them so numerous, that it is to be feared, St. Peter will never more be put
to the trouble of opening the gates of Heaven for any man.

It Is true, Christ has promised to be with his Church always, even Matt. 28.
20.
to the end of the World. But if all those with whom Christ is present, are
infallible, then every sincere Christian in the world is so; and then what will
become of the Popes Prerogative? When the poorest Mechanic, in case he be but
an honest Christian, will be as infallible a Guide of Controversies, as he is
now by his Flatterers pretended to be.

And as little to this purpose, is that other Promise of our Savior; Where two
or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. For
if Christ's being in the midst of Matt. 18. 20.
them, does make them infallible; since it is sure he will never be worse than
his word: it is also certain, that if but two or three only shall meet together
in his name in London, they will be when so met together, infallible. And if
Infallibility may be had at home, and at so cheap a rate, great Fools are they,
that will put themselves to the trouble and expense of traveling to Rome for
it.

Those other Scriptures produced to this purpose; As, Tell it to the Church,
and if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be to thee a^ Matt. 18. 17 Heb.
13. 17.
an Heathen and a Publican. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit
your selves, etc. are even to a prodigy impertinent: For whosoever from these
and such like Texts shall infer, that any person or society of persons is
infallible, he must also by the same rules of arguing conclude, that every
Prince and subordinate Magistrate; yea, that every Parent and Master is so;
since the Commands of God to Hear and Obey these, are as express and
peremptory, as to hear and obey the other.

Secondly, And as the Scriptures alleged, do not prove any Church now in being
to be infallible; so much less, that the Church of Rome is. For what proof is
this?

Christ promised his Apostles that his Spirit should lead them into all Truth;
therefore the Church of Rome is infallible: Is not the consequence altogether
as good; therefore the Church of England is infallible?

Christ has promised, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against his
Church. And is not this Promise as applicable to the Church of England, as to
the Church of Rome?

The Church is the Pillar and Ground of Truth: So was the Church of Ephesus,
when these words were directed to Timothy; and so was every one of the Asian
Churches, as long as they continued Churches: and so is the Church of England
now, and other reformed Churches, in a higher Sense than the Church of Rome
(which together with the Truth she still upholds, does also maintain so many
Errors, that the pillar and ground of Error, is a Title better becoming her)
and so will the universal Church be in all succeeding ages.

Christ has promised to be with his Church to the end of the World. But is
this Promise limited to the Church of Rome? May not the Church of England put
in as good a claim to it? And may not Christ be in the midst of two or three
that are gathered together in his name in England, as well as in Italy?

But as more especially relating to the Church of Rome, they tell us that
Christ prayed for St. Peter, that his Faith might not fail. It Is true; Luke 22.
32.
but is every man infallible whose Faith fails not? Yea, suppose Christ had
prayed that St. Peter might be infallible; does it thence follow that the
Church of Rome is so? Christ promised St. Paul, that no man should set on him
to hurt him: And it seems as fairly to follow from this Promise made to St.
Paul, that the Church of Rome is infallible, as from the Prayer made for St.
Peter.

But St. Peter was that Rock Christ meant, when he said, Upon Mattt. 16. 1^.
this Rock will I build my Church. That Is a question: For St. Chrysostom
understood by the Rock, not the Person but the Confession of St. Peter, (...).
In cap. 16. Matt. Hom. 55.
and so did St. Cyril of Alexandria, and many more of the Fathers. And if the
Pope be infallible, it is certain, that by the Rock is meant the Faith or
Confession of St. Peter; for so Pope Felix III. has expounded it Super ista
confessione, adificabo eccles^am meam. Epi^t. 5. apud Binium, tom. 3. p. 603.
Edit. Paris. 1636.
But suppose that by this Rock is meant the person of St. Peter; does it follow
that the Church of Rome is infallible? Yes, (say they) because the Church of
Rome was built upon him: Whether it was or no is much disputed; but it is out of
question that the Church of Antioch was, and that some years before there was a
Church at Rome; if therefore any privilege accrue from thence, the precedence
must be given to Antioch.

But was not St. Paul a Rock, and all the rest of the Apostles, in the same
Sense that St. Peter was? If then a Church becomes infallible, by being founded
upon a Rock, how comes it to pass* that all the other Churches of Apostolical
Foundation have erred?

In brief, when they shall produce one Text of Scripture, that but so much as
fairly intimates, that his Holiness of Rome is not as subject to err, as His
Grace of Canterbury; that a Lateran Council is more infallible than a
Convocation at Westminster, they will produce something, that is not altogether
impertinent.

II. Let us now consider, whether their Arguments from Reason are more
concluding. 'Twill I think be sufficient to examine that alone, which they most
frequently insist upon, and make the greatest noise with; for if that shall be
found to be of no weight, we may warrantably conclude, that all the rest are
lighter than nothing and Vanity.

Now that is taken from the supposed necessity of an infallible living Judge,
in order to the Peace of the Church. For though the Scripture (they grant) is a
Rule infallible, yet since Controversies notwithstanding frequently arise about
the Sense of it, by what means shall these be determined, and Sects and
Heresies either prevented or suppressed, if there be no infallible Interpreter
of it?

Which Argument supposes these three things.

1. That it is necessary, in order to Peace, that all Controversies which arise
in the Church should be determined. 2. That Controversies cannot be determined
without an infallible Judge. 3. That such a Judge would certainly give a final
Determination to them.
Neither of which Suppositions may be granted. For neither is it necessary to
the Peace of the Church, that all manner of Controversies should be decided;
and if it were, there may be other means by which they may be as well decided,
as by an infallible Judge; and in case there were not, yet this Judge would not
be so effectual to this purpose, as is supposed.

1. There is no necessity, in order to this end, that all sorts of
Controversies should be determined; because every difference in opinion, does
not necessarily infer the breach of Peace. How frequently do we meet with those
who live in Peace together, and yet are in many things different in their
Judgments one from another? This the Romanists themselves must of necessity
grant; for they boast much of their own Peace and Unity, and yet all the World
knows, that there are many Controversies among themselves, that are yet
undetermined, and are likely so to remain.

Nor is this true only of particular Persons, but the same is also verified of
particular Churches; many of which maintain Peace between themselves,
notwithstanding their different Judgments in many matters of smaller moment.

2. When Controversies arise which really distrub the Peace of the Church, is
there no way to decide them without recourse to an infallible Judge? If not,
then it is not enough that there be such a Judge, but it is also necessary that
he should be clearly known: If there be, then such a Judge is not necessary;
for that means cannot be necessary, without which the end may be attained.

1. If Controversies which create disturbance to the Church, cannot be
determined without an infallible Umpire, it is also necessary for the
determining of them, not only that there be such an Umpire, but that we be
assured who he is; for in this case not to be known, and not to be, are in
effect the same thing: so that let there be Judges infallible never so many,
our Controversies will be never the nearer an end, unless we are able to
discern who they are. Now I cannot imagine at present, how they can be known,
except one of these two ways only; either by being clearly revealed by God in
Scripture; or by God's bearing witness to their Infallibility by Signs and
Wonders. But God has neither expressly, nor by evident consequence, declared in
Scripture, that he has any where constituted such a Judge; much less has he
told us who he is, and where we may find him; till therefore they who pretend
to it, prove their Infallibility by unquestionable Miracles, let them not
expect that we should take them for such. Nor can they in reason blame us for
this; since the disagreement in this point, is so great among themselves, that
of all other questions, it seems most to stand in need of an infallible Judge
to determine it.

2. If Controversies may be decided by other means, then what need of an
infallible Judge? That cannot be necessary to an end, without which the end may
be obtained. And that Controversies may be otherways determined is certain,
because they have been. How were all the Controversies decided, and the
Heresies suppressed, which sprang up in the early Age of the Christian Church?
Were the Gnostics, the Valentinians, the Novatians, the Macedonians, the
Donatists, the Arians suppressed by those who took upon them to be Infallible?
No such thing was in those days talked of; the Bishops and Councils that
confuted them, did not so much as pretend to any such Privilege. The only means
they had recourse to, was the infallible Rule, the Holy Scriptures; this was
the Judge to which in all their Questions they appealed; and those who are so
perverse, as not to be determined by it, should Elias come and take the Chair,
neither will they be determined by his Sentence; for nothing can be objected to
render the Scripture ineffectual to this end, but the same may with equal force
be objected, against the Definitions of an infallible Judge. And therefore,

3. An infallible Judge, is no such infallible means for the ending of
Controversies, as is by the Romanists supposed. For,

1. When there was such a Judge in the Jewish Church, (I mean our Blessed
Savior) Did his Authority put an end to the Disputes between the Pharisees and
the Sadduces, and other Sects among them? Yea, did not that Church then fall
into the most damnable Error, by rejecting this infallible Teacher? 'Twill be
said, the reason of that was, because they did not own his Infallibility; Be it
so; and may not then any other infallible Guide be rejected? Can it be
imagined, that any other Person's Infallibility, should ever be attested with
more unquestionable Credentials than his was? But,

2. Neither those who have been owned for Infallible, have been so successful
to this purpose among them who have owned them under this Character. For, 1.
The Apostles were thought Infallible, by those Churches which they planted; and
yet Errors and Heresies sprang up in them, and they were divided into Parties.
And tho St. Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, had endeavored to
reduce them to Unity; yet we find by his second Epistle that that had not put
an end to their Divisions. Those who know they have a Guide that cannot err,
may go astray as much as others, in case they refuse to follow his conduct. 2.
The Romanists tell us, that their Church cannot err; and if they do indeed
believe what they profess, it will be as effectual for the ending of
Differences among themselves, as if it were indeed Infallible: And yet are
there not many Controversies among them? And tho they upbraid us with our
Divisions, are not theirs as many? And some of them such as are by the
differing Parties reckoned even Matters of Faith? If then their Infallibility
were such a Sovereign Cure of Divisions, how comes it to pass, that no
Reconciliation is made between the dissenting Parties among themselves? The
truth is, so far is their pretended infallible Judge from lessening, that he
increases their Controversies; for no sooner was he talked of, but instead of
deciding those that were already, many were raised, that were never before
heard of. And therefore,

3. Such a work of the Holy Spirit upon men's Hearts, as would make them meek,
and humble, and charitable, and heavenly minded, sincere Lovers of Truth,
desirous to know the will of God, and resolved to do it, would be an expedient
much more available for the healing of our Divisions, and promoting of Peace,
than Infallibility of Judgment. For from whence come Wars and Fightings among
us? come they not hence, even from our Lusts? Scarce ever was any Error
broached, that created disturbance to the Church; but it is manifest it took its
rise from, and was fostered and maintained, either by the Lust of the Flesh, or
the Lust of the Eye, or the Pride of Life: Let but men's fleshly, worldly, and
devilish Lusts be once mortified, and our Differences will be composed; or if
any remain, they will be such, as will be destructive neither of Peace, nor
Charity. Should we therefore argue at the same absurd rate that our Adversuries
do, might we not as fairly conclude, that God has made every man Pious and
Humble, and a Doer of his Will; as that he has made one Man, or one Church
Infallible?

But now, if that which is supposed by the Romanists were all granted: If it
were necessary to the Peace of the Church, that all Controversies should be
decided; if they cannot be decided without some infallible Umpire; and if it
were certain that such an Umpire would give a final determination to them; yet
does it hence follow, that the Church of Rome must be that Umpire? Suppose the
Church of England were Infallible, might it not be as serviceable to these
Intents and Purposes?

III. This pretended Infallibility of the Church of Rome, has as little
support from the Doctrine of the Ancient Christian Church, as it has from
Scripture and Reason. Tho the Romanists are wont (among those who will take
their word) to boast much of the Authority of the Fathers; yet that they are
not able to produce so much as one, who speaks to their purpose, may be
reasonably concluded from the Performances of Cardinal Bellarmine in this
matter Bell. de Romans Pontif. l. 4. c. 4.
, all whose Allegations are so impertinent, that the very reading of them may
be sufficient to satisfy an impartial person, that nothing can be found in
Antiquity that really favors this pretense. Yea, that the Fathers were of a
contrary Judgment, and thought that the Church of Rome had no such paramount
privilege above other Churches, will afterward appear by plain and undeniable
proofs.

If what the Romanists slily suppose, and make great advantage of in this
Question, were true, (viz. that the Roman is the Catholic Church) it would not
do their work. For tho the Catholic Church is infallibly led by the Holy
Ghost, into all things necessary to be believed and practiced; yet we have no
assurance, either from Scripture or Reason, that she shall not err in other
matters. But that the Roman and Catholic are the same, is an opinion, not only
condemned by the first Council of Nice Can. 6.
, and (which is more) was wholly a stranger to the first eight general Councils
Novem primis seculis, quibus octo universalia concilia habita sunt, nunquam
auditum aut lectum, Romanam Ecclesiam alia notione aut significatione sumptam,
quam pro singulari and particulari Ecclesia, atque primo membro Ecclesiae
universalis. Richer. l. 1. c. 13. p. 754. Colo^. 1683.
, that is, unknown to the Christian World for 900 years after Christ: But it is
moreover as absurd in it self, as to say that the part is equal to the whole;
that the Church of London is the Church of England. And till they have proved
the latter, we shall hardly be persuaded to believe the former. In the mean
time, let them take it for a favor, that we grant the Church of Rome to be a
part of the Catholic Church, it being a part so miserably corrupted.

I thought it needful to premise what has been said, because when we charge
the Church of Rome with Errors, and for proof of that charge, produce many
particular Instances; her Advocates think it a sufficient answer to tell us;
alas, Sirs, you are grossly mistaken! as for those Opinions and Practices which
you take to be Errors, it is your selves only that err in thinking them to be
so; for the Church of Rome is so highly privileged, that Christ and his
Apostles may as soon err as She. Having therefore removed this Obstacle out of
the way, I now proceed to that which I mainly design, which I shall comprise
under these following heads of Discourse.

I. That the Church of Rome, is not only fallible, but has actually erred.

II. That her Errors were not slight, and in matters of small moment; but so
gross and enormous when the Reformation was set on foot, that there was a
necessity of reforming them.

III. That no hope was left, that the Church of Rome, would either reform these
Errors in her self; or give consent to the reformation of them, in any other
Church that communicated with her.

IV. That every particular national Church had a right to reform it self
without her leave.

V. That this right of the Church of England in particular, was most
unquestionable. And therefore as a necessary Conclusion from these Premises,

VI. That the Church of England was indispensably bound to reform her self,
notwithstanding the prohibition of the Church of Rome.

Rome, not only may err, but has actually erred. This cannot be denied, if
those in that Church have erred, who (as they themselves assert) are the only
persons that cannot err: For if their supposed infallible Guides have mistaken
their way; how can it otherwise be, but that those who blindly follow them,
must go astray too? Now let them place their Infallibility where they please,
either in the Pope, or in a general Council; or in both united, it is as certain
that they all have erred, as that both parts of a contradiction cannot be true.

1. For their Popes; it is a common thing with them to rescind each others
Decrees, and to make Definitions as opposite one to another, as Yea and Nay.
Thus Pope Stephen VI. abrogated the Decrees, and nulled the Acts of Formosus I.
Platina in vita Steph.
. Pope Romanus I. did the like kindness for Stephen Id. in vita Romani.
. Pope John X. reprobated the Acts of Stephen, and restored those of Formosus
Id. in vita Johannis X.
. Pope Sergius III. was so great an Abhorrer of Formosus and his Acts, that he
compelled those Priests who had received orders from him to be re-ordain'd; nor
would he suffer his dead Body to rest, but commanding it to be taken up, set it
in the Pope's Seat, adorned with Priestly Robes, and passed Sentence upon him,
as if he had been alive, and then pulling off the Sacred Vestments, and cutting
off the three fingers with which he was wont to give his Blessing, commanded it
to be thrown into Tiber, as unworthy of humane Burial Id. in vita Sergii.
Luitprand. l. 1 de reb. Imp. and Reg. c. 8.
. Pope Nic. I. decreed that it was not fit for Clergymen to bear Arms Nam cum
discreti sint milites seculi a militibus Ecclesi^; non convenit militibus
Ecclesiae, militare secule, per quod ad effusionem sanguinis necesse sit
pervenire. Gratian. Did. 50. c. 5.
. Pope Urban the II. exhorted the Bishops to fight against the Amalekites,
(viz. the Turks) Baron. an. 1095. n. 49.
, and Pope Boniface VIII. showed himself to the people at the Jubilee, in an
imperial Habit, and had a naked Sword carried before him.

Nor have they only contradicted one another, but the same Pope has
contradicted himself too. So did Pope Vigilius again and again in the
Controversy about the three Chapters Pet. de Marca dissert. de decret. Vigilii.
. So did Pope Martin V. he confirmed that Decree of the Council of Constance,
which set a general Council above the Pope, and he set the Pope above a
Council, in publishing a Bull against Appeals from the Pope to a Council
Richer. Hist. Council. general. l. 2. c. 3. s. 21, 23, 25.
. So did Eugenius IV. Paul III. and many more.

Nor have they erred only in points of small importance, but even in matters of
Faith. Pope Liberius consented to the Arian Heresy, as S. Athanasius In
epistola ad solitariam vitam agentes, p. 837* Par.
, S. Hilary Haec est perfidia Ariana, Anathema tibi a me dictum, ^iberi, and
sociis tuis; iterum tibi Anathema, and tertio, praevaricator Liberi, Hill. in
Prag. col. 426.
, and S. Jerome In Catalogo vir. illustr.
, inform us. Pope Honorius defended the Heresy of the Monothelites, and was
condemned for a downright Heretic by the Sixth Richer hist. Council. general.
l. 1. c. 10. s. 23, 24.
, Seventh Id. l. 1. c. 11. s. 10.
and Eighth Id. l. 1. c. 12. s. 21.
general Councils. All which Councils were confirmed by Popes: The sixth by Leo
II. the seventh by Adrian I. the eighth by Adrian II. So that if the Pope
confirming a Council be infallible, it is certain that the Pope has not only
erred, but has been a Heretic: that is, it is certain, that he has damnably
erred, and that it is impossible he should err.

I shall propose two or three questions to the Romanists, the answers to which
(one would think) might put an end to this controversy; because whether they
be in the affirmative or negative, they must of necessity grant, That either
the ancient or modern Popes have erred. The questions are these. First, Whether
Pope Gelasius did not err, when he forbad communicating in one kind only as a
grand Sacrilege Comperimus antem quidam sumpta tantummodo sacri corporis
portione, a calici sacri cruoris abstineant, qui proculdubio quoniam nescio qua
superstitione docentur obstringi, aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab
integris arceantur; quia divisio unius ejusdemque mysterii sine grandi
sacrilegio non potest provenire. Gratian. de consecrat. did. 2. c. 12.
? Secondly, Whether Pelagius II. and Gregory the Great did not err, when they
condemned the title of universal Bishop, as profane and Antichristian Pelagii
epist. ad Constanstantinopol. Synod. Episcopos. Greg. M. lib. 6. Epist. 30.
? Thirdly, Whether Pope Martin V. did not err, when he confirmed the Council of
Constance, which determined that a general Council was the Popes Superior
Council. Constant. sess 4, and 5.
.

Now what Arts have the Romanists to reconcile these palpable contradictions?
They have a notable invention, by which Statuimus and Abrogamus do signify the
same thing, as the Gloss upon Gratian informs us they do Statuimus, i. e.
abrogamus. did 4. cap. Statuimus.
. For that the Pope may err, and that he cannot err, may both be true: He may
err as a private Doctor, he cannot err as Pope: Hildebrand may quite fall from
the Faith, Gregory the Seventh cannot so much as trip; His Errors (whatsoever
they are) are ever personal, never judicial. Much like that distinction in the
late times of Rebellion, between the King's personal and politic Capacity, by
the help of which, they fought for the King, who fought against Charles Stuart.

But when the Pope determines judicially, does he follow his private judgment,
or does he not? If not, he defines against his Conscience; he really believes
one thing, and professes to believe another. If he does, then in case it
happens that he err personally, he must of necessity err judicially.

But when may the Pope be said to err judicially, if not when he errs in making
his Decrees? And so of necessity must one of those Popes do, whose Decrees
thwart and oppose each other. If ever the Pope cannot err, it is (as Bellarmine
asserts) when he teaches the Universal Church, in Matters concerning Faith
Summ^s Pontifex cum totam Ecclesiam docet, in his quae ad Fidem pertinent,
nullo casu errare potest. Bell. de Romans Pontif. l. 4. c. 3.
, and so did Pope Vigilius, when he published his Definition concerning the
three Chapters Baron. an. 553. n. 208.
, which he himself afterward retracted.

In brief, if the Pope could not sin, we might then be persuaded to grant, that
he could not err, since a Holy Heart and Life are the best Dispositions to a
right Belief; but since the Popes are such great Strangers to Holiness (as they
have commonly been, for a long time) who can imagine, that they, above all
other men, should be so intimately acquainted with Truth?

2. That Councils, as general as any that have ever been, have erred, the
Romanists will be forced to grant, because there are many such Councils which
are by themselves reprobated Bell. ^e Council. l. 1. c. 6.
. It Is to no purpose to tell us, that those are such as were never confirmed or
approved by the Pope; for if a General Council, as such, is Infallible, it is
so whether the Pope confirm it or not. Besides, the Council has done its work,
and therefore has erred or not erred, before it is confirmed by him. In case
therefore it has erred, his Confirmation cannot make it not to have erred; if
it has not erred, there is no need of it to that purpose.

But some will say, the Popes Confirmation does not make the Council not to
have erred, but declare it; and thereby gives assurance to all Persons, that it
has not erred. It seems then, that a General Council may err, or else what
need the Pope to declare, that it has not erred? But if the Pope himself be
not Infallible, how can I be e're the more sure that a Council has not erred,
because the Pope approves it? And what if the Pope be an Heretic, (as Honorius
was) can a Council be thought the moreor less Orthodox for being confirmed by
him? Should the Council condemn his Heresy, and vindicate the Truth, can it be
supposed that he would confirm it?

But that the Popes rejecting or approving, is no certain Argument that a
Council has erred or not erred, is certain; because if it were, that which is
Truth to day, may be Error to morrow; because the same Council which has at
one time been condemned by the Pope, has at another time been confirmed by
him: For instance, the Fifth General Council, which was first condemned, and
afterward approved by Pope Vigilius Pet. de Marca Dissert. de Epist. Vigilii.
.

3. That General Councils confirmed by the Pope, have actually erred, is no
less manifest. For, 1. They have made Decrees, so apparently contradictory to
the plain Words and Sense of Holy Scripture, that no impartial Person can any
more question it, than he can, whether Theft be forbidden by the Eighth
Commandment. So did the Council of Constance confirmed by Pope Martin V. and
the Council of Trent confirmed by Pope Pius IV. The former in the Decree for
Laics communicating in one kind only, notwithstanding (as themselves
acknowledge) that Christ instituted the Sacrament in both kinds, and delivered
it in both to his Disciples Council. Constant. Sess. 13.
; The latter in decreeing, that the Divine Service should not be in the vulgar
Tongue Council. Trident. Sess. 22. c. 8.
, in plain contradiction to what St. Paul prescribes in the fourteenth Chapter
of the first Epistle to the Corinthians. 2. General Councils confirmed by
Popes, have made Definitions and Decrees plainly contradictory one to the
other. The sixth General Council was confirmed by Pope Adrian I. the Council of
Trent by Pope Pius IV. The former defined that Marriage was dissolved by
Heresy Canon. ^2.
; The latter that it was not Council. Trident. Sess. 24. Can. 5.
. The Council of Constance confirmed by Pope Martin V. decreed that a General
Council was superior to the Pope Sess. 4. and 5.
, the last Lateran Council condemned this Decree Co^c^l. Lateran. Sess. 11.
; 3. A General Council confirmed by one Pope, has been condemned by a General
Council confirmed by another: As the Council of Basil confirmed by Pope Nicolas
V. was esteemed a Schismatical and Seditious Conventicle, and reprobated by the
last Lateran Council confirmed by Pope Leo X. Binii notis in Council.
Constantiens. B^ll. de Council. Au^t. l. 2. c. 17.
, which at Rome is accounted a General Council. So that unless Errors become
Truth, and Contradictions be reconciled when determined by a Pope and Council,
we may conclude, that not only the Pope himself, but a General Council
confirmed by him has erred.

It plainly appears by what has been said, that those have actually erred,
whom the Church of Rome supposes to be her only infallible Guides: From whence
it unavoidably follows, that the Church of Rome has erred; First, in all those
Points, which have been erroneously defined by them; Secondly, In supposing
them to be Infallible.

I shall not stay to show, of what use Councils, either General or Provincial,
are; how far their Authority extends, and what great Benefit may accrue to the
Church by them, tho they be supposed not to be Infallible: But shall proceed to
the next Proposition, viz.

Rome, were not slight, and in matters of small moment; but so gross and
enormous, when the Reformation was set on foot, that there was a necessity of
reforming them. This will be evident,

First, By unquestionable Testimonies.

Secondly, By taking a particular view of the Errors themselves.

First, By Testimonies of unquestionable Authority; of Persons who could
neither be mistaken through Ignorance, nor biased by Interest or Affection, to
represent Matters worse than indeed they were: But who were on the contrary, as
well acquainted with the State of the Roman Church, as any Persons in the
World; who were promoted to the greatest Honors in it; whose worldly Interests
engaged them above all other men to maintain its Reputation and Authority; and
who not only lived, but died in Communion with it. Such were their learned
Doctors, their Bishops and Cardinals, their Princes and Emperors, their Popes
and General Councils; tho the two last are not to be reckoned for single
Witnesses, but for the Voice of their Church; the one being their Church
Representative; the other (according to their Divinity) their Church Virtual.
Of those many which offer themselves, I shall content my self to produce a few;
and those shall be such as were either cotemporary with, or who lived within
about a hundred years of the Reformation, passing over those who were at a
greater distance from it.

John Gerson, the renowned Chancellor of Paris, in a Sermon to the Council of
Constance, applies to the modern Church of Rome, these words of the Prophet
Ezekiel: Thou did trust in thine own beauty, and plaiedst the Harlot, because
of thy renown; and pour'dst out thy Fornications on every one that passed by.
And in all thy Abominations, thou have not remembered the days of thy youth.
Thou have built thy brothel house at every head of the way, and have made thy
beauty to be abhorred. Behold therefore I will deliver thee into the hands of
those that hate thee. And after he had told them, what were the sad Symptoms of
approaching Ruin, he advises them to a great and notable Reformation of
Manners, as the only means to prevent it John Gerson Sermon. de ^ign^^ ruin^
Ecclesiae.
. And because, says he, some may say, that the Church is founded upon a Rock,
and therefore in no danger of ruin; He declares more particularly, what were
those Enormities, in which the Churchmen especially needed to be reformed, and
then exhorts the Council, either to reform all Estates of the Church in a
General Council, or command them to be reformed in Provincial Synods; that by
their Authority the Church might be repaired, and the House of God purged from
all Uncleanness, Vices and Errors Declarat. Defect. viror. Ecclesiast.
.

The same Author earnestly pressed Pope Alexander V. to set himself to reform
those Corruptions and Abuses, which (as he says) were the Plague of the Church,
and without the removal of which, 'twas in vain to expect Peace Sermon. coram
Alexand in die Ascens Domini.
.

Nic. Clemangis, another Parisian Doctor, writ several Books upon this Subject,
in which he represents to the World, the deplorable State of the Roman Church,
and the necessity of Reforming it De Corrupto Statu Ecclesia, and de Repara^^^^
and Ruin^ Eccles.
.

Add to these single Testimonies, the solemn Appeal of the whole University of
Paris, from Pope Leo X. to a General Council, in defense of the Pragmatick
Sanction. In which they set forth, how that the Councils of Constance and Basil
made many Decrees, especially about the Reformation of the Ecclesiastical
State, as well in the Head as in the Members, which in those days especially,
seemed to stand in need of Reformation. And how among other things, the Sacred
Council of Basil considered, how by the ancient Fathers, Sacred Canons and
wholesome Decrees were made for the happy Government of the Ecclesiastical
State, which as long as they were observed, the vigor of Ecclesiastical
Discipline continued, Religion, Piety and Charity flourished. But after that
men through Ambition and Covetousness, began to contemn the Decrees of the Holy
Fathers, there followed Deformities in the Church, many of which they
afterward enumerate, and then appeal from the Pope to a future General Council
Fascic. rerum expe^end. ac sugiend. Richer. Hist. Council. General l. 4. part 2.
p. 84.
. And it is observable, that this Appeal was made in the year 1517. the very
same year in which Luther began to preach against the horrible Abuses of
Indulgences.

If we pass on to Bishops and Archbishops, tho their Interest engaged them more
strongly to oppose it, yet we shall find several even among them, who were so
sensible of the necessity of Reformation, that they earnestly called for it,
and endeavored to promote it.

Frederick Archbishop of Salerno, Jerome Archbishop of Brunswick, and Joh.
Matthew. Gibertus Bishop of Verona, plainly declared, that they had a great Sense
of the Corruptions of the Church, by the Articles of Reformation, which
(together with the rest of the Select Council) they delivered to Pope Paul III.
Richer. Hi^t. Council. General. l. 4. part 2. p. 136.
.

In a Book Entitled, Onus Ecclesiae, written by John Suffragan Bishop of
Saltzburgh, in the year 1519. (that is, but two years after Luther began the
Reformation) we have for many Chapters together, a most direful Description of
the corrupt State of the Church Onus Ecclesi^. c 19, 20, 21, etc.
.

In the Council of Trent the Bishop of Conimbria said; For these 150 years the
World has demanded a Reformation in the Head and the Members, and hitherto
has been deceived; that now it was time they should labor in earnest, and not
by Dissimulation History of the Council of Trent, l. 6. p. 558.
. And Dudithius an Hungarian Bishop, prayed the Hungarians and Polonians, That
for God's sake, and for the Charity every Christian owes to the Church, they
would not abandon so honest, just and profitable a Cause, but that every one
would put down in writing, what he thought might be constituted for the Service
of God, without any respect of man, not reforming one part, but the whole Body
of the Church, in the Head and the Members P. 5^8.
.

If from Bishops we ascend to Cardinals; tho to their Pride and Luxury, and
Pomp and Grandeur, nothing could give a greater blow, than a due Reformation;
yet to such a wretched State was the Church reduced, that many of them, did not
only acknowledge the necessity of Reforming it, but in some measure contributed
their endeavors toward it.

Gaspar Cardinal Contarene, John Peter Cardinal Theatine, James Cardinal
Sadolete, and Reginald Pool Cardinal of England, were of the number of the
Select Council, that presented the Articles of Reformation to Pope Paul III.
Richer. Hist. Council. General. l. 4. part 2. p. 156.
.

The College of Cardinals at the death of Alexander VI. before they entered the
Conclave for the Election of a new Pope, took an Oath, that if any of them
should be chosen, he should immediately before the Publication of his Election,
bind himself under pain of Perjury and a Curse, to call a Council within two
years for the Reformation of the Church Richer Hist. Council. General. l. 4.
part 1. c. 2.
, which Oath was taken by Julius II. Id. l. 4. part 1. c. 3. p. 334.
, who was chosen Pope; and when it appeared afterward, that he made no
conscience of keeping it (seven years having passed without any mention of a
Council) in the year 1511. nine Cardinals who had withdrawn themselves from
Rome, by reason of his Insolences, by the assistance of the Emperor
Maximilian, and Lewis XII. King of France, called the Second Pisan Council to
that purpose Id.
. Petrus de Alliaco Cardinal of Cambray, wrote a Book for the Reformation of
the Church Fascic. rerum expetend. a^ fugiend.
; and Ludovicus Cardinal of Arles, who presided in the Council of Basil,
zealously endeavored it. The Cardinals who called the first Pisan Council, to
extinguish the Schism raised by the two Anti-Popes, Benedict XIII. and Gregory
XII. vowed, that they would to the utmost of their power procure, that he that
should be chosen Pope, should reform the Church; and that till a due and
sufficient Reformation of the universal Church was made, as well in the Head as
in the Members, he should not suffer the Council to be dissolved Richer. Hist.
Council. General. l. 2. p. 102.
.

Tho the Testimonies already produced are beyond Exception, yet behold greater
Witnesses than these; I mean Popes themselves, who above all men in the World
abhorred all Proposals of Reformation, as that which would throw them down from
their usurped Dominion, and put a stop to their lawless Tyrannies. To such an
Excess were the Romish Corruptions grown, and so evident was the necessity of
reforming them, that they were forced to confess it, who most desired to deny
it.

To this purpose Paul III. appointed a select Council of Prelates, to collect
those Abuses which were most Notorious and Pernicious, and present them to him,
that he might correct them Id. l. 4. part 2. p. 136.
. Pope Marcellus II. said, that he resolved to make a severe and entire
Reformation, but died before he could let the World know, whether he intended
to be as good as his word Hist. Counc. of Trent. l. 5.
. Paul IV. who succeeded him, promised to reform not verbally but really, the
Head, Members, Clergy, Laity, Princes and People Hist. Counc. of Trent. l. 5.
. Alexander V. as soon as he was chosen by the Pisan Council, promised to set
himself to the Work, and to choose good and learned Men out of every Nation to
consult with the Cardinals about it Council. Pisan. sess. 21. apud Richer.
. Pope Adrian VI. was free and ingenuous in confessing the abominable
Corruptions of the Church, and especially of the Court of Rome, and professed
that he took the Papacy upon him, to the end that he might reform the Universal
Church Sleidan Comment. l. 4. Richer Hist. Council. general. l 4. par. 2. p. 129
Fascic. re^um expetend, etc. f. 173.
.

What Testimony of greater Authority can be desired, than these already
mentioned, unless it be the concurrent voice of the Church representative, in a
general Council? To which I now proceed.

The first Pisan Council (as it is commonly reckoned, though it was indeed the
second) were resolved to reform the Church; which Alexander V. (as was said
before) who was chosen by, and presided in that Council, promised to assist
them in Council. Pisan. sess 17. and 21. apud, Richerium; apud Binium, sess. 16,
and 20.
. The Council of Constance, which followed five Years after, decreed; That the
Pope which was then to be chosen, should together with the Council, or those
which should be deputed by the several Nations, reform the Church, before the
Council should be dissolved; and the matters about which it was thought fit the
Reformation should be made, were reduced to eighteen Heads Council. Constant.
sess. 40.
. In the Council of Basil, the Pope gave his Legate full power of concluding
all such things as appertained to the reformation of the Ecclesiastical State
Council. Basel. sess. 1. Bin.
. And whereas there were six things which that Council resolved mainly to
prosecute, two of them were these, 1. That the Church should be reformed in the
Head and Members. 2. That the ancient Discipline, as much as possible, should
be restored Richer. hist. Council general. l. 3. c. 2.
. The second Council at Pisa declared, That the reformation of the Church was
most necessary, and passed this Decree upon it: That the Holy Synod would not,
nor could dissolve it self, till the Universal Church should be reformed, both
in Faith and Manners, as well in the Head as in the Members Sess. 3. apudi
Richerium, l. 4. par. 1. p. 430.
. Where it is observable, That the Reformation decreed by this Council, as so
highly necessary, did extend to Faith, as well as to Manners: And so did also
that which was required by many other great Men of the Roman Communion, as
shall be afterward showed, when I descend to particulars.

It cannot be expected, that I should ascend higher in the Ecclesiastical
State, since a general Council is the highest Authority of the Church on Earth;
by which we see the necessity of a Reformation is confirmed; and that not by
one single Council only, but by four successively; three of which were
confirmed by Popes; The first Pisan by Alexander V. the Council of Constance by
Martin V. the Council of Basil by Nicolas V. and so much of it as concerned the
Reformation (and much more) by Eugenius IV. who was deposed by it. If therefore
a General Council, confirmed by the Pope, cannot err, it is infallibly certain,
and (according to the Principles of the Church of Rome) an Article of Faith,
That the Reformation of the Church was necessary.

Should we now pass from the Clergy to the Laity; from Bishops, Cardinals,
Popes and Councils, to Secular States, Kings and Emperors, we should find, That
they were also highly sensible of the Corruptions and Abuses, Usurpations and
Oppressions of the Church of Rome, and many of them zealous and active in their
endeavors to reform them.

What great complaints were made, by many of our Kings of England, against the
Encroachments of Rome? How often did they petition the Pope for a redress? but
finding no relief from thence, Edward the Third, and Richard the Second, did in
part right themselves and their Subjects, by the Statutes of Provisoes and
Praemunire 27 Edw. 3. c. 1. and 25 Edw. 3. 16 Rich. 2. c. 5. and 13 R. 2. c. 3.
See Cook upon these Statutes, Institut. par. 3. c. 56.
.

Charles VII. King of France, as a Fence to the French Church against the
Mischiefs which flowed from the Court of Rome, set up the pragmatick Sanction,
which when Pope Pius II. endeavored to overthrow, he appealed from him to a
General Council Richer. Hist. Council. general. l. 4. par. 1. c. 1. p. 36, 37,
etc.
. Lewis XI. was indeed decoyed by the Popes fair Promises to revoke that
Sanction; but soon after seeing his error, he commanded it again to be
observed Richer. Hist. Council. general. l. 4. c. 1. s. 13.
. After the death of Lewis, the three Estates of the Kingdom, assembled at
Tours, besought Charles VIII. who succeeded him, to maintain the Pragmatick in
its full strength Id. s. 15.
: Which he not only consented to, but resolved to make a further progress in
reforming the Church, and to that purpose consulted the College of Divines at
Paris Id l. 4. c. 2.
. Lewis XII. who followed next, coined his Money with this Inscription, Perdam
Babylonis nomen, I will destroy the name of Babylon Th^ani Hist. l. 1 p 11.
: by which he plainly declared, what his Judgment then was of Rome.

The zeal of Sigismund the Emperor for the Reformation was abundantly
manifest, by his indefatigable pains in procuring the Council of Constance, and
assisting in it: By protecting the Council of Basil against the attempts of
Eugenius, and by laboring with other Princes to promote it; but especially by
that Reformation he made in many things himself. Maximilian I. made bitter
Complaints of many scandalous Abuses of the Roman Court, and commanded the
redress of them under pain of his heavy displeasure Fascic. rerum expetend. a^
fugiend. s. 170.
. The Emperor Ferdinand proposed to the Council of Trent, by his Ambassadors,
twenty Points concerning Worship, Manners and Discipline, which he desired
might be reformed History of the Council of Trent, l. 6. p. 513.
; and in a Letter to the Pope, and another to his Legates in the Council,
earnestly pressed for an effectual Reformation l. 7. p. 682.
.

The Princes of Germany, at the Diet at Nuremberg, in the Year 1523. in their
Answer to Cherogat the Popes Nuncio, insisted upon the reforming of Abuses, and
correcting of many Errors and Vices, which by long tract of time had taken deep
root; for the effecting of which, they demanded a free and general Council. And
those intolerable burdens (as they called them) laid upon them by the Court of
Rome, they reduced to an hundred Heads Sleid. com. l. 4. Fascic. rerum
expetend. ac fugiend. History of the Council of Trent* l. 1.
, which they called the Hundred Grievances of the German Nation, and presented
them to the Pope, protesting that they neither would nor could endure them any
longer.

To conclude this Head; to so monstrous a deformed state, was the Western
Church degenerated, that the Prince, the Priest, the Clergy, the Laity; Men of
all Conditions and of all Nations: Yea, (if the infallible Oracle, Pope Adrian
the Sixth, spoke truth) the whole World groaned after a Reformation Richer. l.
4. par. 2. p. 130.
.

Secondly, The necessity of which will be further evident, by taking a
particular view of the Corruptions and Errors themselves, which for methods
sake, and to avoid confusion, shall be reduced to four general Heads: 1.
Corruptions in Doctrine, 2. In Worship, 3. In Manners, 4. In Discipline.


In treating of which it will plainly appear, that their Errors were not small,
and of light importance; but so gross, and in matters of such high moment, that
there was an absolute necessity of reforming them.

1. Gross Corruptions in Doctrine. Many Doctrines were imposed as Articles of
Faith, which have not the least Foundation in Scripture, Reason or Primitive
Antiquity; and many others, which are not only Strangers to all these, but
contrary to the common sense and Experience of Mankind. I shall instance in
some of them.

(1.) The Infallibility of the Bishop or Church of Rome. We have before seen,
that this Doctrine has no Foundation in Scripture (and by consequence can be
no Article of Faith): Yea that there is no pretense of Reason, why the Bishop
and Church of Rome should be infallible, rather than the Bishop and Church of
Constantinople; and all those fine flourishes they are wont to make, of the
expediency of this Doctrine, for the ending of Controversies, and the safe
conducting of Souls to Heaven, may be as well accounted for, by making the
Church of England, or any other Church infallible.

That no such Doctrine was owned by the ancient Church, we may be assured; both
because the Fathers in those many Heresies, which in their times arose, never
betook themselves to this easy and compendious remedy for the suppressing of
them, but chose the more tedious and laborious way of confuting them by
Scripture, by Reason and Catholic Tradition; and because the Asian and African
Bishops, did in some Points so resolutely dissent from the Roman Bishop and
Church, that they chose rather to break Communion, than to comply with them
therein.

Had any such thing in those days been believed, would the African, Illyrican
and Dalmatian Bishops, have renounced Communion with Vigilius Bishop of Rome,
for consenting to the condemnation of the three Chapters Petrus de Marca
dissertat. de Epist. Vigilii, s. 8.
? Would the blessed Polycarpus have dissented from Pope Eleutherius? Irenaeus
from Pope Victor? S. Cyprian from Pope Stephen? Can any Man who is not forsaken
of his Reason, imagine, That such Men as these, would have behaved themselves
so toward the Pope as they did, had they not thought themselves as infallible
Judges as he?

But what need I contend for this, when such great men of the Church of Rome,
as Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica, Gerson Chancellor of Paris, Almain,
Alphonsus de Castro, yea Pope Adrian VI. himself teach us, (as even Bellarmine
himself acknowledges) B^ll. de Romans Pontif. l. 4. c. 2.
that the Pope may not only err, but be a Heretic, yea, and teach Heresy too,
if he define without a General Council? And when a General Council says, it is
certain the Pope may err Concilii Basil. Respons. Synodal. de Authorit. Council.
general. supra Pap. Richer. l. 3. c. 2. S. 6.
? And what that Council says of the Pope, is experimentally verified of a
Council confirmed by the Pope, (as has been before proved).

Nor is this Doctrine to be rejected, merely because it is notoriously False;
but more especially because of its horrid Consequences, as it opens the door
to, and gives protection to any other the most palpable Error, both in Doctrine
and Practice. For if this be once granted, there is no remedy, but we must
believe Darkness to be Light, if the Church of Rome says it is so. Yea, a
Thomas Becket, a Garnet, or any other the most execrable Traitor, must be
worshipped for a Saint, when the Pope is pleased to canonize him.

(2.) Their Doctrine of the Popes sovereign Power over the universal Church:
That every Christian under pain of Damnation, is bound to be subject to him;
that no Appeals may be made from him; that he alone is the supreme Judge over
all Persons, in all Causes Ecclesiastical, but that he himself can be judged by
no man.

This Doctrine has not only been defined by Popes themselves, (as well as
their Flatterers) and many hundreds of years together put in execution by them;
but has moreover been established by such Councils as are by the Romanists
accounted General Council. Florent. p. 85^. tom. 8. apud Binium Council.
Lateranens. V. Sess. 11.
. And yet is not only destitute of all Authority from Scripture, but much may
be found in Scripture against it; And not only in Scripture, but it is plain
from Church History, that the Bishops of Rome, in the early Ages of
Christianity, had no Jurisdiction beyond their own Province; that for the first
300 years, there were but two only, viz. Victor and Stephen, that took upon
them to censure Persons that were of another Diocese, and that they themselves
were severely censured for it by other Bishops; That the eight first General
Councils, were all both called and confirmed, not by Popes, but by the Emperors
Richer. Hist. Council. general. l. 1. c. 13. p. 753. Review of the Council of
Trent. l. 3. c. 1. and 2.
; That the Pope has been opposed in many Councils, and many Synodical Decrees
have been passed full sore against his will As in the Council of Chalcedon, the
second at Constantinople, the Council of Constance, of Basil, etc.
; That he himself was subject to the Laws of the Church and upon his
transgression of them, obnoxious to censure, no less than other Bishops; That
no Appeals were allowed to him by the African Bishops; That by the ancient
Canons every Bishop did order the Affairs of his own Diocese, without
dependence upon, or Subordination to the Bishop of Rome, and that all Causes
were finally to be determined by Provincial Councils Council. Constantinopol. 1
Can. 2. Council. Nicaen. 1 Can. 5.
. That many Popes have been anathematized by other Bishops, and many judged,
condemned, and deposed by Synods. All which, and many more things which might
be mentioned, are plainly inconsistent with this pretended universal Empire of
the Pope.

But if nothing could be alleged from Scripture, or the Doctrine or Practice of
the ancient Church to the contrary; yet the intolerable Evils which unavoidably
flow from it, cannot but render this Doctrine detestable, to all those who have
any sincere Love, either to Truth or Goodness. For wherever this Doctrine is
received, a man must think himself in duty bound, to entertain Error, and to
reject the Truth; to put Virtue for Vice, and Vice for Virtue, in case the Pope
require him so to do. And that the Pope not only may, but for many Ages has
commanded men so to do; the sad experience of the Christian World, is a proof
too unanswerable.

(3.) The Doctrine of the Popes Dominion over temporal Princes. That if Kings
and Emperors oppose themselves to him, or turn Heretics, he may depose them,
absolve their Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, and give away their
Kingdoms to whomsoever he pleases. This exorbitant Power has been challenged
by the Pope for many successive Ages Dictates of Greg. VII. Dictate 9. That all
Princes should kiss the Popes Feet. Dictate 12. That the Pope may depose the
Emperor. Dictate 27. That he may absolve the Subjects of wicked Princes from
their Allegiance. Binius tom. 7. part 1. p. 362. Richer. l. 1. c. 13.
; And when opportunity has served, has been frequently put in practice by
them. So Gregory VII. excommunicated the Emperor Henry IV. and gave away his
Kingdoms to Rudolphus Duke of Sweden Baron. an. 1080. n. 8. and 12.
. Gregory IX. excommunicated the Emperor Frederick II. and absolved his
Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance Bullarium Romans Tom. 1. p. 89, 90.
. Pope Paul III. excommunicated and deposed Henry VIII. King of England, and
commanded all his Subjects, under pain of a Curse, to withdraw their Obedience
from him Bullar. Romans Tom. 1. p. 514.
. Pope Pius V. and Gregory XIII. damned and deposed Q. Elizabeth, and absolved
her Subjects from their Allegiance Camdens Elizabeth.
. This Doctrine and Practice has been defended by their learned Cardinals
Baronius and Perron, by their Schoolmen, Canonists, and by the whole Order of
Jesuits. Yea, it is no more than what was decreed by diverse such Councils, as
are generally owned for lawful Representatives of their Church; As by the third
Lateran Council under Pope Alexander III. Cap. 27. Relaxatos autem se noverint
a debito Fidelitatis, etc.
; And by the fourth Lateran Council under Pope Innocent III. Si vero Dominus
temporalis requisitus and monitus ab Ecclesia, terram suam purgare neglexerit,
etc. -- Eadem nihilominus lege servata circa eos, qui non habent Dominos
principales, c. 3.
. And tho some Romanists are now ashamed to own it; yet no less a man than
Lessius tells us, that if Kings may not be deposed by the Pope, then of
necessity, must the General Council of Lateran have erred.

But what can be more manifest, than that this Doctrine is contradictory to the
Holy Scripture? Which tells us in express terms, that the King is supreme 1
Epist. Pet. 2. 13.
, and commands every Soul to be subject to the highest civil Powers Romans 13. 1.
. Nothing can be more repugnant to the Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers, who
taught that the Emperor was the supreme Power on Earth, that he was subject to
God only, and that all other Persons were put in subjection under him Tertull.
Apolog. c. 30. and ad Scapu^^m, c. 2.
; that neither Prophet, nor Evangelist, no, nor Apostle (and therefore not S.
Peter himself) was exempt from subjection to him S. Chrysostom. ad Romans c. 13. v.
1.
.

And such as their Doctrine was, such was their Practice; tho their Emperors
were Idolaters, and implacable Enemies to the name of Christ, yet they thought
it not in the Popes Power, to set them loose from subjection to them; Nor did
any Pope in those days pretend to such a Power; And therefore they chose rather
to dye, when they had the greatest Provocations to resist; and when the number
of the Christians was so great, that they were able, with ease, to have
vanquished their Enemies Cyprian. ad Demetrianum.
.

It Is a Doctrine that is contrary to the Confessions and Practice of the
ancient Bishops of Rome, who took the Emperor for their Lord and Master, and
yielded themselves his most humble and obedient Servants and Subjects. So did
Pope Gregory the Great Greg. M. Ep. 2. 62.
, and before, Pope Gelasius I. Gelasii Ep. 8.
; and after him Pope Agatho Epist. ad Constantinum Imp. Action 4. Syn. 6. Vide
etiam Richerium Hist* Council. General. l. 1. c. 10 S. ^, 6.
. In short, it is a Doctrine that involves the highest Impiety against God, the
greatest Injustice toward men; that subverts the Foundations of Government, and
is inconsistent with humane Society; No man can recount the Usurpations and
Rapines, the Perjuries and Murders, the Treasons and Rebellions, the Confusions
and Desolations it has caused in the World.

(4.) The next Instance shall be, that which was likewise decreed by the Fourth
Lateran Council Cap. 1.
, viz. the monstrous Doctrine of Transubstantiation: For the belief of which,
there is no better ground in Scripture, than that the Church is
transubstantiated, or that the Rock in the Wilderness was substantially changed
into Christ; because the Church is called Christ's Body Ephesians. 1. 23.
, and it is said, that the Rock which followed the Israelites was Christ 1 Corinthians. 10. 4.
. But because it is confessed by many of their own learned Writers, we may
therefore take it for granted, that this Doctrine cannot be proved by
Scripture: Yea, that it is contrary to it, is manifest; because we find in
Scripture, that the Sacramental Elements, after the words of Consecration were
passed, are called the Bread and the Cup, as they were before 1 Corinthians. 11.
26, 27, 28.
. And if we may believe our Savior, the Wine after it was consecrated, and
made the Blood of the New Testament, was no other for substance, than the Fruit
of the Vine; for after he had said, This is my Blood, of the New Testament; he
adds, But I say unto you, that I will not, henceforth, drink of the Fruit of
the Vine, etc. Matthew. 26. 29.
. That the Fathers for seven hundred years after Christ, believed the Elements,
after Consecration, to remain the same for substance, is beyond all
contradiction proved, by many Protestant Writers; particularly in two short
Discourses, lately written upon this Subject Letter to Lady T. Discourse
against Transubstantiation.
. And that the Popes themselves were of the same Belief in the fifth Century,
is evident: For surely, says Pope Gelasius, the Sacraments we receive of the
Body and Blood of Christ, are a divine thing, for which we are also by them
made Partakers of a divine Nature; and yet the Substance or Nature of Bread and
Wine does not cease to be Certe Sacramenta quae sumimus Corporis and sanguinis
Christi divina res est, propter quod and per tadem divinae efficimur consortes
naturae: and tamen esse non definit substantia vel natura panis and vini. De
duab. not. in Christo. Biblioth. Patr. Tom. 4.
.

Yea, so far was Transubstantiation, from being the Doctrine of the Primitive
Church; that we can meet with nothing like it, till near the end of the eighth
Century; and tho as soon as it was started, it was vigorously opposed, by the
most learned men of that time; yet by the help of the deplorable Ignorance and
Superstition, of that and the two next succeeding Ages, it was, by slow
degrees, nursed up, and brought to its full growth; till at length it came to
be established for an Article of Faith, in the Lateran Council, under Pope
Innocent III. in the year 1215.

Nor is it only destitute of the Authority of Scripture, and the ancient
Church; but plainly destructive of our whole Religion, by subverting the main
Foundation, upon which it stands. For if that be indeed the Flesh of a Man,
which we see, and feel, and taste to be Bread; what assurance can we have, that
there ever was any such Man in the World as Jesus of Nazareth? or that he ever
wrought one Miracle in it? The cerrainty of which, depends upon the certainty
of our Senses; and therefore S. John appeals to them, as the great
unquestionable Proofs of the Truth of our Religion 1 Epist. John 1. 1, 2, 3.
. We have therefore the same Assurance that Transubstantiation is False, as
that the Gospel of Christ is True.

Nor is it more opposite to Sense, than Reason; the belief of it implying ten
thousand Contradictions. To which we may add, the horrible Impieties it
involves. That the glorified Body of our Savior, should be contracted to the
crum of a Wafer; that he should be perfectly deprived of Sense and Reason; that
he should not be able to defend himself against the Assaults of the most
contemptible Vermin; that he should be swallowed down whole, and if the Stomach
of the Communicant chance to be foul, or over-charg'd with Wine, that he should
be vomited up again: Good God! what man, who is not quite forsaken of Religion,
Reason and Sense; who is not himself transubstantiated into something below
either Man or Beast, can believe these things?

(5.) That the Marriage of Priests is unlawful. This Doctrine the Church of
Rome borrowed from the ancient Heretics; especially from the Manichees, who
allowed Marriage to their Hearers, as the Church of Rome does to Laymen; but
forbad it to their Elect Hic non dubito ves esse clamaturos invidiamque
facturos, castitatem perfectam vos vehementer commendare atqui laudare, non
tamen nuptias prohibere; quandoquidem Auditores vestri quorum apud vos secundus
est gradus, ducere atque habere non prohibentur uxores. Aug. de moribus
Manichaeorum. l. 2. c. 18.
, as that Church does to her Priests.

The first Pope we read of that condemned the marriage of Priests, was
Siricius, almost four hundred Years after Christ, though he seems by his
Epistles (if they are indeed his); rather to dissuade Priests from it, than
peremptorily to forbid it Epist. 1, and 4. apud Binium.
. Pope Calixtus II. absolutely forbad Priests Marriage, and in case they were
married, commanded them to be separated Presby^eris, Diaconis, Subdiaconis and
Monachis concubinas habere, seu Matrimonia contrahere, penitus interdicimus;
contracta quoque Matrimonia ab hujusmodi personis disjungi. Great. did. 27. ^.
8.
. Pope Innocent III. pronounced such marriages null, and the Council of Trent
anathematizes those who say they are valid Sess. 24. Can. 9.
.

But one would think, that God had sufficiently declared his approbation of
such Marriages, in that the whole World has by his appointment been twice
peopled by two married Priests; first by Adam, secondly by Noah. And we are
sure the Holy Scripture tells us, That Marriage is honorable in all Heb. 13. 4.
. And places it among the Qualifications of a Bishop, That he be the Husband of
one Wife, having faithful Children Tit. 1. 6.
, which says S. Chrysostom, The Apostle prescribed to this end, That he might
stop the Mouths of Heretics, who reproached Marriage; declaring thereby, That
Marriage is no unclean thing, but so honorable, that a married Man may be
exalted to the sacred Throne of a Bishop (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in c. 1. ad
Tit.
.

And well might he think it not unbecoming a Bishop, when our Lord thought it
not unbecoming an Apostle, no not the Prince of the Apostles (as the Romanists
will have him) for it is without doubt, that S. Peter was married; in that the
Scripture makes mention of his Wife's Mother Matt. 8. 14.
. And Clemens of Alexandria tells us, That it was certainly reported, that when
he saw his Wife led to death, he rejoiced; and having exhorted and comforted
her, he called her by her name, and bid her remember the Lord Clemens Alex.
Stromat. l. 7 p. 736. Lut. 1629.
; and that he was not only married, but begat Children, the same Clemens in
another place affirms Stromat. l. 3 p. 448.
. Yea that S. Philip and S. Jude were also married, and had Children, Eusebius
is witness Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 20, and 31.
.

In like manner we find, That many of the primitive Bishops were married, so
were Chaeremon Bishop of Nilus, S. Spiridion, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Gregory
Nyssen, S. Hilary, and many more.

Nor can it be said, that they took Wives while they were Laymen, and after
they took upon them the sacred Ministry, were separated from them; since the
Canons commonly called the Apostles, did prohibit either Bishop, Priest or
Deacon to put away his Wife, upon pretense of Religion (...). Can. 5.
; and if any such shall abstain from Marriage, as in it self abominable,
command that he be corrected, or deposed and cast out of the Church Canon. 50.
; which Canons, though not made by them whose name they bear, yet they are of
greater Antiquity than the first Nicene Council. And when in that Council it
was moved, That Bishops and Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons, might not cohabit
with their Wives, which they had taken before Ordination; the Motion was
presently dashed by the famous Paphnutius, who was himself a single person
Socrat. Ecclesiast. Hist. l. 1 c. 11.
. Yea, a long time after this Council, we meet with many Popes, who were Sons
of Bishops and Priests: Pope Theodorus, Silverius and Gelasius I. were the Sons
of Bishops; Pope Boniface I. Felix II. and Agapetus I. were the Sons of Priests
Great. did. 56. c. 2. Platina in vitis eorum.
. And that we may not think this strange, Gratian himself informs us, That the
Marriage of Priests was in those days lawful in the Latin Church, as it was at
that time when he writ, in the Eastern Church Did. 56. c. 13.
.

Nor is this Doctrine to be rejected only as contrary to Scripture, and to
Primitive and Apostolical Practice, but because of the abominable Fruits
produced in the Church of Rome by it. For when their Clergy might not have
Wives (which God allowed) instead of them they took Whores; which wickedness so
far prevailed in that Church, that no less a Man than the Cardinal of Cambray
informs us, That many Clergymen were not ashamed publicly and in the face of
the World to keep Concubines De reform. Eccles.
. And the Gloss upon Gratian says, That it is commonly said, That a Priest may
not be deposed for simple Fornication, because there are few Priests to be
found without that fault Communiter autem dicitur, quod pro simplici
fornicatione quis deponi non debet, cum pauci sine illo vitio inveniantur,
Did. 81. c. 6. in Gloss.
. And therefore Pope Pius II. had great reason to say, That though Priests were
by the Western Church forbid to marry for good reason, yet there was stronger
reason to restore Marriage to them again Father Pa^^s History of the Council of
T^ent, l. 7. p. 680.
. This many in the Council of Trent were sensible of, Who alleged the great
Scandal given by incontinent Priests, and that there was want of continent
persons fit to exercise the Ministry P. 679, 680.
. And therefore the Emperor and the Duke of Bavaria required, That the marriage
of the Priests might be granted P. 514, and 526.
. And the Archbishop of Prague, and the Bishop of five Churches desired that
married persons might be promoted to holy Orders. But this request would not be
granted, because if the Clergy once come to be married, they will no longer
depend on the Pope, but on their Prince P. 680, and 747.
.

(6.) The Doctrines of the number of the Sacraments; of the Character impressed
by them; and of the necessity of the Priests intention, defined by the Roman
Church as necessary Points of Faith, are such as cannot be derived from
Scripture, or from the Tradition of the Church; as is freely acknowledged by
many learned Men of their own Communion.

As the Word Sacrament is ambiguous, so it is sufficiently known, That the
Fathers, as they took it in a more strict or large sense, so they either
increased or lessened the number of them: And Cassander has observed, That we
scarce meet with any Man before Peter Lombard, who reduced them to a certain
number Cons^lt. Cassand. Art. 13.
. And that the number Seven has no color, either from Scripture, or the
ancient Church, we may be assured by those goodly Reasons, upon which it was
established by the Council of Trent, viz. There are seven Virtues, seven
capital Vices, seven Defects, which came by original Sin, seven Planets, and I
know not how many sevens more History of the Council of Trent, l. 2. p. 234,
235.
, and therefore there are seven Sacraments, neither more nor less. Risum
teneatis?

As to the Character impressed by three of them (viz. Baptism, Confirmation and
Order) 'twas so little understood by the Trent Fathers, that they could not
agree what it meant, or where to place it. One would have it to be a Quality,
another to be a Relation; and of those who made it a Quality; some said it was
one kind of Quality, others that it was another, some placed it in the Essence
of the Soul, some in the Understanding, some in Will, etc. P. 239.
.

And in case the intention of the Priest be necessary, then as the Bishop of
Minori unanswerably argued in that Council, If a Priest having charge of four
or five thousand Souls, be an Infidel, but a formal Hypocrite, and in absolving
the Penitent, baptizing of Children, and consecrating the Eucharist, have no
intention to do what the Church does, it must be said, that the Children are
damned, the Penitent not absolved, and that all remain without the Fruit of the
Communion History of the Council of Trent, l. 2. p. 241.
. And what an horrible abuse is it, to make such things as these Articles of
Faith? and impose them upon all Men, to be believed under peril of Damnation.

(7.) The Doctrine of Merits. That the good Works of justified persons be truly
meritorious, deserve not only the increase of Grace, but eternal Life, yea an
increase of Glory Council. Trident. Sess. 6. Can 32.
.

Whereas the Scripture tells us, That our goodness extends not to God Psalm. 16.
2.
; That not only all that we do, But all that we can suffer, is not worthy to be
compared with the Glory that shall be revealed Romans 8. 18.
: That when we have done all those things which are commanded us, we are still
unprofitable Servants, and have done no more than what was our duty Luke 17. 10
. That we can give nothing to God, but what we have first received from him;
that we are obliged to him for the good we do, as well as for that we receive;
since all our good Works are entirely owing to his Grace, are the free Gifts of
his Holy Spirit, who works in us both to will and to do Phil. 2. 13.
.

Yea even Reason it self teaches us, That whatsoever we are, and whatsoever we
have, it is all received from him; that we can give nothing to him, that it
should be recompensed to us again; that the best Services we can perform are no
matter of favor, but a Debt we owe him; and in case they were wholly our own,
yet if put in the Balance with that exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
would be infinitely too light.

Though therefore we readily grant, That our good Works, are not only
Conditions, but necessary Qualifications by which we are made meet to be
partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in light, and without which we are
not so much as capable of enjoying it; though we do not condemn the Word Merit,
in that large sense in which it was used by the ancient Doctors of the Church,
as it signifies a Work that is praiseworthy, and to which God has promised a
Reward, as it denotes a Means appointed by God, in order to the bringing us to
Heaven: Yet we can in no wise grant, That any Works of ours, are truly, and in
a proper sense meritorious; but whatsoever right is thereby acquired to
eternal. Life, it is founded in the gracious Promise of God, who has declared
that he will reward our poor and imperfect services with Glory, Honor and
Immortality.

(8.) Though every sin be in its own nature deadly, yet the distinction of sins
into Mortal and Venial, is in a sense admitted by Protestants, viz. If by
Mortal be meant such a grievous sin, as actually excludes a Man from the favor
of God, and puts him into a state of Damnation; as all those do, mentioned 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10. and every other wilful sin. By Veniul, such a lighter sin, for
which God in the Gospel Covenant makes allowances, and which he will not impute
to Condemnation, to those who sincerely endeavor to do whatsoever he commands;
as sins of Ignorance and mere Infirmity.

But this distinction as it is commonly explained and applied by the Romish
Doctors, is plainly destructive of a holy Life, and one of the greatest
encouragements to Vice. For a Venial Sin in their Divinity, is a Sin, that in
its own nature is so light and small, that it cannot deprive a Man of the
favor of God; or render him obnoxious to eternal Death P^^catum aliquod
dicitur Veniale ex natura sua, and propria ratione; and est illud, quod ex se,
and sua natura, est tam leve and tam minutum, ut non valeat aliquem privare
^ratia divina, aut facere illum Dei inimicum, aut redde^e illum dignum mo^te
^terna. Alphons. de Castro advers. Haeres. l. 12. fol. 210.
. And if you ask them, What Sins in particular these Venial Sins are, scarce
any Sin can be named, but some or other of their most approved Casuists, will
tell you, It is no more than Venial; even lying and slandering, false witness
and Perjury, Theft and Covetousness, Gluttony and Drunkenness, are placed in
the Catalogue of these little harmless Sins. Now let these Venial Sins be never
so numerous, the greatest evils (which according to their Doctrine) they can
expose a Man to, are no more than the temporary pains of Purgatory; and these
(they tell us) may be bought off at so cheap a rate, that there is no Man in
such unhappy circumstances, but he may purchase his release from them. And what
then remains to give check to a Man's sinful appetites?

(9.) But for their looseness in Venials, some may think they have made amends
by the severity of their Doctrine concerning Mortal Sins. For no Man (as their
Church teaches) can obtain the pardon of these, without confession to a Priest,
and performing the Penances he imposes for them. And this Confession must be
complete; not only of the kinds, but of the particular Sins, together with the
circumstances which change the kind, that a Penance may be enjoined
proportionable to them Con^il. Trident. Sess. 14. c. ^* de P^nitent. Can. 4.
and 7.
.

But besides that we find no such sort of Confession required by Christ or his
Apostles; no, nor used in the Church for more than four hundred Years: But on
the contrary, that our blessed Savior proposes pardon of Sin, how Mortal
soever, upon condition of sincere Repentance and new Obedience; besides that,
the thing it self is unpracticable: For how shall an ignorant Mechanic know,
what those circumstances are that change the kind? When perhaps his Confessor
is not able to tell him? How shall he know, which Sins are Mortal, and which
are Venial? when their most learned Casuists are at no agreement among
themselves about them, but that which one says is Mortal, another says is no
more than Venial, and their seraphical Doctor affirms, That many Sins are
believed to be Venial, that are Mortal, and it is a most difficult thing to
discern the one from the other Multa enim frequenter ereduntur esse Venialia,
quae Mortalia sunt, and diffici^limum est in talibus discernere. Bonavent. l.
2. did. 24. par. 2. Dub. 1.
. Besides, I say, these and many other insuperable prejudices that lie against
it; as the matter is managed in the Church of Rome, it wholly defeats its own
design. For what Man will be ashamed to do that, which is done upon course, by
the best Men in their Church; the Priest, the Bishop, yea the Pope himself not
excepted? And who will be afraid of the most formidable Sin, when the Penance
imposed for it is usually trifling, and next to nothing; so far from giving
check, that it is one of the strongest provocations to sin? For what greater
encouragement can a Man desire, than to purchase a pardon upon such easy terms?

(10.) I need not show, that the Doctrine of Purgatory, as taught by the Church
of Rome, cannot derive its Pedigree, either from the Scripture, or the
primitive Fathers; because it is freely confessed by many of her own Members,
that it has no foundation in either of them. Yea a late learned Writer of that
Church, has proved by great variety of Arguments, that it is plainly repugnant
to Scripture, to Reason, and to the judgment of the ancient Church, and exposed
the vanity of those pretended Proofs which are commonly brought for it Tho.
Aug. ex Al^i^^ (...) Saxon. de media Anima^um statu.
.

And yet it is no wonder, that the Romish Clergy so zealously contend for it,
that the Council of Trent has established it, and that Pope Pius IV. has put
it into the Roman Creed Bull. super formam Jurament. Confess. Fidei*
, because this is that by which they make spoil of the people, and enrich
themselves. This alone has erected and richly endowed many fair Abbeys and
Monasteries; this has founded many Colleges, Chapels and Chantryes; this has
set up and maintained the gainful Trade of Indulgences and Masses: Let the
people be once disabused, and rightly informed in this Point, Masses for the
Dead will grow out of fashion, and Indulgences will be despised as nothing
worth. For,

(11.) The Doctrine of Indulgences is another new Article of the Roman Creed.
This is generally owned by the learned Romanists themselves: In particular,
Durandus (one of their famous Schoolmen) acknowledges, That little that is
certain can be said concerning them, because the Scripture speaks not expressly
of them; and the holy Fathers, S. Ambrose, S. Hilary, S. Augustine, and S.
Jerome, make no mention of them De Indulgentiis pauca dici possunt per
certitudinem, quia nec Scriptura express de eis loqultur: sancti etiam, ut
Ambrosius, Hill. Aug. Hierom. minime loquuntur de Indulgentiis. Durand. l. 4.
did. 20. q. 3.
. And Cardinal Cajetan grants, That no sacred Scripture, no Authority of the
ancient Doctors, Greek or Latin, has brought the Original of them to our
knowledge De ortu Indulgentiarum, si certitudo haberi posset, veritati
indagandae opem ferret: verum quia nulla sacrae Scripturae, nulla priscorum
Doctorum, Graecorum aut Latinorum, authoritas scripta hanc ad nostram deduxit
notitiam. Opusc. Tom. 1. Tract. 15. c. 1.
. And no wonder, because their Original bears a much later date than either the
Sacred Scripture, or the Authority of the ancient Doctors; for the learned
Romanist before mentioned tells us, That for ought he could find, Indulgences
were not thought on, before the Age of the Schoolmen De his Indulgentiis ante
Scholasticorum aetatem, quod sciam, ^nspicio nulla. De m^dio Animarum statu,
Demens. 27.
, That is till twelve hundred Years after Christ; and therefore no mention is
made of them by Gratian, or the Master of the Sentences.

It is true, That in the Primitive Church, severe and long Penances were
imposed upon scandalous Offenders, the rigor of which, upon weighty
Considerations, was sometimes moderated by the Bishop; and this Relaxation was
called by the name of Indulgence. But the Popish Indulgences are quite of
another nature; for they suppose a Treasure in the Church, made up of the
Merits of Christ and the Saints (the Saints must be added to supply the defect
of Christ's Merits) which is wholly at the Popes disposal, which therefore he
dispenses to others as he thinks fit, to discharge them from those Temporal
Punishments to which they are obnoxious, for their Venial Sins, in Purgatory.

Nor are these Indulgences (as the Practice of their Church is) limited to the
Souls in Purgatory, and to those Punishments which are due to venial Sins only;
but granted to all Persons indifferently who will pay for them; and for all
Sins, be they never so enormous.

To such an excess of Abomination, were the Doctrine and Practice of
Indulgences grown, about the time of the Reformation; such an intolerable
Reproach were they to our Holy Religion, that the more sober Romanists
themselves cried shame on them Espencaeus in cap. 1. Ep. ad Tit. Onus Ecclesiae
c. 15. Eras. l 30. Ep. 57.
.

(12.) Another Error (and that which is, indeed, the main Foundation of many of
those already mentioned, and of many more which follow under the next Head), is
this, That unwritten Traditions ought to be added to the Holy Scriptures, to
supply their defect; and ought to be received as of equal Authority with them.

Whereas the Scriptures themselves, (which the Romanists acknowledge to be an
infallible, tho but an imperfect Rule) do frequently bear witness of their own
Sufficiency, as to all Matters necessary to Salvation Psalm. 19. 7. John 20. 31.
2 Timothy 3. 16.
: I say, all Matters necessary to Salvation; because we do not assert, that all
things belonging to Rites and Ceremonies, and to the external Polity of the
Church, are contained in them, except only in general Rules, by which the
particular Determination of them is committed to the Discretion of our
Governors; but we affirm, that there is no Article of Faith, or Rule of Life,
that is necessary to be believed or practiced, that is not either in express
words contained in them, or by evident consequence may be deduced from them; so
that supposing them to be the Word of God, we need no other Rule in such
Matters.

And it is certain, that the ancient Fathers were of the same Judgment. I shall
produce the words of S. Austin only. In those Matters, says he, which are
plainly placed in Scripture, all those things are found, which contain Faith,
and the Manners of Holy Living, viz. Hope and Charity In iis quae aperte in
Scriptura posita sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia quae continent fidem, moresque
vivendi; spem sc. atque Charitatem. De doct. Christiana, l. 2. c. 9.
. In which words he affirms, not only that all things belonging to Faith and
Manners are contained, but that they are plainly contained in the Scripture.
And in another place the same Father says, If an Angel from Heaven shall preach
to you, any thing concerning Christ, or his Church, or concerning any thing
which belongs to Faith or Life, besides what you have received in the Writings
of the Law and the Gospel, let him be accursed Proinde sive de Christo, ^ive de
ejus Eccles^s, ^ive de ^uacunque alia re, quae pertinet ad fidem vita^que
nostram, etc. Aug. contra li^eras Petil. l. 3. c. 6.
.

It Is true, the Fathers in their Contests with Heretics, do frequently press
them with the Tradition of the Catholic Church; But then it must be
remembered, that the Heretics, against whom they disputed, were either such as
denied the Authority of the whole, or a great part of the Scripture; or such as
insisted upon Tradition, and pleaded that in defense of their Errors; that
therefore they might beat them at their own Weapons, the Fathers confuted them
by Tradition too: But they never set up Tradition as another word of God, or
sought thereby to establish any thing as an Article of Faith, or a piece of
necessary Worship, that they thought was not to be found in the Scripture; As
the Church of Rome does, which under pretense of Apostolical Tradition,
obtrudes upon the Christian World, as Matters of necessary Belief and Practice,
such things as are but of yesterday; such things as are doubtful and uncertain;
such as are childish and tri^^ing; yea, such as are false and impious, plainly
contrary to Scripture, and to Primitive Doctrine and Practice.

That I may not be over tedious, I forbear to mention many other Errors in
Doctrine, and proceed to the next general Head of Corruptions.

2. The Church of Rome has not only erred in Doctrines of Faith, but has also
grossly ^werv'd from that Rule of Worship which Christ has given us, and from
the Practice of the Primitive Church; and set up a Worship of their own
invention in direct opposition thereunto. I shall instance in some Particulars.

First, In having their public Worship in an unknown Tongue. This is expressly
condemned by our Church, as a Practice plainly repugnant to the Word of God,
and to the Custom of the Primitive Church It is a thing plainly repugnant to
the lord of God, and the Custom of the Primitive Church, to have public
Prayers in the Church, or to administer the Sacraments in a Tongue not
understood of the People. A^t^cles of Religion Anno 1562. Art. 24.
.

That it is plainly repugnant to the Word of God, no man can be ignorant, who
knows what is written in the fourteenth Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, in which the Apostle so directly, and with such variety of
Arguments, confutes this unreasonable Service, that it is as easy to make
midnight and no^nday meet, as to reconcile them one to the other.

Nor is it less contrary to the Custom of the Primitive Church. That in the
first Ages of Christianity, every Christian Church had the public Prayers and
Administration of the Sacraments in their own Tongue, I need not prove, by
citing the Testimonies of those Persons, who lived in those Ages; because the
learned men of the Church of Rome, do themselves confess it, which is a Proof
more convincing, than a thousand other Witnesses. Out of many which offer
themselves, I shall produce a few, whose Authority is beyond exception.

Their great Aquinas grants, That it was madness in the Primitive Church, to
speak in a Tongue not understood; because they were rude in Ecclesiastical
Rites, and did not know those things that were done, unless they were
expounded: But now, says he, that all are instructed, tho all things are
spoken in the Latin Tongue, they know what is done in the Church Aq^in.
Comment. in 1. ad Corinth. c. 14. Sect. 5.
. Cardinal Bellarmine grants, That in the Primitive times, because the
Christians were few, all sang together in the Church, and answered in the
divine Offices; but afterward the People increasing, it was left to the Clergy
alone to perform Prayers and Praises in the Church Bell. de ^erb^ ^ei. ^^^. c.
16.
. Mr. Harding to this Exception of the Protestants, S. Paul requires that the
People give assent to the Priest by answering to his Prayers made in the
Congregation, returns this answer: Verily in the Primitive Church this was
necessary, when the Faith was a learning; and therefore the Prayers were made
then in a common Tongue, known to the People, for cause of their further
instruction, who being of late converted to the Faith, and of Painims made
Christians, had need in all things to be taught, etc. And again, Whereas S.
Paul seems to disallow praying with [^ strange] Tongue in the common
Assembly; because of want of edifying, and to esteem the utterance of five
words or Sentences with understanding of his meaning, that the rest may be
instructed thereby, more than ten thousand words in a strange and unknown
Tongue; all this is to be referned to the State of that time, which is much
unlike the State of the Church we be now in: They needed instruction, we be not
ignorant, of the chief P^ints of Religion: They were to be taught in all
things; we come not to Church specially and chiefly to be taught at the
Service, but to pray, and to be taught by preaching: Their Prayer was not
available for lack of Faith, and therefore was it to be made in the vulgar
Tongue for increase of Faith; our Faith will stand us in better stead, if we
give our selves to devout Prayer Artic. 3. Divis. 28, and 30.
. Thus we see he grants, that the public Prayers were in the Apostolical times
in the vulgar Tongue, and that 'twas necessary they should be; but nothing can
be more false and absurd than the reason he gives, why 'twas necessary then,
and not now. Add to these the infallible Testimony of Pope Gregory VII. who tho
he would not permit the Celebration of Divine Offices in the Sclavonian Tongue;
yet confessed that the Primitive Church had them in the vulgar Language History
of the Council of Trent. l. 6. p. 578.
.

So that by the Confession of the Romanists themselves, the Church of England
has in this Point no further departed from the Church of Rome, than the Church
of Rome has from the ancient Church. If they can instance in any Church in the
World, that for above five hundred years after Christ, worshipped God in a
Language that the People did not understand, we will yield the Cause.

And may it not justly be matter of amazement, that for the serving of some
poor worldly ends, the Church of Rome should introduce a Practice, that renders
the Worship of God useless and insignificant? That destroys not only the end of
Prayer, but is inconsistent with the nature of it? That is so absurd and
unreasonable, that S. Paul thought they deserved to be reckoned Madmen, who in
such sort pray to God 1 Cor. 14. 21.
.

So evident is this; that many great men of the Church of Rome, acknowledge it
would be better to have the public Offices in the vulgar Tongue. So Cardinal
Cajetan confesses, That according to the Doctrine of S. Paul, it is more for the
edification of the Church, that the public Prayers should be said in a Tongue
common to the Clergy and People, than in Latin Ex hac Pauli doctrina habetur,
quod melius est ad edisicationem Ecclesiae, orationes publicas, quae audiente
populo dicuntur, dici lingua communi Clericis and Populo, quam dici latin.
Comment. in c. 14. Ep. 1. ad Corintle.
. And Mr. Harding says, I grant they (viz. the People) cannot say Amen, to the
Blessing or Thanksgiving of the Priest, so well as if they understood the Latin
Tongue perfectly Artic. 3. Divis. 29.
. And Father Paul thought the Latin Service a great Corruption and Abuse; as we
may see in his History of the Council of Trent l. 6.
. In which he also tells us, That in the Roman Pontifical, there remains yet
a Form of the Ordination of Readers in the Church, in which it is said, that
they must study to read distinctly and plainly, that the People may understand
Ibid.
. To conclude this; upon these and such like Considerations, The Emperor at the
Council of Trent required, That Divine Service might be so said, that it might
be understood both by him that said it, and by him that heard it History of the
Council of Trent. p. 513.
.

(2.) Another Corruption is the propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass. The Church
of England does not quarrel at the name of Sacrifice; she not only grants, but
asserts, that the Eucharist is a commemorative and representative Sacrifice.
And this was the meaning of the ancient Fathers, who frequently call it a
Remembrance or Commemoration, a Resemblance or Representation of the Sacrifice
which Christ once offered upon the Cross Eusebius. Demonst. Evang. l. r. c. 10.
(...). Chrysostom. Hom. 17. in Epist. ad Heb.
. And this is as much as Cassander seems to mean by it Cassand Consult. Art. ^
24. de Sacrificio Corp. and sang. Christi.
.

But this will not satisfy the present Church of Rome; but Christ (as they
will have it) is truly and properly sacrificed; that is, according to their own
notion of a Sacrifice, Christ is truly and properly put to death, as often as the
Priest says Mass. For in a true Sacrifice (as Bellarmine tells us De Missa. l.
1. c. 2. etc. 27.
) the thing sacrificed, must be destroyed; and if it be a thing that has Life,
it must be killed: And so inde^d many of the Romanists roundly assert, that
Christ every day is by the Mass-Priest.

Which besides, that it is contrary to the Doctrine of the ancient Church, and
to the words of the Apostle, who tells us, That Jesus Christ offered not
himself often, as the High Priest entered into the Holy place every year with
the Blood of others; for then must he often have suffered from the Foundation
of the World. But now once in the end of the World, has he appeared to put
away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. And as it is appointed to men once to
dye, but after this the Judgment; so Christ was once offered to bear the sins
of many Heb. 9. 25, 26, 27, 28.
. And again: That after Christ had offered one Sacrifice for ever, he sat down
on the right hand of God. And that by one Offering, he has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified Heb. 10. 10, 12, 14.
. And whereas the Apostle argues the perfection of Christ's Sacrifice, above
those of the Law, because those were offered year by year, but the Sacrifice of
Christ's Body was offered once for all; If Christ be daily sacrificed in the
Mass, the Sacrifice of Christ must be much more defective, than those of the
Law: for one Sacrifice of Expiation for the whole Congregation of Israel, was
thought sufficient for the whole year; Whereas the Sacrifice of Christ's Body
is repeated every day: Yea, for one single Person he may be sacrificed a
thousand times over, and this Sacrifice so often repeated, and a thousand times
more, may perhaps be of so little Virtue, as not to procure the release of that
one poor Soul out of Purgatory.

Consider further, that this is inconsistent with the end they assign of
Sacrifice, which is to testify our subjection to God; which cannot be done by
offering up God himself in Sacrifice; for what we offer in Sacrifice, we are
not subject to, but have the disposal of, and dominion over it.

Besides all this, it is a piece of Worship more absurd and impious, than was
ever practiced by the most barbarous Heathen; they indeed sometimes offered
their Sons and Daughters in Sacrifice, but we never read that they were so
sottish, as to make a Sacrifice of their God. And therefore our Church has
deservedly condemned the Sacrifices of Masses, as blasphemous Fables, and
dangerous Deceits Articles of Religion, anno 1562. A^t. 31.
.

(3.) The solitary Mass, in which the Priest alone, who Consecrates,
Communicates, can no way be reconciled, either with the Doctrine and
Institution of Christ, who when he had broken the Bread, gave it to his
Disciples, and said, take ye, eat ye; and commanded his Disciples to do as he
had done: Or, with the words of S. Paul to the Corinthians, who supposes them
to meet together to eat the Lord's Body, and commands them to stay one for
another 1 Cor. 11. 31.
. And from this meeting, the Sacrament was called by the Ancients, Synaxis, the
Collection or gathering together of the Faithful; as it is by us still called
the Communion.

Furthermore, it is inconsistent with the nature and intendment of the
Sacrament; which is a Feast of Love, and designed to unite us more closely
together in brotherly Love one to another, by representing to us, by our eating
together at the same Table, and partaking of one and the same Loaf, that we all
belong to one Family, and are Children of one Father.

It Is contrary to the Practice of the Apostles and first Christians; who were
wont to assemble on the first day of the week to break Bread Act. 20. 7.
. And that it was unknown to the Christian Church for many Ages, is freely
confessed by the Romanists themselves: Even Bellarmine grants, that we no where
expressly read, that the Sacrifice was offered by the Ancients, without some one
or more communicating besides the Priest Bell. de Missa. l. 2. c. 9.
; tho it is true, he says, we may, by many conjectures, collect that it was: but
how weak his Conjectures are, will be evident to any man who will be at the
pains to read them. Harding confesses, that in the Primitive Church, the People
received every day with the Priest; and that private Mass came in afterward by
the negligence and indevotion of the People Article 1. Divis. 7.
. Cassander questions, whether solitary Mass came not first into use after the
days of Gregory the Great, (that is more than six hundred years after Christ)
and shows, how at its first rise, it was disallowed and condemned, not only by
particular Persons, but by some Councils Cassand. Consult. de Solit. Missis.
. It Is plain, that it was not in use in the Church of Rome in ancient times,
and that it cannot be reconciled with the Roman Office as it now stands, in
which the Priest prays and gives thanks, not only for himself, but for the
Communicants. And what a mockery is it, for the Priest to say, The Lord be with
you, lift up your hearts, and let us give Thanks to the Lord God, when he has
not so much as one that partakes with him? And therefore the Church of England
has, upon good grounds, abolished it, and ordained, that there shall be no
Celebration of the Lords Supper, except there be a convenient number to
communicate Rubric after the Communion.
.

(4.) Another instance of gross Corruption in Worship, is the half Communion.
That Christ instituted and administered the Eucharist under both kinds, and
that it was likewise so administered by the Primitive Church, I need not prove,
because it is expressly granted by the Council of Constance, which
sacrilegiously forbad the Cup to the Laity. For tho, says the Council, Christ
instituted and administered to his Disciples, this venerable Sacrament under
both kinds of Bread and Wine; and although, in the Primitive Church, it was
received by the Faithful under both kinds; yet notwithstanding, for the
avoiding of some Dangers and Scandals, this Custom is, upon reasonable grounds,
introduced, that it be received by Lay people under the kind of Bread only: And
then commands, that no Priest shall administer it in both kinds to any Layman
under pain of Excommunication Council. Constable. Sess. 13.
.

It may be presumed, that the Scandals were great, and the Reasons weighty,
that moved the Council to make a Decree in plain defiance to Christ's
Institution: I shall therefore mention them, and leave them to the judgment of
the Reader. John Gerson, who was himself present at the Council, in a Treatise
which he writ in defense of that Decree, has told us they were these. 1. The
danger of spilling the Wine. 2. The danger in carrying it from place to place.
3. In defiling the Vessels (which ought to be kept as Sacred things) by being
touched and handled by Laymen. 4. In the long Beards of the Laymen. 5. In
keeping the consecrated Wine for the use of the Sick; because Vinegar may be
generated in the Vessel, and so the Blood of Christ would cease to be there,
and pure Vinegar would be administered for the Blood of Christ; (tho by the
way, if the consecrated Wine be transubstantiated, it seems strange, that it
should degenerate into Vinegar.) Besides, in Summer, Flies may be generated,
and sometimes it may putrefie and become loathsome, and some might loath to
drink it, because many others had drank of it before. 6. Wine would be
chargeable, especially in such places where it is scarce. There would be,
moreover, danger of freezing in Winter; and there would be further danger, in
giving occasions many ways to the People to believe that which is false; As
that Laymen, as to the receiving of the Sacrament, are of equal Dignity with
Priests Gerson. Tract. contra haeres. de Commun. sub utraque specie.
. These were the frightful Dangers, and horrible Scandals, which they supposed
might arise from permitting the Cup to the Laity. And is it not strange, that
such Reasons as these, should move the Council to depart from Christ's
Institution? especially when confirmed with that emphatical command, drink ye
all of it Mat. 26. 27
; and when that command had been inviolably observed, not only by the
Primitive, but by the whole Church, both Greek and Latin, Eastern and Western,
for twelve hundred years after Christ? For Cardinal Bona grants, that the whole
Church, both Lay and Clergy, for about one thousand two hundred years, received
in both kinds, even in the Church of Rome it self De Rebus Liturgicis, l. 2. c.
18. p. 491.
. And Gregory de Valentia (tho a Jesuit) tells us, that the Custom of
communicating in one kind, began to be generally received, even in the Latin
Church, not long before the Council of Constance Coepit autem ea consuetudo in
Ecclesia Latina esse generalis non multo ante tempore Concilii Constan^iensis;
in quo tandem pro lege ab omnibus eam consuetudinem esse habendam, decretum
est. Greg. de Valent. de legitimo usu Eucharist. c. 10.
, which began in the year 1414.

And that this Innovation might be removed, and the whole Sacrament
administered according to Christ's Institution, was earnestly desired, not only
by Protestants, but by many Popish Princes and Churches, as is manifest by
their requests to that purpose, made to the Pope and the Council of Trent. The
French Ambassador besought the Pope, in the name of the King, the Church, and
Prelates of France, that he would grant the Communion of the Cup to the People
History of the Council of Trent. l. 5. p. 4^9.
. The Duke of Bavaria, at the Council of Trent, demanded, by his Ambassador,
the Administration of the Eucharist under both kinds; and that not for the
Sectaries sake, to reduce them; but to retain those who as yet continued in
Communion with them. The Bavarian was seconded by the Emperors Ambassadors, who
represented to the Council, that not only the Kingdom of Bohemia would never be
satisfied without the Cup; but that there were Catholics in Hungaria, Austria,
Moravia, Silesia, Carinthia, Carniola, Stiria, Bavaria, Suevia, and other parts
of Germany, who desired the Cup with great Zeal; that therefore his Majesty
demanded it, not for the Heretics, but for the Catholics only P. 528, 529.
.

Tho these already mentioned are Corruptions, which loudly called for a
Reformation; yet behold greater Abominations than these; As,

(5.) The giving Divine Worship to the consecrated Bread in the Eucharist. This
the Church of England has declared to be abominable Idolatry The Sacramental
Bread and Wine remain still in their very natural Substances, and therefore may
not be adored; for that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians.
Rubric after the Communion.
.

And that it can be no less, is granted by many learned men of the Church of
Rome, in case the Bread and Wine, after Consecration, be not really changed
into the natural Body and Blood of Christ, but remain the very same for
substance, that they were before. And that there is no substantial Change
wrought in them, we are fully assured by Sense, by Reason, by Scripture, and by
the Authority of the ancient Church; and if these are not sufficient Grounds of
assurance, we can be assured of nothing; but for ought we know, even we our
selves, and all that is in the World, may be nothing but Phantasm and Delusion.

But suppose, that upon due Consecration of the Elements, such an incredible
Change were wrought; yet no man can be sure that it is indeed wrought, and by
consequence that he is not guilty of foul Idolatry. The reason is evident,
because upon the Principles of the Church of Rome, the Consecration depends
upon such a number of Uncertainties, that no man can ever be certain that it is
duly made. For if he be not a true Priest that Consecrates; if he do not
pronounce the words of Consecration, and pronounce them aright; if he do not
intend to consecrate, but to abuse the People, then no Consecration follows,
and consequently no substantial change is effected. And if the Roman Doctrine
be true, is it possible for the People, or for the Priest himself to know, that
he is a true Priest? For no man can be so, who is not baptized by a Priest,
whose intention was right in baptizing him; and ordained by a Bishop who
intended to do what the Church does: And who can tell, whether the Priest that
baptized him, or the Bishop that ordained him, had a right Intention? And can
any man tell, besides the Priest himself that consecrates, whether he
pronounces the words of Consecration, or pronounces them as he ought, when the
words are uttered with so low a voice, that none can hear what he says? And
none certainly but himself, and the Searcher of Hearts can tell, whether the
Priest, when he pretends to consecrate, may not intend to mock the People. Now
in these cases no Consecration follows, but the Bread remains Bread still, and
a Wafer only is worshipped instead of Christ.

And if any say, these cases are rare. Let a Bishop of the Church of Rome
answer Bishop of Minori. History of the Council of Trent. l. 2. p. 241.
. Would to God (says he) they were so, and that in this corrupt Age, we had not
cause to doubt they were many. But suppose they are very few, or but only one:
Let there be a knave Priest who faineth, and has not an intention to
administer the true Baptism to a Child, who after being a grown man, is created
Bishop of a great City, and lives many years in that charge, so that he has
ordained a great part of the Priests: it must be said, that he being not
baptized, is not ordained, nor they ordained who are promoted by him. So that
in that great City, there will be neither Eucharist, nor Confession, because
they cannot be without the Sacrament of order, nor order without a true Bishop,
neither can he receive order who is not baptized. Behold millions of Nullities
of Sacraments, by the malice of one Minister, in one Act only. So many
uncertainties does Consecration depend upon in the Church of Rome, that it may
seem highly probable, that not one Sacrament in an hundred is duly consecrated,
and by consequence, not one Person in an hundred that worships the Host, but in
so doing, according to their own Doctrine, he gives that worship to Bread, that
is due to God only.

It will not save them harmless, nor so much as excuse them, to say that they
verily believe it not to be Bread, but the very Son of God; since if they do
so, their mistake must be grossly wilful; there being no such exact likeness
between Christ and a bit of Bread, that any Man can mistake the one for the
other, who is not resolved so to do.

(6.) To make a Picture of God, is forbidden by God himself in the Holy
Scripture. Take ye therefore good heed to your selves, says God to the Jews,
(for ye saw no manner of similitude in the day the Lord spoke to you in Horeb,
out of the midst of the Fire) lest ye corrupt your selves, and make you a
graven Image, etc. D^ut 4. 15, 16.
.

It Is repugnant to the very nature of God, who is a Spirit, and can no more be
represented by a bodily shape, than a Thought can. It is an intolerable
reproach to, and infinitely derogates from his peerless perfections. It was
judged an absurd and a wicked thing, by the ancient Christians, as Cassander
confesses, and quotes S. Augustine for the proof of it Cassand. Consu^t. Art. 2^
. We believe, says that Father, speaking of Christ, that he sits at the right
Hand of God the Father; and yet it is not to be thought, that God the Father is
circumscribed by a humane shape; that those that think of him should conceive,
that he has either a right-side or a left; or for that the Father is said to
sit, is it to be supposed, that it is done with bended Knees, lest we fall into
that Sacrilege, for which the Apostle abhorrs those, who changed the Glory of
the incorruptible God, into the likeness of corruptible Man? For such an Image
of God it is unlawful for a Christian to place in the Temple; much more
detestable, to place it in his Heart Aug. de Fide and Symbolo. c. 7.
. Which Words plainly show, what the Judgment of Christians in this matter was,
four hundred Years after Christ.

It was condemned by the wiser sort of Heathens, as a thing altogether
unsuitable to the Divine Nature. Yea, that very Council which decreed that the
Image of Christ, and the Saints should be worshipped, thought it not only
unlawful, but absurd and impossible to make an Image of that Being which is
Spiritual, Invisible and Incomprehensible Council. Nicaen. 2. Action 4 and
Action 7. in Epist. Synodica ad Constantinum and Iren.
. And Durandus, one of their learned Schoolmen says; It is a foolish thing to
make Images to represent God l. 3. did. 9. q. 2.
.

And yet the practice of the Church of Rome, not only now, but many Years
before the Reformation, was to picture God the Father, and the adorable
Trinity; and so generally has this practice obtained, that Bellarmine makes
that an Argument to prove the lawfulness of it Bell. de Imagine. l. 2. c. 9.
. For now, says he, such kind of Images are almost every where received, and
it is not credible, That the Church would universally tolerate that which is
unlawful. He says they are almost every where received, and that the Church did
universally tolerate them; but in that he says, they are now received, he
plainly grants, that they were anciently rejected.

(7.) Another gross Corruption in the Worship of Rome, which rendered the
Reformation necessary, was the Worship of Images. This also the Church of
England has condemned as Idolatrous* and proved it to be so, by the Authority
of Gods Holy Word, and by the Testimonies of the ancient Fathers Homily against
the peril of Idolatry.
.

I shall not mention the many Scriptures in which God prohibits, and expresses
his abhorrency of this sort of Worship, and dreadfully threatens those who
practice it; for that would be to transcribe a great part of the Bible.
Whosoever can reconcile it with the second Commandment, he need not doubt, but
he may make Perjury, and Murder, and Theft, and false Witnessing to become
Virtues: Which is indeed no more than the Church of Rome does: For to break
Faith with Heretics, to rob and falsely accuse them, yea and to murder them
too, are in their Divinity great Virtues and necessary Duties.

So far were the Primitive Christians from worshipping of Images, that many of
the most learned of them, thought it was a sin so much as to make them; and
others who did not scruple the making them, yet thought it unlawful to have
them in Churches, though for no other use than Ornament: And when some in the
fourth Century, thought they might be permitted in Churches, they
notwithstanding abhorred the thoughts of giving any manner of Worship to them:
All which are so fully proved by learned Men of our own Church Bishop Tailor,
Dr. Stillingfleet, etc.
, that I forbear to insist upon them: Though it is a matter that needs not
proof, because it is confessed by Cassander, That the ancient Christians had a
great abhorrency for all Veneration of Images Cassand. Consult. Art. 21
.

It is certain the Pope himself was an enemy to Image Worship for six hundred
Years after Christ; for Gregory the Great, to a certain Recluse, who desired
the Image of Christ, expressly answered, That Images were not to be worshipped.
And in his Epistle to Serenus Bishop of Marseilles, though he blame him for
breaking the Images in pieces, yet he praises him, for that he would not suffer
them to be worshipped; he thought they might be of use for the instruction of
the Ignorant, but would not endure that they should be adored. For it is one
thing, says he, to adore a Picture, another thing to learn by the History of
the Picture, what is to be adored; If any Man will make Images, do not forbid
him; but by all means avoid the worshipping of them l 9. Epist. 9
.

But after that they were once brought into Churches, Men came by little and
little to worship them; till at length it was established for a Law in the
second Council of Nice, that they were to be set up in Churches, to the end
that they might be worshipped; and that with true and proper Worship; and all
those were anathemized who durst say the contrary; which Decree was confirmed
by the fourth Council at Constantinople, and afterward by the Council of Trent.

And though the Worship decreed by that Council, was of an inferior nature, yet
in process of time, it was advanced by the Church of Rome to that supreme
Worship which is proper to God himself. For before Luther's time the approved
Doctrine of that Church was, That the very same Worship was to be given to the
Image, that was to be given to the person represented by it; and therefore to
the Images of God and of Christ, the Worship of Latria, that is, That Worship
which belongs to God over all blessed for ever. And such as their Doctrine was,
such was their Practice; insomuch that Cassander complains, That their Worship
of Images, and their vanity in making and adorning them, was nothing inferior
to that of the Heathens Consult. Cassand. Art. 21. de Imagine. and Simulachris.
. We may add, If there was any difference between Heathen and Christian Rome,
it seems to be this; that the latter has outdone the former, in this piece of
Idolatry. Add to this,

(8.) Their solemn Prayers to Saints departed, and that not to intercede for
them, but to bestow upon them those Temporal and Spiritual Blessings they stand
in need of; which was the practice of the Church of Rome, and made a part both
of their private and public Devotions, long before the Reformation.

Now were it so good and profitable to invoke the Saints, as the Council of
Trent teaches; it is strange that so great a Lover of Mankind as S. Paul, when
he so frequently commands us to pray, and has left so many directions
concerning Prayer, should wholly forget to teach us this Lesson. Can it be
supposed a Worship so pleasing to God, when God has not given us the least
intimation in his Word that it is so? For that it has no foundation in
Scripture, we may be assured, when so great a Man of the Church of Rome, as
Cardinal P^rron acknowledges that neither Precept, nor Example, is there to be
found for it; and when other learned Doctors of that Church, not only confess
the same, but also give us several Reasons, why no mention is made of it either
in the Old or New Testament.

But this is not all. There is not only nothing in Scripture for it, but much
against it: For we are there frequently taught, to offer up our Prayers to God
alone; through that one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus.

And had the Fathers been of opinion, that Saints might be invoked; could they
have thought the Invocation of Christ, a good Argument to prove his Divinity?
Would they have accused the Arians of Idolatry for worshipping him, because
they supposed him to be no more than a Creature? Could they be so sottish as to
deride the Heathens for worshipping dead men, had they themselves worshipped
such? And would not the Heathens have retorted their Sarcasms? When Heathens
and Jews both, so often reproached the Christians, for worshipping one that was
crucified; had they worshipped not only him, but his Apostles and Disciples
too, would they not much more have reproached them for that? But what need of
Arguments to prove it, when the Fathers themselves plainly tell us, that they
made their Prayers to God alone Clemens Alexand. Stromat. l. 7. p. 721. Paris.
Edit. 1629. Tertull. Apol. c. 30. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 8. c. 27.
?

It Is unreasonable to say, that the Fathers speak of supreme Worship only which
the Romanists themselves reserve to God, while they allow an inferior Worship
to others: Because they were not aware of any such difference of Worship: All
religious Worship, was in their account, such as was due to God alone. The
distinctions of worship into supreme and subordinate, absolute and relative,
terminative and transient, as they have no foundation in Scripture, so the
Christians of the first Ages were ignorant of, they having no such different
objects of Religious Worship, to which these different Degrees were to be
suited.

And forasmuch as the Romanists themselves, make sacrifice proper to God; it
seems very absurd to make Prayer common to him with others. For Sacrifices were
not only accompanied with vocal Prayers and Thanksgivings; but were themselves
real Prayers and Praises; they being sacred Rites by which they offered up
their Petitions and Thanks to God, as their very names Euctical and
Eucharistical teach us. And when Prayer and Sacrifice are considered apart, and
compared the one with the other, God sets the higher value upon Prayer, and
desires that rather than Sacrifice Psalm 50.
. If therefore, Sacrifice be a Worship peculiar to God, it follows a fortiori,
that Prayer must be so too:

As will be further evident from the very nature of the thing; because Prayer
is an acknowledgment of those Excellencies in the Person prayed to, and a
payment of those Duties to him, which are the sole Prerogative of God. For what
are the incommunicable Perfections of God himself? If not to be present in all
places, to know the Secrets of our Hearts, and to be able to supply the wants
of all those that call upon him? And all these must be supposed to be in him,
to whom Prayers are addressed by all Persons, from all distant places of the
World. And what Homage can be more proper to him, who is infinite Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness, than to submit our selves to him? To hope and trust in
him, and to cast all our care upon him? And all these Duties we pay to that
Being, to whom we make our Prayers. And therefore the Church of England had
great reason to charge them with Idolatry, who put up their Prayers to Saints;
because, in so doing, they give that Worship to the Creature, which is due to
God alone Homily against peril of Idolatry.
.

(9.) I might largely insist upon the Worship which the Church of Rome gives to
the Relics of Saints, which is more absurd, than that which they give to the
Saints themselves.

By their Relics, they understand not only their dead Bodies, and all the
parts of them (their Nails and Hair not excepted) but all those things that any
way appertained to them: Yea, whatsoever they touched, and whatsoever touched
them, by virtue of that Touch, it becomes Sacred. Upon which account, no things
are had in greater Honor with them, than those by which our Blessed Lord was
put to shame. The Thorns that gored him, the Nails that pierced him, the Cross
he was nailed to, because they touched his Sacred Body, divine Honor must be
given to them, as the great Oracle of their Church has determined (and by
consequence to the Judas that betrayed him). Tho with this difference, that not
only to the true Cross, on which our Savior hung; but to the Image of it
Divine Worship is to be paid; but not to the Images of the Nails and Spear, but
only to those very Nails, and that very Spear that pierced him Crux Christi, in
qua Christus crucifixus est, tum propter repraesentationem, tum etiam propter
membrorum Christi contactum Latria adoranda est: Crucis vero effigies in alia
quavis materia, priori tantum ratione Latria adoranda est.

Quantum ad rationem contactus membrorum Christi, adoramus non solum Crucem,
sed omnia quae sunt Christi. Aquin. pars 3. quaest. 25. Art. 4.


.

And which is yet more monstrous; tho it is certain, that these pretended
Relics, if not all, yet are most of them counterfeit, (unless that which is
but one, can be a multitude) because the same is pretended to be showed in many
places; yet the same worship is given to the false, that is given to the true
Relics; and so the Body of a Malefactor, is sometimes worshipped, for that of
a Saint; and the Bones of a Beast, for those of a Martyr. But suppose they are
true, are they not goodly objects of Worship? Garlic and Onions (the Egyptians
Deities) may justly be accounted Gods right worshipful, when compared with
Thorns, and Nails and Chips, and many other of the Romish Gods. So ridiculous
are the Follies and Impieties, that are often practiced in this
Relique-worship, that nothing equal was ever found among the most sottish
Heathen.

I shall therefore spare the pains of showing that it is condemned by
Scripture, by Reason, and that nothing like it was practiced by the Primitive
Christians, for more than three hundred years; and shall only tell you what
censure, a learned and famous man of their own Church has passed upon this
sort of worship. It is manifest (says he) that in later times, too much has
been attributed to the Memories and Relics of Saints, so that even by such
good men as have a pious Zeal, the Sum as it were of Religion, is thought to
consist in getting of Relics, and adorning them with Gold and Jewels, and in
building sumptuous Temples and Memories for the Martyrs; and also by wicked
men, a false trust is placed in the needless worship of Relics -- And out of
covetousness (says he) false Relics are forged, and feigned Miracles are
published, by which Miracles, the Superstition of the People is nourished, that
they are rather transported into admiration of the Miracles, than provoked to
the imitation of the Saints, or the amendment of Life. But sometimes by the
Craft and Illusion of the Devil, abusing man's superstitious Conceits by Dreams
and Visions, new Relics were revealed, and by his operation Miracles seemed
to be wrought -- Also very many are found, who make merchandise of the Relics
of Saints, whether true or false; so that almost every where, they are carried
about by Pedlers and the vilest of men, and with many Lies are recommended to
the ignorant Vulgar. But since at this day, when every where all places seem to
be full of the Relics of Saints; it is to be feared, that if Bishops and
Princes would take that pains which they ought, in searching out and judging of
true Relics, great and detestable Cheats would be discovered. And after some
other things of the like import, he concludes: Since therefore the true and
known Relics of the Saints, especially in these Provinces, are very few, and
many of those which are shown, may be justly suspected; and since the
frequenting and Veneration of them, does not serve Piety much, but very much
serves Superstition and Gain; it seems much more advisable, that no Relics
should be shown; and that the People should be provoked to worship the true
Relics of the Saints; that is, to imitate the Examples of their Piety and
Virtues, which are extant either in their own Writings, or in the Writings of
others concerning them Consult. Cassand. Art. 20. p. 973.
. To conclude this Head, we reverence the Memories of the Saints, especially of
the ancient Martyrs; and should we meet with any unquestionable Remains of
their Bodies, we should pay more than ordinary respect to them: We bless God
for their exemplary Lives and triumphant Deaths, but we dare not worship them,
and make them our Gods. I proceed now to the next general Head of Corruptions.

3. Corruption of Manners, which at the time of the Reformation, and long
before, was grown to that excess, that the great men of the Church of Rome
before cited, who called for a Reformation, thought it especially necessary in
regard of Manners. And some of them did not stick to publish to the World, that
either the ruin of the Church, or some dismal Plagues were near approaching,
unless prevented by a speedy Reformation in their Morals. This was the main
design of Gerson's Treatise concerning the Signs of the Ruin of the Church. And
I am bold to say, says the Cardinal of Cambray, in the Preface to his Book of
the Reformation of the Church, That although they are great Evils which we see,
yet unless the Church be speedily reformed, we shall in a short time see
incomparably greater; after those horrid thunders we have already heard, we
shall presently hear others that are more horrible. And the Suffragan Bishop of
Saltzburg, having described the Vices of the Roman Court, he concludes; It Is
vehemently to be presumed, and cautiously to be feared, that the Ruin of the
Latin Church, as to its Ecclesiastical Dignity is near Onus Ecclesiae, c. 19.
fol. 36.
.

Nor shall we think it strange that considering men apprehended such dreadful
Evils were approaching, if we consider that this deplorable corruption of
manners was (1.) Universal, in all States and Degrees of Men. (2.) And more
especially in the Clergy. (3.) And most especially in the Pope and Cardinals.


(1.) There was a general corruption of manners, both in the Civil and
Ecclesiastical State. The Cardinal but now mentioned, having recited the sad
complaints S. Bernard made of the corrupt State of the Church in his time, he
further adds: If these things were spoken by blessed Bernard, they may now much
more be said; because since his time, the Church has proceeded from bad to
worse; and in the whole State as well Spiritual as Secular, Virtue being
abandoned, it has fallen into the shame and filthiness of Vice Fascic. rerum
expetend. ac fugiend. fol. 203.
. And supposing all States and Orders to be corrupted, he afterward proceeds
to show, what he thought were the best expedients, both for the Reformation of
the Church in general, and of the head and the several subordinate Members in
particular. Nicolas de Clemangis tells us: That wicked Persons did so much
abound in all professions of men, that scarce one among a thousand was to be
found, who did sincerely live answerable to their Profession; and if there was
any one that was honest, chaste and frugal, and did not follow this lewd kind of
life, he was made a laughing stock to others, and was presently called, either
an insolent and singular madman; or an Hypocrite Sed tanta est improborum in
singulis professionibus exuberantia, ut vix inter mill unus reperiatur, qui id
quod sua Professio exigit, sinceriter f^ciat. Quinetiam si simplex aliquis, si
castus and frugalis in Collegio aliquo vel convent^ latam and lubrican
perditorum vitam non sectetur, fabula ridicula caeteris efficitur, insolensque
and singularis insa^^s aut hypocrita continuo appellatur, etc. Nic. de Clemang.
de corrupto Statu Eccles. c. 25.
. The description of the corrupt manners, of all orders of Men, both in Church
and State, which we find in the book before cited Onus Ecclesiae.
, is so black and tragical, that it can hardly be read without horror: and
that Book was published about the beginning of the Reformation. And the
Cardinal of Lorrain forty years after in his Speech to the Council of Trent,
attributes all the dismal calamities which had befallen the Kingdom of France,
to corruption of Manners, as one principal cause of them Hist. of the Counc. of
Trent. l. 7.
.

(2.) And no wonder that all flesh had corrupted their ways, when the lives of
the Clergy, which should have been the Salt of the World, were themselves more
corrupt and unsavory, than those of the Laity. Cardinal Julian in his Epistle
to Pope Eugenius IV. tells him, That the People were above measure incensed
against the Ecclesiastical State, by the dissolute lives of the Clergy, for
which, says he, it is greatly to be feared, unless they mend their Manners,
lest the Laymen, after the example of the Hussites, fall foul upon the whole
Clergy. And in truth this deformity administers great boldness to the
Bohemians, and gives a fair color to their errors, who especially inveigh
against the filthiness of the Clergy Incitabat me huc venire deformitas and
dissolutio Cleri Alemaniae ex qua laici supra modum irritantur adversus statum
Ecclesi^sticum, propter quod valde timendum est, nisi sise eme^dent, ne laici,
more Hussitarum, in totum irruant Clerum, etc. Richer. Hist. Council. general.
l. 3. c. 2. p. 322, 323.
. The German Bishop before quoted, in the words of Catharine of Sienna, gives
this character of the common Clergy, at the beginning of the Reformation: The
Modern and unhappy Clergy addict themselves to temporal things, being destitute
of Divine light; they love themselves, neglect the love of God, and their
Neighbor; they are worse than wordly Men, whom they destroy together with
themselves. They are addicted to Pleasures and infamous Practices, and neglect
the Salvation of the Souls of Christ's faithful People. By the lives of such
wicked Clergymen, the seculars come to be disobedient and irreverent toward
the Church; they are seduced by blind Guides, who, Oh shame! are ignorant
Idiots, Proud, Covetous, Hypocrites, Simoniacal, Luxurious, Envious, slow to
good Works, prone to Evil, etc. Where at this day can be found that Continence
in Gesture, Diet, apparel, and Laughter, that becomes the Clergy? At Banquets,
Taverns, Plays and Theaters, they are more frequently found, than in places
dedicated to God. How hugely pernicious to the Universal Church, the
Scurrility, Ignorance, Fornication, Simony, and other crimes are, with which
almost the whole Clergy is infected, there is no man doubts Onus Eccles. c. 21.
S. 1.
. Much more may be found of the like import, in the following part of the
Chapter. And Nicolas de Clmeangis, who was himself an Archdeacon in the Church
of Rome, represents the Clergy of that Church, as the dregs and scum of
mankind, as persons who for the generality abandoned themselves to the most
loathsome vices, as may be seen in the Margin Jam illud, obsecro, quale est,
quod plerisque in Dioecesibus, Rectores Parochiarum ex certo and conducto cum
s^is Praelatis pretio, passim and public Concubinas tenent? De corrupto Statu
Ecclesiae, c. 15.

Si quis body desi^iosus est, si quis a labor abhorrers, si quis in otio
luxuriari volens, ad sacerdotium convolat, quo adepto, statim se caeteris
sacerdotibus voluptatum sectatoribus adjungit, qui magis secundum Epicurum quam
Christum viventes, and ca^^onulas sedulo frequentantes, potando, commessando,
p^ansitando, convivando, cum tesseris and pila ludendo, temp^ra tota consu^unt.
Crapulati vero and in^briati pugnant, clamant, tumu^tuantur, nomen Dei and
sanctorum s^orum polutissimis labi^s execrantur, si^que tandem comp^siti ex
meretricum suarum amplexibus, ad Divinum ^^tare veniunt. c. 16.


.

Nor were the inferior Clergy alone, chargeable with these foul immoralities;
but the Prelates were as bad, or worse than the Curates. The Bishops (says the
forementioned Author) serve Onus Ecclesia, c. 20. S. 3.
their own Tables instead of the Altar; they are unwise in Divine things, while
they love the wisdom of the World; they are more employed in the Offices of the
Exchequer, than in the Works of Christ; they adorn their Bodies with Gold, they
defile their Souls with Impurity; they account it a shame to employ themselves
in spiritual matters, and their Glory is to meddle with those things that are
scurrilous. Hence it is said by Catharine of Sienna; they as men that are
blinded, reckon that to be their Honor, that is truly their shame; contrary to
the Canons, they keep about themselves, Pimps, Bawds, Flatterers, Buffoons;
such as give themselves wholly to Vanity, instead of men that are Learned, and
of good report. And a little after: The Bishops neglect due Hospitality, by
neglecting the Poor of Christ, by making themselves fat, by feeding Dogs and
other Beasts,. 9.
and so one Beast feeds another; as if they chose to be of the number of those,
against whom the Lord will pronounce that just sentence, I was poor and ye
received me not, therefore depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire.
There are few Bishops who are not covetous, they take by violence other men's
Goods, and wastfully spend the Goods of the Church; they bestow the revenues of
the Church, not to pious uses, but upon their Kindred, upon Stage Players,
Flatterers, Huntsmen, Whores, and such like Persons; they rather make provision
for the wickedness of Men, than for the necessities of Nature, etc.

This was the complaint of a Popish Bishop in the year 1519. And that the
matter was not much mended with the Romish Clergy more than forty years after,
appears by the speech of the Duke of Bavaria's Ambassador to the Council of
Trent; In which he tells the Council, that the cause of the evils that were
risen among them, was the bad life of the Clergy, whose wickedness was so
great, that he could not relate it, without offending the chaste ears of the
Auditory Hist of the Counc of Trent, l. 6. p. 527.
.

Though it may seem strange that the Clergy, who by their very Calling are
obliged to exemplary Purity and Holiness, should be so monstrously vicious, yet
the wonder will be the less, if we consider,

(3.) That the vicious lives of the Popes and Cardinals were indeed the main
source of that deluge of wickedness, in which the inferior Clergy was
immersed. We can desire no better proof of this than the confession of Pope
Adrian VI. in his instructions to his Legate for the Diet at Nuremberg in the
year 1522. Thou shall promise, says he, that we will use our utmost endeavors,
first that this Court may be reformed, from whence perhaps all this evil has
proceeded; that as from thence the corruption flowed to all inferiors, so from
thence the health and reformation of all may proceed Sleidan. Comment. l. 4.
History of the Council of Trent, l. 1. Richer. Hist. Council. general. l. 4.
part 2. p. 129.
. This was a rare confession from a Pope, but no more than what the necessity
of the thing extorted from him.

For the Cardinals were by degrees arrived to such an excess of Pride and
Luxury, as was odious and intolerable to all but themselves, and those whose
vices were supported by them. If a man would make an image of Pride (says
Clemangis,) he can no way do it more to the life, than by representing a
Cardinal to the eyes of the Beholders Jam vero Cardinalium qui Pap^ assident
spiritus, verba tumentia, gestus tam insolentes, ut si Artifex quisque vellet
superbiae simulachrum effingere, nulla congruentius ratione id facere posset,
quam Cardinalis effigiem oculis intuentium objectando. De corrupto Statu
Eccles. c. 10.
. They trampled upon Bishops who were their Betters, nor would they vouchsafe
so much as to salute them, when they fell prostrate upon the ground to worship
them; which is more than any King ever assumed Nec pro quocunque Praelato etiam
prono adorante eos in terra ponerent manum ad capellum, ut salutarent eum: quod
nunquam aliquis Rex aut Princeps fecit, neque hodie permitteret. Responsio
Apologet. Gallicanae Nationis de Annat. non solvend. apud Richer. l. 2. c. 3.
. One of themselves (more modest than the rest) when he returned home laden
with the Spoils of Germany, being asked in Consistory, what the Barbarians (so
they called the Germans) thought of Rome, which was so kind as to send them
those choice Wares of Indulgences, answered; That the whole World complained of
the Pride and Luxury of the Cardinals Totum orbem conqueri de luxu fastuque
Cardinalium. Fascic. Rerum expetend. ac fugiend. fol. 203.
. And can any man think there was not just cause for this complaint, who will
but consider, what vast Revenues were spent upon their Lusts? For not two or
three, or ten or twenty Benefices would suffice; but a hundred or two hundred,
yea sometimes four or five hundred or more, were usurped by one Cardinal; and
those not of the poorer sort, but the fattest and richest of all. And well had
it been, says our Author, for the inferior Clergy, had they been content with
that prodigious number, but the great mischief was, that nothing would satisfy
them, but how great a number soever they had, they still more vehemently
coveted more Non quidem duo vel tria, december vel viginti, sed centena and
ducentena, and interdum usque ad quadringenta vel quingenta aut amplius. Nec
parva and tenuia, sed omnium pinguissima and optima, quibus si contenti essent,
postquam ad summam illam numerosam perventum est, nec ultra quaererent*
prospere cum pauperibus Clericis, qui reliquias earum expectant, ageretur: Sed
quantumcunq^^ ad numerum aut summam venerint, ad ^mptiorem festinant, and
assidue festinant, and ardentius festinant. De Cor. Statu Eccles. c. 11.
.

Nor shall we think it strange, to hear of such Cardinals, when we consider
what manner of men the Popes themselves commonly were. We need not look back to
foregoing Ages, in which their own Historians tell us, they were Monsters and
Prodigies H^c monstra, haec Portenta. Plat. in vita Benedicti IV.
; Such tragical Examples, and so devoid of all Piety, as neither to regard the
Person they sustained, nor the place they were in Non possum non multum mirari,
unde tragica haec Pontificum fluxerint exempla, quam dira pietatis oblivio
eorum mentes irrepserit, ut neque personae quam sustinebant ratio ab his ulla
haberetur, neque loci quem tenebant. Sabellic. Ennead. 9. l. 1.
; that about fifty Popes together, did utterly degenerate from the Virtue of
their Ancestors Hoc vero uno infelix quod per annos fere 150. Pontifices
circiter quinquaginta a virtute Majorum prorsus defecerint. Genebrard.
Chronograph. l. 4.
. But passing over these, let us only consider what the Popes were, about the
time of the Reformation, when the World was now grown weary of the burden of
Vice, and groaned to be delivered from it; when (if ever) their worldly
Interest engaged them to put on the show, how much soever they abhorred the
Reality, of Virtue.

When after the death of Innocent VIII. Lionel Bishop of Concordia, in an
Oration to the Cardinals, pressed them with the most rowsing Arguments, to
choose a good man, whose Life was without Scandal Raynald, an. 1492.
. What was the effect? Alexander VI. was chosen, a man (if he may be so called)
who was the Reproach of humane Nature; who before he was chosen Pope, was a
Prodigy of Lust and other Vices; and continued so to the last, when by the just
Judgment of God, he was poisoned by a mistake, in drinking that Cup himself,
which he had prepared to dispatch others Quos gemitus Christianorum, vita
prodigiosa and spurcissima gesta Alexand. VI. abundantius and ita quidem
excivit, etc. Richer. l. 4. part 1. c. 2. S. 1. Cum Alexand. VI. PP. anno 1503.
Veneno quod aliis paraverat, de improviso extinctus. Id. S. 3.
.

Pius III. lived not long enough to let the World know what he would prove, for
he died within six and twenty days after his Election.

Julius II. who succeeded him, his Crimes (as Lewis XII. King of France tells
us) were notorious, and such as scandalized the whole Church Vide Edict. Reg.
Gall. pro Convocat. Council. Pisani.
. It Is certain, he filled Italy with Rapines, War and Blood; to which he was so
addicted, that contrary to the Laws of Nations, he commanded the Procurator of
the Duke of Savoy to be tortured, because he endeavored to persuade him to
Peace Richer. Hist. Conc. general. l. 4. par. 1. p. 151.
. So monstrous were his Acts, that Richerius says, he must be wholly made of
Steel, who can read them without horror -- Nisi ob gesta Julii obstupueris,
totus, quidem eris ferreus. p. 150. Sup. l.
.

Pope Leo X. (in whose time the Reformation began), was a civil debonair
Gentleman; but so little concerned for Religion, that he cared not to know what
it meant History of the Council of Trent, l. 1.
. When he admitted Discourses of that nature, it was for diversion sake, and to
make himself sport. His Soul, he thought, was no longer-liv'd than his Body,
and therefore he gave himself up to sensual Gratifications; and 'twas indeed
but reason, that he who supposed he should die like a Beast, should live like
an Epicure.

Adrian VI. promised fair, but God alone knows, in case he had lived, whether
his performances would have answered his Promises.

Clem^nt VII. as he got the Popedom by Simony History of the Council of Trent,
l. 1.
, so he administered it by as ill Arts as he got it: His prime Virtue was
Dissimulation; he made no conscience of his Word or Oath, but brake his
Covenants as often as he made them.

Paul III. and Julius III. who followed next, the Characters given of them by
many of the Romish Writers, are so foul and loathsome, that if I had the face
to write them, no modest man could read them without blushing.

4. I should now proceed to the last general Head of Corruptions, viz.
Corruptions in Discipline. But because that is so large a Subject, that it is
better to say nothing, than a little concerning it; and because this Discourse
is already swelled beyond the bounds prescribed; and because what has been
said upon the foregoing Heads, is more than enough to evince the necessity of
Reformation: I shall therefore refer the Reader, for satisfaction in this
Matter, to the History of the Council of Trent, written by Father Paul; the
Review of the Council of Trent; Mr. Gerson's Sermon before Pope Alexander V.
and his Declarat. Defect. viror. Ecclesiast. Clemangis's Tracts de Corrupto
Statu Eccles. and de Reparat. and Ruina Eccles. the hundred Grievances of the
German Nation; Espencaeus's Comment on the first Chapter of the Epistle to
Titus; the Appeal of the University of Paris from Pope Leo X. the Articles of
Reformation proposed by the select Council to Pope Paul III. The twenty Points
of Reformation proposed by the Emperors Ambassadors to the Council of Trent,
and the four and thirty proposed by the Ambassadors of the King of France.
Richerius his History of General Councils, etc.

ERRATA.
PAge 16. l. 4. dele or less. p. 24. l. 35. for Eleutherius read Anicetus. p.
41. l. 2. after to conclude this, put a Colon; and l. 3. after Considerations a
Comma. Margin for (...); read (...). p. 56. l. 11. after shame put a Semicolon;
after Canons a Comma.

FINIS.

