EIGHT CASES OF Conscience Occasionally Determined BY The late Reverend Father
in god, ROBERT SANDERSON, Lord Bishop of LINCOLN.

HEB. XI 4. He Being Dead, yet speaks.

LONDON Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in St Paul's Church Yard 1673



EIGHT CASES OF Conscience: Occasionally Determined BY The late Reverend Father
in GOD, ROBERT SANDERSON, Lord Bishop of LINCOLN.

HEB. xi. 4. He being Dead, yet speaks.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom, James Collins and Christopher Wilkinson. 1674.

A LETTER from a Friend concerning the ensuing CASES.
SIR,
HAving perused the Papers you sent me, I can safely vouch them for Genuine,
and not in the least Spurious, by that resemblance they wear of their Reverend
Author; and therefore you need not fear to bring them to the Public Test, and
let them look the Sun in the face.

It Is true, their first Commission was but short, and long since expired, they
being designed only to visit and respectively satisfy some private Friends;
yet I cannot see what injury you will offer to his sacred ashes, if, by
renewing that, you send them on a little farther Embassy for the common good.

Indeed the least remains of so matchless a Champion, so invincible an Advocate
in foro Theologico, like the filings and fragments of Gold, ought not to be
lost; and pity the world was not worthy many more of his learned Labors.

But -- Praestat de Carthagine tacere quam pauca dicere, far be it from me to
^pinion the wings of his Fame, with any rude Letters of Commendation; or, by
way of precarious Pedantry, to court any man into a belief of his worth, since
that were to attempt Iliads after Homer, and spoil a Piece done already to the
life by his own Pencil, the works whereof do sufficiently praise him in the
gates

All I aim at is, to commend and promote your pious intention, to give the
world security, by making these Papers public, that they shall never hereafter
stand in need of any other hand to snatch them out of the fire, a doom (you
say) once written upon them.

I have no farther trouble to give you, but to thank you for those excellent
Pieces of the same Hand and Stamp (as every Intelligent Reader will easily
discern) with which as an accession to this Edition, your Care and Piety has
obliged the Public: Only again let me bespeak your vigilance over the Press,
which by her daily teeming and expertness, or (at least) negligence of the
Midwife, is wont of late to spoil good births with monstrous deformities, and
unpardonable Errata; so you will avoid a double guilt contracted by some
without fear or wit, of abusing your critical Reader on the one hand, and your
most judiciously exact Writer on the other; and (if that may contribute any
thing more) very much gratify the most unworthy of his Admirers.

The Eight Cases Determined.
I. Of the Sabbath 1 II. Of Marrying with a Recusant 20 III. Of Unlawful Love
30 IV. Of a Military Life 59 V. Of Scandal 94 VI. Of a Bond taken in the King's
Name 101 VII. Of the Engagement 107 VIII. Of a Rash Vow 134
Imprimatur,

John Hall, R.P.D. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domestic.
May 30. 1665.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 7. read not at all, p. 6. l. penult. dele so long as, p. 15. l.
12. r. change, p. 2. l. ult. r. with, p. 23. l. 16. r. she, ibid. l. 22. r. it
is, p. 32, l. 4. r. unto, p. 42. l. 24. dele of, p. 43. l. 10. r. married, p.
45. l. 21. r. sayings, ibid. l. 24. r. muta, p. 51. l. 7. r. Premises. p. 52.
l. 9. r. to whom, ibid. l. 25. r. should, p. 53. l. 23. r. with all, p. 56. l.
12. r. happily, p. 57. l. 23. r. herself. ibid. l. ult. r. he, p. 67. l. 3. r.
does but, p. 72. l. 12. r. artis, ibid. l. 17. r. nearer, p. 84. l. 19. r.
mediations, p. 86. l. 11. r. a Prince, ibid. l. 26. after right; add belongs
to him; and another to assume a power that of right, p. 96. l. 23. r. or what
means, p. 99. l. 5. for to r. do, p. 106. l. 7. r. whereunto, p. 107. l. ult.
dele in, p. 119. l. 13. dele to, p. 120. l. 23. dele the, p. 136. l. 19. r.
makes, p. 137. l. 4. r. parts, p. 141. l. 21. r. voideth, p. 142. l. 6. r.
place.

The Case of the Sabbath.
To My very Loving Friend Mr. Tho. Sa. at S. B. Nottingh. March 28. 1634.
SIR,
WHen by your former Letter, you desired my present Resolution in two Questions
therein proposed concerning the Sabbath: although I might not then satisfy
your whole desire (being loath to give in my opinion before I had well weighed
it) yet that I might not seem altogether to decline the task imposed on me by
you, I engaged my self by promise, within short time, to send you what upon
further consideration I should conceive thereof. Which promise, so far as my
many distractions and occasions would permit, I endeavored to perform by
perusing the Books you sent me, (in the one whereof, I found written on the
spare paper with your hand, a Note moving a third Question, about the Name of
the Sabbath also;) and by looking up, and reviewing such scattered Notes as I
had touching that Subject. But then I met with difficulties so many and great
(whereof the more I considered, the more still I found them to increase) that I
saw it would be a long work, and take up far more time then I could spare, to
digest and enlarge what seemed needful to be said in the three Questions in
such sort as was requisite, to give any tolerable satisfaction either to my
self or others. Wherefore I was eftsoons minded to have excused my self by
Letter to you, from farther meddling with these Questions, and to have remitted
you over for better satisfaction to those men, that have both better leisure to
go about such a business, and better abilities to go through with it than I
have; for to questions of importance, better nothing be said, than not enough:
And the rather was I minded so to do, when I perceived there were rumors spread
in these parts, (occasioned, as I verily suppose, by some speeches of your good
friend Mr. Tho. A.) as if I were writing a Treatise of the morality of the
Sabbath. Which besides that, it might raise an expectation of some great
matters which I could in no wise answer; it might also expose that little I
should have done to the mis-censures of men wedded to their own opinions, if
after I had laid mine open, it should have happened in any thing (as in some
things like enough it would) to have disagreed from theirs. Yet, because by
your late kind Letter, (wherein, whilst I was slack in making it, you have
prevented mine excuse,) I perceive the continuance of your former desire; I
have therefore since resolved to do somewhat, though not so much as I first
intended, hoping that you will in friendly manner interpret my purpose therein.
I have therefore now sent you but a naked summary of my thoughts concerning the
three Questions, abstracted from all those Explanations, Reasons, Testimonies
of Authors, removals of Objections, and other such Enlargements as might have
given further both luster and strength thereunto.

Howsoever, by what I presently send, you may sufficiently see what my opinion
is; which I shall be ready to clear, so far as my understanding will serve, in
any particular wherein you shall remain doubtful; and as ready to alter when
any man shall instruct me better, if he bring good evidence either of Reason,
or of Scripture-Text for what he affirms: The Questions are,

1. Which is the fittest Name whereby to call the day of our Christian
weekly-rest? whether the Sabbath, the Lord's Day, or Sunday?

2. What is the meaning of that Prayer appointed to be used in our Church; [
Lord have Mercy upon us, and incline, etc.] as it is repeated after, and
applied to the words of the fourth Commandment?

3. Whether it be lawful to use any bodily recreation upon the Lord's Day? and
if so, then what kind of Recreations may be used?

I. Concerning the Name Sabbatum, or Sabbath, I thus conceive;

1. That in Scripture, Antiquity, and all Ecclesiastical Writers, it is
constantly appropriated to the day of the Jews Sabbath, or Saturday; and not at
all (till of late years) used to signify our Lord's Day, or Sunday.

2. That to call Sunday, by the name of the Sabbath Day, ( rebus sic stantibus)
may for sundry respects be allowed in the Christian Church without any great
inconveniency: and that therefore men (otherwise sober and moderate) ought not
to be censured with too much severity, neither charged with Judaism, if
sometimes they so speak.

3. That yet for sundry other respects it were perhaps much more expedient, if
the word Sabbath (in that notion) were either not all, or else more sparingly
used.

II. Concerning the name Dominica, or the Lord's Day:

1. That it was taken up in memory of our Lord Christ's Resurrection, and the
great work of our Redemption accomplished therein.

2. That it has warrant from the Scripture, ( Apoc. 1.10.) and has been of
long continued use in the Christian Church, to signify the first day of the
week, or Sunday.

III. Concerning the name Dies Solis, or Sunday.

1. That it is taken from the courses of the Planets, as the names of the other
days are: the reason whereof is to be learned from Astronomers.

2. That it has been used generally, and of long time, in most parts of the
World.

3. That it is not justly chargeable with Heathenism; and that it proceeds
from much weakness at the least, (if not rather superstition) that some men
condemn the use of it, as profane, heathenish, or unlawful.

IV. Of the fitness of the aforesaid three names compared one with another.

1. That according to the several matter or occasions of speech, each of the
three may be fitter in some respect, and more proper to be used than either of
the other two; As, viz.

1. The Name Sabbath: when we speak of a time of rest indeterminate, and in
general, without reference to any particular day: and the other two, when we
speak determinately of that day which is observed in the Christian Church. Of
which two again.

2. That of the Lord's Day is fitter, in the Theological and Ecclesiastical;
and,

3. That of Sunday, in the civil, popular, and common use.

2. Yet so as that none of the three be condemned as utterly unlawful,
whatsoever the matter or occasion be, but that every man be left to his
Christian liberty herein, so long as so long as superior Authority does not
restrain it. Provided ever, that what he does herein, he do it without vanity
or affectation in himself, or without uncharitably judging or despising his
Brother that does otherwise than himself does.

To the second Question.
V. The words of that Prayer, [ Lord have mercy, etc.] repeated after the
fourth Commandment, do evidently import, as they do in each of the other ten.

1. An acknowledgment of three things, viz.

1. That the words of that particular Commandment contain in them a Law,
whereunto we are subject.

2. That it is our bounden duty to endeavor with our uttermost power to keep
the said Law.

3. That our naughty hearts have (of themselves) no inclination to keep it,
until God, by the work of his Grace, shall incline them thereunto.

2. A double supplication, viz.

1. For mercy, in respect of the time past, because we have failed of our
bounden duty heretofore.

2. For Grace, in respect of the time to come, that we may perform our duties
better hereafter.

VI. But how far forth the words of the fourth Commandment are to be taken as a
Law binding Christians, and by what authority they have that binding power, is
the main difficulty.

For the resolution whereof, it may suffice every sober minded Christian, to
understand the Prayer appointed by the Church, in that meaning which the words
do immediately import, and without overcurious inquiry into those things that
are more disputable, to believe these few points following, which ought to be
taken as certain and granted amongst Christians; viz.

1. That no part of the Law delivered by Moses to the Jews, does bind
Christians under the Gospel, as by virtue of that delivery; no, not the ten
Commandments themselves, but least of all the fourth, which all confess to be
(at least) in some part Ceremonial.

2. That the particular determination of the time to the seventh day of the
week, was Ceremonial. And so the obligation of the fourth Commandment in that
respect, (although it were Iuris divini positivi to the Jew, yet) is ceased
together with other legal Ceremonies since the publishing of the Gospel, and
binds not Christian Consciences.

3. That the substance of the fourth Commandment in the general, ( viz. that
some certain time should be set apart from secular employments, to be
sanctified to an holy rest, for the better attending upon God's public and
solemn worship) is moral and perpetual, and of Divine right, as a branch of the
Law of Nature, whereunto Christians under the Gospel are still bound.

4. That de facto, the Lord's Day, or Sunday, is the time appointed to us for
that purpose by such sufficient Authority, as we stand bound in Conscience to
obey: absque hoc, whether that Authority be immediately Divine, or but
mediately through the power of the Church.

This is sufficient to regulate the judgment and Conscience of every ordinary
Christian; yet is it not unlawful for Scholars (soberly and fairly) to argue
and debate a little farther matte^s which are questionable, for the better
finding out of the Truth.

And the points in this Argument that are most in controversy, are these two,
viz.

1. Concerning the observation of a weekly Sabbath; whether it be of necessity
to keep one day of every seven? And by what right we are tied so to do?

2. Concerning the change of the Jewish Sabbath into the Lord's Day; and by
what Authority it was done.

VII. As touching the observation of a weekly Sabbath; there are these three
different opinions, viz.

1. That it is de jure naturali, as a branch properly of the Law of Nature.

2. That it is properly and directly de jure divino positivo; established by
God's express positive Ordinance in his Word.

3. That it is merely de jure humano and Ecclesiastico; introduced by
Authority, and established by the custom and consent of the Catholic Church.

Touching which three opinions, I leave it to the judicious to consider.

1. Whether the last of them might not hap to be of evil consequence, by
leaving i^ in the power of the Church, at her pleasure to change the old
proportion of one in seven, (which has continued ever since the days of
Moses) into any other greater o^ lesser proportion of time?

2. Whether the two former opinions (though they do indeed avoid that
inconvenience) do not yet stand upon such weak grounds otherwise, that they are
by many degrees more improbable than the third?

3. Whether a fourth opinion going in a middle way, might not be proposed with
greater probability, and entertained with better safety than any of the former
three? viz. That the keeping holy of one day in seven, is of Divine positive
right, taking jus divinum in a large signification: not for that only which is
primarily, properly, and directly such, according to the tenor of the second
opinion; but including withal that which is Secondarily, Consequently, and
Analogically such.

VIII. For the better understanding whereof, we are to consider;

1. That those things are de jure divino in the first and strict sense: which
either,

1. Are enjoined by the express Ordinance and Commandment of God in his holy
Word; or else,

2. May be deduced therefrom by necessary, evident, and demonstrative illation.

In which sense, there are not many things de jure divino under the New
Testament.

2. That for a thing to be de jure divino in the latter and larger sense, it
suffices that it may be by humane Discourse upon reasons of Congruity probably
deduced from the Word of God, as a thing most convenient to be observed by all
such as desire unfeignedly to order their ways according to God's holy Will.

3. That this kind of Ius divinum may be reasonably discerned by the
concurrence of all, or the chiefest of these four things following, viz.

1. A foundation of Equity for the thing in general, either in the Law of
Nature, or by virtue of Divine Institution.

2. An Analogy held for the particular determination, with such Laws and
directions as were given to the Jewish people in the Old Testament, so far as
the reason of Equity holds alike.

3. Some probable insinuations thereof in the Scriptures of the New Testament.

4. The continued practice of the Christian Church, so far as the condition of
the times in the several Ages thereof would permit. For, Lex currit cum praxi.

4. That all these do in some measure concur for the observation of a weekly
Sabbath; as upon the examination of the several particulars will easily appear.

IX. This distinction of Ius divinum is to be observed the rather, because it
may be of very good use, (if rightly understood and applied.)

1. For cutting off the most material instances, which are usually brought by
the Romish Party for the maintenance of their unwritten Traditions.

2. For the clearing of some, and the silencing of other some Controversies in
the Church, which are disputed pro and con with much heat; as, viz. concerning,

1. The Government of the Church by Bishops.

2. The Distinction of Bishops, Priests and Deacons.

3. The Exercise of Ecclesiastical Censures, as Suspension, Excommunication,
etc.

4. The Building and Consecrating of Churches for the service of God.

5. The assembling of Synods upon needful occasions, for the maintenance of the
Truth, and for the settling of Church Affairs.

6. The forbidding of Marriages to be made within certain degrees of
Consanguinity and A^finity.

7. The Baptizing of Infants born of Christian Parents.

8. The maintenance of the Clergy by the Tithes of the people, and sundry other
things: none of all which (to my understanding) seem to be de jure divino in
that first and proper sense; but yet all (or most) of them to be de jure divino
in this latter and larger signification.

3. For the right bounding of the Churches power, that she be neither denied
her lawful liberty in some things, nor yet assume to her self a greater power
than of right belongs unto her in other some. For,

1. In things that are merely de jure humano; every particular Church has
power in her self from time to time, to order, and alter them at her pleasure,
and may exercise that power when she thinks fit.

2. Things that are de jure divino in that first sense, the Universal Church
may not (and much less then may any particular) at all take upon her to alter,
but must observe them inviolably, whatsoever necessities or distresses she be
put unto.

3. Things that are de jure divino in this latter sense; every particular
Church (but much more the Universal) has a power to alter in a case of
necessity: But the exercise of that Power is so limited to extraordinary cases,
that it may not be safe for her at all to exercise it; unless it be for the
avoiding of mighty inconveniences, not otherwise to be avoided.

X. As for the other controversed Point, touching the change of the day, from
the last day of the week, or Saturday, (which was the Jews Sabbath) to the
first day of the week, or Sunday, which is our Lord's Day: My opinion is, that
the observation of the Lord's Day among Christians instead of the Jewish
Sabbath,

1. Is not grounded upon any commandment given by Christ to his Apostles.

2. Nor yet upon any Apostolical Constitution given by the Apostles unto the
Churches in that behalf. But,

3. That it was taken up by the succeeding Church; partly in imitation of some
of the Apostles, who used (especially in the Churches of the Gentiles; for in
the Churches of Judea the old Sabbath was still observed) to Celebrate their
Holy Assemblies upon the first day of the week, in the honor of Christ and his
Resurrection; and partly for the avoiding of Judaism, wherewith false Teachers
in those first times were ever and anon attempting to enthral the Christian
Church.

4. That the observation of the Lord's Day, having been confirmed by so many
Constitutions both Ecclesiastical and Imperial, and having withal continued
with such uniform consent throughout the whole Christian World, for so many
Ages ever since the Apostles times; the Church (not to dispute what she may or
may not do in plenitudine potestatis, yet) ought not to attempt the altering of
it to any other day of the week.

To the third Question.
XI. In this matter touching Recreations to be used on the Lord's Day, much need
not be said, there being little difficulty in it, and His Majesty's last
Declaration in that behalf having put it past Disputation. I say then,

1. For the Thing. That no man can reasonably condemn the moderate use of
lawful Recreations upon the Lord's Day, as simply, and de toto genere unlawful.

2. For the Kind. Albeit there can be no certain rules given herein, (as in
most indifferent things it comes to pass) by reason of the infinite variety of
^^rcumstances, to fit with all particular cases, but that still much must be
left to private discretion: yet for some directions in this matter, respect
would be had in the choice of our Recreations.

1. To the Public Laws of the State. Such games or sports as are by Law
prohibited, (though in themselves otherwise lawful) being unlawful to them that
are under the obedience of the Law.

2. To the condition of the Person. VValking and discoursing with men of
liberal Education, is a pleasant recreation; it is no way delightsom to the
ruder sort of people, who scarce account any thing a sport which is not loud
and boisterous.

3. To the effects of the Recreations themselves. Those being the me^test to be
used, which give the best refreshing to the body, and leave the least
impression in the mind. In which respect, Shooting, Leaping, Pitching the Bar,
Stool-ball, etc. are rather to be chosen than Dicing, Carding, etc.

3. For the Use. That men would be exhorted to use their Recreations and
Pastimes upon the Lord's Day in godly and commendable sort. For which purpose,
amongst others, these cautions following would be remembered.

1. That they be used with great moderation (as at all other times, so
especially, and much more) upon the Lord's Day.

2. That they be used at seasonable times, not in time of Divine Service, nor
at such hours as are appointed by the Master of the house whereunto they
belong, for Private Devotions within his own house. His Majesty's Declaration
limiteth men's liberty this way, till after Even-song be ended.

3. That they be so used, as that they may rather make men the fitter for God's
Service the rest of the day, and for the works of their Vocations the rest of
the week, than any way hinder or disable them thereunto, by over-wearying the
body, or immoderately affecting the mind.

4. That they use them not doubtingly, for whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.
He therefore that is not satisfied in his own judgment, that he may lawfully,
and without sin, use bodily recreations on the Lord's Day, ought by all means
to forbear the use thereof, lest he should sin against his own Conscience.

5. That they be severer toward themselves than toward other men in the use
of their Christian liberty herein, not making their own opinion or practice a
rule to their brethren. In this, as in all indifferent things, a wise and
charitable man will in godly wisdom deny himself many times the use of that
liberty, which in godly charity he dare not deny to his Brother.

The CASE of Marrying with a Recusant.
SIR,
YOurs of July the 2d. I Yesterday July the 6th. received. In Answer to the
Contents whereof (desi^ing that my Services may withal be most humbly presented
to my very much Honored Lord) I return you what my pr^sent thoughts are
concerning the particulars therein proposed. First, for Marrying a Daughter to
a professed Papist (considered in Thesi, and as to the point of Lawfulness
only) I am so far from thinking the thing in it self to be simply, and tot^
genere, unlawful; that I dare not condemn the Marriage of a Christian with a
Pagan (much less with any other Christian, of how different Persuasion soever)
as simply evil and unlawful, inasmuch as there be Causes imaginable, wherein it
may seem not only Lawful, but expedient also, and (as the exigence of
Circumstances may be supposed) little less than necessary so to inter-marry But
since things lawful in the General, and in Thesi, may become (by reason of
their inexpediency) unl^wful pro hic and nu^c, and in Hypothe^i to particular
persons; and that the expediency or inexpediency of any action to be done, is
to be measured by the worthiness of the end, the conjuncture of present
Circumstances, and the probability of good or evil consequents and effects,
prudentially laid together, and weighed one against another; I conceive it
altogether unsafe for a Conscienc^ous person (especially in a business of so
great concernment, as the Marrying of a Child) to proceed upon the General
Lawfulness of the thing, without due consideration of Circumstances, and other
requisites for the warranting of particular Actions. Now, as for the Marriage
of a Daughter with one of so different Persuasion (in point of Religion) as,
that they cannot join together in the same way of God's Worship, which is the
case of a Protestant and a Papist, it is very rare to find such a concurrence
of Circumstances, as that a man can thence be clearly satisfied in his Judgment
(without just cause of doubting the contrary) that it can be expedient to
conclude upon such a Marriage; and how dangerous a thing it is to do any thing
without a doubting Conscience, we may learn from Romans 14.13.. For the evil
consequents probably to ensue upon such Marriages, are so many and great, that
the conveniences which men may promise to themselves from the same (if they
should answer expectation, as seldom they do to the full) laid in an equal
balance there-against, would not turn the scale; and in one respect the danger
is greater to marry with a Papist, than with one of a worse Religion; for that
the main Principle of his Religion, (as a Papist) is more destructive of the
comfort of a Conjugal Society, than are the Principles of most Heretics; yea,
than those of Pagans, or Atheists; for holding that there is no Salvability but
in the Church; and that none is in the Church, but such as acknowledge
Subjection to the Sea of Rome; it is not possible, but that the Husband must
needs conclude his Wife to be in the state of Damnation, so long as she
continues Protestant: whence one of these two great inconveniences will
unavoidably follow; that either he will use all endeavors, engines, and
artifices, to draw her to the Church of Rome, (as indeed who can blame him to
bring his Wife into a capacity of everlasting Salvation?) the restless
importunity whereof (together with the ill advantages they of that party can
make from the sad Confusions that are amongst us in these times) it will be
very hard for one of the weaker ^ex perpetually to resist; or else in case she
stand firm in her Religion against all Assaults and Attempts to the contrary,
whatsoever he may be toward her in outward carriage, he cannot but in his
inmost thoughts, pass judgment upon her, as an obstinate and desperate
Heretic, and (so living and dying) an accursed and damned Creature. These are
sad things both; and it is not conceivable how a Woman so matched should live
with any comfort, or ever hope to see a good day, wherein ^he shall not either
be tempted from her Religion, or censured for it; what assurance can she have
of his good affections toward her, who is bound not to permit any better
opinion of her, than of a Reprobate and Cast-a-way? Is it possible there may be
so much good nature in the Husband, as to take off somewhat from that
rigidness, which otherwise the Principles of his Religion would bind him to, or
so much discretion, sweetness, and obligingness in the Wives demeanor toward
him, as to preserve a good measure of Conjugal Affection between them,
notwithstanding their different Persuasions: This I say, is possible; and where
it happens so to be, it rendereth the condition of the Parties so much the
less uncomfortable; and that is the utmost of the happiness that is to be hoped
for from such Marriages: and I think there cannot be produced ma^y examples
thereof; yet even there, there cannot be that cordial Affection, and fullness of
Complacency (wherein yet the chiefest happiness of Conjugal Society consists)
that would be, if the same Parties (supposed to be of the same Qualifications
otherwise) were also of the same Religion. I omit other oeconomical
differences, that may, and very frequently do (occasionally) arise, betwixt
Husband and Wife from this difference in Religion, as concerning the
Entertainment of Friends, the choice of Servants the education of Children
(very considerable things all) besides sundry others perhaps of less moment;
yet such as are apt to breed Discontents and Jealousies, and sometimes break
out into great Distempers in the Family: Such Marriages therefore I should
utterly dissuade; especially in the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty, where
there is choice enough otherwise to be had of Persons of equal Degree, Estate,
and Education of the same Religion to match withal: Kings and Princes for
reasons of State, and because there is little choice of Persons of equal
Dignity with themselves, are therefore oftentimes by a kind of necessity, put
upon such Marriages; yet even there, where they are certainly the most
excusable, it has been observed, that such Marriages have proved for the most
part unfortunate.

The other Particular proposed in your Letter, is concerning the Marriage of a
Daughter to one that profe^^eth the Protestant Religion, but having had Popish
Parents, may be suspected (though he deny it) to be that way inclined. The
resolution whereof (as of most other Cases, and Practical Questions) will
depend very much upon the consideration of Circumstances, whereunto being
altogether a stranger, I am less able to give Judgment in the Case with any
certainty; only in order to the resolution of the question, these (to my
understanding) seem to be the most proper and important Enquiries.

First, whether the Parents of the young Person be living or no, one or both?
if both be dead, the Temptations from them (which in such Cases are wont to
prevail very much) are by their Death clearly superseded; and then the danger
is by so much less: but if either be living, there can be little security of
the Sons continuance in the Protestants Belief, (notwithstanding his present
Profession thereof) when he shall be assaulted with the whole Authority of
them, to whom he owes Reverence.

Secondly, with what degree of Confidence, and with what kind of asseverations
he professes the one, and denies the other Religion; for although they out of
design put on a counterfeit vizor, use all the art they can to dissemble it;
yet very seldom can it be done so cunningly, warily, and constantly, but that
at some time or other, the dissimulation will unawares bewray it self to the
eye of a curious observer.

Thirdly, what measure of understanding the young Person (who is, you say, of
great Abilities for his Age) has in the Fundamental Articles of the Christian
Religion; those I mean, wherein the English and Romish Churches are at
agreement, for in those the substance of Christianity consists; he that
rightly understands those Catholic Truths taught in the Catechisms of both
Churches, and concerning which all Christendom (in a manner) are at a perfect
accord; and then will but suffer himself to consider, that the Church of
England does not impose upon the judgments and consciences of her Members, any
thing to be believed, or received, as of necessity to Salvation, than what is
truly Catholic, and by her Adversaries confessed so to be; and consequently,
that the difference betwixt her and the Romish Party, is wholly about those
Additionals or Superstructures, which they of the Roman Faith require to be
believed, and received with like necessity as the former; but appear to us of
this Church respectively, either evidently false, or of doubtful truth, or not
of absolute necessity to be believed: I say, whosoever well considers this,
may rest satisfied in his judgment and conscience, that the Faith taught and
professed in the Church of England, is a plain and safe way to lead a Christian
Believer to Eternal Salvation, if he withal lead his life and conversation
answerable thereunto.

To the last particular in your Letter, all the return I have to make, is no
more but an humble acknowledgment and sense of his Lordships noble favors
toward me, in entertaining an opinion of me more suitable to his own goodness
and ingenuity, than to my merit: I know not, nor desire to know of any
occasions likely to draw me into those parts so distant from me (being grown
into years, and infirmities, that render me very unfit for long Journeys)
unless the business of my Sons Marriage, which occasioned my late Journey to
London, require a second thither in Michaelmas Term. But I am so sensible both
of the trouble and charge of such Journeys (besides some inconveniences to my
affairs at home, whilst I am long absent) that I will avoid it, unless there be
no other remedy: I shall not willingly decline any employment (within my low
and narrow sphere, both of outward condition and parts) wherein my service may
be any ways useful, or but acceptable, to that noble and excellent Person: but
truly Sir, I conceive there will be little need of my further endeavors, as to
that particular expressed in yours, whether what I have written now, give
satisfaction, or not; there are persons nearer hand, whom I know to be much
fitter for an employment of that nature, than my self, who have ever studied
Peace more than Controversies; and namely, one at the next door to
Hatton-House, whose sufficiency and readiness in that kind is well known to Mr.
Geoffery Palmer. Sir, I wish you Happiness, desire your Prayers, and rest,

Your Faithful and Humble Servant,
July, 7. 1656.
The CASE of UNLAWFUL LOVE.
TWO Gentlemen who were very good Friends, and both of them Married, used to
converse together familiarly; one of these took a special liking in the company
and conversation of the others Wife, and she answerably in his; which
afterward proceeded to some degree of Love; which, though ever restrained, and
preserved without any violation of Chastity, grew yet in the end to this issue,
that they mutually vowed either to other; that if happily either of them should
at any time be freed from the Bond of Matrimony (either he by the death of his
Wife, or she by the death of her Husband) that party so freed should continue
afterward unmarried, and stay for the other, till the other should be freed
also, though it were during life: Now so it is, that this Gentlewomans Husband
died, and her affections and resolution so altered, that gladly she would
Marry, if she might be released of the Engagement of that Vow; or persuaded of
the unlawfulness or nullity thereof.

Concerning the present Case, as it is propounded, sundry Points are needful to
be resolved, that so we give a right judgment de praeterito, of what is already
done for the time past, in respect of the Gentlewomans former promise, and
found direction also de futuro, which is further to be done for the time to
come, in respect of her present distresses.

Point I.
Sect. 1. First of all, It is considerable, whether the promise made by the
Gentlewoman and her friend, were properly a Vow or no? so it is called in the
proposal of the present Case, and that agreeable to the common use of speech
with us here in England, who extend the word [ Vow] very far; neither shall I
make scruple in the ensuing Discourse, sometimes to call it so; for Loquendum
ut Vulgus. But to speak properly, a Vow is a word of a narrower extent than a
Promise, every Vow being indeed a Promise, but not every Promise necessarily a
Vow; Votum soli Deo fit, sed Promissio potest fieri etiam Homini. Aquit. 2.2.
q. 88.5. ad. 3.
Promises may be made indifferently, either to God, or Men; but Promises made
to Men are no Vows: wherefore it is usually inserted into the definition of a
Vow, as a condition Promissio Deo facta est essentia voti, Ibid.
essentially requisite thereunto, that it be made un^o God alone, insomuch as
to make a Vow to any Creature, is interpretative to exalt the Creature into the
place of God, and so to make it an Idol, which is clear, not only from the
Psalm. 76.11.
express Precept of God, and the constant Numb. 21.2. Judge. 11.30. 1 Samuel 11.25.
examples of godly men, and the usual Judge. 11.36. Psalm. 56.11.
phrases of the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures; but also from the universal
consent of all learned men, both Divines and others, and even of Sponsio qua
obligamur Deo. Cic. 2. Leg.
Heathens also: This Gentlewomans promise then being made to the Gentleman her
Friend alone, as was his also to her, and neither of both to God, is therefore
to be taken for a mere Promise, but no Vow.

Sect. 2. If for more confirmation thereof, she bound her self also by Oath, as
it is not unlike, yet it is no more for all that but a mere promise still, and
not a Vow; for albeit the very using of an Oath be a calling in of God into a
business, and the person that takes an Oath does thereby set himself in the
presence of God; yet an Oath calls him in only to be Iurare nihil est aliud
quam Deum Testem invocare. Aq. 2.2. qu. 89.1. ex Aug. de ver. Apost. Sermon. R.
28. quod affirmas, si Deo Test promiseris, id tenendum est, Cic. 3. de Offic.
a witness, without any intent to make him a party to the business, whereas in
a Vow he is made a party, and not only a witness; whereunto agree those forms
so frequent in holy Scripture, in Oaths both assertory, and stipulatory; Genesis
31.50. Judges 11.10. Mal. 2.14.
The Lord be witness between us: Romans 1.9. 1 These. 1.5.
God is my witness: 1 Cor. 1.23. Phil. 1.28.
I take God to Record, and the like: for even as when a promise is made unto
God, whereunto for the more solemnity, the presence of some men is required as
Witnesses, such a Promise is to be held for a Vow, because it is made to God
alone, although in the presence of Men: So on the other side, when a Promise is
made unto some Man, whereunto for the more assurance, the presence of God is
required as a witness, such a Promise is not to be held for a Vow, because it
is made unto Man alone, although in the presence of God.

Sect. 3. Nay further, if the Gentlewoman when she thus engaged her self, did
use these very words [ I VOW TO GOD] or words to that effect, as we know is
often done in solemn Promises between man and man; yet neither is that
sufficient to make it properly a Vow; for to judge rightly when question is made
concerning any particular promise, whether it be a Vow yea or no; we are not to
be guided so much by the forms of speech, (which are subject to change,
impropriety, and many defects) as by the true intention and purpose of the
parties, especially the Promiser. Now, what was the whole intent and purpose of
these Parties, when they mutually bound themselves in such sort, as in the Case
propounded is laid down, no rea^onable man can be ignorant; even this and no
other, to give as good assurance as they could devise, either to other, and to
receive the like assurance again, that the thing by them agreed on, and
promised, should be faithfully performed; and if either Oaths or Protestations
were also used by way of Confirmation, they are all in common intendment to be
taken as tending to the self-same purpose, without looking at any further
thing; and clearly where the Promiser has no intention to bind himself to God,
but to Man only, the Promise so made is no Vow, whatsoever formality of words
may be used in the making of it.

Sect. 4. Neither is the examination of this Point a curiosity either in it
self fruitless, or impertinent to the Case in hand; for albeit, in that which
seems to be the very main point of all, viz. the power of binding the
Conscience, there be no material difference between a Vow, and an ordinary
Promise; a lawful Promise no less binding unto performance, than a lawful Vow;
and an unlawful Vow no more binding than an unlawful Promise: yet there is some
difference between them, and that of some importance too, in respect of the
relaxation of that Bond; for since it belongs to him to whom a bond is made,
to grant a release thereof: It belongs therefore to God alone to release the
obligation of a Vow; and no man has power so to do, because the Vower by his
Vow, binds himself to God, not to Man; whereas the obligation of a mere
Promise, wherein the Promiser binds himself but to some Man, may be released
by that Man; and a release from him is to the conscience of the Promiser a
sufficient discharge from the said obligation: which Consideration of what use
it will be in the present Case, will in the due place further appear. In the
mean time we have evidentl^ proved, that this Gentlewoman bound he^ self by
Promise only, and not by Vow.

Point II.
Sect. 5. We are next to enquire concerning the validity thereof whether or no
the Gentlewoman (...).
Romans 7.2.
having an Husband at that time, were so disabled in that respect from making
such a promise, that the promise then made by her, without the Husbands
consent, was utterly void from the very beginning: For the Wife is under Romans 7
2.
the Law, and 1 Cor. 7.4.
under the power of her Husband, and so is not sui juris, nor can bind he^ self
by Vow, Oath, Promise, or otherwise without the privity and consent of her
Husband; which consent we may presume this Gentlewoman never had, the promise
being of that nature, that it had been not only immodesty, but even madness, at
all to have sought it. And it is certain^ from the Numb. 30.3.
Law of God, by Moses (to the equity whereof Christians are still bound,
because it is founded upon right Reason, and the light of Nature) that every Vow
and Promise made by a person that of right has not power to make it, is de
jure nullum, altogether void from the first instant, and binds the Party no
more than if it never had been made.

Sect. 6. If any Scruple shall arise from this Consideration, that albeit the
promise made by the Wife in her Husbands lifetime, bind her, not without his
consent, so long as he lives, because she is all that while under his power;
yet after that she is loosed from the law of her Husband, by his death, it
shall thenceforth bind her, because she then becomes sui juris: I say, this
makes no difference at all in the Case; for this is a general Rule, that what
Quod initio vitiosum est, non potest tractu temporis convalescere, L. 29. F. de
Div. Reg. ju.
act soever had a nullity in it at the first, when it was done, cannot by any
succeeding tract of time grow to be of force. As if a young Scholar shall be
instituted to a Benefice, being not of lawful years; or a young Heir make a
sale of his Lands during minority, the institution and the sale, as they were
both void at the beginning, so they shall continue void, as well after the
Clerk is of lawful years, and the Heir at full age, as before; so that to judge
of the validity of any Vow, Promise, or Covenant, respect must be had to In
stipulationibus id tempus spectatur quo contrahimus. L. 18, F. eodem.
that very time wherein it was made, and to the present condition of the person
at that time, and not to any time or condition before or after: If then there
were indeed a nullity in this Gentlewomans Vow, at the time when she made it,
there is a nullity in it still; and if it were indeed of no force to bind her
then, neither is it of any force to bind her now.

Sect. 7. But after due pondering of the matter, I rather think, that there was
not a nullity in the promise at the first, neither (supposing it had been
rightly qualified in other, respects) was it void upon this ground; because
although she were not sui juris absolute, it is sufficient yet, that she was so
quantum ad hoc. For a person that is under the power of another, has yet power
of himself, (and so is sui juris) to dispose of all such things, as by the free
disposal whereof, the proper right of him, under whose power he is, is no way
prejudiced; but in whatsoever may be prejudicial to the other in any of his
Rights, he is juris alieni: neither may dispose thereof without the others
consent; and if such a person shall make a Vow, or other Promise concerning any
of those things wherein he is sui juris, such vow or promise shall stand good,
and is not void (though possibly it may be vicious in other respects) from the
inability of the person that makes it: As for example, if a Servant shall
promise to his own Father, to work with him a day or two in Harvest, this
promise, unless his Master consent thereunto, shall be void, because the Master
has a right in the Servants wo^k, to which right it would be prejudicial, if
the Servant should dispose thereof after his own pleasure; but if such a
Servant shall promise unto his needy Father to relieve him from time to time
with a third or fourth part of all such wages as he shall receive for his
service, this promise shall be good of it self; neither shall the Masters
consent be requisite to make it so, because the Master has no right at all in
the Servants wages; wherein to be prejudiced by the Servants disposing thereof
according to his own mind: Now, forasmuch as the Husbands right and power over
the Wife cease together with his life, (as the Apostle Romans 7.23.
expressly teaches) and so cannot be prejudiced by any act of the Wife done
after his Decease; It is manifest that the Wife is sui juris to make a vow or
promise during her Husbands lifetime, concerning something to be done after
his decease, in case she over-live him, because his right will be expired
before the performance of the said vow or promise be due; as to give instance
in a Case not much unlike to this in question: A Wife estated upon her Marriage
in a Ioynture or Annuity for her life of an 100 l. per Annum, makes a promise
in her Husbands lifetime to one of her younger Brothers, that has but short
Means to allow him thence forward out of the said Estate, 10 l. yearly toward
his better Maintenance; this promise is void unless the Husband consent,
because the performance thereof would prejudice him in that right which he has
during his own life in the Revenue of all the Lands and Annuities estated upon
the Wife in Reversion; but if such a Wife shall promise to her said Brother to
allow him the said yearly sum of 10 l. after the decease of her Husband, in
case she survive him, this promise is good, though made by the Wife in her
Husbands lifetime, and without his consent, because the Husbands right, (being
to cease before the Promise is to be performed) cannot be prejudiced by the
performance thereof: And this I find agreeable to the best Casuists, whose
peremptory opinion it is, that Vota uxorum vel serv^rum exequenda illo tempore
quo fuerint sui juris, mariti vel domini non possunt irritare. Nav. Man. Number.
65. and alios.
Husbands and Masters cannot disannul such Vows as their Wives and Servants
make concerning things to be performed at such times as they shall be from
under their power. Which position, if it be true (and I yet see no reason why
it should not) then doubtless this Gentlewomans Vow made to her Friend, though
in the lifetime, and without the consent of her Husband, was not originally
void from the inability to make it, upon this respect, that she was not sui
juris so to do.

Point III.
Sect. 8. But though I dare not say, neither do I think that there was a
nullity in it, in respect of the person, to make it void that way; yet it
cannot be denied, but there was much obliquity in it, in respect of the matter,
to make it otherwise utterly unlawful: in which Point much need not be said,
because the truth thereof will soon appear; for there was in it manifestly a
threefold obliquity, and thereby also a breach of three several Commandments.
The first obliquity was in respect of the unlawful affection from which it
proceeded; which being placed upon another than the Husband, and that in such
an high degree, as to produce a promise of this kind, must needs be vicious,
both for the object, and for the measure, and such inordinate affection by the
Analogy of our Saviors Mat. 5.28.
expression of the Law, is a violation of the Chastity of the heart, and so a
breach of the Seventh Commandment. The second obliquity was, the want of that
true Conjugal love which ought to be between Husband and Wife, who ought to
have a mutual Prove. 5.18. Eccles. 9.9.
complacency and delight the one in the other, and to be Prove. 5.19.
satisfied at all times with the Love,. Comfort, and Society of the one of the
other; which Love, if it had been so thoroughly rooted and seated in the
Gentlewomans heart, as it ought to have been, would have crushed all motions of
unlawful affection toward a Stranger in the shell, long before they could grow
to such strong Resolutions, as by the making of this Vow it appears they did;
for it is not to be imagined that such a vow as this could be made, and really
intended to be performed, but we must needs suppose in the parties so vowing, a
kind of weariness at the least, if not rather some inward loathing of the
present Yoke; which being contrary to that honor that martyred persons owe to
their yoak-fellows, is so a breach of the Fifth Commandment: A third obliquity
there was also as a breach of the Tenth Commandment, against those express
words [ Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife] every Man and Woman being to
content themselves with that lot, which, by Gods Providence has befallen them,
as in all other things, so especially in that which is of the greatest weight,
the lot of Marriage, without coveting or lusting after that which it has
pleased the Wisdom of God already to dispose upon another; this Gentlewomans
promise then being such, as (if it should be brought to an impartial Trial
before that Tribunal which God has erected in every ones Conscience, and
according to the tenor of that Divine Law, whereof no Christian should be
ignorant) could not be reasonably acquitted from any one of these sinful
Obliquities, but not possibly from them all, we may conclude to have been an
Act utterly unlawful.

Point IV.
Sect. 9. But because a Man may contract an Obligation by an act not free from
Obliquit^, as the saying in such Cases is, [ Fieri non debet, factum valet,]
and we have a Ruled case for it in the Covenant, which the Princes of Israel
made with the Gibeonites, which though Josh. 9.14, etc.
sinfully made at the first, was Ibid. ver. 19. 2 Samuel 21.1, 2.
necessarily to be kept afterward: We are therefore to enquire into a Fourth
Point, Whether the Gentlewoman having de facto bound her self by such an
unlawful promise, be still, by virtue of the said promise, bound in Conscience
to the performance thereof, or not? To answer directly to the Point, I take it,
she is not bound thereunto; for that saying [ Fieri non debet, factum valet]
has place only there, where the obliquity that makes the act unlawful, may be
severed from the substance of the matter, about which the act is conversant; as
when a man voweth to do something, which is not in it self, and for the
substance of the matter simply unlawful to be done; but yet voweth it, either
rashly, and without due advertisement, or for some indirect and unwarrantable
end, or upon slight and insufficient inducements, or the like, any of these
Obliquities are enough to make the vow unlawful, in respect of the act of
vowing; yet because these Obliquities do not necessarily pass upon the matter
it self, or the thing vowed, but may be severed from it; therefore, though the
act of vowing were sinful, the Vow it self for all that may stand good, and
bind the Party to performance; but where the sinful obliquity passes upon the
substance of the matter, or adhereth inseparably thereunto; there not only the
act of vowing is sinful, but the performance also becomes unlawful: In which
Cases those other saying ought rather to have place, Iuramentum non debet esse
vinculum iniquitatis, in malis promissis rescinde fidem, in turpi voto ma^a
decretum, etc.

Sect. 10. If it shall be said, that this difference being admitted, will
nothing avail the Gentlewoman in our present Case, to free her from the
obligation of her said promise; because here the matter of promise seems not
to be in it self unlawful, especially on her part; for if the Gentleman her
Friend, were presently free from the Bond of Matrimony by the death of his
Wife, as the Gentlewoman now is by the death of her Husband, they might perform
what they had promised either to other, by joining themselves in Matrimony, and
that without sin, which is an argument that the sinful obliquity was only in
the act of promising; which therefore they ought to repent of: but does not
cleave to the matter of the promise, which therefore they ought not to violate.
To this I answer, what in my opinion is true, That if both the Parties were now
actually free from the Marriage bond, they not only lawfully might, but were in
Conscience bound (unless some other lawful impediment should hinder) to join
themselves together in Matrimony, because none of the forementioned
Obliquities, which made the former act of promising unlawful, would fall upon
the after- act of Marriage to make it unlawful. But that Allegation is not
direct to the Point in hand, nor to the Case as it is propounded; for it may be
observed from the very form of the proposal, that the matter of the promise,
wherein the Parties interchangeably bound themselves, was not to Marry
together, when they should be both free; upon which false ground the Objection
runs; that was indeed the thing they aimed at therein; but the end is one
thing, and the matter another: but the very matter of the promise was, the
continuance of their mutual affection either to other, with a resolution to
stay the one for the other, when either Party should happen to be free from the
bond of the present Matrimony, till the other should be also free. The
continuance of which affection and resolution, will upon examination be found
subject to all, or some of the three Obliquities aforesaid; and therefore as
such an affection and resolution, could not be entertained at the first without
sin; so neither can they be now continued in without sin; for so long as they
continue, the first of the said Obliquities remains still, both on his part
and hers; the second indeed by the death of the Husband is ceased on her part,
but remains still on his, and the third contrarily being on his part ceased,
remains still on hers, as will evidently appear to the understanding of any
man that shall take the pains to examine it.

Sect. 11. Yea, and it is further to be considered, that the continuance of
such an affection and resolution may be likely to expose a well the one as the
other to the assault ^f more strong and dangerous temptations, now since the
Husbands death, than before. The danger on the Gentleman's pa^^, this, lest by
how much he is now by the Hu^bands death, put into a nearer possibility of
enjoying his unlawful hopes, he should grow into so much the deeper loathing of
hi^ own bed, and so much the earnester longing that, that which is now the only
obstacle to the fruition of his desires were removed; of which thoughts, who
can tell how fearful the issues might be? the sly Enemy being most ready at all
times to practice upon the corruption that is in the naughty heart of Man; but
especially having a mighty advantage against him, when he has got his
conscience as it were in a snare, by the engagement of some vow, promise, or
settled resolution. And then on the Gentlewomans part, the danger this, lest
having by her own voluntary act debarred her self of that which is the only
allowed remedy, namely Marriage; she should by the just judgment of God, be
left to the rage of the Disease of burning Lusts: for upon what sound warrant
can she be confident, or with what reason expect, that God should either
preserve her from, or assist her against temptations in that kind, though she
should seek it of him with Fasting, and Prayers, and Tears, so long as she
tempts Him by persisting in a wilful obstinacy against that means of Remedy
which He has appointed? Indeed, where the Hand of God Himself has prevented
the use of the Remedy, (as if the Husband should be long detained in a foreign
Land, or held in close Prison, or taken with a dead Palsy, or some other
bodily impotence, or the like) there the Wife might comfortably implore God's
assistance to preserve her from being overcome by carnal temptations, and
assuredly rest upon it by Faith, if she be not wanting to her self, in putting
to her own utmost endeavors, because she has a Promise to rest upon for that
purpose; and God who is faithful in all his Promises, is also faithful in this,
of not suffering his Servants to be tempted beyond their strength: but for the
Wife, by some inconsiderate act of her own, wherein she wilfully and
obstinately persisteth to refuse the appointed means, and yet to expect God's
assistance nevertheless, for which she has no Promise, is a fearful tempting
of God; and it is but a just thing with God, and she suffers it worthily for
her presumption, if she be left to her self, and so wrestle with the temptation
by her own strength, and so be overcome thereby: For God, who has after a sort
tied Himself by His free and gracious Promise, to protect us in Via Regia, so
long as we walk in the ordinary known way that he has appointed for us, has
no where bound Himself to vouchsafe us the like powerful protection Ex^ra viam
Regiam, if we refuse that highway, to walk in bypath of our own choosing;
which present dangers on both sides, and the former reasons laid together, do
suffici^ntly prove, that the Gentlewoman is not at all bound to perform her
said unlaw^ul Promise.

Point V.
Sect. 12. Hitherto we have proceeded in genere judiciali, by considering of
the nature and validity, lawfulness and obligation of the P^omise for the time
past: Now we are to deal in genere deliberativo, and to consider what in
Christian Wisdom is meetest to be farther done, for the better both quieting
and regulating of the Conscience for the time to come; wherein, submitting to
Men of better judgments, and experience, I give my advice as follows, viz.

First, That the Gentlewoman out of the serious consideration of the Promises,
be brought to a through feeling of the grievousness of those sins which she
has committed against God, and wherein she has so long continued, that so she
may not only be humbled in his sight with true contrition of heart, and remorse
for the same, proportionably to the greatness thereof; but also be provoked to
a proportionable measure of thankfulness unto him, for his gracious goodness in
restraining her unlawful affections from breaking out into actual uncleanness,
and preserving her when she had run out so far in an evil way, from rushing
into more desperate Extremities; for Erranti nullus terminus: as a stone that
tumbleth down a steep hill, so man's corruption, when it is once set on going,
has no stay of it self till it come to the bottom of Hell, unless the Lord lay
a stop in the way: and it is to be acknowledged a blessed act of God's merciful
Providence, when we have let loose the reins to our own lusts in any kind, if
they be bridled from running headlong into all excess of wickedness; great sins
require more than ordinary Repentance, and great mercies more than ordinary
Thankfulness.

Sect. 13. Secondly, That having thus humbled her self before God by inward
Contrition, she also make an outward free Confession of her said sins, to him
whom God has delegated a Ministerial Power to remit sins, that she may receive
Comfort and Absolution from his Mouth; I mean the Priest: and this I think
meetest to be done to the Bishop of the Diocese, with one or more of his
Presbytery, such as he shall think good to take to him to assist him; or else
to some other by his appointment; because the Bishop is the chief Pastor, to
whom the care of souls most immediately belongs, within his own Diocese:
besides that, both the quality of the person, (if she be of eminent Plac^, and
Rank) and the weightiness of the case, make it so much the more proper for his
cognizance: But howsoever it would be done to a Man of approved Wisdom, and
such an one as will be both compassionate, and secret, wherein the more freely
she shall make confession of her said sins, and the more cheerfully she shall
subject her self to perform such further Acts, whether of Humiliation or
Charity, as the Bishop or Priest shall advise to be done, in testimony of her
unfeigned Repentance, the more sound comfort undoubtedly will the sentence of
Absolution bring unto the soul.

Sect. 14. This done, then thirdly, that she endeavor by all fair means, that
the Gentleman also her friend and partner, in the aforesaid Promise, may be
brought to the like sight and acknowledgment of the great sins that were
enwrapped in that act, and to a true persuasion withal, that so long as he
continues in the former unlawful affection and resolution, he is not only
still under the guilt of those sins, but also in near danger (without God's
great mercy preventing it) of falling into other and greater sins, for which
purpose it will be expedient, that he be truly and effectually dealt withal,
(yet with as much lenity as the state of his Soul will suffer, and withal
possible secrecy) and that by some such person especially as he holds a
reverend Opinion of both for Learning and Piety; and to procure that this be
done, the Gentlewoman ought to take it into her own especial care; which it
will concern her to do, not only in Christian Charity for the good of his Soul,
but in Christian Wisdom also for her own future benefit and security.

Sect. 15. For when he shall be once thoroughly convinced in his judgment and
conscience, of the unlawfulness of the Promise made between them, and of the
sinful inconveniences that attend the continued purpose of fulfilling it, there
is a fair way open for that which is next and fourthly to be done, viz. That he
be then earnestly moved for his Relaxation of the said Promise to the
Gentlewoman, which (being it was but a mere Promise, and no Vow, as in the
first Point has already been showed) he has in himself a full power to make,
and this also to be done in the presence of such Persons, as they shall make
choice of betwixt themselves to be witnesses of the said Release; for although
the Promise being utterly unlawful, has no power to bind, and so there needs
no Release, as of absolute necessity, in reward of the thing it self; yet such
Release may be very behoveful in regard of the Gentlewomans person, and for the
quieting of her conscience, in case there should remain any fears or scruples
behind, lest perhaps her promise should still bind her; for as Satan labors
to benum the Conscience with security, to make men bold to commit sins without
scruple, till he has drawn them into the snare; so when he sees them offer to
get out of the snare again by Repentance, he is very cunning to inject needless
scruples and fears, if possibly he can, to hold them in by means thereof;
wherefore I hold it very expedient, that such a Release, if it may be obtained,
be not neglected; for thereby the binding power of the Promise, though we
should suppose it lawful, should be quite taken away, so as there need no
scruple to remain: Abundans Cautela non nocet, is a safe Aphorism; as wary men
when they pay moneys, besides seeing the Book crossed, will crave to have an
Acquittance: So it may be some satisfaction to the Gentlewomans mind, to have a
solemn Release before witness, which say it should be more than needs, yet
can do no harm howsoever.

Sect. 16. Fifthly, that the Gentlewoman all the while before, and so ever
after (that time only excepted, when the Relaxation should be made, for then it
is requisite she should be personally present) carefully avoid the company of
that Gentleman, and he likewise hers, so far as conveniently may be; but at
leastwise, by no means converse together with any familiarity, especially in
private; lest the former unlawful affection should rekindle in either Party,
and so the disease after some measure of Cure grow to a relaps, which many
times proves more dangerous than the first malady; for commonly when the
unclean spirit is ejected by Repentance, if once he make himself master of the
heart again (as he will attempt it, and without a good watch happily effect it)
he will be sure at the re-entry, to come with a new strength, and that
sevenfold to what he had before, and needs must the end of that man be worse
than the beginning: she must therefore resolve to shun all likely occasions of
falling again into the same snare, so far as the quality of her person and
condition, and the common affairs of life will permit: And she had need also to
use her best care and diligence (praying to God daily for Grace to strengthen
her thereunto) to withstand all wicked temptations of the flesh, that she be no
more foiled thereby, neither entangled again in such sinful inconveniences, as
by God's Mercy she shall be now freed from.

Sect. 17. If in these Directions, I be thought to deal with too much rigor
and strictness, it would be considered:

First, that it is much better to put the Patient to a little more pain at the
first, than by skinning the wound over, to heal it deceitfully; and to suffer
it to rankle inward; which will breed a great deal more grief at last.

Secondly, That since all men (through corrupt Self-love, and privy Hypocrisy,
cleaving to our depraved nature) are partial toward themselves, and apt to
deal more favorably with their own sins than they ought; it is therefore
safest for them (in their own Cases especially) to incline to severity rather
than indulgence.

Thirdly, That there may be a mitigation used of the present Directions,
according as the state of the Patient (in the several variations thereof) shall
require; but that (for the avoiding of partiality) not to be permitted to the
sole liberty of the party himself, but rather to be done by the advice of a
Ghostly Physician, who if he be a man of such wisdom and moderation as is meet,
will I doubt not allow a greater indulgence in case she see it expedient, than
it could be safe for the Party her self to take of her own head.

Fourthly, That in all this Discourse, I take not upon me to write Edicts, but
to give my advice, that is to say, not to prescribe to the judgment of others,
if any shall see cause to dissent, but to deliver my own opinion (being
requested thereunto by a Reverend Friend) with such a faithfulness and freedom
as becomes me to do; and truly those Parties whom it most concerns, ought
not to blame me for it howsoever; inasmuch as there can be no cause to suspect
that I should be carried with any personal respects to be partial either for or
against either of them; so God is my witness, whom I desire to serve, I had not
any intimation at all given me, neither yet have so much as the least
conjecture in the World, who either of them both might be.

The CASE of a MILITARY LIFE.
SIR,
IN referring over your friend to me, you have pitched upon one of the
unfittest persons in the World, to be consulted in cases of that nature, who am
altogether a stranger to the Public Affairs of Christendom, and understand
nothing at all of the mutual Interests, Relations, or Transactions of Foreign
Princes or States; yea, so little curious have I been to inform my self, so
much as where the Stages lay of the chiefest Actions of these latter times
abroad, or what persons were engaged therein; that I have something pleased my
self (perhaps too much) with my own ignorance in our home Affairs, accounting
it among the happinesses of my privacy and retiredness, in these unhappy times;
that amidst so much fury and bloodshed on every side, it was never my hap to be
within the view of any Battle or Skirmish; nor did I ever see so much as a
Pistol discharged, or a Sword drawn against any single person, since the
beginning of the War. I could have wished therefore, since my opinion herein is
desired, that I had had the opportunity to have advised with some more knowing
Men, and of greater experience and judgment than my self in these matters; or
at lest, that you had sent me, together with the two enclosed Letters, a
transcript of your Answer (whose judgment I do with great reason very much
value) unto the former of them; for there I assure my self, I should have met
with such Materials as would have served me for a good foundation to work upon;
yet to satisfy your desire, so far as in me lies, and the rather for the
Gentleman's sake your friend, (who though unknown to me by face, or till the
receipt of your Letter, so much as by Name; yet by his Letters appears to be
a person of Piety and Ingenuity, and a great Master both of Reason and
Language) I have endeavored (with reservation of Place for second thoughts,
and submission to other Judgments) to declare what my present apprehensions are
concerning the whole business; wherein the resolution of such doubts, as in
point of Conscience may arise, or of the most and chiefest of them, will (as I
conceive) very much depend upon the consideration and right application of
th^se Four things, viz. I. The different sorts of Men's employments in general.
II. The nature of the Soldiers employments in particular. III. The end that
Men may prop^se to themselves in following the War; or what it is that chiefly
induces them thereunto. IV. The condition of the Person so employed, or to be
employed.


I. Considerations of Men's Employments in General.
1. Men's employments are of two sorts. The one of such as any man may (without
blame from others, or scruple within himself) follow, merely upon his own
score, if he find himself in some measureable for it, and have a mind
thereunto; he has a power in himself (and that jure proprio, by a primitive
and original right, without any necessary derivation from others) to dispose of
himself, his time and industry in that way; for the exercise of which power,
there needs no special or positive warrant from any other person, but it is
presumed he is, (as in relation to others) sufficiently warranted thereunto in
this, in that he is not by any Superior Authority, Divine or Humane, forbidden
so to do; and upon this account it is, that men betake themselves, upon their
own choice and liking, to Husbandry, Merchandise, Manual Occupations, the study
of the Law, etc.

2. But another sort of Employments there are, whereunto a man has not a just
right primitively, and of himself, neither may he lawfully exercise the same
merely upon his own choice, but it is necessary, that that power should be
derived upon him from some such person or persons, as have sufficient Authority
to warrant him for so doing: Such is the Employment of a Judge, a Constable, an
A^bitrator, etc. which are therefore said to be juris delegati, because the
right that a^y man has to such Employments, accrueth unto him by virtue of
that Authority which he receives by Delegation of Deputation from some other
that has a right by Command, Election, Nomination, or otherwise to Empower him
thereunto, whence are those usual forms, Quo jure, Quo warranto? Who made thee
a Judge? By what Authority do thou those things? Or, Who gave thee this
Authority? A man may betake himself to the Study, and so to the Practice of the
Laws, of his own accord, but he may not take upon him to be a Judge, without
Commission from his Sovereign; so he may follow Husbandry, and Merchandry, upon
his own choice, but he may not do the Office of a Constable, unless he be
chosen by the Neighbors; or of an Arbitrator, unless chosen by the Parties
thereunto.

3. Now, although as well the one sort as the other, after a man has addicted
himself to the one, or is deputed to the other, may not unfitly be termed his
Particular Calling, and the latter perhaps with better propriety than the
former, (for the word Calling properly imports the Action of some other
person) yet according to the common Notion, which by custom of speech among us,
we have of these terms [ The General and the Particular Calling] the
Employments of the former sort, are usually taken to be the Particular Calling
of Men, and those of the latter sort, will be found (if well considered) to
fall rather under the General Calling, as branches or parts thereof, inasmuch
as the exercise of such Employments, is a part of that moral duty, which all
men (according to their several respective Relations) ought to perform to
others, being by them empowered thereunto, upon the tie of Obedience, Contract,
Friendship, etc. but for distinction sake, as the Latins make a difference
between vitae institutum and munus, we may call those of the former sort, Man's
Profession, and those of the latter sort his Office; so a Man is by Profession
a Lawyer, by Office a Judge; by Profession an Husbandman; by Office a Constable.

4. To bring this Discourse home to the present business, we are next to
enquire, to whether sort of the two, the Employment of a Soldier does more
properly appertain; that is, whether we are to conceive of it as a Profession
which a man may at his own choice fix upon, as his particular vocation; or
rather as an Office of duty and service, which he is to undergo, when by the
command of his Prince, he shall be thereto appointed, and so to come rather
under the notion of a General Calling? To me it seems clearly to be of the
latter sort. For, (1.) in the passage of St. Paul, 2 Timothy 2.4. No man that
warreth, entangleth himself in the affairs of this life, that he may please him
that has chosen him to be a Soldier; the word is (...), applied to him that
warreth with the note of Universality ((...)) annexed, seems to imply, as if
he supposed that no man might go to war, unless he were chosen for that service
by some other person that might command it. Nor do I see (2.) what good
construction can be otherwise made of that speech of our Savior, Matt. 29.57.
All they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword; or what should be
the crime there intended to be signified, by this Phrase of taking the Sword,
if it be not this, for a man to take the Sword into his hand by his own
Authority, before it be put into his hand by that Supreme Power, whom God has
immediately trusted with the bearing and managing of it. Now, (3.) can that be
said to be a Man's Profession, or particular Calling, which men of all
Professions are (in obedience to their Governors, and for the service of their
Country) bound to perform whenever they shall be by Lawful Authority, called
and appointed thereunto.

5. If these premises will be granted, it will soon appear, that the answer to
the Question proposed, in the beginning of the former Letter (as it stands
there in Terminis, and in Thesi, abstractly from the consideration of the
person in the said Letter charactered, and those other circumstances which may
vary the Case) must be in the Negative; viz. That it is not lawful to be a
Soldier, upon the same account that men apply themselves to Trades, to the
practice of the Laws, and to other (like) civil Employments.

II. Consideration of the Soldiers Employment in particular.
1. THe care that ought to be in every Man that takes upon him the exe^cise of
any Office, to be well assured that he has a sufficient right and warrant for
so doing, is no less requisite in a Soldier, than i^ any other Officer; yea
rather by so much more requisite in him, than in most of them by how much the
matter he is conversa^^ about, ( viz. the Life of man) is of greate^
consequence, than are the matters in which most of them are employed; for the
Soldier ^very time he draws his Sword i^ the Field, is by the very nature of
his Employment supposed to do it either with a resolution to lose his own, or
to take away his Enemies life; else he does it but prevaricate, and is
unfaithful in the Service he has undertaken: In which service, if it be his
fortune either to kill, or to be killed, he is actually and deeply guilty; but
if neither, yet that very resolution makes him intentionally guilty of the
Transgression of the sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill; in case he have no
good right, so far to dispose either of his own, or the others life. It
concerns him therefore to look well to that; both what Power belongs to
him, as a Soldier, and by what Authority he claims the exercise of such a
Power.

2. Most certain it is, that properly and originally the power to dispose of
Man's Life ( Ius vitae and necis) belongs to God alone, who is, Dominus vitae
and necis, as the sole Author of Life, so the sole Lord and Master of Life and
Death: some part of which power, since it has pleased him for the good of
humane Society, (in the preservation of Peace and Justice, and the punishment
of such as are enemies to either) to communicate unto men, (which power so
communicated, is that which we use to call Ius Gladii, or the power of the
Sword) it may therefore be lawfully exercised by men; but within that latitude,
and in order, as God has communicated it to them, but not farther nor
otherwise.

3. Now God has not given to any man, either Sovereign or Subject, power over
his own life, to destroy it by his own voluntary act in any Case; no, nor yet
power to expose it to the certain hazard of being destroyed by another in
fight, saving in the one only Case of just and necessary defense: under which
notion is to be comprehended also the hazzarding of the Princes Life, in a just
and necessary War; out of which Case, whosoever shall expose his life to
hazard, by fight, of his own accord; if he perish in it, cannot be excused
from being guilty of his own death, nor from usurping a power over his own
life, which God has not allowed.

4. Add hereunto the injustice, that he thereby does to his Sovereign and
Country* God has given to his Vicegerents here on Earth, a right in, and a
power over the persons of all their Subjects, within their several respective
Dominions, even to the spending of their lives in their Countries service,
whenever they shall be by their Authority required thereunto, which they
cannot therefore prodigally spend at their own pleasure, without apparent wrong
done to their Governors interest; for as he that shall kill a private person,
is not only an offender against God, and against that person, in depriving him
of life; but is also by the Interpretation of the Laws, (according to the
importance of the ancient form of Enditing) an offender against the Crown and
Dignity of his Sovereign, in depriving him of a Subject, and consequently of
the interest he had in his person, and of the use he might have had of his
service: so he that is so prodigal of his own life, as to hazard it upon the
Sword in fight, without his Sovereigns Authority, if he perish, is not only
guilty of his being accessory to his own destruction; but does also an act
injurious and prejudicial to his Sovereign, at whose service and disposal
(under God) his life and person ought to be.

5. And as his presumption cannot be excused, if he be slain upon that account;
so neither can he justify the killing of another (though an enemy) in Battle,
if he have no other warrant for taking of Arms, than from himself; for War is a
kind of Judicature, wherein the Prince that wageth the War, is as the Judge
that gives sentence of death against the Enemy, as a disturber of the Peace of
his Country, and all that engage in the War under him, are but as so many
execution^rs of the sentence pronounced by him; and he that executes the
sentence of death upon another, must do it by some lawful Authority, as well as
he that pronounces the sentence; or else he is a Murderer as well as This.
Now the Soldier that by fighting on the one side, does ipso facto declare
against those of the other side, as Enemies; if he so engage of his own mind
only, he does indeed, upon the point, take upon him the Office of a Judge,
being none, and so runs before he be sent: or if it shall be said in his
behalf, That he does it not as a Judge, but as the Executioner of the sentence
pronounced by that Prince, into whose service he has put himself, and who by
the accepti^g of his service has sufficiently authorized him to do such
Execution: Your Letter has suggested to me this ready Answer, That the
sentence pronounced by one that is not his Lawful Sovereign, and by
consequence, whose judgment he is not warranted to follow, is of no more
validity (as in relation to him) than Sententia lata a non judice, and
therefore can be no warrant to him to execute it. True it is, that with license
from his Sovereign, he may serve under another Prince, and consequently do such
execution as we now speak of; because the Sovereign by so licensing him, does
really refer him over from himself to another judgment, and consequently
warrant him to follow the same, and so render him capable (upon the others
acceptance) to execute it. All this is true, but nothing to our purpose,
because it does destruere suppositum; for we now suppose the Case of a Soldier
putting himself into service, under a Foreiner of his own mind, and where
himself thinks good, without the knowledge or license of his own lawful
Sovereign.

III. Consideration of the end to be proposed by the Soldier.
1. Since the goodness or badness of Men's actions and undertakings depends
very much upon the end which they propose to themselves therein; he that would
desire to lead a Soldiers life, must narrowly examine his own heart, what it
is, bona fide, and in very deed, that first and chiefly induced him to that
desire, and what affinity there is between that end, which he proposes to
himself, as the main scope of his Intentions, and that which is or ought to be
the true end of the thing it self; the true end of the War, which only can
warrant it lawful, we all know is the necessary preservation of a Commonwealth
in Peace, by repressing (or preventing) all Seditions, or Hostile attempts to
the contrary; but as in other things it often happens, according to that
saying, [ Finis non idem est a^tis and artificis] so here many times the
Warrior has another end to himself far distant from that of War, and the more
distant ever the worse; as on the contrary, the action is ever by so much the
better, by how much the intention of the person has a neare^ affinity with, or
a directer tendency unto, that for which the thing it self was ordained.

2. Now, the ends which men, desirous to follow the Wars, do usually propose to
themselves in so doing, are especially one of these Three, Lucre, Honor, or to
do their Country service; concerning which, we are to enquire severally,
whether or no, and how far forth any of these may be a sufficient inducement to
a Christian, or but moral man, to follow the Wars, as his particular Calling or
Profes^ion.

3. For Lucre first: He that has a warrant otherwise to employ himself as a
Soldier, may doubtless lawfully both receive pay, and require it; John the
Baptist allowed the Soldiers (...), Luke 3.14. And St. Paul thought it not
reasonable, that any man should go to warfare at his own Charges, 1 Cor. 9.7.
Not so only, but he may also, in putting himself upon that employment, (being
called thereunto) have an eye to his profit, and an actual intention (if
moderate, and otherwise rightly qualified) of getting himself a livelihood,
yea, and of raising himself a fortune (as we call it) by his service therein;
even as men in the choice of other Professions, or undertaking Offices usually
do, and may do without sin? but to propose to himself Lucre, as the main end
and scope of following the Wars (as it is evident by their actions, that very
many of our Common Soldiers do) is one of the most hateful and unrighteous
things in the World: so far is it from being a sufficient inducement to any man
to make that his Profession. How can it be imagined to be consistent with that
Charity, Justice, and Moderation, that should be in every Christian to set up a
Trade of killing of Men for Money? The mere Mercenary Soldier therefore, or a
Soldier of Fortune (as we call him) I find every where inveighed against as
one of the greatest Scourges or Plagues of Mankind; for such Men never look at
the Cause they engage for, whether it be right or wrong; but at the pay and
prey; and therefore they take their best Markets, and care not whom they undo,
kill, and oppress, by V^olence, Rapine, Mur^her, and Plunder, so that they may
but enrich themselves thereby, and can do it with safety: Nor will they stick,
if there be an advantage to be made of it; and that they can spy a fit
opportunity for it, either to betray their own party, or to revolt to the other
side, or to do any other act, though never so base and dishonest, Nulla fides
pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur.

4. Next the i^tuition of Honor and Glory to be acquired by worthy Actions in
the Wars, may be not only lawful, but commendable also and useful in a
Soldier; and truly this of Glory is a more noble end, of a higher pitch, and
more befitting a generous spirit by much than that of Lucre is; both because
Men of eminent Birth, and Place, and Parts, are aptest to be affected with it;
whereas Gain works most upon the lower sort of Men, and also because it
puts Men upon more worthy Enterprises, and such as may win Honor and
Reputation; and restrains them from those baser acts of Injustice, Cruelty,
and Rapine, to which the desire of Gain usually prompteth the Me^cenary Man;
but yet as to the warranting of the Soldier for making that his Profession,
(which is the Point now in hand) this of Glory is of no more importance than
was that of Gain; for the right end of War, being a safe and honorable Peace,
there is something common to both (consequential to the desire of Glory as well
as of Gain): so inconsistent with that end, that it sets them at an equal,
or not much unequal distance therefrom: For as he that aim^th to gain by the
Wars, cannot but desire the continuance of War, that so his hopes of gain may
continue; so he that aims to get himself Glory by the Wars, cannot but desire
the continuance of War, that so the opportunities of increasing his Glory may
continue; for there is a Dropsy of vainglory in the Ambitious, as well as of
Avarice in the Covetous, as thirsty and unsatiable in the one, as in the other;
whence it comes to pass, that both the one and the other use their utmost wits
and endeavors to find occasions to lengthen the Wars, and to obstruct and
retard (so much as lies in them) the advices of Peace: Nay, let me add
moreover, that in this respect at least ( viz. as to the effectual hindering of
Peace) that of Honor and Glory, is much the more dangerous end of the two;
because this humor is aptest to seize upon the greatest Persons, and such as
by privil^dge of their birth, eminency of their places, activeness of their
spirits, glory of their former actions, or other like advantages bear a great
sway in Councils, and are of some authority in the Armies: whereas the
Peasantry, in whom most of the other humor (that of base Lucre) abounds,
have neither the wit nor the power ordinarily to do much harm. It has
therefore been a constant observation in all times and places, that the
embroyling most Commonwealths in Wars, in the mean time, and working their ruin
in the end, has grown from the restlesness of some ambitious spirits, and
their immoderate thirst after Honor and Glory.

-- Patriam tamen obruit olim
Gloria paucorum, and laudis titulique cupido:
Juvenal Sat. 10. 5. So that if there be any possibility of finding a person
capable to take upon him the employment of a Soldier, as his proper
Profession, it must be among those that propose to themselves the same end
therein, that is, or ought to be the end of War; that is to say, those that
after an impartial search of their own hearts, can truly say (and not pretend
it only) That their chiefest aim in applying themselves to the Wars, is to do
their King and Country service, in procuring or preserving the Peace thereof:
which no man can truly say, but he that prefereth the Public Good, and the
Peace of his Country, before all private In^erests. The trial whereof is, if he
take up Arms with this Resolution, and by his after carriage make it good, not
to do any act, or enterprise any thing for his own benefit, glory, or safety
that may hinder, nor to refuse any service or hazard that may probably promote
the obtaining of that end; which Qualification supposed, I deny not but that a
Man may find warrant to go on in the way of a Soldier as his proper
Profession, and that in two Cases.

6. First, that which (in the nature of the Employment it self) is rather an
Office than a Profession (such as we have already shown the Soldiers
employment to be) may yet become to the person so employed, as his proper
Profession, if he shall be appointed thereunto by lawful Authority; especially
if it be done with a declared intention (whether expressly or interpretatively
declared) of continuing him for life, or for any long space in the same; and
that the said employment, during such his continuance therein, shall require
his personal attendance, either constantly or for the most part: As for
example, a Lawyer by Profession and Practice, is by his Sovereign called to be
a Judge of either Bench, or a Baron of the Exchequer, the Office of a Judge is
now become his Profession, or particular Vocation, because it is supposed that
he is to continue in that Office; and the execution of that Office will require
his attendance thereupon, in the yearly Terms and Circuits: but ^f the King
shall appoint a Sergeant or Counselor at the Law, by his particular Commission
to ride this Summers Circuit, into such and such Countries, and there to
execute the Office of a Judge, the Party so constituted and appointed, has by
virtue of that Cmmission, full power to do the Office of Judge in that Circuit,
and is to be received and honored with the title of Lord, and all other
testimonies of honor and respect, in as much ample manner as other Judges in
their Circuits are; yet does he not thereby come to be denominated a Judge, as
if that were his proper Profession, or ordinary Calling, as in the former Case;
because he is empowered to execute the Office of a Judge, but during the time of
that Circuit only: Nor is his attendance upon that Office any longer required,
or so much as allowed him. In like manner, if the King of England shall make
choice of some person of Quality to be Gover^or of Dover Castle, or of Barwick,
that O^fice then is as his Pr^fession, or particular Calling; because it is to
be supposed, he is to continue in that imploymen^, and to attend the same until
the Kings pleasure be further known therein: but if the King upon some sudden I
s^rrection and Invasion should raise an Army, and make choice of some person of
like Quality to have the Conduct thereof, for the S^p^^essing or Repelling such
Insurrection or Invasio^, his Employment in that service being but temporary,
and to determine as soon as the business were ended, should not otherwise than
in courtesy denominate him a General; or at least not be esteemed as his
permanent profession, but only as a transient Office; This is one Case.

The other Case (which is more pertinent to the business of these Letters) is
of such as desire to employ themselves in the exercise of Arms in Foreign
Service, that they may attain to such knowledge or experience in the Art
Military, as might the better enable them to do their King and Country
Service, whenever there should be need thereof; for since the Managery of War
is long since grown into an Art, and that not to be learned from Books, or from
private study; but to be acquired by much practice and experience, and diligent
observation: and the rather for that the particular Rules of that Art, do not
stand at such a certain stay as those of most other Arts do, but are daily
altered and improved by new Inventions: It is very necessary for every State to
be well provided of a good number of such persons of their own Nation, as
should be expert and skilful in that Art; lest they should be forced, if an
unexpected War should happen, to call in Foreiners for assistance, which is
both dishonorable and dangerous: the necessity hereof too well appears by
the evil consequents of the neglect of it in this Nation in these latter times,
especially in the Reigns of the two last Kings, by reason of the long Peace;
and (which commonly breeds out of it as the rust and canker thereof)
tenderness of Education and voluptuous living. The Nobility and Gentry of
England, in the generality of them, had so much degenerated from the Martial
Prowess of their Ancestors renowned in all Histories, than in the beginning of
these unnatural Wars, there were very f^w to be found of our own No^ility and
Gentry, fit to have Command in an Army, or that knew any thing belonging to the
Art of War; insomuch as use was made on both sides of Mercenary Men, and most
of them Scots, who being for the most part bred up abroad (in France
especially, a place of much action) had learned experience more than our
English had in such matters, by which advan^age they had so wound themselves
in^o the chief Places of Command, and had such an influence into the Coun^ils
of both sides, ^^at the War was in a manner wholly ordered ^y their directions,
witness the great power that Ruthen, V^rey, King, Meldram, etc. ^ad in the
Armies on either side.

8. The weightiness then of Princes Af^airs, upon all emergent occasions,
rendering it necessary for them, not only to have Power to command their
Subjects of whatsoever Rank or Profession to serve as Soldiers in their Wars;
but also to provide aforehand for a supply of able Men, both for places of
Command, and to execute other parts of that service, which cannot be done,
unless a considerable number of persons be trained up in the exercise of Arms,
and bred Soldiers: It is consequently necessary, that some persons be, either
by their Authority appointed, or at least by their permission allowed to addict
themselves to a Military course of life, as their proper Profession and
Calling, which Authority or Permission from their So^ereign, will sufficiently
warrant to their Conscience the choice of that Profession; supposing (as now we
do) that the intention be right, the person meetly qualified, and all other
Cautions in respect of the matter, manner, circumstances, and otherwise, duly
observed.

9. The necessity of learning this Art granted, there may sometimes follow a
further necessity, viz. of learning it abroad; and after it is learned, of
exercising it abroad; and in Foreign service, and that in these two Cases:
First, when the Soldiers own Country, whereunto his service is principally,
and in the first place due, has either the happiness to be in a settled Peace
and Freedom, under the Government of a lawful Sovereign; or the unhappiness to
be in such servitude, through the prevalency of an Usurping Power, that no
Resistance can be made there against; for in the former Case, there is no
exercise at all of the Soldiers faculty in earnest; and of what little avail
to the attaining of any solid knowledge, or experience in the Art Military, such
superficial trainings, as were used (and those but very seldom neither) by the
Lieutenants of the several Counties here in England, with the Country Captains
and Muster-Masters are (besides that, our own reason will tell us) the Rawness
and Vnserviceableness of our Trained-Bands in the beginning of the late Wars
did abundantly manifest: and in the latter Case, the Soldier, if he will have
Employment at home, must either engage on the b^half of an unjust Power, or
else run upon his own certain destruction to no purpose.

IV. Consideration of the condition of the Person.
1. THis must be considered too; for the different conditions of persons, may
make a great difference in the lawfulness or unlawfulness of their actions,
according to the old saying, which holds true in this sense also, no less
than in that other, in which it is commonly used (relating to men's corrupt
partialities, Duo cum faciunt idem, non est idem. In your Friends second
Letter, I find a demand made (as in the way of Reply to some passage of your
Answer to his first Letter) to this purpose; Suppose two great Princes (as
France and Spain, for instance) have had long Wars together, and the justice of
the Cause appear neither more nor less, on the one side, than the other; if in
case a third Prince, or State, out of a sincere desire to Establish the Peace
of Christendom, after other offers and meditations for that purpose made in
vain, might lawfully join in Arms with the one party to force the other to
Peace, why a private person might not as lawfully (having the same intention)
enter into Arms for the same purpose; and the reason of demand thereof is,
because every Prince or State is (in relation to other Princes and States) but
as one private man to another; for being called to the Regiment of his own
people only, he is but as a private man in Aliena Republica.

2. But that there is a great difference between a Sovereign Prince and a
private Person in this affair, it cannot be denied; insomuch that I find in the
very same passage (put in as it were by way of O^jection) three very
considerable differences. First, That Princes may, and sometimes are obliged by
Articles and Covenants, for the defense of their Allies, to take up Arms, which
cannot be the case of private Men. Secondly, That Princes may see cause to set
in for their own safety and interest, lest the prevailing Party might grow too
Potent, and so themselves might be oppressed by him. Thirdly, there is a
greater probability in a Prince of compa^sing that Noble and Glorious end, The
Peace of Christendom, than can be in a private Man. All these differences are
allowed there as true; but yet excepted against, as not contributing any thing
to the justice of the cause, which is here the Question.

If these do not, yet a Fourth difference there is, that will (as I conceive)
manifestly contribute thereunto, to wit, that Ius Belli, is Penes Principem
solum: in the business of War, Princes have a judicial, private Men an
executive power only; and he that has no power but to execute the sentence of
a Judge, is bound to wait the Judges Sentence before he offer to act; otherwise
he shall act beyond his lawful power, which is unjust: Not but that Prince, if
he raise a War where he ought not, is unjust too; even as a Judge is unjust,
which pronounces a wrong sentence: but herein is the difference between them
^or taking up of Arms. The Prince having jus agendi in that behalf, may do it
justly, and he may do it unjustly; yet where he does it unjustly, he does but
abuti jure suo: but the private person, not having jus agendi, in that respect
cannot (without the Authority of the Sovereign) do it otherwise than unjustly;
because in so doing, he does without leave uti jure alieno, which is always
unjust. It is one thing for a Man to use (whether well or ill) a power that of
right belongs not to him; the one is not unjust, unless he abuse his Power,
the other is, if he use it at all.

4. Neither perhaps will the Reason alleged to the contrary ( viz. that a
Prince in point of Justice and Power, is in Aliena republica, but as a private
person) bear so much weight as is laid upon it, if one Point be well
considered, which I think will prove a truth, though it be very tenderly
handled; otherwise it may prove very dangerous, both because it may seem a
Paradox to those that have been little conversant in public Affairs; as also,
and especially, because it may, by racking it too high, be easily wrested to a
mischievous construction, for the Patronage of any Tyrannical action; the point
is this, that justitia politica, and Iustitia privata, have not in all the same
adequate measure. Princes are bound to be just, as well as the meanest private
men are, and obliged to keep Faith both with Friends and Enemies, every whit as
exactly and punctually, without equivocation, reservation, or other eluding
devices, as they; of all this no man doubts: but it is not therefore
necessary, that the Rules of Justice, whereby the Councils and Actions of
Princes and States, in their mutual Relations are to be measured, should be
precisely the same with those which measure the dealings of Private men one
with another.

5. And the reason of the difference is evident: private Men's Controversies may
be decided, and their Injuries repressed or punished, by the positive Laws of
the State, whereof they are Members; and consequently subject to be ordered in
all their dealings by those Laws; which positive Laws (together with the Law of
Nature, and the Divine Law, which are common to all Men) are the adequate Rule,
whereby the Justice of private Persons, and of their actions, is to be
measured; but since Princes and States are not subject to any such positive
Laws common to them both, as may determine their Differences and Controversies:
The great necessity of Humane Affairs, has (for the good of Mankind in the
pr^serv^tion of Peace) introduced by the common consent of Nations, another Law
of larger extent, that which we p^culiarly call Iu^ Gentium, or the Law of
Nations (whereof that which we call the Law of Arms, is one special part) by
which the Law of Nations (together with the Law of Nature, and the Divine Law,
as aforesaid) the Justice of Princes and States, and of their Actions, is as by
the proper adequate Rule thereof to be measured. Whence it comes to pass, that
sundry things are by the Rules of Politic Justice allowed as lawful and just
between Princes, which between private men, would by the Rules of mere moral
Justice, be condemned (and that deservedly too) as unjust and unlawful: There
are sundry Arcana Imperii, some arts and simulations for maintaining
Intelligence abroad for concealing and disguising Councils at home, in the
Instructions of Ambassadors and managing of Embassies, in making Alliances and
Confederacies, but especially in the pursuance and effects of War, which seem
much to swerve from the ordinary Precepts of moral Justice; which yet side
integra and circa dolum malum) are by the consent of Nations allowed to be
used, and so must be, or else there could be no secure living in the world in
any Society, that saying of his A^que ipsa utilitas justi prope ma^er and
aequi, had somewhat of truth and reason in it.

6. The truth and reasonableness of what has been said will appear (omitting
many other) in these few Instances. First, when a Town is taken by the Enemy,
by the Law of Nations, the spoil thereof falls to the Conqueror, which if he
give to the Soldiery to plunder (as usually is done) every Soldier thereby
acquireth a just Right and Dominion in that which he can lay his hand on first,
and take into his Possession. Secondly, It may sometimes concern a Prince or
State in point of Honor or Safety to vindicate himself by War, for some wrong
offered to his Merchants, or for some Rudeness or Incivilities done to his
Ambassador (for even these, in case Reparation be demanded and denied, have
been ever held just causes of War; (as Amphitruo in Plautus rendereth that as a
sufficient reason of his War, Nimis ferociter legatos nostros increpant) in
this case it is by the Law of Nations allowed him, not only to fight against
the Prince himself, who yet on^y did the wrong, but to waste his Country, fire
his Towns and Villages, and spoil thousands of his innocent Subjects of their
fortunes and lives in pursuance of his just revenge; but if a private Gentleman
w^onged by his Neighbor should in like manner, in revenge of that wrong, beat
his Servants, vex his Tenants, and seek his or their undoing, the act were
palpably most unchristian and unjust. Thirdly, Since potent Princes, have for
the most part, great Ambitions, (and Ambition is a boundless lust) it behooves
a Prince for his own safety, to have a watchful eye over the Motions and
Desi^ns of a potent Neighbor, almost as much as of a declared Enemy; and
therefore wise Princes have ever been careful by all just means to balance
their neighbor Princes and States as near as they could; in such a proportion
as might hinder the over-growth of any one above the rest: In order whereunto
it has been held lawful for a Prince, laying aside the consideration of the
cause, to join in Arms with the weaker, for his assistance against his Potent
Adversary, who else were likely in a short time to swallow him up, whereby he
should become formidable and dangerous, as well to himself as to the other his
neighbor P^inces and States; upon which account alon^, were there no other
reason besides, it would be as just for all Christian Princes to compose their
own quarrels, and to aid the Venetian, and Hungarian, Persian, or Tartar,
against the Turk, as it is expedient and honorable for them so to do: but what
is thus allowed just in the waging of War between Princes; if in a wager of Law
a private person should attempt the like, viz. to assist with his purse and
pains a Poor Man against a Rich without considering the equity of the Cause,
the Act were (as in the former instance) palpably unjust and unchristian:
Instances might be produced many more to the same effect were it needful, but
these I think sufficiently ^vidence the truth of what I undertook to show in
this particular.

7. There are also sundry other circumstances considerable concerning the
condition of the person, which may render the same undertaking unlawful to one,
which yet may be lawful for another, or more or less expedient or inexpedient
for one than for another, supposing both private persons and Subjects; as
namely, whether he be a person of Honor and Estate, or a man of ordinary rank
and fortune; whether a single man, or Married? if Married, whether he have the
consent of his Wife or no? and whether such consent were a free and rational
consent in the Wif^, arising from a Judgment convinced of the fitness of the
undertaking, or rather w^ung from her by the importunity of the Husband, and
her facility in yielding to the potency of his desires therein? whether the
necessity of his domestical Affairs, and Oeconomical Relations will brook his
absence for so long a time as must be spent in that Employment; or will not
rather require his presence and care for the ma^ager^ thereof in the mean time?
and an hundred other like doubts and difficulties meet to be taken into
deliberation, and unprejudicately weighed against those other probabilities and
inducements which at first kindled, and after fomented his desires, before he
imbarque himself in that Employment: and yet when all is done, it were safer
for him (in my opinion) to forbear than to proceed in his intentions, unless he
shall be assured, that he has the free allowance of his Sovereign, thereunto
either expressed (which would be the clearest warrant for his conscience) or at
leastwise upon very pregnant grounds of probability presumed.

The CASE of SCANDAL.
1. IN judging of Cases of Scandal, we are not so much to look at the event,
what that is, or may be; as at the cause whence it comes; for sometimes there
is given just cause of Scandal, and yet no Scandal follows, because it is not
taken: sometimes Scandal is taken, and yet no just cause given; and sometimes
there is both cause of Scandal given, and Scandal thereat taken: but no man is
concerned in any Scandal that happens to another, by occasion of any thing
done by him; neither is chargeable with it, farther than he is guilty of having
given it: If then we give Scandal to others, and they take it not, we are to
bear a share in the blame as well as they, and that a deeper sha^e too, ( Vae
homini, Woe to the man by whom the offense comes, Matthew. 8.7.) but if they take
Offense when we give none, it is a thing we cannot help, therefore the whole
blame must lie upon them; wherefore if at any time any doubt shall arise in the
Case of Scandal, how far forth the danger thereof may, or may not oblige us to
the doing or not doing any thing proposed, the Resolution will come on much the
easier; if we shall but rightly understand, what it is to give Scandal, or how
many ways a man may become guilty of scandalizing another by his example. The
ways (as I conceive) are but these four.

2. The first is, when a man does something before another man, which is in it
self evil, unlawful, and sinful; in which Case, neither the intention of him
that does it, nor the event, as to him that sees it done, is of any
consideration; for it mattereth not whether the doer had an intention to draw
the other into sin thereby, or not: neither does it matter whether the other
were thereby induced to commit sin or not: the matter or substance of the
action being evil, and done before others, is sufficient to tender the doer
guilty of having given Scandal, though he had neither any intention himself so
to do; nor were any person actually scandalized thereby; because whatsoever is
in it self, and in its own nature evil, is also of it self, and in its own
nature scandalous, and of evil example. Thus did Hophni and Phineas the Sons of
Eli, give Scandal by their wretched profaneness and greediness about the
Sacrifices of the Lord, and their vile and shameless abusing the Women, 1 Samuel
2.17.22. And so did David also give great Scandal in the matter of Vriah, 2 Samuel 12.14. Here the Rule is, Do nothing that is evil, for fear of giving
Scandal.

3. The second way is, when a man does something before another, with a direct
intention and formal purpose of drawing him thereby to commit sin; in which
Case, neither the matter of the action, nor the event is of any consideration,
for it makes no difference (as to the sin of giving Scandal) whether any man
be effectually enticed thereby to commit sin, or not; neither does it make any
difference, whether the thing done were in it self unlawful or nor, so as it
had but an appearance of evil; and from thence an aptitude to draw another to
do that (by imitation) which should be really and intri^secally evil, the
wicked intention alone, (whatsoever the effect should be, or means soever
should be used to promote it) suffices to induce the guilt of giving Sca^dal
upon the doer: This was Ieroboam's ^in, in setting up the Calves with a formal
purpose and intention thereby (for his own secular and ambitious ends) to
corrupt the purity of Religion, and to draw the people to an Idolatrous
Worship, for which cause he is so often stigmatized with it, as with a note of
Infamy, to stick by him whilst the World lasts, being scarce ever mentioned
but with this addition, Jeroboam the son of Nebat that made Israel to sin. Here
the Rule is, Do nothing (good or evil) with an intention to give Scandal.

4. The third way is, when a Man does something before another, which in it
self is not evil, but indifferent, and so according to the Rule of Christian
Liberty, lawful for him to do, or not to do, as he shall see cause (yea, and
perhaps otherwise commodious and convenien: for him to do) yet whereat he
probably foreseeth the other will take Scandal, and be occasioned thereby to do
evil. In such Case, if the thing to be done, be not in some degree (at least
prudentially) necessary for him to do; but that he might, without great
inconvenience and prejudice to himself, and any third person, leave it undone,
he ^s bound in Charity and Compassion to his Brothers Soul, (for whom Christ
died) and for the avoiding of Scandal to abridge himself in the exercise of his
Christian Liberty for that time so far, as rather to suffer some inconvenience
himself by the not doing of it, than by doing of it to cause his Brother to
offend; the very Case which is so often, and so largely, and so earnestly
insisted upon by St. Paul, Romans 14.13, 21. and 15.1, 3. 1 Cor. 8.7, 13. and
9.12, 22. and 10.23, 33. Here the Rule is, Do nothing that man be reasonably
forborne, whereat it is like Scandal will be taken.

5. The last way is, when a man does something before another, which is not
only lawful, but (according to the exegencies of present circumstances pro hic
and nunc) very behoveful, and in some sort (prudentially) necessary for him to
do; but foreseeth in the beholder a propension to make an ill use of it and to
take encouragement thereby to commit sin; if there be not withal a great car^
had to prevent, as much as is possible, the Scandal that might be taken
thereat: for Qui non prohibet peccare, cum potest jubet. I^ such case the bare
neglect of his Brother, an^ not using his utmost endeavor to pr^ve^^ the evil
that might ensue, making him guilty upon which Consideration stands the
equity of the Judicial Law given to the Iew^ Exodus 21.33, 34. which orders,
that i^ case a man dig a Pit or Well for the use of his Family, and (looking no
farther than his own convenience) put no cover on it, but leave it open,
whereby it happens his Neighbors Beast to fall therein, and perish, the
owner of the Pit is to make it good, inasmuch as he was the occasioner of that
loss unto his neighbor, which he might and ought to have prevented: In this
last Case the thing is not (for the danger of the Scandal) to be left undone,
supposing it (as we now do) otherwise behoveful to be done; but the action is
to be ordered, and carried on by us, for the manner of doing, and in all
Respects and Circumstances thereunto belonging, with so much clearness,
tenderness, and moderation, and wisdom, that so many as are willing to take
notice of it, may be satisfied that there was on our part a reason of just
necessity that the thing should be done; and that such persons as would be
willing to make use of our example, without the like necessity, may do it upon
their own score, and not be able to vouch our practice for their excuse; even
as the Jew that stood in need to sink a Pit for the service of his House and
Grounds, was not (for fear his Neighbors Beasts should fall into it, and be
drowned) bound by the Law, to forbear the making of it, but only to provide a
sufficient cover for it, when he had made it. Here the Rule is, order the doing
of that which may not well be left undone, in such sort, that no Scandal may,
through your default, be taken thereat.

6. I do not readily remember any doubt that can occur about the reason of
Scandal, which may not be brought within the compass of these four Rules; and
then the right applying some or other of these Rules, will give some
furtherance toward the resolution of these doubts.

The CASE of a BOND Taken in the KINGS Name: Proposed July 1658.
R. C. Was seized in Fee of certain Houses of small Value, with the
Appurtenances; and in the Year 1635. whiles Owner of the said Houses, he
entreated A. B. to be his Surety for One Hundred Pounds; and continued the same
at Interest till 1639. At which time he requested A. B. to discharge that Bond,
and in consideration thereof, sells the said Houses to A. B. and his Heirs
for ever; the said R. C. also buyeth of a Merchant a parcel of Goods; the
Merchant being a Receiver of some part of the late Kings Revenue, and under
pretense of a privilege thereby, takes a Bond of the said R. C. for the
payment of Two Hundred pounds to himself, but in the Name of the late King, as
if indebted to the King; and under that pretense, procures an extent upon the
Houses sold to A. B. and makes seizure thereof: Was R. C. seized of the same,
when he entered into that Bond.

The said King, 1640. published a Proclamation, wherein he declared, That the
taking of such Bonds was contrary to His Intention, and an abuse of his
Prerogative, and prohibited all such crafty Courses, as tending to the
Oppression of his Subjects; and it is to be noted, that the said Proclamation
was published two years before the extent was executed upon the Houses, which
nevertheless have been held under that extent, about fourteen years, which is
beyond the value of the Houses.

The said R. C. died poor, the Merchant is dead also, without any Child,
leaving an Estate behind him of Twenty Thousand Pounds, as is supposed; a
great part visible in Lands, as appears by his last Will upon Record.

Advice of Council at Law being taken, how the said A. B. may be most readily
relieved; he is directed to Petition the present Supreme Power to pardon the
Debt, because taken only in the Kings Name, when there is no Debt due to him
from R. C.

As to the Case Proposed.
1. I Am clearly of opinion, that the taking of Bonds in the Kings Name, to the
mere behoof, and for the advantage of private persons, when there was such Debt
really due to the King, was a fraudulent and unjust act from the beginning; for
though it were not actually forbidden, and so might perhaps be valid enough in
foro externo, till the issuing out of the Kings Proclamation in that behalf;
yet was it in point of Conscience unlawful before, as being a crafty course: so
refused by the King himself, and guilty of a double injustice, the one to the
King, as an abuse to his Prerogative; the other to the Subject, as tending to
their oppression, as by the Proclamation is recited, and that therefore.

2. Neither might the Merchant, whiles he lived, nor ought his Executors, now
he is dead, to make advantage of the Kings Name used in that Bond; nor might he
then, nor may they now, by virtue of the Kings Prerogative, or under the color
thereof, for the recovery of the said Debt, use any way to the prejudice or
damage of the Obligee, or of any Purchaser from him, other than such, as he or
they might have used, in case the Bond had been taken in the Obligee's own
Name, and not in the Kings.

3. If any Proceedings have been made already in pursuit of the Debt, due upon
the said Bond, upon no other ground or color, than the Prerogative aforesaid,
whereby the said A. B. comes to be endamaged or prejudiced more than otherwise
he should have been; that the Execu^ors ought to make him some considerable
satisfaction for the same, although perhaps not to the full of what he has
suffered or would demand; yet in such a proportion, as to the judgment of
indifferent persons (in a case wherein both parties, if they must do what is
fitting and just, are sure to be losers) shall seem reasonable, in case the
Parties cannot accord it between themselves.

4. Whereof, although through the corrupt partiality that is in most, I may
truly say, all men more or less; I do not apprehend any great likelihood (for
neither part would, and yet both must be losers) yet I should advise that trial
were made thereof in the first place, as the most kindly Christian way of
growing to peace, if parties will be persuaded to meet about it, and can be
made Masters of their own passions when they are met; and surely matters might
be easily brought to a handsome conclusion, if both parties, but especially the
Executors, who seem to have the advantage in Law, would not stand too much upon
whatsoever advantage they may seem to have, but (as in Conscience they ought)
submit both that, and all other circumstances appertaining to the business, and
indeed their whole mutual demands; to the final determination of that
transcendent Law, which Christ has established as the only Royal Standard,
whereby to measure the equity of our actions, in all our dealings toward
others, viz. To do as we would be done unto; or which comes to one, Not to do
that to another, which if he should do to us (supposing his Case was ours) we
should think our selves scarce justly and fairly dealt withal.

5. But lastly, in case no such accord can be made, either by agreement of
Parties, or mediation of Friends, and that through the only default and
stiffness of the Executors; A. B. having by all fair ways faithfully sought and
endeavored the same, I see not but the said A. B. may (but not to be done, but
as his last refuge) seek to relieve himself according to the advice of his
Council, by making his Addresses to such Person or Personage, as for the time
being shall be in actual possession of the Supreme Power, and so in a capacity
to overruled the Law in a Case of that nature, by forgiving that Debt whereupon
the King was colourably and fraudulently entitled for private advantage, to
the prejudice of a third person, but was not at all a debt owing to him from
the Obligee.

P. P. 17. July, 1658.
The CASE of the ENGAGEMENT.
SIR,
I Have hitherto been very sparing in delivering my opinion concerning the
point now most in agitation, viz. Of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of
Subscribing the Engagement: considering the mischiefs that must needs have
followed, if it should be once noised abroad, that I had given forth any
determination in so tickle a point. I could not but foresee on the one side, if
I should condemn it as utterly unlawful, how I should be looked upon by those
that have all power in their hands, not as a refuser only, but a disswader also
of what they have thought fit to require: And on the other side, if I should
allow it in any case lawful, what ill use would certainly be made thereof by
multitudes of people, apt to be so far scandalized thereby, as either to
swallow it whole without chewing, (that is, resting themselves upon the general
determination of the lawfulness to take it in hand over head, without due
consideration, either of the true meaning of it, or of other requisite cautions
and circumstances) or else to conceive themselves by so engaging, to be for
ever discharged from the bond of their former Allegiance.

Yet since by your Letter, and by sending your servant therewith on purpose so
many days journey, through unknown ways, and at this season of the year
(especially as the weather has proved since his coming forth) scarce passable,
you have shown your earnest desire to understand what my opinion is in this
point; so great, both for difficulty and concernment; I could not think it fit,
nor consistent with that civility which is to be used, especially toward
Strangers, to send back your messenger without the return of some kind of
answer: Wherein, albeit I shall not come up to the full, of what your Letter
declares to be your desire, viz. In giving a particular Judgment and estimate
of the Eight several Arguments therein proposed, and the additional Quaere in
the Postscript: yet you shall find something tending toward your satisfaction
therein, by touching upon those points (so far as the straits of time would
suffer) wherein the difficulty of the whole business seems chiefly to consist.

First then, it is to be considered, that Allegiance is a duty that every
Subject, under what form of Government soever, by the Law of Nature, owes to
his Country, and consequently to the Sovereign Power thereof. For the very
same Law (which we may call the Law of Nature, at least in a large acceptance)
which inclines particular men to grow into one civil body of a Commonwealth,
must necessarily withal, imprint a sense, and tacit acknowledgment of such a
duty of Allegiance in every inferior member of the body, unto the Caput
Communitatis, or Sovereign Power, by which that Commonwealth is governed, as
is necessary for the preservation of the whole body. So that the bond of
Allegiance does not arise originally from the Oath of Allegiance; as if those
that had not taken the Oath, had a greater liberty to act contrary to the
Allegiance specified in the Oath, than those that have taken it, have: or as
if, in case the Oath should be quite laid aside, there should be no Allegiance
due. But it is so intrinsecal, proper, and essential a duty, and (as it were)
fundamental, to the relation of a Subject, qua talis, as that the very name of
a Subject does, after a sort, import it; insomuch, that it has thereupon
gained, in common usage of speech, the style of Natural Allegiance: Whence all
these inferences will follow.

1. That the bond of Allegiance, (whether sworn or not sworn) is in the nature
of it perpetual and indispensable.

2. That it is so inseparable, from the relation of a Subject, that although
the exercise of it, may be suspended by reason of a prevailing force, whilst
the Subject is under such force, ( viz. where it cannot be imagined, how the
endeavor of exercising it can be effectually serviceable to restore the
Sovereign Power to the right owner, for the establishment of that Public
Justice and Peace wherein the happiness of Commonwealths consists) yet no
outward force can so absolutely take it away, or remove it, but that still it
remains vertually in the Subject, and obliges to an endeavor (so soon as
the force that hindered it is over) of actually exercising of it, for the
advantage of the party, to whom of right it is due, and the advancement of the
common good thereby, upon all fit occasions.

3. That no Subject of England, that either has, by taking the Oaths of
Supremacy, or Allegiance, acknowledged; or that not having taken either Oath,
yet otherwise knows, or believes, that the Sovereign Power in England, to
whom his Natural Allegiance is due, is the King, his Heirs, and lawful
Successors, can without sinning against his Conscience, enter into any
Covenant, Promise, or Engagement, or do any other Act or Acts whatsoever,
whereby either to transfer his Allegiance to any other party, to whom it is not
of right due, or to put himself into an incapacity of performing the duties of
his bounden Allegiance to his lawful Sovereign, when it may appear to be useful
and serviceable to him.

4. That therefore the taking of the late Solemn League and Covenant, by any
Subject of England (notwithstanding the Protestation in the Preface, that
therein he had the Honor of the King before his eyes; and that express clause
in one of the Articles of it, wherein he swore, The Preservation of the Kings
Person and Honor) was an act as clear contrary to the Oath of Allegiance, and
the Natural Duty of every Subject of England; as the Assisting of the King to
the utmost of ones power (which is a branch of the Oaths) and the assisting
against any person whatsoever, with his utmost power, those that were actually
in Arms against the King (which was the very end for which that Covenant was
set on foot) are contrary the one unto the other.

5. And that also for the same reason, no Subject of England, that has taken
the Oaths, and understands them, or is persuaded that the Sovereignty of this
Realm does of right belong to the King, his Heirs, and lawful Successors, can
without sinning in like manner against his Conscience, take the Engagement now
offered: if he so understand the words, wherein it is expressed, as if they did
contain in them, and require of the Promiser, an acknowledgment that the
Supreme Power of this Realm, whereunto the Subjects owe their bounden
Allegiance, is rightly vested in those persons that now exercise it; or as if
they did import an utter abjuration, or renouncing of that Allegiance which was
formerly held due to the King.

II. This being cleared, the next enquiry must be, Whether or no the words of
the Engagement will reasonably bear such a construction, as to the
understanding of a rational and conscientious man, may seem consistent with his
bounden duty and Allegiance to his lawful Sovereign? Whereof (I think) there
need be no great question made, if it be well considered.

1. That all expressions by words, are subject to such ambiguities, that scarce
any thing can be said or exp^essed in any words, how cautelously soever chosen,
which will not render the whole speech capable of more constructions than one.

2. That very many men, known to be well affected to the King and his Party,
and reputed otherways both learned and conscientious (not to mention the
Presbyterians, most of whom, truly for my own part, when we speak of learning
and conscience, I hold to be very little considerable) have subscribed the
Engagement; who in the judgment of Charity, we are to presume, would not so
have done, if they had not been persuaded the words might be understood in some
such qualified sense, as might stand with the duty of Allegiance to the King.

3. That (as you write) it is strong^y reported and believed, that the King
has given way to the tak^ng of the Engagement, rather than that his good
Subjects should lose their Estates for re^using the same. Which, as it is a
clear evidence, that the King, and they who are about him, to advise him, do
not so conceive of the words of this Engagement, as if they did necessarily
import an abandoning of the Allegiance due to him: so it is (if true) a matter
of great consideration toward the satisfaction of so many, as out of that fear
only, have scrupled the taking of it. For the doing of that cannot be
reasonably thought to destroy the Subjects Allegiance; which the King, who
expects Allegiance from all his Subjects, advisedly, and upon mature
deliberation allows them to do.

III. But all this being granted, that the words of the Engagement are capable
of such construction; yet is not the Conscience thereby sufficiently secured,
from justly scrupling at the taking thereof, unless it may yet further appear,
that the Subject has the liberty to make use of such a construction; which is
in effect the Qu^re contained in your Postscript, viz. Whether upon
supposition, that the words of the Engagement will bear more constructions than
one, the subscriber may take it in his own sense, or is bound to take it in the
imposers sense? or, Whether it be necessary or expedient before he subscribe,
to ask those that require his subscription, in what sense they require him to
subscribe it? Upon the resolution of which Quaere, since (as I conceive) the
last resolution of the Judgment, wherein the Conscience is to acquiesce, does
principally depend; I shall endeavor to give you my thoughts therein, (wherein
I acknowledge to have received much light and satisfaction from a Discourse
written by a Learned, Judicious, and Pious friend, whereof I lately had the
perusal, but for some reasons, not thought fit to be published) as distinctly,
and clearly, as the time I have to do it in, will suffer.

1. First then, for a man that is required of another to give Faith by some
Oath, Promise, or other Engagement, to take it in a sense of his own,
manifestly different (even in his own apprehension) from the others meaning,
sufficiently expressed by words, according to the common custom of speech, and
the nature of the business which it concerns, is so gross a conceit, that had
not the impudence of the J^suits, in maintaining the lawfulness of their
Equivocations, and the sad experience of these late times, (wherein thousands
have cheated themselves in perjury, by thinking to avoid it) evidenced the
contrary, it might well have been thought a thing incredible, that any man of
common understanding, should suffer his reason to be so infatuated by his
affections, as to be deceived thereby. For if such latitude of construction
should be admitted in Promises, and other Obligations of that nature, intended
for the Preservation of Faith amongst mankind, there would not remain any
possible means, whereby for men to have assurance of one another meanings.
Wherefore I take that for a clear truth, That all Promises, and Assurances,
wherein Faith is required to be given to another, ought to be understood, ad
mentem imponentis, according to the mind and meaning of him to whom the Faith
is to be given; so far forth as the meaning may reasonably appear, by the
nature of the matter about which it is conversant, and such signification of
the words, whereby it is expressed, as according to the ordinary use of speech
amongst men, agrees best thereunto. The reason whereof is, because the Faith
so required to be given, is intended to the b^hoof, and for the interest of him
that requires it; namely, to the end he may have the better assurance from him
that gives the faith, that what is promised shall be accordingly performed:
which assurance he cannot have, if after his meaning, sufficiently declared by
the words, it should yet be at the liberty of the Promiser to reserve another
secret meaning in his own breast, differing therefrom.

2. But Secondly, what if the Intention of the Imposer be not so fully declared
by the words and the nature of the business; but that the same words may in
fair construction be still capable of a double meaning, so as taken in one
sense, they shall bind to More, and in another to Less? I conceive in such case
it is not necessary, nor always expedient (but rather for the most part
otherwise) for the Promiser, before he give faith, to demand of the Imposer,
whether of the two is his meaning. But he may by the rule of Prudence, and that
(for ought I see) without the violation of any Law of Conscience, make his just
advantage of that ambiguity, and take it in the same sense which shall bind to
the Less. And this I ground upon the very same reason as before; For since the
Faith to be given, is intended to the behoof of him, to whom it is given, it
concerns him to take care that his meaning be expressed in ^uch words as will
sufficiently manifest the same to the understanding of a reasonable man. Which
if he neglect to do, no Law of Equity or Prudence binds the Promiser by an
over-scrupulous diligence to make it out, whereby to lay a greater obligation
upon himself than he need to do.

3. But then Thirdly, if it shall happen (as often it comes to pass, when we
have to deal with cunning men, and may possibly be the Case now, and
undoub^edly was so in the business of the P^otestation, when the time was) That
he that requires the faith to be given, do of purpose so contrive the words,
that there may be l^ft an ambiguity and latitude of sense therein; yea, and
that it be very probable, and in a manner apparent, (upon the consideration of
the point of interest, or other strong presumptions arising from circumstances
or otherwise) even to the apprehension of the Promiser himself, that he has
some farther reach in requiring that promise from him, some more remote and
secret intention then he is willing to discover. In that case what is to be
done? I answer, That the Promiser in such case is no ways obliged in giving his
Faith, to take notice of any secret intention, but is at liberty to make use of
that Latitude of sense, which the other did rather choose to leave undetermined,
than to restrain, and so to turn the others cunning dealing to his own best
advantage, by taking it in the more favorable construction; and that which
binds to less. For it is the declared intention only, ( viz. That which the
words, according to the common use of speech, do in relation to the nature of
the subject, most naturally and properly represent to the understanding of
reasonable men, when they hear them) and not (...) the remote, secret, and
reserved intent, which the Promiser is obliged unto. The reason whereof is
manifest; because he that requires Faith to be given from another, by words of
his own contriving, is ever presumed so to have determined the sense thereof,
in the contrivance of the words, as may sufficiently declare what he intends
the Promiser should assure him to perform. If therefore he have not so
determined the words, as to signify the More; it is in all reason to be
presumed, that he intended to oblige him but to the Less. For being at liberty
to make his own choice of words, whereby to express his own meaning; who can
think otherwise, but that he would make the choice with respect to his own
Interest? And therefore, though he might have a secret desire, which he is lo^h
to discover, that the Promiser should be bound to the More, and would be
marvellously well pleased, that he should so understand the words, as if they
intended to bind him to the More: Yet since it had been so easy a matter for
him, by adding or altering a few words, to have declared that intent, if he had
thought it conducible to his own ends; it will be presumed also, that it was
out of respect of self-interest, that he forbear so to do, and chose rather to
leave his meaning, in such general words, as will not exclude the sense, which
binds but to the Less; and consequently that his declared intent obliges to
no more but to the Less only.

IV. To bring the matter yet closer, and to put it up to the present Cases,
there are yet two things more to be done.

First, To show what the different constructions ( the highest, I mean, and the
lowest) the words of the Engagement are fairly capabl^ of.

And Secondly, to find as well as we can, whether of the two is more probably
the meaning intended by the Imposers, to be declared by the words.

The words are these: I do promise to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth
of England, as it is now established without King or Lords.

Wherein there are sundry ambiguities.

1. First, In the words true and fai^hf^l; by which may be intended, either the
promise of that Fidelity and Allegiance (which was formerly acknowledged to be
due to the King, etc.) to be now performed to those that are presently
possessed of the Supreme Power, as their right and due. Or else that promise of
such a kind of fidelity, as Captives taken in the War, promise to their
Enemies, when they fall under their power; viz. to remain true Prisoners of
War, and so long as they are in their power, not to attempt any thing to their
destruction.

2. Secondly, In the word Commonwealth, by which may either be meant, those
persons who are the prevalent party in this Kingdom, and now are possessed of,
and do exercise the Supreme Power therein, as if the right of Sovereignty were
vested in them: Or else, the whole entire Body of the English Nation, as it is
a Civil Society or State within it self, distinguished from all other Foreign
Estates. Taken in the former sense, the fidelity promised to the Commonwealth,
relates directly to the upholding of that party who are the present Governors
de facto, and imports subjection to them as de jure: But taken in the latter,
it relates to the safety of the Nation, and imports no more as to the
present Governors, but to live peaceably under them de facto, and to yield
obedience to them in things absolutely necessary for the upholding Civil
Society within the Realm; such as are the defense of the Nation against
Foraigners, the furtherance of Public Justice, and the maintenance of Trade.

3. In the words as it is now established, etc. which may be understood either
by way of approbation of what has been done by way of abolishing Kingly
Government, and the House of Peers, and placing all Authority and Power within
the Realm, in the House of Commons. Or else (...) only, as a clause simply and
barely reciting what manner of Government it is that this Nation de facto, is
now under; viz. a Government by the Commons only, without either King or House
of Lords.

Which Ambiguities considered, The highest construction that can be reasonably
made of the words, is to this effect. I acknowledge the Sovereign Power of this
Nation, where unto I owe Allegiance and Subjection to be rightly stated in the
House of Commons, wherein neither King nor Lords (as such) have, or henceforth
ought to have any share; And I promise that I will perform all Allegiance and
Subjection thereunto, and maintain the same with my fortunes and life to the
utmost of my power.

And the lowest construction that can be reasonably made of the same words, is
to this effect: Whereas for the present, the Supreme Power in England, under
which Power I now am, is actually possessed and exercised by the House of
Commons, without either King or Lords; I promise that so long as I live under
that power and protection, I will not contrive or attempt any act of hostility
against them: but living quietly and peaceably under them, will endeavor my
self faithfully in my place and calling, to do what every good member of a
Commonwealth ought to do for the safety of my Country, and preservation of
Civil Society therein.

V. Now comes in to be considered in the last place the great Question,
whether of the two constructions it is, ( That which binds to the Most, or
This which obliges to the Least, the words can well bear) that the formers of
the Engagement did rather intend to declare by these words. They that think the
former, want not probability of reason to ground their persuasions upon. For
they consider, that those who are presently possessed of the Supreme Power, are
not minded to part with it if they can hold it. And that the likeliest way to
hold it is, if they can possibly bring the whole people of England, or at least
the far greatest part thereof, to acknowledge that they are rightly possessed
of it, and to promise Subjection and Allegiance to them as such. And that
therefore the Engagement, being purposely devised and set on foot, as the
fittest engine to expedite that work, must in all reason intend to oblige so
far. Which being so contrary to their Judgment and persuasion, concerning the
duty and Oath of Allegiance, I cannot blame those that so understand the words
of the Engagement, if they abominate the very thought of taking it.

But there wants not great probability of Reason on the other side, to induce
us to believe that the latter and lower sense is rather to be deemed the
immediate, and declared intent of the Imposers, whatsoever cause of suspicion
there may be, that the former meaning may be more agreeable to their secret,
reserved, and ultimate intent; between which two, if there be any difference
(as it is not impossible but there may be) the Engager is not concerned in it,
or not yet: the Equivocation, if there be any in that, must be put upon the
Imposers, not on the Promisers score. For thus believing, there are amongst
others these Probabilities.

1. That many prudent and conscientious men of the Royal Party, as well Divines
and Lawyers, as others, have thus understood it, who we presume would not for
any outward resp^ct in the world have taken it, if they had conceived any more
to have been intended in it.

2. That it has often been affirmed, both publicly and privately in several
parts of the Kingdom (if we may believe either common fame, or the reports of
sundry credible particular persons) by those that have persuaded or pressed
others to subscribe; that the same is the very true intent and meaning of it,
and no other.

3. That if the Imposers had been minded to have declared an intent of binding
to more, they might easily have framed the words so as not to be capable of a
construction binding to Less.

4. That (as is also credibly reported) whilst the form of words was under
debate, the opinion of those that would have had it set higher, was not
followed, as held unseasonable; and the vote carried, for the more moderate
expression wherein it now stands.

5. That the Imposers, intending by the Engagement to secure themselves,
especially against the designs and attempts of those men, who they knew (well
enough) held them for no other than Usurpers, must be in reason supposed to
require no more assurance of them by the Engagement, than such as may and is
usually given to Usurpers; which is, not an acknowledgment of their title, and
a promise of Allegiance, but merely a promise of living quietly, so long as
they are under their power, and enjoy their protection.

6. That it is a received Maxim of Political prudence, for all new Governors,
(especially those that either introduce a new form of Government, or come in
upon a questionable title) to abstain from all harsh proceedings, even against
those whom they know to be evil affected to their Power, and not so much as to
exasperate them (though it be in the power of their hands to destroy them)
especially in the beginning of their Government; but rather to sweeten them
into a better opinion of their persons, and to win upon them by Acts of Grace
and Oblivion (for Remissius imperanti melius paretur. Senec. 1. De Clem. 24.
) So as they may have but any tolerable kind of as^urance from them in the mean
time, of living quietly and peaceably under them. We have no reason therefore
to believe that the Imposers of this Engagement, who have acted the parts of
the greatest Politicians, ^o perfectly and succesfully hitherto, as to possess
themselves so fully of the Supreme Power of so great and flourishing a Kingdom,
in so few years* would be so impolitick as not to proceed by the same ^ules,
that all wise and succesful persons have ever practiced in the managing, and
for the establishing of an acquired power.

VI. Out of all these premises together (weighing my Positive conclusion,
either Affirmative or Negative, touching the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of
subscribing in universali) I shall declare my opinion only in these few
following particulars.

1. That it is not lawful for any man to take the Engagement with a resolution
to break it.

2. That therefore, whosoever thinks the words of the Engagement do contain a
promise of any thing which it is not law^ul for him to perform, cannot take it
with a good conscience.

3. That whosoever so understands the words of the Engagement, as if they did
oblige him to any thing contrary to his Allegiance, or render him unable to act
according thereunto, upon any seasonable emerging occasion, cannot with a good
conscience take it.

4. That if any man for any temporal benefit, or avoiding any temporal damage,
shall take the Engagement with a doubting conscience (that is, before he be
persuaded in his Judgment, upon some probable ground of reason, that it is
lawful for him so to do) he sins therein.

5. That if any man after a serious desire of informing himself as rightly as
he can, what are the duties of his Allegiance on the one side, and what is most
probably the meaning intended by the words of the Engagement on the other side,
shall find himself well satisfied in this persuasion, that the performance in
the mean time of what is required by the Engagement so understood, is no way
contrary (for any thing he can discern for the present) to his bounden
Allegiance, so long as he is under such a force, as that he cannot exercise it;
and likewise, that whenever that force is so removed from him, or he from
under it, as that he has power to act according to his Allegiance, the
Obligation of the Engagement of it self determines and expireth: and out of
these considerations, rather than suffer extreme prejudice in his person,
estate, or necessary relations, shall subscribe the Engagement; since his own
heart condemn^th him not, neither will I.

Sir, I have now two requests to you, which I doubt not but you will think
reasonable. The one, that whatsoever use you shall please to make of these
papers, or any thing therein contained, for your own, or any frien^s
satisfaction; yet you would not deliver any Copies abroad, lest they should
come to be printed, as some other papers of mine, written in this manner, have
been without my knowledge. This I desire, both in respect of the danger I might
incur from the displeasure of the Potent Party, if any such thing should come
abroad; as also lest upon the consideration of some things here hinted, they
might think the words of the Engagement too light, and might thence take
occasion to lay some heavier Obligation upon us, in words that should oblige to
More. The other request is, that since I have not any other perfect Copy of
what I now send you, you would procure it to be transcribed for me; and either
the copy so transcribed, or these very papers rather, when you have transcribed
them, transmit enclosed in a Letter, or by some Friend that will be sure to
deliver them safe, with his own hands, to my Son -- in London, to whom I shall
write shortly, that he may expect them,

Sir, I desire that my best respects may be presented, etc. -- God endue us all
with Grace and Wisdom fit for these evil times; to whose Mercy and Blessing
commend us all, I rest,

Your Loving Friend and Servant.
B.P. Dec. 20. 1650.
The CASE of a RASH VOVV Deliberately Iterated.
The Case.
A Gentleman of good Estate, has Issue one only Daughter, who placing her
affections upon a person much below her rank, intends Marriage with him: The
Father hearing of it, in great displeasure Voweth, and confirms it with an
Oath, that if she Marry him, he will never give her a farthing of his Estate.
The Daughter notwithstanding Marryeth him: After which the Father sundry times
iterateth and renews his said former Vow, and that in a serious and
deliberate manner; adding further, That he would never give her or any of her^
any part of his Estate.

QUAERE:
Whether the Fathers Vow so made, and so confirmed and iterated as abovesaid,
be Obligatory or not?

The Resolution.
My opinion is, That the Vow was Rash, and is not at all Obligatory.

1. The Question here proposed is concerning the obligation only; yet I deem it
expedient to declare my opinion concerning the Rashness also: and that for two
reasons. First, Because there seems in the propo^al of the Case, to be some
weight laid upon the after iterations, which were more deliberate, as if they
added to the Obligation. And Secondly, Because I think it needful that the
Vower should as well be convinced of the greatness of his sin in making such a
Vow, for the time past, as satisfied concerning the present and future
invalidity of it.

2. It is easy to believe, that the Gentleman, when he first made the Vow, was
possessed with a very great indignation against his Daughter for her high and
inexcusable disobedience to him in so very weighty a business. And truly it
must be confessed, he had need to be a man of a very rare command over his own
Spirit, and such as are scarce to be found one of a thousand, that could so
contain himself within the bounds of reason, upon so just a provocation from an
only child, (possibly some other aggravating circumstances concurring) as not
to be transported with the violence of that passion, into some thoughts and
resolutions, not exactly agreeable with the dictates of right reason. It can
therefore be little doubted, but the Vow made whilst the Reason was held under
the force of so strange a perturbation, was a rash and irrational Vow.

3. Nor will these after-acts in confirmation of the first Vow, though having
more of deliberation in them, be sufficient to redeem either it or themselves
from the imputation of Rashness: understanding rashness in that latitude as the
Casuists do, when they treat de Voto temerario, under the notion whereof they
comprehend all such Vows as happen per defectum plenae and discussae
deliberationis, as they express it; For it is to be considered, that when an
injury, disobedience, or other affront is strongly resented, it many times
^aketh a very deep impression in the Soul, which though after the first impetus
have a little spent it self, it begin somewhat to abate, yet it does so by such
slow and insensible degrees, that the same perturbation, which first
discomposed the mind, may have a strong influence into all succeeding
deliberations for a long time after. Even as after an acute Fever, when the
sharpest paroxysmes are over, and the malignity of the disease well spent,
although the party begin to recover some degrees of strength; yet there may
remain for a good while after such a debility in the parti^s, as that they
cannot exercise their proper functions, but with some weakness more or less,
till the party be perfectly recovered. Since therefore the after-iterations on
the first Vow in the present case, did proceed apparently from the rancor and
malignity remaining in the mind, as the dregs and relics of the same
perturbation, from which the first Vow also proceeded: they must upon the same
account (to wit, per defectum plenae deliberationis) undergo the same censure
of Rashness with the first. The same I say for the kind; some difference I
grant there is for the degree: but Magis and Minus non variant speciem, we
know. And the consideration of that difference is only thus far useful in the
present Case, that the more deliberate those after-acts were, the more culpable
they are, and the le^s capable either of Excuse or Extenuation; and
consequently do oblige the party to so much the more serious, solemn, and
lasting Repentance.

4. But concerning rash Vows (in as much as the knot of the Question lies not
there) it shall suffice to note these few points. First, That every Rash Vow is
a sin; and that upon its own score, and precisely as it is Rash, although it
should not be any other way peccant. All acts of Religious worship (by the
importance of the third Commandment) are to be performed with all due sobriety,
attention, and advisedness: how much more than a Vow? which is one of the
highest acts of worship, as being a sacred contract, where unto God himself is
a party. See Eccl. 5.1. etc. Secondly, That Rash Vows are for the most part,
(besides the Rashness) peccant in their matter also; For they are commonly made
in passion, and all passions are evil Counselors, and Anger as bad as the
first. The wrath of Man seldom works the righteousness of God. Thirdly, That
a Rash Vow, (though to be repented of for the Rashness) may yet in some cases
bind. As for example, A man finding himself ill used by a Shopkeeper, of whom
he had formerly been accustomed to buy, voweth in a Rage that he will never buy
of him again: This is a Rash Vow, yet it binds, because if the party had
never made any such Vow at all, it had neither been unjust or uncharitable,
(nor so much as imprudent) in him for to have done the same thing, which by his
Vow he has now bound himself to do. So if a man impatient of his ill luck at
Cards, should Vow in a heat never to Play at Cards any more; he were in this
case also bound to keep his Vow: because there neither is any sin in keeping
it, nor can be any great necessity why he should break it. That therefore
Fourthly, if at any time a Rash Vow bind not; the invalidity thereof proceeds
not merely (nor indeed at all) from the Rashness (which yet is a very common
error amongst men) but from the faultiness of it otherwise, in respect of the
matter, or thing vowed to be done; when that which is so Vowed, is either so
evil in it self, or by reason of circumstances, becomes so evil, that it
cannot be performed without sin.

5. That therefore concerning the Vow in the present case, I declared my
Opinion that it is not at all obligatory; it is done upon this ground (which is
a most certain truth, and consented to by all) that Rei illicitae nulla
obligatio. If a man shall Vow any thing that is contrary to Piety; as if having
taken offense at some indiscreet passage in a Sermon of his own Minister, he
should vow that he would never come to the Church, or hear him Preach again,:
Or that is contrary to Justice, as to take away the life of an innocent person,
as those 40 persons that had vowed they would neither eat nor drink till they
had slain Paul: Or never to make restitution to one whom he knew he had
wronged: Or contrary to Charity; as to be revenged of, or never to be friends
with one that had done him wrong: Or that is contrary to Mercy; as if having
lost some money by lending to his friend, or having smarted by suretiship, he
should vow never to lend any man money, or become surety for any man again. Let
such a Vow, I say, as any of these, or any of the like nature, be made either
rashly, or deliberately, and strengthened with Oaths and Imprecations, in the
most direful and solemn manner that can be devised to tie it on the faster; yet
it is altogether null and invalid as to the effect of Obligation. Whence those
common sayings, In male promissis rescinde fidem; ne sit juramentum vinculum
iniquitatis, etc. And we have a good president for it in David, after he had in
a rage vowed the destruction of Nabal, and all that belonged to him; which vow,
upon better consideration, he not only did not perform, but he blessed God
also, for so providentially preventing the performance of it, by the discreet
demeanor and intervention of Abigail.

6. Now the reason why such vows are not binding, is very cogent and clear;
Even because the party at such time as he is supposed to have made such Vow as
aforesaid, lay under another (a former, and therefore a stronger) obligation to
the contrary. And it is agreeable to all the reason in the World, that he who
either by his own voluntary act, has bound himself (where lawfully he might so
do) or by the command of his lawful Superior (that has a right to his service,
and may exact obedience from him) is already bound to do, or not to do this or
that; should not have power to disoblige himself therefrom, at his own
pleasure, or to superinduce upon himself a new Obligation contrary thereunto:
Obligatio prior praejudicat posteriori. As in the case of Marriage, a
precontract with one party, avoideth all after-contracts with any other: And if
a man convey Lands to several persons, by deeds of several date, the first
conv^yance stands good, and all the rest are void; and so in all cases of
like nature. The Obligatory power thereof that is in Vows, Oaths, Promises,
etc. is rightly said by some, to be a constructive, not a destructive power.
The meaning is, that such acts may create a new Obligation where was none
before, or confirm an old one; but it cannot destroy an old one, or substitute
another contrary thereunto, in the place^ thereof.

7. And the reason of this reason also is yet farther evident; for that
Quisquis obligatur, alteri obligatur. When a man is obliged by any act, it is
also supposed, that the obligation is made to some other party; to whom also it
is supposed some right to accrue, by virtue of the said act obligatory; and
that that other party is by the said act sufficiently vested in that said
right, of which right he cannot be again divested and deprived by the mere act
of him who instated him therein, and is obliged to perform it to him (unless
himself give consent thereunto) without the greatest injustice in the World.
Now God having a perfect right to our obedience, by his own obliging Precept,
both for the not doing hurt to any man, and for the doing good to every man
upon all fit opportunities: and this right also confirmed, and ratified by our
own obligatory act in a solemn manner, before many witnesses at our Baptism,
when we vowed to keep all God's Commandments: it were unreasonable to think
that it should be in our power, by any after-act of ours to disoblige our
selves from both, or either of those obligations. For then we might by the same
reason free our selves from the obligation, of that latter Act also (suppose an
Oath, or Vow) by another subsequent Oath, or Vow; and from that again by
another: and so play fast and loose, make Vows, and break them in infinitum.
Evident it is therefore, that every vow requiring any thing to be done, which
is repugnant to any office of Piety, Justice, Charity, or Mercy, which we owe
either to God or man, is void, and binds not, because it finds us under the
power of a former contrary obligation, and has not it self power sufficient to
free or discharge us from the same.

8. The general rule thus cleared, it remains to examine concerning the
particular Vow now in question, whether it be void upon this account or no? It
will befound hard I believe to free this Vow from being repugnant to the rules
of Justice, but impossible, I am sure, to reconcile it with the perfect
Evangelical Law of Charity and Mercy. First, Civil and Political Justice,
requires that every man should obey the wholesome Laws of his Country, and
submit himself to be ordered thereby. Now, put the case (which is possible
enough) that the Daughters Husband should for lack of support from his
Father-in-law, or otherwise, live and die in great want, leaving his Wife, and
many small Children behind him, destitute of all means for their necessary
sustenance. The Law would (as I suppose) in that case, upon complaint of the
Parish, and for their case, send the Daughter and her Children to the Father,
and compel him to maintain them out of his Estate. Which order he ought to
obey, nor can refuse so to do, without the high contempt of public Authority,
and manifest violation of the Civil Justice, notwithstanding his Vow to the
contrary: The Law must be obeyed whatsoever becomes of the Vow; in that case
therefore it is evident the Vow binds not.

9. But say that should not happen to be the case (which yet is more than any
man can positively say beforehand) the Parent is nevertheless in Moral Justice
bound to provide due maintenance for his Children and Grandchildren if he be
able. Saint Paul says that Fathers ought to lay up for the Children. True it
is, he speaks it but upon the by, and by way of Illustration, in the handling
of another argument, very distant from this business: but that does not at all
lessen the importance of it, such illustrations being ever taken a notiori, and
from such common notions as are granted, and consented unto by all reasonable
men. The same Apostle having amongst other sins of the Gentiles, mentioned
disobedience to Parents in one verse, in the very next verse, mentions also
want of natural affection in Parents. And the disobedience in the Child can no
more discharge the Parent from the obligation of that duty he owes to the
Child, of affection, and maintenance, then the unnaturalness of the Parent, can
the Child from the duty he owes to the Parent, of Honor and Obedience. For
the several duties, that by Gods ordinance, are to be performed by persons that
stand in mutual relation either to other, are not pactional and conditional; as
are the Leagues and Agreements made between Princes (where the breach in one
part dissolveth the obligation on the other) but are absolute and independent;
wherein each person is to look to himself, and the performance of the duty that
lies upon him, though the other party should fail in the performance of his.

10. Something I foresee may be objected in this point, concerning the
lawfulness of the Parents withdrawing maintenance from the Child (either in
whole, or at least in part) in the case of disobedience. Which how far forth it
may, or may not be done; as it would be too long to examine, so it would be of
little avail to the present business. For it is one thing to withold
maintenance from a disobedient Child for the present, and to resolve so to
continue till he shall see cause to the contrary. And another thing to bind
himself by Vow or Oath, never to allow him any for the future, whatsoever
should happen. Let be granted whatsoever can be supposed pleadable on the
Fathers behalf in the present case; yet there will still remain two particulars
in this Vow, not easily to be cleared from being unjust. First, let the
Daughters disobedience deserve all this uttermost of punishment from the
offended Father; yet how can it be just, that for the Mothers fault, the pour
in^ocent (perhaps yet unborn) Children, should be utterly, and irrecoverably
excluded from all possibility of relief from their Grandfather? Secondly, It is
(if not unjust, yet what differs very little therefrom) the extremity of
rigid Justice; that any offender (much less a Son or Daughter) should for any
offense, not deserving Death, be by a kind of fatal peremptory decree, put into
an incapacity of receiving relief from such persons, as otherwise ought to have
relieved the said offender, without any reservation either of the case of
extreme necessity, or of the case of serious repentance.

11. However it be for the point of Justice; yet so apparent is the repugnancy
of the matter of this Vow, with the Precepts of Christian Charity and Mercy;
that if all I have hitherto said were of no force, this repugnancy alone were
enough (without other evidence) to prove the unlawfulness, and consequently the
invalidity, or inobligability thereof. It is (not an Evangelical Counsel, but)
the express peremptory precept of Christ, that we should be merciful, even as
our heavenly Father is merciful. And inasmuch as, not in that passage only, but
for the most part wheresoever else the duty of mercy is pressed upon us in the
Gospel from the example of God: God is represented to us by the Name, and under
the notion of a Father, although I may not lay much weight upon it, as a
demonstrative proof; yet I conceive I may commend it as a rational Topic, for
all that are Fathers to consider of, whether it do not import, that mercy is to
be expected from a father as much as (if not rather much more then) from any
other man; and that the want of mercy in a Father, is more unkindly, more
unseemly, more unnatural then in another man: But ^his by the way, from that
Precept of Christ, we learn that as there is in God a twofold mercy, (a giving
mercy, in doing us good, though we deserve it not, and a forgiving mercy, in
pardoning us when we have done amiss:) so there ought to be in every good
Christian man a readiness (after the example of God) to show forth the fruits
of mercy to others, in both kinds, upon all proper and meet occasions. So that
if any person, of what quality or condition soever, shall upon any provocat^on
whatsoever Vow that he will never do any thing for such or such a man; or that
he will never forgive such or such a man: every such Vow, being contra bonos
mores, and contra officium hominis Christiani, is unlawful, and binds not.

12. The offices of mercy in the former of those two branches, viz. of doing
good, and affording relief to those that are in necessity, are themselves of so
great necessity (as the case may be) that common humanity would exact the
performance of them from the hand, not of a stranger only, but even of an
enemy. If a stranger or an enemies Beast lie weltering in a Ditch, a helping
hand must be lent to draw it out. The Samaritans compassion to the wounded
Traveller in the Parable, Luke 10. (There being a feud, and that grounded upon
Religion, which commonly of all others, is the most deadly feud between the two
Nations) is commended to our example, to the great reproach of the Priest and
Levite, for their want of Bowels to their poor Brother of the same Nation and
Religion with themselves; For the nearer the Relation is between the Parties,
the stronger is the obligation of showing mercy either to other. And there is
scarce any relation nearer, and more obliging, then that of Parents and
Children.

Our Savior, who in Matthew. 15. sharply reproved such vows, (though made with
an intention to advance the Service of God, by enriching his Treasury (as
hindered Children from relieving their parents, will not certainly approve of
such vows (made without any other intention then to gratify rage, and
impatience) as hinder Parents from relieving their Children.

13. If to avoid the force of this argument, it shall be alleged, that the
Daughters disobedience, in a business of so high concernment, might justly
deserve to be thus severely punished, and that it were but equal that she, who
had so little regard to her Father, when the time was, should be as little
regarded by him afterward. All this granted, comes not yet up to the point of
showing Mercy according to the example of God. No Child's disobedience can be so
great to an earthly Parent, as ours is to our heavenly Father: Yet does he
notwithstanding all our ill deservings continually do us good, communicating*
to our necessities, and causing his Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall, and
infinite benefits in all kinds to descend upon mankind, not excluding the most
thankless, and disobedient, and rebellious, from having a share therein.

14. And as for that other branch of mercy in pardoning offenses, God gives a
rich example to all men, of their duty in that kind, (and to Fathers
particularly (by his great readiness to pardon the greatest offenders, if they
sincerely seek to him for it. If the Father in the Parable, Luke 15. had
proceeded with such severity against his riotous Son, as to have vowed never to
have received him again; he had been a very improper ^xemplar, whereby to
shadow out the mercy of God to repentant sinners. Concernin^ the great
importance of this duty, which is so frequently inculcated by Christ and his
Apostles, and so peremptorily enjoined, as not any other duty more. See Matt.
6.4, 15. Matt. 18.21. -- 35. Ephesians. 4.32. Col. 3.13. James 2.13. See also Sirac.
28.1, etc.] I shall not need to say much; only as to the present Case, it would
be considered, how perverse a course it is, and contradictory to it self, for a
man to think himself obliged by one inconsiderate act, never to forgive his
Daughter; when as yet he cannot beg pardon of his own sins, at the hands of
God, (as he ought in his daily Prayer to do) without an express condition of
forgiving every body, and an implicit imprecation upon himself, if he do not.

15. But shall the Daughter that has thus grieved the spirit of her Father,
thus escape unpunished, and be in as good a condition as if she had never
offended? And will not others be encouraged by her impunity, to despise their
Parents after her example? There is much reason in this objection; and
therefore what I have hitherto written, ought not to be understood, as if
thereby were intended such a plenary indulgence for the daughter, as should
restore her in integrum, but only that she should be made capable of receiving
such relief from her Father, from time to time, as in relation to her
necessities, and after-carriage, from time to time, should seem reasonable; and
that his Vow ought not to hinder him from affording her such relief. But by
what degrees, and in what proportion, the Father should thus receive his
daughter into his fatherly affection, and relieve her, must be left to
discretion, and the exigence of circumstances. Only I should advise (in order
to the objection, viz. for examples sake, and that the daughter might be made,
even to her dying day, and kept, sensible of her great and sinful disobedience
to her Father) that the Father should cut off from his Daughter, and her
Posterity, some meet portion of his Estate, (as perhaps a fifth part at the
least; or if a fourth, or a whole third part, I should like it the better;) and
by a solemn deliberate vow, dedicate the same to be yearly employed in some
pious and charitable uses. These times will afford him choice of objects, if
God shall move his heart so to do; and by so doing, he may, First, in some sort
redeem, and make a kind of satisfaction for his former Rashness, (not Popishly
understood, and in regard of the Justice of God, but) in a moral sense, and in
regard of the World, and his own Conscience. Secondly, it may be a good means
to keep the Daughter in a continual fresh remembrance of her fault, that she
may not, after a short and slight repentance (as in such cases too often it
happens) forget the same; whereof she ought to have some remorse all the
days of her life. Thirdly, he shall thereby after a sort, perform his first
vow; I mean according to the general inte^tion thereof, and the rational part,
(which was to make his Daug^ter repent her folly, and to smart for it:) the
overplus more tha^ ^his, being but the fruit of rancor and pertu^bation.
Lastly, he shall in so doing, doubly imitate God, our heavenly Father. First,
when a rash or sinful act is made an occasion of a pious or charitable work, it
bears some resemblance of, or rather is indeed it self a gracious effect of
that goodness and wisdom in God, whereby he brings light out of darkness, and
good out of evil. Secondly, God Himself when he graciously pardons an high
presumptuous sin, as he did David's great sin, in the matter of Vriah, commonly
lays some lasting affliction upon the offender, as he did upon David, who
after the sealing his pardon for that sin by Nathan, scarce ever had a quiet
day all his life long. The reason whereof seems to be double, partly for
admonition to others, that none presume to provo^e God in like manner, lest
they smart for it also in like manner; and partly for the good of the offender,
that he may by the smart be brought to the deeper sense of his error, and be
eftsoons reminded of it, lest he should too soon forget it.

Thus have I with very much ado, (in that weak condition I have been in, ever
since the question came to my hands, and wherein I yet continue) declared my
opinion fully concerning the whole business as far as I understand it. More
largly I confess than I intended, or perhaps was needful; and with greater
severity than (it may be) the parties will well like of. But truly I desired to
do the part of a faithful Confessor, and the sores on both parts seemed to be
such as were not to be touched with too gentle a hand: In the Daughter, an act
of high disobedience, transported by the passion of inordinate love; and in the
Father an act of great Rashnes^, transported by the passion of inordinate
anger: both beyond the bounds of right Reason, and Religion; and both to be
deeply repented of. Howsoever, I cannot be suspected to have written any thing,
either out of favor for, or prejudice against either party; not having the
least conjecture who the persons are that are concerned in the business; nor so
much as in what part of the Nation they live. I shall pray that God would
direct them both, to do that which may best serve to his glory, and bring the
soundest comfort to their own souls. Amen.

FINIS.

