A SPECIMEN OF SOME Animadversions upon a Book, Entitled, PLUS ULTRA, OR,
Modern Improvements of Useful Knowledge. Written by Mr. JOSEPH GLANVILL, a
Member of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

Fr. Bacon de Verul. in Dedie. Sap. Veter. ad Cantabrigienses. Aequum est tamen
omnia vobis attribui, atque in vestrum honorem cedere, cum Accessiones quaeque
principiis magna ex part debeantur.

Mr. Sprat. Hist. R. S. page 317. It is but Reasonable, that the Original
Invention should be ascribed to the true Author, rather than to Finishers.

Hor. ep. l. 2. ep. 1. Ut primum positis nugari Graecia bellis
Caepit, and in vitium fortuna labier aequa,
Nunc Athletarum studiis, nunc arsit equorum,
Marmoris aut eboris fabros aut aeris amavat.
Suspendit picta vultum mentemque tab^lla:
Nunc tibicinibus, nunc est gavisa tragoedis.
LONDON, Printed in the Year 1670.

THe favorable Censure of the Reader is craved for what Errors have happened in
Printing, which the Authors leisure has neither permitted him to prevent nor
correct: However I am to desire that these two may be thus read, viz. In the 2
Page of the Dedication, line the 11. for ( your Supporters) read ( their
Supporters) and page 105. lin. ult. read Libavius.

N. H.

TO THE Reader.
THE Discourse of Mr. Glanvill, was the first occasion of my writing about the
Royal Society, the provocation which it gave to all sorts of men, of different
Professions were such, that it might stir up any public spirit, to support so
common a cause. I was sensible of the injuries he does unto the dead, the
affronts he puts upon the living, the contempt wherewith he decries that
University Learning, and those Studies by which Christianity has been
supported against the Arrians, the Jews, the Mahometans, and of late the
Papists and Socinians: and which if they be relinquished, I profess, that I
think that the Christian Religion must inevitably fall without the aid of a
Miracle. It is a kind of Apostasy from the Nicene and Athanasian Creeds to
slight Metaphysics. The distinction of the Trinity, of Essence and
Personality, the Hypostatical Union of the two Natures in our Savior, and the
meritoriousness of his death, (which depends thereon,) are undermined with
School Divinity; and whosoever has any sense or value for the benefits we
derive from Controversial-Divinity, either as to the quieting of his
Conscience, or convincing of his Adversaries, must detest this Enterprise of
Mr. Glanvill. And methinks that whosoever does but call to mind that variety of
foolish Sects, which gave the Church so much trouble in its first Infancy, and
of late years, and considers that they had their Original from want of Logic,
should not condemn that Art, by which men argue rightly from sound Principles.
It was no less strange to me to find the names of Reverend, Sage, Grave,
Disputer and Logician, perverted into terms of Contumely; yet had not all those
Motives prevailed with me, but that he had so defamed the Ancient and Modern
Physicians, until those late Innovators, that many importuned me to revenge my
Faculty upon this Insolent Man. Besides, I had been much troubled with
impertinent discourses of some, who to excuse their Ignorance in the
Prognostic and Therape^tick parts of Medicine, indulged themselves in the
vilifying all the ancient learning and reading, and asserting out of the
Writings of the Society, the necessity and convenience of new methods, in
curing and abbreviating diseases. I soon espied my advantages over Mr.
Glanvill. But perceiving his Defense so complicated, with the History of the
Royal Society, that I could not well meddle with the one without reflecting
upon the other; I set my self to peruse that also, and found the Errors therein
so numerous and gross, and the tendency of it so dangerous, that it seemed but
an easy, yet necessary work, to the Universities, and all Learning, as well as
the profession of Methodical Physic, to write against these new-fashion'd
Philosophers; I remarked so many defaults in both books, that I was at last
weary of taking notice of them, there being still Plus ultra. I resolve to give
my Studies no further diversion in pursuing Mr. Glanvill; but to leave him to
the scorn of some more common Pens, who being at the Universities may have more
leisure then I have at present. After all this Ostentation of Learning, the
things he talks and writes of are such, as he is utterly unacquainted with: the
Authors he mentions he never saw, and all his discourse about the Mathematics,
and Mathematicians, procured him no other acknowledgements from a Learned and
Reverend Prelate, (to whom he sent one of his Books) than a Reprimand for
intermedling with what he understood not. Who can choose but smile when he
reads how Apuleius improved the Mathematics a^^^^ ^^clide? who ^ver heard of
such men as Maximus Palanudes, Achazen and Orentius? Plus Ultra. page 23.
I suppose this last should have been Orontius, and he is so famous a
Geometrician, that when Sir H. Savill (as I remember) was to seek for an
instance of a pitiful fellow; this was the man he fixed upon; He tells us that
the most learned (...) of all so^ts and professions; Mathematicians, Page ^.
Chemists, (...)ns, ^natomists, Antiquaries, and Philosophers, make up the
Royal Society: but one would not guess so by their History! He tells us, that
the former Methods of Science for so many Centuries, never brought the world so
much practical beneficial knowledge, as would help toward the Cure of a Cut
Finger, which he says is a palpable Plus Ultra Page 7. and 8.
Argument, that they were fundamental mistakes, and that the way was not right.
Can any one that has heard of Podalirius and Machaon in Homer prate thus? Quos
tamen Homerus non in pestilentia, neque in variis Corn. Celsus in Pra^at.
generibus morborum aliquid attulisse auxilii, sed vulneribus tantummodo ferro
and medicamentis mederi solitos esse proposuit. Ex quo apparet has parts
medicinae solas ab his esse tentatas, easque esse vetustatissimas. Had our
Virtuoso but known how Hippocrates had writ about Wounds and Ulcers, and that
Dieg. Laert. in vita Arist. Suidas in Nicomacho, and Ammonius in vita Arist.
Vide notas Menagii in Diog. Laert. l. 5.
Aristotle himself was descended of the line of Aesculapius, and that his
Ancestor Nicomachus was Physician to Amyntas King of Macedon, And that
Aristotle also was a Physician, and writ several books (besides his Anatomy of
Man) in that Science, and was upon that account valued by Alexander the Great,
as Plutarch says. And how little the Ancients stood in need of modern
discoveries and aids to cure Cut Fingers, any man may judge, that knows what
Scribonius Largus, and Galen (in his books de Compos. Medicam. sec. genera)
have written: and how this last Author (upon Philosophical deductions)
compounds several Medicaments to that purpose. In the Augustane Dispensatory,
to this day his Tripharmacon, his Diapalma, his Diadictamnum, and others are
recorded. And if any thing rendered Paracelsus justly famous, it was the cure of
inveterate Ulcers, not green Wounds: and that therein he did out-doe the
ancient Physicians, is a question, I cannot grant, and have not leisure to
dispute.

He reckons up Five Instruments by which the latter Ages Plus Ultra. Page 10.
have improved Knowledge above Antiquity. The MICROSCOPE, TELESCOPE,
THERMOMETER, BAROMETER, and the AIR-PUMP. Some of which were first invented,
all of them exceedingly improved by the ROYAL SOCIETY. But as for the
Telescope, he confesses that to have been invented by Metius and Galilaeo.
Which Confession of his, although it take from the Society all pretenses to the
invention thereof; yet it is unbecoming an inquisitive person, who might upon
better Intelligence from Borellus, in his book about the Inventor of
Telescopes, published in 1656. He might have learned thence that Adrianus
Metius of Alkmaer did not invent them, but one Zacharias Joannides of
Middleburgh in Zeland, (though perhaps Baptista Porta had obscurely proposed
it) and that he who may most justly come in for a second share in the glory of
that invention is one Joannes Lapreius of the same Town. And whereas it is
generally written, that Galilaeo was the first who applied those tubes to the
contemplation of Celestial Objects, even that appears to be false, seeing that
the first Inventor, even Zacharias Joannides, (together with his son Joannes
Borel de vero invent. Telescop. c. 12.
Zacharides) did make use of them to discover several new Phenomenon in the
Moon and Heavens. Which mistake is unpardonable in our Virtuoso (and his
Assistants) because that a more particular Enquiry has been made of late years
hereinto, then ever before. The Barometer he allows to have been first invented
by Torricellius, not to try the gravitation of the Air, but to prove a vacuum;
Afterward, the different ascent of the Quicksilver, being tried on the top and
at the bottom of Hills in France, the opinion of the rising of the Quicksilver
from the pressure of the Air, was introduced and illustrated. But nether is the
gravitation, or pressure of the Air, a new opinion; it is as old as Aristotle,
it is Pecquet. Exper^m 2. in Diss(...)at. p. 54. Ed raris. 1651.
his, and he essayed to weigh the Air, in his book de coelo l. 4. sect. 29, 30,
39. He proves the Air to ponderate, because a bladder full of Air weighs
heavier then one that is empty. Concerning which Experiment I shall add the
words of Scipi Claramontius, that learned Writer, the truth of it having Scipio
Claramont de universo l 14. c 3.
been questioned, Possum tamen testari observationem Aristotelis dicto
faventem, fuitque diligens observatio, and a diligentissimo pensatore,
exactusque stateris and lancibus peracta, me praesente and adsistente, cum
pluribus veritatis cupidis viris: pensit avimus ergo primum follem novum
penitusque vacuum, primo statera quae solum unciarum differentiam indicabat,
invenimusque unciarum decemnovem, and totidem reperimus eundem follem
diligenter inflatum, and solo spiritu nulloque humore immisso: ac postea usi
sumus lance, quae semuncias quoque indicabat, tumque follem inflatum unciarum
decemnovem and and semis invenimus, adeo tamen ut ibi libra in aequilibrio
absque tractu (ut vocant nostri) adamussim permaneret: at idem vacuus non
amplius in eodem signo sine tractu, sed cum tractu perstabat. Quocirca verum
dicit Aristoteles. So that whether we consider the gravitation of the Air, or
its being weighed, (which Mr. Glanvill in his Plus ultra thinks so strange of,
as he expresses, To have said in elder Time, That Plus Ultra p 59. c 8.
Mankind should light upon an Invention, whereby those Bodies might be weighed,
would certainly have appeared very wild and extravigant; and it will be so
accounted for some time yet, till men have been longer, and are better
acquainted Many Peripa^^^icks (as Claramontius) (...) impure Air of ^or
Atmosphear does gra^itate, (...) deny it as to the pure Elemental Air.
with this Instrument, etc. The opinion it self, and the attempt to weight it,
is Aristotle's: Nor is this Discourse casually proposed once in Aristotle; but
sundry times he avows the gravitation of the Air in his Problems, viz. sect.
11. probl 45. sect. 21. probl. 18. sect. 25. probl. 12, 13. From hence we may
judge how well Mr. Glanvill is acquainted with the tenets of Aristotle, and how
well read he is in him whom he condemns. He and his Philosophic friends dealt
only in some pitiful Compendium of Physics, and from thence learned that which
was the opinion of Themistius, Simplicius, and other eminent Peripatetics, as
if it had been the avowed doctrine of their great Master; and thereupon they
thus deliver themselves. And on this occasion, Sir, I observe the incompetency
of their Mr. Glanvill, p. 122.
judgments, who are Enemies to the real Experimental Philosophy, in that they
do not (as I intimated at all, or very little, understand what they condemn.
This I have some reason to say, since in the whole Compass of my Acquaintance,
which is not very narrow, I profess I know not one who opposes the Modern way,
that is not almost totally unacquainted with it. And on the other side, upon
the most careful turn of my thoughts among my Philosophic friends, I cannot
light on one of all those that are for the free and experimental procedure, but
who has been very well instructed in the Peripatetick doctrines, which they
have deserted, and most of them much Pecquet. Exper. Physico-Math. de Va^uo.
page 10, etc. Parit 1651. Mersenni Phenomenon Pneumat. page 140. Par. 1644.
better than those who are yet zealous Contenders for them. I might tell our
Divine, that the Gravitation of the Air seems proposed in Job 28. 25. Qui fecit
ventis pondus, God is said to make weight for the wind: indeed neither the
gravitation of the Atmosphear, nor the notion of Aerial cylinders, pressing
upon subjacent bodies, were any News in the world when the Society was first
established. But the News of the Barometer is so pleasant, that I will insert
the whole passage.

But (IV.) The BAROMETER is another late Instrument, very helpful to useful
Knowledge. That there is gravity even in the Air it self, and that that Element
is only Plus Ultra cap. 8. page 59.
comparatively light, is now made evident and palpahle by Experience, though
Aristotle and his Schools held a different Theory: And by the help of
Quicksilver in a Tube, the way is found to measure all the degrees of
Compression in the Atmosphere, and to estimate exactly any accession of weight,
which the Air receives from Winds, Clouds, or Vapors. To have said in elder
Times, that Mankind should light upon an Invention whereby those bodies might
be weighed, would certainly have appeared very wild and extravigant; and it
will be so accounted for some time yet, till men have been longer, and are
better acquainted with this Instrument. For we have no reason to believe it
should have better luck than the Doctrine of the Circulation, the Theory of
Antipodes, and all great Discoveries in their first Proposals. It Is impossible
to persuade some of the Indians that live near the heats of the Line, that
there is any such thing as Ice in the World; but if you talk to them of Water
made hard and consistent by Cold, they will laugh at you as a notorious Romancer.
And those will appear as ridiculous among the most of us, who shall affirm it
possible to determine any thing of the Weight of the Wind or Clouds. But
Experience turns the laugh upon the confident incredulity of the Scoffer; and
he that will not believe, needs no more for his Conviction, then the labor of
a Trial. Let him then fill a Tube of Glass, of some Feet in length, with
Quicksilver; and having sealed one end, let him stop the other with his Finger,
and immerge that which is so stopped into a vessel of Mercury, the Tube being
perpendicularly erected; let him then substract his Finger, and he will
perceive the Quicksilver to descend from the Tube into the subjacent vessel,
till it comes to 29 Digits or thereabouts; there, after some Vibrations, it
ordinarily rests. The reason that this remainder of the Mercury does not
descend also, is, because such a Mercurial Cylinder is just equiponderant to
one of the incumbent Atmosphere that leans upon the Quicksilver in the Vessel,
and so hinders a further descent. It is concluded therefore, That such a
Cylinder of the Air, as presses upon the Mercury in the Vessel is of equal
weight to about 29 Digits of that ponderous Body in the Tube. Thus it is when
the Air is in its ordinary temper: but Vapors, Winds, and Clouds alter the
Standard; so that the Quicksilver sometimes falls, sometimes rises in the
Glass, proportionably to the greater or less accession of Gravity and
compression of the Air has received from any of those alterations; and the
Degree of increase beyond the Standard, is the measure of the additionable
gravity. --

There is something so charming and so divertive in this discourse, that I
cannot yet dismiss it, notwithstanding what I have said out of Aristotle and
Claramontius. That there is Averroes adheres to Aristotle, and holds the Air
does gravitate.
gravity even in the Air it self, and that that Element is only comparatively
light, was of old made evident by the Man of Stagira: nor did the Schools hold
a different tenet, if you take Air for this impure mixture and Sphaera vaporosa
about the Earth, which we breath, and in a special manner have to do with: as
appears from Claramontius in his Book of the Universe, and Septalius upon
Aristotle's Problems. But Mr. Glanvill neither understands what he opposes,
nor what he Asserts. For in the beginning he speaks of the gravitation of the
Element of the Air; whereas that Instrument called a Barometer proposes only a
way to measure the degrees of compression in the Atmosphear, in which Region I
believe no man ever denied but that the Aqueous and Terrestrial corpuscles
interspersed had their weight and pressure: Thus the ordinary temper of this
Air (which is never pure) the alterations of it by vapors, winds, clouds, are
the subject of those contemplations, as any man knows that reads Mr. Boil, or
even Mr. Glanvill. Thus all the flourish of Rhetoric comes to nothing, the
wonder is ceased, and we come to try only a more particular way of examining
the weight of a body, which no man in his wits ever denied to be ponderous. And
here I must tell our Virtnoso, that his reading or consideration extends not so
far as to the writings of Mr. Boil, and the experiment in him. For it appears
out of Him that F eri^* Phy^^c-Mechan. E* per. 7.
the Mercurial Cylinder rises and falls in the Magdeburgical Air-Pump,
according to the lessening or vigorating of the Spring of the Air: and that
upon putting in the Barometer, and closing the Engine, there appeared not any
change in the height of the Mercurial Cylinder, no more then if the interposed
Glass-Receiver did not hinder the immediate Besides, the difference in
Quicksilver is such, that all Writers take notice of it, and I am apt to
believe the Phenomenon may be much varyed in the Cylinder, according to that.
pressure of the ambient Atmosphear upon the enclosed Air; which hereby appears
to bear upon the Mercury, rather by virtue of its Spring then of its weight.
And if this Phenomenon proved such in a greater and less Receiver, with a
greater or less cylinder of Mercury (it being indifferent which is used,) I
doubt this Barometer will not determine the strength of the Spring of the Air,
much less its weight. For the Elasticity is a distinct consideration from the
weight of the Air: as when some Experimentators went about to weigh the Pike,
the Flownce or Spring of the Pike was no part of the weight of the Pike, though
it might turn the Scales. This sole consideration destroys all the great
promises we have from the Barometer, for if the Spring of the Air cannot be
exactly known, that we must be for ever ignorant of the nature of those other
bodies which influence and press upon our Air, and compress the Spring of the
Air, and may have many operations upon it which we know not, neither can
comprehend; If the height of the Atmosphear cannot be determined, (which I make
a postulatum of) the alterations in the higher Regions are unsearchable, and
the mechanismes of those corpuscular combinations incomprehensible, I shall not
doubt to say, that there is not yet found out a way to measure ALL THE degrees
of Compression in the Atmosphear: nay, it is far from that exactness; for the
body of the Quicksilver varies not upon insensible variations in the Air: the
intercepted Air in it takes off from the Niceness of the Experiment: and since
even heat, (and perhaps other circumstances) adds to the Spring of the Air, it
cannot give us that account pretended, about vapors, winds and clouds.

The Essay by Tubes and Quicksilver, as ingenious as it is, yields the Society
no further glory, then to have illustrated it, and perhaps to have made some
further Experiments in it then those had done, to whom, as the first Inventor,
(by the concession of the Historian) appertains all or most of the Honor which
arises from such accessionals. It is true, our Virtuosi fixed on it the name
of Barometer, but they had done better to have called (...), or (...), or Gas,
or Blas, or Diaceltateston, or some such unintelligible name, rather then have
termed it thus: the Appellation signifying no more an instrument to measure the
gravity of the Air, then an instrument to weigh a parcel of Tar, or
indefinitely a pair of Stillyards. The Aerometer might have been a little more
Emphatical; especially considering that (...) and (...) are Synonimous. Had not
Aeroscopium been accommodated to the Thermometer, it would not have been much
incongruous. But I conceive, that Aerobaricon or Aerostaticon would have fitted
the Experiment as well as any name I can now think upon. The Barometer was
invented by Torricellius to prove a Vacuum, and in Mersennus's Cogitata
Physico-Mathematica, you may find it applied to the examining the difference of
the Air in several places. The Air-Pump was found out at Magdeburgh, and not in
England; it was first published by Schottus, under the name of Instrumentum
Magdeburgicum. Mr. Boil amended it, and prosecuted many ingenious Experiments
in it, for which all Philosophers are redevable to him, but cannot proclaim him
the Inventor of the Instrument, no, nor of the (notion of the Elasticity Hen.
Reg. Philos Not. l. 2 c. 12. p. ^4. and l. 2 c. 3 p. 173. ed. 1661.
of the Air, which was proposed first to the world by Henricus Regius, under
the name of the spontaneous dilatation of the Air: and illustrated by
Pecquetus, who first, (that I know of,) spoke of the Elater, Pecquetus page 19
( quem elaterem nuncupo). The Microscope was invented by the aforesaid Borel
ubi supra c. 12. p. 26. Blancanus de mundi fabr. part. 3. c 2.
Zacharias Joannides: The Thermometer, or Thermoscopium was first the invention
of Sanctorius; so Blancanus says, Audivi Doctorem quendam medicum Patavii
degentem, qui Sanctorius cognominatur, hujus esse inventorem And now I demand
of our Virtuoso, which of these Five Instruments for the Improvement of
knowledge have been found out by the Royal Society: The Thermometer is the
discovery of a Galenical Physician; but as to our Virtuosi nothing appears but
the pretension to other men's discoveries, and the improving of them.

By the Benefit indeed of one of these Instruments,the Telescope, we are put in
hopes to find a sure way to determine those mighty Questions, Whether the Earth
move? or, The Planets be inhabited? And who knows which way the Conclusion may
fall? -- I perceive hereby that Mr. Glanvill is not altogether convinced that
the Earth moves; and I am as little satisfied, that the solution of those
Questions is so mighty and important a thing; for if the Earth stand still,
then things will be as they are now: and if it be determined otherwise, yet
shall we not need to fear that the Revolution of the Earth in its Diurnal
motion, either shake our houses about our ears, or shake us off by the tangent
line: and as for those inhabitants of the Planets, in case all our other
trading should be lost, we shall not find out any gainful commerce with them;
nor need we dread that they will piss out our Eyes as we look up. So that let
their Telescopes be brought to that unimaginable perfection, whereby to
discover the inhabitants of the Planets as plainly as mites in Cheese, and let
the Conclusion fall which way it will, things will fall out no otherwise than
they do.

He inveigheth bitterly against Aristotle for his Heathen-Notions, and in his
Preface to the Clergy of B. and W. wishes that the devoted Admirers of
Aristotle would study his Rhetoric, History of Animals, and Mechanics. I
wonder he did not recommend unto them the perusal of his Ethics. Certainly
they deserve as much to be read in these days, as any Piece. And perhaps his
Politics might contribute something to the instruction of a Nation. But how
dare herecommend any book of that man of Stagira to be read, if those motives
that swayed him to Anti-Aristotelism, be of any validity: Alas! he is troubled
at his Heathen-Notions! Oh! rare Puritanism! But my dear Brother Scruple, ought
any one to be offended at every thing that is of Heathen-Original, though it
contain nothing of Gentilisme in it? Represent your adversary as you please to
his Diocesan, nothing has more of the Presbyterian and Fanatic then this
Topic. Moreover, what do you think of those Atoms and Corpuscles? are they not
Heathen-Notions, and decried by the Fathers? what do you think of the terms
used by the Mathematicians? what of the Languages, such as are not Sacred? what
of the months, days of the year, and the names of the Stars, Constellations,
etc. Must every thing be reformed according to the Coelum Stellatum Christianum
of Julius Schillerus? Besides, these words in Theology, of Unity and Trinity,
have as much of Heathenism in them, as they have of Platonism. I shall here
take further notice of his exceptions against Aristotle, as they are
Recapitulated here (though they are more largely proposed by him in his Letter
against Aristotle, which I have fully answered in a distinct Treatise) the
general censure whereof is, That they are nothing but Lies, and such as no man
that is acquainted with any thing of ancient Literature could have uttered. I
protest in the Presence of Almighty God, that if there be not great care taken,
we may be in a little time reduced to that pass, as to believe the story of Tom
Thumb, and all the Legends or falsifications of History, which the Papists
obtrude upon us! This Philosophy fairly disposes us thereunto, by taking us
off from the Pedantism of Philology, and ancient reading, and by accustoming us
to believe the forgeries they obtrude upon us. Methinks herein he is one as
absurd as that Romish Monk was in the Pulpit. Heresbachius I. C. citante
Taubmanno, J^ H^n H^ttingerus in (...). Oriental l. 1. c. 2. p. 2
audivi, inquit, Monachum in Ecclesia declamantem, qui, nova, inquiebat, jam
reperta est Lingua, quae vocatur Graeca, ab hac sedulo cavendum: Haec enim est
quae parit omnes omnes istas heraeses. Ea lingua est liber proditus, in manibus
passim habetur and vocatur N. T. Plenus hic liber rubetis, and viperis. Alia
etiam oriturlingua, quam vocant Hebraeam, hanc qui discunt, efficiuntur
Hebraei. We are running on as fast as we can to this condition of ignorance,
and shall be so inured to Historical untruths, magisterially imposed upon us,
and disused from inquiring into them, as to believe any thing. He tells us the
Aristotelian Philosophy aims at no more, than the instructing men in Notion and
Dispute, that its Design was mean, and its Principles at the best uncertain and
precarious, -- -- One may guess how well our Virtuoso understands the Old
Philosophy, to ascribe that unto it all in general as its aim, which is but the
intendment (and that a necessary one too) of the Dialectick and Metaphysical
parts. In Natural Philosophy their designs were the same that our Moderns boast
of, if they miscarried in the main, let us pity their misfortunes, but not
blame their intentions. Did Aristotle in his books of Animals, or Theophrastus
about Plants, instruct men only to Dispute? Had his Anatomy, and his Problems
nothing but Notion? Must we cast off all Notions? Or ought we to endeavor
after the gaining of clear notions of things? If men hitherto did proceed no
further, and yet pretended to be Peripateticks, blame the abuse, but condemn
not the Philosophy, which has nothing in it that puts a stop to Enquiries and
Curiosity. Nor do I find that those Physicians, and others, who advanced the
several parts of Natural Philosophy and Physic, did thereby act contrary to
the rules of their Master or Tutors. It is true, that their Schools did meddle
but with few points mainly, and those were such as related to Divinity, as the
Eternity of the World, the Nature of the First and Second Causes, of the Soul
and its Faculties, etc. as to an exact natural Philosophy, they did not much
trouble themselves, nor had we had what we have, but that Averroes and the
Physicians befriended us. But must Scaliger and such like suffer under these
Imputations, which particularly relate unto their School-Divines? and must they
also be blamed for not teaching nor putting men upon further Enquiries than
were necessary to that Christianity, which they were to support against the
Mahometans and Jews? He that knows the end of their first institution by
Charlemaigne, can best judge how prudential it was, and how they answered
expectation. But our Illiterati know nothing of that, and are always reviling
them where they are not faulty, and would have had them nglected that part
which was necessary to the Education of all that were to live under and support
Christianity, to pursue Studies that contribute little thereto, and such as
were never essential to the being of a State, but have been often exploded as
prejudicial thereunto. The same Apology may serve the present Universities, who
do enough in breeding up men to be fitly qualified for Employments in Church
and State, and instruct them in so much Philosophy as is necessary for the
explaining and defending of our Religion against Atheists, Papists, and
Socinians: and whosoever shall put the accurate debate of these Points, the Art
of reasoning, the Validity of Consequences, the unfolding of crytical
Syllogisms and Fallacies, the general doctrine of Topics, the Moral
Philosophy, and Foundations of Civil Prudence, (besides Civil and
Ecclesiastical History and Languages) which are taught there, or ought to be by
their Constitution, into the Scales on one hand, and the Mechanical Education
(recommended with all the advantages that arises from Aphorisms of Cider,
planting of Orchards, making of Optic Glasses, magnetic and S^e Mr Sprat, p.
329.
hortulane Curiosities) on the other hand, will be able to judge easily which
Studies deserve the most encouragement by the public, and which are most
useful and requisite. Having said thus much in behalf of our
University-Learning (which is now contradistinguished from the Mechanical
Education) I shall add thus much in favor of our Ancestors, who gave solemn
encouragement to Archery, Cudgel-playing, Foot-ballplaying, and other
Exercises, that prepared the Vulgar to Military Performances; as the more
Academical did the Gentry to State Affairs: whereas they gave little
countenance to the Experimental Philosophers and Naturalists: that the practice
is justified by Vegetius l. 3. c. 10. Quis autem dubitat artem bellicam rebus
omnibus esse potiorem, per quam libertas retinetur, and dignitas propagatur,
provinciae conservantur and Imperium? Hanc quondam relictis doctrinis omnibus
Lacedemonii, and post coluere Romani. Hanc solam hodieque Barbari putant esse
servandam: caetera aut in hac art consistere, aut per hanc artem assequi se
posse considunt. Haec dimicaturis est necessaria* per quam vitam retineant and
victoriam consequantur. But to return to our Virtuoso! Are not the principles
of Des Carts, and the figured Atoms of Gassendus as precarious as those of
Aristotle, and less subjected to sense? Have (...) si ac^^piantur h^c
Chymicorum p^^^^ij (...) assent* (...) ^^s p^ss^mus, ita ut pro Mercurio aqua
ponatur, Sulphur ignis and ^er, S le ter^a. Analogia negata negatur omnia eo
abire Ex aqua and terra sac li^um viscidum* and hunc cu^ae conglutinari and
con^rescere in ^apidem: quemadmodum natural (...) videmus. Si hic resolvatur in
ultima non in Mercurium. Sulphur, and Salem, sed in vulgata and Physica
resolvetur principia* M. Ruland. Progyn^n. Alchym Qu^^.
not the Chemical Principles so much of uncertainty, as they have of
Equivocation? Are not they precarious too, and suspicious? Are there any of
those that agree amongst themselves? and do not they as little agree with
Nature as those of the Peripatetick way? I will not doubt to maintain that as
far as Physic is concerned in the debates; The ancient Philosophy better
agrees with the Phenomenon of Nature, and carries us on with more assurance to
work (as they phrase it) then any other, and that the diligent reading of
Vallesius, Mercatus, Saxonia, Claudinus, etc. shall produce better Physicians
then Sylvius, Helmont, or Odorode. And whosoever resolves any of the other
Questions in the Negative, whatever he pretend, has never considerately
studied the Points. Give therefore the Aristotelians leave to hold an
Hypothesis, which is accommodated to the polity of our Nation) at least as
revocable, till a better be introduced; and do not proceed in an exterminative
way, till something else be ready to be substituted.

If Notions might be rejected for being first proposed and used by Heathens,
then is not Aristotle in a worse condition then Epicurus, Democritus, Plato, or
Pythagoras; If Impiety in the Teacher may authorize us to reject doctrines not
impious, I think the condition of our Stagirite not to be worse then that of
other ancient Philosophers, and better then some of the New. That there is
impiety enough in Gassendus's Answer to Des Carts, any Christian will grant,
especially if he be a Protestant. And the life of Descartes had but little of
the Saint: this is I cannot find any ground to conclude Aristotle so wicked.
If we indemnifie him for having an hand in poisoning Alexander, (which perhaps
is not true). In his last Will, there is much generosity: in his life, many
testimonies of a singular virtue: ^n his discourses much wit and worth. He writ
an Apology for Piety; got the walls of his destroyed Country to be rebuilt,
and made excellent Laws for it. Philip chose him to breed up Alexander. And
those are greater assurances that he was not so wicked, as he is reported by
his adversaries* They repeat nothing but old lies, such as Apellicon refuted:
and Aristocles says, (...). Se^ Casaubon upon Diog. Lart.
manifest. And I desire Mr. Glanvill to acquit Paracelsus from being impious in
his life, and many of his doctrines. If he was a Corrupter of the Wisdom of the
Ancients, for mis-citing, and misrepresenting their opinions; and must
therefore be condemned and rejected: who can approve of Mr. Sprat, Mr.
Glanvill, and their Adherents? He says, that Aristotle was of no such
superlative Account in the wisest times. But he tells us not which those most
wise times were, when he was in disesteem. I have not read of any more wise
people, then Greece, Rome, and the Mahometans, under their first Caliphs and
King Almansor. And yet all these admired him at several times. He that charge
Philip of Macedon, Alexander the Great, and his Successors, (particularly the
Ptolomyes of Egypt,) with Folly: and Sylla, Tully, and those other Romans that
admired him, with want of wisdom; Or, who thinks that the Empire of the Moors,
and their Academies at Bagdod, Fez, and Cordula, were composed of a sort of
Simpletons, may go seek for the wise and the prudent in Gotam College. And
perhaps those Christians that celebrated Aristotle, and advanced him to that
repute in their Kingdoms and Universities, were not Idiots or Changlings. That
He was much opposed and slighted by the first Fathers, is an Objection that
has some truth in it, but not much to the particular prejudice of our
Stagirite. For at first they hated and detested all humane Learning, and
Philosophy; and when they came any of them to admit of those Sciences, then
they divided into the Aristotelians and Platonists, as they did into Arians and
Catholics: That the Arians were Aristotelians, is to me as evident, as that
Mahomet taking the advantage of that faction, and of the brutal lives and
ignorance of the Catholics depending upon the Patriarch of Constantinople,
did advance the Sect of Christians, called Mahometans; and his Successors the
Caliphs, did wholly employ themselves to improve (...) that the Virtuosi would
enquire after the Peripatetick Philosophy, at Alexandria after the Ptolomies
and not at Athens. And when they have done that, and studied the condition of
Christianity, during the time of the Arrians, and enquired into the rise of
Mahomet, the circumstances that advanced him, and contributed to the spreading
of his doctrine, and increase of that Empire under the Caliphs, then they will
be able to judge of the truth of what their Historian, and Mr Glanvill writes
in the books animadverted on, and in his Letter concerning Aristotle.
the doctrines of Aristotle and the Peripateticks. So that Aristotelism,
Arianism, and Mahometanism issued out of the same parts of the world, viz.
Alexandria, and the adjacent Countries: Nor was it Chance or the black
ignorance of the Age, but great prudence in Charlemaine and his Successors in
the West, that brought in Aristotle: as any man will say that understands the
circumstances of those days. But so much History is above the reach of my
Experimental Philosopher: To supply that defect, Christians must be once more
told, that since their minds are enlightened with the rays of the glorious
Gospel, they have less reason to bow down to the Dictates of an Idolater and an
Heathen. And so farewell to the Rhetoric and other works of Aristotle, which
our Virtuoso a little while ago recommended unto us. Let us shake hands with
Seneca, and Epictetus, and Plato: and join with Tertullian in that saying.
Nobis Philosophia opus non est post Jesum Christum, nec Aristotele post
Evangelium. Having said thus much to these grand accusations against Aristotle,
with which Mr. Glanvill was so perplexed, I suppose he may think that a more
devout Admirer of Aristotle then I am, with more time, may say enough to
convince him, that it was his fault, and not the Peripateticks, that he
benefited so little by them. And I pray what language did Epicurus, Pythagoras,
and Philolaus make use of? He writ better about divine things than Plato, as
Vossius witnesses, Quanquam multa de Deo scripta sunt a Platone, accuratius
tamen apertiusque de iis egit Aristoteles. He cites a passage of Plato, (...),
and adds, that the Universe must be known by the Art, by which it was made. If
it be not to be known any other way, it is unintelligible. Let him answer Dr.
More's Dialogues upon that point, where he explodes the Mechanism of Nature:
and reckons upon Descartes as the most prodigious Fool that ever was, for
holding that opinion. I shall add, that Geometricians are commonly a sort of
men, that being once got out of their Science, they are far from being elevated
and improved thereby: And the reason is, because that the severe procedure of
Mathematical demonstrations, and their ways they take to demonstrate things
appertaining to their Science, these do not qualify a man at all for those
argumentations which sway and guide in Metaphysics, Ethics, Politics Arist
Eth. l. 6. c. 8.
and Religion it self. Upon this account Aristotle observed, that a child might
become a Mathematician, but not a Politician, or Moralist. Hence it is, that
Geometricians, (except their studies have particularly acquainted them with
those Dialecticks, which regulate the generality of Mankind in such
discourses,) seldom, if ever, prove Metaphysicians, Religieuse, or otherwise of
tolerable ratiocination: either rejecting as false, frivolous, and demonstrable
those reasonings and studies, according to which humane affairs are regulated;
or else ignorantly, running into Whimseys, and fantastical ways of arguing.
Neither is this more manifest, then I think these two Conclusions are, which I
deduce from thence in opposition to some Comical Wits in their History, viz.

That by how much more general as to public and private use and emolument in
order to domestic affairs, or Civil Prudence and the preservation of Humane
Society and Government those things are, which depend upon persuasive
Arguments, and those topics and methods of ratiocination which are laid down
by Aristotle, not Euclide: by so much those courses ought to be pursued, upheld
and encouraged by understanding Statesmen which are subservient thereunto,
above the less necessary and utile Mathematics.

Next, That the Mechanical Education, or that whereby Hist of the R* ^. p. 319.
Youth are inured at first to vigorous demonstrations, and necessary deductions
from evident Principles, and a Philosophy that is purely Corpuscularian, ought
not to be premised or preferred to other studies in order to the fitting men
for humane life: seeing either accidentally, (yet so, as in regard of our
depraved nature it is almost unavoidable) or intrinsecally those courses
dispose men's minds afterward to Atheism, or an indifference in Religion, and
inhabilitate them toward those more important, but less delightful studies of
Law, Policy, and Religion, with their several dependencies.

I find that Aristotle has complained of some, that in their Explications of
Nature made too much use of Geometry. Magnenus has complained also of them;
and Conringius, Bullialdus, and Ricciolus, of Kepler; and Bodinus, in his V de
Ricciol^m in Alma^^st no^. l. 4. p 278.
Theatrum Naturae l. 5. and all Physicians almost of Descartes his ridiculous
book de Homine. And if Plato was so solicitous, that none but Geometricians
should come into his School, yet he sent them very fools out, if they allowed
See Mr. Parkers censure of the Platonic Philosophy.
of his Logic and Physiology. I shall leave the further defense of Aristotle
to others; only I must tell him, that Vossius in his account of Geometricians
allows of Aristotle for no mean one. And we find that he supposes his Scholars
not ignorant in Geometry, since without that knowledge they could Vide
Blancanum in loca Mathematica Aristotelis.
not understand his Analyticks, nor that part of his Ethics, where he
illustrates Justice by the Arithmetical and Geometrical proportions. And as for
his Ethnical opinions, it is ridiculous to upbraid the University-Learning
Epicurus Mathesin insuper habuit: unde ut Plutarch, ait libro contra Epicurum.
Philosophum quendam nomine Apellem, co nomine laudabat, quod ab adolescentia
nunquam esset contaminatus disciplinis Mathematicis. Vossius de Philos. sect. c
8 sect. 7.
with them, since they are not taught, but solidly refuted there, However if
Aristotle must suffer on this Account, let not Epicurus triumph. He tells us
that Archytas, that great Geometrician was scared from Mechanical and Organical
Methods to the great hinderance of beneficial Improvements that way, so that he
kept himself up in Abstractive Contemplations. I cannot find any such thing in
his life written by Diog. Laertius, but the contrary, (...). Diog. Laert. l. 8.
in vit. Archytae.
He made a Pidgeon of wood artificially to fly. So Favorinus. (...). ^^llius
x. 12.
I wonder oftentimes how He did to commit so many mistakes; and I cannot
believe that He or his Philosophic friends were ever well instructed in the
Peripatetick doctrines, who are so ill taught in all manner of Humane Learning.
I resign him up to be the scorn and entertainment of others henceforth. Nor
will I engage particularly in the dispute betwixt him and Mr. Cross. I am
informed, that the Relation is very false; and I profess I have no mind to
believe this Virtuoso in any thing he says. It is easy for him to misreport a
private discourse; His great and admired friend Mr. Sprat relates general
Encounters salse; He tells us, Of a mischance that befell the Christian Army in
Egypt in the time of the Hist. of the R. S. Page 412.
Holy War. Their strength was great and irresistible, if they had only
understood that which every Egyptian could have taught them, the course and the
time of the overflowing of the Nile. For the want of that slender knowledge,
the bravest men of all Christendom, were led up to the Neck in the River, and
were forced to yield to the Enemies conditions without striking a stroke. This
was occasioned by the stupidity of the Cardinal who commanded them. If he had
been less skilful in the Schoolmen and more in Nature, that dreadful disaster
had never happened. -- Such an untruth as the Historian tells here, such
perhaps is the Narrative of what passed betwixt him and Mr. Cross. I cannot
find any such Story in Fullers Holy War, but the contrary, viz. Egypt
Fallers Holy War, l. 3. c* 27.
is a low level Country except some few advantages, which the Egyptians had
fortified for themselves. Through the midst of the Land runs the River Nilus,
whose streams they had so bridled with banks and sluices, that they could keep
it to be their own servant, and make it their Enemies Master at pleasure. The
Christians confidently marched on, and the Turks perceiving the Game was come
within the wile, pierced their banks, and unmuzling the River, let it run open
mouth upon them, yet so that at the first they drowned them but up to the
middle -- not to the neck. There is no body charges the Cardinal Pelagius, who
was Legate, and commanded the Army there, for invading Egypt in an unseasonable
time, nor with being ignorant of the time when Nile did overflow. The
Christians were not ignorant of that, who had discovered and invaded Egypt
before in 1218, and this was but two years after in 1220. The Egyptians, it is
true, dammed up the River (which was now low) and upon the approach of the
Cardinal cut their banks, and so gained the victory. That the Cardinal was no
Soldier, and unacquainted with Stratagems of war, I grant; and for this
Historians* condemn him, but not for being ignorant of that part of Natural
Philosophy. A Member of the Royal Society published lately an account of the
Original of Nile. The Description had nothing of News in it to any Scholar,
that was material. But they should have procured an account of the manner of
the inundation of Nile, for the Historian is more ignorant then the Gardinal of
it. Had it been the time of the beginning of the overflowing of Nile, they
might have retired easily to Prosper. Alpin. de Medic. Egypt. l 1. c. 8.
Damiata without damage; for it never exceeds in rising above ten inches each
day, sometimes it arises not eight inches. Just such an Account, I fear, does
I know not what Logic Mr Glanvill read at Oxford, but it is Ignoratio Elenchi
in him, to oppose what Mr. Cross might say about Asia as 'twas of old named,
and bounded* and traveled over, with the new discoveries of China, Japan, etc.
which rather constitute a fifth part of the world, then are included in Asia.
That is Asia, which they imported that gave it the name, not what others affix
to it. By the same Sophistry it may be said that the former Kings were not
Kings of France, because late Conquests have enlarged the borders.

Nor was Aristotle implicitly guided by the relations of those Hunters, etc. he
diligently inquired into their reports, and oftentimes refutes the vulgar
stories. See this particularly asserted by Federicus Bonaventura de partu
Octomestri l. 5. c. 60.


Mr. Glanvill give of Mr. Cross's discourses, whom report speaks so
advantagiously of, that we must give the Lie to general fame, or believe him a
very learned Person, as well as pious. Perhaps he, as well as my Lord Eacon
might suspect the truth of those Telescopes. And perhaps also he might be
mistaken in saying that Aristotle did travel all over Asia: yet, however that,
that Jonssius ( de Script Philos. l. 1. c. 18.) disproves that opinion* yet no
less man then Josephus l. 1. adv. Apionem, was deceived as well as Mr. Cross.
Solinus also c. 14* and Ammonius in the life of Aristotle say, that Aristotle
did accompany Alexander in his Asiatick* Expedition. And I prosess my self in
an error as well as Mr. Cross, if it be not true, that Aristotle had sundry
advantages to pen his History of Animals which our Virtuosi want. Pliny Not.
Hist l. 8. c. 16. says* Alexandro Magno rege inflammato cupidine animalium
naturas noscendi, delegataque hac commentatione Aristoteli, summo in omni
doctrina viro, aliquot millia hominum in totius Asiae, Greciae que tractu
parere jussa, omnium quos venatus, aucupia, piscatusque alebant: quibusque
vivaria, armenta, alvearia, piscinae, aviaria in cura erant: nequid usquam
gentium ignoraretur ab eo: quos percontando, quinquaginta fermo volumina illa
praeclara de animalibus condidit.

Let a man now consider the greatness of Alexander, the impatience he had to
effect his purposes, how generous he was in acknowledging Services, and how
vindicative when neglected, and how understanding to know what was done and
omitted: Let any man consider this, and he will think that the Society have not
a Patron that interesseth himself so much as Alexander did for Aristotle. He
had several thousands commanded to give him intelligence: their number
transcends any that ours can pretend to: their quality is such as the R.
Society wishes for, viz. Intelligence from the constant and unerring use of
Experienced men, of the most unaffected Mr. Sprat. p. 257.
and most unartificial kinds of life. And if notwithstanding all these
circumstances Aristotle were abused or mistaken, or defective in his
Narrations, I am confident there is less credit to be placed in the Narrations
of some of our Virtuosi, who have been so mistaken in their Accounts of Cider
and Saltpeter, domestic Enquiries; what man will give himself the trouble to
inform them, either at home, or abroad? with what negligence and imperfectness
will they register things? how un-philosophical will their memoires be? How
will they be able by entreaty to procure a second information? That there are
more parts of the world discovered and sailed unto then in Aristotle's time, I
grant. But what certainty shall we have of Narratives picked up from negligent,
or un-accurate Merchants and Seamen? What judgment have these men of no
reading, whereby to rectify or enlarge their Enquiries? Mr. Glanvill does not
so much as know who writ well upon the several subjects, in which he pretends
that the Moderns have outdone the Ancients. As Improvers of the History of
Bathes (by the way we are far inferior to them in the practice of Bathing) he
reckons Savananla for one: he might as well have recounted Bayrus, Gordonius
and Gatinaria: or any of the barbarous Physicians, for advancers of the
practick: He might have told us of a Volume of Writers de balneis: But why did
he omit Solinander de thermis, Libavius, and our Dr. Jordan (who lived at our
Bathe) and Bauhinus de font Bollensi, and the other Writers about particular
Bathes? Alas! He knew them not: nor did I ever hear any man commend Blanchellus
upon that subject. About Minerals, could he not have named Encelius,
Caesalpinus, Fallopius, and Lazarus Erkerus, whom I find by some to be
preferred before Agricola? In his Account of remote Histories of Nature, could
he remember the Author of the Caribby-History, and pass by Carolus Piso,
Burggravius, and Bontius about Brasile and the East Indies. So where he speaks
of discoveries made by Microscopes (page 57.) by naming only Dr. Power and Mr.
Hook, ingenious Mechanics, Members of the Royal Society; he seems to
intimate, as if none but the Virtuosi had proceeded in that adventure, whereas
Petrus Borellus, Physician in ordinary to the King of Erance, published a
Century of Microscopical observations An. Dom. 1656. such as have (if true)
more of utility then those of Mr. Hook, though less of curiosity, and
destitute of Cuts; and Kircher after many years employed in those
contemplations, per exquisitissima Microscopia, did Kerch. de Pest sect. 1. c.
7.
publish several Experiments of that kind, in his book de Peste; and Nicolaus
Zucchius about the same time (1656.) Nic. Zucchius Philos. op^ic. part. 2.
(...). 3. c. 7. sect. 4. p. 348.
published a short account of Microscopical observations, about a Lowse, a
Flea, the feathers of a Peacocks tail, etc. encouraging others to prosecute the
work. He tells us, ( page 56.) that the discoveries by Telescopes may inform us
of the Longitudes: upon which must needs ensue yet greater improvements of
Navigation, and perhaps the discovery of the North-west passage, and yet
unknown South. I grant that the invention of Longitudes will be extremely
beneficial to mankind in point of sailing: and the R. S. have made great
boasts how that it shall be achieved by their Members; and thereupon caused
some projects to be rejected, which yet perhaps would have proved as unfeasible
as the attempt of Galileo's* to calculate it by the Medicean Stars. I desire
much to see the happy result of our Virtuosi, though the consequences here
affixed to it, as Improvements was very defective. I shall propose some
Scruples about the North-west passage, and ^he utility of its discovery, as
also of the hopes of finding out the Southern Tracts.

First, I say that the story about the streights of Aman See Mr. Gardener in
his description of America c. 25. where he professes to write nothing but what
his own knowledge, or good intelligence persuaded him unto, he having lived
long in the remote parts of America: the loss of whose large Account thereof we
may deplore.
is very improbable, if not certainly a Fiction. It has been so thoroughly
searched into by our Nation, that there is no encouragement to a further trial:
and this Straight of the Northwest passage, is indeed nothing but a narrow
difficult passage to Button's Bay, the entrance being properly called Hudson's
Straight, in regard of his first finding it; the mouth whereof lies in 62
degrees. But were there such a passage, it would much more concern the
Portugals, and the Spaniards, and Dutch, then it does the English; for their
trade is to the North-part of the East Indies, and ours to the South: theirs to
the Moluccoes, Philippinas, Japan, and China; whereas we seldom pass beyond
Bant am in Java.

Secondly, were there a passage that way, yet it were not to be chosen before
the other: for, could a man sail in a strait line, first from England to the
Straight, and thence from the Straight to the East Indies, it would prove a
further way then the other by the Cape of good Hope. But those that know any
thing of those Seas, know that the Sea-Course to any part of North America, is
as low as 23, 24, 25, or 30 the highest by reason of the wind which blows in
the South Sea East and West* as well as in the North, that is to say, for the
most part West without the Tropicks, and almost constantly East within them.
Wherefore you must go out of your way as well from the North-part of America to
the East Indies, as from England to this supposed Straight: and there is as
much difference in relation to pleasantness in the Voyages, as between Summer
and Winter. For when one is clear of the Bay of Biscay, in all the Voyage by
the Cape you find no cold weather till you return to the same place again: but
on the contrary, it is so cold and Icy about the Straight in the middle of
Summer, that there is no making Judge hence what hopes there is of making
discoveries in the Southern Tracts.
way without much difficulty and trouble. And in the South Sea, where the Sun
keeps the same course as in the North in June; Sir Francis Drake in compassing
the world, found so much cold in thirty eight degrees of North-latitude, that
he was forced into a Southerly course. Besides, if we may take a conjecture
from the winds, which have blown when the Undertakers for that discovery
passed into those Streights, one would guess by their great coldness, that they
did blow from the Land, and consequently that there is no Sea to the North of
America, but that the Land of this New World reaches by the North parts, even
to the Northwardly Provinces of Tartary, etc.

I am surprised to find, that Mr. Glanvill does not make the Moderns to
surpass the Ancients, in Architecture, Sculpture, Picture, and several other
Arts of ingenious Luxury. That he does not advance the glory of our
Mathematical burning- Glasses, above the Specula Ustoria of Proclus; and the
Artificial Fires of our Virtuosi above those invented by Callinicus, when he
burned the Saracens Fleet.

But not to upbraid him with what he has omitted: I shall resume the discourse
about Telescopes, and their fallaciousness, wherein if Mr. Cross was a little
doubtful, yet Mr. Glanvill is so assured, that he makes an ample recital of the
contest, and the advantages he gained in it. I shall set down his words, the
better to divert my Reader, and to show how insupportable such kind of men are
in all judicious and intelligent company.

To my Discourse about the Dioptrick Tubes, the Telescope Mr. Glanvills Plus
Ultra. c. 9 p. 65.
and Microscope, the Reverend Disputer replied,

[ That our Glasses were all deceitful and fallacious] Which Answer minds me of
the good Woman, who when her Husband urged in an occasion of difference, [ I
saw it, and shall I not believe my own Eyes?] Replied briskly, Will you believe
your own Eyes before your own Dear Wife? And it seems this Gentleman thinks it
unreasonable we should believe ours* before his own dear Aristotle.

For an assurance of the credit of those Glasses, I told him he might try them
upon objects near, and easily visible by the unassisted sight; and if he made
the trial, he would find they altered the objects in nothing but their
proportions* which are represented larger for the advantage of vision in things
small and remote; and we have all the like reasons to distrust our Eyes, as
these Glasses (for their informations are the same in all things, but the
mentioned difference) and there is no man so much a fool as not to make
allowances for that. Never was any yet so grossly deceived by the Microscope, as
to be persuaded that a Flea is as big as a Lobster; nor did the Telescope ever
make any one believe that the Moon was at the end of his Tube: But if the
former represents that little Creature as bristled and jamar'd, and the other
makes the Planet mountanous and uneven, we have no reason to believe but that
their reports are sincere, though our unaided Senses are too gross to perceive
either the one or other; since, if the mentioned bristles and jamars are in the
Glass, and not in the Animal, they would appear in like manner in all the small
Creatures which in the same light and position are looked on through the
Microscope: And if the ruggedness of surface were in it, and not in the Moon,
the same would be seen upon all other distant Objects, that are viewed through
the other Optic Instrument. And if there be deceit in those Glasses, Seamen
had need beware how they trust them, since the Flags which appear to be those
of their Friends in the Perspective, may be really the Colors of their Enemies.

Upon these Accounts, Sir, which afford plain and sensible evidence, I wondered
much at the Disputers strange suspicion, which had been scarce pardonable in a
vulgar head; and I know not what to call it in one, that would be thought a
Philosopher: But the wary man gave a reason, which made me as much wonder at
his Argument, as his Doubt. And to this attend Ye Philosophers of the ROYAL
COLLEGE, and prepare your selves to answer a Demonstration from Experience
against your Glasses; Raise your Expectations for a wonderful, convictive
Experiment; Let the Mountains travel, and the Birth will follow. [ Take two
Spectacles (says the Experimental Sage) use them at the same time, and you
will not see so well as with one singly.] therefore your Microscopes and
Telescopes are Impostors. This man, Sir, is a Logician, and no doubt you
perceive so. O how I admire this rare faculty of arguing! How dull are our
Wits, to those subtle, Eagle-ey'd Schoolmen, who see Conclusions so far off,
through the more unerring Telescopes of their own piercing Understandings? Did
ever old man before make this use of his Spectacles? But to leave wondering,
let us endeavor to understand this Philosophy of Chue. How a man may see by
Spectacles, that Perspectives are deceitful. [ We can see better through one
pair, than two] says the deep Philosopher. Most sagely observed! The Argument
begins strongly: But in the name of Aristotle, whence comes the Consequence?
Therefore Perspectives are fallacious.

" One Proposition for Sense,
" And the other for Convenience.
This fits his purpose to discredit new Discoveries, it is no matter how it
follows. This Gentleman, you must know, Sir, uses to have his word taken among
his admiring Neighbors, and so is not wont to be put to the trouble of
proving: but I was so unmannerly as to expect it, choosing rather to see with
mine own Eyes, than his infallible Spectacles. We can see better -- says the
Disputer. How does he know that? If Perspectives deceive us, though naked sense
witness for them, Why may not his single Spectacles be as deceitful as they?
These represent things bigger than they are to the unaided sight; and the
Philosophical Glasses do but the same thing, in a higher degree of magnifying
the Object. But we allow him the benefit of his single Spectacles, though he
will not be so courteous to our Glasses, and confess his Reverend Experiment of
the use of two, but are inquisitive about the Consequence. The Reason of which
certainly must be, (if any be intended in it) that our Telescopes and
Microscopes have a Glass at each end, which the Man of S^p^ence thinks answers
the two pair of Spectacles, and therefore must render the Representation
deceitful. If this Philosopher had (...) of those thoughts to the profitable
doctrine of Optics, which he has spent upon Genus and Species, we had ^ever
heard of this Objection, which is as much a reason against the credit of all
Perspective Glasses whatsoever, as the Philosophical ones he would discredit.
And without more Optics than those of natural Understanding, he might, if it
had pleased him, have known, that we see better through the two Glasses in
Perspectives, then any single one; because they are so fashioned and ordered,
that the visive rays are better gathered and united by them for the advantage
of sight: But in the two Spectacles, the case is contrary. These things I
suggested, and some others from the Dioptricks, in which this Sage Person was
pleased then to conceal his Knowledge; and how great that was in these matters,
will appear by the Learned Problem he proposed at this period of our Discourse,
[ Why we cannot see with two pair of Spepectacles better than with one ^^ngly?
For, says the Man of AXioms, Vis unita fortior?]

A pleasant piece of Philosophy this; And I Will show the Disputer how strongly
he infers from his Maxim, by another Question like it. Why cannot he write
better with two Pens then with a single one, since Vis unita fortior? When he
has answered this Quaere, he has resolved his own. I said in the Discourse,
That the reason he gave why one would expect it should be so, is the reason why
it is not; and this is plain enough to sense, from the confusion of Vision,
which shows, that the rays are not united after the way requisite for the
aiding the sight (as I just now intimated) and how that should be, I had here
shown, but that I am ashamed to add more in earnest about a ^^^ve foolery.

Upon this Discourse, the first Remark I shall make is, That Mr. Glanvill has
little or no insight into Optics, and is in a manner as ignorant in that
profitable Science, as he represents his Adversary to be. It is something for a
Man to be able to give an account how he spent his time, though about Genus and
Species; rather then to appear to have idly passed it away, without acquiring
any knowledge at all. The Solution of Mr. Cross's fallacy, if it were his) by
that Intergatory, Why cannot he write better with two Pens, then with a s^ngle
one? is ridiculous, since there is no vis unita there: and in one sort of
Tubes, though the Vitrum Sphaerice earum, dilatando radios per ipsum
transmissos amplificat nota^^lit^r imaginem si in debita distantia constituatur
post Sphaerice convexum. Zucchius phil. o^t part. 2. (...). ^. c. 7 sect. 5.
page 360, 3^^, 362. How it is in Telescopes made up of all convex-Glass^s, the
same Author shows there: and so does Kepler in his Dioptricks.
rays be united in the first convex-Glass, and brought to a Convergency, yet:
must the Sphaerical Cavity of the next Glass dilate again, and dispose them
sittingly to effect the expected vision in the Retina: and besides this, it is
requisite that the Tube be so fitted unto the eye (not to speak of the fitting
it differently according as the Medium is) as to exclude all other impressions
and radiations, that Zucchius philos. opt. p^^t. ^. t^. 3. c. 7. s^ct. 5. p.
358.
may divert and impede the sight, viz. Ad consulendum sufficienti
determinationi potentiae per languidiorem and angustiorem impressionem a
remotioribus, multum prodest, si ex forma instrumenti and ejus applicatione ad
Oculum vel ex condition loci e quo per instrumentum remotiora, and in minori
amplitudine apparentia prospectamus, impediuntur radiationes aliunde intra
oculum simul and semel diffusae, praesertim validae.

As to what Mr. Cross is said to have argued against Telescopes, that the
addition of one Glass to another must hinder rather then improve vision,
because that the superadding of one pair of Spectacles to another, rather
weakens then amends the sight. I must say, that whosoever understands the
forming of an Argument cannot except against the form of that, nor do the
Propositions cohere so ill together, as that one should be as it were for
sense, and other, for convenience. All that excursion of our Virtuoso shows his
Ignorance, not Mr. Cross's. It Is one thing to except against the form, another
thing to except against the matter of a Syllogism. I confess there is reason
enough for to do the latter; but now for the other procedure. I believe such a
dispute was never heard of since the declining of Arcadia, as this was: If Mr.
Cross did urge this otherwise then to try the Intellectuals of Mr. Glanvill,
(concerning whose inhability he might be well satisfied) there is no defense to
be made for him, otherwise then that he was unacquainted with a sort of
knowledge which is unnecessary in a Divine, and not expected from him; whose
credit is better supported by those Qualifications which represent him as a man
of godly Conversation, faithful and able in the discharge of his
Gospel Ministry. But that Mr. Glanvill as little understood the subject of a
knowledge he pretends unto, it is manifest from hence; that he might easily
have denied the Assertion of the Spectacles, that two pair did not impede, but
amend the sight in some eyes that are very weak. I know a young Gentlewoman
that has two Cataracts breeding in her eyes, which reads and works with two
pair of Spectacles, whereas she cannot with one pair. There is also an old
Gentlewoman of my acquaintance who uses the same helps. I am ashamed to debate
these fooleries (as our Virtuoso calls them,) but if Mr. Cross did call in
question the integrity of the Telescopes, I shall assume the liberty of a
digression about that Point, which perhaps may not seem unseasonable in this
Age, and which will abate the pride, and evince the great ignorance of Mr.
Glanvill.

Either my Memory does very much deceive me, or else the Lord Bacon did suspect
these Telescopes, that they might impose upon our Senses: and I am sure Mr
Boil is in the same Error with Mr. Cross, for he complains that when He went
about to examine those appearances in the Sun called Maculae, and Faculae
solares, he could not make the least discovery Tentam. Physi^log. page 144.
145, 146.
of them in many months, which yet other Observators pretend to see every day:
yet does Mr. Boil profess, that He neither wanted the convenience of excellent
Telescopes, nor omitted any circumstance requisite to the Enquiry. Besides Vide
Ricciol. Almagest. nov. l. 8. sect. 1. c. 16.
these, Scipio Claramontius, he that baffled Tycho about the Comets in the
judgment of most men, and gained advantages enough against Kepler and Galilaeo
to make himself glorious, and to show that instead of Mathematical
demonstrations they proceeded upon uncertain Topics Scipio Claramontius in
defensione Anti-Tychoni^, and libri de novis stellis a se con^^ripti Italico
idiomate edit^, multis contendit Telescopium in repraesentatione objectorum
fallax esse, Part. 2 c. 15. ex quibus insert c. 16. ei qui velit apparentias
coelestium per illnd exceptas ratas haberi, necessario ostendendum esse ^ nulla
aberrationum, quibus illud obnoxium est, ^^jusmodi nitiatas esse. Quare cum ex
una part assumi nequeat, quasi universaliter verum quicquid per Telescopium
repraesentatur; ex alia part non possit talis propositio universalis restringi
ad apparentias ^oelestium, sine manifesta petitione principii cum hoc ipsum ^it
quod ^o ^trovertitur; an fallaci de se instrumento observata in ^^lectibus pro
certis habenda sint? manifest sequitur nihil ex usu Telescopii ^^^stirui posse
de dispositione ^oelestium. Zucchius Philos. opt. part. 1. c. 17. sect. 2. p.
175.
and Probabilities: this learned and inquisitive person does avowedly suspect
the Telescopes as fallacious more then once, and that there are more then He of
that judgment, is a thing unquestionable by any but Superficial Scholars: nor
do I apprehend any other reason then this to be in their heads, who have till
this day employed their thoughts here to contrive new Glasses, and amend
defects in the former. Our Virtuosi have complained of an Iris in their
Glasses, and gone about to correct that by Turning of them; but a friend of
mine writes, that he imagines it was after that Eustachio Divini at Rome had
given them an hint of it: and then they found it out. A little more modesty in
Assertions of this kind would become our Wits, considering that affairs of
this nature (it is the opinion of Archimedes, and refers to all Mechanismes)
admit not demonstration. Cum neque visus, neque manus, neque instrument a per
quae experiri oportet, satis habeant fidei ad exquisit am demonstrationem. --
Archimed. in libro de Arena.

I shall not so far engage in the controversy, as to repeat the Arguments and
Replies on both sides. It seems strange, that the Telescopes should so magnify
thirty, forty, or one hundred times objects on earth, and yet lessen those of
the fixed Stars in Heaven, viz. Stellas primae magnitudinis, Caniculam, Scipio
Claramont. de univer so l. 9. c. xxi.
etc. Jovem, Saturnum minores repraesentat multo, quam oculo libero appareant:
and idem instrumentum stellas nusquam apparentes, ut Jovis Satellites justae
magnitudinis repraesentat, and paulo minores repraesentato Jove, imo tantas
facit, ut possint pius apparere* quam queant apparere stellae primae
magnitudinis, -- at quid? in Octava Sphaera stellas nihil apparentes magnas
facit, Nebulosas scilicet, and Galaxiae formatrices. -- This is granted all by
Galileo to be true, but he solves by an imaginary irradiation, the fancy
whereof he advanced upon some weak Experiments, most whereof he deserted
himself, and the Vide Scip. C^^^^m* de u^iverso 9 c. 19. 18* 1^. 2^ Zucchius
ph^. opr par 1. c. (...) sect 6 p. 111. Id. ib p. 216.
rest are excellently refuted by Zucchius, who introduces another Salvo from
the configuration of the Eye, and that part of it called Uvea: which perhaps
may be discovered to be as false as any of the other hereafter: but he adds, Ex
quo est, ut in facilitate detrahendae circumfusae sideribus radiationis sit
notable discrimen inter Planetas collatos inter se, and inter stellas fix ^
invicem, and aliquas earum cum aliquibus eorum comparatas. Thus the Objection
in its full force is granted by all (except Sorsius deny it) only the cause of
the Phenomenon was not till Zucchius (if then) sufficiently explicated; Sure
Zucchius phil. op^. part. 1. c. 1^. sect* 5. p 159, 200.
I am that he in another place avows, that long Telescopes rightly made do not
lessen Jupiter, but represent him greater then He appears to the naked Eye:
insomuch that his Tube of 23 feet-long did represent Jupiter as big as the Moon
is when at full, and looked upon without any Telescope: so that He says the
Objection holds only in Telescopiis brevioribus, in quibus pariter evenit
inspiciendo lucida inferiora.

Besides, were there such certainty in the Telescopes, how comes it to pass
that there is such a variety of opinions amongst those Observators, whose
diligence can be as little suspected as their learning? Claramontius did set
two persons to observe the Spots of the Sun, (both were inclined to
Novelties) they were not 40 miles distant, yet did not their Schemes agree as
to number, or situation. Nor is this a figment of that partial Peripatetick:
any man that reads Ricciol Almag. nov* ^ 3. c 3 Zucchius phil. opr. par 1. c 7.
sect 8. p. 233. See this point of the variety about the sp^^ ^ in the Sun,
particularly handled by Schottus ^n his N^res upon Kircher^'s ^^er ex^^. ^i*
cum ^oelest* ^^^^er* 1. dialog. ^. p 183. And ^ow different the observations of
Galilaeo and Scheiner were you may see in a Synopsis ^n the R^^^ U(...) l. ^.
c. 4. and ^ib. c 10.
Ricciolus, and Zucchius, will see that they cannot agree about the number, the
motion, the situation, or so much as color of them. The words of this last
Writer are very remarkable in reference to Mr. Glanvill, and that certainty
which he asserts unto the Telescopes, viz. Neque obstat discrepantia numeri,
vel figurae macularum in observationibus plurium, circa idem tempus captatis:
tum quia longiores Telescopii in ampliori disco plures exhibent, quae
spectantem breviore Telescopio, angustiori disco latent: immo eodem Telescopio,
ad exactam mensuram suae extensionis redacto, notabiles fiunt aliquae, ante
inobservatae: and facillimum est in tali mensura minus exercitatos decipi; cum
tam pauci ex observatoribus, nec nisi monente Scheinero, didicerint ad exact
consignandam Solis imaginem, and in ea maculas, per trajectionem radiorum
Telescopio in planum direct oppositum, necessariam esse mutationem extensionis
Tubi, eo not abiliter magis producto in hyeme, correpto in aestate: Tum quia
sicut facilis est, ex allatis varietas in numero macularum, ita in
terminatione, quae facilius mutari potest ex iisdem capitibus in illis, quae in
pluribus observationibus consignantur, and ex modo consignandi. Less do they
agree about the nature of them: one Joannes Jarde named them Astra Borbonia:
and Malapertius, Mastrius, Rheita, do hold them to be Stars: of this opinion
was Scheinerus once, but he afterward assented to that of Galilaeo, Kepler,
Bullialdus and Blancanus, that they were not Stars, but fuliginous exhalations
arising out of the furnace of the Solar Globe, which he conceives to be a fire.
Kircher and others are of the same judgment; but Ricciolus distrusts it, being
not Vide Schottum ub^ supra, p. 184. Ricciol. Almag. nov. l. 3. c. 3 P. 7.
able to comprehend how fuliginous vapors should arise in such a number, so
constantly, so permanently as to keep a motion about, or with the Sun, of
about 27 days.

The like uncertainty there is in the Observations about Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
etc. what controversies do they raise Galilaeo ^n e^. ad Velserum, citante
^^a^amontio de univers. l. 9. c. 9. Ricciolus Almag. nov. l 7. sect. 1. c. 2.
p. 487, 488. Schottus in Kircher. iter exstat. coeleste p. 301, 302. Christ.
Hugenius ap^^ B^r^llum de con^pici^is, p. 63.
and how contradictious are their Relations? Galilaeo does represent Saturn in
one figure, Sch^^^^^ in another* the former says, that the oblong shape in
Saturn arises from a defect in the Telescope, or Eye, that could not
distinguish the Comites Saturni from the Planet it self* But Ricciolus and
others dissent from him in that point* and Christi^^^s Hugenius made
observations about Saturn, such as neither Antonius de Rheita* nor Hevelius did
ever see; and represents the ansulae of Saturn, differently from what Fontana
and the Dantiscan Selenographer do write. The words of Hugenius I shall propose
to Mr. Glanvill's consideration, Expectamus ut sub finem Aprilis, si non antea,
brachia Saturno renascantur, non curva illa, cujusmodi a Francisco Fontana, and
Hevelio depicta cer^untur, sed secundum lineam rectam utrinque prominentia,
siquis melioris notae perspicillo intueatur. Nam vulgaria si adhibeat binos
orbiculos referent, sicuti Galilaeo primum se obtulere. Nostram quo Saturni
asseclam reperimus, quinquagies diametrum rei visae multiplicat, duodenos pedes
aequans; cui postea duplum longitudine constriximus, multiplicatione centupla.
Cum autem longiora etiam hisce Telescopia, utpote triginta and quadraginta
pedum ab aliis fabricari dicantur, aliquid aut vitris vitii inesse, aut haec
eadem non debita proportione mutuo respordere credibile est. Neque enim alius
hucusque aciem eorum effugisset novus Saturni Satelles. Being to speak of
Saturn, I must not forget Zucchius, who after thirty five years diligent
observation with variety of the best Telescopes, represents this Planet
differently from Zucchius philos. opt. part. 1. c. 17. sect ^. p. 00, 201.
what any others write, viz. Assero Saturnum multorum annorum spatio figura
passim oblonga, and in oppositione ad Solemn, not abiliter majorem apparuisse,
in apparentiae medio visum esse album illustre tumidum, aliquo modo ad
rotunditatem vergens, accedentibus hinc inde ad illud duabus velut nigris
notis, quas altum illustre, totam apparentiam ad apices terminans ita includit,
ut ad apices illius multo sit crassius, ubi vero eas notas complectendo ad
medium extenditur, gracilescat.

Assertio est facti, in quo a multis jam, annis convenient accuratiores, ex
variis Provinciis observatores longioribus Telescopiis instructi.

Scio a prioribus vulgatum, tres a se stellas in loco Saturni spectatas, media
multo majori, quae simul mutantes in coelo situm, a fixis aperte
distinguerentur, and Saturni duobus Planetis minoribus stipati apparentium
exhiberent, qui postea, illis a tali situ motis spectatus sit figura rotunda.
Verum triginta quinque ut minimum, anni sunt, quibus figura semper oblonga, cum
dispositione in assertione assignata, a me spectatus est pluries quotannis, pro
vario ad Solemn situ, acutioribus, minus acutis, cavis, convexisque lentibus ad
oculum proxime in Telescopio adhibitis apparentia eadem, semper magis
distincta, and majori, in oppositione ad Solemn, etiamsi meliorem vitiorum
^laborationem in multo longioribus Telescopiis postremo D. D. Evangelistae
Torricellii, and Eustachii Divini artificio, and beneficio singulari consecutus
sim. -- Quare in hoc priorum observationes, qui brevioribus, minusque perfectis
Telescopiis, ut omnino ratas admittere non audeo.

Concerning Jupiter, and his Satellites, and their number, Vide Schottum in
Kirch. iter exstaticum coeleste p. 268, 269. etc. Ricciol. in Almag. nov. l. 7.
sect. 1. p. 486.
taking in the Urban Octavian Stars, I find a great variety, even when two
men observed at the same time, as de Rheita and Gassendus: that both of them
were in the right, cannot be said: which of them were in the wrong, I know not.
In sum, the observations about Jupiter and his Attendants are so various,
Aliter enim apparuerunt Simoni Mario, aliter Apelli, aliter Galilaeo, that
Claramontius takes this advantage of it. Ego igitur argumentum ex ejusmodi
diversitate alicio contra veritatem objecti, non contra observationum
diligentiam, Scipio Claramonti^s de universo l. ^. c. 8.
cum observatio ejusmodi non sit nisi pura per tubum transpectio, eaque defixa:
ii etiam viri perfectum instrumentum habebant, es^que id verisimile, cum in eam
rem toti incumberent, instrumentum etiam exactum paravisse: oculorum etiam and
visus acumen, cur demam Apelli and ejus in observando sociis, potius Galilaeo
demerem, qui se fatetur oculum minus perfectum habere

Neither are they better agreed about Mars and his Figure, the umbo or spot in
him. Gassendus denies that ever he saw it, though he used the Tube of Galilaeo;
others avow it: as you may see in Schottus and Ricciolus. In fine, as to
Scott^s in Kircher. ^ter exstat. ^oe (...) p 242* etc. Ricciolus Al mag nov. l.
7. ^^ct. ^. p 486. Zucchius ^hil opt. part 1 c. 17. sect 4 P. 193.
the new Phenomenon about Mars, Venus, and Mercury, to desend them Zucchius is
forced to complain of the Telescopes, and protests thus. Interim te, amice
Lector, provoco Spectatorem, bono and longiore Telescopio instructum, cujus
Lens superior ad obtinendam siguram apparentiarum been praecisam, juxta dicta,
maxima ex part contecta sit, modico ad medium aperto for amine.

I am tired with the further prosecution of this subject; and therefore shall
confine the rest of my discourse to the Observations about the Moon: the
contemplation whereof, as it is more facile, so it has been more pursued then
any other of that kind. There is none of our Comicall Wits doubt that it is a
World, divided into Hills, Valleys, Seas, Lakes, Rivers, and even peopled as
this Terraqueous Globe of ours But it is remarkable, that the use of the
Telescope has not convinced some, that the Moon has an unequal surface, but
that the Phenomenon of the spots may be solved by the conceit that some parts
of it are more Diaphanous, some more opake. Who has not heard how Scheiner
looked on the Moon in an Eclipse, and did conceive it was fistulous, (at
Berigardus C^^^. P. (...) de Luna. id. ^
least translucid in part) and so did transmit the light thorough several
Cavities in some places, whilst others, not directly subject to the Sun, are
obscure. They cannot agree whether the Spots of the Moon be more bright, or
obscure in an Eclipse. The observations and descriptions of the Moon, made by
Galilaeo, Scheiner, Fontana, Schottus upon Kircher, etc. are so defective, that
we must repute them but as the first rudiments of an intended Science. And as
for the descriptions of the Phases of the Moon, made by Langrenus and Hevelius,
however there by many things in which they all agree: yet the Telescopes of
Ricciolus (made by a Bavarian Artist) and of Franciscus Maria Grimaldi, either
rectified the mistakes, or represented many Phenomenon different from those
delineated by Galilaeo, Fontana, Torricellius, and Manzini, viz. Lunaris faciei
parts omnes magnas, mediocres, ac Ricciolus Almag. nov. l. 4. c. 7.
minimas singillatim Telescopio intuens Grimaldus, easque statim cum Langreni
and Hevelii Schematibus comparans, deprehendit multa quidem egregie ab iis
peracta, non pauca tamen superesse, quae aut addenda, aut quoad situm,
magnitudinem, siguram, symmetriam, nigroris aut claritatis differentiam
corrigenda forent. Such as reject the exact Sphericalness of the Moon,
introduce Asperities and inequalities in the surface of it, which some explain
by Mountains, Valleys, and Waters: but concerning the parts of the Moon, which
might be Water, and which Land, our Observators did differ. Galilaeo Glailaeo
sy^^m. co^mic. p. 131. edit. Lonain. Kepler. Astronom. Optic. c. 6. sect. 9.
believes the spots or obscure parts to be water. Kepler held the contrary,
that the bright parts were water, and pretends to demonstrate it out of
Optics. though afterward he changed his opinion for that of Galilaeo's, which
is generally received. As to those asperities in the surface of the Moon,
whether they extend to the Limbus, or utmost circumference, or no, is a doubt
amongst them: Galilaeo Ricciolus Almag nov. l. 4. c. 8. qu 2.
denies it; Kepler, Ricciolus, and others affirming it: and the latter gives
this reason why they are less frequently observed there: Vera causa cur raro
asperitas illa Limborum videatur, est partim imperfectio Telescopii, etc.
Neither are they better satisfied about the Atmosphear of the Moon: that there
is one, Galilaeo, Kircher. iter exstat. coe^est. p 48. Ricciolus Almag. nov. l.
4. c ^. sect. 8.
Kepler, Antonius Maria de Rheita, Kircher, Cysatus, Scheiner, with others do
avow: and Langrenus says, that we may observe it with a Telescope: eandem
Tubo* specillis conspici affirmat Michael Florentius Langrenus. But others deny
it as peremptorily. Interim mihi (faith Ricciolus) nondum quocunque Telescopio
adhibito Ricciol. Almag. nov. l. 4. c. a. sect. 3.
aer hic ita patuit, ut illum potius prope ac circa Lunam, quam in aere nostro,
in quo and Halones siunt, cogar agnoscere. And Zucchius at large proves this
Corollary, Non elevantur Zucchius phil. optic part. 1. c. 17. sect. 9. p. 2^4.
vi luminis Solis vapores e Luna, sicut elevantur ex Globo e terra and aqua
integrato: Neque datur circa Lunam Sphaera vaporosa ulla, qualis circa dictum
Globum deprehenditur.

Having proceeded thus far, I shall take notice of some extravagant opinions
that possess many of our Comical wits, and their Associates or Admirers, which
are extended to the prejudice of Christianity, and the growth of Atheism in
this Age, viz. That the resemblance betwixt the Moon and the Earth is such,
that it is a Terraqueous Globe inhabited by men, and they hereupon concern
themselves about their Progeny, Salvation, etc. I shall from hence take
occasion to instruct those fantastical persons, that even Hevelius, who
accommodated the Terrestrial Geography to the Lunar Globe, and seems to
conclude that the illuminated part is earth, the darker is water: yet did it
only because He knew no fitter comparison amongst sublunary bodies. -- Non est
autem quod quispiam ideo existimet Lunam ex ejusmodi sabulo, luto, aut lapide
esse compositam, ut haec terra nostra, siquidem fortassis ex alia poterit
constare materia, ab imaginatione nostra prorsus Joan. Hevelius Selenograph. p.
148.
diversa, and modo adhuc incomprehensibili. -- Minime etiam hasce Lunares aquas
nostris^ similes assero, sed quod nihil quicquam similius, propter magnam
utrarumque affinitatem hic in terra habeamus, cum quo illas comparare valeamus.
It was indiscreetly done of Kepler, Kircher, Hevelius, and such Writers to
carry on the comparison so far, the resemblance betwixt the two Globes being so
little as the most unprejudiced Ricciolus Almag. nov. l. 4 c. 7. p. 203.
persons findit to be. Hevelius perinde acsi Luna esset altera tellus,
Geographica nostratis Telluris nomina in Lunam transtulit: licet quoad figuram,
situm, symmetriam, etc. nulla fere sit Analogia inter utriusque superficiem.
The truth whereof will further appear from those considerations which the
inquisitive Zucchius after thirty five years use of all manner Zucchius* phil.
opt. heart. a. c. 17. sect. 9. corol. 7. p. 266.
of Telescopes at length fixed upon, viz. That the discrepancy of Parts in the
illuminated Moon may be explained without attributing thereunto any variety of
colors: yea, it ought to be so explained. The first part of which Assertion he
proves thus: because in Opace bodies the difference of a greater and lesser
Obliquity in their situation toward the body that shines upon them does cause
a diverse manner of illustration. Thus the same wall, of one uniform color,
according as it is differently illuminated, seems in some parts to be white, in
others pale, in others dark-colored, and black: besides that, a greater or
lesser asperity or inequality of the superficies may cause an intermixture of
the enlightened and over-shadowed parts, and so create different appearances of
light and opacity in their most observable parts.

The second part He proves thus: because that the face of the Moon being looked
on with a Tube of an extraordinary length, with Glasses excellently polished
(such as He used for many years) appears all of it like a great Tract of Land
covered over with Snow, which the Sun variously illuminates accordingly as
the parts are differently framed and situated. Where there is any change of
situation in the parts illuminated in reference to the body that irradiates
them, then do such parts abate of their whiteness: and although they still
continue in such a position that his beams may in some degree and manner reach
them, yet by reason of the unequal surface of the Moon (in which some parts are
more elevated then others) some parts are directly opposite to the Sun,
others are glanced upon with an oblique ray, and this mixture of shades and
brightness occasions those spots which we so talk of. Thus upon the libration
of the body of Jupiter, the girdle, which otherwise seems remarkably black
above the other adjacent parts of the Planet, becomes like unto the rest of the
body in whiteness, and so disappears.

As to the distinction of the Moon into Sea and Land, consisting of Mountains
and Valleys; although the Analogy may Existimo materiam globi lunaris non
constare terra and aqua Galilaeo system. cosmic p. 132.
seem allowable by reason of the Asperities in the surface of the Moon, (which
is a thing not to be denied: albeit that the calculation of the height of
those more elevated parts are ridiculous, except the nature of the Cavities
were better to be discovered, as Zucchius shows) yet the imagination Zucchias
phil. opt. part. 1. c. 17. sect. 9 p 260, 261.
of Seas and Lakes therein, or any thing of that Nature, except what borders
upon the Peninsula deli^^orum in the Lunar Chart of Ricciolus, it is all an
improbable phancie. For, that the more pale and obscure spots are not water,
appears hence, that those spots keep the same Phasis or appearance for many
days, though the Site of the Moon, both in respect of the Sun, and of us the
Spectators, do vary much in that time: whereas when the Sun casts his beams
upon Seas or great waters on Earth, the Phenomenon differ according as the
Sun, or the beholder vary their station: And this alone might convince us,
but that I find now in Zucchius, viz Similiter transitum successiv^m radiis
Solis Zucchius (...) supra p. 263.
ad fundum usque ad magnis maculis intra margines illustriores contentis
praebent (ut diximus in apparentiis, page 239.) quod non evenit in liquido
profundo instar aquae, ut in aquis e^perimur etiam in multa vicinitate
illustratis, quando not abilem habent profunditatem: tum quia constantem
inaequalitatem illustrationis exhibent in horizonte Lunari, and quidem, juxta
dicta in Apparentiis (number. 3.) secundum magnam extensionem illustratam, intra
reliquas parts nondum Solis radiis perfusas; imo aliquae, Soli proximiores,
alias sequentes in eadem majori macula inumbrabant: hujusmodi autem convenire
non possunt corpori Galilaeo pro^^^^eth, that in the Moon the^^ is no ^^in; no
clouds there thick^n ^^e a^^. Long^s ac diligentious observationibus nunquam id
ant^nadvertere p^t^i, ac semper unisormem purissimamque serenitatem ibi
deprehendi. Galilaeo. system. comic. p. 133. Zucchius ub^ supra. p. 264*
inconsistenti, and liquido aquam referenti, quae tamen certum est convenire
aliqu^bus Lunae partibus, ab omnibus inter maculas computatis. I must confess I
think these reasons convincing to any persons not prepossessed; and they are
much more enforced by him with a discourse concerning e^halations and an
Atmosphear about the Moon, which he denies absolutely: yet considering the
proportion of the imaginary Waters to the Land in the Moon, and the heat and
continuance of the Sunne-beams thereupon, common reason would tell us* that the
vaporous exhalatious would proportionably exceed those about the Earth here,
and produce an Atmosphear that should be observable, whereas the most accurate
inspection at most opportune times with the best Telescopes could not satisfy
Zucchius, that there was any such thing at all.

Kepler (and his Master Moestlinus) did believe that the Kepler Astronom.
Optic* c. 6. sect. 9.
Moon was a World consisting of Sea and Land, making up one entire Globe, as
the Earth does; and that the Mountains there were much higher and bigger
comparatively then those of the Earth: and adds by way of jocundry, that since
the Men and other Animals commonly Ga^ilaeo system. Gosmic. p. 13^. Existim^
matertam Glo^i Lunaris non constare ^e^ra and aqua. Quaeres un^ ad generationes
^ltet^^^onesque nostris (...) tollendas (...). ^^^untamen etiams^ concede^etur
(...) ibi ^erramque da^i; non tamen plantae and (...) nostris similia
nas^eren^ur, (...) (...) ^^^s praecipue rations: p^imo qu^^ ad nost^^s
generationes aspectu^^ Solis var^^^^s ^d^^ necessaria est, ut sine illis esse
nul^ae (...). Ja^ autem ha^itudines (...) ad Te^ram, ab (...) quae sunt ad
Lunam, ^ald^ diffe^unt. N^^ quoad illumin^tionem diar^am, in majo^^ part
terrae, singulis h^rarum viginti quatuor peri^dis noctis atque ^iei (...)
experimur, quae in Luna men* ru^ ^emum spati^ absolvitur. Item ille Solis in
Z^dta^o d^scens^s and ascensus annuus, qui hie^^s aestatisque (...) and di^rum
ac noctium inaequalitatem producit* in Luna uni^o mense finitur: Cumque S^l
apud nos si^ elevetur ao deprimatur, ut inter maximam ac minimam altitudinem
intercedat differentia gradum, 4^* qu^nta (...) est distantia ab uno tropi^^ ad
alterum; in Luna non nisi 10 gradibus aut paulo amplius illa differentia
constat* quanta scilicet est maxima latitudo Draconis ultra citraque Ecli^ticam
Nunc consideretur qualis operatio sit futura Solis in Zona torrida, si per
quindeci^^ die^ continuos radiis suis eam ferire pergeret. Per se enim
intelligetur, omnes plantas, herbas and animalia possum itura* Quod si vel
maxim generationes ibi fierent, illae tamen ab herbis, plantis, and animalitus
nostratibus diversissimae sorent.

Secundo persu asissimum est mihi, nullas in Luna pluvias esse. Nam si qua
part nubes ibi cong^gearentur, ut fit in terra, videremus utique rerum illarum
aliquid abs^ondi, quas open telescopii in Luna conspicimus: and in summa, in
particula aliqua nobis variaretur aspectus. Id quod longis ac diligentibus
observationibus nunquam animadvertere potui, ac semper uniformem purissimamque
serenitatem ibi depre^endi*


participate of the nature of the soil and climate they dwell in, that the
inhabitants of the Moon must be of a greater stature, and more robust
constitution then those of the Earth: The Day there making up fifteen days of
ours: and the Hea^s seem so scorching, and so unexpressible by reason of the
Suns being vertical to them so long. In fine, he thinks it no absurd opinion of
the Gentiles, that made the Moon a kind of Purgatory for departed Souls.

Upon the most serious consideration of all circumstances, whereunto I could
ever engage my thoughts; when I reflected upon the great difference betwixt the
Days here and there; the different influence which the Sun must have here and
there through the Diversity of his Aspects, (whereupon depend Terrestrial
productions) that there is no rain, no clouds there; no Atmosphear (like ours)
proportioned to such respiration and life: no intermixture of earth and water:
no innate diversity of colors, which occasion the Phenomenon that perplex our
overcurious Mortals: and that all the Enquiries hitherto made, have so little
of evidence, that it is more clear that the Moon is a Cheese, (not fat, for then
it would melt) odly figured and made with Asperities in its Superficies *and
perhaps a little vinnyed in some parts* then an Earth resembling ours: I could
not but condemn those our Comical and Atheistical Wits, who use so little of
modesty or scrupulousness in their discourses about this so uncertain subject.
They are men of so little reading and inquisitiveness (whatever they pretend
unto; as if this Nation produced no persons equal to them for Learning and
Ab^lities) that they never examined these debates; but the opinions which they
take up and transform into Assertions, are only the raillery or casual and
imperfect pieces of conversation betwixt more intelligent persons, or some
Coffee house-talk, which they confidently obtrude and impose upon speculative
or more considerate Gentlemen, and render themselves insupportable in any
Society.

A young Gentleman, a friend of mine, who was not a little valued in the world,
who was no stranger to the Mathematics, and whose wit and learning far
transcended any thing I can observe in a droll and Comediantes of these times,
entertained me with a discourse once of this nature; Having spoken of the
Celestial Phenomenon, how differently they were represented by sundry men, he
was more prone to suspect their dioptrick Tubes, then their in^egrity: He
thought Tuius lentibus duabus constans dici potest o^uius mere artifi^i^^us
(...) ^ne^ Ro^. Ursi^. l 2. c. ^7 quem vide ^b. a c. 23. usque ad c. 30.
our Eyes were Telescopes of God Almighty's making, and the model by which the
others were regulated and amended: and that any man who regarded the daily
Occurrents in vision, could never believe it possible* that any certainty could
be derived from Telescopes, about such Phenomenon as we could employ only one
sense about, and that not in a due distance, and with such circumstances as
legitimate the judgment thereof: That we were to look through their different
mediums (granting that our Air makes but one Diaphanum) and those not contrived
dioptrically, that we know, and that since every medium, thicker or thinner,
(besides the intercurrencies of irregular and unknown particles, like to moats
in and upon Tam ra^it^s quam densitas potest esse causa r^fractionis. Me^senn*
a Glass) did cause a different Refraction, and that neither the constitution
of our Atmosphear (as not proportionate to our sensible enquiries) and air, nor
the intermundial Ether, nor the Sphaera vaporosa of the Planets could ever be
accurately and satisfactorily searched into; no man could particularly know
what he beheld, and deduce with prudence any theoremes and conclusions from
such infirm hypotheses. He added, that our senses and the daily objects we
converse with on earth, did prejudicate rather then qualify us for these
speculations: that we might easily observe what mistakes arise from the
contemplation of resemblances: that similitudes, though very slender, engage
the unwary, (and some that are cautious too) to conclude an identity in
objects: that it would be impossible for any man without the aid of a nearer
approach, and even of his other senses, to conclude whether a stick lying part
in, part out of the water were straight or crooked* by reason of the refraction
in the different mediums of Air and Water: and that a Glowworm, or an Indian
fire-Fly would create strange disputes and contests amongst mankind, had they
no other helps to discover the Phenomenon then a Telescope, magnifying the
object and its parts thirty, forty, or one hundred times. He admired that
saying of Aristotle, (...): Arist meteor. ^* (...) 4. sect. 2. These are the
words, and this the judgment of Galilaeo Syst. Cosm p. 7^ (...) Hypo^^* de vet
med. s^ 3.
and commended him, that in his doctrine of Meteors he pretended not to arise
higher then a low degree of probability. That it was possible to imagine such
things to our selves as were not really in the Moon, but not such as were
there, except in a very general and indefinite manner. Posse quidem excogitari
nonnulla, quae in Luna neque sunt, neque esse possunt: nihil autem eorum quae
ibi sunt aut esse possunt, nisi largissima generalitate. That the appearance of
an Earth, did not infer the inhabitation of men, much less Animals and Plants
like ours: that our own Geography might undeceive us herein, some parts of this
Globe being not peopled, and the animals, and plants, and nature of the soil,
differing so much from our European productions, as we could not have
conceived, had not our Eyes and authentic testimonies gained us to a belief of
it. That the most clear Eyes have in this case a kind of a suffusion, and the
most unbiassed persons their Intellectuals prejudicated, and had no reason to
condemn the opinion of that Peasant, who imaginer the Grandeur of Rome to be
like unto his Village, or the Scot who represented London to be such another
town as Edinburgh. It is an opinion wherein the Peripateticks and Galilaeo
system c^smic. p 77.
Lyncei are agreed: Quicquid sub nostram cadit imaginationem, id aut jam ante
viderimus oportet, aut ex rebus rerur^ve partibus jam ante visis compositum
sit, quales sunt Sphynges, Sirenes, Chimerae, Centauri, etc. He smiled at those
who thought they had much improved solid knowledge, by telling men of
Quasi-terra, Quasi-mare, Quasi-sylvae, which he suppposed to be as
insignificant terms as the Canting of Chemists, or the Quasi-corpus, and Quasi
sanguis, in the gods of Epicurus: that it was intolerable in a Philosopher to
phrase it thus, however a Poet might say,

(...) But nothing created in him a greater laughter, then the Proposals some
made of flying to the World in the Moon: this design he thought superlatively
ridiculous, though the contrivance of wings for mankind were then but
projecting at Wadham-Colledge: It did not appear to him then that this World
was no Magnet: he wished that first these Opiniatours would go to both Poles,
and placing themselves there try the Observations of Descartes with some dust
of Iron: that they would consider whether the more remote Air would bear up
their wings and weight, (perhaps there might be that difference in Air that
there is in water* where those Ships which sail in salt water do sink in fresh
streams) and how it might agree with their respiration, since the Air upon the
tops of Andes of Peru is so sharp, that those Mountains are as difficult Vide P
Alph Ovag^ium (...) (...) Chilensi^* ^. Ricciol Almag nov. in append. ad part.
primam tomi primi, P. 730.
to pass, or live upon, as Aristotle represents Olympus to have been, where men
are forced to breath through Sponges: whether that inhability of the Air for
men to breath in it did arise from the real nature of so elevated a place, or
that it was occasioned by some destructive exhalations (since Mount Athos is
reputed higher then Olympus) he knew not: but he thought they might enquire
well into this particular, and into those regions (which are different) wherein
storms, thunder, and snow are generated; what tempests might arise therein (of
which we are not sensible here below) what provision there is against them
before one arrives at the twelve Celestial houses: what accommodation of meat
and drink, what money current in those parts, all which ought Concerning a
voyage to the Wo^ld of the Moon, the difficulties of the passage and of the
air, water, and other circumstances the^e, read Kircher his ^ter exs^at. unto
the Moon; and you will find how just a ca^^at I give here.
to be regarded lest our Experimentators should come off as ill as the Knight
of the Mancha did, when he had not wherewithal to defray the expense of his
Inn: besides that, he was much afraid, that at their arrival, agreeably to
what Kepler says, they might find their lodging too hot for them.

Having said these things, that great young man, (who died before that
Ignorance and the Virtuosi grew prevalent) presented me with the works of
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, published by D. Meric Casaubon, opening it at that
place where that understanding Emperor acknowledges it to have been the
special favor of the Gods, that he never troubled himself about these
Meteorologies and extravagant speculations, whereunto nothing humane can reach:
He added, that in these kind of speculations he knew enough that was secured
from superstition, that for a man to desert those Studies which qualify him
for a sociable life, and were of importance to the preservation of the
Government and Country he lived in, this was a kind of salvagenesse, had more
of the A^chorete, then of Civil Prudence, and was to be encouraged in a
Cloister, or in the deserts of Thebais, then to be made a practice among wise
Statesmen.

I have sometimes entertained my self with the remembrance of this Gentleman,
and guessed how he would have sported vt that passage of Mr. Glanvill, in his
Scepsis Scientifica, where he complements the R. Society, to whom that book is
Addressed.

We expect greater things from Neoterick Endeavors. Scepsi Scien^^^. p. 13^, 134
The Cartesian Philosophy in this regard has shown the World the way to be
happy. And me thinks this Age seems resolved to bequeath Posterity somewhat to
remember it. The glorious Undertakers, wherewith Heaven has blessed our days,
will leave the World better provided then they found it. And whereas in former
times such generous free-spirited Worthies were as the Rare newly observed
Stars, a single one the wonder of an Age: In ours they are like the Lights of
the greater size, that twinkle in the Starry Firmament: And this last Century
can glory in numerous Constellations. Should those Heroes go on as they have
happily begun, they will fill the World with Wonders. And I doubt not but
Posterity will find many things, that are now but Rumors, verified into ( God
^orbid.
) practical Realities. It may be some Ages hence, a Voyage to the ( It Is very
cold going thither, if you believe Sir Fr. Drak^; as I have showed before in my
discourse of the Northwest-passage.
.) Southern unknown Tracts, yea, possibly the Moon, will not be more strange
then one to ( Yes a little more; the Ancients had been there before; besides,
the difficulties ingoing to the Moon are more insuperable.
) America. To them that come after us, it may be as ordinary to buy a payr of
Wings to fly into Remotest Regions; ( Pacole^'s Horse; Fortunatus's
wishing-Cap; the skill of Medea in restoring youth, all ancient and modern
fables shall be really achieved!
) as now a pair of Boots to ride a Journey. And to confer at the distance of
the Indies by Sympathetick conveyances, may be as usual to future times, as to
us in a literary correspondence. The restoration of Gray hairs to Juvenility,
and renewing the exhausted marrow, may at length be effected without a Miracle.
And the turning the now comparative desert World into a Paradise, may not
improbablie be expected from late Agriculture.

Now those that judge-by the narrowness of former Principles and Successes,
will smile at these ( They that do not so, laugh at you, and think such
expectations thence paradoxical.
) Paradoxical Expectations: But questionless, those great inventions, which
have in these latter Ages altered the face of all things, in their ^aked
Propo^alls, and mere Suppositions, ( Prove that they ever did think of them: if
they did not, they could not be ridiculous ^o them.
) were to former times as ridiculous. To have talked of a New Earth to have
been disco vered, had been a ( Et q^i^e into the Navigations of Antiquity and
then ^ay this.
) Romance to Antiquity: And to sail without sight of Stars or Shoars by the
guidance of a Mineral, a story more absurd then the H^g^t of Daedalus. That
men should speak after their tongues were ashes, or communicate with each other
in differing Hemi phears, before the invention of Letters, could not but have
been thought a Fiction. Antiquity would not have believed the almost incredible
force of our ( The stran^eness lies more in the incredible force of the powder:
had they known that, they would not have thought the other strange.
) Canons; and would as coldlie have entertained the wonders of the Telescope.
In these we all condemn ( I know not any that condemns the an^^^nts ^ ^
incredulity about such matters as were never proposed unto them, but ^or the
credulity of th^s Age, expect scorn rather then pity.
) antique incredulity, and it is likely Posterity will have as much cause to
pity ours. But yet notwithstanding this straightness of shallow Observers,
there are a set of ( It Is a pretty philosophy indeed, it is all * invention.
) enlarged Souls that are more judiciously credulous, and those who are
acquainted with the fecunditie of ( Not of the Paracea, not of the ^hilosophers
stone, n^r any thing in Ovids Metamorphesis, Atlantis, o^ Utopia. ^lus ultra,
Page 66.
) Cartesian Principles, and the diligent and ingenious Endeavors of so many
true Philosophers, will despair of (m) nothing.

This is a most extraordinary Flourish: Yet I find the Rhetoric defective in
the suiting of the Antitheses and Antapodoses: but I shall not take notice of
that fault now, it is so general in our Comical Wits. I shall now quit my
Digression, and resume the controversy betwixt the two Disputants. Mr.
Glanvill, for the credit of those Dioptrick Glasses, told Mr. Cross, That he
might try them upon Objects near, and easily visible, by the unassisted sight;
and if he made trial, he would find they altered the Objects in nothing but
their proportions, which are represented larger for the advantage of vision in
things small and remote; and we have all the like reasons to distrust our Eyes,
as these Glasses ( for their informations are the same in all things, but the
mentioned difference) and there is no man such a fool as not to make allowance
for that. -- I see Mr. Glanvill is not only ignorant of the Optics, but
altogether unacquainted with Telescopes: for first there are some made by Mr
Smithwick (a very ingenious and worthy man) Duobus vitiis convexis instructo
Telescopio, habetur simul and semel objecti medoocris, vel multarum partium
grandioris repraesentatio, sed inversa: si debite addatur tertium convexum,
multiplicatis adhuc refractionibus, una unius obtinetur apparentia, and in situ
conformis Objecto. Zucchius phil. opt. part. ^. c. 17 sect. 2. p. 180.
which represent the Phases of the Moon very well, and yet invert all Objects,
but that is no default or impediment where the thing looked on is round. These
unequal Telescopes after the Object in some thing else besides their
proportions: nor does any such thing happen in a welldisposed Eye upon vision
Secondly, he might have known this further difference betwixt an un-assisted
sight, and what is performed by the best and longest Telescopes abo^t ordinary
Objects, that the Dioptrick Tubes do represent the light and colors of bodies
more d^lute and remiss then they appear to Zucchius ubi supra p. ^81.
the naked Eye. Per Telescopia, praesertim longiora, objecta spectantur luce
and color dilutiora, quam libero oculo. This is granted by Zucchius and
others; and the reason is given by Zucchius, because that so great an expa^^^on
o^ amplification of the Object, and (...) of its Expansion^m repraesentativorum
aequ^valere remissioni, and densationem little intensioni, and utramque non a
medio, sed a propria condition propagationis radiorum pendere. id ib. Si
Telescopium sit extraordinariae longitudinis, ex nimia expansione, quae a
quivalet remissioni qualitatis visibilis, apparet nimis dilutum: ut minus in eo
varietas partium internosci possit* Zucchius phil opt. p 2. tr. 3. c. 7. sect.
5. p. 366. Zucchius phil. opt. part 1 c. 17. sect. 6 p. 204
parts one from the other, is equivalent to a remission of those qualities
therein. But to show Mr. Glanvill a little more of his ignorance in Telescopes,
I shall show him some further differences betwixt the naked sight, and what is
performed by those Glasses. For some of them represent some Objects greater
then they appear to the naked eye: Some (in the shorter Tubes) are represented
no bigger, or rather less then they otherwise seem: Some Objects in the longer
Telescopes are magnified indeed, but nothing so much as other Objects are by
the same Glasses. The Experiments are obvious: place a candle in the dark at
some considerable distance, and the flame will appear round and encompassed
with rays: then take a short Telescope fitly made and placed, and look through
it, and you will see the irradiation taken off, and the flame represented as
oblong, not round, and rather seemingly less then greater then it appeared
before to the naked Eye. Then turn your eye unto any colored Object, and take
notice how big it seems: assume the same Telescope, and you shall find that to
be magnified above what it seemed to the naked eye by much. After this, take a
long Telescope, and view the aforesaid candle through that; and at the same
distance view some other colored Object, and you shall see that this last
Telescope will represent both Objects much magnified; but the Candle less of
the two by far.

But I shall add further, that it is not to be doubted but that the Telescopes
of Galilaeo, Scheiner, Rheita, Gassendus, Grimaldi, Eustachio Divini, Hevelius,
Hugenius, Ricciolus, and Zucchius, were good in their kind, and that they did
represent Objects as truly here on earth, as Si Lunares discos, post tot
inspectores, and inspectiones* publicatos videas, neque* numero, neque
conformatione si^i correspondent: quam multae parts vel prae aliis
circumpositis illustriores interjectae and saa multo mino^i illustrationis
exhibitione illas interrumpentes, aliquos latuerunt, and in angustioribus, vel
minus accurate expressis. Discis omissae, q^ae vere internoscibiles sunt in
luna, and ab alii^ consignantur? quantum totius Disci lunaris terminatio* and
insigniorum in ea partium, variata? Zucchius phil opt. part. 1. c. 17. sect 8.
p 2^3.
any could; yet when they come to be applied to the Celestial Phenomenon, what
difference is there in their Observations? How do they complain either of the
default of the Telescopes, or want of care or skill, each in the other? Simon
Marius boasts of his accurateness: Scheiner in his Apelles tells us,
Observationes omnes factae sunt summo studio coelo serenissimo, semper cum
observatum est, and obscurissimo, plerumque Vide Scipion. Claramont. de
Univers. l. 3. c. 8.
in absentia videlicet Lunae: talis vero variis and excellentissimis, quorum
uno meliorem adhuc ad stellas non vidi. But enough may be collected to this
purpose out of the foregoing discourse, so that I need not repeat it over
again: out of all which as I would not be understood totally to discredit the
use of Telescopes in celestial discoveries, (I do not deny but some things and
some motions are observed by them, which a naked Eye cannot discern; but this
knowledge arrives to a slender degree of certainty, when the Phenomenon come to
be particularly explicated; and theoremes or assertions framed thence) so I
would not have them too much relied on, nor men be too confident in principles
and Conclusions which have no surer Foundation then those probabilities: and I
do herein join with Claramontius in that Epiphonema, In tanta diversitate, quid
certi ex tubo Optico habemus? If I must suspect the skill or accurateness of
Galilaeo, Scheiner, Gassendus, Hevelius, Fontana, Ricciolus, and Zucchius, and
such like; pardon me, if I know not whom to believe.

I have been the more large in this Point because of the insolence with which
Mr. Glanvill persecutes that Reverend, and otherwise learned person, whom he
represents to the world as He pleases, and accordingly treats him with that
contempt and scorn which is less allowable toward a Divine, and such a one as
is, and always has been in that Country very much esteemed by several
honorable Families, as well as others. However God has so providentially
ordered the dispute, thereby to check the pride of our Virtuoso, that The Man
of Words cannot triumph over the Man of Axioms. And if it be true, that our
Aristotelean was amazed at the hard words of Dioptrick Tubes, etc. as if there
had been Magic in them: I doubt not to Justify Him in it; for the insolent
Virtuoso made use of them, not as became a knowing person, but as Conjurers use
strange terms, and of an uncouth sound, though perhaps really Hebrew, Latin,
or Arabique.

Besides all this, perhaps Mr. Cross seems to have been offended at something
in that mixed discourse or dispute, that might derogate from the Authority of
the Scripture: many sayings are not innocent, but as they are worded or
uttered. To say the Scripture was written to men's fancies is an expression very
unwary in a Divine: although a convenient interpretation may excuse it. To say
it is not written according to vulgar Methods may so be spoken, that the action
may render the words culpable. And in another Age they might have passed better
then now, when men are prone to vilify the Scripture, especially the little
Wits. I perceive Mr. Sprat is not over-tender of the dignity of the Scripture:
for although there be an ancient Canon of the Church against the applying the
Sacred Word of God ad scurrilia and adulatoria (which Canon is authorized even
by the Council of Trent) yet does he encourage men to apply it to ordinary
Raillery. The Wit that may be borrowed from the Bible is magnificent, Plus
ultra Page 4 4.
and as all the other Treasures of knowledge it contains, inexhaustible. This
may be used and allowed without any danger of profaneness. The Ancient
Heathens did the same. They made their Divine Ceremonies, the chief subjects of
their phansies: But this practice of theirs was the ruin of their Religion, as
any man may judge who sees what use Clemens ^lexand^inus and Lictantius make of
it against Paganism. And the Greeks thought so when they punished on^, (...)
by that means their Religions had a more awful impression, became more
popular, and lasted longer in force then else they would have done, And why may
not Christianity admit the same thing, if it be practiced with Sobriety and
Reverence. What irreligion can there be in applying some Scripture-expressions
to Natural things? Why are not the one rather exalted and purified, then the
other defiled by such Applications? -- The Case is clear Gentlemen, Has not
the Lord said, What have thou to do to take my words into thy mouth since thou
hate to be reformed? Besides, methinks our Divine might have remembered the
feast of Belshazzar, and the resentment that the Lord expressed upon the
applying of the consecrated vessels to the serving in a festival banquet,
though to a Prince. He might have called to mind the handwriting upon the
wall, and very probably have inferred with himself, that if God was so
concerned at the misapplication and abuse of those Temple-Vessels, he would
much more severely interess himself where that Word of his, which he has so
many ways hallowed and recommended to our Veneration, is abused to raillery:
This Humor is no part of the words or works in which the Man of God is to be
perfected by reading of the Holy Scripture. I fear the great Judge will one day
say unto these Drolls, Ye are weighed in the balance, and found too light. To
conclude, the generality of Raillery amounts to no more but so many idle words,
and they become doubly criminal by being profane.

Of the Antiquity and Use of Chemical Physique.
Chemistry has indeed a pretense of the great Hermes for Plus ultra, Page* c
^1.
its Author, ( how truly I will not dispute.) From him it is said to have come
to the Egyptians, and from them to the Arabians; Among these it was infinitely
mingled with vanity and superstitious devices: but it does not appear at all in
use with Aristotle and his Sectators: Nor does it appear that the Grecians, or
the disputing Ages, were conversant in these useful and luciferous Processes.
--

Our Virtuoso is not willing to dispute whether Hermes were the Author of
Chemistry, or not: It had become one that is encharged with the Cure of Souls
very well, to have declined all these other disputes, as being remote from
those Studies, by which he ought to qualify himself for a be fitting discharge
of the Ministry. But to tell him further, what I am sure he is ignorant of, the
Egyptians did never attribute to Hermes the Invention of Physic, or any part
of it, but to Apis and Aesculapius; and as for that Chemistry which they
practiced, which consisted in melting down and improving of Metalls, or making
of Gold: Chemiae nomine olim haud (...) ^vi^ aliud significatum* quam (...) aut
vero (...) ^^am quae viliorum metallorum la pdumque in melius commutationem
pollicetur Ne q^i them legere est, vel medicamentis praeparandis operam aliquam
impendisse primos Chemiae professores. Con^^ng. de Med. Herm. c. 3. p. 15.
the Egyptians did never reckon the discovery of that Art amongst the praises
of their Hermes, though they were very forward to magnify him, and to ascribe
unto him a great many Elogies. Nay, when they do recount the Authors of their
Chemistry, though they do not agree about them, yet there is none that
transfers that honor upon this Trismegistus. But whether Aesculapius, or the
wicked Angels, (to both which the Invention is attributed) were the discoverers
of Chemistry, I think I may allow the Egyptians to have been the first
Practisers of it, and that there wanted not those who did mention Hermes
amongst them that used that Art, and were esteemed Philosophers. Nor is the
Egyptian Chemistry of any great Antiquity, there being no mention of it in any
Greek or Latin Writer, till almost the Vide Coming. c. 3 p. 28.
fourth Century after Christ. Neither is the name only of Chemia or Chemistry
of so modern a date: but there is not any record of any book In the time of
Constantine A. D. 320. Firmicus is s^id to be the first that is recorded to
have named A ch^mia; he says, that S^turn disposes to ^^chimy. Whence
Libavius argues that it was then an Art, and had been long practis^d, or else
how comes it under Astrological Prediction? But there is no consequence in that
reason of his it being usual for Astrologers to accommodate the Stars so as to
have an influence upon noveliny ^^ions. Under Theodasiv^ the Great, A. D 38.
He^odorus writ a book to the Emperor about the Chrysopoeia; and something
about that (...) to er^^lius, as Cedrenus witnesses. Libav in Exam censur.
P(...).
written, or work performed, that imports any such thing. Yet have the
Alchymists (it is true) pretended to a greater Antiquity, entitling several
spurious books to Hermes, Moses, (and Miriam his Sister) Democritus, Plato,
Aristotle; and made as if their Art were intimated in the fable of the Golden
Fleece, the H^sperian Orchards, and the Song of Solomon. In which I cannot but
take notice of the different procedure of those Chemists, and our Experimental
Philosophers: the one attributed all glorious discoveries to the Ancients,
their Predecessors; these will not allow them those praises which indisputably
belong unto them. But however, that I may grant our Virtuoso, that Chemistry
did flourish in Egypt in such manner and at such time, as I have declared out
of Conringius, (to whom I refer the inquisitive Reader) yet I must not gratify
him with this other concession, that from them it came to the Arabians, the
followers of Aristotle not being at all acquainted with it, nor the Grecians,
or those disputing Ages, being at all conversant with it. For it is made
eviden^ by Conringius, ( c. 26. p, 368.) that it passed from the Egyptians to
the Greeks. There are of Greek Writers, Zosimus* Panopolita, Olympiodorus,
Stephanus, Synesius, Michael Several of these Greek Writers were seen by
Salmasius in the King of France his Library, and by Reynesius, (vide var.
lection l. 2. c. 5 p. 5^.) who transcribes this passage ^s the Conclusion of
one of them. (...) lest any one should think that by (...) were meant our Wits,
and Poets, and inventors. I must add, that it is a name long ago fixed upon
the Chemists and Chrysipporeticks, as Reynesius declares.
Psellus, Blemmydas, and many others, which are instanced in by the same
Author, and deduced through the several Centuries anteceding the Saracen
Empire. The very name of (...) or (...), is Greek, as Vossius observes, de
Philos. c. 9. The Moorish particle Al being prefixed. Nor is the word Alembex
of any other original, being compounded of the said (...), a term used by
Dioscorides to signify a vessel, not much unlike our Limbecks. Diosc. l. 5. c.
64. vid. Conring. and Voss. ubi supra. From the Greeks together with other
Learning, even Chemistry was transmitted: and Geber himself (as Leo Afer
relates it, lib. 3. page 136.) was but an Apostate Grecian. This Geber is the
most ancient of Arabian Alchymists, their Idol, and styled Magister
Magistrorum. I am not ignorant that Conradus Gesnerus (in praef. ad Evon.) and
some others Geberus quem volunt circa annum Portus virginei sexcentissimum in
vivis fuisse Libav exam. censur. Prisiens.
have reckoned upon Geber as if he had been originally a Saracen, and the
Nephew of one Mahomet: some say he was the Grandchild of the Impostor Mahomet:
but their credit is not equal to that of Leo Afer, who appears a most learned
person, and inquisitive even to Curiosity into the Lives as well as Customs of
the Moors, his Countrymen. Habent Fessani Arabes multa Chemicae artis opuscula
a viris Aser Hist. Afric^ l. 3.
doctis conscripta, inter quos potiorem locum habet Geber, qui centum annis
post Mahometen vixit, quem natione Gidum aiunt fidem abjurasse. -- Gesner
cannot tell at what time he lived, but he says he was not the Inventor, but
Illustrator of the Art of Distillation. -- Quanquam non illum primum hujus
Artis Inventorem, sed Illustratorem fuisse existimo. Hoc in opere quod summae
perfectionis inscribitur, de distillatione in Gener Conrad Ges^^^ praes. ad
E^onym.
Multa pulchre disserens, varios distillandi modos fere omnibus notos esse
scribit: nimirum ut vetus quoddam suo seculo, non recens quoddam inventum.

But though the Greeks were not free of the Metallurgical part of Chemistry,
yet did they not prepare any Medicines Chymically (that I know of,) except it
were the Alcalisate Salts, and Ecchylomata, or Juices formed into Extracts, and
Oils drawn per descensum. This seems manifest in that Oribasius, Aetius, Paulus
Aegineta, Alexander Trachcanius, PAULUS and JOANNES Jatrosophistae of
Alexandria, Simeon Sethus, Actuarius, Nonus, Conringius c. 26. p 370. Gesner,
in praesat. ad Euonym.
and others mention no such Medicaments: no, nor Michael Psellus, though he
writ a peculiar Tract about Chemistry. Neither has Nicolaus Myrepsus (though a
modern Grecian) any Chemical Preparation.

The Arabians seem the first that ever accommodated Chemistry in an eminent
manner to Physic; if it be true, as Libavius imagines; that Abulchasis did
live in the time of Muhauia the Saracen, that settled their Empire at Damascus
Anno Dom* 660. Chemistry then seems to have been regulated into an Art; He writ
a Book of Physic called Servitor, Libav in exam. sent. Paris.
which principally treats of Medicines Chymically prepared, and uses the terms
of reverberation, calcination, coagulation, distillation per ascensum and
descensum: and many such like expressions, together with Processes purely
Chemical. It was then that Alchymie was called Perfectum Magisterium; and that
which we call Oil of Bricks, did bear the name of Oleum Sapientiae and
Perfecti Magisterii.

So Avicenna speaks not only of Rose Water distilled: but of Mercury and
Arsenick sublimed: after him Joannes Mesues shows how to make several Chemical
Conring. ubi supra, p 374.
Oils, as of Amber, Wheat, Oleum Philosophorum, etc. Neither is it to be
doubted, but that there were an infinite number of Chemical Processes latent in
the hands of particular Artists, since Joannes Mesues refers us unto them, viz.
de quibus loquuntur, qui quae Vid. Conring. ubi supra.
sunt occulta in rebus manifestant and detegunt. Hos quoque aggredere rei hujus
cupidus tam famosae apud illos. After that the Western Christians were
civilized and instructed in the Sciences by the Moors inhabiting Spain, Read
Libavius more fully upon this (...) subject in E* am. censur. Parisiens.
and that Physic superstructed upon the principles of Galen, Avicenna, and
Averroes, was derived unto them, those Sectators of the ancient Philosophy
improved Chemical Pharmacy very much. nor were Albertus Magnus, Aponensis,
Gentilis de Fulgineo, Arnoldus de villa nova, Raymundus Lullius, or Joannes de
Rupescissa, or Isaacus Hollandus, or Basilius Valentinus, or Antonius Conring.
ubi supra, c. 27. p. 379. 380, etc.
Guainerius, or Michael Savonorola, or Montagnana, or Hieronymus Schallerus,
and Magenbuchius (Chemical Physicians at Norimbergh before Paracelsus) or
Guilielmus Varigana, or Antonius Fumanellus, or Wolfgangus Talhenserus, or
Hieronymus Brunsvigus (the first that writ of Chemistry in the German tongue)
any other then Pretenders to the ancient Physic and Philosophy. There was no
faction betwixt the Physicians in those days; nor did they undervalue or decry
each other; They rather represented themselves to be Adherents and Sectators of
Aristotle, then his Enemies; and chose rather to sophisticate his fourth book
of Meteors, to Conring. ibid. c ^8. p. 387. Erastus de metal. p 34.
show that great Man knew all things, then condemn all his other works, as if
he knew nothing. Nor were they only followers of the PERIPATETICKS, but I find
the Chemists that did precede Paracelsus to be accounted Hippocratical
Physicians: witness this passage in Caspar Bravo, who inquired more into them
then I have had leisure to do.

Caspar Bravo Resolut. Medic. part. 1. disp. 1. sect. 1. resol. 3. sect. 2.
Resolvendum, artem Spagiricam veterum Spagiricorum, quam Avicenna, Geberus,
Rhasis, Arnoldus de villa nova, Raymundus Lullius, Blemmydas, Braceseus,
Virceanus, Joannes Augustinus, Panterus, Isaachus Monachus, Morienus, Zosymus,
and alii Hippocratis Sectatores professi sunt diversam esse a Secta
Paracelsistica. With this agrees that passage of Conringius de Med. Herm. c.
28. Certe ante Paracelsum haud est observare With him agrees Libavius in the
forecited Treatise.
in Chemicorum scriptis singularem aliquam sive Hermeticam, sive Chemicam
Medicinam. Observata autem est plerumque medendi illa via quam Hippocrates,
Galenus, horumque Sectatores cum Graeci tum Arabes, interque eos Avicenna
calcaverant: quod unum Arnoldum Villanovanum legenti non potest non Sole videri
clarius. So Primrose de vulg. Error. l. 4. c. 1. Haec medicamenta praeparandi
ratio non a Paracelso inventa est: sed multis ante Paracelsum natum seculis
exculta fuit ab iis etiam Meditis qui Galeni doctrinam sectabantur, ut Raym.
Lullio, Villanovano, etc.

But when Paracelsus was seized with the same spirit that seems to sway some of
the Virtuosi: then did he begin to decry the study of Languages, as loss of
time; our Wits call it Pedantry. He vilified Logic as that which caused
endless disputes, and darkened rather then discovered Nature: He calls it matrem
odii, rixarum and litium; He prohibited the reading of other good and Ancient
Authors. He seemed to be of no Religion; and if for any, it was to be without
Metaphysics, without the mixture of Glosses and Interpretations, Solum textum
Scripturae legendum, interpretationem nullam adhibendam. He calls upon all
Universities and Countries to resort unto him, to follow him and his new
discoveries, his real Philosophy, his Essential Anatomies, all other
performances being but empty and verbose.

Because I observe some resemblance betwixt the invitations of Mr. Sprat and
his, I will set one of his passages down in the Preface of his Paragranum, viz.
Me sequimini; Non ego vos sequar. Me, me, inquam, sequimini, Avicenna, Galen,
Rhases, Montagnana, Mesue. Me sequimini; non ego vos sequar, Parisienses,
Monpelienses, Suevi, Misnici, Colonienses, Viennenses, qui Danubium and Rhenum
accolitis. Vos item Insulae marinae, Italia, Sed in primo de pestilitate
tractatu primo, ubi d^ Chelidoniae contra imaginationes Magicas amuleto
disserit, adeo non rejicit Galeni and Hippocratis decreta, ut etiam amplius
vider velit Galeni- i cus, quam omnium sc^o^a (...)
Dalmatia, Athenae, Graeci, Arabes, Israelitae, me sequimini, non ego vos
sequar. Mea enim Monarchia. Hereby any one may see that He was as conceited of
himself, and as great a contemner of all ancient Learning, and of Aristotle,
and Galen, etc. as some of the Virtuosi: and as ignorant of Latin and other
tongues; and as false and imperfect in his relations; as variable in his
hypotheses, as if he held nothing but with the power of revoking it, which is a
great qualification of a modern Philosopher. He was not for the particular
methods in vogue, but for a general Enquiry into the Experiments of old Women,
Mountebanks, Hangmen, Husbandmen, etc. He could make use of the writings and
inventions of others, concealing their (...), and (...) as becomes a modish
Experimentator. To evince this last assertion, I shall set down some passages
of Crato, and others, to show that the disputing Ages were not so ignorant of
Chemistry as Mr. Glanvill pretends. Crato in a Letter to Erastus writes thus;
Remedia quibus aliquando usus esse dicitur, Erastus part. 4. p. 300.
non illius esse ex eo certus sum, quod librum vidi ante ducentos fere annos a
Monacho quodam Ulmae scriptum, in quo eadem medicamenta, quae ille
frustillatim, nunc in has nunc in illas chartas sparsit, perspicue sunt
scripta. -- And elsewhere, P^ae^ ad Exercit. Scaliger. Hartman and Crollius
published no new medicines. Caeterum neque Crollium neq me aliquid nov^
protulis^e libenter satemur, neque ea unquam utriusque nostrum men's fuit.
Hartman* in not* ad Croll. p. 138. Libavius ubi supra.
Fuit in bibliotheca viri optimi and integerrimi Marci Singmoseri Sacratissimi
Impp. Consilii a Secretis primi, liber ante ducentos annos a Monacho quodam
exaratus. Eo multis mensibus usus sum, and omnia quae isti (Paracelsici)
tanquam in Eleusiniis sacris mussitant, tam evidenter tradita, ut neminem
fallere possent animadverti. He himself confesses who were his teachers in
Chimistry, and that he was far from being the first Inventour of it.
Theophrastus Paracelsus natus anno Christi 1493. mortuus 1541. Hic non erubuit
confiteri seremedia in Chymicis accepisse, and his ipsis Scientiam Artis
Chymiae debere. Antiqui Philosophi (ait in ^. part Chirurgiae mag. tractat. 3.
c. 1.) studiosi indagandarum longae vitae causarum (recitamus breviter
sententiam) destituti vero perfecta praeparandorum componendorumque
medicamentorum scientia ab Alchymistis eam petere non sunt veriti, atque sic
utronemque laboribus conjunctis genuina praeparandorum remediorum Scientia
exorta, and variis Chemicis experimentis in medicinam transfusis est aucta,
maxim vero tincturis and floribus metallicis, quarum tincturarum quant a
fuerit efficacia, antiqui ea de re Codices testantur, quos diu a
Pseudomedicorum turba suppressos, nos publicos facere non dubitavimus. Remedia
nostra ex Chymicorum Schola prodiisse non dubito fateri: and quoniam Chymica
ars infinitis erroribus scatere visa est, illud quoque Augiae stabulum
repurgandi laborem sumpsimus: in quo felicius mihi versari licuit, quod ob
ineunte aetate magnae Artis studio captus summa diligentia sub excellentissimis
praeceptoribus Arti huic studuerim. Praeceptores enim fuerunt Wilhelmus
Hohenheimius Pater, and alii infiniti: praeter hos quoque scriptis adjutus sum
Setthagii Episcopi, Erhardi Laventalii, Nicolai Hipponensis Episcopi, Matthai
Sohechtii Suffraganei Treisingensis, Abbatis Spanheimii, aliorumque
doctissimorum Chemistarum: Quin and variis little experimentis factus sum
locupletior, inter quos honoris causa nominandus mihi venit nobilissimus vir
Sigismundus Fueger Schwathensis, qui magnis sumptibus pluribus ministris
sustentatis Chemicam accessione locupletavit. Haec ibi Paracelsus. Neque vero
falsa scribere est putandus, quandoquidem seculum istum and exercitiis Chymicis
and voluminibus scatuit, cum jam plures tractatus typis publicis sint impressi,
nihilominus cernimus, subinde ex tenebris prodire plures, ita ut ne Thesauri
quidem multi videantur sufficere cupiendis, nec Theatra.

His followers confess, that he borrowed much out of Basilius Valentinus, and
more out of Isaacus Hollandus, as Penottus declares, Cum incidissem in Isaaci
librum de opere vegetabili, De dena^* medic.
reperi de verbo ad verbum doctrinam de tribus principiis, and de separatione
quatuor Elementorum ab eo desumptam, Unde constat illum praecipua sua Opera
suffuratum fuisse, atque hinc inde expiscatum: ut de gradationibus medicinarum
ab Arnoldo, Vide Conring. de med. Herm. c. 2^. p. 252* 253.
Archidoxa a Raymundo Lullio ex sua Art operativa: de Arcanis a Rupescissa;
nihil prorsus a seipso praeter convitia: and maledicta: a Trithemio varia. --
The same is confessed by Quercetan somwhere as I remember, and he himself
intimates it by adding to many preparations the words, Ex nostra correctione,
ex mea emendatione. Out of all which it is evident, that neither the Grecians,
nor the disputing Ages were so ignorant of Chemistry, as Mr. Glanvill asserts;
as it is certain that the Arabians as well as the Grecians were disputers and
followers of Aristotle and Galen, and that particularly Albertus Magnus and
Roger Bacon were Schoolmen. Nor can any man doubt the same of those other
Bishops and Monks, who knows with what perfect Veneration, in those days
Aristotle was regarded. How useful and how luciferous their Processes were, it
is not for Mr. Glanvill to judge, who is ignorant of them: but any one will
allow them, both the one and the other, recommmendation, who considers that
their Chemical Processes which passed amongst them gave occasion to all, and
make a great part of the improvements in Chemistry, in Dioptricks and other
Subjects, wherein our Virtuosi pride themselves. Particularly as to Chemistry,
it is as clear that the disputing Ages and followers of Aristotle were
acquainted with it, and eminent for it, as that there were Monks and Schoolmen.
Those men whom Mr. Glanvill so explodes, and with whom the Historian disports
himself, had of late years before Paracelsus, in a manner, solely the knowledge
of this Art by which Nature is unwound, etc. This Sennertus De Cons. Chym. c. 3.
grants. Proximis seculis fere inter Monachos latuit Chymia, quorum non pauci
illud, quo abundabant, otium post sacras meditationes and orationes, arti huic
praestantissimae honest tribuerunt: inter quos fuerunt Raymundus Lullius,
Albertus Magnus, Joannes de Rupescissa, Savanarola, Morienus, Rogerius,
Trithemius, and Frater Basilius Valentinus: quorum scripta multa hoc seculo in
lucem edita sunt, and multa adhuc manuscripta passim latent. I hope there is no
exception against Sennertus, how partial soever Erastus or Crato may seem. And
to affront our Virtuoso a little more, it was a follower of Aristotle, and
those Disputers, a pitiful School-Divine that discovered the making of
Gunpowder, which single invention out-does all that our Collegiates boast of.
In the year 1354. Bertholdus Schwarz a Benedictine Monk discovered it, and I
dare warrant him in those days no enemy to the man of Stagyra, the Idol of
disputers; A very anc^ent Manuscript gives him this Character. Bertholdus
Schwarz Goslariensis Monachus ordinis Sancti Benedicti, cum mire Chymicis
delectaretur, atque eorum peritia jam magnam sili nominis existimationem
acquisiisset, etc. Any one may read the rest in Kirchers Mundus subterraneus l.
12. sect. 5. part. 4.

I shall relate some particular processes in Chemistry, V^ssi^s de philosoph c.
1^. sect 12. Gesn. in prae^ (...) E^^ny^n. Vossius* (...) philo c 13* ^^^ring
de med. Herm* c. 26 p. 371.
which are mentioned by such as were not Arabians, but of a much more ancient
date. In the time of Julianus and Valentinianus Emperors lived Aetius
Amidenus; he and Nicolaus Myrepsus (who is indeed later then Mesue) do mention
the distillation of Oils per descensum, as Gesner shows; and Vossius together
with Conringius avow -- Nicolaus Myrepsus (or Praepositus) -- in quo illud
miror nullam ab eo aquarum oleorumve Chymisticis instrumentis paratorum
mentionem fieri. Capnistum tantum oleum, quod per descensum distilletur,
describit, ut Aetius quoque. As to the ways of making Chemical Extracts, let
any man judge whether the Grecians were ignorant of them, by these passages, as
they are Obscr^at and paradox. chym. l. 1 c. 2. p. ^2.
cited by Gunterus Billichius, viz. Chylismata extrahuntur aut exprimuntur.
Extrahendi nec ars nova est, nec novus modus, quanquam Heurnio ita visum sit
Method. ad praxin. lib. 1. and lib. 2. c. 25. Rationem ejus a Dioscoride
accipe, verbis interpretis Ruellii lib. 3. c. de Gentiana. Contusa, inquit,
radix quinque diebus aqua maceratur, postea in eadem tantisper decoquitur, dum
extent radices, and ubi refrixit aqua, linteo excolatur: mox discoquitur, dum
mellis crassitudo, fiat fic^ilique reconditur. Similia cap. 9. ejusdem libri de
Centaurio minore habet. Dioscorides i^ed in the days o^ ^leopa^ra and ^a^c.
Anton. whose Physician he was a so lower of Herophilus, and consequently of
^^ppocrates and Aristotle, Vide Vess d^ philos. c. 11. sect. ^0. and Jonsium de
script. hist. and phil. l. 2. c. 6. p. 145.
Dabo tibi ipsissima Dioscoridis verba; (...). Nequid ad plenitudinem artificii
deesset, subjungit; Quod siquid concretum faucibus vasis adhaerescat, deradunt,
reliquoque humori permiscent. Item haec; Quae autem siccis radicibus aut herbis
liquamenta exprimuntur, decocta (ut in Gentianae mentione retulimus*
praeparantur. Ita Lycium and Abscynthium, hypocistis, and consimilia coguntur.
De Lycio vide cap. 135. lib. 1. de hypocistide libri ejusdem cap. 128.
Chylismatis denique absynthini, cap. 26. meminit. Nec aliter Extractum
Melampodii clarissimus Raymundus Mindeserus concinnavit, quod in Pharmacopoeia
Augustana inter Ecchylismata*Cathortica locum non postremum reperit. Ut
^iqueat, extrahendi artificium, dignum omnino fuisse, quod and erudita
antiquitas inveniret, and non degener posteritas imitaretur. Nec quicquam
Chymia novi, praeter liquorem attulit.

Concerning fixed and Alcalisate Salts, the Chemists and Chemical Physicians
make a great noise: and undoubtedly the Invention is very extraordinary, and
their use very singugular in Medicine. Yet both See the antiquity of the use of
Alcalisate and other Salts by the Ancients, largely proved by M. Ru^andus
progymn. alchym. qu. 14, 15. Vide Galen. de Theriaca sub finem, and Pharmacop.
Augustan. in append. ad an^idot. class. de Salib. Theriacal. G. Bellichius
observat. and paradox. chym. l. 1. c. 2. p. 30. and in Thessalo chymicum. c. 7.
p. 90.
the preparation and the use of them is set down by Dioscorides, Galen, and
Aetius, in their discourses about Theriacal Salts; Though latter days have
reformed the preparation, as Galen endeavored to do that which he found in use
in his time. Besides, I observe out of Gunterus Bellichius, that Aristotle was
not ignorant of it. Aristoteles auctor est, Umbros cinerem harundinis and junci
decoquere aqua solitos, donec exiguum superesset humoris: qui ubi refrixisset,
salis copiam fecerit, lib. 2. meteor. cap. 3. Hoc se apud Theophrastum invenire
Plinius testatur, lib. 31. cap. 7. Idemque non harundinei tantum juncique salis
meminit, sed colurni insuper, and querni. Amborum autoritate (nam de
Theophracto nihil mihi constat) Chymicorum castigabitur temeritas, quae suis
inventis salem cineritum an^^merare ausa est.

The preparation of Saltpeter with Sulphur, in order to the making of what the
Chemical Physicians call Sal prunellae, was known to Hippocrates, and others of
the ancients, and they used it in Squinonsyes in Gargarismes for the tongue and
throat. Desinant in posterum Chymici de lapide Prunellae magnifice gloriari.
Nam and apud Hippocratem (...) G Bellichius obsciv. chym. l. 1. c. 5. p 49.
quater invenimus. Semel quidem in tertio de morbis: bis in de internis
affectionibus: denique semel in lib. de morb. mulier. Ac ne dubites erudite
antiquitati cognitum eum lapidem fuisse, Plinius auctor est, nitrum frequenter
liquatum cum Sulphur coqui in carbonibus, sulphuri concoctum in lapidem verti.
Haec recognosce ex lib. 31. cap. 10. And the same Author says elsewhere, Prae
aliis omnibus inclaruit (...) Hippocratis G Bellichius (...) l. 2. c. ^. p 119.
seu lapis Plinii nitrarius, dictus a barbarorum pruna se^ angina, cui
singulariter mederi perhibetur. Nec nova est quaecunque ea laus. Nam and
Hippocrates abstergendae Salivae and muco, ac facilit andae exscreationi nitrum
anginosis obtulit, indiditque ^^llationibus Oris. Lib. 2. de morbis, sect. 49.

Neither is the way of subliming Flowers of Benzoin, any thing else then the
imitation of that way which the Ancients had of condensing Soot. So Bellichius
informs me, Fuligo, Id ib. l. 1. c. 2. p. 31.
definiente Scaligero, cujusque rei pinguis crematilis pars est, ac demum
aliarum rerum fumus condensatus, Exerc. 56. Modus conficiendae ejus, siquid
artificii subest, apud Dioscoriden extat, lib. 1. c. 85, 86, 94, 97. imitatio
apud Beguinum, quando Benzoinum defloravit, l. 2. c. 18.

It may perhaps be granted by most intelligent persons, that the making of
Extracts, and fixed Salts, and such instances of Vegetables being prepared as I
have given, and the glory of those inventions cannot justly be denied unto
those disputing Ages; but that the preparation of Minerals, and the medicinal
use of them inwardly, is a discovery the ancient times were not acquainted
with. And this is the judgment of many learned men. But in refutation of it,
seeing that the inward use of Antimony, as it is several ways prepared, refers
to Basilius Valentinus, and before his days; since that, sundry preparations of
Mercury are more ancient then the humor of Novellism; since Paracelsus,
Hartman, Crollius did but publish the processes of Aristoteleans, Avicennists,
and such like Monks and Physicians; all that our Virtuoso can derive from this
Plea is, that the Arabians, adherents to the old Philosophy and their
followers, did improve the extent of Chemistry, and added thereunto as they did
in the other practice of Physic, the use of Rhubarb, Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds,
and other benign medicines: and this demonstrates that Philosophy and those
notions not to be so steril, as they are represented in comparison of the
Fecundity of the Cartesian Principles, from whence Physic has received little
(if any) benefit or advantage. But to raise this Enquiry beyond the times of
the Saracen Empire, it is manifest out of Pliny, that mineral-waters were drunk
in those ancient times: and that the Stomoma or rust of iron, as also that
drinks in which Iron was quenched, was given in the time of Dioscorides and
Galen. That Brimstone was given inwardly Diosc. l. 5. ^. 53. Galen. l. 1. de
cuporist. c. 17.
by Hippocrates to asthmatick persons. That the Squamma aeris was given
inwardly, as a purge and vomit by Hippocrares, Hippocr. de vict. in morb. acut.
Vide Doring. de medicina, p. 217. Ruland* progymn. qu. 20. Brassavol. de me^.
purg. p. 177. ^oterius. Pharmacop. Spagir, l. 2. c 6.
Galen, Dioscorides and Gelsus: and the Experiment happily tried by
Brassavolus, that great Experimentator again of later years. So the giving of
Sandaracha, or Orpiment inwardly for old coughs; and the suffiment made out of
it, are recorded by Dioscorides: the trochises of it recommended anew by Mesue,
and the more modern trials in Riverius. Even Chalcitis is an ingredient in the
ancient Treacle of Andromachus. I shall conclude all with the passage of
Doringius in the place already cited, Praeter Sandarachum Isidorus, Athenaeus,
Idius, Eubulus, Heras, Gemellus, Agathius, Nicostratus, Doring. de medic. and
med. p. ^19. Vide and Ruland. progymn. Alch. qu. 20.
Menander, Thanyros, Deletius Epagathus, Asclepiades, and alii: Alumen scissum,
Auripigmentum, Aeris squammam, Aes ustum, Calcem vivam, Sulphur vivum, faeces
unde ustas, Cadmiam, Cerussam, Gypsum, Stibium sive Antimonium in pastillos
redacta dysentericis praescripserunt: quorum praeparandi rationem and utendi
modum vide apud Galenum lib. 9. de compos. med. sec. loc. c. 5. Out of which
passages any Reader will guels what President later Authors had out of the more
remote Ancients for the giving minerals inwardly; and if we are just to the
Arabians and their followers, we shall scarcely allow them any further honor,
then to have found out some new ways to serve up o^d dishes.

I shall add, that in Egypt, at such time as the repute of the Egyptian
Priests, and their fantastical Philosophy had given way to the followers of
Hippocrates, Aristotle, Herophilus, and others, that introduced the Grecian
Learning there, that is, in, and somewhat before the days of Dioclesian, the
Egyptians were Masters of that Secret of making Gold, which our inquisitive
Moderns have so vainly sought after. Before that Age there is no mention of it,
and then it is said they had such knowledge of the Art of making Gold, that
thereby they were enriched and empowered to make War upon the Romans; and being
overcome by the Emperor Dioclesian, he burned all the books which they had,
containing the Mysteries of that Art, to prevent any future commotions of that
Nature. So Suidas in the word (...)* (...). And in the word (...) he says,
(...). The renown of this Story is not questioned by the Chemists, and I find
the learned Joannes Langius to give credit Joan. Langii Ep. med. l. 1. ep. ^3.
de Orig. Alchym. But Or^s. and Paulus Diaconus were credulous Writers, and of
little reput^. Libavius in exam. censur. Parisiens. Rolfincius chym. Art. ^
redact l. 1 10 and Con ring. them. Herm. c 3. 21. Erastus de metallis, p. 103.
unto it, quoting for the truth of it in his margin, besides Suidas; Orosius l.
7. c. 16. And Paulus Diaconus in tho life of Diocletian: Neither does Libavius
or Rolfincius elevate the authority thereof, though he mention the passage of
Suidas. And to give a further color unto this relation, I am informed that
Aeneas Gazaeus, who lived in the latter end of the fifth Century, when Zeno and
Anastasius were Emperors, treating of the Resurrection, has this passage,
(...). But these Narrations are rejected by such as deny that other metalls may
be transmuted into Gold: It is replied by Erastus, that either those Egyptian
books contained nothing but the Art of melting down of metalls, and separating
the latent Gold therefrom: or that Suidas being a late writer, living but 500
years ago, about 800 years or more after Diocletian, might have been imposed
upon by the Chemists of those times (in Greece, and during the disputing Ages!
mark that Mr. Glanvill) Conring de med. Herm. c. 3 p. 23.
who even then might have feigned some such stories as that (and the
Allegorising of the Golden Fleece) just as they have within the last Centuries
counterfeited the Works of Moses and Solomon, and entitle them unto their
Fictions. There are an infinity of stories in Suidas, which render his
Assertions suspected: and in this he has not the countenance of any ancient
Writer to second him. It seems strange, that the Romans having so long ruled in
Egypt absolutely, and their Governors, they not being to be supposed free from
all desires of gain, how they should never apprehend the Artifice, nor have the
least mention of it in their Writers ( Greek or Latin) till the end of the
fourth Century: and that so remarkable a passage as this is should be omitted
by those ancient Writers, who relate both the war and actings of Diocletian Id
ib p. 22.
after his victory. As for that saying of Aenaeas Gazaeus, it is replied that
he speaks by hearsay, rather then certain knowledge of the operation: that
there have not wanted many learned persons, who have with a great deal of
confidence, De plant. resuscit. vide Bellich. Thessal, ^ed. v. c. 7. Rolfinc.
art. chym. l. 6. c. 3. and l. 7. c. 19.
illustrated the Resurrection by contemplations of the Phoenix, and of the
forms of Plants resuscitated in their several Salts, as if both were realities:
yet is there no such thing as either the one or the other.

Out of all which it is evident that Chemistry was a practice known and in use
among the Sectators of Aristotle: and that the Grecian and disputing Ages were
not unacquainted with those Processes, though these latter times have been more
various and inquisitive, and have reduced that Art into better Method, and
enlarged the Practice of Physic, with an infinity of Medicines: and indeed we
must confess our selves very much obliged by the labors of ingenious Chemists,
and that they have afforded multitudes of Experiments, such as contribute to
the delight of all Philosophical heads, and to the Cure of many that being
sick, have either better opinion of Chemical Medicines then of others, or are
pleased with their small, and commonly more pleasant dose.

But that those parts into which Chemists reduce things, ^ee this largly
disputed by Libavias in exam. censur. Parisiens.
are latent in the compound body, otherwise then by the Aristotelean
distinction of formaliter and materialiter (so much laughed at by Mr. Glanvill,
page 119.) This is an Assertion which does not become any man that pretends to
have read Mr. Boil in his Skeptical Chemist, where that Point is too amply
debated to be here transcribed. or ever (I think) refuted. Vide Kerger. de
fermentat. sect 1. c. 3. p. 10. and Rolfinc* chym. in ar. red. l. 1. c. 19.
Conring. de med. Hermet. c 22.
Having denied Mr. Glanvill, that by those useful and luciferous processes,
Nature is unwound and resolved into the minute Rudiments of its composition.
Which Rudiments were not made use of at the first Creation, when one Fiat
created those compound bodies, which Artful Fires sometimes (and but sometimes)
analyze into several parts, as Salts, Oil, or Sulphur and Spirit, and those
grosser Elements of Earth and water. All which are not found in many bodies,
(and when they are, it is with a great discrepancy betwixt those of one
Concrete, and those of another) nor any of them to be De serment. c 1. p. 4.
separated from Gold. Which Libavius, no, nor Dr. Willis does not make to be
the last unmixt, and simple Constituents of natural bodies, sed ejusmodi tantum
substantias, in quas veluti parts ultimo sensibiles res Physicae resolvuntur:
Substances into which natural bodies are resolved finally as far as sense can
judge, and when the Analysis is prosecuted in one sort of procedure: for
another method, different Solvents, and different Fires discover different
parts, and those sensible too from what the usual Chemistry builds upon. Having
denied him this, I must further tell him, that when the Countreywoman sets her
Eggs to be hatched, she produces by those means such bodies as no Chemical
fires with their vexatious Analysis ever would discover: so she does when she
does brew and churms her butter. Nor is this more evident, then it is clear
that the Chemical principles, when they come to be accommodated to the solving
of the Phenomenon in nature, or in diseases, have as much of darkness and
dissatisfaction in them, as occurs in the Peripatetick way: so that now we are
more dubious, not more knowing, then before: and this any man that has
considered how the Chemical Physicians disagree about the causes of diseases,
and even about the common Phenomenon of Nature, will easily grant me: nor will
it appear less manifest, that if the Chemical hypotheses do take place, that it
will subject the Mechanic Philosophy, and establish that of Anaximander,
revived by the ingenious Berigardus.

But Mr. Glanvill adds, That Chemistry directs Medicines Plus ultra, p. 11.
less lothsom, and far more vigorous, and freeth the spirits and purer parts
from the clogging and noxious appendices of grosser matter, which not only
hinder and disable the operation, but leave hurtful dregs in the body behind
them. -- This Plea for the preferring CHEMICAL Medicines before those commonly
called Galenical, is much insisted on by Beguinus, Quercetanus, and others of
that way. Yet, first it is observable, that whether we regard taste or smell,
those very Authors recommend as odious medicaments, and as loathsome, as ever
Coerdus or Foesius in their Dispensatories, if not worse. Will any man in his
Wits condemn Wormwood and Centory because of their bitter taste, or Castoreum
for the smell? Secondly, every thing is not the better for being extracted.
^reictag. nect. med. c. 75. p. 325. See Mr. Boil of the usefulness of Philos.
part 2 p. 148, etc.
Thus the Extract of Rhubarb, though quickened with its Salt, is not so
efficacious as plain Rhubarb, except it be sophisticated with Diagridium. Nor
is Cynnamom improved by Extraction. Their being more vigorous and freed from
grosser parts is not always a commendation, and sometimes it carries danger
with it. That those grosser parts, and those natural vehicles are requisite,
seems even thence clear, that their spirits and essences must be tempered and
mixed often with other gross bodies before they be given. Those appendices of
grosser See this point fully debated in the Vulgar Errors of Primrose, l. 4. c
3. which I desire Mr. Glanvill to read. In Pharmacop* August. De CC
philosophice calcinat. p. 805.
matter are not always noxious to Nature, since in our meats we find none to
be able to live on Chemical viands, but good Kitchin-Preparations. How many
ways are there of preparing Hartshorn, yet is there not one that equals the
crude Horn. I shall set down Zwelfers words, whose credit no Chemist almost
will extenuate. Licet ex cornibus vel ossibus it a Philosophice calcinatis
distillationi subjectis de spiritu sale volatili, and oleo ipsorum foetido
nonnihil eliciatur, non tamen propterea existimandum ipsa adhuc iisdem quibus
crudum cornu pollere viribus vel majoribus etiam (prout nonnulli sibi
imaginantur and asserunt) vel etiam, ut alii arbitrantur, hac calcinatione
nihil aliud peractum fuisse quam quod friabilia, ad pulverandum aptiora, and
magis pura reddita sunt: Neutiquam, Quippe, qui ambo cornua, tam crudum quam
Philosophice calcinatum, examini ignis subjiciet, reipsa deprehendet multum de
nativa sua humiditate, de sale volatili and oleo huic cornis Philosophice
calcinato detractum esse, and eorundem vix part quarta adhuc gaudere, ut
propterea and hanc calcinationem Philosophicam, licet totali exustione
aliquanto meliorem, approbare In prosecution of this point let any man
consider, that Chemical oil of Anniseeds is not so effectual as the powder.
Heurn. meth. adv. l. 1. c. 5. Nor does the like oil of Camomile equal the
infusion, as Simon Paul's Cl. quadrip. p. ^55. practically observed. So the
common Pillute de succino and Franckfort-pills transcend the minute doses of
diverse and the most famed Panchymagoga. This is an* observation so common with
all practitioners, that none but Mountebanks and Quacks can deny it. Crato,
Steeghius, Hofman, and others, generally taking notice of it.
nequeam: e contra vero ipsum crudum cervi cornu subtiliter and minutim
raspatum pluris aestimem, quod tamen diversimode parari, inque virtutibus suis
exaltari potest. Ut vel in substantia, forma nimirum pulveris, vel in aqua
decoctum and in mucilaginem vel gelatinam conversam tuto and sine nausea
propinari possit. Nor is this more true in Hartshorn than in Vipers, which are
more effectual being eaten as Eeles, or by a common infusion in wine, or given
in powder ( plain powder) then when reduced to volatile Salt and Essences. It
is also false, that Chemical preparation always amends, or does not render some
things worse: The ingredients of sublimated Mercury are not poison; the result
is. How much is the nature of Antimony and Mercury altered by preparing, so
that a few grains prove mortal to the taker, who might without prejudice devour
great quantities of either of them unprepared, Hydrargyrus, Antimonium M.
Ruland. progymn. Alchym. qu. 33.
crudum larga saepius porriguntur: The infusion of crude Antimony, (a pound in
four Gallons of Ale) often rectifies all impurities of the blood, as well any
viper-wine: and Mercury, which being crude is not only given in Pills by sundry
Physicians, but drunk without any hurt in greater or lesser Poterius Pharmacop.
Spagir. l. 1. p. 352. This experiment is not down in the two Treatis: sof the
Vit^osi about the sophistication of wines: but in short, those* pieces (as much
as they are famed before they came out) have been laughed at by all knowing
persons and Wine-coopers.
quantities in several cases. Non desunt qui Mercurium crudum in dolioli fundo
detinent, ferunt vinum ne arescat, aut vaporem contrahat, aut pendulum fiat, ea
ratione fieri. Nos tale vinum ad ventris lumbricos plurimum valere certo
scimus. As for the hurtful dregs which the Galenical Medicaments are said to
leave behind: I am confident, that whosoever shall enquire into the ill
consequences of the two Pharmaceutics, will say, that if the Galenical be not
always the most efficacious, it is always the most safe and innocent: and any
man will be more apt to dread the violent impressions which the powerful
spirits and minerals may make upon the membranes of the Stomach (which may
introduce an irrelievable distemper in the torenus of that part, whereupon
depends the nutriment, health, and vigor of the whole body) then any noxious
faeces or little and remediable hurt from the generality of the Galenical
Medicaments. Qui Deum credit malefactorum vindicem ultoremque, is a noxiis
medicamentis, cum ad manum sunt alia, diligenter abstinebit: ne quando
homicidii, accusant^ conscientia, reus fiat, parum profuerit novendecim curasse
periculoso curationis genere, quo vigesimus, aut trigesimus sit necatus.
Erastus disp. de propr. medic. c. 65. And there is this to be said in
Justification of that Course -- that those who have most decried it, and raised
their repute upon a different way, yet have practiced with it. In ipsius
Paracelsi scriptis Conring. de med. Herm. c. 21. p 2^9. Paludan. epist. (...)
H. Sme^. Ea habetur in Bartholini cista med in vita Severini. p. 127.
passim laudantur remedia morborum vulgari modo and composita and praeparata.
Etiam Petrus Severinus test Paludano, Medicamentis Paracelsicis non semper
us^s est, verum and compositionibus Galenicis saepe. Nor are Paracelsus and
Petrus Severinus Danus singular in this action: it is the common usage of
Quercetan, Crollius, and Hartman; not to mention Dr. Willis: I shall add, that
Chemical medicines have never or very seldom answered their expectation, which
men raise of them: and whosoever shall inquire into the credit which
Paracelsus, Petrus Severinus, Vide Conring. de med. Herm. c. 25 p. 358. etc. de
Paracelso, de Phedrone, and Pharmacis Paracelsicis vide Bernardum Dissenniam
Croneburgium in def med. veter. c. 40, 41, etc. and de Petro Severino Dano.
Vide epistolam Palu dani, ubi supra. De Scheunemanno vide Rolfinc chym. l. 1.
c. ^8. p. 51.
Phedro, or Scheunemannus, or Helmont gained by these refined Medicaments, he
shall observe that either they are infamous for their destructive courses of
Physic, or at best achieved nothing beyond other Mortals, except by Chance.
In fine, though I have seen very good success of many Chemical Medicines; yet
dare I not express so great an admiration for them as Mr. Glanvill declares:
and if he in all the number of his Philosophic friends, had but one
understanding Physician, or two, they would tell him, That there are some
diseases in themselves, or by accident incurable; that men will die under the
most able Physicians, and that the most best and innocent Physic will
sometimes have effects different Nec Paracelsi sectatores probo, qui medicina
dogmatica explosa and relicta, ^lixir vitae. quintas essentias* Axungiam Solis
and Lunae, etc. and a^ia perniciosa and deterrima pharmaca in parva dosi, magno
cum supercilio exhibere solent, aegrorum palato consulere volentes: cum hoc
titulo tenus saltem medicamenta sin^, ipsorum quidem opinione singularia,
revera autem mortis fercula and pocula, quibus plerumque corpus humanum
vehementer exagitatur, and magna cum jactatione satigatur, and ita debilitatur,
ut aut ae^^e aut nunquam amplius, pristinas vires recuperet. ^abelchover. Cent.
6. hist. 7. in annot. p. 24.
from the wishes and hopes of the Doctor: and he would find that by ordinary
medicaments not purged from their dregs,, nor exalted into spirits and
essences, as great Cures are done by Countrey-Physicians and Country.
Gentlewomen oftentimes, as any ever were wrought by Chemistry. The Physic
which is celebrated in the Scripture, that which St. Luke, St. James, Cosmas
and Damianus, Joannes Damascenus, and others followed, was that which our
Divine scruples, at least it leaves dregs in the body.

I confess that among the Egyptians, and Arabians, and Paracelsians, and some
other Moderns, Chemistry was very fantastic, unintelligible and delusive; and
the boasts, vanity, and canting of those Spagyrists brought a scandal upon the
Art, and exposed it to suspicion and contempt: but what the Society have done
in order to its improvement, I understand not so well as Mr. Glanvill seems to
do: the Treatise of Dr. Willis about Fermentation was writ before he was of
that number: and I know not how he has improved Chemistry much since. And in
that famed Piece, all is not to be reckoned upon as invented (much His notion
of Fermentation, as thereby he expresses the natural and praeternatural
occurrences in our bodies, is taken from Bellich. defermentat sect. 89. His
notion of the fire in the heart it very near related to the doctrine of
Conringius de calid(...); and the comparison of the blood with wi^e is derived
from Carolus ^i^o. so that those things which are the principal in his book)
^^em rather illustrated excellently well, then new discoveries and dypotheses.
less is improved) that is written. Those that have improved it most, and made
it intelligible, are Beguinus, Crollius, Quercetan, Hartman, Angelus Sala,
Schroder, Zwelfer, Sennertus, Glauber, and others, that never conversed with
the Society, whose Improvements are not mentioned by Mr. Glanvill, though so
great, that (considering what men now write or do, is but by their Example, and
after they had removed away all difficulties) all that our Inventors have done,
does not deserve to be mentioned.

I shall add, that we owe not only the invention, and rude improvement of
Chemistry to the Disputative followers of Hippocrates, Aristotle, Galen, those
superstitious Porers upon the Writings of the Ancients, those ridiculous
Schoolmen, and Monks, and Physicians, but even the present credit and esteem
which it has in the world, and upon which it has so far advanced it self.
It was not Paracelsus with all his noise and Insolence, but the Dogmatical
Physicians, who observing the benefit thereof in Pharmacy gave it fame, and
introduced it into the Shops, and Cabinets of Princes, and the use of serious
and considerate Persons. Crato introduced it Cra^o medicin. ^p 137. Erast. ad^.
Para^^^s. part. 4 p. 285. and de metal. p. 8.
into the Emperors Court at Vienna: not a Chemical Oil, or Extract was
prepared there, till he gave Encouragement to the thing. So did Erastus, a
greater enemy to Paracelsus than to Chemical Physic: as appears by that saying
which he uttered in the midst of his Disputes and animosities against the
Paracelsians. Equidem ne absoluta est Ars nostra sine distillatoria. And had
not Langius, Auder^acus, Gesuerus, Fernelius, Zwingerus, Schegkius, Augenius,
Sennert de cons. chym. ^. 2.
Minadous, Matthiolus, Libavius, and many other Physicians of the Hippocratical
way introduced the sober and honest practice of it, and rendered it helpful to
common life, perhaps our Virtuosi had never meddled with it, at least not have
been able to give it any esteem in the world. But now that the Galenists and
Aristoteleans, (as they are commonly called) have refined it from its dross,
and cast off the Chrysopoietick and delusory designs, and magical
intermixtures, and Rosicrucian vapors and superstitions, all which they
effected; and gave Mr. Glanvill the opportunity of this Cant, with which I
conclude this discourse.

I confess, Sir, that among the Egyptians, and Arabians, Mr. Glanvill, p. 12.
and Paracelsians, and some other Moderns, Chemistry was very fantastic, and
unintelligible, and delusive: and the boasts, vanity, and cantings of those
Spagyrists brought a Scandal upon the Art, and exposed it to suspicion and
contempt. Perhaps not so delusory as Mr. Glanvill thinks: but I am sure the
projects some go upon are delusory, have much of the Rosicrusan humor in them:
and ^he design of introducing a sensible Philosophy is the pretense of
Crollius, and of the Rosi^rusive Order.
But its late Cultivators, and particularly the ROYAL SOCIETY have refined it
from its dross, and made it honest, sober, and intelligible, an excellent
Interpreter to Philosophy, and help to common life. For they have laid aside
the Chrysopoietick, and delusory designs, and vain transmutations, and
Rosicrucian vapors, Magical Charms and superstitious suggestions, and formed it
into an instrument to know the Depths and Efficacies of Nature. -- All this
without dispute the Society has done; and without disputing. And hereupon I do
agree with our Virtuoso, that they have no small advantage above the old
Philosophers of the Notional way.

Of Anatomical Improvements.
WE have another advantage above the Ancients in the study, use, and vast
Improvements of Anatomy, Plus ultr^* p. 12.
which we find as needful to be known among us, as it is wonderful 'twas known
so little among the Ancients, whom a fond Superstition deterred from
dissections. For the Anatomising the bodies of men was counted barbarous and
inhumane in elder Times: And I observe from a learned man of our own, that the
Romans held it unlawful to look on the Entrails. And Tertullian severely
censur^s an inquisitive Physician of his time for this practice, saying, That
he hated man, that he might know him. Yea, one of the Popes ( I take it 'twas
Boniface 8.) threatens to excommunicate those that should do any thing of this
then-abominable nature. And Democritus was fain to excuse his dissection of
Beasts, even to the great Hippocrates. Nor does it appear by any thing extant
in the writings of Galen, that that other Father of Physicians ever made any
Anatomy of humane bodies. Thus shy and unacquainted was Antiquity with this
excellent Art, which is one of the most useful in humane life, and tends
mightily to the eviscerating of Nature, and disclosure of the Springs of its
Motion.

I have set down without any interruption the words of this English Bravo and
Hector of our Modern Philosophers, that my Reader might come with a greater
expectation to the perusal of my Animadversions: so high a charge of ignorance
upon the Ancients, such useful discoveries of the Moderns render the former to
be contemptible fellows* and the latter a very beneficial and important p^r^y
in this Age. But if it do appear that the Moderns have not as yet convinced us
by their works and great performances in Physic, that the knowledge of these
new inventions is so necessary to Physicians, and so advantageous to mankind,
but that those which either slight or ignore their discoveries, acquire a
greater repute, are more employed and possessed of a more honorable and
gainful practice, and, in fine, do greater Cures in general, then our
Braggadochios; then is there no such reason for this Triumph of Mr. Glanvill,
as he imagines. The better to judge hereof, I desire all considering men to
look back upon the several Physicians, who have flourished in Greece, Rome and
Barbary, and to view the present state of Physic in Italy, Spain, and France,
and try his most severe judgment if it be possible for him to condemn that
Physic as imperfect and pitifully deficient, which gave that credit to
Hippocrates, Galen, Rhases, Avicenne, Fernelius, Lacuna, Mercatus, Vallesius,
Christophorus, and Thomas a Veiga, Claudinus, Massarius, Septalius,
Rondeletius, Hollerius, Ballonius, Rodericus a Castro, Fonseca, Saxonia,
Sennertus, Crato, Prosper Alpinus, Antonius Musa Basavola, Hofman, and many
others whom I shall not name; as indeed I name these without any order) which
they now enjoy. Let him set his most ambitious thoughts on work, and see if he
can propose to his desires greater things then they attained unto, and
achieved. Let him employ all his envy, and yet condemn their Diagnosticks,
Prognostics, or that Secretorum Secretissimum, their method of curing, and
their Medicines. If there be little or no fault in these parts, it signifies
not much what principles they went upon in Philosophy, nor whether they did
mistake or ignore some things in Anatomy, as long as they were not such as
hindered a Physician from the obtaining of that end which is designed by his
Art: And as to the improvement of the Therapeutick part of Physic, by new
Medicaments, or new and more pleasant preparations of old Medicaments, if they
be no more efficacious then the former, we pay to the Inventors those
acknowledgements, which we do to the introducers of new garbs and fashions of
clothes, the best contrivances whereof, howsoever they may excel in
convenience, cannot be endeared unto us by the representations of being
necessary. I have named practical Physicians; I shall now instance in
Surgery: What man is there in this Age, that would not be content with the
repute of Ingrassias, Vesalius, Fallopius, Carcanus, Aquapendens, Spigelius,
Marchettis, Severinus Paraeus, Chalmetaeus, Pigraeus, Guillemeau, Hildanus,
etc? or what man is there in this inquisitive Age, that any sober man would
compare with them, much less prefer before them? If the Posture of Physic be
such, and that the value we ought to place on every thing be to be regulated by
its subserviency and conduciveness to some end, ( finis conciliat mediis
gratiam) it is easy to judge what certain esteem we are to put upon the modern
Improvements of Knowledge in order to Physic, and how far we may justly
censure the Ancients, and such as either slight or are ignorant of them. I
profess my self not to know what disease it is that the Virtuosi cure better,
or with more certainty then those that follow those other of the Dogmatical
way. If it were done, there would not want such as should cry such performances
up; besides the interest of the Novellists, the sense of their great Cures,
would gain them all the practice that is now in the hands of such as vary not
from the ancient Method, and Rules of that Art. I shall add, that I could
demonstrate by undeniable testimonies, and such as are confirmed by modern
trials, that the introducing of new Medicines, either Chemical, or otherwise,
and the neglect of a diffused reading, has occasioned the dis-use and
ignorance of several Medicines for Consumptions, the Gout, Plague, and other
grievous diseases, which might be attempted with much more assurance, then is
to be placed upon the later Methods. To prosecute this point further, I shall
tell you, that Physicians hitherto looked with a great indifference upon the
Principles of natural Philosophy, whether they were true, or no; so that they
did but serve as convenient Memorials to regulate them in their practice, and
that they did guide them to their wished end with such certainty, as if they
were true. All disputes about Natural Philosophy that did not refer to
practice, they looked upon as Curiosities, going beyond their Art, and about
which they would not contend, so as that the Method of curing were not
undermined thereby. Upon this account they did allow of two sorts of Truth, the
one in Physic, the other in Natural Philosophy, and that what was such in one,
might not be such in the other. This President they derived from their great
Master, Hippocrates, who in his discourses sometimes proceeds upon the Doctrine
of the four Elements, as if that were true: Sometimes he goes upon the doctrine
of Atoms, as if he regulated his Cures thereby: sometimes he seems to favor
the Tenets of the Chemists; See Otto Tachenius' s Hippocrates redivivus* and
his Clavis Medic. Hippocr. Devet. medic 24 Concerning the meaning of which
place see Erastus adv. P^rac. p. 3. page ^6 and Con^ing. de Hermet. med. c. 16
p* 191.
and he cries out as Mr. Boil, and other Chemists cite him, Non calidum,
frigidum, humidum, siccum esse quod maximam vim agendi habet in corpore, verum
amarum, and falsum, and dulce, and acidum, etc. Sometimes he proceeds as it were
upon the principles of the old Methodists, and ascribes the origin of diseases
to the altering of the texture of the body, to the different conformation of
parts, the different configuration of pores, etc. This was the course that
Great Man took: he was willing to observe in all diseases the motions and the
course Nature took; to take those for ill signs and symptoms, which he found to
be such from that great Instructor; however (...), those ways whereby Nature
did usually terminate diseases, were the ways he thought they ought to be
terminated by; and he made that the scope to be aimed at in the curing of
diseases: those evacuations that had helped naturally to cure, he endeavored
to promote artificially, by such Medicines as Experience showed to be
serviceable to those ends, when administered at due times and seasons. In short,
he made himself absolutely the slave of Nature, attended on her motions,
sometimes gently leading her on, as it were a Gentleman Usher; sometimes
following her, as a Page, never pretending to command her by his Medicines: So
cautious he was, that he would not adventure to do good unseasonably, and at
other hours then his Teacher directed him, lest he should do harm: he would
not adventure to shorten a disease, lest he should shorten his Patients life.
As if he had foreseen the truth of that observation* which Vallesius, and
others in these days experiment, Celerior quam pro morbi longitudine curatio,
detrahens plus virium quam Consultius esse nullus nescit tempore paulo longiore
and tuto curari, quam paulo breviore cum certo vitae periculo sanari. Erastus
disput. de propriet. med. c. 65. sub finem.
pro morbi ratione, facit in tempore curandos ante tempus mori. Agreeable to
this Method of Hippocrates, was that counsel which Dr. Bathurst (of
Blackfriars) gave me, when I first seriously set my self to study and observe
his practice in Physic, viz. Nunquam ille Medicus magnus erit, quisquis
patitur sese principiis Philosophicis alligari atque constringi. It is
impossible for any person to be a great Physician, who ties up himself to one
sort of Natural Philosophy, as if it were really true and certain: the
operation of Medicaments is oftentimes such as answers not the Principles of
any Philosophy, and the digestions of Nature are so different from those of
Chemistry, her fires, her solvents, her filters, her furnaces and vessels, her
mixtures and degrees of heat so discrepant, that there is no arguing from the
one to the other: nor is there any thing to be relied upon in Physic, but an
exact knowledge of medicinal Phisiology (founded upon observation, not
principles) semeiotics, method of curing, and tried, (not excogitated, not
commanding) medicines: where this course fails (as sometimes it will) we then
try uncertain Medicines, rather then abandon the Patient to those Prognostics,
which are seldom so fatal as to destroy all hope; and where Skill is at a loss,
we frequently behold Chance to be successful. And this last is the Mystress of
our Reforming Physicians, it is under her conduct that they will enrich our
Therapeutick part of Medicine, and alter our Method. I shall not enlarge further
hereupon, being content to have showed what esteem Physicians have had
Philosophy in, and how they have had as little regard to the truth of their
principles in natural Philosophy, as a man ought to have to the hand of a Dial,
or which points out the way to any place: It is not requisite that it be a real
hand, whatever men call it; nor would we endure the impertinencies of any that
should go about to persuade us out of our way, because they that called that an
hand, were mistaken: In sum, so the way be good and certain, I am content to be
one of those whom the Italian Proverb commends, for going that way which the
Mules go. Ito qua Muli eunt. In this opinion I have amongst late Writers the
learned Hofman, whose words are these. Quae enim necessitas est Instit* med l.
2 c. (...). 11* 1* etc. and (...).
Medicum semper loqui cum Physico, siquidem usus, a quo pendet ars nostra,
aliud velit, vel certe permittat? Quid enim ibi VERIT AS est, hic UTILITAS est.

Nor will it be amiss to propose the Judgment of the learned Practitioner
Joannes Antonides Vander Linden, which he Jo. Ant. Vander Linden de circuitu
sanguin. exercit. 1. sub finem.
passed not long before his death at Leiden A. D. 1659 after a mature
consideration of all the new speculations in Natural Philosophy, which this
last Age had produced and acquainted him with. Physici ab imaginariis
incipiunt, per ratiocinia pergunt, and in frivola desinunt. Cordatos obtestor,
an apud se non (...)? Ad quid igitur Physica, ut nunc constituta est, Medico?
Etiam quae nunc docetur optima ( praeter quod Principiis nitatur non
necessariis, and ob id certa non sit) quid ad medendum, si scitur, utile; aut,
si nescitur, noxii confert? Etiam, si extaret, quae absolute certis principiis
and perfectis regulis constaret, tamen Medicina: non esset, nisi Institoria,
non Institutoria. Institoria, inquam; nam id Medicis est Physica, quod Fabris
omne genus taberna mercium Novicarum. Instituriam Medicinae qui volunt, nae
illi sciunt, quid velit detritissimum, ubi desinit Physicus, ibi incipit
Medicus. Medicina non habet opus aliena; nedum a Physicis ficta and emendicata
principia: habet sua, and certa, and ausa stare contra omnem dubitationis
impetum. Qua fiducia concludo: Physica hodierna optima Medicinae parum aut
nihil utilis est. Qui habet aures ad audiendum audiat, mentemque sanam in
corpore sano habeat. Saltem vos, vos iterum alloquor (...), sapite; and ab ea
quae Medicinae larva se tegit, Physica cavete; and hoc agite, ut quam aliquando
salutis humanae praesidem Artem in bona conscientia vultis facere, eam ante cum
certo fructu regia via velitis discere.

Upon this account I often laugh at our modern Virtuosi, when they dilate
themselves with a great deal of ostentation and confidence, about the qualities
and correctives of Opium, whether it be hot or cold? which controversy how
great soever, has no influence upon practice, because both agree pretty well
in the cases in which it is to be used, and man^ of the modern preparations and
corrections are foolish, and make it worse; And as to that Laudanum of Helmonts
amongst the Virtuosi; I have seen much more simple preparations stupifie less,
and produce greater Cures, then that did when made by the hands of one of the
Society, and given by another of it: whilst the best of Modern Chemists,
Pharmacop. August incons. Archigenis.
Zwelfer; bestows this commendation upon that old medicine of Archigenes and
Mesues -- Erit sic rite praeparata opiata, quae merito Laudani opiati,
multarumque aliarum Opiatarum vices supplere posset. I could enlarge here, but
that Mr. Glanvill will think I have forgot him.

Having made this general Apology for Physicians, which is sufficient to
justify them, both as to their care of their Patients, and their skill; I
shall come to apply my discourse particularly to Mr. Glanvill. It is hard to
reconcile the necessity of Anatomy, with the Mosaical Constitutions, it seeming
strange that God should make it so unclean a thing for any one to touch a dead
body, and yet the knowledge of Sceletons should be so necessary. To supply
this, the Jewish Rabbis say, that God Almighty did reveal unto Moses the
accurate knowledge of Anatomy: and when we consider how they embalmed their
dead, and that embalming does infer a knowledge of dissection, and of the
Entrails; when we observe (out of Buxtorfs Synagoga) that artifice with which
the Jews kill all Animals, thereby to let out the blood exactly: when we
consider that the multiplicity of accidents in war, or otherwise, would render
the knowledge of the inward and outward parts necessary to them, and experience
acquaint them with their nature (not to mention some Jewish relations about the
Vid. Riolan. Anthropog^. ph. l. 1. c. 3.
opening of the Os pubis and the partus Caesareus) I am apt to think that the
ancient Jews were not ignorant of useful Anatomy, nor so superstitious as
totally to avoid the practice of it; nor dare I say (with our Virtuoso) such
Superstition is fond, which is ascribed to God as its immediate Author.

As for the Greeks, the study of Anatomy was very ancient amongst them, since
it is attributed to Alcmaeon* that ancient Physician (a Scholar of Pythagoras)
as the first Author of it, if we will believe Chalcidius upon the Timaeus of
Plato. From him it was derived to posterity by tradition and manual operation,
children being bred up unto it, such as were to be Physicians, as also
Philosophers. So Democritus, Hippocrates, and many others came to be acquainted
with it. But none of the Ancients, until the time of Diocles Garystius, did
Hieron. Mercurialis Var. Lect. l. 1. c. 10*
write any thing about it: which notwithstanding, that Science seems to have
been in never These Anatomical o^erations of the Youth were called (...), which
Hofman thinks may be rendered fitly in* a^n^, Exercitia Anatomica. Adding,
Didiceram enim ex ejus operis (apud Galenum) l. 2. initio has (...) ab ipso
artis incunabulo suisse puerorum (...)a Asclepiadea, alto* rum ad factitandam
medicinam. Sciebam etiam aliunde, long alium fuisse tum Anatomiae rationem,
quam nunc est, seorsim inquam fuisse traditam historiam partium ipsarum,
semperq* fultam oculari inspectione. Vide Hofman Var. Lect. l. 2. c. 13. The
same is avowed by Vesalius in his Preface to Charles V.
the worse condition, as Mercurialis thinks. Anatomen etsi a nullo veterum
usque ad Dioclis aetatem Scriptis mandatam referat Galen. in 2. de anat. admin.
melius tamen sic conservatam and amplificatam inde intelligere possumus, quod
tunc homines a primis annis Anatomen (ut caeteras arts,) non ex scriptis sed
ex Parentum sermonibus ipsaque exercitatione addiscebant; sicque melius ipsam
comparantes, non modo tenacius in animis servabant, verum etiam assiduis
studiis augebant. But to put this question more out of doubt, I shall appeal to
Galen, who could give a better account of what they did in the elder times then
Mr. Glanvill. I have not his Works by me; but Lacuna in his Epitome thus
expresses him. " Quod veteres nihil scripserint de Lacunae Epit. Galeni de
anatom. admin. l. 2.
consectionibus administrandis, vertendum illis vitio non est: quandoquidem
erat iis tum frequens tamque in communi usu ipsa Anatome, ut domi apud Parents
etiam ab ipsa pueritia, in illa omnes olim exercerentur. Postea vero tam
praeclaro illo exercitio intermisso, opus certe nobis fuit Commentariis, quae
Anatomicam disciplinam Chirurgicae medendi rationi maxim necessariam, integram
conservarent. That Aristotle did dissect the bodies of men is manifest out of
his Hist. Anim. l. 3. where he informs us how he made an inquiry into the
nature and series Vide Riolan. Anthr. p^g^aph. l. 1. ^4.
of the veins in humane bodies: and as to his anatomizing of other creatures,
beasts, birds, I would not be understood to justify every passage in Aristotle
relating to Anatomy: he has many gross errors opere in longo: but have not
also Harvey, Highmore, Silvius, and others, so many as may excuse his
incogitancy sometimes?
fishes, insects, (and how he had some thousands employed under him to that
purpose) no man can doubt who reads Riolanus and Pliny l. 8. c. 18. How
accurate he was (however his brevity does not represent every circumstance, nor
fully describe things) we may judge by this that there are few of the new
inventions, but are ascribed unto him; and Dr. Harvey is known D^* Pearsoni ^
Dedic. Laertii ad Carol. II.
commonly to have said, Nihil fere unquam in ipsis Naturae penetralibus
invenisse se* quin cum Aristotelem suum pensiculatius evolveret idem ab illo,
aut explicatum, aut saltem cognitum reperiret. After Diocles, I find these
other reckoned as notable Anatomists by Volcherus, Coiter, viz. Polybius,
Erasistratus, Callistus, all Scholars of. Aristotle: And after them Marinus,
and Lycus, Vol. Coiter intro. inanat. c. 6 Galen in his Coment upon Hippocrates
de not. hum. reckons up above ^0 eminent Ana^^mists of the ancients. Vide
Riolan. Anthropogr.
the Master of Galen, and Satyrus, and Pelops, and Numesianus, besides several
others at Alexandria all which Galen went to converse with. But I must not pass
by Herophilus without an especial Character, who did not only correct the
mistakes in Anatomy which his Master Praxagoras fell into, but by his industry
and skill acquired a repute so great, that his name is equal to the most famous
that ever were before, or since his time: This great man is preferred by
Vesalius before Galen: And it was an usual saying of Fallopius, that any man
might as easily contradict the Gospel, as contradict Moebius fundam. med. c. 1.
p. 10. and V^ssius de philos. c. ^1. sect. 2.
Herophilus in Anatomy. Contradicere Herophilo in Anatomicis est contradicere
Evangelio. This man is that inquisitive Physician, of whom Mr. Glanvill speaks,
and who is blamed by Tertullian not for dissecting humane bodies, but for
dissecting them alive, which he terms Butchery. Because, I think Mr. Glanvill
never read him, and because I will make it evident that one of the Ancients did
dissect more bodies of men, then all the Society put together, and that with an
extraordinary caution. I shall set down the words of Tertullian, and
Tert^llian. de anima. c. 10. Gagr^us, Mercurialis, and Vossius read it se,
ringentos exsecuit.
they are these, -- -- Herophilus ille Medicus aut Lanius, qui sexcentos
eexecuit ut naturam scrutaretur, qui hominem odiit ut nosset, nescio an omnia
ejus interna liquido explorarit; ipsa morte mutante q quaevixerant, and morte
non simplici, sed ipsa inter artificia exectionis errante. Upon which passage,
Philip le prieur notes thus, Anatomia quae and celebris magnoque in precio fuit
apud Ethnicos, a veteribus Christianis odio quam maximo afficiebatur. Quamvis
hic dictum Lanium Herophilum constet, quod vivos homines dissecaret* Id autem
facere solitos Erasistratum, Dioclem, and Herophilum docet Claudius Galennus 8.
de plac. and 2. anatom. administr. Agreeable to of Tertullian, is that passage
of Cornelius Celsus in his Preface. Celsus l. 1. in prooemio.
Necessarium ergo esse incidere corpora mortuorum, eorumque viscera atque
intestina scrutari, longeque optime fecisse Herophilam and Erasistratum, qui
nocentes homines a regibus ex carcere acceptos, vivos inciderint,
considerarintque etiam Spiritu remanente, ea quae Natura clausisset, eorumque
posituram, colorem, figuram, magnitudinem, ordinem, duriciem, molliciem,
laevorem* contactum: processus deinde singulorum and recessus, and sive quia
inseritur alteri, sive quid partem alterius in se recipit. This Herophilus was
undoubtedly a person of vast parts, great learning and curiosity. He brought
the Hippocratical Physic to its height and perfection, completing the
Anatomical part, and illustrating the Doctrine of the Pulses. His followers had
a School not far from Laodicea, as Strabo says, wherein it is not to be
doubted but that Anatomy was taught, and so in that other School of
Erasistratus at Smyrna. (...) Strabo Geograph. in fine lib 12. citante
Mercuriali Var. Lect. l. 2. c. 12.
From whence it is clear, that in the Reign of Augustus Caesar (when Strabo
lived) Anatomy in the East was in great request, and that the Physicians and
followers of Herophilus had a great Academy betwixt Laodicea and Garura. And
that before those times at Smyrna, Erasistratus that was a great Dissector of
men (even alive) had another Academy of his followers: whose works Vesalius de
rad. Chinae, p. 163.
though they are lost, yet Vesalius says, that one may conjecture out of the
passages in Galen that relate to them, that they were very accurate Anatomists.
-- Veteribus dissectionum proceribus, quos ex Galeni libris in corporum anatome
sedulo versatus esse nobis persuasum est. -- Not much unlike this character of
Vesalius is that Elogy which Veslingius bestows upon the Ancients in an Epistle
of his to C. Hofman, enquiring whether the venae lacteae of Asellius were a
part of the portavena known so long ago? Sic habeas, incertum mihi esse quid
primi illi qui ante Dioclis Carystii aevum privatis a^ffectionibus in corporis
humani parts inquirebant hic viderint, cum nihil eorum quae cognorant scriptis
divulgarint. Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona multi, ait Lyricus: and proculdubio
ante Herophilum eximii, and in hoc dissectionum studio exercitatissimi, quos ob
monumentorum defectum longa nocte oblivio premit. Veslingius Ep. 20. edit. per
Bartholin.

I shall conclude this discourse of Herophilus, with an observation about the
time when he lived; which was not in the days of Tertullian, though Mr.
Glanvill represents them as Contemporaries: but many Centuries before, in the
time of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, and he is famed for his raillery upon Diodorus
Cronus, who denied there was any motion, yet had his shoulder dislocated. See
Conring. de medic. Hermet. c. 9. p. 83. Some make him more ancient, but none
ever brought him so low as our Virtuoso. Vide Voss. de Philos. c. 11. Jonsium
de Script. Philos. l. 1. c. 15.

As to the Romans, and their skill in Anatomy, I cannot say much of it, except
it be to their disparagement. They were a military sort of people, rough-hewen,
and thought all that below their studies or serious thoughts, which our
Experimental Philosophers boast of, and recommend unto our care with so much
vanity. All the Mechanic, I had almost said the Liberal Sciences, they thought
to be excellent qualifications in their slaves, not in themselves: And they who
gave Laws to all the world, scorned to be instructed by their vassals, and a
conquered Nation. Upon this account, not only in the time of Tully, but
afterward to the days of Quintilian and Tacitus, (I know not which writ the
Book De Oratoribus) it is evident, that however many Gentlemen did inform
themselves of the several parts of ingenious Learning, yet did that haughty
people behold those persons with indignation, and some thoughts of hatred, in
so much as that those who were best versed in it, pretended ignorance and scorn
of it. Things being in this condition, and the Romans having no other
Physicians then their Slaves, it is not to be wondered if they were not eminent
for Anatomy. Cato had banished the Physicians long ago, and after-ages gave
them little encouragement. I do not at present remember any Physician, whose
name has any thing of the Roman till Cornelius Celsus, and after him Vectius
Valens. Pliny says, that even to his time, in the reign of Titus Vespasian,
the Romans did not care to profess and practice Physic. Solam hanc artium
Graecorum nondum exercet Romana gravitas in tanto fructu: paucissimi Quiritum
attigere, and ipsi statim ad Graecos transfugae: imo vero autoritas aliter quam
Graece eam tractantibus, etiam apud imperitos expertesque linguae, non est.
Not. hist. l. 29. c. 1. In the time of Augustus Caesar, his ^reed man Artorius
Musa, and his brother Euphorbus gave some credit to Physic, and afterward
Ideo d^se^ ta est haec discipli^ qu^a ^ecess^c^^ in (...).
several eminent Greeks are said to have flourished; but whether it were that
the Romans were impatient to learn so much as was requisite (or thought to be
so) to make a man eminent in the Hippocratical and Herophilian way; or whether
they thought it more becoming their grandeur, rather to learn (with all the
world) a new Method of Physic, then seem to have been so long as it were
brutish and ignorant in comparison of the Greeks; or During the flourishing of
the Roman Empire, the study of Physic was principally pursued at Alexandria in
Egypt. There Herophilus and his Scholars had given it credit, and the Empiricks
and Methodists had their Academies. and the Jacrosophistaes were endowed
professors The repute of Alexandria being such*even in the da^s of Valentinian,
that it was cre^it enough for any Physician to say he had been b^ed these.
Ammian. Man cell. lib. 23.
whether that the new principles and method were more agreeable to that
Empirical way, they had been accustomed unto (See Plin. not. hist. l. 26. c.
3.) and so more easily received by the populac^ then that of Hippocrates made
up of a Grecian diet, and medicaments; whatever was the reason, I find that
the Romans did generally incline to that Sect of Physicians, called the
Methodici, begun by Asclepiades and Themison in the time of the Triumvirate, or
Vectius Valens, and completed by Thessalus in the time of Nero: This Sect
seems to have had the advantage over all other the Physicians amongst the
Romans from the time of Augustus, to the reign of Severus, which is near three
hundred years. Pliny calls Themison, Summum authorem, (...) 14. c. 17.
and by that place in Juvenal one would guess him to have been a man of great
notice and general practice in the days he lived.

Morborum omne genus, quorum si nomine quaeras,
Promptius expediam quot amaverit Hippia moechos,
Quot Themison aegros autumno occiderit uno.
Thessalus, against whom Galen and Pliny inveigh was certainly a man* not only
of great Eloquence, but also of extraordinary Learning and Judgment, as we may
guess by those parcels and fragments of that excellent man, which are all that
remains of him, and they preserved in the works of others. His Books de
Communitatibus and Syncriticis are pieces whose losses I much lament. The
Memory of his Tomb is not lost upon which he inscribed himself, (...), or, The
Conqueror of Physicians. His Letter to Nero had something of a gallant
confidence in it, which may become Heroes, and is justified in men of great
Learning. Cum novam sectam condiderim, and quae sola vera sit, propterea quod
qui ante me fuerunt omnes nihil utile prodiderunt, vel ad sanitatem tuendam,
vel ad mor bos propulsandos --. The generality of his followers seem to have
been excellent Physicians, as Dionysius, Proculus, Archigenes, Soranus,
Attalus, Julianus, and others. I shall not insist upon a particular relation of
their tenets, Prosp Alpin. de medic. methodica.
which one may see excellently illustrated by Prosper Alpinus. This sect of
Physicians seems to have left impressions Quintilian being to describe Physic,
renders an a^ count of it agreeable to the Methodists. In declam. 8. Gemini
Languentes.
of its method and principles, in all places where the Roman Empire swayed.
They placed little They called Gallen* when he put himself ^orth in the world
by the ostentation of Anatomy and Philosophy, Logiater: Logiatri autem nomen
sui tempori: medici Romae Galeno per contemptum imponchant; ut ita eum
traducerent, quasi non reipsa, nec usu* and ^xercitio artis peritus esset: Sed
ad loquacit* tem d^ntaxat and disserendum de iis quae ad a^tem pertinent
comparatus. Gesner. in Schol^is ad Cassium P. 57.
value upon the exact knowledge of Anatomy, being content with a general skill
therein, and enquiring no further than was necessary. They knew that the Romans
had formerly banished the Physicians (as Archagathus) from amongst them, for
using their Patients with much cruelty, cutting and burning them; and
understood the humor of the people so well, how they disliked the dissections
of humane bodies, especially alive, and therefore they closed with that popular
prejudice, and turned it to their advantage; neither dissecting of bodies, nor
tormenting them with those odious or cruel methods of Cure, which were
practiced by the followers of Herophilus. Nor do I doubt that those objections
in Celsus against Anatomy, were put into his mouth by the Methodists, as well
as Empirics, viz. that all Anatomy of bodies was a nasty performance; but to
dissect the living, most barbarous and cruel: that as much of Anatomy as would
instruct one sufficiently, might be learned in a Camp, where the Physician need
not make wounds, but learn at once and practice Cures. Hence it was that the
study of Anatomy was so much out of request at Rome in Galens time, that I
think he mentions not one curious Anatomist there, though he tell how Satyrus
taught him at Pergamus, and Pelops at Smyrna, and Numesianus at Corinth, and
others. There were some that were excellent Ostrologists at Alexandria. And I
am apt to think, that even he durst not for fear of public odium, dissect any
living men there, because, as Celsus says, most people held it to be cruelty,
and perhaps would not have thought well of him, who should have dissected any
dead men. Whereupon he set up with Apes, dissecting them, as being nearest to
men in resemblance, Vesalius in his Treatise de^ad. Chinae shows bow Ga en
dissected Apes, and was thereby led into sun dry mistak^s But even such as did
blame Galen were themselves faulty, as Vesalius and Columbus; which appears by
what they say about the kidneys; which they describe out of brutes, not men, as
Piccolomineus and Beverovicus observe ^everovic. dc calculo, p 3 Read also
Fallopius Observations
and imagining the fabric of their bodies to have as great an affinity with
the parts of men, as their shapes had; that this was the cause of many mistakes
in him, is certain; and demonstrated by Vesalius. But that he never made any
Anatomies of humane bodies, or considered any as they came in his way, is a
calumny which might be refuted by sundry instances Vesalius in ded ^c. lib. de
sabric. corp. hum. ad Carol V. Imper. In the same place ^e calls Galen,
dissectionis professorum facile primariam.
out of his Works, and some thereof are to be seen in Riolanus Anthopogr. l. ^.
c. 12.

Vesalius never raised his imputations to this height; all that he says of
this nature, is, Nobis modo ex renata dissectionis art, diligentique Galeni
librorum praelectione, and in plerisque locis eorundem non poenitenda
restitutione constat, nunquam ipsum nuper mortuum corpus humanum resecuisse. At
vero suis deceptum Simiis (licet ipsi arida, ac veluti ad ossium inspectionem
parata hominum cadavera occurrerint) crebro veteres Medicos, qui hominum
consectionibus se exercu^rant, Galen. l. 3. sec, genesis c. 2.
immerito arguere. Nay, it is evident out of Galen, that the Roman Physicians
which were in the Army of Antoninus did dissect the Germans that were killed by
him in battle. As for that Learned man of our own, out of whom he tells us,
That the Romans held it unlawful to look on the Entrails: I know not who it
should be. Mr. Boil indeed does say, that in Galens time it was thought little
less then irreligious, if not barbarous, to mangle the bodies of men: which how
far it is true, one may guess out of what I have said; But that Honorable
Person speaks in such a manner as gives us little of exception; Mr. Glanvill is
so peremptory, that I wonder that he did not deny, that the Romans did not use
any Augury from the inspection of the bowels, heart, and liver of beasts; or
that they did not eat the Livers of Geese, and other Guts of several Animals.
This is so well known to every School boy that has read Martial, or Horace, or
Virgil, that I need not speak of it. Had the Romans held it so unlawful a thing
to behold the Entrails of Animals, I wonder they gave the name of Visceratio to
those distributions of flesh which they publicly used: to such unlawful
customs, Virgil would not have alluded, when he brings in Dido her self,

-- Pecudumque reclusis*
Pectoribus i^hians spirantia consulit exta.
Aeneid. l. 4. v. 64. and Georgic. l. 1. v. 484. Tristibus aut Extis fibrae
apparere minaces. Nay, they carried the bodies of beasts open with their
Entrails displayed to be sold publicly, as Mart. shows l. 6. ep. 64.

N^ valeam, si non multo sapit altius istud,
Quod cum panticibus laxis, and cum pede grandi
Et rubro palmone vetus, nasisque timendum,
Omnia crudelis Lanius, per compita portar.
But perhaps he will confine his discourse to the Entrails of men, why then did
not he speak more plainly? And even in this case, that some superstitious
persons might hold it impious and unlawful is possible* and that others out of
enmity to the Anatomical Physicians, (as Pliny l. 28. c. 1.) Aspici humana exta
nefas habetur, might* (...) that pla^e in Pliny relates only ^o Argu^y, that
i^ was not lawful amongst m^n t^ make use of humane bodies, and search their
bowels to th^se ends: this was ne^as: but nothing else.
call it so, I deny not. But what Law was there against it? How comes it to
pass, that Celsus in his debate about the lawfulness of Anatomizing even living
bodies, says (or makes others to say) that it is only cruel, or nasty and
abominable; not impiety or a breach of Religion? Besides, how could any
Physician in those days have dressed such wounds in which their Entrails either
gushed out, or were hurt, in case it had been unlawful to look upon them? It is
manifest that Celsus says, a prudent Physician may from such accidents learn
Anatomy; Ita sedem, positum, ordinem, and figuram, similiaque alia cognoscere
prudentem medicum, and advises him to improve the occasion: And he was a
Person learned not only in the Physic, but Civil Laws of his Country.

To convince our Virtuoso a little more, out of Schoolbooks, in which he ought
to be conversant. Is there not a controversy agitated in Seneca, Controvers.
l. x. contr. 6. about Parrhasius the Painter? how he brought an old Olynthian,
and dissected him alive, thereby to draw the picture of Prometheus with a
vulture preying upon his Liver! Is it not agitated pro and Con, by Romans and
Grecians? Is there any one that says it was unlawful for him to behold the
Entrails? Nay, is it not said in the midst of Rome, that it was always LAWFUL?
In argumentis dixit, quantum semper Artibus LICUISSET, Medicos ut vim ignoratam
morbi cognoscerent, viscera rescidisse HODIE cadaverum artus rescindi, ut
nervorum articulorumque positio cognoscipossit. In Quintilian is there not a
Declamation Declam. 8. ( Gemini languentes) in which the Mother accuses the
Father for permitting the Physician to dissect one of the sick twins, thereby
to discover the disease of the other! Does not the Mother there bid him dissect
the bowels of the dead youth? Differ saltem, pater, hanc calamitatem: quicquid
ex filio facis, facies ex cadavere. Si deprehendi potest languor dum occidit,
facilius cum occiderit. Does she not describe the cruelty of that Anatomy very
tragical^y? Passus est miser discurrentem per omnia reserati pectoris improbum
vagae artis errorem. Contentum fuisse medicum toto homine discurrentem primo
putatis aspectu? Egesta saepe vitalia, pertractata, diducta sunt: fecerunt
manus plura, quam ferrum. Stat juxta medicum pater apertis visceribus inhians,
stillantem animae sedem cruentis manibus agitantem: ne festinet, hortatur;
jubet altius diligentiusque scrutari: Interrogat, dubitat, contendit, affirmat,
and accepit de filii morte rationem -- Inter haec reficiebatur miser haustibus,
detinebatur alloquiis, comprimebatur residuus cruor, claudebantur aperta
vitalia. Nemo unquam tam nova pertulit commenta ^evitiae, tanquam sanaretur
occisus est -- Vos tunc putatis illius tantum languoris medicum quaesiisse
causas? quaesivit quicquid nesciebat, and usus occasion rarissima in omnem
voluit proficere novitatem. After this she tells in what manner she gathered up
his bowels, and by closing up his Corpse fitted him for the Funeral. Corpus quod
medicus, quod reliquerat pater, hoc sinu misera collegi, ac vacuum pectus
frigidis abjectisque visceribus rursus implevi, sparsos artus amplexibus junxi,
membra diducta composui. If any one can imagine, that this great Orator in so
solemn a Declamation would have omitted so important an objection as the
unlawfulness and impiety of beholding the entrails of the youth, certainly he
thinks too meanly of the judgment of Quintilian, and too well of his own. It
appears out of that Oration, that they had seldom opportunities of dissecting
men alive, and therefore he calls it rarissimam occasionem. And that they were
not ignorant of Anatomy and the inward fabric of humane bodies, it is evident
further out of that Oration, where the Mother says the Physicians must needs
already have learned that part of their Art. Sufficit quod aliquando jam facta
How could they behold the Ludi Circenses, the Gladiators fighting in the
Theater, and at the tombs of the deceased; or those s^d spectacles described by
Martial? I profess I think it as gross a mistake to say they held it unlawful
to behold the entrails*of men, a^ to deny the Augury by beasls.
ex unius hominis inspectione, ad totius intellectum naturae medicina pr^fecit.
Quid allaturus huic aegroto es, quod non tot seculorum, tot languentium
experimenta deprehenderint?

As for what Mr. Glanvill says about Democritus, that he was fain to excuse
himself to Hippocrates for dissecting of beasts; this is as true as all the
rest. Never was there a fitter second for Mr. Sprat, then Mr. Glanvill. They do
not cite, but invent stories, and that with so much confidence, that a man must
be assured by his own reading, before he can suspect theirs. That Hippocrates
was a diligent Anatomist, is a thing every one must confess who either knows
the manner of their education then, or has looked into his Anatomical books de
locis in homine, de fracturis, and sundry other pieces of his. That he not only
contemplated the seat and action of parts in the dead, but living, appears by
this passage, De Articulis sect 43* where he speaks about the setting of the
Sphondyles of the back; Itaque si tale contingat, palam Page 800. ^om. 2. edit.
Vander Linden.
est quod neque concutiendo, neque alio quodam modo reponi possit, nisi qui
dissecto homine and manu in ventrem injecta, inquisitionem faciat, ut ex
interna part ad externam manu retrudat: atque haec in mortuo quidem facere
possent, in vivo autem non ita. But I shall give an account of the Anatomy of
Hippocrates, in the words of the learned Riolanus Anthropograph. l 1. c. 2.
Testatur Galenus Comment. in lib. 3. de artic. Hippocratem potissimum rationi
corporum incidendorum sedislam operam dedisse, cum Anatomen mirum in modum ad
artem medicam confer sciret, quod nunc aperte docet cum spinae naturam
intelligi voluit, quam Empirici non secus atque caeterarum partium
contemplationem inutilem esse dicunt. Ipsemet Hippocrates lib. 3. de artic.
Commentarios de venis and arteriis pollicetur, quos nunquam videre potuit
Galenus. Praeterea librum de dissectione conscripsit, quem imperfectum habemus.
Ipsemet Galenus libros de Anatome, secundum Hippocratis doctrinam composuerat,
quorum deploranda est jactura. Hippocrates canes dissecuit ut pulmones
observaret. lib. de cord. Ibidem monet quod dissectio accurata hujus partis
non est opus cujusvis, sed periti artificis, and appellat istud opus
Chirurgian. l. 6. Epidem, scribit hominem habere cola intestina cani similia.
Idem lib. de intern. affect. testatur se in bove, in cane, and s^e, quod
impedibus dissectis tubercula in pulmone aqua referta invenisse, unde natus
fuerat hydrops thoracis. Idem testatur se ex hominis ossibus ossa descripsisse:
primus spinae admirabilem figuram descripsit: primus vesiculas seminarias,
earumque situm, omenti usum, valvulas venarum, ortum nervorum, lienis actionem,
uteri oonformationem. Atque ut extaret aliquod monumentum aeternum and
immutabile suae diligentiae, laborisque in hoc fludio exantlati, sceletum aere
fabricatum Apollini Delphico consecravit: ut Author est Pausanias lib. 10. And
is it credible that ever Democritus should be forced to excuse himself to
Hippocrates for cutting up of Animals, as if it were so uncouth and strange to
him? I cannot answer for the Intellectuals of our Virtuoso, but no man of an
higher capacity can believe it. The pleasantest part of this Narrative is, that
there appears no such thing upon record. First of all the story of Democritus,
how Hippocrates came and found him busy in dissecting of Animals, is called in
question by Cortesius in Miscellaneis, as Riolanus tells me. And indeed I
cannot persuade my self that those Letters in the end of Hippocrates works are
genuine. But to pass by this exception. All that Hippocrates writes in his
second Letter to Damagetus amounts to this. That at the request of the people
of Abdera, he came to cure Democritus of his supposed madness, that being
conducted to his house, he found him sitting under a Plantanus tree in a garb
not much differing from a madman, and postures that had something of the same
humor: Ipse Democritus sub ampla and humillima plantano sedebat, in vest
crassa citra humeros desinente, solus, discalceatus, super lapidea sede, valde
pallidus ac macilentus, promissa barba -- -- Ipse vero cum inculto ornatu,
super genibus, librum habebat, sed and alii quidam ex utraque part adjace^ant.
Accumulata etiam erant Animalia multa per totum resecta. Et ipse quidem
aliquando concitate incumbens scribebat, aliquando quiescebat, diu multumque se
continens, and in seipso m^ditans. Deinde non long post, his peractis,
exurgens deambulabat, and viscera animalium inspiciebat, and depositis ipsis
digressus, rursus desidebat. -- When Hippocrates approached near him, he was
busy writing, and even then his deportment had something odd and
Enthusiastical in it. (...) After the first complements (which arr great (...)
usual in those days) Hippocrates demand^^ of him (...) ^e was writing? He
replied about (...) about that, said the great Physician? To which he answers
again thus. (...). Quid enim, inquit, aliud quam quid sit, and quomodo in
hominibus generetur, and quomodo allevetur. Nam animalia haec, quae vides,
inquit, hujus gratia reseco, non quod odio habeam opera Dei, sed bilis naturam
ac sedem quaerens. How much this and the whole passage of that E^terview makes
for Mr. Glanvill's purpose, I see not. Hippocrates does not blame him for
anatomizing of animals, nor is surprised at the novelty, nor troubled at the
impiety of the action. Democritus knowing what apprehension the people had of
him, and fearing lest the garb and posture he was in might confirm to
Hippocrates, the truth of the report tells him how he employed his thoughts,
and that the Animals that lay there upon the ground, were not slaughtered by
him in a frantic rage, out of hatred to the creatures of God; but cut up
Anatomically by him, thereby to discover the seat and nature of the gall, and
the effects it had upon Maniacks. Whereupon Hippocrates was wonderfully pleased
with the testimony he gave of the soundness of his judgment, and after some
other prudential discourses, departed, satisfied about the good condition of
his Patient. But if Democritus were not out of his Wits, I believe Mr. Glanvill
was to allege such an impertinent story. But idle persons, that would upon
easy terms acquire the repute of Learning, by citing quotations, are often
thus imposed upon, and liable to mistakes. And perhaps there may be some person
in the world that I know not of, who may have abused our Virtuoso in this case:
but He should have minded the Text better.

What Pope Boniface the Eighth did, I know not. But I am apt to suspect a
person that has told me so many untruths. The place in the Canon Law, which I
am apt to believe Mr. Glanvill never saw: It is lib. 3. Extravag. titulo de
Anthropogr. l. 1. c. 12.
sepultura. And Riolanus, whom I had rather credit, gives this account of it;
Inter Christianos Papa Bonifacius octavus barbarum and inhumanum judicavit,
peregre mortuorum corpora exenterare, carnibusque spoliare, ut ossa le^ta and
tersa in locum sepulturae, quem vivi delegerant, commode perferri possent. It
seems that Pope thought it an inhumane and barbarous thing not to dissect
bodies for information sake; but to embowel them, and reduce them into
Sceletons, and so to carry their bones to distant places to be buried according
to the desire of the deceased. I am apt to think this Canon was never applied
to Anatomy, and perhaps there is nothing of Excommunication in it, since
Riolanus does not mention it.

As for the gross errors in Anatomy which Galen is charged with, I know not
one that incommodates a man in point of Practice, but that the Method he took
(however founded on false principles) was secure and good. Upon which it
happened Hinc [ Galeno] universi fidem dedere, ut nullus repertus sit medicus,
qui in Galeni Anatomicis voluminibus vel levissimum quidem Japsum deprehensum
esse, multoque minus deprehendi posse censuerint. Vesalius in dedic. lib. de
Fabric hum.
that all his followers implicitly submitted to his Anatomical relations
without further Enquiry, and taught his Errors for truths: And perhaps a
certain vanity seized Galen to contradict the famous Herophilus out of
dissected Apes, thereby to raise his own credit. However it was, from him arose
most of the mistakes in Anatomy, that were translated to the Moors, and from
them to our Ancestors. The Moors are said by their Religion, to forbid the
meddling with dead bodies: Which Assertion, how true it is, I know not, because
that Avicenne and Albucasis commend the study of Anatomy, as necessary in a
peculiar manner to Surgeons. They practiced sundry Chirurgical operations in
Cauteries, and opening Arteries, which seemed to require an Experimental skill
in dissections; and which were their own inventions. In fine, Averroes pleads
not any scruples of Religion for his ignorance in Anatomy, but laments the
Civil Wars of the Moors, which hindered him from inquiring by dissection into
those controversies betwixt Galen and Aristotle, which he had occasion to
debate. Yet did Averroes at all adventures, assert the credit of Aristotle
against Galen, out of an emulation against Avicenne who was a Galenist. From
these two great men amongst the Moors, as the knowledge of Physic and
Philosophy, happened to be imparted to the barbarous Christians of the West, so
was there a ^eud propagated betwixt the Philosophers, and the Physicians* and
the controversies were the more intricate, because the Sciences had not been so
well translated out of Greek into Arabic, as was requisite; and they were
worse put into Latin. After the taking of Constantinople by the Turks, when
some learned men had fled thence into Italy, they began to impart unto the
world new books, to acquaint the West with the Greek tongue, and with the Greek
Works of Hippocrates, Aristotle, and Galen; and thereby multiplied many
Controversies in the practice of Physic, about Phlebotomy, and Purging, and
the like; especially about bleeding in a Plurisy, on which side it should be
done. The contention was fierce, and some proofs being fetched out of Anatomy,
some persons were excited to enquire into humane bodies dissection, thereby to
determine this controversy, and also the others betwixt Aristotle, Galen, and
others. Amongst these Vesalius was (I had almost said) the first and principal,
and by his indefatigable pains prevented much the industry of others. After him
Fallopius and Eusiachius were the most remarkable; though many others came in
with their little inventions to make up the cry, and failed not to supply the
inutility of their discoveries with excessive clamor. What Apologies were made
for Galen by Sylvius, and others, would be tedious to relate; Yet neither are
all the exceptions made by Vesalius against Galen allowable. Ga^^num aliquando
in verbis potius quam in ^ententiis carpit, aliquando mutilum (quod sacere
debuerat) minime excusat* ac saepe indignius, quam Anatomieum* Philosophum, ac
Medicum tam insignem ^eceret, carpit at accusat. Fallopius observat. ana^om. p
3.
they being so ridiculous, and repugnant to common sense, that nothing could
stop the growing glory of Vesalius and his followers. The issue of all was,
that as Hippocrates lost no credit by an ingenious confession of his mistake
about the Sutures in the head of Autonomus; small errors being not observable
in great Authors: So Galen still retained a great repute in the world, his
other Works having advanced him above the effects of petty calumnies, or
defaults. And the great Guinterus And^maeus, a competent Judge of old and new
discoveries in Physic and Anatomy, gives this censure upon those curious
Disquisitions: De vet. and nova med comment. 8. dial. 5. p. 261.
Multa in rerum natura extant, quorum notitia non quidem Medicum aptiorem*
facit, sed medicinae tantum profectum reddit, Sic nulli ob accuratam illam, ne
dicam curiosam nimis, partium corporis perscrutationem Medici excellentiores,
sed ob curationes dextre sentatas absolutasque censentur. Ideo etiam
Hippocrates, Galenus, Erasistratus, and plures id genus alii, tantum ex rerum
natura and corporis humani fabricatione scrutarivoluerunt, quantum ad medicinam
probe exercendam ex usu esse putarunt. Non eadem enim semper omnibus similem ob
causam conducunt. Sic Anatome aliter physicis inseruit, qui disciplinas ipsas
propter se amant; alterii, qui illam non adeo affectant, sed nihil temere a
natura factum esse demonstrant: aliter his qui argumenta (ut ille ait) ad
actionem quandam vel naturalem vel animalem cognoscendam, ex partium humani
corporis historia adferre nituntur: aliter medico qui manum aculeis, telonumque
cuspidibus probe exprimendis vel alicui parti apt excidendae vel sinubus and
fistulis and abscessibus incidendis adhibiturus est; quo Anatomes usu nihil
aeque est necessarium.

Certainly it had been an action of greater ingenuity in our Novelists to have
acknowledged the many excellent things that are in Galen, which are so
advantageous to Physic, then to endeavor to render a man multi ingenii
multaque nihilominus habiturum, contemptible by the representation of a few
defects in him, relating to things not much material to his profession. It must
always be said of Galen, that he was the man who by his dextrous wit, happy
practice, and great eloquence, as well as universal learning, did restore the
glory of the Hippocratical Physic, which was in a manner extinct in his days.
He again brought Anatomy into request, which had been slighted and dis-used so
long: he himself dissected bodies privately, and publicly in the Temple of
Peace; and amongst other Discoveries of his own, it is observable that he found
out the use of recurrent nerves, whose Vide Columbum Anat. l. 14 and Vesalium
de fabrica corp. hum. l. 4 c. ^.
influence upon the voice is such, that as they are pressed or cut into two, so
a Dog becomes perpetually mute, or only howls, never barks. Had that curiosity
been but the discovery of some Novelists, what a noise would they have made?
what boastings should we have had? But all that is good in Galen is passed by,
and to make way for the glory of our new Inventors, Vesalius, Fallopius,
Carcanus, Eustachius, Ingrassias, Columbus, Arantius, Varolius, are not so much
as mentioned by Mr. Glanvill; to the end that we may (if we will) believe that
it is the genius of this Age alone, which puts men upon discoveries, and that
before them there were none that had merited this remark.

I instance in the most remarkable of their discoveries Plus ultra, page 13.
Riolanus asserts the first invention of the Valves in the veins to Hippocrates.
Anthropogr. l 5. c. 49.
briefly: and those I take notice of are, The valves of the veins, discovered
by Fabricius ab Aqua pendente: The valve at the entrance of the Gut Colon,
found as is generally thought by Bauhinus. -- I cannot think these to be so
remarkable discoveries, but that he might have found out many more, since the
time of Vesalius, I shall name one woe gave a great light to the Circulation of
blood, and that is the discovery which Realdus Columbus made, that the blood
did pass through the Lungs out of the right ventricle into the left, and so
into the Aorta, and all the body. As for the valves in the veins, I believe
there are few that think that Fabricius ab Aquapendente, was the first
discoverer of them: for they were showed to Fabricius by father Paul, that
famous Venetian Monk, as appears in his life written by Fulgentio, and extant
in English. Neither indeed was Father Paul the first Inventour of them, for
they are described before by Jacobus Sylvius, Professor of Physic at Paris, as
Riolanus, and Riolanus Anthropogr. l. 5. c. 49. Marquard. Slegel. de circul.
sangu. l. ^. p. 7. Bartholin. in libello de venis c. ^. Varolius Anat. l. 3. c.
3. Riolan. Anthropogr. l. 2. c. 14. Bartholin, Anat. ^es. l. ^. c. 11. Plus
ultra, page 14.
Slegelius, and Bartholinns do inform the world. And as to the valve in the
beginning of the Colon-gut (if there be such a one, and that it be not rather a
protuberant circle, arising from the joining of the Ileon and Colon, as Pavius,
Falcoburgius, and Riolanus hold) whatsoever it be, it was discovered by
Varolius, and called the Operculum Ilei, before that ever Bauhinus was born, as
Riolanus does demonstrate: there are two others that may as justly pretend to
it, to better merit the credit then Bauhinus, and those are Solomon Albertus,
whom Bartholin inclines unto: and Joannes Posthius of Montpelier, whom Riolanus
also favors.

The Sinus of the veins, and their use found out by Dr. Willis -- I wonder Mr.
Glanvill should not acquaint us with those particular Sinus which Dr. Willis
should find out; for since in common discourse, when we speak undeterminately
of the Sinus, we understand those of the brain, it did become him to tell us
which others he meant: lest a man that knew his skill, should apprehend him so
ignorant as to think that Dr. Willis had newly found out those Sinus, one
whereof has for above two thousand years born the name of Herophilus, and was
called Torcular Herophili, in Greek (...). But I shall Dr. Willis de cerebro c
^. p. 82, 83.
be so favorable as to think that these are not the Sinus he meant, Dr. Willis
having tried nothing more in prosecution of them, then to pursue the
Circulation of the blood there by the injecting of Inkish liquor, whereas
Wepferus used a tincture Jo. Jac. Wepferus Apoplex. p 116. Bartholin. Anat. l.
3. c. 7.
of Saffron; and Bartholin evidenced the same thing by a pair of bellows, or
tube and wind insufflated. I do believe that He, or they that suggested this
to him, did mean the Sinus or venae vertebrales, which are described exactly in
the Doctors Book, in the thirteenth Table. But I must tell him, that whatsoever
there is in that Piece, which is Anatomical, the glory thereof belongs to Dr.
Lower, whose indefatigable industry produced that elaborate Treatise; and any
man that knows the great practice of that other Doctor, will grant, that
although he could not want abilities, yet he wanted leisure to attend to such
painful and tedeous inquiries. Dr. Willis indeed heartily does relinquish this
honor to Dr. Lower, and his pains deserved your commendation (Mr. Glanvill) if
that be of any value, so much more then those other inventions that are
celebrated by the Virtuosi, by how much the subject was more minute and subtle
which he was to trace. All that Dr. Willis contributed, that I hear, was the
discourses and conjectures upon the Anatomical deductions of Dr. Lower, which
as ingenuous as they are, I am sure neither are, nor ever will pass all for
inventions. But in the case I now mention, I am confident that Dr. Lower is so
ingenuous, asto acknowledge that what He exhibits there, is taken out of the
Cuts of Varolius, as far as where they empty themselves into the subclavian
veins: but I think that as to the Synus, or veins, and arteries all along the
Spine, as there is not any Cut of them extant before that I hear of, so I allow
them to pass as his invention: but the accurateness of his Neurology equals to
the best Inventors.

But if Mr. Glanvill injured Dr. Lower in attributing what he invented unto Dr.
Willis, he will (...)l his own discoveries, you shall see what a Divine can d^
in Physic. 'St. St"! I add the origination of the Nerves, which were of old
supposed to arise out of the substance of the brain, but are found by late
Anatomists to proceed from the medulla oblongata. This is such an Addition as
becomes our Novellists, most that they pretend unto being no more then* Mr.
Glanvill here boasts of; and which is so pitiful an accessional in Anatomy,
that none ever bragged of it, or upbraided the Ancients about it, that I
remember, except Bartholin may be said to do it. As to the late Anatomists,
unto whom he ascribes this invention, I would he had told their names. The
difference betwixt the cerebrum, cerebellum, and medulla oblongata, is a modern
(but not very late) distinction. Some have made the medulla oblongata and the
spinal marrow to be but productions of the brain and cerebellum, from whence it
raises it self by four foundations or roots: the discrepancy betwixt that and
the other parts whence it is originated, not being such as to justify any
great contest about it: since it is the usual course of Nature in its progress
from the union of two different bodies, to produce an intermediate substance,
participating of the nature of both. Spinalis medulla ortus principium rectius
cerebro atque cerebello Vol. Coiter. observe. anatom miscel. Ex substantia
cerebri and cerebelli quatuor radicibus oritur primum troncus insignis, Medulla
spinalis appellatus, ex quo multi emergunt surculi, nomine nervorum insig^iti.
Varolius Anatom* l 1. c. 13. ^ 12.
acceptum fertur, unde non immerito caudex, sive processus, sive soboles
cerebri appellatur: nam vix in ullo, nisi in duritie (est enim cerebro
aliquanto solidior and firmior) videtur a cerebro differ. Some have made the
brain and cerebellum to be productions of the spinal marrow, which enlarges it
self within the skull, and generateth those two Apophyses called the cerebrum
and cerebellum. In fine, it does not appear that the Ancients mistook much the
place of the origination of nerves, if you reckon amongst them Vesalius and
Fallopius: but they said they rose all from the brain, understanding by that
word all that which is included within the skull, and termed that to be the
spinal marrow, which was without the skull, and whence those other paria
nervorum seem to rise, which Anatomists describe. And this subtilty of Mr.
Glanvill is so little regarded by late Anatomists, that Moebius (a man of as
great note as most are) slights it Moebius fundament med. c. de usu nervor. p
606. Caspar Hofman. ins^^t. med. l 2. c. 65. sect. 1.
by the example of Hofman, whose sense I shall here report: Monendi sunt
adolescentiores, ne forte morentur illos qui neglecta veteri distinctione
dicunt, Omnes nervi sunt a medulla, sed alii ex illa, antequam cranio excidat,
alii ex eadem, cum jam in spinam delapsa est, and Spinalis dicitur. Quid enim
hoc aliud est, quam frustranea nominum So Dr. Charlton in his Discourse to the
Royal Society concerning the Brain, takes the liberty to understand by the
Cerebrum as well as others, totum illud corp^^ quod Calvariae concavo
continetur ( page 67. de Propr. cerebri humani) though afterward, when he
comes to speak more accurately, he treats of the Medulla oblongata thus:
Cerebro proxime subjicitur alma nervorum ad sensus spectantium matter, and funis
argentei (sicut Sapiens in Ecclesiaste eleganti sed obscu^a Allegoria vocat
Medull^m spinalem) principium Medulla scilicet intra cranium oblongata. Behold
the addition of Mr. Glanvill!
novatio? Cum dico me de nervis ex cerebro ortis acturum, intelligo totum id
quod cranio continetur. There is another Origination of the nerves, which is as
ancient as Aristotle, and which Hofman and Vander Linden assert, whereby they
are deduced immediately and formally from the brain, but immediately and
materially from the heart; for so much as they hold each nerve to be an Artery
vested with the membranes of the brain, and so issuing to several parts. This
opinion is very agreeable to the observations that occur in the practice of
Physic, and their arguments seem to me so plausible, that I am so averse with
Mr. Glanvill to proclaim a new origination of the nerves, that I much doubt
whether the followers of Galen were not deceived, and the Peripateticks in the
right. See Vander Linden Disp. 38. de vasis and nervis, and Hofman de partib.
similar. in these. de orig. nerv. sec. Aristot.

It is clear now that Mr. Glanvil^s new addition amounts only to this, that
the Ancients did some of them hold that the nerves had their original from the
brain; others deduced Vide Varolium l. 1. c. 3.
them from the heart. Some (perhaps before Varolius) did subdivide the brain
into several parts, If Varolius found it out, as I believe be did, by a
peculiar way of dissecting the head, what is it that Mr. Glanvill then ^DDS? I
am sure that Fracassatus says, Varolius primus principium spinalis medullae
vel intra cranium sobolescere in nervos, quorum origo olim a cerebro petebatur,
docuit.
and said that the nerves had their origination from the medulla oblongata, and
not from the cerebrum and cerebellum. This nicety Dr. Willis makes some use of,
but since he explicates nothing of the brain with a mechanical accurateness; I
shall only subjoyn, that whosoever shall view or eat that which they call
Medulla oblongata and spinalis, and compare it with the marrow that is in the
bones otherwise, he will think it a less impropriety of speech, to say the
Medulla oblongata is a part of the brain, then to term it a Medullary substance.

And though the Succus Nutritious be not yet fully agreed upon by Physicians,
yet it has so much to say for it self, that it may not unreasonably be
mentioned amongst the new Inventions -- It Is strange Mr. Glanvill should
entitle this opinion about the Succus Nutritious to so great a degree of
probability, as he does. Physicians are so far from being fully agreed upon it,
that, excepting Dr. Glisson, Dr. Charleton, and perhaps one or two more, the
rest do generally reject it. Highmore de affect. hypochondr. c. 4. Willis in
Anatome cerebri c 20. Bartholin spicileg. 1. c. 3.
Dr. Highmore, Dr. Willis, and Bartholine have written against: it; and so has
Deusingius writ a particular discourse against: it. Nor do I doubt, but
whosoever peruseth those Authors which I refer unto, will be so far from
imagining it reasonable to ascribe the Succus Nutritious to the number of modern
Inventions, that he will term it at best but an ingenious Paradox, which when
the first surprise is over, vanishes with the appearance of being ridiculous.
How much does our Virtnoso, and Bartholine differ? Prodeat Herophilus, ex
Bartholin. spicileg. 1. de vasis lymphat p. 23.
autro educatur Democritus, advocentur prosectores cujuscunque sortis and
aetatis, si in dissectis corporum nervis ullum invenerint liquorem nutritioni
opportunum, nolim inter eos locum mereri.

But of all Modern Discoveries, Wit and Industry have Plus ultra, page 15.
made in the Economy of humane nature, the noblest is that of the Circulation
of the blood, which was the invention of our deservedly famous Harvey. It Is
true, the envy of malicious Contemporaries would have robbed him of the Glory
of this Discovery, and pretend it was known to Hippocrates, Plato, Aristotle,
and others among the Ancients; but whoever considers the expressious of those
Authors, which are said to respect the Circulation, who find that those who
form the inference, do it by a faculty that makes all kind of Compositions and
Deductions, and the same that assists the Enthusiasts of our days, to see so
clearly all our alterations of State and Religion, to the minutest particulars
in the Revelation of Saint John. And I think it may be as well concluded from
the first chapter of Genesis, as from the remains of those Ancients, who if
they had known this great and general Theory, how chance they speak no more of
a thing, which no doubt they had frequent occasions to mention? How came it to
be lost without Memory amongst their followers, who were such superstitious
Porers upon their Writings? How chance it was not shown to be lodged in those
Authors before the days of Dr. Harvey, when Envy head impregnated and determined
the Imaginations of those who were not willing any thing should be found anew,
of which themselves were not the Inventours? But it is not only the remotest
Ancients, whom time has consecrated, and distance made venerable, whose Ashes
those fond men would honor with this discovery; but even much later Authors
have had the glory fastened upon them. For the Invention is by some ascribed to
Paulus Venetus; by others to Prosper Alpinus; and a third sort give it to
Andraeas Gaesalpinus. For these, though either of them should be acknowledged
to be the Author, it will make as much for the design of my discourse, as if
Harvey had the credit: and therefore here I am no otherwise concerned, but to
have justice for that excellent man: and the World has now done right to his
Memory, Death having overcome that Envy which Dogs living virtue to the Grave;
and his Name rests quietly in the Arms of Glory, while the Pretensions of his
Rivals are creeping into darkness and oblivion.

Whether those that have gone about to deprive Dr. Harvey have been incited by
Envy and Malice, it is hard for any considerate man to judge; since those which
first proposed the doubt about the Author, were great friends to the Theoreme;
such as Walaus, who first mentioned it; Riolanus, Nardius, Fracassarus, and
Joannes Antonides Vander Linden: All of them pay a great respect to Dr.
Harvey's Performances; All of them concur with him generally in his Assertions,
saving that Riolanus made some variation therein, and perhaps his passion might
blind his candor; though I do not think so, because I find him zealously
vindicating of Dr. Harvey from those imputations by which Walaeus endeavored
to transfer the credit of the invention upon Father Paul.

Another thing I must take notice of is, that Mr. Glanvill speaks very
peremptorily about a thing he has not enquired into, for it is evident that he
never read the passages out of the Ancients, which are cited by Walaeus and
Riolanus, to to show they were not altogether ignorant of that motion of the
blood which is called Circulation. He thinks it may be as well concluded from
the first chapter of Genesis, as from the remains of the Ancients. And why so?
Is there any thing mentioned in the first chapter of Genesis, that sounds like
the Circulation of the blood, or any words that can be applied unto this late
discovery? not one. But any man that understands Greek, must confess that the
words (...), and (...). in Hippocrates (whatever he meant by them) do most
emphatically signify the Circulation of the blood, as it is now proposed. If I
merit not to be believed herein, take the judgment of Julius Caesar, Scaliger
upon Aristotle de insoma. xiij. 1444. (...). I shall not from this place deduce
the mystery of the Circulation of the blood, by saying that rivers circulate
under ground thorough that sandy earth, which those that dig in Wells, when
they come unto, they can descend no further: (which Helmont in the Brabant
Dialect calls Quellem, other Dutchmen name Well-ground and Well-sand, and
after return unto the Sea again by open Channels: But whatever the intent of
the Philosopher was, that (...), properly imports such a thing, and that we
have the name given it by Aristotle, this Scaliger confesses, Ejus ad
apotelesma xxxi. haec sunt verba.. (...) motum; ut infebribus accessionem.
Circuitum Calvus cum dicit, fideliter, non pleno explicat. Neque enim.
circumducitur sanguis, ut (...) impleat significationem Nam in febribus idcirco
dicitur (...), quia revertitur paroxysmus: quasi circumductus ob diem parum and
vacuum a morbo. From which it is evident, that if Scaliger had known that the
blood had circulated, he would have granted it to have been properly expressed
here in the Text: which is more then He would say of any Apocalyptical
discoveries, or deductions of that opinion out of the first Chapter of Genesis.
And if the word (...) be so significant, it is hard to deny that Hippocrates
did not set down the thing it self in this passage, (...), Hippocrates de oss.
not. t. 17.
(...). Venae per corpus fusae spiritum, and fluxum, and motum praestant. Ab
una multae propagantur: sed illa una unde incipiat, aut ubi desinat, non scio.
Circulo enim ducto, principium non invenitur. And in that other; (...)- E^ lib.
de alim. t. 4. 1^.
(...). In pilos alimentum [id est, sanguis nutriens] and in ungues, atque
extremam superficiem intus advenit: faeris alimentum ab extrema superficie
intime revertitur. Corrivatio una, conspiratio una, consentientia omnia. Certe
quod ad communem naturam omnia: in quavis part parts ad opus. Principium
magnum [id est Cor, per transmissos spiritus and sanguinem] ad extremam partem
pervenit: ab extrema part ad principium magnum revertitur. There are more
passages in the same Author which seem to import the same thing, though his
usual brevity and obscurity is such, that had not Harvey and others dilucidated
the point, we had never, I believe, fixed this explication upon him, which
amounts to no more then a new gloss upon an old Text: which yet is sufficient
to check the largeness of Mr. Glanvills assertion. The (...) of Plato, and his
making the Heart to be the original of the veins, (...); Plato in Timaeo.
these are something more then is to be found in the first of Genesis. And that
passage of Aristotle de Genesis Anim. l. 4. c. ult. is so unlike any thing of
Moses's, and so like to the doctrine of Harvey, that any man must blame Mr.
Glanvill, for rashness of what he says. The words are thus set down by
Riolanus, and I have not the Original by me to consult: Cum coelestia corpora
circulariter moveantur, inseriora' corpora motum illum imitari debent, cumque
Oceanus fluxu and refluxu moveatur ab influxu Lunari, similiter humores talem
motum habere necessum est. Which words seem clear enough, so as to justific the
Epiphonema of my Author, in opposition to our Virtuoso. Quid ista significant
nisi sanguinis Circulationem. He that would be informed more fully about the
judgment of the Ancients, whether there be any thing in them that discovers
the Circulation of the blood, to have been known unto them; or that they were
not totally-ignorant, and without any apprehensions of it: let him read the
first letter of Walaeus, and the several Pieces of Joannes Riolanus about the
Circulation of the blood, and the disputations of Vander Linden about the
Circulation of the blood, in which he vindicates it in a prolixe discourse unto
Hippocrates. I will not trouble my self to transcribe them: It is evident that
all men do give unto Harvey the credit of having so explicated it, and
Anatomically proved it, that he may as well be termed the Author of it, as
Epicurus and others the Authors of that Philosophy which they derived from
Pythogoras, Democritus, Leucippus, and Ocellus Lucanus. Nor has Harvey any
other Plea and Right to the Invention, then that he did more fully and
perspicuously declare it, and in the most judicious and solid manner assert
what others had but hinted at, or fainily insisted on.

Nor is Mr. Glanvill any better acquainted with the notions of the Modern
Writers, then he is with those of the Ancients. He says, that some have
ascribed the Circulation of the blood to Paulus Venetus. I must inform the
Reader (who may easily mistake, if he be one of the ordinary Comical Wirs) that
it is not to be ascribed to Paulus Venetus, the great Traveller, who is
generally understood, when that name is mentioned; none can say that he brought
it from the Kingdom of Cathay. But Pater Paulus Sarpa (or Serpa) or Father
Paul, the famous Venetian Monk, of the order of the Servi; who signatised
himself during the time that Venice was interdicted. He was a Student at Padoa
at the same time that Harvey was there, and discovered to Aqua pendens the
valves in the veins, which discovery that great Anatomist appropriated to
himself; and so Harvey was thought to have abused the same Father. But since
Fulgentio in the life of Vide Slegel. de motu Sanguin c. 2. and Riolan. in not.
ad ep. Walaei.
Padre Paolo does not challenge Harvey for this Cheat, as he does Fabricius for
that other; and since Marquardus Slegelius could not hear of any such thing
upon a strict Enquiry at Venice and Padua, I know not any since Walaeus and
Franciscus Ulmus, that have ascribed the invention to Paulus Venetus Servita.

Neither did I ever read of any man that attributed it to Prosper Alpinus: nor
is it credible that any ever did so. For that great Physician established his
glory by being an excellent Practitioner, and not by any Anatomical
curiosities, which he rather contemned, then pursued: and till I know what
Author Mr. Glanvill follows, I believe the mentioning of him was occasioned by
that way of discoutse which is common to the Wits of this Age, to blunder out
any thing: and by laughing at improbabilities (of their own suggestion) to
explode substantial truths, or represent them as forgeries. But if any did
deceive the world in attributing the Circulation of the blood to Padre Paolo
and Prosper Alpinus, it does not follow but that Andreas Caesalpinus was the
first Inventor of it, and proposed it to the world in his Medical and
Peripatetical Questions, thought not in any Set Discourse, but as it casually
falls into the discussion of other Problems: Whereupon it was little regarded,
and not enquired after; the book being also scarce, and he being of that
faction of Physicians which adheres to Aristotle against Galen, whence it
happened that few read his Paradoxes, and one of the bravest men of the latter
Age has been almost buried in oblivion. However, an ingenious Florentine,
called Joannes Nardius, has asserted the repute of Andraeas Caesalpinus, for
precedence to Harvey in the Discovery; nor does the same Author doubt, but that
Erasistratus was of the same opinion: but he says of Caesalpinus this: Foelix
cui contigit post mortem nancisci clarissimum Patronum Guglielmum Harveium
Regium Medicum, nobisque per charum, qui abortivam illam opinionem excoluit
adeo, ut nihil cultius nostro seculo, nilque mirabilius occurrerit curiosis and
amaenarum literarum amatoribus. To decide this question* and to put an end to
those disputes which trouble some of our Virtuosi so much, by reason of that
little converse they have with Books, I shall draw out the opinion of
Caesalpinus, as he expresses himself in his Disputations.

As a great abettour of Aristotle, he avows that the Heart is Andraeas
Caesalpinus Qu. peripatet. ^. 5. qu. 3.
the principal part in man, and the original of the veins, arteries, and
nerves; which is the opinion of Hofman, Van der Linden, and other Aristotelian
Physicians.

He describes the Fabric of the Heart as exactly as any of the Circulators in
reference to the Valves, so much talked Ib. qu. 4.
of; but he declares not their shape: Vasorum in Cor desinentium quaedam
intromittunt contentam in ipsis substantiam, ut vena Cava in d^^tro ventriculo,
and arteria venalis in sinistro: quadam educu^ ut arteria aorta in sinistro
ventriculo, and vena arterialis pulmonem nutriens iu dextro: omnibus autem
membranule sunt appositae and officio delegatae, ut oscula intromittentia non
educant, and educentia non intromittant.

And for the account of the Vena arteriosa, and Arteria venosa in the Lungs,
Harvey is not more perspicuous, then he is afterward, where he makes the one
to be an Artery, the other a vein, viz. Putaverunt autem Medici usum hunc non
videntes commutatae fuisse vasa in pulmone, ut Arteria quidem similis esset
venae, vena autem similis Arteriae: appellantes venas vasa omnia quae in
dextrum ventriculum desinunt, Arterias autem, quae in sinistrum: figmenta multa
and absurditates excogitantes ut usum invenirent. Pulsat igitur in pulmone vas
dextri ventriculi, haec enim e cord recipit, ut Arteria magna, and similiter
fabricatum est ejus corpus. Vas autem sinistri ventriculi non pulsat, quia
introducit tantum, and ejus corpus simile est reliquis venis.

He holds that the motion of the Heart and Arteries depends not upon any
pelsifick Faculty, but that it arises from the (...), ebullition, or
effervescency of the blood in the Ventricles; and that the Heart and Arteries
are dilated at the same time, the blood dilating the Heart, and issuing out
thorough the valves of the Aorta and Pulmonique Artery at the same instant,
which is pure Cartesianism.

He holds that the Blood comes up from the veins to the Heart, and there
acquires the last Perfection, and becomes vital and spirituous: in the mention
of the Arterious Blood, he uses indifferently the terms of Blood, spirit, and
natural heat, which I desire may be observed, lest the proofs seem not full
enough, and he be construed to speak of nothing but spirits and natural heat in
the Arteries. He says, that this Blood having acquired its Perfection in its
passage through both the ventricles, is distributed through all the parts of
the body, for its nutriment by the Arteries, in which Arteries there is such a
constant quantity of Blood, that the effervency of that in the Heart impells
the whole continuation of the Arteries, so that they beat all at once. Cum enim
pulsatio Cordis and Arteriarum sit accidens quoddam quod ex necessitate
insequitur humoris in cord effervescentiam, qua sanguinis generatio per
ficitur, ut in caeteris quae igne elixantur, accidit. lib. de vita and mort. c.
^. intumescente cord necesse est simul omnes Arterias dilatari, in quas
derivatur fervor: non enim repleri potest una pars, quin totum fiat majus: ubi
non omni ex part vasa quae continua sunt fuerint exinanita. Nam nullo intus
existente corpore, non contingit simul repleri principium and extrema, cum
motus non fiat in instanti: existente autem per totos canales aliquo spiritu,
simul ac in principio alius fuerit genitus, necesse est totum simul dilatari,
unum enim sit spiritus accedens cum toto. Cum ergo totum reddatur majus simul
ac accesserit pars, non potest una pars dilatari, quin eodem tempore dilatetur
totum. Est autem veluti totum quoddam Arteriae omnes cum cord; Mark this,
where he makes the Heart and Arteries to be one continued recepracle of perfect
blood: by which you must explain what he says in some p^aces, as it only
spirits or natural heat went into the Arteries, or returned by the veins.
Continuum enim est vas sanguinis perfecti. Spiritu autem efflante inhabitum
corporis, and distributo particulis sanguine, necesse est tumorem vasorum
desidere, quae est pulsus contractio. Continue autem hoc fit, quia continua est
partium nutritio, and continua sanguinis generatio in cord. Elevatio igitur
Spiritus a calore fit, non tamen temere, sed alicujus gratia. Nam sine
hujusmodi amplificatione non fieret distributio alimenti in omnes parts.

He plants a kind of Flammula cordis, or fire in the heart, which causes the
ebullition, and imprints a spirituousness in the blood that issues out into
the Arteries. Hujusmodi loc^s Cor est in quo secundum Naturam elementum
praeparatum ardere possit, and fieri spiritus: venae alimentum suppeditant,
Arteriae flammae spiritum recipient.

He says, that the Blood moves toward the Heart, as the Oil to the flame of
the burning Lamp, and that the Valves as the orifice of the Vena Gava which
immit the blood, are placed there to moderate the source of the blood, lest it
should fall in too fast, and extinguish the vital fire: and that the valves at
the entrance of the Aorta do fly open upon the effervescency of the blood, by
the pressure of it every way, to get more room: it finding no outlet but by
those yielding valves, which were so placed, lest upon any accident, or viclent
passion, the arterious blood should regurgitate into the Heart, Motus fit ex
venis in Cor caliditate alimentum trabente, ex cord autem in arterias, quia
hac solum patet iter propter membranarum positionem, positae autem sunt hoc
modo membranae, ne unquam contingeret contrarium motum fieri, quod accidere
posset in vehementibus animi perturbationibus, aut aliis causis, a quibus
sanguinis retractio fit ad Cor: Obsistunt enim huic motui membranae. Nam si hoc
modo condite non essent, ignis cordis vel levi causa extingueretur. Si enim
metus fieret contrarius simile esset, ac si flamma compingeretur deorsum ad
alimentum, quod cum minime sit praeparatum, aut cepiosius quam oportet, ignem
suffocat. Oportet enim alimentum praeparari, and paulatim dispensari ad locum
flammae.

He says that this arterious blood, or spirit, is distributed into all parts
of the body, with great celerity, and that it is that which nourishes the
parts: and that upon its diffusion into the habit of the body, the spirits are
very much exhausted, and the corpulent part of the aliment does remain, being
coagulated partly by heat, and partly by cold.

He says, that the variety of the pulse, as to strength or debility, celerity
and slowness, depends upon the nature of the vital fire, the nature of the
aliment with which it is fed, and sometimes upon the particular Fabric, or
conformation of the Heart, in which that Fire is seated.

He places Anastomoses betwixt the veins and arteries every where in the body.
Osculorum communio est non solum in cord, sed etiam per totum venerum and
arteriarum ductum,

He says that the blood is never extravasated, but where it is aggregated to
any part by way of nourishment, or else it putrifies: he does not understand
how it should not coagulate if once extravasated; nor can he comprehend how it
should be reassumed into the veins in such a case. Venam continuam esse
oportet, usque ad cordis ventriculos, ut inde omnis virtus descendat: nec
ullibi contingit disjunctam esse; sanguis enim calore cordis destitutus
concrescit, and tandem putrescit.

He makes the Blood to pass betwixt the right and left ventricle of the Heart;
partly by the Lungs, and partly by the Septum Cordis. Pulchre igitur condita
sunt omnia. Cum enim fervere oporteret in cord sanguinem, ut fieret alimenti
perfectio: primo quidem in dextro ventriculo, in quo crassior adhuc continetur
sanguis, deinde autem in sinistro, ubi sincerior sanguis est: partim per medium
septum, partim per medios pulmones refrigerationis gratia ex dextro in
sinistrum mittitur. Interim autem pulmo abunde nutriri potest: totum enim eum
sanguinem absumere, quem recipit, egreditur fines rationis. Non enim rara esset
ejus substantia and levis, ut videtur si tantum alimenti, vim in suam naturam
converteret. This he thus further explains. Pulmo per venam arteriis similem ex
dextro cordis ventriculo fervidum hauriens sanguinem, eumque per anastomosin
arteriae venali reddens quae in sinistrum cordis ventriculum tendit, transmisso
interim aere frigido per asperae arteriae canales, qui juxta arteriam venalem
protenduntur, non tamen osculis communicantes, ut putavit Galenus solo tactu
temperat. Huic Sanguinis Circulationi ex dextro cordis ventriculo, per pulmones
in sinistrum ejusdem ventriculum optime respondent ea quae ex dissectione
apparent. Nam duo sunt vasa in dextrum ventriculum desinentia, duo etiam in
sinistrum. Duorum autem unum intromittit tantum, alterum educit, membranis eo
ingenio constructis. Vas igitur intromittens, vena est magna quidem in dextro,
quae cava appellatur: parva autem in sinistro, ex pulmone introducens, cujus
unica est tunica, ut caeterarum venarum. Vas autem educens Arteria, est magna
quidem in sinistro, quae Aorta appellatur, parva autem in dextro ad pulmones
derivans, cujus similiter duae sunt tunicae, ut in caeteris arteriis.

He holds that the spirituous or arterious blood is cast ou^, and diffused
vigorously into the habit of the body, that the veins and arteries being
continuous by Anastomosis, it returns to the Heart again, vigorating the blood
of the vena peria and Cava as it returns: which is sufficiently intimated in
that he deduces all the vigor and vitality of the blood from the Heart, and
that this vigor or natural hear is carried over the body by the Arteries
alone, and that it is necessary that the whole venous Systeme, or contexture of
Arteries and veins be continuous, lest the blood in the veins, being destitute
of the cordial heat, should coagulate and putrify. He holds that this motion,
or Circulation of the blood is without intermission: and that the swelling* of
the veins upon the Ligature is a sufficient proof of it. But he holds, that the
recourse of the blood by the veins is greater in the sleep, then when we awake;
which he proves thus, in that the veins are more full and tumid during sleep,
then waking: and the pulse weaker, and more slow; as any man may observe. From
whence he concludes, that the natural heat (which is the Arterious blood, as I
observed before, to prevent all possible mistakes) which was otherwise in great
part expended upon the nerves and sensories, does in sleep return: and fill the
veins more visibly (that exhaustion ceasing) then when we are not asleep.

His opinion will be best set down in his own words; and I think it necessary
to do it, because Nardius has done it so imperfectly, that one would attribute
as little to his allegations, as to those which are cited out of the Ancients;
and if I had not read Caesalpinus long before, I should have thought the
Florentine to have entitled Caesalpinus to the opinion out of envy to Harvey,
or out of a partial desire to advance the glory of the Tuscan Academy at Pisa,
when Caesalpinus was Professor. Thus that learned man writ about the year
1590. or a little after.

Andraeas Caesalpinus Quest* Medic. l. 2. Qu. 17. edit. venetae secunda in 4to.
A. D. 1593. fol. 234. col. 1. Sed illud speculatione dignum videtur, Propter
quod intumescunt venae ultra locum apprehensum, non citra: quod experimento
sciunt qui vena secant: vinculum enim adhibent citra locum sectionis, non
ultra: quia tument venae ultra vinculum, non citra. Debuisset autem opposito
modo contingere, si motus sanguinis and spiritus a visceribus fit in totum
corpus: intercepto enim meatu, non ultra datur progressus: tumor igitur venarum
citra vinculum debuisset fieri. An folvitur dubitatio ex eo quod scribit
Aristoteles, de Some c. 3. ubi inquit, Necesse enim quod evaporatur aliquousque
impelli: deinde converti and permutari, sicut Euripum: calidum enim cujusque
animalium ad superiora natum est ferri: cum autem in superioribus locis fuerit,
multum simul iterum revertitur, ferturque deorsum. Haec Aristoteles. Pro cujus
loci explicatione illud sciendum est: Cordis meatus ita a natura paratos esse,
ut ex vena Cava intromissio fiat in Cordis ventriculum dextrum, unde patet
exitus in pulmonem: ex pulmone praeterea alium ingressum esse in Cordis
ventriculum sinistrum, ex quotandem patet exitus in Arteriam Aortam, membranis
quibusdam ad ostia vasorum appositis, ut impediant retrocessum: Sic enim
perpetuus quidam motus est ex vena cava per Cor and pulmones in Arteriam
Aortam: ut in Quaestionibus Peripateticis explicavimus. Cum autem in vigilia
motus caloris nativi fiat extra, scilicet ad sensoria: in Somno autem intra,
scilicet ad Cor: putandum est in vigilia multum spiritus and sanguinis ferri ad
arterias, inde enim in nervos iter est. In somno autem eundem calorem per venas
reverti ad Cor, non per Arteriam. Judicio sunt pulsus, qui expergicentibus
fiunt magni, vehementes, celeres, and crebri, cum quadam vibratione: in somno
autem parvi, languidi, tardi and rari notante Galeno. 3. de cause. pull. 9, 10.
Number in Somno calor nativus minus vergit in arterias: in casdem erumpit
vehementius cum expergiscuntur. Venae autem contrario se modo habent: nam in
somno fiunt tumidiores, in vigilia exiliores, ut patet intuenti eas quae in
manu sunt. Transit enim in somno calor nativus ex arteriis in venas per
osculorum communionem, quam Anastomosin vocant, and inde ad Cor. Ut autem
sanguinis exundatio ad superiora, and retrocessus ad inferiora ad instar Euripi
manifesta est in somno and vigilia, sic non obscurus est hujusmodi motus in
quacunque part corporis vinculum adhibeatur, aut alia ratione occludantur
venae. Cum enim tollitur permeatio, intumescunt rivuli qua part fluere solent.

From hence it is clear that He held that the blood did circulate continually,
falling into the Heart by the vena Cava, and issuing out by the Aorta into all
parts of the body: that this motion of the blood was perceivable by the
Ligatures at any time, but most manifest in the intumescence of the veins in
sleep: at what time also the blood or natural heat (which is all one to him)
did pass by way of Anastomosis out of the arteries into the veins, as well as
at other times. So that we are not to imagine any interrupted circulation in
him, but that it did constantly flow night and day, sleeping and waking, though
with unequal celerity. In letting of blood he tells us, that the blood which
first issues out is venous, and blacker then that which follows, and comes more
immediately Qu. Med. l. 2. qu 5 fol. 212. col. 1. lit. ^.
out of the Arteries. -- Venas cum Arteriis adeo copulari osculis, ut vena
secta primum exeat sanguis venalis nigrior; deinde succedat arterialis flavior,
quod plerumque contingit. And Qu. Med. l. 2. qu. 15. fol* 230. col. 1. l. c.
he explains the motion of the blood, and natural heat thus, to prevent all
ambiguity. At instabit quis in somno nequaquam prohiberi calorem in cerebro and
sensoriis: pulsant enim arteriae in toto corpore etiam in somno. At praesente
calore innato debuisset duci in actum facultas animalis. An calor innatus in
somno viget in venis and arteriis, non in nervis sine quibus, non sit sensus
and motus? Extra igitur ferri est nervos petere, intra autem non solum ad
viscera, sed in omnes venas and arterias; unde operationes naturales magis
perficiuntur in toto corpore.

I hope I have now determined the Question which has occasioned so many heats
in the world concerning the Circulation of the blood, who was the first
Inventor of it? I have demonstrated that Andraeas Caesalpinus, a rigid
Peripatetick upon sensible Experiments and Mechanical considerations, not
notional apprehensions, did not only discover this motion of the blood (even
through the Lungs) but gave it the name of CIRCULATIO SANGUINIS; which name is
not so proper in it self, considering the Fabric of the veins and arteries,
and the Labyrinth in which the blood moves universally, describing a Line no
way circular, as that a man would have pitched upon it in any other Age then
when Caesalpinus lived, when the knowledge of the Learned Languages was less
general then now, and such a barbarous style in fashion, as our Inventour used.
But it was not so in the days of Dr. Harvey, who published his Treatise in 4to.
at Francfourt in the year (as I take it) 1628. I must confess I am apt to think
upon* this consideration, that Dr. Harvey (who was a Peripatetique Physician,
and in whose time at Padoa, those Physicians did flourish with the greatest
repute of Learning and skill in Anatomy, as well as Philosophy) did take up
this opinion from my Author. And although there wanted not occasion by reason
of what Walaeus, Riolanus, Slegelius, and others had said upon the point, for
him to declare the original of the discovery, yet in his two Answers to
Riolanus, and his Book of Generation, He no where asserts the Invention so to
himself, as to deny that he had the intimation or notion from Caesalpinus; but
leaves the Controversy in the dark: which silence of his I take for a tacit
Confession. His Ambition of Glory made him willing to be thought the Author of
a Paradox he had so illustrated, and brought upon the Stage, when it lay
unregarded, and in all probability buried in oblivion. Yet such was his
Modesty, as not to vindicate it to himself by telling a Lie. And such his
Prudence, as rather to avoid the debate, then resolve it to his prejudice. Had
Dr. Harvey been a Chemist, I should have guessed that he might have fixed upon
the word Circulation, upon other reasons, and those congruous enough to his
Hypotheses: but since (especially in the days when he writ) those Studies were
Narravit mih. Nobiliss. and Ampliss. Nicolaus Oudart, illustrissimi Principis
Auria^i Consi^iarius, meminisse se audire ipsum Harveium profitentem se revera
primam circuitus sanguinis n^titiam, and in eum sectione viventium inquirendi
occasionem ex Herioto* accepisse. Fuit* is serenissimi quondam Regis Jacobi
gemm^rius, and Matheseos peri^^s, eoque nomine Londini celebris. -- Si verum
hoc, verisi milius quoque est, vel ipsum, vel Sarpium, vel Heriotum, a
Caes^lpino accepisse. Nemo enim mihi persuaserit, ab little nemine visum suisse
scriptum [ venetiis impressum] quod vel titulo se, nedum eruditionis varietate
atque sublimitate commendet. Jo. Arter* Vander Linden disput, de circuit. sangu
exercit. 9. sect. 196. and exercit. 16. sect* 582.
unknown to him, and not valued by him, I am inclined to think that He did
receive his first Iutelligence from this Professor at Pisa (where Harvey also
was) and so improved those hints, that in the divulging of his Opinion, they
are as little to be seen, as the first indeclines which Painters draw in
Pictures that are lost, when the Pourtraict is finished: or as in the first
Appearances of Plants above-ground, where those leaves and buds, which often
give growth to the succeeding stem, flower, and fruit, are lost, or altered
so as not to be known. Let it suffice, that Dr. Harvey had parts and industry
enough to have discovered it, had he not been prevented therein. And I should
have imagined that our Countreyman had found it out, without any communication
with those other books (a thing possible enough, and of which we have instance
in the case of Rudbek, Bartholine, and Jolice) but that the reasons I have
alleged render the case suspicious. Had Caesalpinus writ a distinct Treatise,
I doubt not but much of the Glory had been his: since there are as great
differences between one Circulator, and another, and greater, then betwixt him
and Harvey: but his notions being confusedly laid down here and there in his
Peripatetick and Medicinal Questions, and he being not ambitious to pretend to
any new discoveries, only to illustrate Aristotle's tenets. I shall allow Harvey
the possession of his present repute: nor do I give my self this trouble of
collecting up into a method these confused assertions of Caesalpinus out of any
envy to the dead, but out of animosity to Pretenders to Wit and Learning, that
brave it thus amongst us; yet if to be ignorant of what has passed in the
world heretofore, be an argument of childishness, there is not any thing more
puerile then this sort of Virtuosi.

I might not dismiss my Reader, but that the great noise which this Circulation
of blood makes in the World, enforces me to speak a little more about the
utility of this discovery, which our Author describes to be the most noble of
all those discoveries in the Economy of humane nature, which Wit and Industry
have made. I do confess I think the Arguments for it to be such as admit of no
Answer in general; but when we come to debate how it passes through the Lungs*
(which Riolanus almost invincibly disproves) or through the Septum Cordis,
(which Riolan and Bartholin asserts, but Harvey, Slegelius, Vander Linden, and
others, reject it o^ good grounds) what it is that causes the pulsation of the
Heart? what continues on the motion of the blood in the veins, even when a
Ligature is made betwixt the antecedent and subsequent blood. Whether the blood
be diffused into the habit of the body, and reimbibed by capillary veins, or
conveyed on by Anastomoses? whether there be any difference betwixt the venous
and Arterious blood? How the Phenomenon (which undeniably are observed) about
the pulse can be made out* and particularly how some have lived without any
Pulse, others (which I have known) in the palpitation of the Heart, suffer no
change in their Pulse? How upon dissection or wounds sometimes both ends of the
vein divided do bleed? How some bleed at the arm without any Ligature; some
upon a double Ligature? These, and many other questions, when I come to dispute
with my self, methinks I am forced to constrain my judgment in the assent I
give to that Problem: and what I am ashamed to deny, I find I cannot own
without some reluctance, which is daily increased in me by scruples arising
from the Practick Part of Physic; nor do I blush to declare my self an
Abettour only of such Tenets, as are consistent with, and illustrated by
Practical Physic: it was thought at first that this Circulation of blood would
overthrow all the usual Methods of Physic, and introduce new and beneficial
discoveries in that part of Medicine which is Therapeutick. But Harvey denies
that it varieth the Medicine of the Ancients; and Slegelius asserts the same
opinion, avowing it to be rather an happy illustration, then ^ subversion of
the former praxis, though it alter the Theory much. In fine, those little
advantages and Diorismes, which we derive from that Invention merit not our
notice; nay, any man shall with more assurance bleed in many diseases in sundry
manners and different places, upon diverse indications upon the old
observations and rules, then on the new hypotheses, wherein as to the use of
parts, and nature of humors, there is as little of clearness and certainty; as
there is efficacy it* that practice* which is regulated most thereby.

I had forgot to take notice of the venae lacteae ascribed to Nardiu^. noct
G^^al. 4. p 412.
Asellius, the invention of them is thought a great discovery, and such as
signatiseth a man in this Age. Yet even those vessels were known to Galen, as
Nardius proves out of his book against Erasistratus, c. 5. and out of the last
chapter of his Anatomical Administrations. It is true, he calls them Arteries;
he says they were in the Mesentery filled with Milk, and that he observed them
in young Kids. And Hofman in his Variae Lectiones does produce out of Galen, de
usu part. l. 4. sect. 19. a place so evidently showing that Galen and
Herophilus did recover those Venae lacteae; that Veslingius cries out in a
Letter to him, Existimo aut nihil cum Herophilo Galenum vidisse, aut has (...),
hos Epist xxi.
ipsos ductus esse, quos lacteos cum Asellio nominamus. Quae ad Pancreatis
(...) (ex multarum enim glandularum compage constructum videtur) pertinent. The
place in ^. H^sman v^r lect. l. 2. ^ c. 2.
Galen is this, as Hofman represents it. (...). Which proof as it is
perspicuous enough to ruin the discovery of the Venae Lacteae, and the
deducing of them unto the Glandules of the Mesentery (beyond which Herophilus
and Galen did never trace the journey of the Chyle, but imagined those veins to
nourish the Mesentery) so I think that the invention of the Ductus Thoracius
belongs to Andr. Vesalius, and Barthol. Eustachius: the one more obscurely
proposes it, the other more openly.

Andr. Vesalius de fabrica corporis humani l. 3. c 7. Jo Ant. Vander ^ird^n ^e
circuitsangu. ^xerc. 9
p. 291. Edit. Venet. 1568. -- Adeo ut mihi etiam persuasum sit quamvis id
nunquam viderim; interdum a sinistro coenae caudicis latere, ubi jugulum
contingit, venam depromi, quae secundum sinistrum vertebrarum latus declivis
ducta, sinistris cos^is samos offerat: illa quam sine pari nuncupamus, dextras
costas alente. Atque hujusmodi venae ortum, non tantum a jugulo primum posse*
fieri, sed paulo infernis, etiam agnus attestatur: in quo tale aliquid semel
observavi.

Viden' venisse in rem, and quasi in manu jam habuisse illud Ariadnae filum,
quod secutus penetrare in naturae Labyrinthum, majoremque sibi gloriam
comparare potuisset? sed quo fructu? Audi sis, and disce, quam homini scientias
sectanti, necessarium sit, etiam in naturalibus eum, qui sui juris and muneris
fecit, docere homines scientias and arts, Ps 94. v. 10. Jer. 28. v. 26,
precari, Revela oculos meos ut cernam mirabilia in operibus tuis, ex Ps. 119.
v. 18.

Verum, inquit, ejuscemodi non nisi rarissime occurrentes venarum series,
anatomes fludioso non aliter expendendas putarim, quam si interdum sextus in
manu digitus, aliud ne monstruosum se spectandum offerret. Adeo ut siquando in
publicis sectionibus haec observo, ea tanquam non essent, tacit praetereamne
artis candidati in omnibus corporibus haec observari arbitrentur.

Quanto egregius, and propter hoc non unam atque immortalem laudem meritus
Barth. Eustachius: qui no^ solum candide exponit, quod vidit; sed et praemisso,
quod res merebatur, praeloquio conatus est posteriorem studia excitare ad
ulteriorem inquisitionem et perfectiorem cognitionem. Neque enim ignorabat, rei
quidem inventionem, (...) munus esse: at vero ejus plenam cognitionem (...)
opus esse. Sed audiamus ipsum.

Ad hanc naturae providentiam quandam equorum venam alias pertinere credidi:
quae cum artificii and admirationis plena sit, nec delectatione ac fructu
careat: quamvis minime sit ad Thorac^m alendum instituta: operae pretium est ^t
exponetur. Itaque in illis animantibus, pergit ab hoc ipso insigni trunco
sinistri juguli, qua posterior seeds radicis venae internae jugularis spectat,
magna quaedam propago germinat: quae praeterquam quod in ejus origin ostiolum
semi-circulare habet, est etiam ALBA ET AQUEI HUMORIS PLENA; nec long ab ortu
in duas parts scinditur; paulo post rursus coeuntes in unam: quae nullos ramos
diffundens, juxta sinistrum vert: brarum latus, penetrato septo transverso,
deorsum ad medium usque lumborum fertur: quo latior efferta, magnamque
arteriano circumplexa, obscurissimum finem, nihilque adhuc non been perceptum,
obtinet.

Since the writing hereof, I have met with a book containing certain Letters of
Marcellus Malpighius, and Carolus Fracassatus; in which it is observable that
Fracassatus (the Anatomy-Professour at Pisa) does ascribe the Invention of the
Circulation of the blood to Caesalpinus; and of the ductus Thoracius to
Eustachius: His words are these: Adeo oscitantia Autorum quaedam tam male
praeponuntur, ac tanguntur, ut oporteat alios eadem repetere, ac ditare novis
elucubrationibus, ac si nunquam fuissent. Sanguinis Circulatio, Galaxia in
Microcosmo humano, scilicet via Chyli Cor, nonne Caesalpinum agnoscit Authorem,
ac Eustachium de vena sine pari? Et tamen soles in Scholis Autores crepant
Anglos Harvaeus, and Di^penses Pecquetos: non tamen spernendi, qui verum
rudimenta ponunt, etiamsi infecto nec absoluto opere cessaverint: qui invenit
anticipavit laborem and curam quaerendi: Fracassatus de cerebro. p. 202.
and ad minora vocatur, si quaestionis solicitudo and jactatio tollatur: par
tamen decus manet and illum, qui primum invenit, and qui postremum perfecit,
nescio enim an praestet invenisse, an ditasse.

Having said thus much, I leave Mr. Glanvill, to answer those little quillets
of his, which can convince none but Shallow-brain'd and Comical Wits. -- If
they knew these grand Theories formerly; how chances it that they speak no
more of things, which no doubt they had frequent occasions to mention? How come
they to be left without memory among their followers, who were such
superstitious porers upon their writings? How chances it not to have been
shown to be lodged in those Authors before the days of Dr. Harvey, etc. when
Envy had impregnated and determined their imaginations? Let illiterate persons
and Mathematicians be swayed against plain proof by these Arguments. I think in
stead of Temples and Altars to be erected to these Inventors, there is more
need of a Schoolmaster and an Antiquary, the one to teach them humane learning,
the other to instruct them in past discoveries; least, with much trouble and
pains our new Philosophers should find out again the Art of Printing, or
Etching: the use of Gunpowder, or the Lodestone.

Of Transfusion of Blood -- into Animals.
THus, Sir, I have done with Instances of Anatomical Plus Ultra. page 17.
Advancements, unless I should hitherto refer the late noble Experiment of
Transfusion of the Blood, from one living Animal into another, which I think
very fit to be mentioned; and I suppose it is not improper for this place: Or
however, I shall rather venture the danger of impropriety and misplacing, then
omit the taking notice of so excellent a Discovery, which no doubt future
Ingenuity and Practice will improve to Purposes not yet thought of; and we have
very great likelihood of advantages from it in present Prospect.

For it is concluded, That the greatest part of our diseases, arise either from
the scarcity, or malignant tempers and corruptions of our Blood; in which cases
Transfusion is an obvious Remedy; and in the way of this Operation the peccant
blood may be drawn out, without the danger of too much enfeebling Nature, which
is the grand inconvenience of mere Phlebotomies. So that this Experiment may be
of excellent use, when Custom and Acquaintance have hardened men to permit the
Practice in Pleurisies, Cancers, Leprosies, Madness, Ulcers, Smallpox, Dotage,
and all such like Distempers. And I know not why that of injecting prepared
Medicines immediately into the blood, may not be better and more efficacious
then the ordinary course of Practice: Since this will prevent all the danger of
frustration from the loathings of the Stomach, and the disabling, clogging
mixtures and alterations they meet with there, and in the intestines, in which
no doubt much of the spirit and virtue is lost. But in the way of immediate
injection they are kept entire, all those inconveniences are avoided, and the
Operation is like to be more speedy and successful. Both these noble
Experiments are the late Inventions of the ROYAL SOCIETY, who have attested the
reality of the former, that of Transfusion of Blood by numerous trials on
several sorts of brute Animals, Indeed the French made the Experiment first
upon humane Bodies, of which we have a good account from Mounsieur Dennis. But
it has been practiced also with fair and encouraging success by our
Philosophical Society. The other of injection, if it may be mentioned as a
different invention, was also the Product of some generous Inventors; though
indeed more forward Foreigners have endeavored to usurp the Credit of both*
This latter likewise has succeeded to considerable good effects in some new
Trials that have been made of it in Dantzick, as appears in a Letter written
from Dr. Fabricius of that City, and Printed in the Philosophical Translations.

I shall not quarrel with Mr. Glanvill for misplacing this Those Foreigners
will rectify hereafter their mistakes, and not attribute the injecting of
Medicaments to their ^nvention: as Caspar Schottus in Mirab. Art. l. xi. c. 21.
p. 891. and Phil. Jac. Sacks in Ocean Micromicrocosm. sect. 155 have donc,
unjustly magnifying Solertissimam Industriam and Experientiam of these
Pretenders Andr. Libav. desens. Syntagm arcanor. adv. Henning Scheunemem act 2.
c. page 8 edit. Francos^uit. A^^ 615.
discourse about the Transfusion* of Blood, but I think all the World will
condemn him for ascribing either the invention of Transfusing blood, or of
injecting Medicaments into the veins, unto the Society. That the latter was a
thing much practiced by Dr. Wren and others in Oxford, before the Restoration
of his Majesty, and before that ever the SOCIETY was thought upon, is a thing
known to all that were at those days in that University. I saw my self in those
days the Dog into whose veins there was injected a Solution of Opium, at the
Lodgings of the Honorable Robert Boil, of which he makes mention in his
second discourse of the Usefulness of Natural Philosophy, and Borrichius in his
Letters to Bartholinus.

As for that other of Transfusing the blood out of one Animal into another, if
the Question be who first proposed it into the World to be tried, it is certain
that Libavius first did that, at least I know not any more ancient then He.
That Learned man above Fifty years ago, so plainly describes the Transsusion,
that one can hardly discourse of it with more clearness, then there is done in
these words. Adsit Juvenis robustus, sanus, sanguine spirituoso plenus: Adslet
exhaustus viribus, tenuis, macilentus, vix animam trahens. Magister Artis
habeat tubulos argenteos inter se congruentes, aperiat arteriam robusti and
tubulum inserat, muniatque mox and aegroti arteriam findat* and tubulum
foemineum infigat: jam duos tubulos sibi mutuo applicet, and ex sano sanguis
arterialis calens and spirituosus saliev in aegrotum, unaque vitae fontem
afferet, omnemque languorem vellet. This allegation was made use of by an
Italian Philosopher, and silenceth all those in England, or France, that
pretend Philos. Transact. Numb. 37. p. 740. By his leave it infers only the
mention of it to be more ancient, not ^e Operation* Libavius proposes it out
of some Paracelsian Magical Writer, and not from his own Fancy: adding that the
Physician who practisethths Transfusion, deserves Helleborc himself. See Mr. J.
Denny's Letter in the Transact. numb. ^7. (...). number. 28.
to the Glory of having first proposed: So that the Author of the
Philosophical Transactions confesses it in these words*. This indeed is clear
enough, and obliges us to aver a greater Antiquity of this operation, then
before we were aware of, though it is true, Libavius did not propose it, but
only to mock at it (which is the common fate of new Inventions in their Cradle)
besides that, He contrives it with great danger both to the Recipient and
Emittent, by proposing to open Arteries in both, which indeed may be practiced
upon Brutes, but ought by no means upon Man. Till that learned Italian had
instructed the Virtuosi in the point, there had been a great Controversy
agitated between the French and English Societies about the Invention. The
former pretended, that it was mentioned first amongst them about eleven years
ago, at the Assembly, in the house of Mounsieur de Montmor, and that the
public is beholding to that Monsieur for this discovery, and the benefits and
advantages that shall be reaped thereby. But about the person that should first
mention the design, the French vary. Monsieur de Gury fathers it upon the Abbot
Bourdelot: but the Author of their Journals upon a Benedictine Friar. Our
Society having given the world occasion to take notice of it publicly, and
having otherwise long before pursued the Oxford-Invention of injecting Liquors
into the veins, thought themselves injured in this, that the French should
usurp the Credit of such a discovery as had its first birth in England, upon a
pretense that it was conceived in France: it being notorious, the French took
occasion to try it by the Example of the English Virtuosi: and there being no
public record cited, declaring the time and place of the Invention proposed
the Method to practice it* and the success of the Execution, Thereupon began a
Paper-scuffle betwixt the Gazettiers o. the Curiense which any man may read
with some pleasure, because they had on both sides such little Logic, as to
argue from the mentioning of a design, to the effecting it. If the way of
Argumentation be good and solid, then Aristotle, and such of the Ancients, as
proposed the squaring of the Circle, must not be denied the glory of being
Inventors of it: So they which first proposed a perpetual motion, or the
Northwest Passage, may go for Inventors of them: yet are none of these things
yet discovered. Oh! new Correlates, and worthy of our Inventors! Long ago
Aristotle and the Common Dialecticks told us, Datur scibile de quo non datur
Scientia. But none like our Anti-Logicians-ever taught, there were a sort of
Inventors whose Inventions were yet to seek. All that our Inventors did, was,
that after Dr. Lower had first discovered and practiced the Transfusion at
Oxford in February 1665. They on the seventeenth of May following See Transact.
Number. 28. page 5^4.
1665. gave order that there should be trials made for transfusing the blood:
but their trials proving lame for want of a fit Apparatus, and a well continued
Method of Operation: the* Dr. sent them a convenient Method for effecting the
thing. Before this, there never was any mention or proposal made at the Society
concerning the Transfusion, as I am certainly informed by one of their Number,
who has examined their Journal* Books, in which such Proposals and Experiments
are recorded. Nay, they were so far from pretending to it at first, that when
it was mentioned unto them by Mr. Boil, there were some as well severe as
ingenuous Critick's, who thought it somewhat strange and bold for him to affirm
that the Dr. had made it succeed. And besides, I observe that Mr. Boil in his
Letter to Dr. Lower (who has vindicated the Invention to himself in his late
Book de Cord) does not say that ever the Society had thought of or attempted,
or designed to attempt the thing. He calls it insolitum and insperatum conamen.
June 26. 1666. and desires He would acquaint the Society with the manner how he
achieved it. Now since that neither was Dr. Lower then of the Society, nor any
way entitles them unto it, but himself, and that in a Treatise wherein he does
not so much as call himself a Member of that Assembly, set any In the
Transactions numb. 37. page 371. The Gazettier affirms, that upon further
investigation it was by good proof ( which is in his hands) proved* that the
invention had been known to some Ingenious persons in England thirty years ago.
If so, then is not the Society the Inventors of it, except we will say, that
Societies as well as individual ^o^'s do pre-exist! But may not a man ask our
Gazettier* where is the public record of this Invention? what Account is there
of the Method with which it was practiced? with what success? How comes all
this to be concealed till after Dr. Lower atchieves it, and the French pre^end
to it? would any man have concealed their claim to the Discovery, after that it
was become the talk of Europe, the Darling of the Society and worthy to be
disputed for by the French? why did they not put in their Claim, being within
hearing, till about three years after.
man judge with how much truth this other Discovery is ascribed to these NEW
EXPERIMENTATORS, by our Virtuoso. But least I should seem to deal too severely
and maliciously with them, rather then it shall be said That they invented
nothing, I grant, that They invented a LIE; and shall conclude the Debate by
representing the words out of their Transactions, by which they assume to
themselves the Credit of the Invention, and by a dubious wording and pointing
of the Period, insinuate as if Dr. Lower as well as Dr. King had been
encouraged to the Attempt by the Society.

Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 27. page 490. How long soever that Experiment may
have been conceived in other parts (which is needless to contest) it is
notorious that it had its Birth first of all in England; some ingenious persons
of the Royal Society, having first started it there, several years ago, (as
appears by their Journal) and that dextrous Anatomist, Dr. Lower, reduced it
into practice, both by contriving a Method for the Operation, and by
successfully executing the same, wherein he was soon overtaken by several happy
Trials of the skilful hand of Dr. Edmund King, and others encouraged thereunto,
by the said Society, which being notified to the World Numb. 6. 19. and 20. of
these Transactions printed November. 19. and December. 17. 1666. the Experiment was
soon after that time heard of to have been tried in foreign Parts, without
hearing any thing of its having been conceived ten years ago. In which
relation, I must take notice that it does not really appear in their
Journal-books, that ever any such thing was started by any persons how
ingenious soever of their Society; Dr. Lower being not then, nor long after in
the History of the Royal Society reckoned as a Member of it. Nextthat the
interpunction of the period is so equivocally placed and ponned, that the
unwary Reader may think that Dr. Lower, as well as the others was encouraged to
the trial by the Society. Whereas he was not, whatever the others were. Again,
it is disingeniously said, that he was soon overtaken by several happy Trials
of Dr. Edmund King, and others, encouraged thereto by the Society. Since it
appears by the letter of Mr. Boil, that the Society knew not how to do the
thing in June, which Dr. Lower had effected in February, and the fame thereof
at that time was spread over England. In July Dr. Lower acquainted the Society
with the manner of the Transfusion, whereof Dr. Wallis had given the Society an
imperfect account a little before of what he had seen Dr. Lower do at Oxford.
So that for at least four or five months, the Members of the Society did not
overtake Dr. Lower. But after they were acquainted with the contrivance, they
invented it very clearly.

From hence it is easy for any man to judge with how much right Mr. Glanvill
does say, that both the injecting of Medicines, and transfusing blood into the
veins of Animals, those Noble Experiments were the late Inventions of the
SOCIETY. I shall now proceed to inquire into the Utility* of them; thereby to
discover how noble and excellent they are, and what advantages we may hope to
derive from them hereafter.

Because this Transfunding of blood has hitherto been looked on as the primary
Invention, and the most famed of any the Society were ever entitled unto: and
that they themselves have particularly concerned themselves in asserting it to
be their discovery, to the end that every Reader may the better be able to
judge of the Controversy, without being forced to go seek out amongst the
scattered transactions and elsewhere, several Histories that are material to
the passing a right judgment; I shall crave pardon if I do relate particularly
the matter of fact, and what has been sundry times performed by the English,
Italian and French Virtuosi, with every circumstance, both as to injecting of
Medicines, and of blood into the veins.

As to the injecting of Medicaments into the veins, it is an Experiment that I
am apt to think was first tried by the English, and as a curiosity, it was not
unpleasant; but that it should be so advantageous a discovery as Mr. Glanvill
represents it is like to be, I do not believe. There was a time when men had
regard to their Consciences, and what could not be administered but upon
prudential hopes of advantage to the Patient, no approved Physician durst, or
would give to any sick person: but in this Age* such as ought to protest
against it, are as forward as any to forget these considerations, and prompt
men on to practices without either regarding whether the effect be not Murder
in the Physicians, besides the ill consequences to the diseased. In the
injecting of Medicaments, I must complain that neither the Operation of
Medicaments immediately injected into the blood and veins is known, nor the
dose; and consequently the Project not like to improve Physic at all, unless
our Magistrates will license men to try so many Experiments, even to the
apparent hazard or certain death of the parties, and may regulate and
authenticate the practice in such manner as becomes a Baconical Experiment: and
to encourage Rational men to this procedure, there ought to be a greater
deficiency in Physic, then yet appears, and a more hopeful success then any
man can yet expect, supposed by this way. A Paynim told us,

Nulla unquam de morte hominis cunctatio longa est. A sober Physician will look
upon the act to be as indiscreet, as the Comedian describes love to be* Quaeres
in se neque consilium, neque modum habet ullum, eam consilio regere non potes.
That there is no probability that this way of Medicine can ever amount to any
thing, appears from this consideration, that Liquors immediately injected into
the blood, have a different Operation there, then when taken in by the Stomach:
and that the mixtures of Liquors with blood upon Phlebotomy in a Pottinger,
gives no light to the Experiment. As I shall now show.

Seignior Fracassati Professor of Anatomy at Pisa tried these Experiments by
injecting Medicaments.

1. Having injected into the jugular and crural veins of a Transact. number. 2^.
p. 490 491.
Dog some Aqua fortis diluted, the Animal died presently: and being opened, all
the blood in the vessels was coagulated and fixed: but that which was in the
Viscera (which I dare not English Guts, but take it to denote the Heart, Liver,
C^r. Fracassar. Ep, Anat. de cerebro. p. 252* 253* ^54.
Lungs, Spleen, where the blood passes extravasated through: though the
Transactions render it Guts, and destroy the antithesis betwixt vasa and
viscera) did not so easily coagulate. It was also observed that the great
vessels were burst, or as it were cut asunder, yet have I known who has put
Aqua fortis into cooling* Juleps in Fevers, as others do spirit of Vitriol
without any harm.

2. There was also infused into another Dog, some spirit of Vitriol, which had
not so present an effect: for the Animal complained a great while, and foamed
like Epilepticks, and had its respiration very thick: and observing the beating
of his breast, one might easily judge, the Dog suffered much: who dying at
last, his blood was found fixed in the veins, and grumous, resembling Soot:
whereas in the Experiment with Aqua fortis (which may as easily be given
inwardly as spirit of Nitre) the blood is not said to have been changed in its
color from other coagulated blood. It was also observable (though the
Transactions mind it not) that the blood in this last Dog was not upon
coagulation continuous in the veins, but broken and severed into parcels.

3. There was also injected into the jugular of another dog, some oil of
Sulphur per campanam, but he died not of it, though this infusion was several
times tried on him. And the wound being closed, and the dog let go, he went
into all the corners of the room, searching for meat, and having found some
bones, he fell to gnawing them with a strange avidity, as if this Liquor had
caused in him a great appetite.

4. Another dog, into whose veins some Oil of Tartar per deliquium was
injected, did not escape so well: for he complained much, and was altogether
swollen; and then died: Being opened, the Spectators were surprised to find his
blood not curdled, but on the contrary more thin and florid then ordinary.

5. Dr. Lower having extracted half a pound of blood out Dr. Lower de motu
Cordis page 1. 9.
of the crural urine of a Mastiff dog, did inject the like quantity of warm
milk into him; within half an hour the dog became very sick, breathed with
difficulty, and seemed to labor much with his heart and diaphragme, and after
to palpitate, tremble and sigh grievously, and at length miserably died. Upon
dissection he found the vena cava, the ventricles of the heart, the vessels of
the Lungs, and the Aorta full of blood and milk coagulated together, and the
concretion was so Transact. number. 27. page 49^.
hard, that it was not easy to part it. This he tried but once. But Monsieur
Dennys the French Physician says, he tried it with a different success. For
having syringed about a quarter of a pint of milk into the veins of an Animal
(he tells not what) and having opened the same some time after, he found the
milk so perfectly mixed with the blood, that there was not any place in which
appeared the least footstep of tho whiteness of the milk, and all the blood was
generally more liquid, and less apt to coagulate.

6. I received an account of some Experiments, from one much versed in these
injections (which he may one day acquaint the world with) to this effect. That
the infusion of Crocus Metallorum, injected in a less quantity then otherwise (
viz., b) will work by vomit in a dog* almost presently, and very strangely, and
make him grievously sick. Yet Dr. Mr. Boil of the Usefulness of Not. Philos.
part. 2. p. 54, 55.
Wren informs Mr. Boil, that a moderate dose of the infusion of Crocus
Metallorum did not much move the dog that he injected it into: but a large dose
of two ounces or more wrought soon, and so violently, that he vomited up life
and all. That a dog will take two drams of Opium into his Stomach, and seem
never the worse, if you keep him from lying down half an hour after; but two
drams of Poppy-seeds made into an Emulsion, and injected into his veins, will
kill him presently.

7. Mr. Boil says, that he conveyed a small dose of the Vid. supra p. 53, 54
tincture of Opium into a dog this way, which began to work so speedily upon
the brain, that he was scarce untied before the Opium began to disclose its
Narcotick quality; and almost as soon as he was upon his feet, he began to nod
with his head, and reel and faulter in his place; but being kept awake, and in
motion, by whipping up and down the Garden, after some time he came to himself
again, and not only recovered but began to grow fat so manifestly, that'twas
admired.

8. A certain German Count coming into England, relates Phil. Jac. Sachs in
Ocean* macromicrocosm. sect 155.
an Experiment, which he saw in the presence of Pr. Rupert. After some blood
taken from a dog, there was injected into him a small quantity ( portiuncula)
of Spanish wine; within sometime after the dog was perfectly drunk, being
giddy, performing sundry ridiculous actions, then vomiting with a profound
sleep.

9 Dr. Fabricius Physician to the City of Dantzick injected Transact. numb. 30.
page 564, 565.
purgatives into humane bodies, with this effect. A strong bodied Soldier
being dangerously infected with the Pox, and having grievous protuberations of
the bones in his arms, two drams of a purgative liquor were injected: he
presently complained of great pains in his elbows, and the little valves of his
arm did swell so visibly, that it was necessary by a great compression on's
fingers to stroke up that swelling toward the Patients shoulders. Some four
hours after it began to work, not very troublesomely; and so it did the next
day, in so much that the man had five good stools with it. Without any other
remedies those protuberances were gone, nor are there any footsteps of the
disease left. Two other trials were made upon women, the one a married woman of
35, the other a Servant-maid of 20 years old: both from the birth had been
grievously troubled with Epileptick Fits, so that there was little hopes of
curing them. There was injected into their veins a laxative rosin, dissolved in
an Antiepileptical spirit; the first of these had gentle stools, some hours
after the injection; and the next day the Fits recurred now and then, but much
milder; and are since quite vanished. The Maid, she went the same day to stool
four times, and several times the next: but by going into the Air, and taking
cold, and not observing any diet, cast her self away. It Is remarkable, that it
was common to all three, to vomit soon after the injection, and that extremely,
and frequently.

I have not time to add any more of these kind of trials: but from hence it is
evident, that things operate (where they do operate in the same manner) in a
lesser dose, then when taken into the Stomach, and with Vulgo hactenus a non
^^ucis sp^^itus Vitrioli, and Sulphuris pro diversis r^b^s habiti sunt: adeo
quidem ut nonnulli flores sulphuris and acidum ad c^sdem pulmonis merb^s
exhiberent: sed valde imp^^ite cum ac^^a omnj^ sin^ pectori inimica, and
spiritus Sulphuris and Vitri ^i ess^ntia null^ modo differant* sed ex cadem re
generent^r, and parentu^. Etenim spiritus Vitrioli and Sulphuris eundem
s^por^m, colorem and omnino easdem qualitates and ^ff^ctus habent, and ad
^osdem u^us in medicina adhibentur: nondumque inventus est, ^ui pecu^iarem
aliquam, seu manifestum seu occultam qualitatem in spiritu Sulphuris monstrare
potuerit, quae non etiam in spiritu Vitrioli sit. Senne^t. in Paralipomen. ad
institut. l. 5 part. 3 sect. 3 c. 5.
more violence. That oftentimes such things as are innocently taken into the
Stomach, are mortal when injected immediately into the blood. That although
learned Physicians have made little or no difference betwixt the operation of
Oil of Sulphur, and that of Vitriol, yet by this Experiment there is found to
be a quite different effect. So the Salt of Tartar (which is as innocent as
Salt of Wormwood, or any such Salt) had a pernicious effect upon the dog,
though discrepant from the others.

As to the Experiments of Dr. Fabritius, they do not give much of Encouragement
to the Trial, for the one died which had the most of youth; and though her
death be attributed to other circumstances and neglect;, yet either those are
trivial, or for some ( unknown) length of time there must be greater care then
ordinarily after Physic, otherwise small accidents become mortal. And the
extreme and frequent vomitings (which here happen from the sufferings of the
Heart, and not the Stomach) render the course more hazardous to tender
Stomachs, and weak Constitutions, then Mr. Glanvill suggests. So that the
loathings of the Stomach are not prevented by this way, nor the success very
inviting (how speedy soever) upon those Experiments any more then from the
Churlish Physiek of the ancient and moderate Chemists of Mr. Odored's party,
which wisemen will not imitate. I wonder the laxative Solutions were not set
down that we might judge of their strength: and that the way of dieting and
ordering of them afterward was omitted: whereas the knowledge thereof might
avail to prevent the ill consequence which befell the Maid.

I shall now consider the effects which the several Liquors have upon a mixture
with the blood, when taken warm in a Pottinger, and those affused to it. This
is a Practice which the Honorable Mr. Robert Boil imparted to the Royal
Society in December 1664. and thinks that Fracassati may have taken his hint
from it, to inject those Liquors: but I find a Letter from Leyden sent to
Bartholinus, Dated Jan. 9. 1662. in which there are several Experiments of that
kind, which I shall set down presently. If I placed any great value upon the
Experiment, I could put in for the Practiser of it at Stratford upon Avon in
1660. and prove that I made some Solutions of Salt of Ash, Salt of Wormwood,
and Salt of Tartar, and received the blood of sheep into the glasses in which
they were, to try the differences betwixt those Salts, whether they were of the
same nature (so that it was indifferent whether one used Salt of Wormwood,
Carduus Benedictus, Yarrow, or Mugwort) or that there were any difference.
Which last Angela Sala denies, though other Angelus Sal^ Tartaralog. sect. 3 c
2. p. 133.
Chemists affirm it. But after that I had enquired into that Controversy by
several ways, I went to Jamaica and neglected the Experiment. But since that I
see that every unprofitable trifle, becomes a famous and noble Experiment, and
if it bring no present Emolument, yet at least it becomes Luciferous, and (as
they say) puts us in the Prospect of several great advantages; at least, more
and greater things will be disclosed by it, when future ingenuity and diligence
has improved and perfected the invention. Since that time I have made many
Essays about the mixture of sundry Liquors, with the blood of Sheep, Lambs,
Calves, Cows, Oxen, Hogs, Poultry, and that in several manners.

I have received the blood of several creatures upon warm solutions of sundry
Salts, of Allom, impure Saltpeter, Sal Prunellae, Salt of Nitre, upon solution
of the several Vitriols; upon Steel-wine, Vomitive wine, Sack, French wine, and
Malaga, upon spirit of wine, spirit of Cider, and spirit of the grounds of
Beer; upon warm Urine, upon mixtures with spirit of Vitriol, and oil of
Sulphur, and Juice of Lemons, and Oranges, upon the rare liquor os Saltpeter;
upon it, after it has passed the Ashes, and upon the Mothers of it, and many
other trials with oil of Wormwood, Amber, etc. dissolved in spirit of wine.

I have also poured upon the Mass, after it has coagulated several acid
spirits, before and after the Serum was separated from it.

I have also taken the separated Serum, and affused spirit of Vitriol to some;
to others spirits of Hartshorn, and other spirituous waters, and I have
affused to those that had a mixture of the spirit of Hartshorn some acid
spirits, and other liquors to see the changes.

I shall not now set down the several Phenomenon, and observations I made, not
having leisure to digest them all, nor being willing to dismember a discourse I
intend about the nature of blood and Phlebotomy, in which I shall not only
treat of all these things, but add many other observations, from the burning
of blood, and the Serum, which any man may do, without feeling any thing by
sympathy, notwithstanding the whimseys of Helmont, and that great Virtuoso Sir
Kenelme Digby. I have done it forty times in Men, Women, and Children, to
observe those varieties in blood, which never entered into the heads of our
Experimentators Though Dr. Walter Needham, my learned School-fellow, a Member
of the Society, deny that blood will burn, Carbonibus injectus Disqui^it, de
soetu. page 130.
sanguis flammam non facile concipit, sed potius torretur in grumum. Yet if any
one please but to take a piece of the coagulated Mass of blood, and lay it on a
Fire shovell, and so place it in an hot fire, that the coals arch round about
it, but touch it not: after he has observed the great variety of its
intumescence, and the crackling of diverse salts, as it were decrepitating, it
will take flame commonly when dry, and burn with a great variety of Phenomenon:
some will not flame at all, though brought to ignition: there will be also
variety in the remaining Cinis, as to its saltness. In the like manner set the
Serum to coagulate on the coals, and then burn it. I have also burned the blood
and Serum, after it has been mixed with acid liquors. By this trial will
appear more then can be imagined as to the differences of the blood of Animals,
and of young and old Animals, I will endeavor to finish that Tractate, wherein
there will be observations about the color of blood, and melancholique, and
pituitous, and crimson parts; and a certain pellicle which generates by the Air
on the top of most blood, if it stand 24 hours; which sometimes is as firm as
those tunicles that encompass the Liver, or Kidneys. Observations upon that,
and upon the turning of the coagulated Mass, and its becoming red again, though
not so floridly. Trials upon that in vessels covered, that it is not from the
air, in opposition to the Fracassati.

I will not mention any thing hereof now, but having imparted some observations
to some, and knowing what plagiaries some men are, I thought fitting to publish
thus much, that they might not pretend to the inventions, each whereof were
enough to make one of them proud, and fill the Transactions. Yet I will say
this, That I never had put my self upon these trials, but out of envy and
indignation against them, and the Transfusion of blood, about which they made
such ado every where. I shall promise one thing, that Mr. Boil is very much
mistaken in, imagining that there is a great difference betwixt the effects of
Medicaments, when mixed with the warm blood of an Animal out of the veins and
in them, as will appear by the mixture of milk already specified, and that of
the Salt of Tartar, which will follow out of the Letter of Borrichius.

Experiments upon the mixture of Liquors, with the warm blood of Animals, taken
out by Phlebotomy.
1. By putting into the warm blood, as it came from Animals, Transact. numb.
29. p. 552.
a little Aqua fortis, or Oil of Vitriol, or spirit of Salt, (these being the
most usual and acid menstruums) Mr. Boil observed, that the blood not only
would presently lose its pure color, and become of a dirty one, but in a trice
also be coagulated; whereas some, if fine urinous spirit, such as the spirit of
Sal Armoniack, were mingled with the warm blood, it would not only not curdle
it, or imbase its color, but make it look rather more florid then before, and
both keep it fluid, and preserve it from putrefaction for a long time.

2. The Learned and Inquisitive Man Olaus Borrichius, having Tho. Bartholin.
cp. Centur. 3 cp. 97. page 421, 4^2
cut up a dog alive, made these observations. He took five glasses, and placed
them in order, putting into the one spirit of vinegar, into another oil of
Tartar per deliquium, into a third a Solution of Allom, into a fourth spirit of
Salt Armoniack, into a fifth spirit of wine; into each of the Glasses, he
suffered the blood of the Crural Artery to run. After some time he come to look
upon his Glasses, but the next day the observation was most perspicuous. That
Glass which had the spirit of vinegar in it, it Insp^ximus post intervallum and
before postridie omnia: Observavimus sanguinem, ^ui affusus erat spiritus
aceti, redditum nigricantem instar sanguinis Melancholicorum, sedimento crasso,
copioso, atro, supernatantem liquorem, paene etiam atrum. Cui affusum oleum
salis tartari, redditum coloris sic satis floridi, sed turbidiorem liquorem.
sedimentum nullum, ramenta tantum fibrillarum instar hinc inde conspicua. Cui
affusa solutio aluminis, redditum instar putidae and subcineritiae
put^ilaginis, omni sanguinis color pror^us abolito. Cui affusus spiritus v^ni,
redditum turbidiorem, quam cui oleum salis tartari. Cui spiritus salis
Armoniaci, redditum omnium elegantissimum, color floridum, tenuem substantia,
in^undo sedimentum diaphanum instar Galatinae ri^ium.
was become black like to the blood of Melancholique persons, with a thick and
copious black sediment, and that liquor which was on the top, was blackish.

Where the Oil of Tartar was, the color was pretty florid, but the liquor more
turbid, no sediment at all, only some filements, like little fibers floated in
it conspicuously, here and there.

Where the Solution of Allom was, there all seemed like a subcineritious or
dirty-coloured putrilage, there being no relics of the crimson color of
blood to be seen.

Where the spirit of wine was, there the liquor was more turbid then that which
had the Oil of Tartar in it.

Where the spirit of salt Armoniack was, that was of the most beautiful color
of all, being very florid, of a thin consistence, with a diaphanous sediment
like to the gelly of currants.

This observation he also tells Bartholinus, that he had in like manner made
the preceding Summer.

Out of all which it most evidently appears how nice a thing the blood is, and
how small mixtures alter the color and texture of it: and what consequences
may follow upon such alteration of its consistence, and particular texture, no
man knows; but that they may be very bad (even where innocent, and wholesome
Medicaments are affused) is evident out of what I have set down.

It is also as manifest, that there are in the bodies of men and women
solutions or liquors imbued with sundry salts, as aluminous, acid, and
vitriolate, etc. which when they shall mix with the injected blood, what the
issue may be, I leave the Prudent to conjecture. Certain it is, that for these
considerations specified (reserving my own Experiments to my self) none but
inconsiderate Quacksalvers would put a Patient upon the trial of injecting of
Medicaments, or transfusing of blood. It is a course Nature (whose Servants and
Imitators Physicians hitherto were) never prompted us unto: Having taken so
many courses whereby blood might at any time of need issue out of the veins and
arteries in sundry parts of the body: But especially provided that nothing
might immediately come into the veins. Whatever comes into the veins by the
Stomach, suffers a great alteration first, and whatsoever is noxious, either
separates from it there and in the guts, or is mortified, or mitigated so as to
be innocent, and agreeable to the nature of the veins. Which particular nature
of the sanguiferous vessels, is that which in the dead keeps its own blood
fluid, and in the living contributes so Vide ep. Walaei de motu ^angu.
much to the motion of it, that if you make a stop and intercept the impulse of
the subsequent blood, yet will the other continue its course. But what will the
effect be of Heterogeneous blood? For undoubtedly the nature of the veins is
agreeable to the blood, and communicates its impurities and virtue, as the cask
does to the wine. But further, since the blood is to pass through the
porosities of the Liver and Lungs, and capillary veins and arteries, how will
they agree with the new blood. (it being evident upon mixture of Liquors, and
upon burning, that there is a difference in the fibrosity of the bloods, and
consistence of the several Serums) or how will that circulate which results
from the mixture, I know not, but certain it is, that the ill consequence is
almost, if not absolutely past remedy.

In fine, what is it that is aimed at in this Transfusion? is it the rectifying
the mass of blood (suppose seventeen pound in a body) with the affusion of a
few ounces, or a pound of Lambs blood? They may as soon rectify as much
vinegar, or decayed wine, with the like proportion of good wine? would they
amend the impurities of the vessels? there is the same difficulty as before.
That which they transfuse is not a Chemical spirit, but an impure, and
heterogeneous mixture, fitted by different digestions and ferments to a
different nourishment of another Animal, with different excrements resulting
from it. It is in the Stomach and first digestion where food is so concocted by
the Humane heat, or Acidity, as to turn to a chyle adequate to the nourishment
of man, and generating such blood, and such excrements, as are the result of
such a concoction as is agreeable to the nature of man. And so it is in all
creatures: Thus we see, that in different Animals different Excrements are
generated, nor is it to be doubted but that the concoctive principle differs as
much in a dog, or cat, as do those excrements which differ much from those of
men, though both Otto Tachenius Hippocr. med. clavis c. 9. p. 201.
eat the same meat. Sicut acidus spiritus quilibet animam inseparabiliter in
ventre suo portat, atque in illud corpus, cu^infunditur, dominium suscipit,
illudque confestim juxta sui naturam format: hinc spiritus salis in Alcali
Tartari fusus statim sibi format corpus salinum propriae naturae consentaneum,
and fit sal: and aceti spiritus, vel acetum distillatum in eodem Alcali tartari
sibi format corpus adaequatum suae propriae naturae, and fit tartarus vini, and
sic de vitriolo, and reliquis acidis: Ita quoque acidum Stomachi humani, cum
apprehendit panem, vel quicquam alibile, in quod dominari possit, illud
convertit and commutat in chylum, and exinde in carnem humanam: and eundem
panem Acidum Stomachi canini convertit and transmutat in carnem caninam: uti
and de reliquis viventibus quotidie docemur, eo quod natura in omnibus iisdem
instrumentis operatur. If the Case be such, and that the blood transfused has
received those impregnations of vitality which are agreeable to the nature of
the Animal whence it is transfused, and is qualified to generate such
nourishment, and such excrements as are the consequences of those digestive
characters (if I may so call them) and impressions; How can we imagine that
such blood being immediately transfused into our veins, without those previous
alimental sigillations and digestions, produce those effects which are to be
expected in humane bodies, and are (though irrationally) in this case wished
for.

But perhaps they think to atchieve their design, by introducing a new texture
in the vitiated blood, and vessels, or fermentation, whereupon should ensue the
amendment. I I had an intention to have set down at large all the Stories
relating to the Transfusion of blood, with remarks upon them: but I was so much
pressed to conclude, and had so little leisure to dispatch it in that manner at
that time, that the Reader must be cont^nt with this brief, but I think
substantial ^eply to all that has yet been said.
perceive indeed by their stories a new fermentation, that the dogs piss blood
(no desirable or trivial accident!) But what a little time is there for the
blood to pass unto the heart, and mix with those other Liquors, and ascending
blood, and so to pass into the Heart and Lungs? How do they know that the blood
they transfuse is good? Upon burning they shall find a difference in blood of
beasts; and a different taste and coagulation in the Serum. Besides, that the
blood of young Animals is generally less balsamical and inflammable, of another
texture and color, the Serum very saline; and in a word, exceeding different
from what is in men and women of years. And in the blood of men and women,
there are often defects not to be perceived but by coagulating and burning of
the Serum and blood. I have taken the Serum of a Maid seemingly healthful, only
pained at Stomach, and abounding in blood, it coagulated and looked like
tallow, and would not burn at all, and smelt noisomely after coagulation, not
before. I have several strange instances of this kind. If there be such
indiscernable causes of distempers, and mixtures in blood of persons that are
not well, if they neither know what they aim at in transfusing in, nor what
they transfuse, Let Mr. Glanvill talk of great Advantages to be expected, and
let them try it for me. Sure I am that the Transactions report See the Stories
in the Philosophical Transactions.
an Untruth, in saying that Coga was ever the better for it: I am told his Arm
was strangely ill after it, and difficultly cured: and if all the great
likelihood of Advantages from Transfusion that are in their present Prospect,
arise from no other grounds, they are very improbable. The Parliament of Paris
have forbid it to be prosecuted but by the allowance of the Parisian Faculty of
Physicians. A Swedish Baron died upon it: and to argue from the cures of
Madmen, or I remember they say that it is not expressed, how the Transfusion
was practiced upon the Baron Bond, nor after how long time it was repeated,
when he died But this is no excuse for them; for they have fixed no r^les or
circumstances whereby to regulate the opera^i^n* those are to be learned by
frequent Experiments, and* It may be, the death of more Patients. Next, it is
not to be doubted, but that He that did it might act as cautiously as they, for
his own credit, and the credit ^f the trial, and the quality of the Person. It
concerns them to procure an Authentic Narration of the thing* and what
appeared upon his being embowell^d
from what they suffer without hurt, is not for a Physician, but for one that
deserves to be sent to Bedlam: for mad people endures a thousand ills, and
strong Physic, such as others cannot endure: and if they find any amendment
sometimes by uncouth means, it is by accident, as it makes them ill, which
sometimes prove their recovery.

As for dogs, they cannot declare what they suffer: but I am in haste, and
refer my Reader to the perusal of the Histories in the Transactions: in which
what I last objected, is all confessed: and if after all I have said, he find
encouragement to try a remedy, that has sometimes proved not unfortunate, (but
is always rash) let him do it for me.

I am satisfied, That the operation carries more of terror (and many swoon upon
bleeding) then a potion, or Galenical Physic; and that the greatest part of
our distempers do not arise from the scarcity, or malignant tempers, and
corruption of our blood, is as manifest as can be; more arise from the depraved
motion, and redundancy of the blood, and serosities in and about the brain, and
the laxity and strictness of the habit and pores of the body; and in these
cases Transfusion is no remedy; much less in malignant diseases, in which to
let blood is often mortal, commonly dangerous; and it always must be antecedent
to Transfusion, excepting only the scarcity of blood; in which case what
strength is there to assimilate, or ferment with the new blood.

As to the Transfusion of blood in Pleurisies, the attempt is very ridiculous,
considering what an Ebullition and Inflammation of the blood there is then in
the Lungs, whither the transfused blood immediately flows: what extravasated
serosities do afflict those parts? how unfit are they for any seasonable
fermentation? And in the Small Pox, how few are they in England which allow of
Phlebotomy in that disease at all? and how irrational must that Transfusion
seem, which disturbs and diverts nature in her present work? what hazard must
the Patient run amidst a Fever, and that violent commotion of humors which
afflicts his head, back, heart and lungs at that time, should he besides all
other accidents fall into pissing of blood, a symptom so dangerous in that
disease, and so usual a consequent of this Operation.

Having dispatched these papers thus far: the length of time since they were
sent to London to be transcribed, perused, and several insertions made,
according as my memory, amidst a constant employment, suggested any thing new
unto me, and the delay of the Printing till Michaelmass-Tearm, gives me an
opportunity to relate some Observations I made at Bath, during my stay there
this Summer: As famous as the Bathes are, and of as general an use as they are
(there being no better Remedy in the world for the Scurvey them the Cross-Bath
regularly pursued, and as it might be, I cannot say is commonly practiced) yet
have not our Experimental Philosophers made any Inquiries into its nature and
qualiti^s: not a man of them ever so much as tried the mixing of several
liquors and spirits with the water: as I did, and found no change upon the
mixture of Acid spirits: but the urinous and volatile spirits of Sal Armoniack
(drawn the Leiden-way) and Hartshorn did change the water of the Pump in the
Cross-Bath (which arises from the hot Bath) into a lacteous color and
opacity, insomuch that it represented an Almond-milk, and after a time there
precipitated to the bottom an insipid Magistery resembling Burnt Hartshorn
finely powdered: the precipitated powder was more copious in the affusion of
the spirit of Sal Armoniack, then that of spirit of Hartshorn: and the former
in that mixture lost its urinous smell, (and made no unpleasant, but an
unctuous, soft, emulsion-like drink) which the other retained.

Not a man of them ever tried whether the several Bath-water would coagulate
milk: which I tried first, and found that the Kings-Bath-water makes Posset
with a soft curd, and whitish posset drink, which will not become clear: the
Cross-Bath makes an hard eurd, a clean but whitish-posset-drink: the Pump-water
of the Cross-Bath (which arises from the neighboring hot Bath) yields an hard
curd, a clear and very green posset drink; which being drunk by a woman that
gave suck bred a great deal of milk (more then fennel posset drink) and made
her break abundance of wind, which those usually do that drink the
Bath-waters. And I believe this way of giving the Bath-waters might be no small
improvement of Physic, were those courses taken there, and that method which
those that understnad the ancient and modern Bathes, and waters that are drunk,
might easily pitch upon: but this is above the reading of our Comical Wits.

I could find no grounds to believe there was any sulphur, or bitumen in the
Baths: but rather Mr. Ch Hotham, when I showed him some of the extracted Salt,
did conceive it to be a mixture of common Salt, and vitriol of Iron.

When I was there, a Spring of the Cross-Bath being lost, they dug for it* I
tasted the Earth, but could find nothing nitrous in it: opening the gutter by
which that Bath emp^ies it self, we found the passage crusted very thick, with
a white lapideous concretion, rough and unequal in the surface, with several
crystals fixed in it, resembling those of cream of Tartar: to taste, it was
insipid, an^ of substance like to what precipitates with ^rinous spirits in the
water: but after it had ^en on the tongue a while, some p^eces discovered a
taste exactly like cream of Tartar, others an adstriction somewhat vitrio^ine.
I brought some away, and intend to examine it further.


some odd Alcali mixed with the vitriol of Iron: I extracted the Salts by
evaporation of two gallons of the Cross-Bath-water; and having reduced them to
three quarts I set it to shoot; but there was no appearance of saltpeter at
all: then I evaporated it to three-pints, but still neither saltpeter, or any
other salt appeared: then I evaporated it quite away; and then I had about two
ounces of a dark* colored salt, which at first resembled cream of Tartar
somewhat in taste; but having lien longer on the tongue, it resembled very much
the Vitriolum Mortis, with some more Alcalisate taste: I performed the
Operation both in Iron and Glass vessels with little difference of the taste,
or quantity of salt: some of the said salt dissolving into a moisture in the
air did eat off the writing upon such papers as it fell, and turned the paper
yellow all over, and rotted it. I made a Lixivium with the Cross-Bath water,
and evaporated that, thinking that if there were any unctuous matter in the
water, it might hinder the discovery of the Nitre in its shooting; but neither
could* I find any thing of Nitre this way: but still there was a taste of the
Vitriolum Mortis in the salt: and one Mr. Berenclaw a Practitioner there
assured me, that he had known the Bath-water drunk, and to have tinged the
Excrements black, but I cannot avow the truth of that.

I inquired about the truth of what Dr. Mearn had writ about the Stone he took
up, upon Lands-down, which being infused in water produced a resembling heat
and taste to what is in the Bath: But Dr. Maplet, an inquisitive and learned
Physician there, who was with Dr. Mearn then, and had some of the mineral
stone, assured me it was a limestone: so did Mr. Chapman an observing
Apothecary there, who likewise saw the Stone, and tasted the infusion. In fine,
where Dr. Me^ra took up that Stone, any man may take up a thousand, they not
being cast out of the Earth, but dropped out of the lime-carts which pass that
way into Bathe, the Kills being thereabouts.

The stones in the bottom of the Cross-Bath, many are of reddish rusty color,
others green: but concerning the Bathe, I may next Summer, during my stay
there, in the midst of June and July (if God give me life and health) make a
further Narrative: I only mention this to prevent the Virtuosi from usurping
upon my discoveries and intendments. Yet to do them some justice, I was told
that in some of their Transactions, *they have this observation about Bathe,
that if any person that is drunk go in there, the Bath will make him sober: If
any that is in the Bath drink freely there, it will cause him to be presently
drunk, with less drink by far then if he were cut of it. This report is worthy
of our Philosophers, and advances their intelligence above the credit that
Aristotle and his Hunters deserve. The first part is defective, for it should
have been added that the drunk person must sit still, and sweat soundly: if he
stir up and down or swim, he shall be more sick then if he had never come in.
The second part is notoriously f^lse, and all the Bath-Guides and others that
have tried it* avow, that it is usual for the Townsmen to sit some hours and
drink in the Parlour of the Queens-Bath, and never be drunk: and they say, a
man that sweats there shall bear much more drink, then if he were out of the
Bath: which I thought rational and agreeable to what I had observed in the
Indies, where men sweat and have more drink then in England, and stronger.

But I come now to that Case, for which I add this Discourse, and that is,
Observations upon the mixture of the Bath-water and other Liquors with blood,
and the Phenomenon thereupon, which, though I might reserve for that other
discourse of mine about Phlebotomy, yet I will oblige my Reader with some of
those Curiosities here, especially since it will give him occasion to reflect
how facile it is to multiply such Experiments, and how negligent they are who
pretend to be the grand Observators of this Age.

When I went to make use of the Bath, amongst other Preparatives thereto (which
are better taken upon the place, then at a distance) I caused my self to be let
blood, and being willing to improve that occasion as well for my instruction,
as health, I caused several Venice-Glasses to be filled with several liquors,
each liquor amounting to some three ounces, and into each glass I suffered to
run as much as half an ounce of blood, or little more; taking no other measure,
then that the whole liquor seemed of a deep blood red. The Phenomenon thereupon
were these ensuing, being observed presently after I had bound up my arm, and
was in condition to write.

1. That Glass which contained the spirit of Sal Armoniack (drawn the
Leiden-way) kept of an equal consistence from top to bottom, being of a deep
red, and not transparent, like Tent-wine. 2. Into two several Glasses I had
dissolved the Salts of Ash and Wormwood, half a dram in three ounces of water;
the solutions of these two Salts showed no difference at all; the top, after
some space, was of a florid red, (such as is visible in watrish blood) for
about a quarter of an inch: the bottom was of a more dark red, and resembled
Tent-wine. 3. A foutth Glass held Oleum Tartari per deliquium: the blood and
that liquor did not first mix, but were as two distinct liquors,
notwithstanding that the blood had streamed into the Glass: After a while the
blood and oil mixed together, and it all became of a deep red from top to
bottom; the surface only was transparent, and of a brighter red, as that of the
other Alcalisate Liquors, but not so far downwards: the rest was as Tent-wine.
4. I dissolved half a dram of Allom in three ounces of water, and upon bleeding
thereupon, all the crimson of the blood was immediately destroyed, and it
became almost as black as Ink: after a little space toward the surface it
cleared up: there were certain bubbles on the top that continued the redness.
5. Another Glass held a quantity of the Kings-Bath water, the blood that did
stream into it, appeared of a dark red, but transparent, as deep Bourdeaux wine
shows: a little below the surface it was deeply red, not transparent, but like
Tent wine. 6. The Cross-Bath altered little from the Kings-Bath, saving that
the transparency of the surface extended it self downwards to a greater
profundity then the other. 7. A Solution of half a dram of Sal prunellae,
yielded a blood on the surface like to that of Salt of Wormwood, but not to so
deep a descent: otherwise it was of the color and consistence of Tent wine.
After they had stood in the window about five hours, I returned and observed
these Phenomenon.

1. That with the spirit of Sal Armoniack continued like Tent-wine, only the
uppermost part of it to the thickness of a barley-corn, was diaphanous as deep
Bourdeaux-wine. 2. That with the Sal prunellae coagulated into a Mass, shrunk
from the sides of the Glass, and sunk to the bottom, leaving them super-natant
water of a pale citrine color; the Mass it self being of a florid red on the
surface, and of a deep red, not blackish, to the bottom, that I could perceive.
3. That with the Cross-Bath water changed not, but seemed thick as Tent-wine,
the upper part being diaphanous, and like deep Bourdeaux-wine? 4. That with the
Kings-Bath water changed not; only the diaphanous surface extended not it self
downwards so far as the other Bath-water did. 5. The Solution of Allom
continued all fluid and black; no coagulated mass therein: but the bubbles had
lost their crimson-colour, and were become cineritious* 6. That with the Salt
of Wormwood resembled deep Bourdeaux wine, but was less diaphanous a little
below the surface: The surface extended downwards to the length of a barley
corn with a perfect transparency. 7. That wherein was the Sal fraxini was
diaphanous to the bottom; no innatant filaments or coagulated mass in it: But
the surface to the length of a barley-corn was like decayed Claret made with a
mixture of white and red wine: the residue was deeper like that of Bourdeaux.
8. That with the oleum Tartari per deliquium was diaphanous to the length of a
barley-corn, and of the color of Bourdeaux wine: the lower part un-coagulated,
and like Tent wine. 9. It is to be noted, that the reflection of the Glasses in
all the Liquors, they being held up to the light, (except the spirit of Sal
Armoniack) did create a corona of several colors, mixed with green, blew, and
so as not one resembled the other. That with the oleum Tartari per deliquium
resembled the blew in Bourdeaux wine, with an eye of green.
I had forgot to relate how I kept some of the blood in a separate Pottinger;
and it seemed excellently well colored; when it coagulated, the top was of a
due red, the bottom blackish red; the serum of a due transparency and
proportion, and not tinged to citrine color: and coagulated all as the white
of an egg over a gentle fire.

I poured also upon the blood in two other Pottingers; upon the one spirit of
Hartshorn; on the other spirit of Sal Armoniack, but not much: perhaps a dram
or more: that with the spirit of Hartshorn at first seemed more florid, then
that with the spirit of Sal Armoniack: both coagulated into Masses after a
while, and were then both of one color on the surface: but that with the
spirit of Sal Armoniack coagulated its Mass so as to break from the sides: that
with the spirit of Hartshorn did not break from the sides; whether the blood
of one, and the other might differ, I know not; but both immediately followed
one the other. That blood which had nothing mixed with it, after coagulation,
differed not from the other two, though they were covered over with the spirits
as soon as they were taken, and that exposed only to the Air.

After a while upon the surface of that with the Kings-Bath-water, there was a
kind of fatty cremor which covered the whole surface; and so on that with the
Queens-Bath-water: the others had none at all.

On Monday after dinner, the next day after I had bled, I came to observe
again; and found,

1. That with the Sal fraxini to be more and more diaphanous, resembling
Bourdeaux wine: that with the Sal abscynthii less diaphanous, but red still. 2.
I observed the Solution of Allom, and however it looked black, yet being held
in a clear light, one might discover in it visible appearances of a deep red. I
poured on it some spirit of Sal Armoniack, to see if it would restore the
color: but in stead of that the liquor coagulated presently into little
massulae or flakes, resembling raw flesh when the blood is washed out. 3. There
was no alteration in that with the spirit of Sal Armoniack. 4. That with the
Queens-Bath-water continued more diaphanously red toward the top: but that
with the Kings-Bath water, did not lose its redness, though it were not
diaphanous near the surface. 5. Of the two Pottingers in which were the spirits
of Hearts horn, and Sal Armoniack, though both were coagulated, yet that with
the spirit of Sal Armoniack was the most florid. 6. That with the Oleum
Tartari* per deliquium continued red, but lost its diaphaneity at the top
almost quite. 7. That with the Sal prunellae after the coagulated Mass had
subsided, had on the top of it in the middle of the Glass, to the breadth of
sixpence, a concrete gelly, exactly resembling that of the clearest
Hartshorn, not boiled up to its greatest height; from hence protended certain
filaments, with which it was fastened to the mass of blood, which was buoyed up
thereby, so that it touched not the bottom; the jelly was insipid and stuck to
my finger, when I touched it: whether that little which did so adhere took off
from the equipollency of the two bodies; or whether I broke casually some of
the protended filaments, or from what other cause I know not; but after a while
the Mass sunk quite to the bottom, and drew the gelatine below the surface of
the water. 8. Upon the pouring out of the blood, that with the Queens-Bath
water happened to seem of a pure Claret, like Bourdeaux wine, no settling, or
floating filaments, but something red, which resembled exactly the flying Lee
in bo^led Claret. 9. That of the Kings-Bath-water appeared as the former, only
at the latter end, as it was poured out, there was a certain gelutine mixed
with it, and sticking to the sides, that for color and consistence exactly
resembled the jelly of red currants. 10. That with the spirit of Sal Armoniack
upon effus^on, appeared like deep Bourdeaux wine, and so from top to bottom
without any alteration. 11. Upon the effusion of that with the salt of
Wormwood, it appeared also like to Bourdeaux wine; but toward the bottom there
was Gelatine red, like that of red currants, more tenacious and in greater
quantity then was in that mixture with the Kings-Bath-water. 12. That with the
sal fraxini poured out like common or less deep Claret: at the bottom there was
no Gelatine, but it ran a little thicker like to Tent wine. 13. That with the
Oleum Tartari per deliquium, upon its first effusion ran like Claret a little
decayed: but the most of it dropped, as if it were a weak Gelatine, and so
continued to the last, being almost of as deep color as a ripe Mulberry; I
poured upon some of the said jelly almost as much of the spirit of Sal
Armoniack, and it immediately dissolved all the jelly, and made it fluid, yet
so as that the bloody crassam^nt appeared unequally mixed, some parts being
more deep and opacous then others. 14. I took the Pottinger in which was the
blood with the spirit of Hartshorn affused to it, having separated the mass
from the sides of it, I poured out the Serum, which was as black as common Ink:
the surface was red, but not so florid as that with the affused spirit of Sal
Armoniack: most of the melancholy blood seemed dissolved into that black Serum,
the super-incumbent mass being thin. 15. That blood on which the spirit of Sal
Armoniack was poured in the Pottinger, appeared from top to bottom red, only in
the bottom there were some little spots of a blackish and darker red then the
other parts: on the surface there was a Gelatinous pellicle generated: the
Serum was of a citrine color: the consistence of the coagulated mass of blood
here was more tenacious and fibrous then in that other Pottinger with the
affused spirit of Hartshorn: There was no pellicle discoverable upon that with
the spirit of Hartshorn; upon that with the spirit of Sal Armoniack so tough
an one, that it would bear up a little way in your hand the whole mass of blood
adhering to it. 16. The blood which was kept in a Pottinger without any
mixture, being placed in an arched fire on a fire-shovel burned with a bright
and continued flame, as if it had been Turpentine, but crackled like a green
bay-leaf cast into the fire: and so it did being cast immediately into the
fire, but the crackling was less durable, by reason of the vivid fire into
which it was cast. It is to be noted that this pottinger having been removed
into the Sun, all the Serum was exhaled or incorporated into the mass, which
was grown to the bottom of the Pottinger, and dried there, so that I scraped it
off: whether that might add to the Phenomenon I know not. 17. The blood in
that Pottinger where the spirit of Hartshorn was affused, being taken out and
placed in an arched fire, rose up with an equal intumescence, as a cake does in
an Oven; it crackled much less then the unmixed mass of blood: It burned
slowly, with a continual but not vivid flame, and in such a manner as if the
mass had never taken fire, but only the smoke issuing from it; for one might
easily see an interstice betwixt the mass and hovering flame all the while,
till it came to a perfect Ignition. 18. The mass which had spirit of Sal
Armoniack affused unto it, being placed in an arched fire, did rise with an
equal intumescence, but greater then that with the spirit of Hartshorn: it
crackled less then that with spirit of Hartshorn: the flame at first resembled
that of the other; afterward instead of hovering about, it seemed to issue
immediately from the blood, and not to appear like a smoke that took fire
within the arch; the flame then was vivid, and continued. 19. The fire being an
exceeding quick fire, I poured some of the serous blood that was in the
Pottinger, impregnated with the affusion of the spirit of Sal Armoniack, and as
it dried it took fire presently, the flame resembled that of the former mass,
only it wasted faster then that, being cast upon so quick a fire: The black
Serum of the coagulated mass with affused spirit of Hartshorn, though cast
into the same fire, would scarce burn at all. 20. I took some of the mass that
was impregnated with the Sal prunellae, and placed it in an arched fire (the
Serum or Solution poured off from it was insipid) it rose with an unequal
intumescence copling, like a loaf, in the midst: I brought it to a perfect
ignition and coal, yet did it not crackle at all, neither burn till the last,
and then but a little, and with an interrupted flame which seized now on this,
now on that part: nay, there was but very little sign of any Sal prunellae in
it to sputter as it burned. 21. I told you how I poured some spirit of Sal
Armoniack, upon the mixture of blood and a Solution of Allom, and of the odd
coagulation that happened thereupon into white massulae which seemed like flesh
when the blood is wasted out of it: I took of those incoherent flakes or
massulae, and putting them to burn in an arched fire upon the fire-shovell, it
run all off, upon a great ebullition, into the fire: I took the red hot
fire-shovell, and placed some more upon it, which seemed to burn as Allom does
in the like case, and so stayed on it: but being put into the arched fire, and
brought to ignition, it would neither flame, nor crackle, nor left any visible
quantity of coal or ashes behind it, as if it had almost all evaporated. 22.
These were the Phenomenon which I had opportunity to take notice of at that
time: but I also left a Solution of the Alcali of Nitre of about three ounces
with the Apothecary, if any else came to bleed there in my absence: upon
bleeding, an healthy young man that was somewhat indisposed, some was suffered
to stream into that Solution: at first it was of a florid red, but paler then
blood usually is, resembling a bastard-scarlet: after some days standing I
found it of a deeper red from top to bottom: one half of it was transparent
like to the duller and more decayed sort of Claret: the other half seemed like
Tent-wine, not diaphanous: on the surface there was a cremor which extended it
self almost all over it: Upon pouring it out, it appeared all to be of a
blood-red, only that which ran last was of a deeper dye: at the bottom there
was a kind of Gelatine like to that of red Currants, which rendered the one
half of it opacous: it was no way dis- colored, nor unequally mixed: the spirit
of Sal Armoniack being poured on it, did render it fluid presently and
transparent.
Having occasion after some weeks stay at the Bath, to ride in extreme hot
weather above 200 miles in a few days, and being tired with watching and the
journey, and being wet very much with a great shower of rain at my return, I
went immediately into the Cross-Bath for half an hour, to prevent any
inconveniences that might befall me upon such travel: but at my coming out of
the Bath I felt so violent a defluxion into my throat, and the adjacent
Glandules, that I apprehended some danger of a Squinoncy, which yet I avoided
by bleeding, purging, and other means together, with the use of the same Bath
after all: when I was to bleed, I was willing to try some further Experiments
in Liquers, different from the former, and the Observations I made were these.

1. I caused two veins to be opened in the left arm at once, and received one
Pottinger out of the Mediana, and the other out of the Cephalica: my intent in
that was to observe (as I had done once before in my self) whether the blood of
two veins in the same arm would yield different blood: if so, then I thought
that it might not be indifferent in what vein a man bleeds, though they all
arise from one trunk of the vena cava; and that we might justly have regard to
those cautions of our observing Ancestors, not to bleed those veins
promiscuously, but some in one case, and some in another. I was confirmed in
those sentiments by the Phenomenon I met with a second time in the trial, as
other observations have satisfied me about the doctrine of revulsion, and its
truth. Having taken one Pottinger out of the Mediane, and another out of the
Cephalica, I stopped the Mediane, and continued to bleed into the liquors out
of the Cephalic. In the first, issuing out of the two bloods, I could find no
difference in the color or consistence; but after standing three or four
hours, that of the Mediane had much less of Serum in it: the Serum thereof
seemed Limpid in the Pottinger: but that of the Cephalic was citrine-coloured:
that of the Mediane somewhat of a volatile saline pungency upon the tongue,
different from the taste, which the other Serum had, that being very salt: that
of the Mediane had a bluish Gelatine gathered upon the top of the condensed
mass of blood; the other had none, but was of a florid red on the top. After
two days I came to look on them again, and upon turning the coagulated mass of
blood in the pottinger, that of the Mediana had much more of black toward the
bottom, then the other: and also a thinner surface of red then that of the
Cephalic. 2. To carry on the Experiment of mixing several liquors with blood,
I bled into some ounces of Aqua mirabilis, which grew deep colored almost unto
the top, which was transparent and of the color of Mant-wine almost: after
some hours the Liquor became of a bright beautiful Claret-colour almost unto
the bottom, where there was an opacous, darkened settling, with an enaeorema of
contexed filaments pretended to the top. The Wasps flocked to that glass in
great numbers, and drowned themselves in it, not meddling with any other of the
subsequent glasses. After two days was little changed, only the beautiful
Claret was somewhat darkened. 3. I bled upon some ounces of Treacle-water, which
turned as black as Ink presently, but continued the blood perfectly fluid: The
red was so destroyed, that the Aluminous Solution did not equal it; there not
being upon inclination of the glass the least sign of any incarnadine; and so
it continued for two days, no variation happening. 4. I bled upon some ounces
of Cinnamon Water, which turned of a pale red; i^ I held up the glass to the
light, it seemed almost to the top opacously red as Tent wine; but, if viewed
otherwise it seemed of a paler red, approaching to bastardscarlet. After a
while it seemed as if all the blood were coagulated into one mass from top to
bottom, subsiding a little within the tinged Cinnamon Water. Upon agitation and
stirring with a knife, it appeared that the fibers of the blood were so
destroyed, that this mass was no coherent thing, but broken into little
massulae, or parcels of a pale red, such as the subsiding curds are in whey.
After two days I viewed it, and found the Phenomenon of the whole Glass to
look cherrycoloured, but the incoherent massulae were of a pale red. 5. I bled
into some ounces of Aqua Bezoarticae, that did coagulate with the blood, so
that it all fell in one incoherent mass toward the bottom: but whether there
happened to be a greater proportion of blood in the glass, or for some other
cause, the coagulated blood filled almost all the water, much beyond what we
observed in the Cinnamon Water: the consistence of the one, and the other
massulae were like the curds in whey; these were of a pale red retaining to
whitishness; and so it continued two days; the small quantity of water
appearing in it giving no opportunity for further Observations. 6. I bled upon
some ounces of Nantes-Brandy, it gave us a more tenacious curd then the former,
of a pale red: but the mass and liquour was opacous toward the bottom, so as
to appear like Tent-wine, in what light soever I placed it. After two days that
of the Brandy which was fluid, (the curd not being answerable to the Aqua
Bezoartica) was of a pretty florid red, the coagulated mass was of a brick
color. 7. I bled upon some ounces of Anise seed water drawn from the grounds
of beer, it yielded a mixture of a deep blood red from top to bottom, somewhat
transparent. The mass coagulated from top to bottom, the curd was of a deeper
red then the others, and of such a tenaciousness as is to be sound in the soft
curd of possets. After two days it turned blackish, the coherent curd being of
a little lighter red. 8. My indisposition, and other cares permitted me not to
prosecute these Experiments as I did the other: but one curiosity more
possessed me, to put two drams of spirit of Hartshorn into a pottinger, and to
bleed thereupon, to see if it would alter the Phenomenon from what it is, if
the spirit of Hartshorn be poured on the blood: I did so, and ^ found at this
time that it kept my blood from coagulating into such masses as otherwise it
would, but the blood turned blackishly-red, and in it there was observed a
crimson gelatine, which run off the knife as jelly of red currants would, when
beginning to cool. After two days it continued still fluid, but blackish. I
have sundry times tried that way of putting spirit of Hartshorn into the
pottinger first, and then caused them to bleed upon it with this success, that
immediately it spoils the red, giving it a more dirty color, and casts up a
mucous phlegm, (such as I never saw in any blood upon other Essays) just like
what many spit and blow out of their noses in catarrhs: this covers all the
pottinger, without any mixture of blood in it, and would be white, but that the
subjacent blood gives it another muddy color. The blood under it was always
fluid, and unequally mixed with parts of a bright and blackish red. Whether my
journey, or distemper prevented that appearance in my blood, I know not. 9. I
had a Patient there which had unknowingly taken much of Mercurius dulcis in
pills at Lo^^o^, to her great prejudice several ways: and though she had taken
golden-bullets, and used other means to discharge her body of that troublesome
Inmate, yet found little benefit: At the Bath I let her blood, and to try an
Experiment I cast a Guinny into one of the middle Pottingers as she bled: I
could observe no difference betwixt the blood preceding, and that therein: but
in the afternoon I came and went to that pottinger which had the most florid
and best colored blood, and searching there found my gold, and that stained
with white spots from the Mercury on the lower side. Whether the separation of
the Mercury, or some other efficacy in the Gold (of whose power in such cases I
can give good instances) caused that difference in the bloods, I cannot tell,
having never tried it since.
Being not well at Warwick, by reason of a violent defluxion into the Glandules
of the Throat, I caused my self to bleed October. 20.
1. I took six drams of spirit of Hearts horn, not very well rectified, nor
clear of color, and put it into a crystal-glass; and bled thereupon about half
an ounce of blood; it turned of a dark red presently, inclining much to black,
though, as it stood, or as it was held on one side, you might perceive a
lighter, but not florid red at the sides. It seemed fluid for two days; but as
I poured it out it appeared to be very Gelatinous, and of color like that
which is become sanious, and degenerated into blackishness with keeping. 2. I
bled upon the same liquor of Saltpeter, about half an ounce of blood, upon
four ounces of liquor, at first the blood did turn on the surface to a
bastard-scarlet (which is an effect every thing of Nitre mixed with blood so
produces) afterward the whole blood sunk to the bottom, the upper part being
all of one color and consistence, such as is observed in the Serum of the
blood sometimes, when the supernatancy is whitish, and not transparent. Being
poured from the blood, I found that coagulated into a mass, which was all of a
very natural red all over, only spotted in many places underneath with black
spots. The concretion was so brittle, that it would not hang together, nor
endure any light-pressure, but as it were melted, and seemed gelatinous. 3. I
bled upon a Solution of the Alcali of Nitre; it appeared upon the first mixture
like bastard-scarlet; then the blood sunk to the bottom, the top being
transparent, yet of the color of High-countrey-white-wine: the bottom seemed
redder then that of the former; the limpid liquor being poured out, seemed all
gelatinous, and had incorporated with it the serous part of the blood: the red
at the bottom was fluid and not tenacious, but of the consistence that blood is
of when it is hot, and newly received in a vessel out of the veins.

N. B. After I had poured out the blood and mixtures out of the several
glasses, and that the glasses had stood a while, I observed that that of the
raw Liquor of Nitre, which remained in the bottom, did turn of a most beautiful
red, as ever I saw in any thing: but that with the spirit of Hartshorn, or
Solution of Alcali, etc. did not vary: after two days all the remains of blood
in the several glasses turned blackish and sanious, only that with the raw
liquour altered not.

4. I bled upon the liquors of Saltpeter which had passed the ashes, and on
that which had never passed the ashes: both were of the same blackish and
sanious color (after the first bastard-scarlet was past) both had on the top a
certain cremor, which being cast into the fire discovered it self to be
nitrous: both of them, though they were of such a dirty red inclining to black,
yet were they of one consistence from top to bottom all fluid, nothing
gelatinous, nor any one part blacker, or redder then the other. Which is very
much, considering the difference of the two Liquors. 5. I bled upon the
unctuous Mothers of Saltpeter, which turned at first to a bastard-scarlet: the
blood did never mix with the Mothers, nor otherwise ting their color, then as
it cast a shadow by its innating on the surface of them. It coagulated on the
top of the Mothers, being of color all thorough exactly like to Ocher: the
concretion was a quarter of an inch thick, a firm mass to se^ to, like so much
bees wax cast into a cake: I took it up in one mass with my knife but trying
its tenaciousness, I found it as brittle as most short cakes are. Upon the
surface, there was an appearance of certain striae, which might be saline. All
the blood did not coagulate so, but underneath there was a quantity which in
the glass was of equal dimensions with the other mass, it was of the color of
Oker, and fluid, and would not mix with the Mothers at all: I took of the mass,
and tried to burn it in an arched fire twice or thrice, it boiled and bubled up
upon the fire-shovel, like impure Niter, and so burned with a flashing, as if
it had been most of it Peter, it never came to flame as blood does usually;
only one blaze as it were always hovered over it for a moment or two, not being
continued to the body, otherwise then by a parcel of smoke issuing out them. 6.
I took also two pottingers of blood, the first and the last of the blood I took
away: there was no difference in the blood of one and the other; the coagulated
mass well-colored, of a good consistence, less of that black or melancholic
crastament then is commonly found: the Serum well colored, of taste brinish: I
placed it in an arched fire, it rose up with a globous intumescence (but
crackled not so much as at Bathe; though very much, and like a bay-leaf) it
burned with a continued, vivid, and lasting flame.
I suffered a pottinger of the same blood with which this last Experiment was
made, to stand ten days or more, in which time it was quite dried up into a
hard fryable mass, the top of which was almost as black as Ink, the bottom
having somewhat of a dark red in it. I cast a piece of it into a quick
coal-fire; therein it crackled like unto a bay-leaf, but burned with a short
and weak flame. I placed another part of it upon a fire-shovel in an arched and
quick fire, where it crackled as much as the other did (and more then that part
of the same blood which was burned in the foregoing Experiment of blood newly
congealed, and separated from the Serum, which was in this last case dried into
the mass) and it did burn with a vivid and continued flame presently. Which
accident I take notice of, to show the different Phenomenon upon the diverse
way of burning the blood. I took a third portion of the said congealed and firm
mass of blood, and put it to some cold water in a Glass, and it dissolved most
of it therein, and tinged the water of as beautiful a red as any claret, though
otherwise the mass were blackish, and had nothing of red but what was in the
extimous crust of the bottom, which seemed of a most deep red inclining to
black.

I suffered two or three spoonfuls of Hogs-blood to run into a large
Venice-Glass, in which was half a pint of the Mothers of Peter; I suffered it
to stand some days, and comeing then to see it, I observed that the Mothers
were become opacous almost to the bottom, on the top was a mass of coagulated
blood exactly resembling the color of Oker; it was so firm, that I took it
with my knife in one entire piece, but I found the top and bottom of the mass
(which was pretty thick) to be very soft, but not as it were fibrous; the
middle was more firm: I put some of it upon a fire-shovell in an arched and
quick fire, when it boiled up, and ran about, and by its sputtering discovered
a mixture of Saltpeter: but it did not flame at all, though I brought it to
ignition. Examineing the remaining Mothers, I found a sanguine mixture to float
in, and stain the liquor of an Oker-colour, and some of it was aggregated into
little masses or lumps, whose particles did not cohere by any tenacious fibers
(indeed I have not been able to observe any tenaciously-fibrous coagulations in
the blood of Hogs hitherto) but upon the least touch of my warn^ hand, they
dissolved or yielded unto the least pressure. Out of all which I intend to
deduce, that some common Experiments may show that, which no Chemical Fires
give any light unto. That there is a great diversity betwixt the blood of other
Animals, and that of Men: because that upon the same Liquors they disclose
different Phenomenon; and consequently that the Transfusion is a rash and
unsafe attempt.

I shall conclude with this intimation, that neither is the lood of several
Animals, nor the blood of the same kind of Animals the same; but in taste and
color of the Serum there will be often a sensible difference, and it is
rational to think the like of the blood it self: nor do they burn or coagulate
alike, or with the like Phenomenon: nor is the blood of the same Men always the
same, though he continue within the latitude of Health; and in diseases
Epidemical let two bleed, and there shall often be no affinity The other day
coming into my Apothecaries Shop, and finding one (not otherwise very ill)
going to bleed, I sent for a bottle of that Lixivium of Saltpeter which had
passed the ashes, and into the first pottinger which he bled, which seemed to
have little of crimson in it, but a Serum of a darkblew color; I poured a
little of it, and it turned black, though it continued fluid: Into the third
pottinger which seemed better blood, with a red color, I poured some of the
same liquor, and it improved the color, and kept it from coagula^ion awhile;
what happened afterward I had not leisure to observe.
in the color of their blood, or in the Serum, the one being white and turbid,
the other Limpid, the Serum of the third citrine-coloured. And if so, what
regulations shall we have for this operation: shall a transfuse he knows not
what, to correct he knows not what, God knows how? This may become indeed that
sort of men, being the worst and most irrational Empirics the Sun ever shined
upon, as I demonstrate more fully in my Letter to a Physician, in a Parallel
betwixt them and the ancient Empirics.

Let them from these Observations draw their sophistical Conclusions for and
against spirit of Hearts horn; for, and against spirit of Sal Armoniack; against
Allom, and Treaclewater, and such like; till all the world come to admire them
as much as I: And that there be a new History penned to render them as
contemptible as this magnifies, by a Rhetoric that has more of the nature of
the Microscope, then of Truth.

Miscellaneous Additions by way of Postscript.
Whatever may seem to be said from hence in favor of the spirit of
Hartshorn, is not so valid as may be imagined: for I have mixed a little of
the Solution of the Alcali of Nitre (which turned Syrup of Violets green, and
rendered it less fluid) upon the blood of a man, which was blackish, waterish,
and ill-coloured, after it began somewhat to coagulate, and I brought it to a
new fluidity, and as vivid a red as ever I saw: and so it continued for 24
hours; at my return after two days, I found the blood in the Pottinger, (by
reason of the Sun on the window) all coagulated, and become friable; but even
that it had visible signs of a remaining redness, which the other blood that
had nothing effused retained not. Oil of vitriol affused to the Serum of blood,
tinged with the crimson part, does improve the red for an instant or two, but
then it turns black and coagulates into a soft mass, that admits the least
impression; the fibers being destroyed: but yet it burns rather better,
brighter, and quicker then otherwise; being poured on the surface of coagulated
blood, on the top whereof was tough pellicle generated; it did not eat the
pellicle, but in one night reduced the Mass, almost to the bottom, into a
consistence like to Bees wax, which burnt well.

In January last 1669. I had another occasion to bleed, but though the
Phenomenon of my blood upon the Mothers of Salt peter were the same as at
first; yet in the other mixture with Salt-peter-liquors, they were not: the
blood separately taken seemed not to differ from the former, only the Serum was
a little yellower: it did burn as well as before, but crackled much less. At
the same time I caused an old man to be let blood for a catarrh and pain in his
shoulder, which he used to ease with bleeding; the blood seemed very good and
well-colored; after it had stood a while I had the leisure to view it, and
upon one pottinger of coagulated blood, I poured twenty drops of spirit of
Vitriol, whereupon immediately all the top turned as white as milk, even the
bubbles which seemed of blood before: whereupon I took another pottinger, and
separated half the blood from the Serum, and poured on the blood and Serum some
spirit of Vitriol as before: presently all the Serum became of color and
consistence like milk: the blood turned black, and hardened into a substance
that cut like white-washed-wax: the other, at my return, I found of the
consistence and color of a common custard. The vitriolated Serum would not
flame: the vitriolated blood did burn with a brisk but short flame: the simple
blood would scarce burn at all, but with an hovering and discontinued flame.

I took also some of the pure citrine Serum of my blood, which tasted not very
salt; I set it in the window for some time: during the frost it coagulated into
a body of the consistence of butter in the heat of Summer: it gathered no Ice
at all: the color became less citrine; but still pellucid. I set it after some
days to thaw; which it did immediately before the fire, but came not to its
former fluidity, but like oil: after that, it coagulated with the warmth
before the fire, and seemed exactly like to boiled Turpentine, but that it
wanted the smell: it would not flame at all (though crackled much, as salt) yet
I brought it to ignition.

I did also take some Hogs blood again, and poured on the Mothers of Peter, it
mixed not; only after some days some filamentary corpuscles subsided unto the
middle of the liquor: the color at first was a pale bastard scarlet: but after
a day it turned to a darkish red, and so continued many days; and in its
primitive fluidity, it suffering not any alteration, but being as fluid as when
it first issued from the veins: it stood in the window all the frost, not
changing or freezing at all. No more did another pottinger of my blood that was
mixed with the liquor of Peter which had past the ashes: but that last blood
turned very blackish.

In fire, notwithstanding any thing I have done or purposed about the nature of
blood, I do now desist from the Enquiry: the result of my thoughts being this,
that there is a continual vatiation in the blood upon every disease, and often
without it, during a state of health: that the blood of Individuals of the same
kind differs not only from it self, but in each other individual: that no man
can by reason of this consideration know what he would transfuse; nor what it
is he would rectify. In a word, that it is most prudential to insist upon
Experienced Methods in Physic, and that all phancies about spirit, salt,
sulphur, fermentative fires in the heart, occasioned by heterogeneous mixtures,
and the explications of the operations of Medicaments by the n^w Philosophers,
either Chemical or others, are all vain, and cannot be allowed as a ground of
practice, till justified by successful trials; seeing that not only the
suppositions are false, but whilst the blood is sub diminio animae, effects
upon it are different from what when it is separate: and I think I may thence
conclude rationally, that it is not conceivable that the fabric of our bodies
is purely Mechanical: for the liquors would have the same effect on the blood
in the body, and without: which they have not.

A REVIEW of the precedent Discourse against Mr. GLANVILL.
AFter I had written the present Discourse, I was so unwilling to give any
offense to the world, and so apprehensive lest my just indignation for the
affront Mr. Glanvill had put upon my Faculty, should transport me beyond all
fitting moderation, that I desired a Friend, (without further advising with me)
to blot out whatever he might in prudence think equitable; by reason of his
great cautiousness, as well as thorough that great haste and continual
interruptions wherein the Treatise was penned; I find several passages either
omitted totally, or not sufficiently explained; so as that I could not
acquiesce in the publication thereof, without some few additions, partly to
prevent some cavills that might (though weakly) be raised against it, and
partly to put every thing past dispute hereafter; that so I might not have any
further occasion to write against our Virtuoso, nor his Abettors have any thing
to do but to call in his Libell against the Physicians, and do some reasonable
justice to those he had so arrogantly and injuriously insulted over. I desire
my Reader to pardon me, if I have not in some circumstantial embellishmeats and
regularity of procedure answered his expectation, since in the main I am sure I
have outdone it.

Whereas I charge Mr. Glanvill (page 2.) with not having read the Authors which
he mentions. These words, Who can choose but smile, when he reads how Apuleius
improved the Mathematics after Euclide? the whole passage should have run
thus; Who can choose but smile when he reads how Apuleius improved Arithmetic?
All that Apuleius did was to to translate something about Arithmetic into
Latin, at such time as the Latins had no other Numerals then L*. M. D. C,
etc. And by reason of this performance of his does Vossius give him a place
amongst the Authors, not improvers of Arithmetic: and takes notice of him as
the first that ever writ in Latin about that subject. Upon which account it
Vossius de Scient. Math^^. ^. 51. sect 1.
was judiciously done of Vossius to mention him there; but Mr. Glanvill is
grossly mistaken here to name him, where he treats of such as advanced useful
knowledge; which a bare Translation does not. It is true, Vossius says of
Apuleius, Primus Arithmeticam Latinis literis Apuleius Arithmeticam Nicomachi
Geras^ni Pythagorici Latin transtulit test Cassiod^r^ de mathem. discipl.
cap. de Arithm. and Isidor^ Hisp. Orig. iij. ^ Jonss. de script. Hist. phil. l.
3. c. 13. p. 280.
illustravit: which words import no more then I say; and it is manifest, that
what He did was but a Translation of Nichomachus. So Cassiodorus d^ mathem.
disciplinis. cap. de Arithmetica. Reliquae disciplinae indigent Arithmetica
disciplina, quam apud Graecos Nicomachos diligenter exposuit. Hunc primum
Madaurensis Apuleiu^, deinde magnificus vir Boethius Latino sermon translatu^^
Romany contulit lectitandum. The same is asserted by Isidorus Hispalensis.
This might our Virtuoso have observed in Vossius de s^i^n^ ^^th^m. c 10 s^^t^^.
Blancanus Mathem. Ch^^nol* se^ul. 15
Vossius, when he read him: and what Apuleius performed is so meanly thought of
by Blancnaus, that in his Chronicles of Mathematicians he affords him no place,
though he mention the Arithmetical work of Boethius, The imputation I fix upon
Mr. Glanvill, for not understanding what the Authors he mentions had writ, and
about his not having ever seen them, is manifest to any man that shall not only
trace him by Vossius, Vossius de sci^^^. Mathem* Mr. Glanvill p. 47, 4^, etc. ^
but consider the ridiculous characters he fixes upon the Writers alleged,
viz. Ptolomy of Alexandra made considerable improvements in Optics: and
Alhazenus the Arabian is famous for what he did in it. From these Vitellio drew
his, and advanced the Science by his own wit and their helps. S. Stevinus both
invented and writ such in all parts of the pure and practical Mathematics, in
Geography, Geometry, Navigation, Mechanics, etc. that never did ^^y one, no,
nor all the Virtu^si in England or Europe, ever equalled, or pursued: From
hence it is ^pp^rent Mr. Glanvill, and his Abettors never read him: he was the
first Proposer I know of, and before my Lard Bacon, of a Society to carry on
Exper ments in order to the rectifying many ^^^o^^s, and impr^ving many known
truths* an Admirer of the Ancients, and th^^^ learning.
Stevinus corrected Euclid, Achazen, and Vitellio, in some fundamental
Propositions that were mistakes; and in the room substituted considerable
inventions of his own. Roger Bacon writ acutely of Optics. -- Any man will
grant, that he who gave so lame an account of these Authors, never was
acquainted with them, nor understood particularly what they writ, or added of
their own invention: whether new theoremes, or different and new demonstrations
of old known truths. Whereas he says that Roger Bacon was accused of Magic to
Pope Clement the fourth, and thereupon imprisoned: but the accusation was
founded on nothing but his skill in Mathematics, and the ignorance of his
Accusers. -- Assertions of this nature are not so easily passed by, so many
learned and judicious persons having reckoned him in the number of Magicians;
such are Joannes Wierus J^. Wierus de praest^daem. l. 2. c. 2.
and other Daemonographers. That the said Writer might declaim against Magic,
or deny the possibility of it, and yet practice it, is an usual procedure with
Vide Bodin. in prae^. ad daemonomaniam.
that sort of people: and that his works have in them sundry Propositions that
are superstitious and magical is granted by Delcio; such happily was that which
Franciscus Se^ Gabr: Naudaeus his History of Magic chapter 17.
Picus says he had read in his book of the sixth Science, where he affirms,
that a man may become a Prophet, and foretell things to come by the means of the
Glass Almucheti, composed according to the rules of perspective, provided he
made use of it under a good constellation, and had beforehand made his body
very even, and put it into a good temper by Chemistry.

As to what I say about Orontius, I add the words of Sir H. Savile in his
Lectures, p. 71. Josephus Scaliger -- hom^ omnium mortalium, ne Orontio quidem
excepto, (...).

Whereas I say ( p. 3.) that the ancient Physicians did not only cure
cut-fingers, and invented Diapalma and and other Medicaments in order
thereunto. I add (what I know not how was omitted) that it is notorious how
all our Herbals and Druggists have explained the nature and use of Medicaments
according to the Doctrine of the Elements, and qualities either arising
therfrom, or from the peculiar mixture of the parts: and whosoever has acted,
or shall proceed according to those notions in compliance with the Ancients,
shall not stand in need of any novel Method from the Virtuosi to salve a
cut-finger.

What I have said in the first and second sheet concerning the Barometer (as
they call it) that it does not determine exactly, neither the weight nor
pressure of the air, wind, or clouds, is an opinion which the more I think
upon, the more I am confirmed in; nor do I doubt that others will be as
scrupulous as I in their assent to our dogmatizing Virtuoso, when they shall
seriously consider what follows, and accommodate it to the Elasticity and
gravity of the Atmosphear.

First, when our Virtuoso speaks of the Elasticity of the Air, he understands
thereby a body whose constituent particles are of a peculiar configuration and
texture, distinct from what can be ascribed to earth, water, or fire? That the
Air near the earth is such an heap of little bodies lying one upon another, as
may be resembled to a fleece of wool; for this (to omit other likenesses
betwixt them) consists of many slender flexible hairs; each of which may indeed
like a little Spring, be easily bent or rouled up; but will also, like a
Spring, be still endeavoring to stretch it self out again. For, though both
these Hairs, and the Aerial corpuscles to which we like them, do easily yield
to external pressures; yet each of them (by virtue of its structure) is endowed
with a power Mr. Boil in his first part of Experiments of the Air: Experim.
1. I desire my Reader to take notice about the Elasticity of the Air, that the
very names of Elater and Elasticity are of a more ancient mention then the
being of the Society: Regius and Pecquetus use the terms: and that as to the
expansive motion of the Air, it is proposed by several Cartesians, and before
them by Kircher de maynet. l. 2. part. 1. progymn. 3. See also Mersenn. and
Schottuss mechanic pneumat. hydraul: So that the Society can pretend to nothing
but the similitude of a fleece of wool, and the explicating it by that way.
or principle of self-dilatation; by virtue whereof, though the Hairs may by a
man's hand be bent and crowded closer together, and into a narrower room then
suits best with the nature of the body: yet whilst the compression lasts, there
is in the fleece they compose or endeavor outward, whereby it continually
thrusts against the hand that opposes its expansion. And upon the removal of
the external pressure by opening the hand more or less, the compressed wool
does as it were spontaneously Page 59.
expand or display it self toward the recovery of i^s former loose and free
condition, till the fleece have either regained its former dimensions, or at
least, approved them as near as the compressing hand, (perchance not quite
opened) will permit. -- Against this I except not only that this supposition is
far from a sensible Philosophy; but that whosoever would weigh the Air exactly,
and estimate the accession of weight which the Air receives from winds, clouds,
or vapors (the thing Mr. Glanvill promises us) must weigh the Air singly
first, and in its utmost degree of expansion, otherwise he can never tell what
its gravity is, or what accessional it receives by its Elasticity, by
exhalations and different mixtures: But this is not done by the Barometer
(however it be essayed in the experiment of Aristotle very judiciously) but
only an imaginary column or Cylinder of Air, and its pressure upon the Mercury
is considered: which procedure seems to me as ridiculous, as if a man should
lay a fleece of wool, or any other body upon any thing, and there being above
that an incumbent body of lead (or the like) bearing thereon, yet should he
proceed to say that he weighed the fleece of wool and not the incumbent lead:
for as yet no discoveries have acquainted the world with the nature of that
Ether which is above the Atmosphere, whether it gravitate or press upon the
subjacent Thus the Moon according to the Cartesian^ by its pressure upon the
waters, causes the Tides on Farth.
Air (which a very subtle but rapid body may do) nor what effects the
Libration of the Moon and other Planets may have by way of pressure upon the
contiguous bodies, which pressure may be communicated to the terrestrial Air:
and without the determination hereof* it is as vain to pretend to weigh the Air
by this Barometer, as to determine of the weight of a board that presses a
Cheese in the Vat, without considering the superin^^mbent stone. Neither are we
informed sufficiently what the Figure of the Ether is, whether it make a
con^^^^ and so encompass the Atmosphear; or also be interspersed with, and
differently move therein; nor what effects those motions and agitations of it
have upon the grosser corpuscles of the Atmosphere, (not only in abating of
their gravity sometimes, but adding to them a levitation: nor is it explicated
yet what effects the corpuscular rays of the fixed Stars and Planets may have
in or upon the Atmosphere, adding to its gravity, (as it is just to imagine,
since that eminent Virtuoso, the Pliny of our Age for lying, but a Virtuoso!
could wash his hands in the beams of the Moon) or Elasticity, of which those
intercurrent corpuscles seem not void (though Sir K. D of Simp. p. 43. Charlton
de fulm^ne.
not Aerie) which constitute Thunder, Lightning, etc. or diminishing them both
in order to the Phenomenon, which occur daily.

Secondly, it does not yet appear by any thing alleged by our Experimental
Philosophers, that for certain the Air which encompasseth the Earth is a
distinct body of a different structure from the Earth and Water that compose
the Terraqueous Globe. Isaac Vossius does think the Air to be nothing Is. Voss
de motu mar. and vent. c. 21 p. 94.
else but watrish exhalations drawn up by the Sun. -- Credimus Aerem esse
Aquam seu humorem dilatatum, ad legem aequilibrii quaquaversum se extendentem.
If it be so, it is a vain supposition which attributes such Aeris elementum
juxta sacra eloquia nihil aliud est quam humidi: quaedam perpetuo occuperantis
subtlissimae and spirabilis substantia. Kircher. Iter ecstat. 2 dial. 2. c. 3.
a structure to the Air, as is repugnant: to the water: Others there are which
make the Atmosphere to be an aggregate of heterogeneous particles exhaled The
Air seems nothing else but a kind of tincture or solution of terrestrial and
aqueous particles dissolved into the Ether, and agitated by it, just as the
tincture of Coch^neel is nothing but some finer dissoluble parts of that
concrete licked up or dissolved by the fluid water. Mr. Hook Microgr. obs ^. p.
13. Atmosphaeram ex halitibus terrestribus and ^aperibus aqueis action ^olis
and reliquorum Astrorum concitari, inter doctos con^enit. Hanc eandem
Atmosphaeram, ob Solis and reliquorum Astrorum conversiones variae mutari and
attemperari apud eisdem indubitatum est. Scheiner ros vagin l. ^. p. ^. ex.
from this Globe, whose structure must be as discrepant as the vapors are: and
what a difference there is in them we may guess by the infinite variety of
Meteors, Rains, Snows, Hail, Winds, Dews, etc. and their component corpuscles.
If this latter be true, (as it is probable that it is; at least that there is no
more besides but an intercurrent Ether or materia subtilis of the Cartesians)
what becomes of this Elasticity, or pressure of this Springy Air so much talked
of?

Thirdly, it is necessary to distinguish betwixt the pressure and weight of
bodies: for, suppose were a man pressed under a bended stick, or other springy
body compressed, he shall feel a great oppression upon him, and be kept down to
his great pain, not with the weight but spring of the said stick, or other
springy body: and whosoever by the violence of the compression would judge of
the weight of the incumbent body, would expose himself to laughter.

Fourthly, it is possible for a body without any springiness or accessional
gravity, to press downwards Acus omnino parallela horizonti, qua s^bito atque
magneti aff^icatur, nullo modo fit gravior, tamen deprimitur, perinde ac si
magnes esset acul subjectus. Finge nunc aliquem, qui haec a magnete fieri
nesciat, is prosecto credet cum Aristotele acum tendere ad centrum mundi.
Berigard. de terra: circulo 6. part. 3.
above its weight: thus a needle touched with a Loadstone declines from that
line in which it hung parallel to the Horizon, without any addition of weight:
which is demonstrable from the variety of its declination and restitution: and
it is as indubitable that such declination of it carries with it something of
pressure.

Fifthly, we are to consider the nature of the Earth, whether that be a Magnet,
or no: for if it be such, (however the Magnetism be explained* whether
according to the Cartesian Hypothesis, or that of Berigardus) instead of
weighing the Air, we deceive our selves as grossly as if we took the impulse
with which Iron runs to the Loadstone for its weight: and thus in some cases we
shall weigh things by their ascent, which is inconsistent with the common
notion of weighing things.

Sixthly, to wave the unestablished notions of Gravity and Lenity, and to
abstract from all the preceding considerations, I say, that even so this
opinion of the Aerial Column pressing down upon the Mercury is false: since in
a body so unequally mixed as the Air is often (and it cannot be disproved that
it is ever otherwise) it is impossible to imagine that the pressure or
gravitation is by way of a Column or Cylinder. Imagine the Experiment to be
tried by six or more weights pressing at one time upon the Mercury, would any
man in his wits say, that this joint pressure were cylindrical? consider but
the variety of mixtures in the Air, (and the separate pressures that are
consequential thereunto* which the contemplation of the clouds will lead us
into, and it is the same thing. Were a man swimming in that concourse of water
in Hungary, where the unmixed rivers flow in one channel, and his body so
placed that part of it were in one stream, and part in another,) would you say
that the incumbent water did press upon him in a Column or Cylinder? But to
proceed further, if it be true that the superior part of the Air or
Atmosphere, which transcends the mountainous asperities of the Earth, has
another motion or lation then that which is more low, (explain it either the
Aristotelian way, or according to Galilaeo, Vide Galilae^^n system. ^^sm dial.
4. ^ ^* 32^. edit. in 410.
and agreeably to the motion of the Earth) if this be true, (as I take it to be
now) how can we determine of the Gravity of the neighboring Air by this
Experiment? and how vain is this notion of a Cylinder? for in a fluid agitated
with different motions as the subject Air is by repercussion from the Hills and
Plains, (which begets vibrations and undulations God knows what it suffers upon
the generation and motions of Meteors; and where the superior part has a
motion different oftentimes from the other, of whose rapidity we are as
uncertain as of its structure, and texture, (and we see that the rapidity or
swift motion of an heavy body takes it from its pressure and gravity how can
any man talk of Aerial columns, much less pretend to weigh the Air incumbent,
and to determine exactly of any accession of weight, as M. Glanvill professes
to do? Besides, if heavy bodies do not gravitate in a straight line, but
describe the circumference of a Circle, or some such line, (as new Philosophers
hold in opposition to Aristotle) and if the Atmosphere be to Vide Galilaeum de
system. mundi dial. 2. page 119. edit. in 410. Sectatoribus Copernici opus est
dicere (quippe qui ponunt orbem magnum circulo ferri) morum gravis deorsum esse
per lineam curvam vel instar quadratricis Nicomedis, vel circulari ut Galilaeus
contendit. Scipio Claramont. de univers. l. xij. c. 20.
be reckoned amongst the bodies that gravitate, how can we imagine this
gravitation to be performed by way of a column or cylinder? Moreover, this
Atmosphere can no way be considered to press cylindrically* if we consider that
in every part of it there are continued exhalations, and smoke ascending
through it, so that the weight of it must needs be abated by the ascent of
those ^apors ^ and what we experiment here is not the weight of the A^^
properly, but the super-ponderancy or over-weight of it. The Atmosphere seems
to me constantly to resemble a Glass in which water is poured on wine, and the
wine is ascending thorough each part of the water indeterminately; if it be
thus, and that the ascending vapors carry a great force with them, (which any
man will grant who considers the weight Vide Sanctorii medic. static. Hanc
Aeris con^^^tionem demonstrat vel ipsa saliva ex alto demissa, quae dilaceratur
prope terram in quam conciratus aer impingens ad salivam redit, eamque
discerpit. Berigard. circ. Pisar. part. 3. circ. 6. de terra.
of the smoke, in comparison to what remains of the wood and coal that is
burnt: and who statically regards the steams transpiring from our bodies: and
how that spittle, which in an entire body issues from our mouths* descends till
near the ground it be dissipated and distended) I cannot imagine how it can be
said that we thus measure all the degrees of compression in the Atmosphere, and
estimate exactly any accession of weight which the Air receives from winds,
clouds, or vapors. To conclude, if the Air do thus press upon the Mercury, how
comes it to pass that there is no difference when the Experiment is tried in a
chamber (where the incumbent column is less then abroad) and in the open Air of
the same level? Why does it not press up water (or other liquors) in the Why
does not this Cylinder of Air which so presses upon the Mercury, depress a
leaf of Gold, but suffers it to fly up and down?
like Siphon to an height as different as is the disproportion betwixt the
gravity of Mercury and water: which I have not heard it does; yet the
proportion betwixt Mercury and water in gravity is 1 ^. 134 / ^. In fine, how
is that true which Mr. Hook says, viz. Mr. Hook in the Preface to his
Micrography.
That he contrived an instrument to show all the minute-variations in the
pressure of the Air: by which he constantly found, that before and during the
time of rainy weather, the pressure of the Air is less, and in dry weather, but
especially when an Eastern wind, ( which having past over vast tracts of Land,
is heavy with earthy particles) blows, it is much more: though these changes
are varied according to very odd Laws. If this be true, (as I am apt to believe
it is) with what face can our Virtuoso tell us, It is concluded, that such a
Cylinder Page 61.
of the Air as presses upon the Mercury in the vessel, is of equal weight to
about 29 digits of that ponderous body in the Tube. Thus it is when the Air is
in its ordinary temper: but vapors, winds and clouds alter the Standard, so
that the Quicksilver sometimes falls, sometimes If you would see how true Mr
Glanvill speaks, read Mr. Boil his eighteenth Experiment, and the defense of
it against Linus: there you will find that the Mercurial Cylinder did in
winter sometimes correspond with the weather Glass and sometimes vary: and the
reason Mr. Boil gives, is such as takes off from the certainty of Mr.
Glanvill's CONCLUSION.
rises in the Glass, proportionably to the greater or less accession of gravity
and compression the Air has received from any of those alterations: and the
degree of increase beyond the Standard, is the measure of the additional
gravity. Is not this prettily said by a man that writes a year after Mr. Hook,
and more after Mr. Boil? How unacquainted is He and his Assistants, even with
the Writings of their fellow- Virtuosi? And if we may be allowed to transfer
the Fool's Cap from the Ancients for concluding too soon, may we no^ crown the
heads of our Virtuosi now therewith? And how careful the R. S. is in making
good their promise to Olaus Borrichius, that what their Members should write,
the whole Society would be responsible, let any man judge that considers how
Mr. Hook, and Mr. Glanvill (I beg Mr. Hook's pardon for the unequal
comparison) disagree; and Dr. Henshaw (another Virtuoso) differs also from Mr.
Glanvill, saying, That the Quicksilver Tube will not give so exact an account
of every small difference in the pressing Air, as the THERMOMETER! what
confusion shall we be reduced unto in time, should these contradictious
Experimentators proceed as they have done! I shall here add, that I do
conceive that this notion of an Aerial column gravitating upon the Earth, or
subjacent body, was framed in imitation of the Hypothesis of Simon Stevinus,
the Teacher of Mathematics to Grave Maurice of N^ssau, in his fourth book of
Hydrostaticks, where he insists much upon this Aqueous Column; but it is
observable that that judicious person, the better to make out his Theoremes,
presupposes such things as give some repute to my objections about the Aerial
Cylinder or Column, viz.

1. Aquam omnibus partibus esse ponderitatis Homogeneae. 2. Cujusvis aqua
superficiem planam and horizonti parallelam esse. 3. Aquae fundo horizonti
parallelo tantum insidet pondus, quantum est Aqueae Columnae cujus basis fando,
altitudo perpendiculari ab aquae superficie summa adimam demissae sit aequalis.
Out of this last Proposition, and the demonstration and consectaries thereof
in him; it is manifest, that he supposed not one of his assertions would hold
(though the Phenomenon were the same in nature) as he worded and explained
them, if that he did not free his aqueous Column from any oblique S Stevinus
hydrostat Elem. l 4 Theoorem 8.
pressures, and make it rectangular. And as for his Postulatum, that the
surface of the water is plain, flat and level; he confesses it is not so
really, viz. Quatenus pars est sphaericae sive mundanae superficiei; mundanam
autem superficiem dicimus sphaerae cujusvis mundo concentricae: he only
professes to assume it as true, because in hydrostatics, things happen as if
it really were so; whereupon he scruples not to make use of a supposition,
which is really, confessedly, and demonstrably false, as long as it conduces
to practice, and serves his turn as if it were true, without pursuing a more
tedious, and not more useful Hypothesis agreeable to Archimedes. Which Id. ib.
postulat. 6.
I take notice of by way of Apology for my self, and those who think fit to
acquiesce in, or not to blame such Methods as are effectual, though otherwise
vain and groundless. Another thing is, that He supposes there that the Earth
is the Id. ib. postul. 7 Et profecto tam receptum fuerit haec ipsa non
admittere, quam postulantibus Astrologis terram esse mundi centrum. fidem
deregare*
Center of the world. Out of all which I am more and more satisfied of the
validity of my former doubts against this so much concluded upon Aerial Column,
to the explanation whereof I find no such cautions, or previous suppositions
used, to take off the edge and force of such objections: neither indeed have I
yet met with any thing of that subject proposed in a Scientifical way; and
therefore much how it comes to be concluded upon so as Mr. Glanvill represents
it to be.

Whereas I have said, that the gravitation of the Air (even Elementary) is an
opinion of Aristotle's, and that his Experiment was tried by Claramontius; I
add, that the verity of that trial (though indeed it extend only to the impure
Atmosphere) is attested by Ricciolus in these words, Duo Ricciol. Almag^nov l.
2. c. 5 sect. 4.
quarto Aquam, and Aerem nostrum habere aliquid levitatis gravitati admistum,
ut vi illius adscendant, ut sint supra id quod est ipsis gravius; and vi hujus
descendant. Hinc fit ut folles lusorii, and Aere addensato been inflati, etiam
sine farinulae ac vim infusione, plus ponderent, quam flaccidi: ut exquisita
trutina deprehendes: immo ego expendi vesicam bovinam, quae flaccida erat
scrupulorum 4. and granorum quatuor, esse inflatam scrup. 4. grav. 6. quaere
Aer additus per inflationem appendebat grana duo. Thus the incomparable
Ricciolus, whom I may as well reckon amongst the Peripateticks, as Mr. Against
Hobs c. 3.
Boil does Schottus: and how true that Aristotelean Experiment is Mr. Boil
demonstrates in his Experiments of Air. Exper. 6. and against Hobs c. 3.
pneumatick discourses. And though the works of Galilaeo, Kepler, Mersennus,
Gassendus, Pecquetus, Paschal, were lost, and were as ignorant as some Virtuosi
of their trials about the weight of the Air; yet would not the Assertion have
seemed so strange and incredible as Mr. Glanvill represents it to be; for
though Maynenus deny it, yet he brings in this Objection. Aer est gravis, etc.
go. probatur primo Democrit. revivisc disp. 1. c. 3. p. ^4. in 4^^.
a Mathematicis, qui de Acris pondere scripserunt, inven^runtque ejus ponderis
momenta. 2. A Francisco Mendoza* qui in suo viridario problema instituit, An in
Aere navigari* possit? 3. A descensu* lapidum and aliorum gravium, qua Aeris
pondere praegrammata urgent suum descensum, and velocius in fine quam in
principio moventur. 4. Experimento adducto a Bassone, qui follem inflatum
citius descendere ai^ quam Aere vacuum, ob additum Aeris pondus. l. de motu.
intent. Circul. Pisa^. part. 6. circ. 7. de nutritione.
1. art. 3. Berigardus also asserts the gravity of the Air, and justifies it by
this Barometer, and the unequal ascent of the Mercury on the top, and at the
foot of a mountain. I shall sum up all, that may take off from the novelty of
the thing, and deprive the R. S. of the glory of pretending to any interest in
the discovery in the words of Thomas Bartholinus de pulmon. sect. 3. p. 60.
Ingeniosus Sanctorius in inveniendis Sanctorius was a Galenist.
instrumentis Medicis, inter alia Com. in 1 Fen. Avic. Stateram ponit, qua
ventorum vim and impetum ponderat. Inventis aliquid addam. Vitream phialam
lanci nostrae impone, and leni halitu inflato videbis quam parum ponderi
accreverit. In instrumento Magdeburgico testatur Otho G^riche Consul
Magdeburgensis and inventor ejus, ponderari posse Aerem hoc pacto; quanto
levius est vitrum post Aerem extractum, tantum ponderabat Aer antea in eo
contentus. Varios modos alios Aeris levitatem bilance expendendi tradit Caspar
Ens Thaumat. Mathemat. Probl. 93. c. 15. Vesicam bovinam se expendisse ait
Joannes Bapt. Ricciolus Tom. 1. Almag. nov. l. 2. c. 5. number. 4. quae flaccida
erat scrupulorum quatuor and granorum quatuor: and deprehendisse eandem
inflatum scrupulorum 4. and granorum 6. Marcius Mersennus in Phaenom. Propos.
29. asserit se Geometris praesentibus and adjuvantibus ponder ass bilance
Aeolipilam aeneam satis calefactam, and propemodum candentem, omnique humore
destitutam and quam minimum Aeris continentem; deprehendisseque pondus fuisse
unciarum quatuor, drachmarum 6. and granorum 15. postquam vero naturaliter
refrixisset Aeolipila, and Aer antea rarefactus rediisset ad pristinum ac
naturalem suum statum, iterum ponderasse ipsam, and invenisse pondus
praecedente pondere majus fuisse quatuor gravis. Plura in hanc rem congessit.
cl. Casp. Schottus in Mechan. p. 1. protheor. 4. c. 6.

I have not Schottus by me at present; neither is there need of any further
Inquiries; for I have sufficiently demonstrated that the Gravitation of the Air
is an opinion of Aristotle, Averroes, and other Peripateticks, though not
generally received by that sort of Peilosophers: and that it was truly and
experimentally demonstrated by them, especially as far as the Atmosphear is
concerned in the Question. I have also made it apparent, that the Barometer, or
Mercurial Experiment does not discover the weight of the Air with any
certainty; much less, all the degrees of it: That the pressure of the Air is
not by way of a Cylinder or Column; and that the Barometer had not its original
but denomination from the R. S. they were, as I may term them, the Godfathers,
not Parents. The World may justly say of the Honorable Mr. Boil, that he has
improved the Experiments of his Predecessors, and represented them more
accurately; and of Mr. Glanvill and his Assistants what it pleases.

In the marginal note ( page 15.) where I say, that perhaps it is not true that
Aristotle had any hand in, or was privy to the impoisoning of Alexander; I add
that Pausanias after he had spoke of the Stygian water, and its strange
property, doubts whether Alexander were made away by such means, or no: (...).
This he says (in Arcadic) without reflecting any way upon Aristotle as one
concerned in the report. And Arrianus who writ the life of Alexander, out of
the Memoires of Ptolomaeus Lagides (who was present when that great Prince
died) avows, that he died of a surfeit: yet he relates sundry rumors about his
death, one whereof is, that Aristotle (being fearful of Alexander after the
death of Calisthenes) should prepare the poison for Antipater, to be sent him:
but concludes thus, (...). Arrian. de expedit. Alexandr. l. 7.

Whereas I reflect ( page 16.) upon that passage of Plato, (...), and what Mr.
Glanvill says, That without Geometry we cannot in any good degree understand
Mr. Glanvill p. 25.
the Artifice of the Omnisoient Architect in the composure of the great World
and our selves: and that the Universe must be known by the Art whereby it was
made. -- There should have been a Chasme made for some passages, I know not why
omitted. I add therefore, that it is not revealed unto us that God made the
Universe according to that Art, and it seems an Additional to the first Fiat,
or let there be -- in Genesis, to say his commands were regulated by the rules
of Geometry, and his powerful and omnipotent word confined thereunto. Had Mr.
Glanvill been pleased to consult the fathers, he would have found that this
Tenet of his is no primitive notion: and that particularly Eusebius has
refuted Eusebius. de praep. Evang l. 14 c. 4.
it, denying that God in his Works is obliged to Geometrical numbers; and that
Socrates (whose authority is greater then Plato's) did place no great value on
those Sciences: that the first Christians did slight the knowledge of them as
useless to Piety and knowledge of God; because my opinion about these things is
agreeable to that of the first Christians, and of Socrates; I shall insert the
whole passage, as it is translated into Latin in the Paris Edition.

Eusebius. praep. Evangelicae. l. 14. c. 10, 11. edit. Paris. 1628. Primum tamen
quoniam Mathematica illa sua tantopere jactare solent, prorsusque necessarium
esse dictitant, ut quisquis comprehendendi very studio tenebitur, Astronomiam,
Arithmetriam, Geometriam, Musicam, illa nimirum ipsa, quae ad eos a Barbaris
profecta esse jam ostendimus, persequatur: (his enim qui carebit, doctum
perfectumque Philosophum esse neminem, imo rerum veritatem ne primoribus quidem
labris digustare posse, nisi qui harum ante rerum animo cognitionem
impresserit:) deinde hanc suarum artium peritiam magnificentius ostentantes,
aethere sese medio sublimi^s propemodum incidere, numerisque suis ipsum quoque
Deum circumferre arbitrantur: nos vero qui similium disciplinarum amore non
flagremus, nihil a pecudibus abesse existimant, deique propterea nunquam
nunquam reipaulo gravioris notitiam percepturos esse pronunciant: Age, hoc
ipsum quam pravum sit atque distortum, vera laminis loco ratione proposita, sic
tanquam ad libellam and regulam exigamus. Erit ea quidem ejusmodi, quae
Graecos, innumerabiles, infinitosque Barbaros complexa; alios tametsi his
artibus doctrinisque paratos, nec Deum unquam, nec honestae vitae rations, nec
omnino praeclarum and utile quid percepisse; alios, ut ab omnium disciplinarum
studio destituti essent, religiosissimos tamen ac sapientissimos extitisse
demonstret. Enimvero quaenam hoc in genere Socratis illius, qui ab istis
omnibus tantopere celebratur, sententia fuerit, e Xenophonte intelliges, si
modo ei suis in Memorabilibus haec scribente fidem adhibebis.

Docebat, inquit ille, praeterea, quatenus cujusque rei peritum esse hominem
been institute oporteret: principio Geometricae dandam eatenus operam esse
dicebat, ut siquando res pasceret, dimensam rite terram vel accipere ab alio,
vel alii tradere, vel eam dividere, vel opus aliquod designare posset. Id porro
tam esse ad discendum facile, ut qui dimensionem attendere voluerit, idem simul
and quanta sit terrae magnitudo assequi possit, and quaenam ejus metiendae
ratio breviter admodum expediteque cognoscere. At ejusdem in Geometricae
studio, ad illas usque descriptiones intellectu difficiliores quenquam
progredi, Socrati non placebat. Cui enim bono futurae illae essent, videre se,
tametsi ne illarum quidem imperitus esset, rogabat. Enimvero, ad exhauriendam
hominis vitam cum satis illas esse, tum aliarum interim and plurimum and
utiliorum doctrinarum studia impedire.

Astronomiam similiter eatenus complecti solum jubebat, ut noctis, mensis,
a^nique tempora cognosceres, atque hujus cognitionis open, siquando vel iter,
vel navigatio suscipienda esset, vel agendae forent excubiae, vel in aliud
quidlibet quod noctis, mensis, aunique spatio fieri solet, incumbendum, signis
ad ea omnia suis quaeque temporibus obeunda, certioribus uterere. Atqui haec
nihilo difficilius tam ex nocturnis venatoribus, quam ex navium gubernatoribus,
and aliis quamplurimis resciri posse, a quibus eorum peritiam suae cujusque
parts officiumque deposcat. At eandem artem eo usque persequi, dum ea quae non
codem motu circumferantur, stellasque simul errantes and vagas distinguere
noveris, adeoque in earum abs terra intervallis, conversionibus causisque
rimandis aetatem viresque consumere, id vero graviter imprimis ac serio
prohibebat, quod multum hujus etiam opere pretium videret, tametsi ne in istis
quidem rebus hospes ipse ac peregrinus esset. Addebat, conficiendae hominis
vitae illas quaeque satis futuras, quae interim a pluribus utilioribusque
studiis avocarent. Postremo quibus coelestia quaeque rationibus Numen
moderetur, investigari nolebat, quod cum eo ab hominibus aspirari non posse,
tum minus cum diis probari existimaret, qui quae prompta notaque esse
noluissent, inquireret. Nec minus illi, quem ea vehementius cura destineret,
insaniae periculum imminer^ dicebat, quam Anaxagorae, qui explicatus a se
deorum Machinas tantopere gloriabatur.

I shall add, that if God Almighty be regulated by the rules of Geometry, and
mechanical motion in the management of this world, and that the fabric of
things is necessarily established upon those Hypotheses, I cannot any way
comprehend how God can do any miracles: how the Sun should stand still at the
command of Joshuah, or the shadow go back on the dial of Ahaz: or how there
could be a general deluge; or such an Eclipse as is related at the death of our
Savior: or that the fire should not burn, or destroy the three children: in
which, and other cases, if God were not tied up to this Art, I do want proof
(till he declare it) that at other times he acts altogether agreeably to it.
This opinion of mine has been hitherto the most Christian Assertion, and held
most consonant to Piety, and has been amply maintained of late by Dr. Henry
More, in opposition to what the Royal Society lays down in their History; That
Generation, Corruption, Alteration, and Mr. Sprat page 312. I wonder that such
effects should be attributed by them to the bare concourse and meeting of
corpuscles of differing figures, magnitudes and velocities; without taking
notice of that alteration of texture, and of the figures of the concurrent
particles, without which Cartesianism, nor the other Mechanical Philosophies
can subsist: and not so without allowing the constant assistance of God,
directing and ordering lay- Mechanism. So des Carts Princ. Philos part. 2.
Deu^ materiam simul cum motu and qui^te in principio ereavit; jamque per Solemn
suum concursum ordinarium tantundem motus and quietis in ea t^ra, quantum tunc
posuit conservet. Oh! rare and sensible explication of things! God Almighty in
a peculiar matter agitates matter! must we thus explain the secondary and
mediate creation of the world in six days, whereas the like productions have
not happened in so many thousand years as are lapsed since! Besides, whatever our
Virtuoso thinks of the Eternal Generation and Incarnation of the Son of God; He
does not except in this Assertion the Generation of mankind in the ordinary
and natural way.
all the vicissitudes of Nature, are nothing else but the effects arising from
the meeting of little bodies, of differing figures, magnitudes and velocities.
Then which opinion there can be nothing more pestilent and pernicious; and Dr.
More, albeit a Member of this Society heretofore, (for he allows nothing to it
now) yet a pious one, professes that this Mechanical Philosophy does incline
to Atheism: neither would he approve of those deductions as necessary, but
ridiculous, when I upbraided him lately with that non-sensical and illiterate
History, Mr. Sprat p. 348. It Is true, his, [viz. The Experimental Philosophers]
employment is about material things. But this is so far from drawing him to
oppose invisible Beings, that it rather puts his thoughts into an excellent
good capacity to believe them. In every work of Nature that he handles, he
knows that there is not only a gross substance, which presents it self to all
men's Eyes; but an infinite subtilty of parts, which come not into the sharpest
sense. So that what the Scripture relates of the purity of God, of the
spirituality of his Nature, and that of Angles, and the souls of men, cannot
seem incredible to him, when he perceives the numberless particles that move in
every man's Blood, and the prodigious streams that continually flow unseen from
every body: having found that his own senses have been so far assisted by the
Instruments of Art, he may sooner admit that his mind ought to be raised
higher by an Heavenly light in those things wherein his senses do fall short.
If (as the Apostle says) the invisible things of God are manifested by the
visible: then how much stronger Arguments has he for his belief, in the eternal
Power and Godhead, from the vast number of creatures that are invisible to
others, but are exposed to his view by the help of his Experiments? My censure
upon this place is, that if his Experimentator have any skill in Logic or the
ways of arguing, though from the Rules of Mechanism, and the contemplation of
visible bodies, he may proceed to the allowance of invisible and insensible
corpuscles, yet shall he still confine his progress and ascent within the
nature of matter and corpuscles, and never apprehend (upon those grounds) the
being and operations of an immaterial, omnipresent Deity acting by the Word of
his Power and Will: nor the incorporeal nature of the soul of man. Such a
Transition ad genus a genere, or (...), he that owns those principles cannot
assent unto, if he understands himself, and argue not so as to allege,

One Proposition for sense,
The other for convenience.
Where I speak of Archytas (page 18.) that he was a practical and Mechanical
Philosopher, contrary to what Mr. Glanvill asserts ( page 27.) I shall add his
life; As it is briefly written in Ricciolus thus. Archytas Tarentinus
Pythagoreus nobilis, Mathematicarum peritissimus. quem ut Ricciolus in Chronic
part. 2. praefixo ad Almag^st. nov. in Archytas.
una cum Timaeo cognosceret Plato, in Italiam navigavit, ut ait Cicero. In
Mechanicis excelluit, and vi illarum quinquies vicit hosts in praeli^, ut
nihil dicam de columba lignea, quam libramentis ad violatum compulit; sed in
Cosmographia at Geometria practica excelluisse indicat illud Horatii lib. 1.
odorum.

Te maris ac terrae numeroque carentis arenae, Mensorem cohibent Archyta.
Neither is Mr. Glanvill mistaken there in reference to Blancanus says of
Archytas, that he was Mechanic^ Inventor, in Chronol. mathem. secul. 5. And
Will^ Snelliu^ in his Preface to the Hypomn. mathem. o^ S. Stevinus, does
reckon upon Archytas and Eudoxus as c^^nent for practical Mechanics. Mr. Hook
micrograph. p. ^10. Zucchiu^ p^ilos. op^. part. 2. cap. ^. sect. 2. p. 3^.
Archytas only: what he says about Eudoxus Gnidius is false: who was a
Mechanician also, and amongst other discoveries, Invenit etiam Arachnen,
horologium videlicet solar^, in quo line^ borariae, and arcus signorum in modum
ara^^^ se secant. Blanoan. in Chronol. Mathemat. Sevil. 5.

Whereas I say ( page 22.) that the Royal Society were not the first that
applied themselves to the observing the forms of Animals, etc. by the
Microscope: I add that Zucchius did not only precede them in the attempt, but
seems to have had hetter glasses to that purpose then they: for whereas Mr.
Hook in his description of a Flea says of the Eyes only this, that the head is
on either side beautified with a quick and round black eye: the more accurate
Zucchius says, Novissims Microscopio parato ab excellentissimo Vitrorum in
omnes formas ad propo^itos usus formatore D. Eitstachi^ Divinio Septempedano,
spectavi meis oculis senescentibus Oculum pulicis, distinctis in eo albescente
Sclerotide Cornea, and per corneam Iride oculi. And in the description of the
feet of a Fly, and the feather of a Peacock, I observe that there is such a
difference betwixt those two Writers, that as one of them must needs be in an
error, so I am apt to think that our Virtuoso is the person: see Mr. Hook p.
167, 168, 169, 170. and Zucchius Philos. opt. part. 2. tr. 3. c. 7. sect. 4.
page 349, 350. If England do yield better Microscopes then those of Eustachius
Divinius, then I am ready to change my judgment.

Where Mr. Glanvill speaks of going to the World of the Moon, and I animadvert
upon the difficulties of the journey* and that his lodging will be too hot for
him; add in the Text these words page 43.

Besides the other difficulties of the journey, it is further considerable, that
from the Center of the Earth to the Moon, according to the calculation of Tycho
Brahe, there is near 56 semidiameters of the Earth, which is about 192416 Van.
E^^ens Mathem recreations page 220, 221.
miles: and admit it be supposed that Mr. Glanvill fly 20 miles every day in
ascending toward that world, he should be above 15 years before he could come
to the Orb of the Moon.

Where I speak against the accommodating of Scripture to common railing, p. 49.
I add, that not only the Council of Trent ( -- fas est and ab host doceri)
has prohibited Sess. 4. that any should apply the holy Scripture ad scurritia,
fabulosa, vana, adulationes; but also that the first Council at Millain,
forbids the using it ad ^jocum, ostentationem, contumeliam, superstitionem,
impietatem. And, to upbraid our Divine-Railleurs a little more, an ancient
African-Council decrees, Si Clericus, aut Monachus verba scurritia, jocularia
risumque moventia loquitur, acerrime corripiatur. The words of which Canon,
(viz. Scurritia and jocularia) are by a learned Frenchman rendered raillery. --
Nous avons le Canon d' un ancient Concile d' Afrique, qui parle en ces terms:
Si quelqu' un du Clerge ou si un Religieuse dit des paroles de raillerie, des
chooses plaisantes and enjouces, qu' il soit chastie tres severement. Qu'
eussent dit a vostre avis ces bons Peers si ces railleries eussent este terees
de l' Escriture? This Question has been agitated with much wit and address in
French, betwixt Mr. de Girac and Mr. Costar in sundry books, wherein any man of
common reason and piety, will give the advantage to adversary of Voiture, who
is justified by the concurrent opinion of Balzac in his remarks sur les deux
sonnets: and to these Writers I refer our Virtuosi, such as reckon upon all
other learning as Pedantry, may inform themselves thence as out of Writers
which transcend not their breeding and studies.

Whereas ( page 58.) I speak somewhat in commendation of the ancient
Aristotelean Monks, I find that their esteem is much advanced by the learned
Gabriel Naudaeus in these words. After the last taking of Constantinople,
Learning began to creep out of Monasteries, which for all the time before Gabr.
Naudaeus Hist. of Magic c. 7.
had been (as it were) public Christian Schools, where not only youth, but
also such men as would apply themselves that way, were instructed in all manner
of Disciplines, Sciences, and Morality, and that to such an height, that not
content with that so famous Quadrivium of the Mathematics, which, besides all
that is now shown in Colleges, was then taught, Medicine both as to Theory and
Practice, was so well cultivated, that we need no more to convince us how
expert they were therein, then the Writings of Aegidius, Constantine, and
Damascene, Joannitius, Peter of Spain, and Turisanus. So that it were easy for
me to answer them who charge them with illiterature and ignorance.

Where I speak out of G. Hofman and others, that it is sufficient for a
Physician that he proceed upon such rules and methods as may most commodiously
guide him in his practice, without being solicitous whether they be rigorously
and philosophically true: page 75. I add, that there are others as eminent as
any that ever pretended to cure, which concur with me in this opinion. As
Avicenna and Riolanus; the words of the latter in his Examen of Harvey, c. ^9.
are these. -- Quapropter cum Avicenna doctr. 6. cap. distinguo sermonem utilem
a vero; Medicus qua Medicus, inquit ille, non curat, quid in veritate sit, sed
contentus est Phaenomenis quibusdam, quae sunt satis illi in curatione morborum.

I add unto the passages ( page 97.) which relate unto the diligence of the
Ancients in Dissections, this: That the Ancients, and particularly the
Peripateticks were very curious and inquisitive into Anatomy appears by this
passage out of Chalcidius, in his discourse upon the Timaeus of Plato; he lived
about one thousand one hundred and seventy years ago, and the passage (which
relates to the Platonic notion about vision) in the Latin Edition of Meursius,
( page 340) runs thus. Quare faciendum ut ad certam explorationem Platonici
dogmatis. commentum vetus advocetur medicorum, and item Physicorum, illustrium
sane virorum, qui, ad comprehendendam sanae naturae solertiam, actus humani
corporis, facta membrorum exsectione, rimati sunt: qui existimabant, ita demum
se suspicionibus, atque opinionibus certiores futuros, si tam rationi visus,
quam visui ratio concineret. Demonstranda igitur oculi natura est: de qua cum
plerique alii, tum Alcmaeus Crotoniensis, in Physicis exercitatus, quique
primus exsectionem aggredi est ausus; and Callisthenes, Aristotelis auditor;
and Herophilus, multa, and praeclara in lucem protulerunt. Out of which it is
manifest that the Ancients (especially the Aristotelians; for such were
Calisthenes and Herophilus) did with some curiosity examine the Phenomenon of
nature, and regulated their opinions by sensible experiments; and that this was
the practice of most of the eminent Physicians and Naturalists of old.

The Letter of Hippocrates to Damagetas mentioned page 89. (though cited as
genuine by Galen) is suspected by Jo. Baptista Carts. miscell. medic. dec. 1.
c. 4. Caeterum and hac Epistola, quae sub nomine* Hippocratis circumfe^tur,
suspecta est mihi, primum quia* Diogenes Laertius lib. 9. in vita Democriti
scribit illum nequaquam ridentem, quanquam concedat ab Hippocrate fuisse
visitatum (non quidem ut ipsum sanaret) quo tempore jam Democritus erat
decrepitus, nec amplius aptus sectioni cadaveram: nam Hippocrates 436 annos
ante Christum natus; Democritus vero 492 ita ut ita ut Democritum nativitate
secutus sit Hippocrates 56 annis: and tum sive ad videndum, sive ad sanandum
eum conveniret, vigesimum quintum annum attigisse verisimile videtur: cum tunc
temporis Hippocrates medici famam adoptus esset, quod non poterat nisi per
longum temporis cursum and varia experimenta in Medicina facta sibi comparare.
-- Sed probandam provectiorem Hippocratis aetatem, and majorem senectam
Democriti, ejusdem Laertii testimonium extat dicentis; Ultimum, quod in vita
Democriti legitur dictum, aut factum, fuisse illam cum Hippocrate
collocutionem: atque annum agentem 109. ab hujus vitae Statione decessisse. I
find also that Menagius suspects those Letters, though he confess Menag. in
Di^^. Laert. l. 9. p. 238.
them to be very ancient. Extant hodie Hippocratis de sua ad Democritum
profectione Epistolae, sed supposititiae, licet perantiquae.

Whereas I say page 114. that I have observed in some that their pulses have
suffered no alteration, at least kept no time, or palpitated as did their
hearts. I shall illustrate this with an observation in a young Lady, which I
had too fatal an opportunity lately to make: she died of a very malignant
Fever joined with the Measils: two nights before she died I watched with her,
and frequently observing the variety of her pulse, I determined to mind
whether there were any such alteration in the beating of the Heart, as I then
observed in her Arteries: I laid my hand upon her Breast, and I found that her
heart did not beat as usually it does, the b^^e erecting it self, and impelling
the left side, but it seemed like a great bullet (transcending any proportion
that is natural to the Heart) as it rolled in the Thorax from the right to the
left side (as much one way as the other) with an uniform and equable
revolution, and thus it continued to do for an hour; during which time I
observed all the varieties almost that are recorded about evil pulses: as
quick, slow; great, small; unequal, deficient, dicrotus, etc. Nor is this new;
for Riolanus says in Exam. Harvey c. 3. Notavi multoties in palpitationibus
cordis vehementibus arterias non sequi motum Cordis, sed bis terve pulsare Cor
pro una diastole Arteriarum: quod indicat Arterias in sanis and aegris
corporibus, non semper sequi motus cordis. So does Mercatus teach, Fit interdum
palpitatio cordis nihil mutatis pulsibus. Tom. 2. de Philos. differ. l. 2. tr.
1. c. 28. and tom. 3. l. 2. c. xj.

Since the writing hereof, being casually in the shop where an old man was
blooded, who upon the healing up of an old sore in his leg, was very ill: I
observed his blood to have very little of what was crimson in it: but it seemed
all a fluid Serum to the bottom, (which was pellucid, not of a turbid white,)
in some Pottingers: in one Pottinger that ran last, it was coagulated into a
thicker mass, on the top whereof was coagulated a translucid gelatine over most
of the Pottinger, the rest being of a fluid Serum like to the other: I took
some spirit of Vitriol, and poured a pretty quantity, ( viz. about 20 drops) on
that which was partly coagulated upwards, partly not: and all that part which
was not blood, did coagulate into a mass like unto the white of an Egg when
hardened by the fire, but without that smell which is usual to it when
coagulated upon a gentle fire: the blood under it coagulated into a consistence
much like wax: but of a dark red inclining to black: into another Pottinger I
poured some of the salt-peter-liquor that had passed the Ashes; but this latter
caused no change at all: I then poured on the same some spirit of Vitriol, as
in the other, and it did immediately turn lacteous, and coagulated into a mass
like to that of ordinary custards: and the blood under, which seemed but very
little, and scarce coagulated, appeared thereupon as a large quantity,
equalling three parts of the Pottinger, upon which all the Serum was thus
coagulated. I went to b^^n these: that blood which had only spirit of Vitriol
did not crackle, and scarce burn: though a little it did: the pure coagulated
Serum did not burn at all, yet crackled like decrepitating Salt, a little: that
with the spirit of Vitriol and Lixivium of Nitre, did burn with a vivid and
lasting flame a long time.

I think my self obliged to add one thing more where I speak as if Dr. Willis
had had little to do in the discoveries of Dr. Lower about Anatomy: that
although that great Physician had not leisure to attend the Anatomical
Inquiries, yet did he propose new matter for improving the discoveries, and put
Dr. Lower upon continual investigation, thereby to see if Nature and his
Suppositions did accord: and although that many things did occur beyond his
apprehension, yet was the grand occasion of that work, and in much the Author.
This Intelligence does not cross what I related before from good testimony; yet
I thought my self obliged to declare the whole truth, and such I believe this
to be. I must also profess that I think the Sinus venarum vertebrales, whose
invention I ascribe to Dr. Lower, may without considerable injury be ascribed
unto Fallopius in his Anatomical Observations page 193. edit. Coloniens. 1562.
in 80. Thus much I thought fitting to annex, lest the Virtuosi should censure
me as partial to my old School-fellow Dr. Lower, or swayed by any regard then
that of Truth.

The Hogs-blood which I last mentioned as poured upon the Mothers of
Saltpeter; after it had stood above three weeks unmixed, did at last cast down
about half of it self below the Mothers, it continuing in that place it turned
crimson: that on the top did not change its color, but on the surface there
gathered a crust or mass, not very thick (as before) nor of so solid a
coasistence.

FINIS.
To divert my Reader after so tedious a discourse, I shall here add the Letter
of Coga their Patient, that they may see how efficacious the Transfusion has
been on him, and what returns he makes for his Cure.

To the Royal Society the VIRTUOSI, and all the Honorable Members of it, the
Humble Address of AGNUS COGA.
YOur Creature (for he was his own man till your Experiment transformed him
into another species) amongst those many alterations he finds in his condition,
which he thinks himself obliged to represent them, finds a decay in his purse
as well as his body, and to recruit his spirits is forced to forfeit his
nerves, for so is money as well in peace as war. It Is very miserable, that
the want of natural heat should rob him of his artificial too: But such is his
case; to repair his own ruins, (yours, because made by you) he pawns his
clothes, and dearly purchases your sheeps blood with the loss of his own wool.
In this sheepwrack't vessel of his, like that of Argos, he addresses himself to
you for the Golden Fleece. For he thinks it requisite to your Honors, as
perfect Metaplasts, to transform him without as well as within. If you oblige
him in this, he has more blood still at your service, provided it may be his
own, that it may be the nobler sacrifice.

The meanest of your Flock, AGNUS COGA.



