Heavenly Treasure, OR MAN'S chiefest GOOD. Wherein The several Workings of the
heart about, and in pursuance of its Chiefest Good, are Solidly and Judiciously
discovered.

By William Strong that godly, able, and faithful Minister of Christ, lately of
the Abbey at Westminster.

(...) by R. W. for Francis Tyton, (...) three Daggers in Fleet Street, (...)
1656.



ALthough it was not my happiness to have any personal knowledge of this worthy
man during his life (having never to my remembrance, so much as seen his face)
so that I cannot speak so amply of his worth as others may that knew him
personally; Yet since his death, by a good providence, some of his Sermons, and
in particular this of the Treasure being brought to mine hand, I had some real
taste and experience of his worth, of whom I had heard so much before. I
confess I had often heard of the great eminency of this worthy man, which made
me the more greedily, and with more intentness to read what I could see of his:
and this I must needs say, that which I met with, did not only answer mine
expectation, but much exceed it: and the more I read, the greater was my
admiration. And though I do not think my self to be such a one, from whose
thoughts in such a kind any credit or estimation should come to such a Work:
Yet I think that I owe so much to him who is dead, and to some who are yet
living, as to profess what I think, that there are scarce any Sermons extant
wherein there is more strength of parts, depth of matter, and singular industry
to be seen, then in the Labors of this reverend Man: and that the Church of
God would sustain a great and invaluable loss, should his Labors be kept from
public view.

John Row.

Reader,
THE Box of Spikenard is broken; no wonder; for we have this treasure in
earthen Vessels: when thou have smelt the savor of this precious ointment, I
doubt not but that thou will see cause to bless that Providence, which has
ordered the endeavor of them that have studied the preservation of it from
loss; In this Paper-Vessel wherein it is commended to thee. The Author was a
burning and a shining Light, as these and other his Sermons do bear witness;
for they carry light into the understanding, and heat into the affections; the
light not merely notional; the heat like that of the Sun, quickening, and
prolifical: both are such as are requisite in a man that is in pursuance of his
Chiefest Good, which is the noble subject of this Treatise, that points you to
it, teaches the way of attainment of it; marks it out with such Characters as
do discriminate it from false treasure; quickens the appetite unto the
prosecution and fruition of it. And in short, shows you the shortest way unto
your own happiness; whereof this is the property, that being but one, it alone
makes the possessors happy, because it does eminently comprehend in it all
other particular good things whatsoever: And this he teaches not to be treasure
on earth; but that it must be laid up by you on earth, as fruit gathered in the
Orchard is thrown over the wall to be taken up when you are gone out. I
undertake not to write the life, but commend the Labors of the man to thee; he
was of an excellently tempered Spirit, both for humility and resolution; one
that was not afraid to follow the truth close at the heels (though sometimes it
strike out ones teeth) but an Orthodox propugnator of it; his style is very
familiar; in exposition of Scripture he is acute and accurate, a great searcher
of hidden Treasures; a friend unto Free Grace, an advancer of practical
holiness; when it fell in his way to strike wicked men with reprehensions, his
arrow so pierced, that it is manifest he drew a strong Bow; when he had to deal
with a wounded spirit, he showed by his soft touch, that he had felt the wounds
himself. In fine, that Aug. de Civit. lib. 19. initio.
which has been the disquisition of the Learned Sages of the world in all
ages; and yet not one of two hundred eighty eight positions, or opinions did
hit upon it, because they wanted a light revealed, and so became fools in the
Research of it; I mean Man's chiefest good, that I say is so delineate in this
Treatise, that I will make bold to commend it to thee as thy pocket treasure,
as it commends to thee thy Heavenly Treasure, and so remain

October. 28. 1655. Thy ready Servant in the Lord, Rich. Vines.

IT is abundantly known to the generality of the Godly throughout the Nation,
though more especially about these Cities of London and Westminster, with what
singular ability, full affection, and good success, the Author of the following
Sermons (now at Rest from, and enjoying the crown of all his Labors) did spend
himself, and was spent in the Service of the Gospel. He did the work of him
that sent him, while it was day. The night (he would often say) was a coming,
in which he should have no season; and while 'twas day therefore (he would add)
that neither should the frowns, nor the flatteries of men divert him from his
Work. His preaching was with very much freedom of speech, delivering the word
without fear, in much boldness, and without partiality: He was not of the
number of them who corrupt the word of God; but Chief among them that preached
it, as 2 Cor. 2. 17.
of sincerity, and as of God: He has often told me, one main part of his study
and prayer to God was, that in all his preaching he might not only be Led into
the truth, but teach the present truth, that, that of any other, might be to
them, to whom he preached, the most instantly useful, and most seasonable
truth: God in his wisdom appointed him to one place after another, where all
his abilities might be tried and shine forth in their luster. He was Lecturer
at Dunstans and Westminster, and one of the Reverend Assembly of Divines.
His Preaching (ye that sat under the shadow of his Ministry with great
delight are the witnesses of it: His preaching) though it was very frequent
(thrice or four times a week, for some years together when seldomest) did not
yet consist of any such thin notions, as being clothed with air only would
melt upon the tongue, and quickly vanish in some little sweetness. No, but in
all his Sermons, the intelligent Hearer (for he took himself to be a Debtor to
as well the wise as the foolish) might observe, that as the materials of them
were full of Spirit and vigor, so the Compilement of them was close, elaborate
and pithy: and though he minded more what might profit, then what might please,
yet did he please as well as profit them that heard him; Because he used to
back what he did deliver with a very great strength of both harmonious and
argumentative heads of Reasoning: His manner always being to compare (or suit)
spiritual things with spiritual, and to teach, though not in the enticing words
of man's wisdom, yet in the fullest demonstration of the Spirit. He was not worn
away with rust, but did wear away himself with use; the emanation of the Spirit
filling his Cistern so, as made him free to do much work in a little time.
Amplissimum vitae spatium usque ad sapientiam vivere.
He understood well that the acceptance of our works follows upon the
acceptance of our persons first; and he therefore did (to the admiration of
them that heard him) open the whole Doctrine of the Covenant, through which our
persons find acceptance with God: that Covenant of Grace, which comprehends
what ever we are either by way of blessing to expect from God, or whatever we
are by way of duty to return back to God again: that Covenant, I say, did he
for years together labor in the opening of: had he lived to perfect, and to
publish it, the Churches of Jesus Christ had received a much more special
advantage, then now I fear they can have by it: but we must be content to have
Elijah first taken from us, before his mantle will be given us.

He vexed his righteous soul to see how among many professors of Religion,
practical Godliness did seem to wither much: what truths therefore might serve
best to revive, encourage and put on to holiness of life, or circumspect
walking, those to choose would he most frequently acquaint his Hearers with: He
judged the power of godliness to consist not so much in men's ability to Master
this or the other high-towring, speculative doctrine (though himself was of
excellent high-raised parts) as in men's affectionate hearty closing with, and
living up to those more obvious common truths (for in facili and absoluto stat
aeternitas. Aust. Enchir.) that are the great necessary things on which man's
everlasting happiness, or misery does most depend: And he would therefore
(therein following the direction Paul gave to Titus, (...).
chap. 3. 8.) earnestly exhort professors to be known most by their maintaining
of good works: and that however they might somewhat differ in matters of
outward order, or Church Discipline, yet that they would all agree in what was
more intimately consequtive to the Spiritual man: A being rich in holy works
Sancta and rectae vitae antistites esse. The Greek word which is a military
word, taken from such as set themselves in the foreward o^ front of the Battle,
and march before for the encouragement of the rest of the army; some translate
it to go before others in good works.
: Our works being the best (at least most sensible) evidence of our faith: He
labored much that parties disagreeing a little what in that part of the
circumference which concerns Ecclesiastics, might yet be one in the center of an
holy life: for indeed he knew well, that though Professors in matters possibly
of less consequence, may show what party of Christians we side with, yet
holiness of life only it was that should best evince our being set apart for
God. He laid it much to heart to see how slightly and ungroundedly, not a few
of latter years, (since the goodness of some in power had altered the face of
times so much as that godliness was no longer now a reproach or hindrance in
the way of, but the easiest step to preferment) for one or other loaves sake
only took up Religion; (as from the manner of their walking might be suspected)
He did therefore insist upon, and in the course of his Ministry press those
doctrines of self examination, and self denial (both which subjects thou may
hereafter, God willing, have put into thy hands) with much earnestness,
searching power, and spiritual exactness; that if there were any who professed
Christianity out of Faction, carrying a Pagan heart under a Christian name,
they might be made manifest to themselves: His insight into the Gospel was
wonderfully quick and singular: his delight was to lead his Hearers within the
vail, and to show them the glory of that one Mediator, whom the Father set
forth for the propitiation of our sins: great was his pains in opening those
Relations (together with their respective virtue and influence) that he stood
in to his Father, to Angels, to all Mankind, and to the Elect in special:
sundry subjects and single Sermons the Author has left behind him, which will
(God willing) be hastened into the Press; what he did last, does (herewith)
come out first; because indeed an imperfect Copy hereof stole forth as a
spurious obtrusion upon the world: Which the Authors Friends judged a great
wrong unto the Public as well as to the Author himself; and for that reason,
therefore have put the same subject first into thine hand, leaving thee to
judge, how much more this Edition (thus published) has of the signature and
mark of his spirit in it, above what the former carried. Thus much premised, I
shall only add by way of prayer, that the Spirit of life and power (who alone
is able) may make the price here put into thy hand very useful for thy souls
good. We are accomptable, not only for what we hear, but for what we read; and
it is equally dangerous to be found among the number of them that are
unprofitable Readers, as to be one of those that are unprofitable Hearers.

Geo. Griffith.

Good Reader,
IT is usually observed that Gods children do best in their close and last
farewell; as natural motion is slower in the beginning, and swifter in the end,
so are their motions more vehement and stirring toward heaven and heavenly
things, when their souls are ready to dislodge from the body, and to be at home
with the Lord.

Certain I am, the Scripture puts a special mark and consideration upon the
last words of the Saints, 2 Samuel 23. 1. Now these be the last words of David;
so the speeches of dying men have more weight in them; for as we draw near to
eternity we grow wiser, and being about to return to the (...). etc. Plotin.
apud Ves.
Original Divinity (as Plotinus speaks) we are more Divine.

And this not only when the Lord gives his people fair warning of their
approaching end, but many times when death steals upon them unawares, by a
strange kind of presage their souls have been marvellously heightened in the
contemplation of eternity, and wholly taken up with that blessedness into which
God was about (though unknown to themselves) to translate them: it is one of the
observations of this Treatise, That when the heart is in heaven the body will
not be long out of it; our translation is but delayed till the months of our
purification be ended, and we by growing dead to sin, and weary of the world,
are made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

All this is spoken, to put thee in mind that these discourses, which are now
put into thy hand, were the last works of that eminent and faithful Servant of
God, Mr. Will. Strong, of whom without any unsavory allusion to his name, I may
truly say that he was, (...), Act. 18. 24. A man eloquent and strong, or mighty
in the Scriptures; this discourse (I say) was the dying blaze of that burning
and shining light, or his Cantator cygnus Funeris ipse sui; quapropter, Plato
in ^^aedone eum (...), appellat.
last Swan-like song, and preparation to his own death and Funerals, which
unexpectedly, and alas too suddenly, as to our profit, followed the preaching
of these Sermons: it was the secret instinct of the Spirit of God (no doubt)
that engaged his thoughts to such an argument, not only for his own comfort in
the agonies of death, but for our benefit who do survive him.

These Sermons were formerly surreptitiously printed by an unknown and an
unskilful hand; but as they now come forth thou may plainly discern the own
spirit of the Author in them, which in those rude and broken notes was more
hidden and obscure.

I have heard of some that out of a sond superstition have been afraid in
health to provide their last Will and Testament, taking it for a certain token
of approaching death, the thoughts of which the carnal world cannot endure; and
therefore seek to put off that which they cannot put away. To prepare for
death, does neither hasten nor hinder it; there is folly in the surmise; however
this truth lies hid under it, that when men are ripe and ready to die, usually
they are not long-lived, but are gathered in like a shock of corn in its
season: I hope none are afraid to be too soon in heaven; let us mend our pace
thitherward, and get up as fast as we can, that every day our salvation may be
nearer then when we first believed; this, as it is the design of these precious
Sermons, so the unfeigned desire of him, who is,

Thine in the Lords work, Tho. Manton.

READER,
THou have here the first fruits of that seed which this Worthy, Reverend,
Learned and Godly man sowed in the days of his Ministry: they were indeed in
themselves, the Last crop of all his Labors, (being the Last Sermons that ever
he Preached) but the overhasty hand of some unskilful, if not unjust Gatherer,
has occasioned they are first Gathered into sheaves: However it is now thy
advantage* Thou have here a Treasure; a Tried Treasure: This Piece which is his
own, compared with those Imperfect notes, Printed since his death, and unjustly
bearing his name, may be to thee a Test, to discriminate the true and
counterfeit Copies, if any shall yet farther in that kind, do him, and the
Church of Christ so great an injury.

Know therefore, there are other things of his that follow: which that they may
be his own, all care is taken, by transcription from, and comparing with his
own notes: which is the onl^ Cause (it may seem possibly) they make not have:
yet they so have as that the engaged in this work, which their heart is in, and
their hand has found to do, (...), they will do it with all their might; using
therein, all possible care and diligence: Having a double earnest of their
Acceptance with the Saints: The one their own spiritual senses, (as they hope)
a little exercised therein; Humbly conceiving, more of the secrets of God, the
deep things of the Law, and the mysteries of Godliness, (which are great,)
fetched out from the very Bowels of the Scripture, have not from any one mouth
been communicated in these latter days.

The other earnest is, that Seal which therein, and thereby the Spirit of God
has fixed on their hearts, and of many others, very many, in the first hearing
of them: witness that great and sad Assembly, in the day of his Funeral
solemnity, when deep silence, heart. breaking sighs, and weeping eyes would
have preached loud enough, had that Reverend Minister, and his dear friend been
silent; His Works that followed him, are not all dead with him, But some of
them are here brought forth for thy spiritual advantage; The good hand of God
be on them: with this Tract God sealed up his Ministry, and his days, and
whosoever shall observe the latter part thereof, shall find it a solemn seal.
Having contemplated that Treasure which was his by choice before, he was now
taken up into the full possession of it; for he was indeed, a meet Inheritour.
He had intended the next Lords day, to have entered a protest against that
which is the treasure of the most of men, from that saying of our Lord, Luke
12. 15. Take heed and beware of covetousness: but in the mean time his Master
called; Well done thou good and faithful servant; it is enough; if they will be
covetous, let them be so still; thou have finished thy Testimony; Enter, now,
into the Joy of thy Lord. How much might be spoken of him, were it necessary?
But what needs it? His works praise him in the Gate. Few of the eminent
Ministers in the Nation, but he was either personally known to them, or else
they had heard of his worth: His name was indeed as an Ointment poured out; But
for such, as Rose up speaking perverse things, he was a thorn in their sides;
practicing (what himself sometimes pressed as a duty) to love their persons,
but (...), to truth it in Love. He was a man mighty in the Scriptures therein
lying a great part of his excellency, to open and explain (quoad sensum, non
quoad sonum) dark Scripture, which we hear without profit, and read without
understanding: He was frequent in preaching, for the most part 4 times weekly,
sometimes many more; in season and out of season; besides the care that lay on
him touching his Pastoral Relation; and yet though his work was so great, who
could say, that he offered to God that which cost him nothing? There was
nothing that came from him that savoured not of much labor, study and
industry: He accounted himself a Debtor to the wise and to the weak; and his
care was that by his Ministry, both might receive advantage. He was powerful
with the Affections, and in order thereto, He thoroughly dealt with the
Judgment. His doctrine was Practical, and his Application Doctrinal. He was a
stout Champion for Truth and Liberty; in both, he set his face as an Adamant
against the sins of the times. In a murmuring Age, he was a mourner in Sion:
very conversant in days of Humiliation, Public, Private; enjoined, not
enjoined; and at such times, This was his complaint, It is time for thee to
arise oh Lord, for men have made void thy Law. He had a spirit fitted to that
work, for he seldom prayed without Tears: an Israel he was, for, he pleaded
when he prayed; nor was he less fitted for thanksgiving, for be had vials full
of odours; he much breathed after Communion with God, and he had it, for he was
strong, to hold the King in the Galleries; often would he complain of the
Imperfection of our Communion here. It Is but (h^ was wont to say) His back
parts: Behind the wall; and through the Lattice: that we now see him: Oh, for
that Vision that is face to face, when we shall see him as he is! The Lord has
now satisfied his des^res, and tought him* (which was much in his mouth) what
means, The souls of just men made perfect, in taking him to himself: The Lord
give us the same frame of spirit, that we in due season may follow after.

The Contents of the Heavenly Treasure.
1. Man's happiness out of himself. page 1, 2

2. The words of the Text have

1. A Dehortation. 2. An Exhortation.
Both backed with two Arguments p. 3

3. The words summed up in two propositions p. 4

4. The words explained and opened.

Wherein Treasures are of two sorts,
1. Gods Treasures, and they are of four sorts, from p. 5. to 9 2. Men have
their treasures p. 9. where is noted, the difference between the godly, and the
men of the world p. 10


5. The doctrine explained by clearing four several Propositions from p. 11, to
34

Wherein 1. By slinging of souls, three things noted p. 14, 15 2. By the fear
of the Lord two things meant, from p. 19. to 21 3. Treasure is said to be a
man's own from p. 22. to 27. upon a threefold account. 4. That which a man
chooses is called his Treasure, from p. 28. to 34


6. In the first Use of Examination six rules. To know whether a man's Treasure
be on earth or in heaven, from p. 35 to 48

Where follows five Trials,

To know where a man's Treasure lies, from p. 48 to 79

Wherein 1. To know whether we love God or no, two rules, and therein two
seasons of Trial, from p. 57 to 65 2. To judge when a man seeks all things in
subordination to God, two rules, from p. 66 to 72


7. In the Use of Conviction, To heighten the misery of those that misplace
their chief good, six considerations, from p. 80 to 100

Wherein 1. Riches are said (not to be) upon a double Account p 83, 84 2.
Deceit about good things fourfold; from p. 95 to 98


8. The misery of those that misplace their chief Good, lies in six things,
from p. 100 to 113

Wherein Two things observed by Augustine, that blessedness require^ p. 112

9. Before Christ's Exhortation is pressed, three things premised, from 114 to
126

Wherein 1. There are three sorts of Treasures that men lay up, and in three
places, from p. 117 to 122 2. To Explain (not upon Earth) three hints, from p.
123 to 126


10. In the prosecution of Christ's Exhortation of laying up Treasure, four
things, from p. 127 to 156

Wherein 1. A double Interpretation of Heaven, from p. 128 to 134 2. Why none
but God can be a man's Treasure in heaven, ^hree things pointed to, from p. 136
to 1^9 3. How to lay up God for a Man's Treasure in heaven, six rules, from 140
to 146 4. To enforce Christ's Exhortation, several Arguments, from p. 147 to 156


11. The Use of Consolation shows,

1. The blessedness, and the Top of blessedness,

1. Of the Saints. 2. Of the Angels. 3 Of the Mediator, from p. 156 to 160. On
the contrary the top of the Devil and damneds misery, to 162
2. Three grand promises mentioned in p. 164

12. To a man that his not misplaced his Treasure, seven grounds of the
greatest comfort, from p 65 to 189

Wherein is explained delivering of a man up to Satan, twofold, from p. 166 to
168

13. That the Treasure is the attractive of the heart, four things by way of
Explication, from p. 190 to 259

Wherein 1. The heart is put diversely in Scripture, 191. But especially three
things intended, from p. 194 to 197 2. That man's Treasure is without himself,
two things noted by the way, from p. 197 (...) 3. To those that seek happiness
below God, three things to consider, from 205 to 207, where that of Jer. 2. 15.
is fully opened, to p. 209 4. Why a man's heart should be rightly set, five
great reasons for it, from p. 210 to 218 5. The heart that is set upon any
worldly thing is lost, in two respects p. 219 Wherein by way of Caution, where
to set a man's heart, two or three things, from p. 220 to 225


14. That the Treasure carries the heart with it, opened, from 225 to 229. And
herein, How it comes to pass, that the Treasure always carries the heart with
it, four demonstrative Arguments, from p. 230 to 240

Wherein two things noted in Conversion, in p. 238 so forward.

15. Why the heart always goes out after the Treasure, six great Grounds,
from p. 241 to 248

16. How the heart of man goes after its treasure, six Conclusions named, from
p. 248 to 259

17. More particularly, that the Treasure is the attractive of the heart, p. 259

Wherein 1. Those instances before given, of the Intendment of the heart, from
263 to 267 2. Its aim and tendency upon a double ground p. 267 The first ground
manifested in two particulars, from p. 268 to 275


Wherein 1. To guess at the aim and tendency of the heart, six rules, from p.
276 to 302 2. Every man's wisdom in reference to his Treasure, is exercised in
three things, from p. 306. to 318 3. To know where a man's thoughts are, four
rules, from p. 321. to 329 4. Why it is of so great moment to know where a man
sets his love, four grounds. 5. To know where a man's love is, eight several
rules, from p. 340 to 372


Wherein is observed a double Union with God, from p. 341 to 347

8. The Application has three Uses 372 The first General Use of Instruction
first discovers the fullness of the Scriprures ibid.

Wherein Eight Wonders are to be understood in it, from p. 375 to 379

2. It discovers six Cases that the Lord puts a special Mark upon, from p. 379
to 383

The second Use, or the First more particular and proper use, shows the
absolute necessity of Conversion p. 84

Wherein The misery of that man whose Treasure is on earth, is seen in two
things, from p. 385 to 388

20. The third and last Use shows, 1. The blessedness of that man whose
Treasure is in heaven, upon a twofold account, from p. 388 to 390 2. The
reasons why he is so blessed, that upon a fourfold account, from p. 390 to 393


Where note the Conclusion ibid.

FINIS.
The Names of such places of Scripture, as are occasionally handled, explained,
and opened in the Heavenly Treasure.
Genesis.
Chap. Verse. Page. 1 1 132 6 5 285 10 9 344 Exodus.
19 5 137 Numbers.
14 24 239 Deuteronomy.
4 29 286 24 15 073 25 263 32 34 8 I. Samuel.
4 20 196 25 29 14 II. Samuel.
12 4 269 I. Kings.
13 23 290 15 10 272 II. Kings.
Chap. Verse. Page. 5 25 194 10 15 300 I. Chron.
12 33 264 Esther.
3 9 293 Job.
8 15 243 13 15 63 20 15 312 Psalms.
17 3 270 14 121 18 21 185 36 4 274 10 148 39 12 261 41 6 228 62 10 196. ^02 63
8 238 73 6 12 112 8 242 116 7 11 119 37 218 Proverbs.
1 17 20 4 17 39 23 215 8 21 81 10 20 213 14 14 77.199 15 6 153 17 22 235 23 5
82 7 330 27 344 Eccles.
2 23 249 6 9 226 7 11 70 11 6 227 Canticles.
1 4 229 8 6 369 Isaiah.
Chap. Verse. Page. 32 11 203 33 6 19.146 44 20 39.202 58 13 47 Jeremiah.
2 13 94.207 33 245 16 16 344 22 2 217 19 ibid. Ezekiel.
7 10 119 33 31 227 Daniel.
7 25 295 11 24 316 25 ibid. Hosea.
4 8 223 7 11 93 12 7 346 Amos.
Chap. Verse. Page. 8 5 46 Habakkuk.
1 18 237 2 5 315 Haggai.
1 5 210 Zechariah.
5 8 120 Matthew.
6 19 172 20 1 and 127 22 177 33 50 10 37 55 12 43 235 19 21 141 21 25 129 Luke.
8 13 233 10 42 170 12 33 130 14 26 56 32 58 15 18 129 16 8 304 11 81 22 15 228
John.
8 21 257 44 87 12 35 339 Acts.
8 21 266 11 23 177 Romans.
10 10 192 I. Corinthians.
3 11 111 12 ibid. 5 5 167 7 29 147 15 10 355 II. Corinthians.
4 4 22 18 51 5 2 74 8 11 283 Galatians.
6 1 269 Ephesians.
Chap. Verse. Page. 2 19 122 Philippians.
2 4 53 8 58 3 14 52 310 349 19 260 Colossians.
2 3 8. 30 3 1 260 I. Timothy.
6 9 220 5 23 374 II. Timothy.
6 29 91 Hebrews.
Chap. Verse. Page. 6 7 102 8 ibid. 9 27 17. 18 James.
5 3 150 II. Peter.
2 14 287 I. John.
2 15 339 16 287 18 151 Revelation.
13 0 308 21 7 334

THe thing that I feared is come upon me, May the friends of this worthy Author
at this time say; for they did in his life time (many of them) earnestly
Solicit the publishing his own notes, (at least part of them) by his own hand:
foreseeing, that (in the best construction) some good affections (out of Zeal,
not according to knowledge) might after his death thrust into the world their
broken and Imperfect notes as his: or if not so, yet knowing nothing is more
ordinary Quis expedivit? venture. Persus. Prolog.
then such abuses, for Advantage sake: whether the one or the other, we know
not, but so it is; That since the foregoing was committed to the Press, and
this Tract fully finished, another most Imperfect, if not counterfeit Bundle,
entitled, The Saints Communion with God, and Gods Communion with them in
Ordinances; Printed for George Sawbridge, and Robert Gibbs; Bearing also his
name with the former, (touching which thou art advertised in the Epistles
foregoing) and being both Bratts (as is probably conjectured) brought into the
world upon the knees of the same unhappy Midwife. And for Mr. John Herrings
Epistles, (with a salvo to his Person and function) we know not what that
Honorable Person, Colonel Purefoy may do, but do conceive, that neither
himself nor the Readers, will give him any thanks, as knowing well that that
excellent man would have been in Writing as he was in Preaching, A workman that
needed not be ashamed. Only, It is humbly enquired of Mr. Herring, whether he
knew not of a Widow the deceased Author left behind him? or had ever heard of
any doing in his own notes? or if not, whether ever he enquired? Sure we are,
in one half hour he might have received satisfaction touching both; we wish his
labors better speed, then that measure he has meted should be met to him
again: It Is only added, that if any Person in good affection, shall endeavor
the hastening of his works, 'twill be acceptable service; Provided, their
labors may endure the touchstone of his notes, which are all ready for such an
end; But if not, its desired when they put them out, they would call them by
their own names, not Mr. Strongs.

Heavenly Treasure, OR, MAN'S chiefest GOOD.
MAT. 6. 20, 21. Heap up for your selves treasure in heaven: for where your
treasure is, there will your hearts be also.
MAn was Created to have a happiness out of himself; for this is the
blessedness of the blessed God only, to be his own happiness; he indeed is not
only al sufficient to you, but he is in himself self-sufficient. But the
reasonable creature was made to have a happiness without himself: and because
he is so, therefore the soul of man is full of nothing but longings: the
Scripture calls it (...), Lusting; it goes out to some other thing; it is always
saying, Who will show us any good? now that which the soul goes out for, is
that from whence it would setch its happiness, its perfection, in which it
places its felicity; and what ever a man does in reference to such a good, this
good is said in Scripture to be a man's treasure; and the storing of himself
therewith, is the laying up a treasure to himself.

In these words, You have a dehortation and an exhortation: First, a
dehortation, in reference to treasures below. Secondly, an exhortation, in
reference to treasures above: and both these are backed with two Arguments;
first, from the uncertainty of the one, and the certainty of the other; the one
being liable to violence, plunder and decay, so is not the other: but the
second Argument is in the Text, Where your treasure is, it will carry your
hearts with it; therefore it is of mighty concernment where a man places his
treasure, because there he will set his heart.

For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

The words are summed up in two Propositions, which are of mavelous high
concernment both.

1. That every man has a treasure in this life. He speaks it as an act to be
performed not after this life, but in the life that now is: Hic mundus laboris,
that mercedis: this life is the sowing time, that the reaping; this is the
world of labor, that of reward; here is the treasuring time, there is the
expending time, therefore every man has a treasure in this life: so Christ
says, Where your treasure is, etc. therefore lay that for a ground, Every man
has a treasure; a treasure in this life.

2. That wheresoever the treasure is, it is attractive of the heart: Or thus,
every man lays up his heart where he lays up his treasure.

The first of them I shall enter upon at this time; every man lays up a
treasure for himself in this life: every man has something which is his,
treasure, his own treasure; Where your treasure is, etc.

I shall first a little explain the words, to open the notion of a treasure, as
the Scripture speaks of it.

There are two sorts of treasures the Holy Ghost in the Scripture speaks of:

God has his treasures,

Men have their treasures.

First God has his treasures, and they are of four sorts.

First, Thesauri naturae: there are the treasures of nature, which we read of
in Job 38. 22. Have thou entered into the treasures of the snow; or have thou
seen the treasures of the hail?

And the Lord when he speaks of the blessings of nature in Deuteronomy. 28. 12. says,
he will open his good treasure, the heaven to give rain, etc. and ler. 10. 13.
he brings the wind out of his treasures: these are the treasures of nature
that are Gods treasures.

Secondly, Recondita providentiae: there are the treasures of providence: in
Psalm. 17. 14. he speaks it of wicked men. These are the ungodly, and they
prosper in the world; they have their portion in this life, whose bellies thou
fillest with thy hid treasure: What be those treasures with which God is said
to fill ungodly men's bellies? Interpreters do observe, that there are some
wicked men in this life, that have not only the common benefits of nature with
the rest of this World, that God causes the Sun to shine, and the rain to fall
upon them; but he does afford them ezquisitas quasdam divitias some peculiar
and choice mercies of this world; and does in Providence order it so, that of
all the honors in the world many ungodly men shall have the highest, of all
the powers in the world many ungodly men shall have the greatest: the dainties
of providence: the Lord many times affords them to those who have their portion
in this world: but remember the text says, He fills their bellies with
treasures: it is but to satisfy their senses, it never fills their souls; their
souls be empty of grace when their bellies be filled with treasures: how many
ungodly wretches have the quintessence of all things, all the Lords treasure?
and yet so it is ordered.

Thirdly, Thesauri gratiae, the treasures of grace, Col. 2. 3. In him are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. It is said of Christ, in him are
hid, etc. Whose are they? Why, they are his treasures that hid the^ there; the
Lord hid these treasures: He is made to us of God, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption: the treasures of wisdom and grace are laid up in
Jesus Christ as in a common treasury, but they be Gods treasures.

4. Thesauri vindictionis, there are yet treasures of vengeance, treasures of
wrath, Deuteronomy. 32. 34. Are not these things laid up by me, sealed up among my
treasures? Many an ungodly man and wicked woman goes along ten years, twenty
years together; and as they treasure up sin, I treasure up wrath; and vengeance
is mine, and I will repay it; their feet shall slide in due time, the mean time
I will forget none of their works; they are sealed up by me among my treasures:
these are Gods treasures the Scripture speaks of.

Secondly, men have their treasures also, and that which a man makes his chief
good, wherein he does place his happiness, that by which the comfort of his
life comes, in that is a man's treasure: you shall see it expressed in other
words, but the thing is one: in Luk 16. 25. Abraham is brought in there
speaking to Dives in hell: Son, remember in thy life time thou had thy good
things: that which Christ here calls your treasure, there Abraham calls thy good
things: and in Psalm. 17. 14. they have their portion in this life; that which
in this place is called a man's treasure, that is there called their portion,
but the thing is the same: and here give me leave to note the great difference
between godly men and the men of the world: the men of the world are all for
great provision in the way, but care not what portion they have at end: but a
godly man is quite contrary, he will be content with small provision, but it is
not a small portion will content him; a little in the passage, but he must have
a large portion. So that which a man pitches upon as his chief good, by which
the main comfort of his life comes in, these are his good things, that is his
portion, his treasure; but only thus far for the opening of the phrase.

Let us now come to open the Doctrine to you.

Every man has in this life a treasure, his own treasure.

This I shall explain by clearing four several propositions, all which are
included in the Doctrine.

First, every man has some chief good which his soul is set upon, and which as
its center it tends unto. I say every man: there is not a person of you but you
have some chief good to which your souls do bend, and upon which they center,
wherein you place your happiness, which if you could attain perfectly, your
souls would be at rest. This is that which David speaks of, Psalm. 116. 7.
Return unto thy rest, oh my soul. Why what was the rest of his soul? truly the
rest of his soul was his chief good: and will you see what that was? in the 73.
Psalm, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and I desire none on earth in comparison
of thee: if a man have a chief good, it must either be on earth or in heaven:
but says David, God is my chief good, whether in heaven or in earth; and that's
the reason why he calls God the Rest of his soul; and for this cause he tells you
all the tendency of his soul went after God. My soul is athirst for God, the
living God: many such expressions you have to let you see that God was his
chief good: and until the soul attain its chief good, it is never at rest, but
is in perpetuo motu, in a continual tendency thereto. But on the other side,
take a poor carnal wretch that never knew any thing above the creature, because
the creature is his chief good, and that not to be had in perfection, so that
he cannot attain to his full desires, therefore his soul is continually
restless: see him described Psalm. 59. 6. to ver. 14. ungodly men are said like
a dog to run about the city, and like a dog to grudge and not be satisfied;
what is the meaning of it? you know how many wearisom labors this creature
takes, and all is for meat, and yet many times altogether in vain: now ungodly
men in the pursuit of the things of this life are compared to dogs; how many
circles do they take this way and that way; but many times altogether in vain,
for they are never satisfied, and when they are not satisfied, they grudge; so
that you see sometimes the dog when he has eaten casts up his meat, and
afterward turns to his vomit again: here it is brought in only to this purpose,
to let you see how restless their souls are, because they seek good in them.
But there is one Scripture very remarkable, 1 Samuel 25. 29. But the soul of my
Lord shall be bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord thy God: but the
soul of thine enemies them he will sling out as out of the midst of a sling: to
have David's soul bound up with God in the bundle of the living, that you may a
little understand; but to have ungodly men's souls slung out by God out of the
midst of a sling; what is that? to sling souls? truly there are three things in
it: First it notes distance, as when you sling a stone, you cast it far from
you: The Lord shall put the wicked far from him. Such expressions are frequent
in Scripture. Secondly, it notes a distance in Judgment, as the Lord binds up
souls in the bundle of the living, in mercy: So in wrath he slings out the
souls of ungodly men. Thirdly, it does not only note distance, but violence;
when the Lord will do it with a sudden violent motion, as when stones are slung
out of a sling; when the souls of ungodly men have nothing to rest upon, but
yet some chief good they fancy to themselves, which they think if they could
obtain they would be at rest: I am persuaded there is many of them do think, if
I had as much riches, as much honors, as much pleasures as I would, my soul
would then be satisfied, and be much content, as the fool in the Gospel: Soul,
take thy rest, thou have goods laid up for many years; thus every man has some
chief good or other to which his soul tends, and till he attain it, his soul is
restless; this is the first particular, for the opening of the Doctrine.

Secondly, every man has some chief good in this life in regard of election:
my meaning is, that there is some chief good he chooses to himself in this
life: I do not say he enjoys it in this life: for the hope of the Saints is not
in this life, but yet for all that they choose it here below: thou had in thy
life time thy good things: its not only true of ungodly men, but even of godly
men; only the one has fruition in this life, the other but election only: the
one enjoys his portion here, the other has it in the life to come; but a
portion he does choose here: the election is below, the fruition is to come:
for remember that Solomon says, There is no invention in the grave whither you
are going: so there is no election in the grave; the good that you choose here
to your selves you must enjoy for ever: some choose pleasures, some choose
wantonness, some choose vanity. Truly look to it, that is no portion: that
which you have chosen here, you will enjoy hereafter: consider withal, that
after death is the Judgment, Heb. 9. 27. the meaning is not the general
Judgment, though that be after death, but a long time after death; but the
Judgment that passes on every particular man when he dies, that Judgment
will be an eternal Judgment: there will be no reversion: for there is a gulf
set between us and you: an eternity of estate that follows this life: therefore
while you live here indeed there is a translation, a man may change his chief
good; he that made wealth, honor, or pleasure his chief good, he may by the
patience of God choose the Lord for his chief Good; but after this life there
is no change; that which is your chief good in this life, you must content your
selves with for ever; every man has in this life his chief good: I mean not in
regard of fruition, but of election.

Thirdly, every man in this life has his own chief good: it is your treasure;
that which is one man's treasure is not another; thy good things, and your
treasure, and their portion; this the Scripture speaks of these things: for you
must know, every man does choose to himself a good that may properly be called
his own. As, pray will you but observe in Isa. 33. 6. The fear of the Lord is
his treasure. Mr. Calvin and some others do observe, that this is peculiarly
spoken of Hezekiah, and in him of the Church of God: and its said, wisdom and
knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, the fear of the Lord is his
treasure: Pray what is meant by the fear of the Lord? I conceive these two
things, as usually the fear of the Lord carries with it this double sense.

1. Reverential fear and awe of the majesty of God, from a right apprehension
of his greatness and holiness; so Prove. 1. 17. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom, that is, God being rightly known, and the soul thereby
duly overawed; a man had never any wisdom till this entered into his soul: nay
the word is, the top of wisdom. In this lies the perfection of all his wisdom,
if he had never so much.

Secondly, by the fear of the Lord also is meant an awful worship of God, to
worship God with reverence and godly fear; the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 19. 9. The
fear of the Lord is clean: he speaks it of the worship of God: compare the true
Religion with all Religions in the world, all their worship is defiled; they be
the more defiled for all their worship, whereas they that worship God in his
way, they be the more holy: now will ye set what was Hezekiahs great treasure?
the fear of the Lord is his treasure: that is, in the holy awe he had of God,
and the constant worship he performed to God, in these lay his treasure: but is
this every man's treasure? No, I can tell you a great many account the worship
of God their burden, look on it as their misery, not their treasure. How comes
it to pass that every man has his own treasure? On these three accounts a
treasure or chief good may be said to be his own.

1. From the differing lights men have, some men see good, where other men see
none: 2 Cor. 4. 18. We look upon things that are not seen: Some men have such
eyes: other men can go no further then the sight of their eyes: and so some men
have the eyes of their understandings enlightened to know what is the riches of
glory in the Saints, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. other men cannot see so far off, neither
the riches and glory the Saints have in their salvation, nor Christ in them:
but 2 Cor. 4. 4. the god of this world has blinded their eyes, that is, they
look upon every thing as the Devil represents them; you know when Satan tempted
Christ, he showed him all the Kingdoms in the world and the glory of them. The
Devil represented them in his own glass. Take a poor creature that thinks
riches a gallant thing, and honors a very fine thing; he sees these as the
Devil represents them. But for the duties of Gods worship, the word of God, and
a regular walking, he sees no excellency in these. Why? Because these are
represented in a glass that makes them most odious to that man; and hence it is
that men have different good things, because they look on things with different
light, and eyes: one man sees things as represented by Gods Spirit, another
looks on things in the Devils Glass continually: this is one Reason.

Secondly, because men have different tastes and savours as well as different
lights. Romans 8. 5. the Apostle says, They that are after the flesh, savor the
things of the flesh, and they that are after the spirit, savor the things of
the spirit; that is, take spiritual things; he that is after the flesh, finds
no more savor in them then in the white of an egg, as Job speaks: the sweetness
of a promise is no more to him, then if he sucked a dry stick, he has no
savor: on the other side, tell him of riches, and plenty, and honors,
prophecy to him of wine and strong drink, and he tastes a savor and sweetness
in them, he is able to relish it: and this is the true Reason why men have
such different chief goods, because they have different savors: they can taste
a sweetness in dainty meats, and gorgeous apparel, and in the pleasures of sin:
but now another man, he comes to look on the word of God, and he says, It Is
sweeter to me then the honey, or the honey comb. The Philosopher says of all
sensitive creatures, vitam gustu ducunt, they live by taste: the truth is, if
rightly understood, so do all rational creatures too live by taste: one man
lives the life of God: Why? because he tastes the things of God: another man
lives the life of Satan: Why? because he tastes the things of the devil: he has
no savor, no sweetness in any other thing: and that's the true reason why vain,
foolish people in the world run after such vanities, it is because they savor no
better things.

Thirdly, men choose to themselves different good things; it proceeds I say
from their own choice; I cannot now stand to distinguish, as the Schoolmen do,
between Election and Volition; but that is the meaning, That that men will for
themselves, that they choose. Would you know why Israel was Gods peculiar
treasure; it was because God chose them himself, I have chosen you to be my
people. So how comes it to pass that God is one man's treasure and not another?
one man chooses him: therefore you shall find still that a man that has made
choice of God as his chief good, he says, Let me enjoy God, and if I have
nothing else, I shall be content. Whom have I in heaven but thee? there is none
on earth, whom I desire in comparison of thee, says David. The good of the
Creature is not the good I choose; but another man that chooses the things of
this life to himself, riches, honors; pleasures, says he, Let me have
abundance of all things here, and though I have never any acquaintance with God
all my life long. Let them take ordinances and Sermons that take pleasure in
them: but let me enjoy my pleasures and abundance of all things here below, and
I can be content to be without God for ever. So that if a man enjoy his chief
good, he is content. This is the third Proposition.

Fourthly, this chief good, which every man chooses according to the light and
taste he has, is in the Scripture called a man's treasure: you see every man
has a chief good, and every man has his chief good in this life, and every
man has his own chief good. Now this chief good that every man chooses to
himself, that is in Scripture called his treasure, and it is so upon a threefold
account.

First, from the preciousness of it in a man's own esteem: treasures are never
made up but of things precious; no man speaks of treasures of dung, or
treasures of stones, they be precious things that be a man's treasure: and
therefore when the Lord speaks of precious things, he calls them a treasure:
the Lord Jesus laid up in the Gospel, is called the treasure hid in the field,
Matthew. 13. 44. And so the Gospel being a depositum laid up with those to whom
the Ministry of reconciliation is committed, is called a treasure in earthen
vessels, 2 Cor. 4. 7. So that treasure carries a preciousness with it, whether
it be in truth or in appearance: for example, take a man whose chief good is in
God, this is his treasure. Why? says he, take away God from me, and I am
undone. So on the other side, take another man that makes wealth his treasure,
or bravery his treasure, Take these things from me, and the comfort of my life
is gone: those that love to be always praying or hearing, I wonder what comfort
they can have, I would not live such a life for a world: that is the first
reason why it is called a treasure, for the preciousness of it.

Secondly, it is called a treasure for its plenty; for it is not a little that
makes a treasure: If a man have a few pieces of gold, you do not say he has a
treasure: no, it is plenty that makes a treasure, Col. 2. 3. In him are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; plenitudinem denotat, Notes the fullness
of wisdom and knowledge, so that treasure carries plenty in the notion of it,
and it must needs be so; for what ever is a man's chief good, he defires
appetitu infinito, with an infinite appetite. Take a man that makes riches his
treasure, and he inlarges his desires as hell, and is not satisfied: and a man
that desires pleasures, cries always as the horse-leaches daughter, Give, give;
let him glut himself to day, and he is hungry to morrow: Why? because it his is
chief good: so take a man whose chief good is laid up in God, though he have
glorious in-comes from God, he is still calling for more and more, more grace
from him, more communion with him, more consolation from the Spirit of God.
Why? it is his chief good. The Spirit says Come, and the Bride says Come.

Thirdly, it is called a man's treasure, because it is that by which a man does
value himself: pray mark it, as look how much a man has in his treasure, so
much he conceives he is worth: so look what is a man's chief good, by that the
man does value himself: there is a rate that the world puts upon a man, and a
rate that the man puts upon himself: a rate that the world puts upon men, and
they value their own as they love their own: and as for those they see God has
taken out of the world, they are men of no worth: but there is a value and a
rate that every man puts upon himself, and that is by the treasure that he
has, as Nebuchadnezzar said, Is not this great Babel that I have built for the
glory of my majesty: he speaks of his Empire: so Paul valued himself according
to his moral righteousness, and thought that should have been gain to him: thus
men do value themselves: but how does God value them? he has his rate on men
too, Prove. 10. 20. he values men according to their hearts: God does not value
men according to their estates, their names, their birth: God values no man so,
but God values them according to their hearts: and therefore he says, The
heart of the wicked is little worth: thus you see that men value themselves
according to their treasure: and upon this account it is that a godly man does,
and ought to do, set a higher value upon himself, then all the men in the
world: because thereby he sets a price upon his treasure: as Paul when he stood
before King Agrippa: who was the better man now, Paul or the King? I would that
thou were such an one as I am, though he were a prisoner at the Bar, and the
other a King: yet notwithstanding Paul values himself beyond him; wishes, I
would his condition were no worse then mine: thus a man's treasure is, that by
which every man values himself, and thinks he is so much worth: And upon these
three Reasons, a man's chief good is called his treasure, because of the price
he sets upon it; the plenty he labors after in it, and the value and esteem he
puts upon himself by it; and so much for the opening of this Doctrine.

The first Use is of examination, it will put every one of you to it: you have
a treasure, and it is either in heaven or earth. If it be a treasure on earth,
where thy treasure is, there is thy heart: and where thy heart is, there is thy
happiness: and where thy happiness is, thy God is: that I will tell thee, and
there you must look for your salvation; therefore you have a treasure, and it is
either on earth or in heaven: if your treasure be on earth, there is your chief
good, and your portion is below. But how should a man know it, that every man
may be able to say unto himself, where my treasure is, there my heart is: there
are six Rules that I shall offer at present, though I shall give further light
into it by Gods assistance.

First, what is it that you dig for, that you labor most for, that you are
willing to spend your money for, as the Holy Ghost speaks? This is the first
trial, if thou dig for wisdom, as for hidden treasure, Prove. 2. 4. what is it
that you labor for? labor not for the meat that perishes, Joh. 6. 57. What
is the great thing you work for in this life? that is your treasure: what is it
that you lay out your money for? Isa. 55. 3. that a man could willingly be at
any cost to obtain, to part with any thing for: now what is it for that you do
it, that is your treasure: Now when any man shall return to his own heart, and
say, Truly I have labored for wealth all my days, and wearied my self in
seeking after pleasures and vanity all my days: and I that have been
straight-handed enough, in reference to what belongs to God and spiritual
things: yet I have been liberal enough for other things: as it was said of
them, when they made an Image, they lavisht gold out of their bags: but when
they are to feed and cloth a poor member of Christ, then every penny is but
like a drop of blood: but when are to lay it out for this or that gallantry,
then men lavish it out: Oh the foolery of some among us! Consider what is it
you labor for? that is your treasure: What do you lay out your money for? see
how strangely people will for that they place their chief good in; how ready
they are to labor and to lay out themselves for it. The Israelites were to
make a Calf, and then they gave Earrings and Jeweis for it from their sons and
daughters: And that old Woman, Judge. 11. 2, 3. that had scraped together 1100.
pieces of silver, and cursed him that had stolen it: Oh my son, says she, I have
dedicated it from thy hand to make a graven Image; it was nothing to part
freely with when it came to make an Image; thus where men place their happiness
and chief good, where their treasure is, there is the main of their labor,
there is their great care, and for this they are willing to spare no cost.

Secondly, would you know where your treasure is, upon what do you live?
examine from whence do the comforts of your life come in; that is your
treasure: It is called The food of the soul, the meat that perishes, and the
meat that endures to eternal life, that is, that by which the soul lives, Joh.
6. 27. and Prove. 4. 17. They eat the bread of wickedness, and they drink the
wine of violence; all the comforts of their life come in by sin: now examine by
what the comforts of your life come in, Isa. 44. 20. He feeds upon ashes,
speaking of men who had the comforts of their lives come in by idolatry: the
curse of the Serpent is come upon them, they feed upon ashes; by what do the
comforts of your lives come in? I have a good estate, I have a plentiful
Table, and herein all the comfort of my life lies. Whereas another man says,
I have incomes from God, and have in some measure, fellowship with him: I taste
the consolations of the Holy Ghost, and this I do in Sermons, and Ordinances,
and therefore I wait upon them. Look wherein the comfort of your life lies,
there is your treasure laid up. These are plain Rules if you deal saithfully
and plainly with your selves, you may easily know it.

Thirdly, what is it that is your greatest care to keep above all things in the
world, sure that is your treasure; treasures are commonly hidden, because men
would keep them safe; called therefore treasures of darkness, Isa. 45. 1. Now
take a man that makes riches his treasure, and what does he fear most? why,
least they should be taken from him by violence: and a man that makes God and
grace his treasure, he fears Satan and sin most, because his great cate is to
keep these: therefore those that would rob him of these, he fears above all
other enemies in the world. Another man that makes pleasure and wealth his
care, I would not says he be deprived of my wealth and pleasure for a world:
let sin come, and Satan come, and take away his God, his grace, his soul and
all, he is not troubled; these the man takes no care to keep: therefore that
which is your treasure, it is your main care to keep.

Fourthly, what does your soul retreat to for comfort in trouble, in any danger
or distress when a man's soul is put to the retreat, whither do you retire? as
if a rich man at any time be in danger, whither does he retreat? The rich man's
wealth is his strong tower, Prove. 18. 11. Let a godly man be in danger, whither
does he retreat? to the name of the Lord; The name of the Lord is a strong
tower; the righteous runs to it, and is safe, and thither he retreats and is
safe. Haman was in danger, and under disgrace; what does the man bear up his
heart with? he goes home and told of his wealth and the multitude of his
children; here was the treasure of the man: to these his heart retired upon
this occasion; and with these he comforted himself. And so it is, let a man be
in disgrace, I have such an estate, and am descended from such Parentage; with
these poor souls bear up themselves: but now another man, though none follow
Christ but the poor of the world, contemptible men, what does he comfort
himself with: just as Tertullian answered those that reviled the Christians,
they came of no honorable parentage, At genus and proavos habent in Coelis,
says he. In heaven they have a Country, a Kingdom in heaven, though they be
but poor here; and so Job: God had taken away all his estate and his children:
now whither does he retire? Job 19. 28. The root of the matter is in me: I have
a treasure of grace in my soul for all that: what is a man's treasure, that he
retreats unto upon all occasions.

Fifthly, look how you judge of other men; for you value men more or less, as
they have of that which you account your treasure: a godly man that makes Grace
his treasure, when the question is, who is the best man, the rich man or the
godly man? truly says he, the godly man is far the better man to me, though
poor and contemptible in the world, Psalm. 16. 3. They are the excellent ones,
in whom is all my delight: here is a godly poor man, and there is a great Lord,
but the godly man is the best man of the two to me, because he has more of
that which I account my treasure: it is so in other things: men that make wealth
their treasure, their chief good, let the man be never so wise and godly, if he
be not rich, he despises him; why? because he has not that which he accounts
his treasure: Another man that makes learning his treasure, he says a godly
man, though never so godly, without learning, is a poor, simple, welmeaning
man, and that is all; he values all men according to that which he accounts his
treasure; examine what value you put upon men. Do thou prize a godly man
above all the world? do thou say a Godly poor man is better to me then an
ungodly King; it is a sign that grace is thy treasure, for thou valuest all other
men according to that which is thy treasure. The Waldenses were reproached and
despised with this, The poor men of Lions; but God has chosen the poor of this
world rich in faith, be they never so poor; by this you shall easily judge
where your treasure is: how do you value other men? for you value them by that
which you value your selves.

Lastly, What be those times that you set most price upon, that you write with
red letters in the Calendar of your days? those times that bring a man in most
treasure, those times the man values most; as look to them Amos 8. they made
wealth their treasure; the Sabbath comes, it was a wearisom time to them, they
took no pleasure in the world in it; When will the Sabbath be gone, that we may
sell corn? as it is now with vain ones in the world, when will the Sabbath be
gone, and the Sermon be done? we cannot take our pleasures as at other times,
that day seems ten to them. Look on the other side, Isa. 58. 13. there is one
that calls the Sabbath his delight: why should the Sabbath be a delight to him,
because he looks upon it as the best day in the week, and most honorable,
because it brings in great treasure. You never knew a rich man think the time
long, so long as he is receiving of money; so it is with a gracious man, so long
as he has in-comes from God, these are Exchequer-days to that soul; those
times are most precious to such men which bring in that which they account
their treasure; now examine your selves by these Rules and deal faithfully with
your selves, and you will find where your treasure is: for where your treasure
is, there your hearts will be: and where your heart is, there is your
happiness; and rules where your happiness is, there is your good, and there
your reward will be. There are five rules of trial which I have prepared for
this present time, which I desire every one would take as a looking glass to
see his face by, thereby to judge of his own estate, that you may know where
your chief good is laid up, where your treasure lies. It is the greatest
inquiry in the world, there is not a greater question to be asked in the world
then this, Where is your chief good, where is your God? and therefore we had
need stick a little the longer in it.

The first rule to judge it by, A man's treasure or his chief good, is that
which is first in his eye and aim in all things, in the whole bent and course
of his life: that which has the priority in all his intentions, that is his
chief good, his treasure. Aquinas observes, Intentio est voluntatis propensio ad
bonum quoddam agendum aut fruendum. Intention is the bent and aim of the will,
in reference unto some good propounded unto it by the understanding; if it be a
good to be affected, that rule takes place; that which is first in intention is
last in execution; if it be a good to be obtained, then this rule takes place,
That which was first in intention, is last in fruition: so that look now what
is the great aim of a man's soul, that the bent of his heart is carried out
after: the first thing that is in his eye, that is his chief good, his
treasure. In the Scripture you find that God stands very much upon priority.
Mat. 6. 33. Seek first the kingdom of God. Seek it first: why? is it not enough
that the Kingdom of God be sought, suppose it be in the second place? no, it is
not sought then; it is despised, it is undervalued, if men do not seek it
first. So likewise the Lord commended his love to us in this, he loved us
first, 1 John 4. 19. So likewise in Matthew. 22. 38. This is the first and great
Commandment: God stands wonderfully upon precedence; so that that which should
be first, if it be not sought for in Gods order, the Lord looks upon it as
neglected, and not sought for; for the Lord in this above all things else may
be truly said to be the God of Order. Take a natural man, and his chief good is
first in his eye: it has the preheminency and precedence in all his actings
and intentions.

Its the voice of all covetous men in the world, Seek Godliness, seek Religion.
I but quaerenda pecunia primum, seek an estate first: So of all ambitious men,
seek honor first. First seek to be great in the world; for a man's chief good is
that which draws out the first intentions of his soul: the first born of his
soul: see this in godliness: the Scripture is plentiful in the proof of it: 2
Cor. 4. 18. It is the Apostle rule, We, says he, seek not or look not at the
things that are temporal, but at the things that are eternal, on things not
seen, and not upon things that are seen (...), we aim not. He speaks it not
only in his own name, but in the behalf of all the Saints: for all act alike in
that respect, all have one chief good and utmost end; for we make these things
our aim; there be many things that we look upon by the by; but we look upon
these things in the first place, as that which we make our aim: so Paul calls
it, I press hard unto the mark, (...), which is properly a mark at which a man
shoots: properly that which a man aims at in shooting: now you know when a man
takes level, though there be many things at his right hand and at his left
hand, that he may look at at another time: but when he levels he fixes his eye
only upon the mark, that's the thing he only looks at: the Apostle on the other
side speaking of other men, Phil. 2. 4. says, Every man seeks his own things,
that is, makes his own things his aim: this is the main thing they look at
above all things else, they aim at: now see by this where a man's treasure is,
what his chief good is upon this account. What is the first and main thing in
all your intentions? If the Lord should come to any Saint here present, and
make him Solomon's offer, Ask what I shall give thee. It may be in reference to
things below, they would not be presently able to make choice: whether he
should choose riches, or honor, or posterity, or long life or authority among
men: if all these were laid before him, the man would not be presently able to
make choice: but there is no Saint in the world, if God should ask, What shall
I give thee? he would make answer without any dispute and reasoning of the
business, hoc primum in votis. This is my first desire, an interest with thy
self, and an inheritance with the Saints: It would be no trouble to a godly man
to resolve it: in reference to the things of eternity there would be no
dispute; that which is first in intention, is last in fruition: this is the
first rule: pray examine your selves, what is the main intention of the soul
set upon? what has the priority in all your aims and purposes? certain that is
your chief good.

Secondly, a man shall know where his treasure or chief good is, by this: that
is a man's chief good which he desires for it self, and desires all things else
in subordination thereunto: that's a man's chief good which he desires for it
self. Christ gives you this Rule, in Matthew. 10. 37. He that loves father and
mother more then me, is not worthy of me: what does Christ intend? a man is
bound to love father and mother: but Christ says, you must not love them more
then me: what is that? When does a man love any thing more then Christ? Truly
then when it is beloved in competition with him, and not in subordination to
him. He must love Christ for himself: that's clear: Christ lays down that as a
Rule: Christ is to be beloved for himself, and God is to be loved for himself,
and so likewise, Luke 14. 26. He that does not hate father, and mother, and
wife, and children, and his own life, cannot be my disciple: hate them? how
hate them? non absolute, sed comparative: A man is bound to love them all, and
it is his duty; it is not to be understood absolutely, but in comparison of the
Lord Jesus: so he is to see that excellency in him, that in comparison of him
he is bound to hate father and mother, yea and his own life: Why then Christ is
to be loved for himself, and God for himself; and all things else are to be
loved in subordination: nay if they do not come in subordination, they are to
be hated: that rule is good always then that Austin lays down, Deum diligere
propter seipsum, amicum in Deo, inimicum propter Deum: God is to be loved for
himself: We are to love our friends in God, and our enemies for God; then a
man's chief good is that which a man's loves for it self: but how shall I know
whether I love God for himself: it is very true a man may love God but out of
self love; and a man may love Christ but out of a principle of self love; but
how shall I know when I love God for himself, and Christ for himself; You shall
know it plainly by two Rules. 1. That which a man is willing to part with all
things for, that he loves for it self; he does love it above all things, part
with all things for it: But how shall I know when I am willing to part with all
things for God and Christ?

There are two Seasons wherein a godly man is tried in this life; and never any
man had grace in his heart, but he had two seasons to try himself by; I say
two, to say no more: at the time of his conversion, and at the time of his
dissolution.

At the time of Conversion, Phil. 3 8. When Paul comes to be converted, put the
Question to Paul, do you love Christ for himself? I account all things loss
that I may be found in him. Now he loves nothing in comparison of him; he that
forsakes not all, cannot be my disciple, Luke 14. 32. not actually forsake all,
but in the disposition of his heart he forsakes all for him. Indeed a godly man
forsakes all for Christ at his conversion: he forsakes all as a condition, that
is, without this I cannot partake of him: For a man must sell all if he will
buy the pearl: therefore at conversion a man parts with all as a condition
without which he cannot obtain it; but after conversion the man parts with all
as an oblation. Does the Lord require any thing as a Sacrifice? Will he have an
Isaac? the soul parts with all, and says, he shall find all in him again: he
parts with all as a condition, and as an oblation: for he knows he is not his
own, 1 Cor. 6. 28. All that he is, and has, belongs to to him: thus at the
time of conversion, a godly man has experience, that he loves Christ and God
for himself; for he parts with all for him.

Secondly, at the time of his dissolution, when a godly man comes to die, he
sees all things here below, taking their leaves of him; his friends, his
estate, his glory, his pomp descends not after him: Naked as he came into the
world, so he must go out again: now a godly man can look on all these with
rejoicing, and say, I have no more need of them; for I am to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ, which is much the better, Phil. 1. 23. Consider I pray then,
a godly man has a double experience that he parts with all for Christ, and for
God at his conversion, and at his own dissolution, and can do it with
cheerfulness, just as that good Martyr, My wife and my children are dear unto
me; so dear (said he, when he came to die at the stake) that I could look upon
it as a mercy to live with them, though in a prison: but my Christ is dearer to
me then all. That's your chief good, thar you can part with all things else for.

Secondly, when a man abstracts God and Christ, the good that is in them from
all the good that comes by them, yet a man loves them for themselves: abstract
and take away the good that comes by them, and the soul is carried after them
for the good that is in them. I do not speak this to favor that Antinomian
Doctrine, which says, that a godly man in his obedience may not, nay it is their
sin to have respect to the recompense of reward: for Moses had so, and Christ
had so: the one for the glory set before him, the other for the joy before him,
omnis amor mercedis, non est amor mercenarius. Its not every respect to the
recompense of reward makes a man a mercinary in Gods service; provided that it
be in the second place. Now you shall find there are two seasons, when all the
good that comes by Religion and Godliness, seems to be abstracted from it; and
what seasons be those?

The time of affliction, and the time of desertion. Is there any outward
benefit comes by Religion? the times of affliction and persecution deprive men
of that.

Is there any sweetness, any inward comfort by it? the time of desertion
distracts and disturbs that: nay when you look upon Job, and see him under
both, under affliction and desertion too: and yet notwithstanding for all that,
though a man say as Heman did, I am free among the dead, like those that are
buried, and thou remembrest no more; for ought I know I shall never have good
look from God more: yet I cry day and night: I have but little experience and
hope of the good that comes by him, but my heart is carried after him for the
good that is in him: Though he kill me I will trust in him. I will love him for
the excellencies that are in himself, what ever becomes of it; this is clear
and evident that he loves God for the good that is in him, and not for the good
that comes by him: you shall find it thus with men in this world; for I would
instance on both hands, those that have their portion or treasure here below;
truth is they are content to part with all things else for their treasure; as
take a man that makes riches his treasure; he will part with a good conscience,
he will part with the best friends he has: nay let him act to the grief of his
friends and unto the reproach of his enemies: yet notwithstanding if the man
can obtain that which is his treasure, it is enough: let his enemies reproach
and his friends grieve, it is well enough, Populus mihi Sibilat, at mihi
plaudo: the man will part with any thing; an Argument that the man loves it for
itself: and so it is true with an ambitious man, that makes honor his treasure
and chief good, he will break all bonds and obligations, natural, civil and
religious, to obtain it, nay let him be accounted the monster of men, let him
be under Religious vows, he will break all these, he will despise counsel,
tread upon friends, trample upon Laws, and all that he may be great: you see
the treasure that men propose unto themselves in this world, they love it for
it self, and will venture any thing for it: this is the second particular.

Thirdly, that which is a man's treasure or chief good, he refers all things to
it, he seeks all things else in subordination to it; for a man's chief good, and
utmost end, as the Philosopher well observes, is that which orders all his
actions: but you will say, still you put us upon a strict inquiry; how can we
tell that? When we seek all things, and love every thing in subordination to
God: for this there are two Rules by which you may plainly judge.

First, he that seeks all things in subordination to his chief good, there is
nothing shall cross it; he seeks nothing that falls cross unto it: for whatever
falls cross unto it, truly that is not sought in subordination. Subordinata non
pugnant. Now see this in a godly man: what ever may cross him in that which is
his chief good, to be sure his soul goes off from it: as for example, suppose
it be the love of life, Acts 20. 24. I account not my life dear, says Paul, so
I may finish my course with joy. And so it may be, the body and bodily ease may
stand in competition with duty. I cannot pray, nor I cannot fast, nor I cannot
spend my time thus, and so: Why, says he, I beat down my body, and make it
serve: I serve. Coming in competition with the chief good, it must yield. And
so it may be an estate: I cannot part with my money, no; but if God be thy
chief good, and thine estate come in competition with God and Christ, then
valeat vita, valeat pecunia, valiant omnia: farewell life, and farewell estate,
and farewell all, as that good woman said. This a man shall see, when he seeks
all things in subordination to God; for nothing else shall cross that which is
his chief good; and so if a man would gain the world, he seeks all things else
in subordination unto it: see an instance in Demas; will godliness abate his
profit? no, it crosses his chief good, and therefore he forsakes it; and so it
is with all men, that do deliberately choose sin to avoid suffering: or
neglect a known duty for temporal advantage: Why? because somewhat else is
their chief good, and the things of Religion are subordinate to that; if any
thing in Religion cross my estate; or cross me in point of honor, then farewell
Religion.

Secondly, it must serve it; that which is subordinate to another, that must
serve thereunto: take a man whose portion is in this world, whose chief good is
here below: there is nothing in Religion, but must serve that man. Simon Magus
his chief good is his money, his covetousness; now let me offer money to buy
the gifts of the Holy Ghost, that by this means he might make gain of the gifts
of the Holy Ghost: the gifts of the Holy Ghost shall increase his estate. And
so Jehu's Reformation in Religion shall tend to this end, to settle Jehu in his
Kingdom; for things subordinate must be useful to that to which they are
subordinate; and if you look upon Popery in the whole frame of it, what is the
aim and intention of it? Here is a great show of Religion, all to keep the
woman that rides the scarlet colored beast on horseback, the greatest shows
and pretenses to conscience that can be: Now on the contrary, take a godly man,
whose chief good is God alone, why he does value all things barely as they are
subordinate to this end: an estate, what does he love it for it self? no, but
as he may thereby lay up a good foundation, that he may inherit eternal life;
as he may make him friends of the unrighteous Mammon: Gifts, does he value them
for themselves? no, but for the edification of the body of Christ: so as every
thing else he makes subordinate to his chiefest good. Ecclesiastes 7. 11.
Wisdom is good with an inheritance; by wisdom is meant saving wisdom, grace,
that which begins with the fear of the Lord; but why does he say, wisdom is
good with an inheritance; is not wisdom good without an inheritance? there are
two things in it: grace teaches a man how to use an inheritance, and to
subordinate it; wisdom is not so good in it self, in reference to others,
without an inheritance: and wisdom teaches how to employ an inheritance to Gods
glory, and the good of others, to make it subordinate to a higher end; you love
it no otherways then as it is subordinate, you do not seek any thing to cross
it; but you make all things else serviceable thereunto; if some of you should
go down into your own hearts, God has given you honors and estates: do you
love these in subordination to God: how then is your honor and estate employed
for God? I am afraid many of us will be found seeking these things as our chief
good, though we pretend that all is in subordination to God.

Fourthly, where a man's treasure and chief good is, a man's soul goes out after
it with continual and earnest breathings and gaspings; whatever is a man's chief
good, his treasure, his heart goes out after it, with continual and endless
gaspings and breathings: so you shall find it with natural men, who have their
treasure in this life, their souls are full of nothing but lusts endless
desires: It is expressed, Psalm. 24. 4. these be the liftings up of a man's soul
to vanity: A man now that makes riches, or pleasures, or honors, or any thing
below his treasure, or his chief good, he lifts up his soul to vanity: to lift
up the soul in Scripture, is to desire a thing earnestly, with continual
earnest breathings after it, Deuteronomy. 24. 15. The poor lifts up his soul to his
wages, that is, desires his wages, and Jer. 22. 27. The Land whereunto you lift
up your souls, to that you shall never return: So that to lift up a man's soul
to any thing in the Scripture is to desire it earnestly: thus if a man's chief
good be here below, continual breathings and gaspings of soul go out after it:
but take another man now that has his treasure in Heaven, his chief good
above: where are the continual pantings and gaspings of his soul, Psalm. 25. 1.
Lord, I lift my soul to thee: the one lifts up his soul to vanity, another
lifts up his soul to God: there is none that I desire in comparison of thee, my
soul gasps for thee: 2 Cor. 5. 1. For this we groan earnestly; for our house
which is from heaven, under continual groanings and breathings always. And
though it is true, the soul while it is here finds an impossibility of enjoying
God here: yet you shall find this true, and it is a mighty speech, Love that is
of the right kind, and carried after God indeed, truly is never satisfied nor
at rest in this, that it is under a possibility of enjoying God, but works
after, and tends to that enjoyment. Consider it I pray; it is with the soul, as
all waters you know run into the sea: a tide may come and beat back the water
at the present, but it returns after the tide, it returns to its own course:
and so it is with a gracious heart, he can never be quiet; when the soul
follows hard after God, it is beaten back again, but it makes after God again;
now examine, what does your souls breath and make after? that is your chief
good.

Lastly, that is a man's treasure and chief good wherein his soul receives
satisfaction, without which he is never satisfied; in the enjoyment whereof a
man blesses his soul, that is, thinks it happy; so the Scripture speaks this
too Psalm. 49. 18. take a natural man, and While he lives he blesses his soul:
while he does live to himself he blesses his soul, so you shall find that men
are satisfied in nothing else. Take an ambitious man; let him have the wealth
of Nations at command: let every man's purse be open unto him; yet
notwithstanding he is not satisfied with all his wealth; for he cannot sit in a
low place: why? because honor is his chief good.

Take another man and let wealth be his chief good: let the man be never so
wise, never so learned, have never so great esteem among men; he is not
satisfied but he must be rich; for the soul is satisfied in nothing but that
which the man makes his chief good.

On the other side, take another man that makes God and godliness his chief
good. In this he is satisfied, and satisfied in nothing else, Psa. 90. 14.
Satisfy us early with thy mercy: take a soul that needs mercy, mercy
satisfies him, and nothing else, Psalm. 66. 18. They shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatness of thy house: Give him wealth, and that will not
satisfy him; his soul is still empty; honor and preferment among men will not
satisfy him, it is not his chief good, Prove. 14. 14. it is said, a good man is
satisfied from himself: what does Solomon mean by satisfaction from a man's
self, it is self joined to a man's chief good; for a man's chief good is nearer
to him then himself: take a man that injoys his chief good, though he be stripped
of all things else, he blesses his soul, he says he is a happy man, for he is
satisfied with himself; examine your selves now by these Rules: look what that
is that is first and chief in your aim in all you do in this world; what that
is that you love for it self: what you love all things else in subordination
to; where are the gaspings of your soul, and in what is it that you bless your
souls? Where is your satisfaction? by these trials you shall certainly know
where your chief good is; and where your treasure is, there is your heart; and
where your heart is, there is your happiness, and there your portion will be at
last; and so much for the Use of examination, how every man shall know; seeing
every man has a treasure in this life, by election, though not by fruition
where his treasure is.

The next thing that now we come to, is a Use of conviction: Has every man
that lives in this world some treasure? or something that may be called his
chief good? why then this will set forth the misery, the most wretched
condition of all those that mis-lay their treasure, misplace their chief good;
the Lord Jesus Christ tells you there are two sorts of men; some whose treasure
is laid up on earth, others whose treasure is laid up in Heaven. Some that have
their chief good here below, their portion in this life: some it may be that
have but the earnest here, the first fruits, the harvest is to come: now all
those that are mistaken in reference to their chief good that do mis-place
their treasure; This does clearly discover to them that they are in a most
miserable condition: and truly this is, I will not say, the condition of most
of you here present: but this is the condition of most in the world; that I am
sure the Scripture warrants me to say. Now that I may a little heighten this
conviction, if the Lord please to bless it to any soul: When upon examination
you find your chief good misplaced, and you have not laid up your treasure
where you should do: there are these six considerations that should
marvellously heighten it unto you.

First, consider the Scripture does speak of a true treasure, Luke 16. 11. If
you have not been faithful in the Mammon of unrighteousness, who will commit
to your trust your true treasure? (...). When I read such expressions in
Scripture concerning riches, and see how strangely men run after them, how mad
men are of them, either unjustly gotten or unjustly kept, or wickedly spent,
the Mammon of unrighteousness every way: But who shall commit unto him the true
treasure? Now here is an opposition that clearly argues a distinction. There is
a treasure that is true, then certainly there is a treasure that is false: it
behooves you then to consider, have I a treasure? is it true or false? as to
that Prove. 8. 21. Where wisdom is brought in, saying, He that loves me, I will
cause him to inherit substance: the word signifies, I will cause him to inherit
something that is, or somewhat that has a being: what does this argue? what do
other men inherit that do not love wisdom? truly they inherit shadows: Take all
the great-landed men in the world and they inherit a shadow. There is a true
treasure that is substantial: pray hear what the Holy Ghost says of all your
wealth, you rich men, Prove. 23. 5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is
not? what is that which is not? riches betake themselves to their wings; riches
is said not to be; why not to be? it is all the being that many of you have in
this world; if it were not for your wealth you were no body; its the only thing
you bear up your selves upon. Its said not to be upon a double account; there
is no reality in them, there is no stability in them; both these I think the
Spirit of God expresses.

First, there is no Reality in them, that is, in reference to what you fancy
them to be; its more fancy that makes them such things, then any reality that
is in the thing in it self; and in that respect covetousness is idolatry,
riches an Idol, and an Idol is nothing in the world; so the Apostle says, that
is, its nothing in substance: so riches is nothing of that which you fancy, it is
not so in substance, it is but so in fancy; and there was never any godly man,
whose eyes the Lord opened to see the vanity of the creature but he saw it was
his own great thoughts made these things great: its your fancy makes them
idols: And,

Secondly, there is nothing of stability in them, they betake themselves to
their wings: you think now to have them to morrow where they were to day, no,
they take themselves wings and are gone; you have seen this in your time in
hundreds of instances, how men's treasures take themselves to their wings; in
none of these things the true treasure lies; he is a miserable man therefore
that does not inherit substance, but fancies. Thou art a miserable man
therefore that art in this mistake; that's the first Argument to enforce this
conviction.

Secondly, consider herein lies the great deceit of sin and Satan, to deceive
a man in his chief good. I, there is the great deceit, the Apostle Heb. 3. 12,
13. Speaks of the deceitfulness of sin, Lest any man be hardened with the
deceitfulness of sin; there is in every sin a deceitfulness: It works with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness; and so the devil is said to do with the
deceivableness of unrighteousness: Now sin and Satan will labor to deceive you
in every thing; but to what end is it? In ordine ad summum bonum. It is in
reference to your chief good, there is the deceit; they will deceive you in all
things else, but in order to your chief good; for as the Spirit of God is in
direction, so Satan is in delusion. The Spirit of God in direction he will
direct a man in all his ways, in every course and passage of his life, but all
in reference to a man's chief good and utmost end: so Satan will deceive a man
in every passage of his life; but to what end is it? that he may deceive him in
that which is his chief good; and in this the great malice of Satan does
appear, that he will set a man's heart upon some particular good thing, which
the soul shall take as its chief good: and embracing that, shall own the Devil
as God, and worship him. Pray consider what I say, whatever Satan fixes a man's
heart upon a particular good, and a man makes that his chief good, he owns the
Devil as God, and worships him as God: And it is in this that Satan was a
murderer from the beginning, Abbadon the destroyer: the devil deceived the
woman: In what? in her chief good, and it is in this that he is the destroyer:
and herein lies the happiness of godly men, that though Satan deceives them in
many things, yet in their chief good he does never deceive them; they are past
that: as he is never able to rob them of their chief good, so he is never able
to deceive them there; that they are sure of; therefore he can never destroy
them: why? because in their chief good he can never deceive them: able to
deceive in this or that particular act: they may be cheated by Satan of the
exercise of this or that particular grace: may be enticed to this or that sin:
may be cheated by men of this or that temporal good: but in that which is their
chief good they cannot be cheated.

Thirdly, consider further, the nature of man does exceedingly abhor to be
deceived: it is so in all your natures, men do not love to be cheated: for there
is not only a loss in the thing, but a disparagement left upon the man: he is
not only deceived of some good thing, but he has the blemish of a fool laid
upon him, because he was deceived, being outwitted: you use to say, I had
rather give away three times as much, then to be cheated of a small matter: now
you shall find deceit is conversant about the understanding, and by this means
a man is deceived through the failing of his understanding: The Holy Ghost
charges, That no man should circumvent and overreach his brother: in
bargaining men do not love to be overreached: the woman was deceived, 1 Timothy
2. 14. and 2 Cor. 11. 3. The Serpent beguiled the woman: outwitted,
overreached, but never was there such a cheat as this in the world, to deceive
a man in his chief good, this is the great deceit: you will say, to give a man
Brass for Gold is a great deceit: for a man to take stones for bread, that were
a greater; because there is a less similitude: but to take the Creature for the
Creator, to set up the devil in the place of God: this is the deceit of being
cheated in a man's chief good; there are it is true many lesser deceits of Satan;
he does deceive men in this or that particular act, and a man is many times
deceived by Satan through the same sin: when a man has been convinced of a
sin, has repented for it, has prayed against it, cost him many tears, and
sighs, and groans before God, and he has resolved against that sin: yet a new
temptation has come, the devil has varnisht that sin over again, and the man
is taken with it: this is a deceit in a particular act: but here lies the grand
deceit, when a man is deceived in point of his chief good: the nature of man is
exceedingly against being beguiled, overreached: consider further,

Fourthly, you have the more reason to look unto it upon this account: because
this is the deceit that above all others Satan takes care to hide from you; he
would so deceive you in your chief good, that you should never know it, keep
you under that deceit all the days of your lives. There are several deceits of
Satan that may be discovered to men, and they may recover out of them, as the
Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 26. speaks of men recovering themselves out of the snare of
the Devil, or as the word is, to come to a man's self after he has been drunk,
to come into his wits again; a man may do so in many things: A man may see that
in this or that action he erred and has been deceived, and that was not good,
and this was not well; this a man may see and recover himself: nay, I think a
man may go thus high, a man may see the deceit of Satan his guile in reference
to his darling sin, that I conceive even in a state of unregeneracy, a man may
change his darling sin; a man may have such discovery of the deceit of Satan;
for the unclean spirit sometimes goes out of the man; in reference to
particular acts a man may see himself deceived, and a man may see himself quite
escaped those great errors among which he lives, 2 Pet. 2. 18. but in regard of
a man's chief good whatever he can do to hinder a man from seeing the deceit in
his chief good, he will do, 2 Cor. 4. The God of this world has blinded the
eyes of them that believe not. What is the devils great design upon all
unregenerate men? his great design is to keep them unregenerate, that's his
business; for never was any man converted to Christ, but he did see that he had
erred in his chief good; for you must consider what conversion is, it is a
turning to God, that argues a departing from God: turn to the Lord, therefore
we are departed from him. Now how is a man departed from God? Why, as his chief
good, as his utmost end, and therein lies the true nature of all ungodliness; I
am departed from God as my chief good, and have forsaken God as my utmost end:
when a man returns to God again what does he do? why, change his chief good:
that place is observable, Jer. 2. 13. My people have committed two evils;
forsaken me the fountain of living waters: what is that? departed from me as
their chief good from whence all good flows: And dig to themselves broken
Cisterns, that is, place their chief good somewhere else; that is the meaning
of the Spirit of God; though a man see his particular error; yet in this he
shall be blind; the God of this world will endeavor to blind his eyes: Further
consider,

Fifthly, this will be the deceit under which the greatest part of the world
will perish, being deceived in a man's chief good. I say under this deceit the
greatest part of the world will be damned; for straight is the gate, and narrow
is the way that leads to life, and few there be that enter thereat, Mat. 7. 14.
Now all men it is very true are carried out after some good thing or other, and
that they pursue: Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4. but there is a fourfold
deceit, under which about good things diligently sought, the greatest part of
the world will perish; pray observe them carefully.

First, men take bonum apparens pro vero, that which is but a seeming good for
a real and true good.

Secondly, they take bonum particulare pro universali, a particular good for an
universal good; that which is the chief good serves to all ends and purposes in
all estates and conditions; it is good every way: whereas riches, its true, they
profit against poverty, but not against death and wrath; honor keeps a man
from disgrace, but will not prevail against sin; and hereby men are deceived.

Thirdly, men take temporale pro aeterno, a temporal good, and they think this
is an eternal good; they think their riches will last for ever, and that they
will go down with them to the pit to bribe the flames, and corrupt the
Tormenter. A man's chief good must last not only for this life, but in the life
to come.

Lastly, they take alienum pro proprio, that which is another man's good for
their own: I that's the deceit. The holy Ghost when he speaks of all things of
this life, says, If thou be not faithful in that which is another man's, Luke
16. 11. I warrant there is never a rich man here, but thinks your estates are
your own: a Nabal may say indeed, Shall I take my meat and my drink? and very
thing is my and my; but the Spirit of God is quite contrary; he says, Thou art
the Steward of it for the present, but it is another man's; and therefore when he
speaks of giving to the poor, he says, withhold not from him to whom it is
due: you do not think it is due, it is at your own liberty; now here is the
deceit, men take that to be their own good which is another man's: this worlds
good: and under these four mistakes the greatest part of the world perish; they
take that for a true good which is but good in appearance; for an universal
good that is particular; for an eternal, that which is but temporal; and that
which is another man's for their own.

Lastly, it is this which will be unto Satan matter of insultation; and if thou
be deceived in thy chief good, it will be matter of derision to thee for ever;
remember that: to Satan matter of insultation: it is not with Cheaters as with
Robbers, that take goods from a man by violence, but the Cheater boasts of his
pranks afterward, to tell how he has outwitted a man: so it is with Satan as
a deceiver, and you know every prevailing is an insulting evil, and Satan is
the envious man: there are not only from Satan cruel murtherings, but there are
cruel mockings: I pray do but consider, Isa. 14. 10, 11, 12. there is
Nebuchadnezzar; the devil set the greatest good before him that this world
could afford, to be the great Emperor of the world, and by this particular good
the poor man is deceived: Well, he comes to Hell after all this; and the spirit
beneath is moved at his coming. Do but see how the devil insults, How art thou
fallen from heaven, Oh great Lucifer Son of the morning! Here is a man that I
cheated, by varnishing over a particular good: riches one, by honors another;
by pleasures a third: and it is that which will be to thee matter of derision
for ever: it will be too late then to say, so foolish was I and ignorant, I was
as a beast before thee: then a man must own his own shame, and lie down under
it: and this is the great and grand deceit which men will look upon with shame
and confusion of face to eternity. Certainly, you had need to take heed then
you be not deceived in your chief good: thus men are miserable, whose chief
good is misplaced.

But wherein does their misery lie, that misplace their chief good? There are
six things; but it would spend a days time to reckon up the misery of that man;
I and a day would be too little to recount the misery of that man who erres in
his chief good, errs in placing his treasure. There are only six things at
present I shall mention, that whoever finds that his chief good is mis-placed,
he may consider of it, and this may help toward his conversion for the change
of his chief good.

First, there is nothing good to that man who errs in his chief good: its the
old rule, Nil bonnm sine summo bono: There is nothing good to that man who is
deceived in his chief good: look into Eccles. 5. 3. there be riches: why, is
not that a good thing? a good thing for a man to have a great estate and a
large portion; but to a man that makes these his chief good, there is no good
in them to him. There be riches kept for the hurt of the owners: the man shall
wish one day that he had been as poor as Lazarus when he lay at the rich man's
gate: the man is the worse for them, he is but made rich for his hurt; and the
same thing is true of honors and all outward things: many a man is made
honorable to his hurt: for if he errs in his chief good, he errs in all things
else.

Is it not a good thing to live under the means of grace, the preaching of the
Gospel, the droppings of the Spirit of grace in the Sanctuary, where he uses to
work? look into Heb. 6. 7, 8. there is the ground that drinks in the rain, and
yet is nigh to cursing. Why? because he errs in his chief good: for what fruit
has he of all these? truly they all tend to no other end but to ensnare his
soul, to draw out his lusts, to ripen his sins, to hasten his ruin: here is
all the good the man gets by it: as it is to a good man that hits right in his
chief good, every thing is good to him: sufferings shall be good, sinning good,
afflictions good, temptations good: Why, every thing is sanctified to him: so
on the contrary to another man, nothing is good to him, because he errs in his
chief good: As it is in order of causes, so it is in order of goodness too: all
inferior things are never good to a man without an influence of the chief good:
remember that is the misery of a man that mis-places his chief good, his
treasure: if he err in that, nothing is good unto him.

Secondly, if a man err in his chief good, this will make him err in his
judgment of things and persons as long as he lives: that is his misery, he
never judges aright of things and persons: the rule of every man's judgment is
that which is to him his chief good: now if he err in that, he must needs err
in his judgment both of things and persons: First,

You shall see he errs, and must needs do so in reference to things: Take a man
whose chief good is here below, and see how he judges of things; he judges
sinning to be good, and therefore he chooses iniquity rather then affliction,
Job 36. 21. he judges the praise of men better then the praise of God, and
therefore chooses that, John 12. 43. nay he chooses things present as better
then those that are to come. This is the way of a man that has his chief good
here below: he errs in his judgment of all things: whereas now it is contrary to
a man whose chief good is in heaven: he says, sin is worse then death, worse
then Hell: as Anselm once professed, if hell were offered on the one side, and
heaven on the other with sin, he would rather enter hell, and account that a
good exchange; Mallem Gehennam intrare. And so he is not praiseworthy whom
men, but whom the Lord commends: why does one judge of things one way, and
another another way? it is because of different chief good: and as it is true of
things, so it is true of persons; one that places his happiness here below, and
has his treasure in this life, he calls the proud happy; judges them happy
that be set up in this world, Mal. 3. 15. he says, they are happy that be rich
and honorable, and have all things in this world in possession: because it is
that wherein he places his chief good. Now another man that has his treasure
in heaven, says, they be the godly that be the excellent ones, the precious
ones of the earth, the Lords jewels, and so they are in his account: for he
judges of them according to his own chief good: and this is the true reason why
the men of the world put darkness for light, and light for darkness: because
the rule of their judgment is their chief good, and a mistake there makes them
to err: that is the second.

Thirdly, if a man mis-place his chief good, this will cause him to mis-place
all the affections of his soul all his life long: all the affections of his
soul will be set wrong, and run upon wrong objects: the holy Ghost speaks of a
perverse generation, crooked and perverse: when all the affections of the soul
are set wrong, and run cross to every thing, they are so perverse: now thus you
shall find a man that has his chief good here below, his treasure on earth, he
loves vanity, Psalm. 4. 6. He fears where no fear is, he rejoices in a thing of
naught, Amos 6. 13. all his affections are set upon wrong objects: why? they
follow his judgment, follow that which he looks upon as his chief good; there
be affections to that which is good in a way of prosecution, and affections to
that which is evil in a way of aversion, and all these are set wrong; and all
these follow that which a man places his chief good in: Other men fear man: a
godly man fears sin; the other rejoices in a thing of naught: but he rejoices
in the hope of the glory of God: to his chief good his affections are set: and
is not this a miserable thing to have all the faculties of the soul dis-joynted
and set awry?

Fourthly, this makes a man to lose his labor in every thing he does all his
life long: if he err in his chief good, all his labor is lost; every man's
labor in this life is in reference to his chief good, Joh. 6. 27. Labor not
for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures to everlasting
life: Now if a man mistake and mis-place his chief good, then all his labor is
lost; for that is the rule of all his labor: you will say it was a miserable
curse, that upon the Princes of Zoar: they made Egypt to err in every work of
their hands: as will you but consider, Prove. 11. 8. the wicked works a
deceitful work: why a deceitful work? why because the man is deceived in his
chief good, and therefore their work never answers their labor; they weave a
spiders web: but it never becomes a garment: he that mis-places his chief good,
he is deceived in every work of his hands: he spends his parts, his time in
vain: he sows the wind, and reaps the whirlwind.

Fifthly, this only will destroy the man; oh consider, this error only is the
damning sin: a man may be deceived in a particular good thing or action, and
his soul be saved in the day of the Lord: there is not the best man on earth,
but in many things Satan deceives him, and in many things he may err and
miscarry: but if he be not deceived in his chief good, his soul shall certainly
be saved for all this. Now that which is your chief good here by way of
election, shall be your chief good hereafter in way of fruition: as for
example, as it is in errors in matter of Doctrine: the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12.
speaks of such a man as holds the foundation, and builds hay and stubble upon
it: that is, is deceived in doctrines of lesser concernment; he shall lose his
labor, but his soul shall be saved for all that: so here in errors in matter
of Practice, good things to be obtained; if a man err in a particular good
thing, his soul may be saved; but if he err in his chief good, he will be
destroyed; this is that which destroys the soul.

Lastly, consider if there were nothing else but this, it is the greatest
delusion, and the absurdest cheat that can be in the world: for a man is
deceived, and makes that his happiness, which is quite contrary; a chief good
must have a quite contrary ingredient. It is observed by Austin, that
Blessedeness requires two things. First, a chief good is that which cannot be
lost: now you place your chief good in things below; and Christ tells you, The
rust and moth corrupts, and thieves break through and steal: therefore to make
them your chief good, is a perfect cheat. Secondly, happiness requires
impeccability; the soul is put into a condition that it should not sin: Now
whoever he be that mis-places his chief good, even in so doing he lives in a
continual way of sinning; for it is setting up another God; he that places his
chief good in any thing below God and heaven: for to be your God, and your
chief good, is all one. In all these respects, see what a miserable condition
that man is in, who mis-places his chief good: when his heart should be on
things above, he sets it upon things below. And thus much for the Use of
conviction: the Lord set it on upon our consciences. Do not misplace your chief
good, do not be cheated and befooled in that: for it is that deceit which is
destruction.

Is this a truth, that every man that lives in this world has somewhat that he
lays up as his treasure? why then take Christ's exhortation in the verse before
the text, lay up for your selves treasures in heaven: that is the exhortation;
if every man has a treasure, then lay up for your selves treasure in heaven;
which before I can come to open, there are three things that I thought
necessary to premise before I come to press home the Exhortation upon you. And
pray mark, for they are very profitable things.

First, some do observe here praecepti suavitatem, the sweetness of Christ's
commands: see how he applies himself to the desires of a man: the Lord Jesus
notes this, that as man in outward things is a prudent, so he is a provident
creature; man is not content to have enough for the present: he must lay up
somewhat for time to come: the Lord Jesus does not forbid this: here is
sweetness of the Command: if you will be laying up treasure, I will tell you
where you shall lay it up to purpose, where you shall lay it up for time to
come. Indeed he tells you where is the true and the safe treasure: you will be
treasuring; why then that you may not deceive your selves, lay up treasure in
heaven. You have abundance of instances of this in Scripture; as for example,
Luke 10. The 72. Disciples are sent forth to preach the Gospel, and they return
with joy, says the Text, that devils were subject to them: Christ does not
forbid their joy, but rectifies it; set your selves to rejoice in this, that
your names are written in heaven. And so men are prone to fear evil; he does
not reprove their fear, Matthew. 20. 18. but fear him that can cast body and soul
into hell: I say fear him: he does not forbid their fear altogether, but sets
their fear upon the right objects; and so also men are apt to glory in some
excellency. Christ does not altogether forbid their glorying, but says, Jer. 9
23. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory
in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches, but let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands, and knows me that I am the
Lord. But let him glory in this that he knows me.

Here is the sweetness of all Gospel commands: the Lord is pleased to fet them
upon a right Object: he does not forbid laying up of Riches, but be rich to
God: he does not forbid adorning and bravery, but says he, be adorned with
humility; love not the world, nor the things of the world, not absolutely
forbad, but comparatively: only sets it upon the right object still. That's the
first thing I observe by way of premise.

Secondly, it is observable also, that there are diverse ways of treasuring: the
Text names two: some there be, their treasures are on earth; and some there be
whose treasures are in heaven. But observing the Scripture, I find there are
three sorts of treasures among men: men do lay up treasure three ways, and in
three places.

First, Thesauri in terra, men lay up treasures upon earth, that is, they place
their happiness in the things below, they savor nothing else, they mind
nothing else: look only to the things that are seen, and have no higher end in
all their ways. Now these men, all their treasure is upon earth. Its well
observed by one, finis amatus and intentus, thesaurus dicitur, that which a man
does love and aim at, that's his treasure; for a man's chief good and utmost end
are the same. Now men that have no End beyond this life, have no treasure
beyond this world, but all the projects of their lives they are terminated here
below, that look for nothing beyond the life that now is, only in this world;
let me be rich and honorable, and let me live in bravery and gallantry while I
am here; in this they please themselves, and take this for their portion; now
these are the men that lay up treasures upon earth. But there are

Secondly, Thesauri in Gehenna: another sort of treasures: some men lay up
treasures in hell; you have such an expression, Romans 2. 5. Thou, after the
hardness of thy heart and impenitency, do treasure up wrath against the day
of wrath: Here is a man that lives in sin: this man is a treasurer too, but he
lays up treasures in hell: there is a treasure of sin, and a treasure of wrath;
and as the man^ adds to the one, God adds unto the other: therefore you must
know that as sin does ripen, so does judgment; as sin increases, so does
wrath, Ezekiel. 7. 10. the prophet has this expression, The rod has blossomed,
pride has budded, spoken of Gods bringing wrath upon the J^ws by
Nebuchadnezzar; for as sin ripens, so the affliction ripens; nay in Zach. 5. 8.
there is an ephah, that notes the full measure of their wickedness; and a
talent of lead, propo^tionable to the sin, that covers the mouth of it: as you
fill up the measure of your sins, so you fill up likewise the measure of the
Lords wrath: oh that men would but consider this then: you only think you carry
on one treasure, but remember there is another treasure goes on: you treasure
up sin: God treasures up wrath.

3. Thesauri in coelo: There are a third sort of treasurers, that lay up
treasures in heaven, place their happine^^ (...) good in nothing (...) ^^^ven,
that take aim^ (...) this life: the things present are the succors of their
way, but far from being made their journeys end. The Philosopher could observe,
every man is as his utmost end is: what thy utmost End is, what thy chief good
is, that art thou: if thy end be earthly, thou art a man of earth: if thy end
be heavenly, thou art a Citizen of heaven: therefore the Scripture speaks, as
in Psalm 10. last verse, That the men of the earth may no more oppress: and
Psalm. 17. 14. They are the men of this world: Why the men of this world? their
portion is in this life, they have no good beyond this life; therefore their
utmost end is not beyond this world: and so likewise why are the people of God
said to be Citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2. 19. and to seek after a C^ty whose
builder and maker is God, Hebr. 11. 10, 16. what is the reason that he has
prepared for them a city? they are therefore said to be Citizens of heaven,
because their End, their chief good is beyond this life: that's the second thing
to be premised. There are several sorts of treasures, some lay up upon earth,
others in Hell, and some lay up in heaven.

Thirdly, we are to observe here, Modum praecepti, the manner or nature of this
command: Lay up treasures in heaven: Christ's meaning is not, that men should
lay up nothing upon earth, that's not the meaning: nay to lay up upon earth is
their duty, Prove. 6. 6. Vain man is sent to the Ant, upon that account, that
lays up in Summer against Winter: It Is a lesson that the bruit Creatures must
teach: nay, 2 Cor. 12. 14. Parents ought to lay up for their children, says
the Apostle, He that provides not for those of his own house is worse then an
infidel: Then it is not unlawful to lay up upon earth: but what then is the
meaning? I find three hints given by Interpreters, which all will help to
explain it: Not upon earth: Non ut adversetur, sed ut subjiciatur Coelo.

Do not lay up treasures on earth, as contrary to treasures in heaven; but lay
up treasures on earth, as they may be helpful to treasures in heaven: There is
a second hint.

Camnissius and others give, Non absolute tanquam ex necessitate objecti: do
not lay up treasures on earth, as if there were an absolute necessity of it,
and a man could not live without it; according as God gives opportunity, so men
may make provision for their own comfortable being, and those that God has
given them: but not as if I and my posterity were undone without it. They think
they cannot live without so much by the year: How many poor simple people have
we heard of that cannot live happily without so much a year, Luke 12. 15. Take
heed and beware of covetousness, for the comfort of a man's life comes not in
from the abundance of things that he possesses: Happily thou may have so
many thousands a year, and yet be a poor miserable man, and live a wretched
life all thy days for all that: There is yet another hint.

Coelo neglecto, do not lay up treasures on earth: how? that is so as to
neglect heaven. Let not this be a means to take off your hearts from higher
things: if it be your treasure on earth, it is your curse and plague: therefore
look to it you whose estates take off your hearts from the things of God and
eternity: God has given you estates on earth: they are your plagues, your
curses, and yet how many poor souls do we hear say, as those in Zach. 11. 6.
Blessed be God, for they are rich. Notwithstanding they hope God will be good
to them: but never hear them say, blessed be God, for I am gracious; or blessed
be God I am converted, these are things their souls savor not. But rather as
that poor wretch, that Cardinal said, I would not leave my part in Paris for my
part in Paradise. Now do not you thus lay up treasures on earth, but lay up
treasures in heaven: and thus I have given you these Cautions for the right
understanding of the phrase.

Let us now improve the Exhortation that has been laid before you, which was
this, Seeing every man in this life has a treasure; some do lay it up upon
earth, and some do lay it up in heaven: be you exhorted to lay up your treasure
in heaven; now that we may gain the more benefit by it, we shall open it a
little: For the more distinctly you understand spiritual truths, the more
profit you get by them, and the more sweetness you taste in them, that I will
tell you. Therefore there are four things I shall speak to briefly in the
prosecution of this Use.

First, what is meant by heaven, and why we are commanded to lay up treasures
in heaven?

Secondly, what are those treasures that a man may have in heaven?

Thirdly, how can a man lay up treasures in heaven, or what is it for a man to
lay up treasures in heaven, seeing no man in this world ever was in heaven? How
is man said to lay up treasure there while he is in this life? how a man can
lay up treasure on earth, we can understand.

Lastly, give some Arguments to press and enforce the Exhortation on every one
of us, as the Lord shall bless them unto us.

First, what is heaven? what is meant by heaven?

And here I meet with a double interpretation, and we may make improvement of
both of them, and therefore I shall give them both unto you; for all such
things tend to very great advantage to the opening of Scripture.

First, (...) in Heaven, some expound it of God, apud Deum, lay up your
treasure in God, as Grotius; lay up your treasure with God; and so they take
heaven for him that is the God of heaven, the possessor of heaven: this will
help you to explain some other Scriptures, Matthew. 21. 25. The baptism of John,
was it from heaven or of men? The proper opposition lies, is it from God or
man? Was it from man's authority, or from Gods? And so Luke 15. 18. I have
sinned against heaven and before thee: Why it is the God that dwells in
heaven; Why? so lay up your treasure in heaven, that is, place your happiness
in God alone, be satisfied in nothing below himself. Let him be (who has
promised to be) your portion and your exceeding great reward: lay up treasure
in heaven, that is, lay up treasure in God; for you are to consider, that,
Though the Scripture do speak of some other treasures in heaven, as in Luke 12.
33. men are exhorted to give alms, and they should have treasures in heaven.
Good works are treasures in heaven. But how? only as the Lord does give himself
there to the soul as a rewarder; pray observe, that you may not mistake (that
your treasure in heaven is God, as after I shall show.) Why? this is very true,
the exercise of every grace, and the performance of every duty, all these are
said to be treasures in heaven. Why? because they stand upon record in heaven,
and because the Lord himself in Heaven will be the rewarder: and therefore lay
up your treasure in God, let him be your chief good; and for all good duties,
lay them up wi^^ God, that so he of all these may be your great rewarder: Lay
up therefore your treasures in Deo, in God, that he may be your eternal
portion: your good works, apud Deum, with God, that he may be your exceeding
great reward: This is of great Use.

Secondly, in Coelum, others take heaven here, For that which we commonly read
of in Scripture, the third heaven, that is called commonly by the Schoolmen the
highest heaven, the habitation of Gods majesty and glory: It is the place where
the Saints shall be glorified with God, when they shall enter into their
masters joy: This third heaven, that was the first of the Creation of God; for
so I conceive the highest heavens, with its inhabitants were first made, and
the first day: In the beginning God created the heavens, the highest heavens,
with its first inhabitants; for though it be true, God from eternity was his
own heaven, as I may so speak, and though he has created the highest heaven,
yet he is not included and comprehended there; for he fills heaven and earth,
Jer. 23. 23. He is God every where present, yet the highest heavens are the
place of his Throne, the place where his honor dwells: Where he is pleased to
show forth his majesty and glory, in a most eminent manner: and the place that
he has appointed where his people shall have both vision and fruition of him
to eternity: called therefore their fathers house; called therefore the City
whose builder and maker is God: called therefore an inheritance, immortal,
uncorruptible, undefiled, reserved in the heavens for us: Now this being the
place of the Saints happiness, when they shall ever be with the Lord; they are
exhorted to lay up their treasures there, for the time will shortly come, when
all the Saints of God shall remove; for you have here no continuing City; you
seek for a country, the time will shortly come when you shall leave all your
treasure here behind you: for you shall carry nothing away with you; for their
happiness is in heaven, to enjoy God and Christ unto all eternity: for this
cause they are exhorted to lay up treasure in heaven: Where they shall receive
the end of their faith, and the fruit of their obedience, the salvation of
their souls, which consists in the enjoyment of God in heaven: then take either
of these for heaven, it is true of both: either God, lay up your treasure in God,
who is the God of heaven; or lay up your treasure in heaven, where your eternal
enjoyment of God shall be: That is the first, what is meant by Heaven. But,

Secondly, What treasures may a man have in heaven? I have spoken a little of
that already, but give me leave to explain it a little more unto you. There are
great variety of interpretations, what a man's treasure in heaven is, and truly
almost every Interpreter differs; some speak of the word, some of the promises,
some of graces, some of duties, some of alms: but we shall easily understand
what must needs be meant, if you observe but the opposition; there is a
treasure in earth, and a treasure in heaven; what is a man's treasure on earth?
that which stands in opposition to treasure any where else: The man has
nothing else but what he has on earth, then a man's treasure on earth is his
chief good on earth, be it what it will: riches, honors, pleasures, or whatever
else: where his heart is, and his chief good, that is his treasure: then what
is a man's treasure in heaven, with a man's chief good in heaven, that's his
treasure. Now what is a godly man's chief good in heaven? why, it is God, God is
his portion, God is his reward, and Christ only as Mediator, as he brings him
to God. Now there are three things that I should point you to. Why none but God
can be a man's treasure in heaven.

First, a man's treasure is that which he loves most, and a man must love
nothing more then God; nay a man's treasure and chief good is that which he
loves with an infinite love, that he can never have enough of, that he can
never be satisfied with, that he never says I have enough. The Hebrews they
have two words, that we use for treasure; one is that which a man does most set
his heart upon; that which is unto him above all a peculiar. You see the word
used, Exodus 19. 5. Israel is my peculiar treasure, says God, that is, a people
that God set his love upon above all the people in the world besides; that is
treasure, where a man stays most; it is very true, where a man's love goes, there
truly the man dwells, that's his treasure, that carries out his heart. Now there
being none in heaven the soul is to love above God, or equal with God;
therefore he alone in heaven must be his treasure.

Secondly, a man's treasure is that, Quod maxim habetur in pretio: which he
prizes most: and some observe upon this place, that is a man's treasure that he
sets the highest price upon. Now a man should prize nothing more then God: so
you see when God says of his people, they are his peculiar treasure: all
people in the world are undervalued for them, Isa. 43. 4. I will give men for
thee, and princes for thy life: Kings and Nations are nothing in comparison of
Gods people to God: In this respect, God is the treasure of his people, because
they are to prize nothing in comparison of him.

Thirdly, God only is their treasure, because upon a man's treasure he does rely
for supply; and therefore that's the other word in the Hebrew which is put for
treasure, Genesis 20. 5. It signifies that which a man makes his refuge in all
calamities and distresses: now when a Godly man is in distress, whither does he
go? Prove. 8. 10. The name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous fly
thither, and are safe: And in David's distress, Psalm. 73. Whom have I in heaven
but thee only? God is his treasure. Now these three things are in a treasure,
that which a man loves most, and sets the highest price upon, and that to which
his heart does retire, and seek supply from in all his wants, and every man
must be supplied out of his treasure, that I will tell you: Take a rich man
when he comes to die, Riches avail not in the day of wrath; therefore God only
is the Saints treasure, and chief good: he lays up treasure in heaven, and this
treasure is God.

Thirdly, you will say unto me, God is in heaven already, it is the habitation
of his holiness and glory. How can I be said to lay up God in heaven, I that
was never in heaven? the Lord he ever was there: how can I be said to lay up
God as a treasure there? It Is very true, God was in heaven from the very
Creation of heaven, that it has been the throne of his glory; but he is not
laid up there as thy treasure, until thou close with him. And no man, but he
that has the Lord for his God, can say, I have God for my treasure: What shall
I do then to lay up God for my treasure?

There are six Rules that I shall give wherein this duty lies; and observe
them, for they are the great duties of your lives, for we live in a scraping
age: labor then to get the God of heaven for your treasure: Why, how so?

First, he that will lay up treasure in heaven, must choose God for his
treasure: no man has a treasure either in heaven or earth, but by choice. If a
man choose riches, that is his treasure; honors, that is his treasure; if he
choose God, that is his treasure: therefore choose the Lord, as that which you
prize above all things: this is the way to lay up God in heaven for your
treasure, Josh. 24. 22. You have chosen the Lord this day for your God: choose
the Lord for your God, and you shall have God for your treasure.

Secondly, If you would lay up God for your treasure in heaven, then you must
part with all other things for him. All other treasure (remember that Matthew.
19. 21.) See the terms, there was a rich young man that came to Christ, Christ
bids him, go sell all he had, and give to the poor, and he should have
treasures in heaven. No man can have two treasures, no more then he can be
servant to two masters; its impossible that a man should have two chief goods:
you can never have God for your treasure, lest you part with all other treasure
for him. You that have other treasures, do not tell me that God is your
treasure.

Thirdly, the soul is to be carried out after this treasure incessantly: that a
man lays up for his treasure, which his heart is carried out abundantly after.
Tell me you have a treasure in God, and never groan and long after him, you
have nothing to do with him; and therefore David, Psalm. 73. 22. There is none
in earth I desire but thee: Now how does his soul go out after God? My soul
pants after God as the thirsty land. Consider with your selves, may be you can
be content; I have a great estate, and I am raised from a mean man and a
Prentice boy, and God has given me a large estate, and I can bless his name
for this, thanks be to God, for I am rich: But do you taste no more savor in
these things in comparison of God then in the white of an egg? Can you desire
to part with all, that you may be with him? This is to lay up treasure in God,
to have the soul go out after him, and to him incessantly.

Fourthly, if you lay up treasure in God, live upon your treasure, live upon
him. You say often you live by faith; what is it to live by faith? To live by
faith is to live upon God, who is the object of faith; therefore in all the
necessities of your lives have recourse to God still; my Refuge is in God
still: what is your chief good? to that your souls will retire.

Fifthly, what a man lays up for his treasure, that he does glory in, every man
gloryeth in it: every man values all other men according to that he makes his
treasure; and he that fails of that, he looks upon him with an eye of scorn and
contempt, be it what it will. I instanced before, a man that makes riches his
treasure: let a person be never so honorable, wise and learned, he will despise
him: and so a godly man values himself according to his interest in God, and
all other men according unto it: Tantus quisque est, quantus est apud Deum,
every man is no more worth then he is of value in Gods account; Christ does so
Psalm. 16. 3, 4. The Lord is my portion, the lines are fallen to me in a goodly
place, I have a goodly heritage; the Lord is my portion: the Saints glory in
God, and make their boast of him all the day long.

Lastly, whatsoever is your treasure, you must use all means that you may add
unto it, or your interest in it: a treasure is increased by continual addition:
whatever therefore may give a man a further interest in God, that is the way a
man is to take, and sell all to buy it: for he is to sell all that buys the
pearl, that which is treasure: as now it is the worship of God: the fear of the
Lord is his treasure, Isa. 33. 6. by the fear of the Lord is meant the worship
of God; why does he lay up treasure in the fear of the Lord? yes, he gets a
further interest in God: why, are good works a man's treasure? because God
rewards a man according to his works, and he shall have a further interest in
God; and therefore the worship of God, and all the works of obedience, and the
exercise of all grace, a man is busied in all these, because it adds to his
treasure, gives him a further interest in him. Who is his God, and his
all-sufficient reward.

Fourthly, and lastly, to give some Arguments to enforce the Exhortation. Is
there a treasure to be had in Heaven? and is it to be had in God? do not be
such enemies to your souls, as to neglect it: and that I may enforce this
Exhortation, take with you these few Arguments, and pray mark them well.
Remember,

First, no treasure below God will be lasting; there will come a time when all
treasure laid up below God, will be expended; and what will you live upon then?
the Apostle tells us, the world passes away, and the fashion thereof, 1 Cor. 7.
29. He uses the expression, the time is short: what is the meaning of it, it is a
Metaphor taken from things folded up; there is very little part of it left; it
is come almost to the last fold: which may help a little to explain that
expression, Psalm. 36. 10. Continue or draw out thy loving kindness to them that
love thee: The Metaphor may seem to be the same; that is, there is abundance of
love folded up: and but little winded off: there is an eternity to spend; but
now for all these outward comforts, there is a great deal worn out, and but a
little more behind: how many men have you seen already outlive them, but to
be sure they will outlive the lives of the best men: therefore remember no
Treasure below God will last.

Secondly, consider this, heaven is the place where you hope to go: carry your
treasures with you, or send them thither before you; there is no man will
remove from a place and leave his treasure behind him; and poor soul, thou
leavest a great estate and a fine house behind thee, and thou hopest to go to
heaven, and thou have no treasure there: its the observation of one upon this
place, Lay up treasures in heaven, carry your provision, carry your treasure
with you, you hope to go to heaven, and if that be a true and lively hope, you
would endeavor to lay up treasure there.

Thirdly, consider with your selves, if you lay up treasure in heaven, as God
is a true Treasure, so God is a faithful treasurer; what thou do commit to
him, he will keep safe: and he is a treasury able to supply all your wants,
and to make you happy for ever; he is self-sufficient in himself; much more
will he be all-sufficient to thee; do not rest in any thing that is below God,
but lay up treasure in him.

Nay, let me tell you further, and pray mark it, any treasure here that is
below God, if it be thy treasure in this life, it will be thy tormentor in the
life to come, Jam. 5. 3. ye have heaped treasure together for the last day: he
speaks it of rich men, and he tells them, that they have laid up treasure
against the last day: there is a double interpretation given of it; some
expound it of the last day of the world, the day of judgment, some of the last
day, the end and period of the Jewish state, which the Apostle speaks of, and
St. John speaks of, this is the last hour: I conceive it spoken of the
Judgment coming upon the Jewish State: take it which way you will, the thing
leaves us a clear argument; if you take it for the last day of the State, when
judgments come upon persons, or people: then, when judgments come, your
riches shall be the greatest plagues you have; but refer it to the last day of
the world, riches then take their leave of a man, they cease then to be
treasures, but they will be tormentors: the Apostle tells them, the rust of them
shall be a witness against them; they have heaped up riches against the last
day; take heed therefore; Take this for a rule; That which a godly man has
wrought upon him at his conversion, that a wicked man is sure to meet with at
his destruction; that which was his treasure before, he then looks upon as his
greatest plague and torment: as Ephraim, What have I to do any more with idols?
and says to his idols, Get ye hence. Look upon Judas, his money was his
treasure before: when he comes to hang himself he casts that away: and the word
carries a great deal of displeasure with it; this is the money that has undone
my soul, and so many a one will say, when he comes to die: the love of an
estate, the things of this life, the love of pleasure, or honor, this has
undone me for ever: when it ceases to be your treasure, then it becomes your
tormentor.

I have one word more; It is one of the great studies of the times, what they
may do now to keep what they have got, Non minor est virtus quam quaerere
partatueri. What shall we do to preserve what we have got? Truly let me speak
plain unto you, the only way to preserve our treasures on earth, is to make
sure of this treasure in heaven; that's the only way: pray look into Prove. 15.
6. but in the house of the righteous is much treasure; in the horn of the
wicked is trouble: most commonly, the poor receiv the gospel, most commonly,
godly men are the poorest men: why, in the house of the righteous is much
treasure: truly the riches they have are precious, because they are the fruit
of the promise, and come in by virtue of the second Covenant; and by this means
they have a propriety in them that other men have not: but Mr. Cartwright
translates the word, and it will fitly bear it: In the righteous man's house
there is much strength, as if he had said, all the care of men is to keep what
they have; and therefore provide to have it under locks and bolts, and use all
ways and means to preserve it: but take a godly man that has an interest in
God, and is truly righteous, and can say, The estate that I have, I have justly
gotten; This is a better way to preserve it then all other means in the world;
therefore would you preserve treasure on earth? labor to get an interest in
treasures in heaven: And to this end make you friends of the unrighteous
Mammon; that you may have a greater interest in God the true treasure.

And for a conclusion, remember this, you that have not God for your treasure
here, you shall never have him, if you have no interest in God for your
treasure in this life; for after this life a man's chief good does never change:
What was thy treasure shall ever be so: thou have a treasure; but if it be
below God, it shall be thy tormentor: A man's eternal estate is cast here; and
being so, that which was a man's chief good, must continue so to him; and
therefore fear before God: if thou have not thy treasure laid up in God in this
life, he will never be thy treasure and reward: and yet in the life to come,
God will be all in all, and that God thou have then no interest in; for as a
man sows here, so shall he reap hereafter. I know not what to preach to you
that ought more to affect you. And so much for this Exhortation. Lay up
treasure in Heaven.

There is one Use remaining of this Doctrine, and it is of Consolation to all the
Saints of God. You have seen the misery of those that err in their chief good;
Give me leave now for the comfort and support of the hearts of Gods people, to
show them their happiness in this, that whatever they are in this world, yet in
regard of their chief good they have not miscarried.

Oh blessed soul, that have not mis-placed thy treasure, that do not err in
that which is thy chief good! I confess a godly man is every way a blessed man;
he is blessed in regard of the pardon of his sin. Blessed is the man whose
transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man to whom
the Lord imputes not sin, Psalm. 32. 1. He is blessed in regard of the
disposition of his soul; Blessed are the pure in heart, blessed are the meek,
blessed are those that hunger and thirst after righteousness; He is blessed in
all the ordinances: Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, Matthew. 5. 8.
Psalm 84. 4. He is blessed in his obedience; blessed are they that are
undefiled in the way, and walk in the Law of the Lord, Psalm. 119. 1. Nay he is
blessed in his expectations, Isa. 30. 8. Blessed are they that wait for him; He
is blessed even in affliction: Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, and
teach out of thy Law, Psalm. 94. 12. A godly man is therefore every way
blessed: But wherein lies the top of his blessedness? the height of it lies in
this, he is blessed in his chief good, there is the top of all his blessedness
unto which all these things are but inferior and subordinate.

Consider I beseech you, look to the Angels of glory in heaven, the elect
Angels they are blessed in their inward qualifications and indowments, their
wisdom, their holiness, their power, their zeal; they are blessed likewise in
regard of their office and employment, they are principalities and powers
employed by Christ in ordering things below; ministering spirits; the spirit of
the living Creatures is in the wheels: they are blessed in their activity in
those offices, they go and come like lightning, its the prophets expression,
Ezekiel 1. 19. but wherein lies the top of their blessedness: truly in this, they
have pitched aright upon their chief good, they have not erred in their treasure.

Nay the Lord Jesus Christ himself as Mediator, he was every way blessed: he is
the heir of all things: he is one appointed to glory, and a glory suitable to
the service that he did perform, which neither man nor angel was able to do:
but wherein lies the top of the blessedness of the Mediator? Psalm. 16. 4. The
Lord is my portion, says my soul: Its the Mediators speech, his blessedness
lay in his chief good: the same thing is true of the glorified Saints in
heaven; the souls of just men are made perfect. Reckon up what you will of the
glory of the soul, or the glory of the body that remains after the
resurrection, when they shall shine as the Sun in the kingdom of the father:
yet this is the top of all; they have pitched upon the right chief good.

On the contrary what is the misery of the Devil and those damned spirits in
hell? Pray consider what I say to you; it is very true, there is nothing wanting
to make them miserable: if you look upon their sinfulness, you must consider,
in Hell (peccatum etiam habet rationem poenae) and sin there is a punishment:
why if you consider likewise the bottomless pit, the burning Lake, in which
they are shut up, held in chains under darkness: all this I say makes them
miserable; add to all these the worm of conscience, that is ever gnawing: for
so it is in all those damned spirits: why, all this you will say must needs make
them very miserable: but what is the top of their misery? wherein does that
lie? It lies in this, I have erred in my chief good: it is Chrysostoms expression
concerning it: put ten thousand hells together, here is the worst, there is
none like this, that I have forsaken God, and God has forsaken me; I have
hated God, and now the Lord hates me: put ten thousand hels together, there is
most in this: here indeed does lie the top of their misery: as this was the
height of their folly.

But what needs so long dilating upon this, you will say? Why,

Truly because as I would speak comfort to Gods people: so I would have them
consider rightly of the comforts proposed; for there are many grounds of
comfort to the Saints, and they may make use of them all, and they are to do it
in their season, according to their order: yet notwithstanding that which is
the great comfort should be in the first place, even in respect of taking
comfort: that which is the great ground of comfort, that the soul should most
of all take comfort from. Now it is in reference to comfort, as it is in
reference to duty; there are many commands, and all of them are to be obeyed:
but yet there are great commands, and these are to have the first place in our
obedience; This you ought to have done, and not to have left the other undone.

So there is variety of comforts, but there are some great grounds of comfort,
and these are to have the chief place in our hearts, and from these in an
especial manner should our comfort come in. As there be some grand promises;
those three I have often mentioned,

I will be thy God:

That's the bottom of all the promises.

I will give thee my Son:

I will send my Spirit:

The great Comfort should come in from the great Promises: and so it is here: and
pray observe it. If a man be much in the lesser duties of Religion, and neglect
the greater, he has just cause to suspect the truth of his obedience. So if a
man take much comfort from lesser grounds, and neglect the greater, he has
great cause to suspect the truth of his comforts, and his right to them: This
is the great reason why I press it so earnestly, that as I would have the
people of God take their portion in comfort, so I would have them take it in an
orderly way.

But now let us come to particulars:

You will say, Why is a godly man so happy in this, that he has not erred in
his chief good? There are seven grounds of the greatest comfort that I know in
all the book of God, arising from this consideration, I have not mis-placed my
treasure, my treasure is in heaven, I have not erred in my chief good: And the
first is this.

Hereby the soul may see the riches, as well as the freeness of the love of
God, that in my chief good I have not miscarried: This is the great error of
the world, they do mis-place their treasure, and by this means, they have their
portion in this life only; and with Dives their good things here: Now is this
the great error of the world, as it will be found to be at the last day: is it
a great mercy to be delivered from lesser sins and judgments? how much more is
it to be delivered from that which is the greatest judgment in the world? Did
Noah find grace in the sight of God, and was delivered from that deluge that
swept away the world of the ungodly? To misplace a man's chief good is the
greatest sin and greatest judgment that can possibly fall upon a man. This is
delivering a man to Satan indeed: delivering to Satan with a witness: The
Scripture speaks of a double delivering of a man to Satan: There is, Traditio
Sathanae tanquam Domino, and tanquam lictori: delivering a man to Satan as a
Lord, delivering a man to Satan as an Executioner, as an Officer.

There is delivering a man to Satan as a Lord, so the Lord Jesus delivered
Judas to Satan by the sop: After the sop the devil entered into him, that is, as
a Lord to rule over him.

But there is another way of delivering to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 5. When you are met
together in my Spirit, deliver such a man to Satan: How is that? for the
destruction of the flesh: when the Lord shall be pleased in an Ordinance to
give over a man so to the power of the devil, that he shall afright his
conscience, and terrify him for sin committed; and for that end this means
shall have its due work and power upon the man: but in this Satan is but an
executioner: A man is never delivered up to Satan, as a lord, until he be
given up to him, so as that he shall deceive him in his chief good, then the
devil is the lord of the man. When the Lord delivers a man to Satan, so as that
the devil cheats him in his chief good; then the man is delivered to Satan as a
lord. Now for a godly man to be able to look into his own condition, and say,
when I look abroad in the world, and see one man place his chief good in this,
another in that; one in riches, another in honors, another in pleasures; but in
the midst of all these, though in many things I miscarry: and therein I was as
a beast before God; yet blessed be his name, here is my comfort, I have not
miscarried in my chief good: there is not any thing stays the soul like this:
when a godly man is in the greatest affliction: when he comes to look death in
the face; nay, when Satan shall triumph over the most of the world, as he will
do; for as he is subtle, so he is envious, and therefore an insulting spirit:
when he shall insult over most in the world, then that poor soul shall be able
to triumph over all the powers of darkness: Its true I am weak indeed, and I am
ignorant, poor and mean, and low in the world, yet in this the devil can never
deceive me: through grace I have so far obtained mercy, that the devil is never
able to cheat me of my chief good: herein will lie the wisdom at the last day,
herein will lie a man's glory; for it is a man's chief good that will be his glory,
or his shame to eternity; herein will be his wisdom or folly to eternity: do
you not remember that expression, Luke 10. ult. Mary has chosen (...), the
better part, or the good part. I shall not inquire what the meaning of that is
the good part; but the word there used, signifies not only partem sed
portionem, part but portion: Mary has chosen that good portion: and herein lay
her wisdom; in a man's election his wisdom lies: And above all choice in the
world, is that which he makes his chief good: true says the soul, I have bin
foolish in many things, and in many things I have erred; but yet blessed be the
name of my God, the true treasure was not hid from me.

And when a man shall come to appear before men and Angels at the last day,
those that are now the fools of the world; that are derided for their
godliness, that are mocked in their choice, as men that are not able to set
themselves in the face of the times, so as to be some body in the present Age.
But when they shall appear before the Lord Jesus to judge the quick and dead in
his Kingdom, then these will be esteemed of all others the only wise men: this
was the soul that was directed by wisdom from above, that carried him still to
the right chief good: if this will not stand by you in your greatest troubles,
there is nothing in Religion will do it.

Secondly, There is this ground of comfort, I have chosen the true chief good,
the true treasure, that shall never be taken from me. You know the expression
of Mary's better part, Luke 10. ult. She has chosen the better part, that
shall never be taken from her: there is no man miscarries in his treasure, but
he that lays it up below: what ever a man lays up as treasure here below, he
will lose; it will be taken from him: for the Lord Jesus Christ tells us, Here
is rust and moth, and here are thieves that break through and steal; omnes
damni causae significantur. One upon that place sets down all the ways by which
men may lose their treasure; whether they be from causes within, or causes
without, from thieves outward violence. Nebuchadnezzar one of the great robbers
of the world, Isa. 10. 13. he robbed them of their treasure; or otherwise there
is a principle of decay in themselves; there is a moth that will come out of
the finest garment, a Rust that will breed out of the purest gold; from within
he speaks it of all treasure men lay up in the Creature, whatever is a man's
treasure below. For all the creatures came under man's Covenant, and the
Covenant with man being broken; all the creatures fall under the curse. Observe
it, it is a great truth, and by this means curses the ground from whence all this
perishing in a man's treasure below does come, they all perish with the using;
but here is the happiness of a man that has his true treasure laid up where
neither rust nor moth, nor thieves can come: it is an excellent observation that
of Austin. Summum bonum nec invitis confertur, nec invitis aufertur. A man's
chief good, its given to no man against his will, but by a man's own choice, and
taken from no man against his will; the true chief good shall not: your good
things here below are taken away against men's wills: men will lose their riches,
and their honors, and their pleasures will vanish into smoke: but now this
chief good it is liable to no violence from without, to no decay within, and
therefore its an excellent observation of the same Father, when he speaks of
the assistings of saving grace, what kinds of helps go with saving grace.

It is, says he, they do close with good, and do it so as no opposition shall
overcome them. No opposition. And when they have closed with it, no opposition
shall take it from them; I, that is Almighty power indeed.

Why then comfort thy self in this, It Is true I have little in the world, and I
see other men abound in riches and honors, and they wash their steps in butter,
and bathe in rivers of oil. But I can look beyond all these: if their chief
good be in this, it will be taken away from them: but blessed be the name of my
God, I have a chief good that cannot be taken from me; these are the great
stays of the souls of Gods people.

Thirdly, has a man chosen the true treasure? from hence he has always
something to guide his way: from hence he has always something to reduce his
wanderings. Let me speak to them distinctly.

First, from his chief good he has the guide of his way; it is the rule of the
Schoolmen, Summum bonum est omnis operationis origo. It is a man's chief good
that is the foundation of all the actions and motions of the soul, from whence
still it has his spring; this is to the soul as the center is to the stone:
you know the stone moves toward its center, and it will go the direct way if
it be not hindered: what guids its motion? why the center: so what guids the
motions of all godly men? the chief good, that's their center, and they move
toward it continually: so that if a man want a particular rule, yet this
general rule will be a mighty guide unto him. The Scripture speaks of a man's
cleaving to God, Acts 11. 23. Following hard after God: Why, what is that?
truly Religion does consist in the cleaving of the soul to God, and a constant
following after God: in this Religion lies: Now what is the great consultation
in all the souls motions? what will bring me nearest to my chief good? and its
the chief good still that is the guide of all its motions. You have an
expression which here comes in fitly to be opened, Matthew. 6. 22. our Savior
says, if thy eye be single, thy whole body is full of light: if thy eye be
single, Austin expounds it, Intentio animae est animae oculus.

It is the intention of the man in what he does, that is the eye of the man:
Why then, a single intention is a single eye; as a double eye is an eye that is
carried after a double object, that is carried partly after God, and partly
after the world: a double eye and a double heart, they one expound another; but
a single eye is that which looks purely upon God: now what influence has this
upon a man's whole life, the whole actions of thy life? for that is meant by the
body here: as the light of the eye guids the body, so the intentions of the
soul guide the way: now all a man's actions will be full of light: holy,
acceptable to God, well pleasing to him. How comes it to pass? Why a single eye
guids him. I pray consider it well: this is a mighty comfort to the people of
God, that in many cases I want a particular rule; and a godly man many times,
though he be well skilled in the Scripture, may want a particular rule: what
carries him directly to his chief good, will be a great guide to a godly man's
way. As in those great points of Socinianism and Arminianism, wherein the
depths of Satan are so much seen, though a Christian be not able to answer many
of their Arguments: yet here is one Rule will carry him through all: That
Doctrine which exalts God most, and abases man most, is true Doctrine:
Certainly that doctrine which exalts man, and puts all the determinations of God
upon the will of man, is false. This general Rule will carry him through the
whole controversy. It Is so in reference to a Christian way; That which carries
me directly to my chiefest good, that is the guide of my way.

Secondly, and so it has a great influence to reduce a man's wanderings: the
truth is, the best men that have chosen God for their chief good, yet many
times depart from him. We all as sheep have gone astray: Now what shall bring a
man back again? why he eyes the chief good; just as it is with a Traveller that
intends to go to such a place; he looks in the Map which must be his way; he
looks first to hs journeys end, and observing the passage he says, This is too
much on the right hand, and that is too much on the left: just thus is the case
of a godly man: God is my chief good, there is my aim: Now I err on the right
hand, and now on the left hand; but where does he take that which reduces him?
Still that's his chief good; observe Isa. 30. 21. They shall hear a voice
behind them, saying This is the way, walk in it. Here is the voice of the
Spirit, that is truth: by the Spirit this reduces the man. Now you go from your
chief good, this is not the way to heaven, this shall never bring you to God;
they are wonderful comforts to a godly man; and there is not any thing can be
spoken that is a more glorious guide, and a more effectual way to reduce a man,
then this consideration, I depart not from that which is my chief good: That is
the third particular.

Fourthly, Unto a man's chief good his soul retires, and from it he fetches
comfort upon all occasions; for he that has made choice of the true chief
good, is able to say, I am sure here is solid comfort, which other men now
cannot, Prove. 18. 10, 11. The rich man's wealth is his strong tower: the name of
the Lord is a strong tower: they are put in opposition: now whether do men
retire in danger? to their chief good: the rich man to his wealth, a godly man
to the name of the Lord; so that in every trouble every man goes out for
comfort to his chief good: Now a godly man is able to say in his distress, It Is
true, I have no riches to comfort me, and very few friends to stand by me: yet
notwithstanding for all that I can retreat to my God my chief good: there is
comfort enough in him. I have a God, a Christ, a Heaven, a new Covenant, and a
new Image; these I can retire to upon all occasions, where I am sure there is
solid comfort. In this case that soul dares compare his chief good with all the
men in the world, at such a time no man knows but he that feels it, how a soul
triumphs in his chief good: just as the Spouse, Cant. 5. 10. My beloved is the
chief among ten thousand: I, let all the men in the world bring out their
treasure, I dare compare with them: for, There is no rock like our rock; who is
a God like our God? The Lord is his treasure: its a strange place, Psalm. 44 8.
22. compare them together. ver. 22. For thy sake are we killed all the day
long: all the day long nothing but killing: now what is their condition under
this? ver. 8. We make our boast of God all the day long: killed all day long,
and yet brag of God all the day long; and yet this is the condition of all the
Saints of God. See the vanity of all other treasures; when men retire to them,
their souls are empty; but in my chief good there is solid comfort to be had
whenever I retire to it.

Fifthly, this is a very great comfort to a godly man, even in the midst of all
his failings. Pray take notice of it, and the Lord set it on upon the spirits
of those to whom it belongs; yet I have attained to choose God for my chief
good: true, the best men may and must say, Who has made his heart clean? and
when they look back upon their ways, they must acknowledge, My heart has run
out inordinately, sometimes to this and that creature: and I have neglected to
seek after him who is my chief good, my treasure, and for this I desire to be
ashamed before him all my days: yet notwithstanding, my happiness is laid up in
him alone; there is my treasure: David comforted himself thus, Psalm. 18. 21. I
have not wickedly departed from my God: departed he had, departed weakly, nay
many times departed wittingly, bur wickedly I have not departed. What is it now
for a man to depart from God wickedly? the meaning is this, it is for a man to
place his chief good somewhere else; to go after another God, as the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm 16. I thank God I have never done so; I have chosen the Lord for
my chief good, and to that choice I stand: though many times weakly and
willingly I have departed from God, yet wickedly I never did: it is a great
ground of comfort in the midst of all the failings of Gods people. And truly
there are no things in this world so great troubles to the people of God, as
their departings from God are; they be their great troubles: as I remember
Chrysostom speaks of sin in reference to his account, and he professes, (...):
my sin, says he, this is death, and this is Hell: I, sin is; and therefore
departing from God is their great affliction; yet here is their stay, and their
comfort, I never wickedly departed from God; and I have never chosen any but
thee.

Sixthly, That which a man does choose as his chief good here, and lay up in
heaven by election, that he shall certainly enjoy hereafter by fruition: what
is here thy chosen good in election, that shall be thy chief good by fruition
hereafter: for as Austin says, Beatitudo electione inchoatur, adeptione
impletur: A man's blessedness begins in election here; what a man chooses for
his chief good, shall be finished and perfected in fruition hereafter; and
therefore what a man chooses for his treasure in heaven, that which he has
chosen, he shall enjoy; do you not remember the promise, Genesis 15. 2. I will be
thy exceeding great reward? do thou choose God for thy chief good here? he
will be thy rewarding God hereafter: what is thy Good here bystipulation, shall
be thy chief good hereafter, by vision, fruition by union: there is a man's
happiness; I have a chief good in heaven, I am sure I shall enjoy him hereafter.

Lastly, which is the top of blessedness, he that has laid up his chief good
in heaven, is happy with the same happiness that God is: he is called the
blessed God: why? wherein does Gods blessedness consist? Truly it lies in this,
in the enjoyment of himself; his chief good lies in himself, he is his own
chief good, for the enjoyment of himself as chief good: herein lies the
happiness of God: then for a creature to enjoy God as his chief good, so far as
a creature is capable, he is blessed even with the happiness of God; thou do
here live the life of God, and art made conformable to the Image of God: thou
art blessed with the happiness of God, and hereafter shall enter into the joy
of thy Lord: these are the particulars that are great grounds of comfort to all
those that have laid up their treasure in heaven, the true Treasury. And so
much for the first Doctrine.

I shall now proceed to the second general observation, which is this:

The treasure is attractive of the heart; and wheresoever a man's treasure is,
it will carry his heart with it. For wherever the treasure is, there the heart
will be. Four things there are which I must speak unto by way of Explication,
which are indeed as so many subordinate Doctrines in the Text: they will all
tend to the opening of this great point.

First, to show what is meant by the heart: that, by heart in Scripture is
meant the whole soul.

Secondly, that the soul of man, the heart goes out of it self for happiness,
for its chief good; for here is treasure laid up either in heaven or earth; the
heart goes out to the treasure: the chief good of a man is without himself.

Thirdly, it is a matter of very great concernment, where a man's heart is
placed: that's the Argument that Christ uses here, Lay up treasure in heaven:
Why, what matter is it where ones treasure is? Why, where your treasure is
there your heart will be.

Lastly, the heart does always follow the treasure: wherever the treasure is,
it necessarily infallibly carries the heart; and then we shall give the Reasons
of this last Doctrine, to which all the rest are but subordinate.

First, what is meant by the heart; or if you will, take it in a Proposition:
The heart of man in Scripture is put for the whole soul.

The Hebrews generally place the Government of man in the heart, and make the
heart the seat of the reasonable soul: so you shall find the Scripture
commonly speaks.

1. If you look to the whole soul as corrupt, Jer. 17. 9. The heart is
deceitful above all things, and desperately evil: who can know it? And,

2. If you look upon the soul as sanctified; for as corruption goes through all
the faculties, so does sanctification also, Psalm. 24. 4. He that has clean
hands and a pure heart, which is called The hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.
4. And with the heart man believes, Romans 10. 10. I conceive that's the whole
soul, and all the faculties collectively. But by heart in Scripture also is
sometimes meant those things, quarum seeds est in Cord, which are situated,
and have their habitation especially in the heart: as wisdom is attributed to
the heart, wise in heart: Ephraim is a silly dove without a heart, without
wisdom, Hos. 7. 11. He that trusts in his own heart is a fool, Prove. 28. 26.
His own heart, that is, he that leans to his own wisdom, or as the Scripture
elsewhere, he that is wise in his own eyes. So likewise you find the heart put
sometimes for conscience, and the actings thereof; David's heart smote him when
he cut off the lap of Saul's garment; it is spoken of the conviction of his
conscience. Sometimes it is put for the memory, the treasury of the soul; Mary
laid up all these things in her heart. But in this place I conceive there are
three things especially intended by heart here by Christ.

First, the thoughts, the meditations, the consultations of the heart; where
the treasure is, there is the heart. In this are all the meditations, the
thoughts, the plottings, the contrivances of the soul, they are where a man's
treasure is, 2 Kin. 5. 25, 26. The Prophet said to his servant Gehazi, Went not
my heart with thee, when thou wentest out after the man? How did the Prophets
heart go with him? that is, his thoughts went; for the thing was discovered
unto him by a prophetical spirit; and that is indeed a mavelous choice
expression, Job 17. 11. where the thoughts of the heart are, in the Hebrew,
called the possessions of the heart. Now whatever you possess here with your
bodies, it is true indeed the body can see the glory, and taste the sweetness in
many contents: but what do your souls possess in all these? nothing but the
thoughts; what the soul possesses, it possesses by thoughts, and therefore they
are called the possessions of the heart.

Secondly, by the heart here is meant, I conceive, the love, desires, the
longings of the soul: for in these the soul goes out toward its objects: so
Sichem, Genesis 34. 8. His soul clave to Dinah, Jacobs daughter: so David's heart
went out to Absalom: therefore where your treasure is, your love is, your soul
goes out in all manner of longings and desires after it.

Lastly, by the heart is meant a man's delight, that wherein the great comfort
of his life lies, wherein it is laid up: It is said by Christ, though a woman
in travel has anguish, yet after she remembers no more the pain, for joy that
a manchild is born into the world: and 1 Samuel 4. 20. There Is a woman delivered
of a son, and calls his name Ichabod: She regarded him not; for she did not set
her heart, that is, took no comfort in him. And Psalm. 62. 10. If riches
increase, set not your hearts upon them, that is, do not place all the comforts
of your lives in these things. Let not your hearts be swallowed up by these, as
if you had no better things: thus then by heart is meant the whole soul, but in
this place especially, the thoughts, the love, the joy and delight: I shall
afterward take up these things again more particularly. I now only endeavor to
open it, that's the first Proposition.

Secondly, that the soul of man goes out of it self for happiness; his
treasure is without himself: It is Gods honor only, and his prerogative; his
blessedness is in himself; his blessedness is himself: he is unto himself the
chief good: he has nothing without himself, that makes him the blessed God:
neither is he moved by any thing out of himself. When the Mediator speaks of
all he did, Psalm. 16. 3. he says, My goodness extended not to thee: its true
the L. Jesus as Mediator in all his obedience, added nothing to the blessedness
of God, his blessedness is in himself: And here note two things that I shall
lay before you.

First, man has not a chief good in himself, his happiness is not within his
own power: he is therefore in reference to all things, a dependant Creature:
Hence the people of God, who have made choice of the Lord for their treasure,
God in Christ, they say, Whom have I in heaven but thee? My soul is athirst for
God, for the living God: my soul pants after God, as the thirsty-land: thus
then the soul is continually restless: why? because it seeks to join it self to
its chief good which is without it self: and as for that place, Prove. 14. 14.
where its said, A good man is satisfied from himself: the meaning there is not
self as separated from God, but self as united to God; not self in opposition,
but self in subordination to God: its true indeed a man's chief good may in that
respect be said to be the most intimate part of himself; that of the Schoolmen
is true so indeed, self united to God: Deus est intimior nobis intimo nostro,
God is nearer to us then our selves. So the man is satisfied, that is, goes not
out to any thing besides God: but otherways a man's treasure is without himself,
his chief good lies not within his own power.

Secondly, it is the nature and constitution of the reasonable soul to make out
to a chief good without it self: its true indeed most of the world mistake this
chief good, and misplace it; but yet this is the very nature of the reasonable
soul, to go out for somewhat as treasure out of it self; this was the very
nature of it in the Creation: it has this common with every creature, not only
to seek its own preservation, but its own perfection: this is the condition of
every creature, but much more of the reasonable creature, because it has not a
fountain in it self, therefore it must go out to draw: because it has not food
at home, therefore it must go out to buy: the greatest part of the world indeed
mistake it, and place their chief good in hell, when they should place it in
heaven: but yet every one goes out to somewhat, and says, Who will show us
any good? It is the observation of Austin, Anima quae vivit ad infimum vivit
misere: ad summum beat. Man is a middle creature, and has something above
him, and something below him: that soul that has its chief good below it self,
is a miserable soul, whatever it is. But here is the happiness now of the
Saints, their chief good is above themselves, but it goes out of themselves
still: Christ speaks of the food of the soul, John 6. 27. Labor not for the
meat that perishes, but for that which endures to everlasting life: the soul
goes out of it self for somewhat to eat and drink; there are hungrings and
thirstings; for its provision is not in himself: therefore the soul that lives
upon some what above it self, that lives blessedly: but Isa. 44. 24. he feeds
upon ashes, etc. the man was seduced by the Serpent, and the Serpents curse is
upon him. All the comforts to which his soul goes out, all is feeding upon
ashes, as the Prodigal is said, in his absence from his father, to feed upon
Husks. Let me point at that place before named, Psalm. 62. 10. If riches
increase, set not your hearts upon them: as it is with insensitive creatures,
herbs and plants, they put their mouths into the earth, as the Philosopher
says, so do they here, apponere Cor: that as they suck the sap and juice, the
nourishment that is proper to their natures: so take a man whose heart goes
out to the creatures, he sets his heart upon them, that from thence he may suck
somewhat for his preservation and perfection. And this brings me to consider of
that place, Isa. 32. 11. they shall lament for the teats, the fruitful fields,
and the pleasant vineyards: lament for the teats, what is the meaning of that?
Forelius indeed, and some others expound it, pro lactantibus, for the children
that sucked the dug. But Mr. Calvin, and some other Interpreters do understand
these teats figuratively: The teats were the fields and the vineyards, and at
these they sucked, and by these the happiness and the comfort of their lives
came in. Now says God, I will cut off, and dry up the teats: you read the same
Metaphor, Isa. 66. 11. They shall suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of
consolation: This then is a truth, that the happiness of man his treasure is
not in himself: but he does naturally go out to somewhat without himself: only
I say indeed the greatest part of the world they do mistake therein. Now give
me leave before I pass this second particular, to show you the folly of sucking
dry teats: to let you see the misery of those men that seek happiness, and go
out of themselves for any treasure below God: Does the heart of man go out for
treasure naturally? Oh the misery of those men that go out of themselves for
any treasure below God! Consider but these three things.

First, consider you draw where there is no water: the creature is but vanity,
all things below God are: you suck where there is no milk, all these things are
empty: and that's one great misery.

But there is another which heightens this wonderfully: and that is, the more
your soul goes out to these things for its treasure, the more the appetite is
increased, but never satisfied: For I told you, its true, all the creatures
below came under man's Covenant in the Creation, and by that means came under
man's curse in the Transgression. Now there is this curse come upon all the
creatures ever since the Fall, they enlarge the appetite but never satisfy
them. Now you would say this were a sad curse upon any man in the world:
suppose it so still in natural things: that the more he eats and drinks, the
more hungry and thirsty he is: therefore lust in the Scripture is compared to
drunkenness.

Nay, consider further yet, hereby you become subject to your own servants; he
places his chief good in that which God has given to serve him. The height of
iniquity lies in this, when a man commits adultery with his own servant: God
gave him the Creature to serve and use, and he will have them to enjoy: it is the
height of a man's misery.

Besides, consider in the last place, what is there to be had in these, when
your souls are gone out to them? Look to Jer. 2. 13. a known place: My people
have forsaken me, the fountain of living water, and have dig'd to themselves
broken cisterns that will hold no water: Me thinks that very Scripture should
wonderfully keep off the heart from going out to creatures for happiness, for
his treasure; pray consider there be two things in it to be opened.

First, all the good in the Creature is but water in a Cistern; what does that
imply? why first,

It implies this, it has no good in themselves, they have no more then is put
into them: Cisterns have no more water then is put into them. God can put a
great deal of good into a creature, that is true, but still remember, it is but
a Cistern.

Secondly, a Cistern is of small compass, it will hold but a little: a man may
see the end of the perfection of the creatures: we cannot say so of the
Fountain: Besides,

Thirdly, it is water that will die, in reference to that expression so
commonly used of living water; they will not be lively refreshing comforts.

Lastly, they will all leave you: for they be broken cisterns; the world passes
away, and the fashion of it. But now,

What is water in the fountain? treasure laid up in God: Why? it is in a
Fountain.

1. It is originally in him.

2. It is a continual Fountain, it is always running.

3. It is in him inexhaustibly, never drawn dry.

4. It is in him communicatively; a fountain gives out water, and does it
naturally.

Lastly, comfort in God is living comfort; the water in the Fountain is living
water: in these respects you may see the misery of that man, whose soul goes
out for treasure to any thing without God: that's the second general
proposition, Every man's treasure is without himself.

Thirdly, it is a matter of great concernment in Christ's account, and should be
in ours where our hearts are: why, Where your treasure is, there your hearts
will be. Give me leave to open this unto you.

The Lord in the Scripture has given special direction for the setting of a
man's heart; therefore that a man's heart should be right set, is a matter of
great consequence, Hag. 1. 5. Set your hearts upon your ways: so it is in the
Hebrew; And if riches increase, set not your hearts upon them: and Deuteronomy. 32.
46. Set your hearts upon all the words of the Law: But why is it so? Truly
there are very great reasons for it: that every one may look down into himself,
and say, where is my heart? As,

First, it is the heart mainly that God looks upon and observes where it is: in
a special manner the Lord eyes the heart; you know in 1 Samuel 16. 7. God looks
not as man looks: man looks to the appearance, God looks to the heart, and 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. His eyes run to and fro through the world to set himself with
those whose hearts are upright: it is a matter of great consequence therefore,
because on your hearts God sets his eyes.

Secondly, it is the heart mainly that God claims and calls for, Pro. 23. 26. My
son, give me thy heart: this is indeed the habitation of the great King: and
when the Lord has taken the heart to himself, he has the man: nothing is
Corban, a fit gift for God, unless the heart be first given.

Thirdly, where the heart is, there is the man; and therefore when the soul is
gone, the man is gone; where the heart goes the man goes: it is remarkable,
Psa. 38. 10. he speaks it of a man's days, and says, they are soon cut off, and
they fly away: they leave the body behind, but the soul is gone: so that
where the heart goes the man goes. Now do but look how the Lord observes the
goings out of the heart. There were men that came to hear the Prophet preach,
Ezekiel. 33. 31. Their heart goes after their covetousness; and the truth is, my
brethren, wherever the body is, yet the soul is with the object upon which it
is set. I remember Austin, speaking of the happiness of the people of God in
this world, says, Anima frequenter ascendit, and currit per plateas coelestis
Jerusalem. Their souls be in heaven, their bodies be upon earth: The soul goes
to heaven, and visits the Prophets, and salutes the Patriarchs and the Angels,
nay the soul closes with the Lord Jesus Christ in glory; he says, There is an
embracing that the heart has, even there where the body cannot come: Therefore
observe, where the heart is, there is the man: its matter of great consequence
then, where you set your hearts: Nay further yet,

God values every man according to his heart, and every man is worth as much as
the treasure is upon which the heart is set, Prove. 10. 20 The heart of the
wicked is little worth: Why? because his treasure is little worth: because that
upon which his heart is set is worth nothing, Prove. 27. 27. A man of
understanding is of an excellent Spirit; and my servant Caleb had another
spirit: God values men according to their hearts, and their hearts to what
their treasure is: There are two things that commend the heart to God, that
make it of value in Gods account; their ornaments, and the objects of the
heart: The ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of
great price: let the inner man of the heart be so adorned, 1 Pet. 3. 4.

But especially the objects of the heart, those things upon which the heart is
set: it is therefore of great consequence; for a man is worth no more then his
heart is worth, and the heart is worth as much as the object upon which the
heart is set; besides,

Fifthly, it is matter of great consequence where you set your hearts, because
from your hearts all your conversation flows, Prove. 4. 23. Keep thy heart above
all things: take heed what that goes out unto: why? from it are the issues of
life: whatever flows forth in a man's whole life, flows from the constitution of
the heart; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks; out of the
heart proceed murders, adulteries, fornications, and the like. Look to the ways
of your hearts, and such will certainly the ways of your lives be. Then it is
of great moment upon what a man sets his heart; if the treasure did not carry
the heart with it, it would not be so dangerous.

Lastly, and pray observe it, for it is the special thing that I shall press in
this point: it is of great consequence where you set your hearts, and upon
what: because the objects upon which the heart is set have a transforming
power, and do mightily fashion the heart unto themselves: you know in the 115.
Psalm, what is said concerning Idols there; they that made them be like unto
them, and so are all that put their trust in them: because that on which the
heart is set, frames the heart like it self; that look as where your treasure
is, there your hearts will be: so like your treasure your hearts will be: as I
would a little instance in those men that have their treasure in this life; let
us see how it fashions their hearts. Its said of Jeconiah, from whom the Lord
in disgrace took one syllable of his name away, Jer. 22. 17. Thy eyes and thy
heart are for thy covetousness: and that's the condition of many men, they have
nothing in their hearts, but how they may either get or save, and covetousness
lies much in them both: nay unjust keeping is many times an act of greater
covetousness then unjust gain: now what does God speak of that man? look
afterward to the 29. ver. Oh earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord;
write this man childless: there are many interpretations given of it; among the
rest, this is one: the man was wholly earth, he was fashioned to it, and
therefore the Lord calls him by the same name. Its that which I entreat you to
observe: the loss of the soul, and the gain of the world commonly go together:
therefore Christ puts them together Matt. 16. 26. What shall it profit a man to
gain the world, and lose his soul? Why is there a necessary connection between
these two? not necessary indeed, but a very dangerous connection: it is a hard
matter to gain the world, and not to lose the soul: but the soul is not only
lost hereafter, but even here in this life; because its framed and fashioned to
the object upon which the heart is set; as I shall give a few instances, that
you may the better understand me.

Take but those two glorious excellencies of the soul, the light of it, and the
purity and holiness of it; now let the heart be set on any worldly thing, and
the soul is lost in both these respects.

First, in regard of the light of it, that the heart can see nothing that is
sinful-evil: can see nothing that is spiritual-good; for the soul in the light
of it is lost, being set on worldly things, they close the eye of the soul: and
therefore David speaks so, Psalm. 119. 37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding
vanity: he speaks of the vanity of the creature: and so long as mine eyes are
set upon these, so long I shall never see the Spiritual excellencies of God; I
shall see the excellency of spiritual things when my eyes are turned away from
these worldly things, it spoils the soul and robs it of all its light: but in
regard of the purity and holiness of it, see how these things defile the heart:
why is covetousness said to be the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 9. It is said to
be so upon a double ground, ab origin, all evil comes from thence as the root:
all evil is nourisht by it as the root; there is no sin that will not flow from
this principle; there is no sin that this principle will not nourish: as give
me leave to instance in 2. or 3. things, that if the Lord please, it may be an
engagement to you to take heed, where you set your hearts

First, There is no sin that this will not frame the heart to: It will make a
man lie with Gehazi; commit Sacrilege with Ananias and Saphira; rob God with
them, Malachi 3. 8. Curse the people of God with Balaam; make merchandise of
men's souls with Rome: make a man prove an Apostate from Religion with Demas:
it is a dangerous thing then to set your hearts upon your covetousness: for
objects have upon the soul a transforming power.

Secondly, it will make a man shameless in sin; I wish diverse of our covetous
men had not attained to this pi^ch of sinning, to be impudent in sinning, that
dare outface the word of God, and the Ministry of the word, and regard it not:
as Judas, Matt. 26. 15. came to the High Priest, and said, What will you give
me, and I will betray him? He demands a reward for his treason, and does it by
compact; and so those, Micah 7. 3. The Judge asks for a reward: why to take a
bribe; in a great man is an abominable thing; but to ask for it much more; and
yet so will the creature do when the heart is set upon it.

Nay further, it will make a man reject the offers of grace out of knowledge,
and the good things of the Gospel out of contempt: take heed of it. In Luke 16.
14. the Lord Jesus had preached there a very soul-searching Sermon against
covetousness, and the Pharisees that were covetous men derided him: take the
distinctions to your selves, you who set your hearts upon Creaturecomforts: and
then,

Lastly, it will make a man take pleasure in the sins of men, and desire them:
It will make a man to desire the damnation of men, Hos. 4. 8. consider it: it is
said of the Priests there, they eat up the sins of the people, and set their
hearts upon their iniquities, or lifted up their hearts to their iniquities:
eat up the sins of the people, that is, the Sacrifices that the people brought:
and because they gained by it, they desired that the people might commit a
multitude of sins, that by this means they might have a multitude of
Sacrifices: you do not know to what hideous shapes such hearts will be framed:
nay, they will desire the damnation of men to be a gainer by it: the false
Prophets are said to sow pillows under men's arm holes, that they might not turn
from their imquities: and this the Lord calls hunting of souls to destruction;
what is the reason of it? why they hunt souls to get dishonest gain: and was it
any great matter that they got by it? no, but for a handful of barley, and a
piece of bread: what is the cause of all this? their hearts are fashioned
according to things below; nay look to the 19. of the Acts, there was a poor
creature possessed with the Devil: it may be such kind of the spirit of
Divination as now some among us pretend unto: this evil spirit is cast out: her
masters seeing their hope of gain gone, they raise up presently a persecution;
Yea, let the maid be possessed by the devil, and go to the devil, so long as we
gain by it, it is well enough. I pray consider of these few particulars, that
you may see what transforming power the objects of the heart have when once it is
set upon any thing below God: I might instance on the contrary, he that has
his treasure in God, what a transforming power spiritual objects have: and this
is the third Doctrine, It is of great moment where a man sets his heart:
therefore take heed; where your treasure is, there your hearts will be: All
these are but previous Doctrines to the last, which is this:

The Treasure carries the heart with it: the Treasure wheresoever it is, is
attractive of the heart.

This I shall first open and prove in the general; and speak some generals, yet
I hope they will be to every understanding Hearer of greater use.

The heart of man has its several motions and outgoings, its processes and
recesses, and all this according as the treasure is: you shall find, Eccles.
6. 9. The sight of the eye is better then the wanderings of the desire: thus you
translate it, it is rendered in your Margents, the walk of the soul: why then
certainly the soul of man has its walk, the heart has its outgoings; and
indeed it is true of the soul of man, that which is said of the Angels in all
their services, They go forth and return like lightning, Ezekiel. 1. 19 The same
thing is true of the soul of man, it goes forth and returns with incredible
swiftness, it goes forth upon the object upon which it is set: and therefore,
Eccles. 11. 6. you read of the way of the heart, Rejoice, O young man, in thy
youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart; so you read the word: the word is
rendered by Montanus fitly, In ^diebus electionum tuarum: in the days of thy
elections; for most men make choice of their chief good in their youth, that
is, the day and time of a man's election. Now walk in the ways of thy heart, the
heart has its out-going, according to the object upon which it is set, and so
much the Scripture clears, Ezekiel. 33. 31. The^r heart goes after their
covetousness: it is a walking heart, their heart walks after their
covetousness: after their covetousness you will say! covetousness is a sin in
the heart; how does the heart go after it? either it is spoken of covetousness
here as the predominant lust, and so it carries the whole soul with it: or else
it is put for the object of covetousness on which it is set, and so the heart
goes out after it; the heart of man goes out to some treasure, some chief
good, as the object upon which it is set: and hence in the Scripture, the soul
of man is said to be full of lust, made up indeed of nothing else; it is taken
in a double sense, both good and evil, Luke 22. 15. With desire have I desired
to eat this passover with you. Its the motion of the new man, spoken there of
Christ, the motions of the new man: all these are called lustings, going out of
the soul after an object; and so in an evil sense too, Ephesians. 4. 22. they are all
called deceitful lusts: which I conceive is the meaning of Cant. 1. 4. Draw us
and we will run after thee: draw us; how is that? by discovering the glory,
sweetness and spiritual excellencies that there are in spiritual things; and
inclining the heart to follow them; for this is but the object; the attractive
of the heart, suitable to that of Austin, Trahitur animus amore: trahit sua
quemque voluptas: thus then the soul does go out to the object, and the heart
is carried after it, and drawn by it: and it is thus suitable to a man's treasure;
and here there are four demonstrative Arguments that I shall give you of it,
and then shall lay before you the reasons, how it comes to pass that the
treasure should always thus carry the heart with it.

First, every man in an unregenerate estate has some predominant lust, and
this lust is said to be predominant, because in the enjoyment, enjoyed by that
lust, therein lies a man's treasure: by that a man's treasure or chief good comes
in: now hence it comes to pass, every man has some predominant lust in the
days of his unregeneracy, called the stumbling block of a man's own iniquity,
Ezekiel. 7. 19. the Fathers use to style it Peccatum in deliciis, the sin of
delight, or a man's darling sin: Job calls it a man's sweet morsel, ^ob 20. 11.
Now what is the reason that any lust is predominants? for there be some servile
lusts: its true every sin rules over the man, yet in respect of sin there be
some servile lusts; the more immediately any lust converses with a man's
treasure, the more immediate his treasure comes in by it; according thereto is
the predominancy of the sin, though in an unregenerate man every sin is
reigning, the whole body of death: yet there is one sin that is as it were the
Viceroy, in whom the body of sin does rest, and that is grounded purely upon
this consideration: the sin that brings in a man's treasure; that wherein the
soul places its chief good, and wherein it takes full delight and contentment,
to which he makes all other sins subservient; This is the first demonstration,
because the sin that converses immediately with a man's treasure, and brings
it in, that is the predominant lust.

The second demonstrative Argument is,

Because that sin, less then any other can the soul resist: pray mark it; what is
the reason? the reason is this; still the heart will go out to the treasure;
and this sin more immediately brings in the treasure, and therefore of all
sins the heart is most foiled by this: it is true indeed every sin draws away
the soul, James 1. 14. It is said a man is tempted by his own lust and enticed.
But remember it is that which I have ^ften spoken, and I desire the Lord to
speak it to my heart and yours: there is no man does perish that ever did make
a profession of Religion, but it is when he meets with this stumbling block of
his own iniquity, that I dare presume to say: Never any made a profession of
Religion, and fell away and perished, but he did stumble at his darling sin,
there he brake his neck, because where his treasure was, his heart goes after
it: That's the meaning of that place of our Savior, Luke 8. 13. Its spoken of
the stony ground, It received the seed and sprung up, and bore fruit: how came
it to pass that these men fell away? what undid them? there was an opportunity
of temptation, (...): In the opportunity of temptation they fell away: every
temptation does not come in the opportunity: when is it then? truly, the
opportunity of temptation is then, when a man is tried in his master lust; in
this is the predominant evil, that he cannot withhold his heart from his
treasure; the heart is gone out to it; and that's the reason whenever he is
tempted in that sin, he can make least resistance, and he is certainly at last
foiled, and overcome for ever. That's the second demonstrative Argument of the
truth of this point.

Thirdly, it will appear that the heart goes out to the treasure, because in
the pursuit of it the heart is impatient of opposition and procrastination; it
can bear no denial, it can bear no delay. First it is impatient of opposition,
Prove. 17. 22. It is better to meet with a Bear robbed of her whelps, then a fool
in folly: What does Solomon mean? who is the fool according to the tenor of
that book? every unregenerate man: but is the fool ever out of his folly then?
you can never meet him out of his folly: I conceive the meaning of it is; in
his folly when the lust is up, when the lust has gotten the hill, the
advantage: when it is active, ruling, and swaying in the man; and this is
according to the manner of the Scripture speech, Matthew. 12. 43. When the
unclean spirit is in a man: the meaning of that place, as Cameron well
observes, 1 John 5. 19. The world lies in the wicked one, that is, in his
power: to be under his power, is to be in him; to meet a fool in his folly, is,
under the power of his folly, when folly has dominion over the man. But what
is it to meet a Bear robbed of her whelps? wherein lies the danger? a Bear is a
savage creature and a creature of prey; and a she-Bear is the most ravenous,
but especially a she-Bear robbed of her whelps: so it is here, because it stands
between the heart and the treasure; the heart goes out to the treasure, and
can endure no opposition, and bear no denial. And as it can bear no opposition,
so it can endure no delay and procrastination: and therefore you shall find
Balaams covetousness was his predominant lust; he went after the wages of
unrighteousness: now Balaams lust is too swift for Balaams Ass: the Ass cannot
make so much have as his lust, he can endure no delay; nay do but observe, it is
an excellent expression, spoken of the Babylonians, when the King and his Army
came to invade their neighbor Nation, Hab. 1. 18. They shall come as an Eagle
does hasten to eat the prey: you know of all birds the Eagle flies swiftest,
and never so swift as when she goes to catch the prey: so the heart goes after
the treasure as the Eagle goes after the prey, it can endure no delay; That's
the third demonstration.

Fourthly, and lastly it appears by this which is the clearest demonstration of
it; Let a man change his treasure, and presently h^s heart is changed and
retires from that which before it went out unto with the greatest earnestness
in the world: there is the happiness of Gods people, they have changed their
treasure their chief good, and therein lies the great change of conversion.
This is the first and great change, when a man changes his chief good; but when
that is done once, the soul that went out after it before, now turns from that
which was his chief good, and persecutes that with the greatest earnestness
that before he did cleave unto: there be two things in conversion.

A version and Conversion. The man turns from all treasures below; take a proof
for that, Psalm. 63. 8. My heart follows hard after God, said David; the word
is, my soul cleaves after him, that though I have many things that would turn
me off from God: yet notwithstanding my soul cleaves to him: in a constant
pursuit of him my soul cleaves after him. There are two expressions somewhat
alike, one is to fulfill after God, and the other is to cleave after God, Numb.
14. 24. Caleb had another spirit, he followed God fully, he fulfilled after
God, so it is in the Hebrew: this points out the sincerity of a man's heart: and
to cleave after God, it is spoken of the constancy of a man's pursuit, the heart
goes out, the bent of the soul always tends that way; yea, he that before
followed after vanity, now cleaves after God: what is the reason? the chief
good is changed.

And as there is conversion; so there is aversion. Take a man that now looks on
sin as a cheat, and all the comforts of the creatures to be but counterfeit,
and that he has taken copper for gold all that while: what then? his heart
turns from them with the greatest aversion that is possible: you know those
places, I need not repeat them, What have I to do any more with Idols, Hos. 11.
8. Say to the Idols, get you hence: therefore the heart is with the treasure:
where the treasure is, there is the heart; but now change the treasure, and the
pursuit of the heatt is changed. Thus much for the demonstrations of it: I hope
all these things may be useful to every understanding hearer.

But why is it that the heart always goes out to the treasure? that where the
treasure is, there the heart is: why, what is the cause?

There are six great grounds of it.

First, because the treasure, which I expound the chief good, is animae
pabalum, the food upon which the soul feeds; and if it be so, no wonder the
soul goes out after it; the heart cannot live without it; take an unregenerate
man, and it is his treasure his heart feeds upon; he eats the bread of
wickedness, and drinks the wine of violence: take a godly man, and he does not
labor for the meat that perishes, but for that which endures to eternal life,
Joh. 6. 27. This is the food his soul feeds upon; and for this cause in the
Scripture you have so often expressions of hungring and thirsting; and you know
what violent impressions those make upon the spirits of men: what is all this
but to let you see that the chief good is the food of the soul, and therefore
the heart makes after it, for it cannot live without it.

Secondly, the chief good is not only the food, but animae sustentaoulum, the
support of the soul, the soul of man without it is not able to uphold it self,
Psalm. 112. 8. David says, my heart is underpropt: so Montanus renders the
word, suffultum est cor meum: then truly the heart of man must be propt, it is
not able to stand of it self, it must have a support: and whence is that
support? pray look, Job 8. 15. there is a man that leans upon his house: what
is that? his hope, the object of his hope; he cannot stand without it support;
that which is his comfort in reference to eternity, upon this his soul leans;
and so the godly, Psalm. 73. 26. My flesh and my heart fails me, but God is the
strength of my heart: he goes to his chief good, because he cannot stand alone:
he must have somewhat to rest upon; and that's the reason that a rich man's
wealth is said to be his strong tower: it is that which defends him: the heart
must needs go to the treasure: it is the hearts food, and it is the hearts support:
it cannot be supported one moment without it.

Thirdly, it is the souls delight, the delight of the heart: oblectamentum
animae: the heart of man cannot live without it long; and all the delight the
soul has, comes in from its chief good; the chief good is the object of the
highest love, and of the greatest trust, and it is the object of the fullest
delight; and therefore the soul of man must go out to its treasure, because all
its joy comes in by it: and without delight the soul cannot live. Why is Hell
said to be death? because there is no joy, no delight; why is Heaven said to be
life? because in thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore; without delight the soul cannot live.

Says Austin, Take away all delight, and the soul dies: let there be but pure
darkness once, and the soul cannot live.

Fourthly, It is a man's chief good, that is animae ornamentum, the beauty of
the soul, that wherein the beauty of the soul does lie; and indeed take the
soul off from this, and it is naked: the heart of man is naked, taken off from
his chief good: will you but observe, and see both put together? Jer. 2. 33.
Can amaid forget her ornaments, and a bride her attire? Take a poor creature,
all the beauty she has lies in clothes; as I sometime told you, that is like
the Cinnamon Tree, that has nothing good but the Bark; indeed it is true, you
dare not go without your ornaments; to be sure whatever you forget, you will
not forget to make your selves fine, to deck your selves: I am afraid diverse of
you forget most other things except that: but can she? why, can she not? there
is not a natural impossibility indeed, but a moral: that is it wherein she
glories, and she cannot forget it; but says God, I am your ornament, your
glory: you ought to make me your chief good, and you forget me days without
number: the soul goes out to its treasure, and cannot forget it: for this is
that wherein all its ornament and beauty lies; and the truth is, all the
adorning of the soul comes from a man's treasure, and chief good.

Fifthly, the heart must go out to to the treasure: for it is animae spiraculum:
this is that in which the soul breaths; pray consider it; we rejoice in the
hope of the glory of God, says the Apostle, Romans 5. 2. Despair is that which
strangles the soul; the soul lives in hope: what is that hope carried after?
why, after its chief good; therefore the soul breaths no other breath: My soul
pants after God, gasps after God, breaths after God, says David, Psalm. 42. 1.
In this the soul lives, this is the breathing place of the soul.

Lastly, here only is animae requies, the rest of the soul: Return unto thy
rest, oh my soul, Psalm. 116. 7. Now it is only the chief good that the soul
rests in, this is only the object of fruition; the soul is restless until it
come to this, but it is ever moving toward it: these be the reasons why the
heart of man must of necessity be where the treasure is.

But now the next thing is, how is the heart of man carried after its treasure?
does it always go after it, that the heart is where the chief good is
continually: how is it carried after it?

Here give me leave to lay down six Conclusions, which are of mavelous great
use, and great truths every one of them. I shall but name them, though they
need a great deal of explication.

First, the heart goes after the treasure continually; the soul of man is
always active, never idle: and what is the reason of all its motions: truly it is
well observed by the Schools, that Summum bonnum est omnium operationum origo:
The chief good is the reason of all the motions of the soul, the soul moves
continually after it: now from thence all motions do arise, Eccles. 2. 23. he
speaks there of a covetous rich man, whose chief good is his wealth, there is
his treasure: his heart takes no rest at night, says he: his bo^i^, that is
necessitated to take rest, but his heart is restless, because still it is
carried after its treasure: and therefore day and night is never at rest,
always moving: what is the reason? because still it is carried after the
treasure continually.

Secondly, The heart goes after the treasure infinitely unsatiably, that where
a man's treasure and chief good is, there the heart is never satisfied, but it
is going out after it without measure; those that place it here below, you know
the expression, Habbak. 1. 15. they imarge their defires as hell, and can never
be satisfied: true the chief good indeed gives measure to all subordinate
things; but it is without measure it self; so that he that has a treasure, his
heart is infinitely carried after it: whether it be below or above, he is never
satisfied; oh the infi^i^e dis-satisfaction in the soul, that has once set the
Lord, and chosen him for his chief good! he is always growing, gasping, crying,
mourning, walking after God.

Thirdly, a man's treasure or chief good, the heart takes fast hold of, and
possesses it for his own: pray observe it: there be other things indeed that
the heart looks upon as other men's goods; but his chief good he possesses as
his own; it is his own, it is his treasure: so observe, Job 8. 15. the place I
cited before; he shall not only lean upon his house, but hold fast his house:
the Text says, take ^ow a poor covetous wretch, whose money is his treasure;
an ambitious man, his honor is his treasure; take a poor proud woman, and
vanity in apparel is her treasure: Let the judgments of God be denounced, and
the Ministers of God strive to take off the men, they hold it fast and will not
let it go, they will contend for it, and look upon them as the worst enemies in
the world that labor to pull it from them: pray observe it, for in this way
the heart goes out to the treasure, he holds it fast; and this is the true
cause why conversion is a work of Almighty power: because as Prosper well
observes, Summum bonum nemo perdit nisi volens: no man loses his chief good,
but by his will: therefore he that shall change a man's chief good, must change
his will, which all the Angels in Heaven cannot do; till God change his will,
he never lets go his chief good, and this is the marriage of the soul; that
which is a man's treasure, it is his marriage, it is an Almighty power must break
that band: men are said to be married to sin upon that account, Romans 7. 5.
purely because it is a man's treasure; thus the heart goes out to it, the heart
holds it fast: take another man that makes God his Treasure and spiritual
things, God in Christ; and what then? why come temptation, the man holds his
treasure; come desertion, the man holds his treasure: look to Heman, Psalm. 88.
I am free among the dead, like those that lie in the grave, whom thou
remembrest no more: yet says he, My God, I cry day and night: ^is God is his
treasure; if he lose that, he is undone; take God from me, and I am undone, or
else you can never undo me; the soul holds it fast; he stays upon his God and
leans upon his beloved; this is another way how the heart goes out to the
treasure, it holds it fast.

Fourthly, if at any time the heart be shaken, to its treasure and chief good
it returns again; shake it while you will, thither it will return again: take
an unregenerate man, and his beloved sin shakes him; many times his knees shake
and his bowels tremble within him: yet after this the man returns to his vomit
again, still he returns to his treasure; as the unclean spirit that goes out of
the man, returns: so a man returns to his treasure again: and so a godly man
let him be by temptations shaken off from God, yet notwithstanding for all that
the soul returns to God again: that as when you throw a bowl, it may seem to
run strait for a time; but after the force that was put upon it is spent, the
biass takes it and carries it another way: so it is here; whiles the violence
of temptation lasts, the soul seems to be carried away from God: but the biass
of the soul takes it and carries it to the chief good again: so that a godly
man, though his soul be shaken from God never so much, has a principle within
him that reduces him again: I will return to my former Husband, Hos. 2. 17.
Somewhat will bring about the soul again, as by that ordinary similitude, As
the needle touched with the loadstane will come about again to its own posture:
so its with the soul that has the true touch from heaven.

Fifthly, the change of a man's chief good is a godly man's first change, it is his
great change, it is his chief change; the great change to destruction, what is
that? they have forsaken me as the chief good; Jer. 2. 13. and dug to
themselves broken Cisterns: Now to return to God again, is the first and chief
change; and that's another reason, why conversion is a work of Almighty power:
Who is able to exalt God in the soul as the chief good? none but himself; the
Sctipture speaks frequently of exalting God, and of the Lords exalting himself;
exalt thy self in thy own strength; and exalt God in his name jah, and rejoice
before him: then you exalt the most High when you lift up God in yout souls as
the chief good; then the Lord exalts himself when he sets up himself in the
soul as a treasure; and then with the change of a man's chief good there is a
change of all the motions in the soul; and do not talk of a change of thy
motions, and of thy actions: it will never do thee good, unless it be founded
in this, the change of thy chief good, and thy utmost end.

Lastly, to close these general considerations, in the chief good the liberty
or bondage of the heart lies; the heart goes after it, and therein lies either
liberty or bondage: the liberty of the heart is in the chief good: If the Son
shall make you free, then are you free indeed, Joh. 8. 21. Now wherein lies the
liberty that the soul has with the Son? In adhaesione animae ad Deum: that it
is fastened on God, as the chief good, cleaving to God as the chief good, and
looking on all other things no otherways then as they are in subordination to
him: there is the liberty: the soul cleaves to God, and to God alone, and looks
upon all other things barely as in subordination to God; and this is the
liberty that Christ purchased, when he is said to bring you to God: that is, to
bring you to God as the chief good: and the more the soul is taken up with this
chief good, the freer it is, and therefore consider in heaven there is perfect
liberty: what is the reason? because there the soul is wholly taken up with
God, and taken off from all things else: and therefore in hell, servitus
consummatur; there is perfect bondage: what is the reason? because the soul
there is wholly taken off from God, wholly set against God: therefore now all
men that have their treasure below, their souls are in bondage: and my
brethren, the Doctrine of the liberty and bondage of the will, will never be
rightly opened, unless this bottomtruth in it be rightly limited; for it is
from the hearts cleaving to this or that chief good, that the liberty or
bondage of a man does arise: and so much for the general opening of this great
truth. The Treasure is attractive of the heart.

I come now to speak unto it more particularly; for surely these are the great
things in which your souls should be always employed; the heart you see, and
the treasure is in separable: the heart will be where the treasure is:
therefore such as the treasure is, such is the heart: as well as where the
treasure is, there is the heart: if the treasure be laid upon earth, then men
are said to be earthly minded, or to mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 19. that is,
though their souls go up and down among many creatures (for the heart of man
does cheapen here and there, before it buys) yet notwithstanding all is
included in the things below: he minds earthly things, and only earth: his
heart never goes beyond the treasure: so if his treasure be in heaven, then his
mind is there, Col. 3. 1. it is true he does use the things below, as his flesh
and his own exigences does require, but yet notwithstanding his heart is not
shut up in these as another man's is: but he goes out to his treasure which is
above, that as his conversation is his in heaven, so likewise his meditation is
there also: all those things that are seated in his heart, they are all there,
as we shall hereafter show: hence it comes to pass, that a godly man is said to
be a stranger here; I am a stranger here, and a sojourner as all my fathers
were, Psa. 39. latter end: why what is the reason? because he does not converse
here as if it were his Country: no, he does seek a Country, because his
treasure is not here; therefore he is a stranger here: it is an excellent
observation, that of Bernard, Anima justi coelum est, and in coelo. A godly
man's heart is heaven, because God dwells there, and it is in heaven, because there
he dwells with God; and for this cause, grace is called glory in the
Scriptures, not only because it is of the same nature with that grace whereof a
man shall in glory receive the perfection; nor only because it is a pledge and
earnest of it, and will certainly end in glory: but because indeed the soul
immediately enters into glory after a sort: for his treasure being in heaven,
his heart is there also: this we are to consider, that a godly man is by this
means in heaven whiles he is here. Yea, more in heaven then he is in earth
before his translation: for his treasure is in heaven, and his heart is there.

Let us see in particular, what is here intended by the heart: more especially
there is by the heart in Scripture then meant all those things that are seated
in the heart. I gave many instances of it before, Let us begin with the first
of them.

The heart in Scripture is put for the aim, the tendency, the bent of the
heart, animi propositus, the propensity of the heart: this is called the heart
in Scripture, Deuteronomy. 24, 25. The Lord there gives a direction concerning the
hireling, that his wages must not be detained beyond the day of his labor: At
his day thou shall give him his hire: neither shall the sun go down upon it;
for he is poor, and sets his heart upon it: what is that? he is a hireling,
and therefore neither love to his master, nor love to his work, but the aim and
bent of his soul in all the labor he takes is the hire he receives for it; he
sets his heart upon i^: therefore the Scripture speaks of a double heart, 1 Chronicles. 12. 33. and Psalm. 12. 2. Now what makes the heart a double heart? some
do apply it to instability in opinion, that which is called halting between two
opinions, when the mind is in a suspense, and hangs like a Meteor: that's the
Metaphor that Christ uses, be ye not of doubtful minds, Luke 12. 20. so you
read it.

Whether it be in reference to opinion, or in reference to love, the mind is
in doubt: it is very true, he that is so, sometimes propends this way, and
sometimes that way: this man after a sort is a double-minded man. But I
conceive the intention of Scripture, by a double heart, mainly refers to the
aim and intention of the heart: when men are double in their intentions, the
bent of their hearts goes not all one way; but sometimes for God, and
sometimes for the world: sometimes for heaven, and sometimes for earth; when
men have not a single eye, that is, as I conceive, a single aim; this the
Scripture calls a double heart: when a man has an aim at God, and the things
of God, and looks at nothing else, but purely in subordination, this is a
single heart; this man has a single aim; but when men go sometimes very hot
after the things of God, and by and by are as eager in pursuit after the things
of this life, certainly this is a double heart; so the heart is said to be
turned away from God, 1 Kin. 11. 3, 4. what is that? the bent and aim of the
heart was from God; I will add no more but that Acts 8. 21. Peter said to Simon
Magus, thy heart is not right: he had been baptized and desired the gift of the
Holy Ghost: but he did not this with a pure intention, not with a right aim;
God saw the crooked aims and purposes of his heart in all the service, and so
the word is said to discover the intents of the heart, Heb. 4. 12. then in the
Scriptures, by heart is meant the aims, the purposes, the bent, the tendency of
the heart: where a man's treasure is, there is his bent and aim: and this I
shall now pitch upon; it is a thing that above all others you had need be
careful of: for the great thing you are to look to is your heart: keep thy
heart above all things, and in the heart lies the great deceit; the heart is
deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked: therefore especially look
to your hearts; but in the heart above all other, the bent of the heart, what
is its aim and tendency, and that upon a double ground, which I must premise,
before I come to particulars.

First, this is the great comfort, nay indeed the only comfort that a godly man
has to fly unto, in all his fa^lings and all his falls, the bent, the aim of
his heart; and this I shall manifest in two part^culars.

First, in any particular failing or infirmity, what is it that the soul can
retreat to? and truly when a godly man, his conscience bearing him witness, is
able to say, Lord, this is my transgression, but thou know this was not my
intention: the aim and bent of my heart went not this way: this is that we see
in Peter: It was a desperate fall, the denying of his Master, especially in
that word denying him with curses and abjuration, or as it were wishing an
eternal curse upon himself, if ever he knew the man: for some conceive that was
the meaning of his words: but yet Peter goes to the Lord Jesus, and says, the
resolution and bent of my heart was this before hand, If I die with thee I will
not deny thee: this was my transgression, but not my intention: and that's the
meaning of Gal. 6. 1. If any man be overtaken with a fault: sin comes upon a
godly man as Judgment upon the wicked: how is that? it comes upon them by
surprise: it was not their aim and purpose, but sin overtook them, came upon
them in the way of surprise: that expression is very observable to that end, 2 Samuel 12. 4. It Is Nathans parable concerning David's adultery; There was a rich
man that had great store of sheep, and a poor man that had but one Ewe Lamb
that he bred in his own bosom: and a stranger came to the rich man: whom does
he intend? Nathan speaks of the lust that rose in the heart of David, and he
calls it a stranger or a traveller; for so the learned render the word,
peregrinus non dominus; he was a stranger, he was not the master: that's the
common interpretation given of the word; its a stranger, a traveller, one that
came suddenly, and unexpectedly, that he did not provide for, but the lust rose
up in him suddenly, unexpectedly, Psalm. 17. 3. I have purposed my mouth shall
not offend; I have purposed: we know David did offend with his mouth many
times; he complains of the way of lying, it was not his aim; I do offend with
my mouth; but I have purposed my mouth shall not offend. I thought so before
hand, it was the matter of my meditation and consulta^io^, least I should be
surprised; I proposed this to my self, here was my intention; I miscarried
indeed, but the aim of my heart was otherways: but the word in the Original
signifies, Aliter proposui and machinatus sum. I plotted and designed. Psalm.
37. 12. The word is used, The wicked plotteth against the just; my great design
was, that my mouth might not offend: thus a godly man can say, and here is his
comfort. It Is necessary then to inquire, where the bent and aim of your heart
is, because in all your failings this must support your souls, the aim of my
heart was otherways: this is my transgression, but this was not my intention.

Secondly, sometimes a godly man cannot comfort himself in this particular; for
many times godly men commit plotted wickedness, wickedness and that out of
consultation, from design, which is that the Scripture calls (and David
deprecates) presumptuous sins: keep back thy servant from presumptuous sins,
Psalm. 19. 13. When men sin and contrive it before hand, before hand intend it,
do it as it were maliciously: but may a godly man do this? pray look into 1
Kin. 15. 10. David's heart was upright in all things, save in the matter of
Uriah; save in the matter of Uriah? sure David's heart was not upright in his
dissembling, and in the way of lying that he practiced: his heart was not
upright when he numbered the people; was David's heart upright in the matter of
Bathsheba? What in nothing but in the matter of Uriah? in the matter of
Bathsheba, it was a sudden temptation led him contrary to the bent of his
heart: but in the matter of Uriah he committed the sin with intention, out of
consultation: now he could not say, this was not my intention; now what may a
godly man now retire unto? to the general bent of his heart, that though in
this particular I miscarried, and my aim was to do evil, yet the general-aim
and bent of my heart was not so: you find the Lord judges men so, and so ought
godly men to judge of themselves. 1 Kings 15. 14. the Lord reckons up the
several miscarriages of Asa; he oppressed the people and imprisoned the Prophet,
two great evils; but the Lord comes in with a nevertheless his heart was
upright with God all his days: though in some particulars he miscarried, and
miscarried by advice and design; yet notwithstanding this was not the general
bent and aim of his heart: you shall understand it by the contrary in ungodly
men, Psalm. 36. 4. He sets himself in a way that is wicked, he sets himself; the
same word is used, Psalm. 2. 2. The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the
rulers take Council against the Lord and against his anointed: When does a man
set himself in a way of wickedness? from meditation and consultation, the bent
of his heart goes after that which is evil, and he sets himself, that is, he
resolves to go on, and continue in it, he will not be turned out of the way;
Now as this serves for an ungodly man's conviction, the bent of his heart is on
evil; so this serves for a godly man's consolation. It is a mighty great thing
which way the bent, aim and tendency of the heart of man does lie; for where
the treasure is, there is the heart, that is, the bent of the heart.

But would you know how a man should find that out, which way the aim and
tendency of his heart goes. There are six Rules that I shall offer, by which
every one of us may very much judge and guess of the aim of our hearts: and
truly this should be our great study, the study of our hearts; as I remember it
was that which comforted a godly Minister, when he died: I bless the Lord, I
have stud^ed my own heart more then Books. It will be the great comfort of
every Christian to be able to say, I have studied my own heart more then the
world, more then my Trade; here will be the great comfort.

The first Rule is this:

What the soul is carried after under different conditions: this declares what
the aim of the soul is, what it tends unto, by that you may judge of the
tendency of the heart; as waters, though you may turn them out of their proper
current, and alter the channel, yet they always run into the sea; you will say
then, Certainly the tendency of these, as their proper place, is the sea, that
turn them into what channel you will, they always run that way: if you see the
Sun, whether the day be clear or cloudy, it always makes toward the West, you
will conclude that is the end of his course, that is, the race and journey that
he is to go; the going out of the heart to the same courses under different
conditions, wonderfully clears to a man, what the aim and bent of the soul is.
As for ex^mple, suppose the heart of a natural man, whose aim is at his own
exaltation; here is his aim, Pride being his predominant and master lust; bring
this man into prosperity, why then it vents it self in self-exaltation,
admiration, Seeking of glory from men, setting himself in the face and glory of
the times, in despising of others, and preferring himself. Bring this man at
any time under trouble of conscience: why then pride vents it self in his
humility and self-abasement: bring him into poverty, and then pride shows it
self in its base dejection and despair; for as faith is the most humbling
grace, so of all others despair is the highest fruit of pride, venting it self
in murmuring and discontent; here is a heart showing the same aim in different
conditions: all this clearly argues where the bent of the heart is; and so also
let the aim of a man's heart go out to coveteousness, the love of money, when he
is in a low condition, truly if he observe his soul, it bends out with earnest
desires that way, and the admiration of all those that are well stored with it;
as the former calls the proud happy, so this accounts the rich a happy man. But
now let him be brought into a wealthy condition, now he has more
opportunities, and by these the lust has more vent; there is still the same
bent of soul; this still argues what the aim of a man's heart is, when it is the
same in different conditions, put a man into what condition you will, the heart
still goes the same way; as covetousness was that which Judas heart went out to
before he was an Apostle; now he is an Apostle, he is still a thief and carries
the bag. Simon Magus when a Sorcerer, his heart run out to money, and became a
Sorcerer upon that account: when a Christian, his heart goes to his money
still. Thus take a man in what condition you will, and you find the aim of his
heart is the same: on the contrary, take another man that is godly, who has
another treasure, and by this means his soul has another aim; put him into
what condition you will, still the bent of his heart is the same, Psalm. 44. 19.
Though thou have smitten us into the place of Dragons, and covered us with the
shadow of death, yet we have not gone from thee: the bent of their souls was
still with God; what affliction soever they met with in a way of godliness,
could not turn their hearts away; so if Job be in the gate or on the dunghill,
the aim of his heart is the same, Fearing God and eschewing evil; this I pray
observe. Its very true in different conditions, men have not the same vent for
their lusts, but still the bent of the heart is the same; consider what thou
wast when thou were young, and what now: what in adversity, and what in
prosperity; consider what thou were when a private man; and what now thou a^t a
Magistrate: only it is true thou have more opportunit^es to give vent to lust at
one time then at another: but still the bent of thy heart is the same.

Secondly, In all places and all companies, if opportunity be offered, consider
what is it that thy heart most greedily catches at, there is the bent and aim
of thy heart. What was the thing they aimed at, that were the Messengers of
Benhadad to Ahab; the aim was to find some favor for their Master Benhadad
and themselves; when Ahab said, he is my brother, they greedily catch at it,
and said, thy brother Benhadad lives: so it is with the soul in every
condition, as if the aim and bent of the soul be lust-carried out that way. In
Prove. 7. 22. He went after her suddenly, or strait way, as you read it, that
is, so soon as the motion was made, the heart caught after it immediately; and
so also suppose it be gain, at the least motion of it, the heart goes out
immediately. Josh. 7. 21. I saw among the spoil a wedge of gold and a goodly
Babylonish garment; and I coveted and took it: the heart caught after it: and
so also let there be at any time a gracious motion from God to a godly man, his
heart catches after it, 2 Cor. 8. 11. There was in you a readiness to will;
there was a good motion made to relieve the distressed Churches, and they were
men that had it to spare; there was a readiness not only at last, and with much
ado as men that were brought now to it with a great deal of persuasion: no
there was a readiness. Now you see by this, what do your souls on the first
motion most greedily close with, as according to the aim of the heart, so all
temptations be suited; this is a means to make them take presently, because
they suit to the bent of the soul, whether it be from men, or from the devil;
Sichem was to persuade the Sichemites, and knowing the bent of their hearts
were for the world, what is his argument, Genesis 34. 23. Shall not their cattle
and their goods be ours: and so it is likewise from Satan, for the devil leads
you captive at his will: but how be you taken? the Apostle uses that
expression, to deceive you with a bait: now what does Satan bait to take you
withal? somewhat that suits the bent of your minds, and to that end the devils
great policy is to observe what is the bent of your hearts, and he bea^s at
that immediately: you may know where the bent of your hearts is by that, in all
comp^nies and upon all occasions. What do your hearts most greedily catch at?

Thirdly, according to the bent of the heart, so does the heart gather to it
self (for this you shall find by experience, every one of these things)
whether there be occasion or no; if there be occasion, the heart catches after
it: if there be no occasion, the heart will gather occasion: you read, Genesis 6.
5. Every imagination of the heart: It is figmentum cordis, every creature of
the heart; something that the heart frames unto it self, many times to the bent
of his heart he frames that to himself which there is no occasion given of in
the world, but the heart frames it to its own aim and inclination: as that you
may observe it, take notice, Deuteronomy. 4. 29. When thou see the Sun, Moon and
Stars in the host of heaven, take heed that thou be not driven to worship
them: what was there in seeing the Sun, Moon, and Stars to drive them to
worship them? Is there occasion given to worship them? its only as Job
expresses it, Job 37. 27. If my heart has been secretly enticed: here is no
occasion in the creatures in the world, but the heart frames such a temptation,
according to its tendency; the heart is bent to idolatry, and so apt to choose
any thing for God; which I think is the meaning of that place, 1 John 2. 16.
Whatsoever is in the world is the lust of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and
the pride of life. I conceive lust is put for the object of lust, as faith and
hope are put for the object of faith and hope: whatever is in this world is the
lusts of the flesh: that is, there is nothing that the heart makes not the
object of some lust or other: and though in the creature there be no occasion,
yet the heart takes occasion to vent some lust or other; but it is strange to
observe, 2 Pet. 2. 14. They have eyes full of adultery, that is, though there
be no occasion in the world; yet notwithstanding, even the lusts break ou^ at
the eyes; the heart vents it self there; they have eyes full of adultery, and
they cannot cease from sin: note but that place, Psalm. 41. 6. David speaks it
of ungodly men, If he come to see me, his heart gathers wickedness to it self:
how so? though I give him no occasion in the world, says he, yet it is to the
bent of his heart: There is not a word I speak, not any action I do, not any
gesture of the mind, but the heart puts some constructions according to its
bent: if there be no occasion given, truly the heart makes occasions: pray
observe it, by this you wonderfully see where the bent of the heart lies. On
the contrary, take a godly man, look where the aim of his heart lies, though
there be no occasion given, yet you will quickly see his heart make occasion;
there is an advantage the heart makes, as David tells you, Psalm. 39. I held my
mouth as with a bridle from the ungodly; doubtless they administered David
little occasion of good thoughts; but at last the fire kindled; even in wicked
company, according to the bent of his heart: It framed such meditations and
goings out as these, that as the one gathers wickedness, so the other gathers
holiness to it self, though there be no occasion given; for the heart of man
has a self-sufficiency to wickedness, though there be no occasion given, yet
there is a self-sufficiency in the heart of man: and therefore lust is said to
be the father and mother too, able to beget and to bring forth of it self,
James 1. 13. When lust has conceived it brings forth sin: and it is truly said
to be like the fire of hell, which burns withour fuel: look which way the bent
of the heart goes, that way the heart will walk, whether there be occasion or
no; take that one instance, 1 Kin. 13. 23. the Lord sent a Prophet from Judah
to cry against the altar at Bethel; this young Prophet disobeys the voice of
the Lord, through the deceit of the old Prophet, and was destroyed by a Lion in
the way: now will you see Jeroboam? what does his heart gather from this? is
there any occasion that the man should say? therefore let me go out to sin
against God: no, rather if God be so severe to a Prophet, and against his own,
what will he be to other men? It is said expressly, After this Jeroboam returned
not from the evil of his ways: after this, that is, Ieroboams heart made
advantage by this Judgment upon the Prophet: surely Judgment is come upon
him: and for this reason, certainly I will never return, never change my
opinion. Pray observe, still you see how the heart, according to the bent,
frame, and tendency of it (for I want words to express it to you) it gathers
somewhat to it self, whether there be occasion given or no: by this you may
much judge where the bent and frame of your hearts are:

Fourthly, would a man know what the bent and aim of his heart is? it is that
which causes a man to break through all oppositions to obtain; you will say
that the bent of his heart is set upon; as I shall give clear instances* let
the thing be never so costly, if the bent of the heart be upon it, it will
spare no cost to obtain it; it will not stick at cost; you may take two
instances, Genesis 34. 12. Sichem his heart clave to Dinah Jacobs daughter, the
bent of his heart went that way; now what does this bring forth in him? A^k me
never so much Dowry I will give it: cost me never so much I will give it: and
so likewise they in the prophecy of Isaiah, their hearts were set on their
idolatry; they spare no cost, they lavish gold out of their bags; if the heart
be set upon it, it evil carry a man through that difficulty: carry these
things home to your souls you that stick at all costs in matters of Religion.
And so like wise if a man's heart be set on revenge, he will spare no cost: you
have a strange instance for it, Esther 3. 9. I do give these things a little to
lead you into your own thoughts: Merdecai did not bow the knee to Haman; and he
did it not on this account, because Haman expected, as most of the Persian
Emperors did, to be worshipped with Religious worship: upon this Hamans heart
is set upon revenge: now did he stick at any cost in it? no let him and the
whole Nation of the Jews be destroyed, and that the King may receive no damage:
I will give ten thousand talents of silver into the Kings treasury; revenge is
costly: and yet notwithstanding, if the bent of the heart be set upon it, it
will stick at no cost; and that you may understand it, a talent of silver is
375. l. of our money: now judge by that what a sum ten thousand talents is: and
yet if the bent of the heart be that way, it will carry the man through that
opposition; and so let a man aim at ambition, let a man's honor be his chief
good, he will stick at no opposition to obtain it: be it the murder of his
father, Absalom will not stick at it, if it hinder his rising; if halting, and
dissembling in the matters of Religion, Iehu will not stick at it, if he may be
settled in his dominion: if it be the making merchandise of the souls of men:
for that is Romes merchandise, Rev. 18. 13. to establish Antichrist in the
Chair, truly that shall never hinder; if it be to change times and laws, that's
the expression used of the little horn, Dan. 7. 25. times and laws, what is
that? one expounds it the fundamental Laws of the Nation, to pluck up
foundations: truly there is no sticking at it; for if the bent of the heart be
set upon it, it will carry a man through all opposition. The same thing is true
also in reference to spirituals: if a man's heart be set on God, and the bent of
the soul go out that way. Psalm. 84. 6. Go through the valley of Baca: but what
for? That they may appear before their God in Zion. No difficulty shall put a
man off, because the bent of the heart is set that way, as Jerome exhorts
Heliodorus: per calcatum perge patrem, etc. the soul will find it so, tramples
upon the greatest difficulties, and the nearest relations, despises all in
comparison of Christ: if the loss of right hand, and right eye, the soul will
not stick at it: why? because the bent of the heart is set that way: do but
observe by this consideration also, where the aim, bent and propensity of your
souls are; for where your treasure is, there is the bent of your souls.

Fifthly, where the bent and aim of the heart is, there it is continually
restless until it obtain that which it tends unto: the aim of the heart, it
is pondus animae, the weight of the soul. It is always tending that way; if the
bent of the soul be set on God, then my soul is athirst for God, even for the
living God; and nothing but God will allay that thirst: if the heart be set on
things below, why, after these things do the Gentiles seek, Matthew. 6. 32. to
seek, argues a sense of want and a restlesness under it; and it argues that a
man will never give over until he find it; this is to seek; if the aim and
bent of the heart be that way, the heart is restless, and never gives over; if
the bent of the heart go after riches, do but observe how restless the man's
soul is: how all means in the world is used to satisfy the heart, in that
which it goes after: they rise up early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread
of carefulness, Psalm. 127. 2. If there be a desire of Rule and Dominion, why
the soul is restless; Nebuchadnezzar gathers the riches of the Nations like
Eggs, robs their Treasuries; and yet notwithstanding for all that he was a
mighty hunter upon Earth; and this has ever been the manner of all the Nimrods
of the World; their souls are restless; and why? because that way the bent of
the heart goes; till that be obtained, they are never satisfied, they be
always restless.

Lastly, that which is the aim of a man's heart, that he makes use of all things
else to obtain: makes all things else in the world serviceable and subordinate
thereunto: if the bent of the heart be set on God, he cares for riches no
further then that he may honor God with his substance, Prove. 3. 9. He looks on
Ordinances, but Ordinances no further then in them he may enjoy communion with
God; nay the Lord Jesus Christ himself as Mediator; no otherways desires him
then as he may come to God by him; for we come unto God by Christ: therefore he
makes use of every thing to bring him to that where the bent of his soul is; so
is a man's heart set on carnal interests? then he makes use of all things to
advance himself: will the name of Religion do it, the gift of the Holy Ghost?
Simon Magus will buy them for money, but it is to advance a carnal interest:
will the countenance of godly men do it, then they shall be courted from all
parts: Iehu when he meets Ionadab the son of Rechab, a man so famous and
honorable among the Jews for holiness and strictness in Religion: Iehu falls on
him especially, Is thy heart right with my heart? there is a double
interpretation that Expositors give of the words. Cajetan and others. Ita me
sincere amas? or, Ita ne mea facta probas? do thou love me truly, as I love
thee? for no man professed sincerity more then he whose whole trade was a way
of hypocrisy. But Peter Martyr and some others: he had destroyed the house of
Ahab, and was going now to destroy the house of Baal: if thy heart fall in with
my in terest, approve what I have done, come up into my chariot; he does not
court every one thus: but Ionadab is a man famous for Religion, and if this will
advance Iehu's interest for Religions sake, and under a pretense of Religion,
he shall be thus kindly used and honored before the people: what ever we can
make use of to serve the ends, that the bent of the heart goes after: if
Reformation will tend to that work, we will reform: the worship of Baal was not
for his interest: and therefore the worship of Baal and its worshippers must be
destroyed; but the worship of the Calves has been anciently among the people,
and it is hazardous to take them away: and therefore let the Calves stand, and
Baal fall: and thus many a man may be an executioner of an Idolater, when he is
successor in the Idolatry: an executioner of an oppressor, and yet succeed him
in the oppression: thus you may see and judge where the bent of the heart is;
he makes use of all things to bring about, to accomplish that which his heart
is set upon: weigh but these Rules, that every one may know which way his soul
goes out, and how the bent and tendency of the heart lies; where the treasure
is, there is the aim and bent of the heart: this is the first particular.

The second particular for the opening of the Doctrine. The heart in Scripture,
is put for the wisdom, the studies, the plots, the contrivances of the heart;
and if it be so, then where the treasure is, there is the wisdom, and there are
the designs of the heart: Let us take some instances of this, Prove. 8. 5. Ye
fools, understand wisdom, understand the heart: so it is according to the
Hebrew, Prove. 15. 32. He that hears reproof gets understanding; he gets a
heart: and so also, Prove. 10. 20. Fools die for want of wisdom; it is for want
of a heart; and Hos. 7. 11. Ephraim is a filly Dove without a heart, that is,
without wisdom: so then the wisdom of the heart, the plots, counsels and
designs of the heart, these are called the heart in Scripture, as the Apostle,
1 Cor. 4. 5. says, At the last day he will make manifest the Counsels of the
heart: there be the deep plots and designs; there is the wisdom of the man;
then this is put for the heart: and where a man's treasure is, there are his
designs, there is his wisdom; and for this cause, there is wisdom that is
earthly, and there is wisdom ihat is from above, Jam. 3. 15, 17. If a man's
treasure be on the earth, all the wisdom he has goes no higher, all his plots
and designs never rise above the earth; if his treasure be in heaven, his
wisdom is heavenward. Do but observe that which is a very choice Scripture,
Luke 16. 8. The children of this world are wiser in their generation, then the
children of light: the children of this world; he does intimate now of two
sorts of men, and two sorts of wisdom; both of them are wlse in their
generations: the one his wisdom reaches not beyond this world; the other his
wisdom is in reference to the world to come; or as the Apostle says, is wise
unto salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 5. and so some do expound that expression, wiser in
their generation. Grotius I remember says, that the Hebrews do use to put
generation for action: actiones denotat, actions are called generations: and
Chemuisius goes likewise the same way, they are wiser in their generation: In
rebus suis agendis, in doing their own business, and accomplishing their own
ends: here they are wiser: in these things below, a godly man is said to be a
babe, Matthew. 11. 22. but the children of light are wiser in their generation
too then the children of the world: now every man's wisdom in reference to his
treasure is exercised in three things:

In getting of it.

In keeping of it.

In improving and increasing it.

And all the wisdom, plots, and designs of men are exercised in these three
things, all about their treasure.

First, every man's wisdom is exercised about his treasure in the getting of it:
if it be pleasure, then observe the wisdom of Amnon, by the advice of his
friend Jonadab, for the obtaining of his lust upon his sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.
And certainly in this respect, even the counsels of the flesh are deep, and
mightily assisted from below: and so if a man has a desire to rise, and
pre-eminence and to be superior is the thing aimed at, and the treasure be laid
up in it, see with what wisdom he can do it: take the instance of Jeroboam, his
aim was to be head of the ten Tribes: observe his policy, and it is remarkable, 1
Kin. 12. It lets a man see that there is all knowledge in the Scripture: first,
Jeroboam must come in and discontent the people, by telling them of their
former pressures, and hard usages: this being done, he must take advantage of
the same discontent of the people growing high in their demands: hereupon who
so like to be the head of the people upon choice, as he that ventured and
hazarded so much for them, and seems to be so far tender of their pressures,
and to finish all, there must come in the old prophecy of Abijah the Prophet,
that God will rend ten tribes from the house of David, and give them to
Jeroboam. Do but observe, it is plain, as a man's treasure is, so his wisdom
works in the getting of it; but there is another instance in Scripture that is
a mighty one; which I shall not give the whole story of, but speak somewhat: it
is that of Antichrist, The woman that rides upon the scarlet colored beast,
and sits upon many waters, that is, rules over many people: why? do but
observe, dominion being the thing aimed at, the strange ways that have bin
taken; look to the rise of Antichrist, Revel. 13. and you see he arises in the
double shape suitable to the twofold power he aims at: first, the beast that
rises out rf the Sea: so he has seven heads and ten horns: he comes in upon
the breach of the Roman Empire, when the Goths and Vandals had given it its
deadly wound; and he joins with the ten Kings to set up an Image of the former
Roman Empire, and to put life into it: an Image it was and but an Image; they
were all zealous for the Roman Empire; and this Antichrist got exceedingly by;
he and the ten Kings that submitted to him, now made up one body of Empire; but
this was not power enough, and therefore he arises under the shape of another
beast, not out of the Sea, but out of the earth, stirpium more, after the
manner of herbs that insensibly grow: and this is his Ecclesiastical power over
the consciences of men; for all pretense of Civil power was to gain this
complete power of ruling over the consciences of men; and thus you see,
whatever a man makes his treasure, all his wisdom runs out unto: this you shall
find in reference to Religion also, a godly man, all the wisdom he has tends
that way; for I told you, It was to make him wise unto salvation; there is all
his wisdom; and so Paul says he did, Phil. 3. 14. If by any means I may attain
to the resurrection of the dead; he means the resurrection of the just: all the
wisdom that he aimed at was upon this account: so that a godly man has but one
design in the world, and that is that he may enjoy God and Christ, where his
treasure is, that he may get an interest in God by Christ, it is all the design
he has: and therefore Bernard does very well observe, Men's sapientis semper
est apud Deum: A wise man's heart is always with God, that is, all his plots and
contrivance is, how he may bring about that great business: all his wisdom is
said out upon this, how he may get his treasure.

Secondly, when he has once got it, his great design and wisdom is exercised
therein, how he may keep it: thus it is with men, whose treasure is on the
earth: they know that rust and moth will corrupt, and thieves break through and
steal: and therefore they all contrive to keep what they have gotten: for they
do know that there be F^nners: says the Lord, I will send fanners upon
Babylon, Jer. 51. Take away all the chaff that now hangs about, that you may
well spare, and yet endeavor to keep so close: now on this account men are
mavelous sollicitous: what care is there for conveyances and inheritances?
and all is purely upon this, because men use their wisdom to keep their
treasure: thou whosoever thou be that endeavourest to make safe here below,
pray mark that place, and consider all you whose treasure is on earth, Job 20.
15. He swallows down riches, but he shall vomit them up: God will pull it out
of his belly; and therefore in the midst of their sufficiency they are in
straits, ver. 22. Upon this account it is that the wisdom of the world is
mightily exercised about that, not only how to get, but how to secure their
treasure: it is true of a godly man too: God in Christ is his chief good, his
treasure; how he may secure it, that is his plot; he knows that it is only sin
that separates between him and God: for this cause his design is not to sin: as
Tertullian does observe: nobis unica est necessitas non deliquendi: men may
pretend necessity whiles they will, we have but one necessity: a godly man has
but one necessity, that he does not sin; why? because his sin robs him of his
treasure: nay a godly man knows though men may lose their treasure here
unwillingly, yet not withstanding a treasure in heaven, nemo perdit nisi
volens, no man loses it but with his own will: why therefore, now his great
fear is, lest his soul and his heart should depart from God; and therefore,
Psalm. 86. 11. Unite my heart to thee, that I may fear thee; that I may with
full purpose of heart cleave unto the Lord, Act. 11. 28. this his wisdom is in
his treasure, not only in getting but in keeping it.

Thirdly, his heart is where his treasure is, that is, how to improve it, and
increase it: a treasure is such a thing as grows by a continual addition: a
treasure is not filled up at once, but by degrees, by a constant addition
thereunto: therefore now this is the great study of the man, all his plots and
designs are there: as now take a man whose treasure is on earth; you may see
the man, Hab. 2. 5. one that did desire Dominion, it is spoken of
Nebuchadnezzar, he is a proud man, says the Spirit of God: what is that? he
looks on himself, as ad dominium natus, alii ad mancipium, as a man born to
rule, and looks on all other men as born to be servants: well, but what does
this put him upon? to increase his treasure: how does he do it? why he keeps
not at home: what is that? that is, he is not content with his own condition:
keeps not within his own territories and dominions, but gath^rs to himself all
nations, and heaps to himself all people: his treasure lay in his Empire, and
that is his business all his life t^me to increase it: this is a man whose
treasure is on earth: you have another expression, Dan. 11. 24, 25. worthy your
observation: the Kings of the north and south are there spoken of: the Text
says, He shall forecast devices against him: forecast devices, that is, plot
and design: why now they endeavor to invade one other, who shall enlarge his
Dominion most: and this they did by using all designs and plots one against
another. So like wise consider a godly man whose treasure is above in heaven,
in enjoying God and Christ: well truly, what esteem soever he has in the
world, it does not much trouble him; that's a great speech of one of the
ancients, Magis ardere quam lucere nititur sapiens: A wise man loves heat
rather then light, chooses rather to have it within in his own soul then to
appear among others; now because the way to enjoy much of God is to be much in
communion with him: therefore always his soul desires communion: the Spirit
says come, and the Bride says come: if there be degrees of enjoyment, he
would have the highest degree, it is his treasure, and he is adding to it, and
his wisdom lies in that: Habet and sapientia sui generis superbiam: there is a
holy pride, as the Father says: now how is this obtained? he rewards every man
according to his works: and what shall that reward be? I am your reward; not
only that I may have fuller communion with him here, but fuller fruition of him
hereafter: this is his design: yea this is his wisdom, his wisdom is always
exercised about his treasure, in getting, or keeping, or in improving and
increasing it.

Thirdly, the heart in Scripture is used for the thoughts, not only for the
consultations and counsels of the heart, but for the meditations of it; and so
our Saviors meaning is: where your treasure is, there will the thoughts of
your hearts be: for this cause God is said to search the heart, and to know the
heart, Cogitationes intimas and absconditas, that is, all the most secret
thoughts of the heart; those secret thoughts which are hid from all else in the
world God only knows, and therefore is said to search the heart, and know the
heart, that is, to know the thoughts: and David interprets it so, Psalm. 139.
23. Search me and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts: thus he explains
it: and Judge. 16. 15, 17. Dalilah says to Sampson: How can thou say thou
love me, when thou hidest thy heart from me? and he told her all his heart,
that is, all his thoughts. Now then the thoughts in Scripture, they are put for
the heart, and indeed there is nothing carries the heart more with it, then the
thoughts does, and nothing wherein there is less deceit, in reference to the
heart, then in thoughts: the thoughts are the firstborn of the soul, the
hearts immediate issues: now if a man would taste water, the way not to be
deceived, is to taste it in the Spring; if a man would taste wine, the way not
to be deceived, is to taste it in the wine press, before it is adulterated by
the Vintner: so our actions and words many times are adulterated: therefore the
heart mightily goes where the thoughts go; you cannot say men's hearts go with
their words; no, very seldom, especially in this dissembling age; men seldom
speak as they mean; Solomon speaks of a man that invites one to dinner, Prove.
23. 6, 7. Eat and drink, but his heart is not with thee: he bids thee eat, but
his heart is not with his words: but I say, there is the least susp^tion of
deceit in thoughts; that if a man can but know which way his thoughts go, that
way certainly his heart goes.

Now I have but four Rules to offer in reference to your thoughts; but pray
observe them; for I do but touch on these things on purpose, that you may a
little know how you may epsy out your own hearts: the thoughts you will say, run
upon ten thousand things, how is any man ever able to know where his thoughts
are? a man's thoughts are every where. There are four Rules I shall give,
whereby you may know where your thoughts, and by that where your hearts are.

First, when you are alone, sequestered from company, out of the noise of your
callings, and outward employments: whither then do your thoughts usually
retire? where commonly are your thoughts then? for the truth is, the man is as
he is when he is alone; such as the thoughts of the heart are, such is the man:
as for example, Nebuchadnezzar; the question is not where his thoughts were
when he was abroad in war: he was at peace, and walking in his palace at home:
now where are his thoughts? is not this great Babel, that I have built for the
honor of my Majesty? and how he had been the head of gold; the first that
raised that glorious Empire; here were his thoughts: take a godly man, and
where are his thoughts, when he is in his Closet, or upon his bed, or when he
awakes in the night? Psalm. 139. 18. says David, when I awake, I am still with
thee: therefore when you are alone, look where your thoughts usually go: for
the man is as he is when he is alone.

2ly. Would you know where your thoughts are? why, then what are the thoughts
that you use to find the greatest sweetness in? a man may think of a great
many things that he finds no content in: but what are the thoughts wherein you
use to find the greatest sweetness and content? sure there is your heart:
David, Psalm. 139. 17. How precious are thy thoughts unto me oh God: another man
the thoughts of his lusts are sweet, and he acts over his wickedness in a
contemplative way; but the thoughts of God are bitter to him, his thoughts
trouble him, as it was with Belshazzar, when he saw the handwriting on the
wall, Dan. 5. 6. His thoughts troubled him. But David because God was his
treasure, his thoughts were sweet and precious to him; now examine what
thoughts come in upon you with greatest pleasure and delight.

Thirdly, what thoughts are of longest continuance, that your souls do most
abide upon? the thoughts that abide upon your hearts, most discover where they
are. Jer. 4. 14. How long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? take a man
whose heart is set upon things below, and not only thoughts come in to him (for
so they do to Godly men) but they dwell and abide there: but as in reference to
God, Psalm. 10. 4. God is not in all his thoughts, his thoughts never stay on
God, nor the things of eternity. Pray consider it, where do your thoughts stay
most? take now a natural man, and cast in but a thought of his treasure, it
abides upon him: he ruminates upon it afterward, and he sucks great sweetness
from it: but cast in a thought of heaven, or God, and he is like the dead sea,
his heart is like the dead sea, of which it is said, whatever living thing is
cast into it dies immediately; so cast in any such thought, and it dies
presently, and will not abide.

Lastly, what are those thoughts that commonly take up your hearts in holy
duties? it is a very great Argument, there a man's heart is where his thoughts in
holy duties most commonly are: what is that therefore that takes off your
hearts, and takes up your hearts in holy duties? you know that place, Ezekiel: 33.
31. they came there to hear a Sermon, but their thoughts went after their
covetousness. Now it is a great argument their thoughts were set upon their
covetousness, because in the duties of Gods worship, these are the thoughts
that most take up their hearts; now the ground of this rule is this, Satan's
great aim in all the duties of Gods worship is to take off your thoughts from
the duty; for grace acts by thoughts: therefore when the word is preached he
will catch away the seed, if he can; if not, he will keep off the thoughts; and
how does the Devil do that? his way is this, he does endeavor to prepossess us,
fixes the thoughts of a man's heart on somewhat else; and what is that? that
which is most likely to take with a man: truly the thoughts of that he indevors
to stir up in the soul, and what is that? the thoughts of a man's treasure,
that's the thought upon which the heart rests most; and the thoughts to which he
is most accustomed; it is a very great Argument on this ground that those
thoughts which most commnoly possess the soul in holy duties, that there a man's
heart is, and there his treasure is; and so much the rather, because into the
duties of Gods worship many other thoughts dare not venture, the soul keeps
them out; but it is in this respect as with a Prince, though at sometime the
servant may not approach his presence, yet a wife, a Favorite may; just so it
is with the thoughts of a man's heart: it is I know one great complaint in all
the people of God: the wanderings of their souls in service: Bernard complains
of it, Aliud canto, aliud cogito, I sing one thing, when I think another, so I
pray one thing when I think another; and hear one thing when my thoughts are
upon something else. But do you observe in all these wanderings of soul, what is
there to which in duty most commonly your souls retire: a great argument that
that is a man's chief good: examine by these Rules, and you shall find out
where your thoughts, and by that where your hearts are; that's the third
particular.

Fourthly, the heart is put in Scripture for the love of the heart, Judge. 5. 9.
My heart is toward the Governors of Israel that offered themselves willingly
among the people: It is Deborahs speech in her song, after that great victory
God had given over Sisera: the people of God they love all those that are
employed for God; but in an especial manner the more eminent men are that are
employed, the more their love is drawn out; so that by heart is meant her love;
she desires all may be thankful, especially the Governors of Israel, who had
the greatest share in the mercy, and were the greatest instruments therein,
Prove. 23. 7. Eat not the bread of him that has an evil eye; for though he bid
thee eat, yet his heart is not with thee; his heart is not with thee, what is
that? he courts thee, but he loves thee not, and the more he complements with
thee, the less he affects thee; thus, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart: love carries the heart with it: so that the heart of man is truly
said to be rather where it loves then where it lives; thus in Scripture the
heart is put for the love: so then the meaning is this, where a man's treasure
is, there his love will be.

But how should a man know where his love is? It is a thing of mavelous great
consequence, for a man to consider where he sets and fixes his love: And there
are four grounds, why it is a thing of so great moment.

First, because a man's love is his greatest gift; there is nothing else is a
gift indeed without love, but amor per se donum, love is a gift of it self,
though there be nothing else; Consider the love of God, though the Lord had
never given you any thing, but set his love upon you, it had been the greatest
gift, more then if he had given you all the creatures in heaven and earth: and
if God had given you an inheritance among all the creatures, yet there is no
gift indeed without love; so likewise the Lord Jesus Christ, if he had never
given you an interest in his Sonship, in his victories, in the promises, in his
privileges: if he had given you but his love, there is the great gift; all
these are so far gifts, as they flow from love; so it is true in you, 1 Cor.
13. 3. If I give all my goods to feed the poor, and have not charity, that is,
Love, it profits me not. Then a man may give great gifts without love; so
hypocrites do many times give God great gifts, but reserve their love; so God
deals with them, gives many of of them great gifts, but reserves his love for
his Saints: therefore it is love only is the greatest gift that a man has;
there is no man gives more then his love: God gives no more, man can give no
more: a great matter therefore where a man sets his love.

Secondly, it is a great matter to inquire where a man's love is, because he
that gives his love, gives himself, gives all things else whatsoever he has:
this is liberal, free love indeed, to give all things to the person beloved:
yea, he gives himself, and all things else: I remember it is Clopenburgs
observation, Satis liberalis amor, omnia amato dans, and seipsum: so the Lord
set his love upon his people from eternity, and then purposed to give himself;
yea, therein lay his love: first, himself, and then all things else; so the
people of God they love the Lord; and therefore they give themselves unto the
Lord, 2 Cor. 8. 5. 1. Love gives it self, and then all things else whatever is
in its power: so you find, Rev. 21. 7. He shall inherit all things, I will be
his God; he shall have an interest in God, and then all things that God has
shall be his; thus as it is with God, so likewise it is with men, Qui amorem
dat, omnia dat, he that gives his love gives all; for a man's love commands
all that he has; therefore a man inherits all that is Gods; why because God
sets his love upon his people; a mighty thing therefore to consider where a man
sets his love.

Thirdly, a man's love is that which makes the thing beloved his; its an
excellent observation of a learned man; Qui nos super omnes amat, super omnes
noster est, Deus: God is ours above all, because he loves us more then all: we
call our estates ours, and our friends ours: Why? God is ours above all things:
faith and love give us an interest in God; so when do we become God's, that the
Lord says they be mine, and they shall be mine when I make up my jewels? why
truly by the love of God we become his; he loves us, and by this means he has
a title to us, as we love God, and have a title to him. It is our love that
makes our beloved ours; of how great consequence must it be then, where a man
sets his love? for thou can call nothing thine but what thou love; for it
is a man's love that makes it his.

Lastly, consider it is a man's love that sets the price upon all things, as one
observes, Amor imponit pretium rebus: Love sets the price on things; and truly
great things are of small value where love is wanting: it is so with God, it is so
with men; if the Lord give an ungodly man the greatest gifts in the world; as
He sometimes gives Kingdoms to the basest of men: how do the Saints value this?
this is without love, and therefore it is but as a scrap cast to a Dog; he
values it no more, as he said of the Turkish Empire, Crustulam canibus
projectam: so likewise, let a godly man give to God but a small thing, there is
love in it, and love raises the price, That poor woman the widow that cast in
two mites, gave more then they all, Luke 21. 12. how did she give more then
they all? why they gave of their abundance: It was more in love and affection,
and therefore more in worth and acceptance. Now if such things as these be
true, and you will find them great truths; how does it concern every man
therefore to consider where he sets his love! But what should a man set his
love upon, that by this means he may know where his heart is? Omne bonum est
amabile, etiam natural: Why truly, all good is lovely wherever it is, and to
be beloved, even natural good. We have the example of the Lord for it; we have
the example of God for it: God loves all his creatures, and of the Lord Jesus
Christ himself, Mark 10. 21. He beheld the young man and loved him; then all
good is lovely: but the question is not, whether we may not love any thing that
is good; but quid primum amatur: but as the Schoolmen put a great question, all
truth is to be known: but what is that as the first truth that the
understanding closes withal? so what is first to be beloved, is the great
question; for where the love is first set, there is the love, and there is the
heart. Consider I pray what is the meaning of al those Scriptures, Mark 10. 37.
He that loves father and mother more then me: to love father and mother is a
duty; therefore not here reproved. But what is the first thing to be loved?
what has the chief place in your love? so Joh. 12. 35. He that loves his life
shall lose it; every man is bound to love his life, and out of that love to
preserve it; but he that loves his life more then me, more then my truth, and
my honor, etc. 1 John 2. 15. Love not the world, and the things of the world:
it is lawful to love the world, and the things of the world; but still the
question is, more then me: remember still that God have the priority; to love
the creature more then God, it is that which makes it lust, as Austin speaks of
it; but to love the creature in subordination to God, that is Charity; Hic amor
est charitas, ille cupiditas: true love, love of the right kind; therefore all
the things that I shall propose in this particular, I desire to be understood
according to this Rule, What is it that you love most? not whether you love
this more then that; but whether you love these more then me; and what is your
first love?

According to this we shall inquire, where a man's love is, that by this means,
we may know where his heart is: and I am persuaded, if you take these following
Rules, and observe them carefully, that you will not miscarry in your Judgment.

First, Would a man know where his love is? what is that he especially desires
union with? For, amor est affectus unionis: love is an affection that carries a
tendency to union. Now this will appear, if you observe the love of God, the
pattern: union with God was first in Gods intention, because this is last in
his execution; the people of God in glory are brought into immediate vision of
him, and into the closest union with him. But this being last in execution, I
say this was first in intention: He loved them with an everlasting love, that
is, he had intention from e^ernity of union with them. Pray, observe it, there
is indeed a double union with God.

1. Of Dependence: one is general of all the creatures, and that's a Union of
dependency; In him we live, move, and have our being: Yea all the creatures
have so; they cannot live separate from God one moment. The Angels in heaven,
did not this union continue, they would fall to nothing immediately; there is a
union of dependency; but that is general, and belongs to all the Creatures.

But there is a special Union that is peculiar to the Saints, by the indwelling
of God in them; they dwell in God, and God in them; such a union as no creature
in the world but a Saint has, by the elapses of God into the soul. Now God
loves the Saints, and his love carries a tendency to union. So Jesus Christ
loved his people: what for? that he might become one with them: That he that
sanctifies, and they that are sanctified might become one: why so you will
find that the love of the people of God carries them unto union with God and
Christ: as the love of God and Christ carries them to union with the Saints:
there is indeed a natural union that is by constitution; but there is a moral
union by inclination, by sympathy, and that's double: there is a union of
likeness, and there is a union of fruition and enjoyment: for the union that
the Saints of God shall have h^reafter, is far different from what they have
here: here it is of similitude, there it is of enjoyment: where a man's love is,
there is a tendency to union, an inclination to union, 1 Cor. 6. 17. He that is
joined to the Lord, is one spirit, and the man that is glewed to the Lord: so
the word does signify: then the man that loves God is a man glewed to God, he
is united to him; for union is the tendency of the heart: so Sichem loved
Jacobs daughter Dinah: and the text says, His soul clave to her: or as the
Septuagint uses the same word, his soul was glewed; so that where a man loves,
the soul goes out to be united to that which is beloved. Now if a man love
God, then my heart follows hard after God: the soul goes out in the pursuit of
the thing beloved, and all is that it may be made one with God; and to this end
you have two Metaphors very remarkable in the Scripture: one is that of a
hunter. Genesis 10. 9. Nimrod was a mighty hunter. Ier. 16. 16. I will bring
hunters among you, Prove. 23. 27. The wicked rosteth not that which he takes in
hunting. What is the meaning of these expressions? why they are all to set
forth the pursuit of the soul, after that which it loves; just as the hunter
pursues the poor creature that flies: so the soul, what it loves it pursues,
and is in continual pursuit of: take men that love riches and honors, their
souls are continually going out to union with them: so a man that loves God,
his soul is in pursuit of God; as that Hermit in a story, that sometime I have
read finding a great Gallant hunting in a desolate wilderness Asked him what he
did there; he told him, He came a hunting there: Et ego Deum venor meum. And I
said he, came hither to hunt after my God, it is in pursuit of my God. There is
another Metaphor, and that is a merchandise, Prove. 3. 15. the merchandise of
wisdom: its spoken of trading for Christ, and grace, and the things of
eternity; he that Trades for Christ, is called a Merchant man, Matthew. 13. 45.
and so also they that trade for any earthly thing are said to be Merchants.
Romes merchandise you read of, Rev. 18. 11. Make merchandise of souls, 2. Pet.
2. 3. and of Ephraim, Hos. 12 7. He is a merchant? what is that? why the
meaning is this, they wholly trade for things below: for as Merchant men go
forth to make themselves possessors of riches, make it their business so to do:
so it is with the soul of a man; the heart is a merchant, it goes out to what
it loves, and never leaves till it has possessed it: now I pray do you consider,
what is it your souls desire most? what do you hunt for? what do you trade in?
there is thy love, whoever thou art: if it be Jesus Christ and Communion with
God and the things of eternal life: if thou art in the pursuit of these
constantly, there is thy heart: if it he after wealth and honor, these thou
huntest for as prey: assuredly there is thy love, and thy heart, and thy
treasure: that's the first Rule.

Secondly, would a man know where his love is? the nearer love comes to the
thing beloved, the swifter it moves; the nearer a man's love comes to possess
the thing he loves, the swifter it moves: yea, it stretches after it then: see
it in worldly things; or else what means that expression? Psalm. 62. 10. If
riches increase, set not your hearts upon them: if you want riches, set not
your hearts upon them; take heed of that; for the nearer a man comes to enjoy
them, the more his heart goes out unto them; and therefore covetous men the
richer they are, the more miserably they scrape and gape after riches; and the
reason is this, because the nearer a man's love comes to the thing beloved, the
swifter it moves after it, and with the greater earnestness, Hab. 1. 6. There
is a man that loads himself with thick clay: the man has already too much for
his graces, for his parts, for his comforts, and already too much for his
account; but yet notwithstanding the more he has, the more his heart grasps
after it; still thus it is with every man's love, the nearer it comes to possess
its object, the swifter it moves after it: so the Apostle speaks of spirituals,
Phil. 3. 13, 14. Not that I have already obtained, but I press hard to the
mark: I am in a vehement pursuit; as if you could take a stone from the earth,
and place it in the Orb of the Sun; yet the stone having a tendency downward
still, moves toward its center; and the nearer it comes to the center, the
swifter would its motion be; so if you could take an ungodly man, and place him
in heaven, yet notwithstanding his heart would move toward the earth; his love
is there, and the nearer it comes to enjoy it, the more earnest would his
motion be toward it. I remember on this account it is, that Bernard says, God
puts his people here into the condition of betrothed persons: here are but the
Espousals, the Marriage is to come; what is the reason that there must be time
between the betrothing and the marriage? that desires may be kindled so much
the more: the nearer a man comes to the enjoyment of a thing that he loves,
sure the more vehemently his heart is carried after it; as for this cause you
have the first fruits of the spirit; that the more you taste, the more you may
be carried after the full crop of them: as the Lord carried the people of
Israel to see the Land of Canaan before they enjoyed it; as the Goths having
once tasted the sweet wines of Italy, would never be quiet until they enjoyed
the Country where those sweet wines grew. Examine thy self by this; the nearer
thou come to enjoy that thou love, the swifter and the more vehement thy
heart moves toward it; if the more thou have of this world, with the more
violence thou runnest upon it, as some men do that think they shall never have
enough, grasp after it with great earnestness: so on the contrary, the more
thou have got of interest in Christ, the more communion thou have with him, the
more thy heart acts to him with the greater earnestness and impatiency; a great
Argument, there is thy love.

Thirdly, love is bountiful; where thy bounty is, there is thy love, that is
certain; where a man bestows most bounty, there he shows most love; it is the
opening of the heart that opens the hand; and therefore acts of the greatest
bounty are demonstrations of the highest love: you read of a woman that had
much forgiven her, and she loved much: the same woman came with a box of
spikenard very costly, Joh. 12. she loved much, and therefore thought nothing
too much for the thing beloved. Gods love is so, he loves his people, and
therefore because he can give no greater, he bestows himself; he loves his
people, and therefore he gives his son: thus Sichem loved Dinah; and therefore
said, Ask me never so much dowry: love is bountiful: Sampson loved Dalilah,
and though he ventured his life in it, yet notwithstanding he told her all his
heart. Consider I beseech you, this is another trial; the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8. 3.
stirs them up to a liberal contribution to the poor, what is it for to prove
the sincerity of your love? men it may be will think the Minister speaks many
times for particular interests and private respects: alas it is to prove the
sincerity of your love, which is seen in bounty: now tell me where your bounty
is laid out: why truly my bounty is on my apparel, and I think there I can
never be too profuse, because I think this poor carcass of mine never fine
enough; or on my body, I love to feast, and to have abundance of the creatures;
certainly there is thy love; but is thy bounty to God, and things of Religion?
Why then there is thy love. Take a man now that loves his belly, and he thinks
nothing too much that he lays out upon it. Some of you have read the History of
Sardanapalus, who thought nothing too much, no costs, no pains, so he might
serve his belly: so Haman loved his revenge, and thought nothing too much for
it. Pray examine where your bounty is; assuredly there is your love. David when
he was to build the Temple, he thought no cost too much, but this I have done
out of my poverty; this was an argument that the things of God carried the love
of the man with them; this will prove the sincerity of your love very much; do
not deceive and flatter your selves, I pray; it is a large heart that makes an
open hand.

Fourthly, love is laborious, it grudges no pains for the thing beloved; then
where a man's love goes, his labor goes; therefore called the labor of love,
Heb. 6. 10. and truly a man may conclude eas^ly from 1 Cor. 15. ^0. that he
that said, I labored more then they all, therein employed, I love more then
they all; for a man's labor is suitable to his love; he that labors most,
loves most; now if a man love riches, all his pains go out that way; where his
love is, there is his labor, Hab. 2. 13. Is it not of the Lord of hosts, that
the people labor in the fire, and weary themselves? toilsom wasting labor,
and laboring in vain, is called laboring in the fire: wicked men labor for
vanity: what is that? why as the Psalmist says, they love vanity, and
therefore they weary themselves; for that you read of a man, Eccles. 4. 8. that
there is no end of all his labor: why his love is endless to the things of
this life; and therefore his labor is so: there is no end of his labor, his
eye is not satisfied with riches: so the Lord Jesus Christ, he loves God the
Fathers business, and therefore labored till he had spent his natural strength
and radical moisture, Humidum radicale, Isaiah 49. 4. I have labored in vain,
and spent my strength in vain. My brethren, a man that is slothful, there is
no love in that man: lazy love is pretended love; for where love is, and
according to the degrees of it, such will a man's labor be: you that find
dullness in duties, and the ways of God, you do not run the ways of Gods
commands; strengthen your love, and you will mend your pace; that is certain:
now pray, look to your whole lives, and observe what your labor is laid out
for. It is the observation of one of the Ancients, and a very spiritual one;
Infra vires amor iniquus est: juxta exiguus non capit: at ad impossibilitatem
tendit amor: love that does not put forth it self in utmost labor, is unsound
love; that which goes to its measure and strength, and no more, is true love,
but weak love: do not tell me, it is beyond my strength: no, love tends to
impossibilities, to labor in those things which it is impossible for him to
attain. Its observed of Mary, when she came to Christ's Sepulcher her love
outbid her strength; If you have taken away my Lord, tell me where you have
laid him, and I will carry him away: would you know where your love is? examine
where the labor of your life is; and consider how much you have labored for
the things of this world: and how little for God and Christ; How little have I
dug for wisdom? pray by these Rules examine, where you have placed your love.

Fifthly, would you know where your love is? Love is ventrous, it will hazard
any thing for the thing beloved: Christ gives an evidence of it; he does not
only venture his life, but lay down his life; greater love then this has no
man, that a man lay down his life for his friend, Joh. 15. 13. Abishai out of
his entire love to David when there came Ishbi-benob a giant, whose staff was
like a Weavers beam, and struck at David, thinking to have killed him: he
interposes, receives the blow, and slew the Philistine, 2 Samuel 21. 16. Love is
ventrous, it will put life in hazard for the thing beloved; it is that which the
people of God speak as a testimony of their love to God: The reproaches of them
that reproached thee are fallen upon me, Psalm. 69. 9. and they do it to choose;
as it was a gracious speech of that Ancient, Mallem in me sit murmur, quam in
Deum: Bonum est quod dignetur Deus me uti pro clypeo. If the Lord will be
pleased to make use of me, to keep off reproaches from himself, truly I shall
look upon it as a very great privilege and honor. Now pray tell me where your
hazards are? where is the man, that for the truths of God, and the interests of
Christ w^ll hazard the loss of his estate, the loss of friends, the spoiling of
his goods? where be the men that be apt thus to hazard any thing? The truth is,
love turns cowardice into Courage: you may see it, the Hen though a feeble
creature, how far out of love to her young will hazard her self against the
most ravenous Bird? the mother, though a weak and fearful creature, yet how
far, and with how little consideration will put her self in hazard, if her
child be in danger? what is that for which you venture? Take a man whose love
is set upon a lust, what will that man hazard? he will lose his friends, spend
his estate, blast his reputation; nay he will venture his soul all this out of
that cursed love; and indeed what is it else that makes men despise the
judgments of God, and mock at fear? what is it that men are so courageous for?
it is their love to sin makes them so: Now pray tell me where are your ventures?
certainly there is your love.

Six^hly, Love is zealous. I do not mean that of suspicion, a zeal of
suspicion, that we commonly call jealousy: suspicio est amicitiae venenum, it is
the poison of love, that suspicion of evil in the party beloved: no, the
property of love is the contrary; for love thinks no evil. 1 Cor. 13. 4. But
when I say love is zealous, my meaning is, it is full of solicitude, fearing
least any injury or wrong should be offered to the person and thing beloved:
this love is zealous against any injury offered to the thing or person beloved.
Consider, Moses was the meekest man upon earth, yet Moses meekness is turned
into anger when an injury is done to the God of his love, as well as of his
life: Moses by and by breaks the Tables: so likewise the Lord Jesus Christ out
of love to his Father, the Zeal of thy house has eaten me up, Joh. 2. 17. Zeal
in the heart is like boiling water, that wastes in the seething: just so the
Lord Jesus, the Zeal of thine house has eaten me up. It makes a man overlook
all interests concerning himself in the world, and be intent only upon the
interest of the person beloved: so it is in Gods love. I am zealous for my
sanctuary with a very great jealousy, Zach. 1, 14. What is zeal? It is a mixed
affection; its nothing else but love provoked that is zeal. Esther speaks the
language of love, Esth. 6. 8. How can I endure to see the destruction that
shall come upon my kindred? the evil that shall come upon my people, how can I
endure? this is the proper language of love. Now pray tell me, what are you
zealous for? Where is your zeal? touch one man in his reputation, and you arm
his zeal against you; touch another in point of goods, and you will quickly see
where his love is: so on the contrary, touch God in h^s Name, Christ in his
truth, To whom I gave place, no not for an hour, says Paul, Gal. 2. 5.
presently zeal is up, and love is provoked. I remember, it is Bernards
exhortation to Eugenius, Ignescat Zelus: when any thing came contrary to the
interest of Christ, he would have his zeal turn into fire: and so it will be
where love is: examine therefore what makes you hot upon every occasion: sure
that's an injury done to the thing beloved: this is that which provokes thy
zeal; therefore where thy zeal is, there is thy love.

Seventhly, Love is fearful of separation from the thing beloved: it desires
nothing more then union, it fears nothing more then separation: the Spouse
gives an instance of that in the Canticles; I charge you, awake not my love
till he please: Austin gives that as the difference between true and unclean
love: between the love of a wife, and the love of an harlot: so he puts it;
both fear the husband: true, Haec ne veniat, illa ne discedat: the one fears
least the husband should come, the other fears least he should depart: this
love wherever it is, fears separation: the intirest affection of the soul in
this world is unto the body: next to God and Christ, and heavenly things, there
is the greatest indeerment between the body and the soul. Now why is death
called the King of terrors? because death is the separation of the soul from
the body, which especially the soul fears, because union it loves: and as
Neriemberg says, A man's moritur sibi, vivit in amato; he that loves, dies in
himself, but lives in the thing beloved; for if a man die in himself, how loath
were he to part with the thing beloved? for that were a double death: for this
cause the great consolation of the Saints is (let some men of our times talk
what they will, that the Doctrine of falling from Grace, is a Doctrine of great
Consolation: but) the Scripture and Experience tells us, who shall separate us
from the love of God? Romans 8. ult. for in the absence of the thing beloved, the
heart languishes, but in the separation from the thing beloved the heart dies:
for this cause, as this is the greatest cordial to the Saints, there is no
separation, they love that from which they shall never be separated: so its the
greatest corrosive to wicked men: they love that from which there shall be a
separation; and therefore the Lord continually tells us, Riches betake
themselves to their wings, Prove. 23. 5. Thou fool, this night I will take away
thy soul, and then whose shall these things be? Luke 12. 20. I will take thy
cup from thy mouth: I will take you away with hooks, and your posterity with
fish-hooks, Amos 4. 2, 3. This I say, the greatest corrosive to an ungodly man
is, there shall be a perpetual separation between him and the thing he loves:
whereas the greatest cordial to godly man, is the contrary; and therefore an
ungodly man when he dies, his love dies, because he is continually separated
from the thing he loves; for love ceases in him, and all the comforts in the
acts of it; so because a godly man shall never be separated from the thing he
loves, therefore a godly man's love shall be made perfect. I am afraid, says
one, I shall lose my estate; another, I shall not die in honor: a third, I
shall be cut off from such a pleasure that is the comfort of my life: by this
you shall know your love: what you fear to be separated from, that the love of
your hearts goes out after.

Lastly, Love is victorious, love is strong as death, Cant. 8. 6. Strong as
death: why? says the Apostle, Romans 5. death has reigned: here lies the
strength of death; it exercises such dominion, as no man was ever able to stand
out against its Scepter. No standing out against it, there is a kind of
dominion in love. Consider I pray, look unto the love that men bear to the
things of this life: Let them have the riches of Christ, and the glory of
heaven tendered them, as the young man in the Gospel had, Sell all that thou
have, and thou shall have treasure in heaven: the love of the world overcomes;
love is victorious: so on the other side, offer a godly man all the comforts of
this life, whatsoever his heart could wish, yet not withstanding his love to
God outbids them all; for love is like lime in that respect, Many waters cannot
quench it: no, the more water you pour upon it, the more it burns. Consider I
pray but that very instance of Luther, in his Epistle to Henry the eight King
of England; he speaks of the abominable slanders that were cast upon him: for
they did not spare him in that kind; they that thirsted for his blood did not
spare to blast his name; but what does he say of this? Si absque animorum
suorum damno fieri posset, ex omnibus talia audirem: Lutherus pascitur
convitiis: the truth is, if this could be done without hurt to their own souls,
I should be glad if all the men in the world would lay as much upon me, as they
could. By these reproaches, I am made fat: a man would have thought that this
would have mightily cooled the man's zeal and earnestness in the profession of
Religion, and the doctrine of the Gospel; no, his love to truth overcame these:
so pray consider wherein are you Conquerors; for not only faith overcomes the
world, but love conquers the world: Examine, what proffers so ever thou have
made thee: it may be the great things of this world, honors, preferment,
riches, reputation, and whatever else: but still love to Christ, and the
interest of Christ overcomes. Try your selves by these Rules: where the love
is, there is the heart; where the heart is, there is the treasure, and there is
the heaven, and the happiness: And so much for the Doctrinal part. For the
Application, there are three Uses that I shall propose to you of it.

The first is general, a Use of Instruction, in two things.

First, from hence see the fullness of the Scriptures: every short sentence you
see how full of mystery it is; the Jews have an ordinary Proverb among them,
In lege non un a literula a qua magni non suspensi sunt montes: there is not
the smallest things in Scripture, but there are great truths depending upon
them: and therefore the Father cries out, Adoro plenitudinem scripturae: that
he did admire the fullness that he found in the Scriptures of God. I speak it
the rather, because many things in the Scripture we are apt to pass over with a
slight eye: It is an observation one has worth our note, Intoleranda est
blasphemia asserere in Scriptura vel unum inveniri verbum otiosum: It is the
greatest blasphemy that can be, to think that in the word of God there should
be found one idle word: he that will judge you for idle words, will not write
one idle word unto you; that is certain: admire the fullness of the Scriptures,
from what you have heard. The Jews indeed were superstitious in this; they made
great matters of every word and tittle in the Law: but what they did in a way
Cabalistical, that you should do in a way truly Christian and spiritual; there
is one place which because Chrysostom instances in, I shall briefly hint to
you; it is but barely to give you an instance, 1 Timothy 5. 23. Drink no longer
water, but use a little wine for thy stomach sake and for thy many infirmities.
Chrysostom has eight wonderful great truths out of this ordinary Scripture:
and I speak it to this end, that you may pass by nothing in the Word, but that
you may labor to understand wonders in it: as (...),

Godly men out of love to duty, neglect the body.

Secondly, Godly men are very watchful and moderate in the use of the
creatures, least they should be brought under the power of them; they be great
truths and clear in the Text, what need Timothy else to make a great scruple
about drinking of wine, but he must drink water also?

Thirdly, consider in this weakness, he did not cease from his charge: he had
infirmities, yea, open infirmities: but yet he did not neglect the preaching of
the Gospel, and the affairs of the Church.

Fourthly, Godly men may yet too far neglect their bodies, even to offend
therein: for he prescribes him this, that argues he did not do his duty to
repair the breaches made upon his body.

Fifthly, use a little wine: every creature is good in its season, yea those
creatures that commonly by men are most abused.

Sixthly, Godly men may be subject to great bodily infirmities, and often men
of great service: when ungodly men and of little or no use in the world, are
healthy and strong: yet many a man of great service in the Church of God are
subject to great and often infirmities.

Seventhly, In the decay of Nature, the creatures are to be used for its
repair, but according to the proportion of natures necessities: and

Lastly, there is a moderation appointed in the receiving of the creature, even
when a man does it for necessity: for he that prescribes him the wine,
prescribes him the measure: drink a little wine: he prescribes him to use
herein as medicine. Now when men read over such portions of Scripture, let them
consider and learn, there may be great mysteries in the smallest portions of
Scripture: and know this, when the word of God upon this account becomes sweet
to a man, and men love to hear it, delight to meditate upon it, its a great
argument of growth in grace, and spiritual knowledge in that man: as Quintilian
tells us, It is a great argument of a man's profiting in eloquence, the more
pleasure he takes in reading Cicero: its a great argument of a man's profit in
spiritual knowledge, and growth in grace, when a man can take delight in
reading and meditating Scriptures, on this account, because he is always a
digging up new Mines, and finding new treasure there: yet withal I would add
this, do not only study the substance of the Scripture: true, there is a man
among you tells you, the Scripture is not to be found in the original, nor in
the translation out of the original. I wonder where he will find the Scripture
then; he says, only in the Saints. I pray consider, I am sure it was
Chrysostoms mind, Do not only study the substance of the word, but the
phrases: for there are mysteries in the very expressions of Scripture: Non
tantum verba sunt, sed Spiritus Sancti verba: they are not only words, but such
words that the Spirit of God made choice of; for the holy men of God were
inspired by the Holy Ghost: not only for the sense, but for the words; not the
shortest sentence in the word of God, but is full of mystery; that is the
first instruction.

Secondly, though all the Scripture be to be studied; yet some portions of
Scripture a man should especially lay up in his heart, that the Spirit of God
sets, as it were, a star upon: such as this Scripture, is that we have been
treating of. But there are six Cases the Scripture speaks of, that the Lord
puts especial marks upon: As,

First, those that the Lord has added a note of attention and asseveration to:
Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world: Verily, verily,
except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Verily, verily,
except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven. There be marks on such
places.

Secondly, such Scriptures as the Lord has often repeated, such should be
diligently studied: The just shall live by faith: We are justified by faith,
and not by the works of the Law; and riches profit not in the day of wrath:
three or four times repeated in the Scripture.

Thirdly, besides those Scriptures that God has made use of in an especial
manner to do you or any others good; them God requires you especially to take
notice of; as Austin was converted by, Romans 13. 7. Not in chambring and
wantonness, but put you on the Lord Jesus Christ. Luther by Romans 1. 17. The
righteousness of God was revealed from faith to faith. Junius by Joh. 1. 1. In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was God: Such Scriptures as the Lord
has made use of, to do thee or any other good, those especially he requires
thee to mark.

Fourthly, especially those Scriptures that speak concerning thy condition: the
Lord requires every man to study the word proper to his own estate: whether he
be in prosperity or adversity, honor, or disgrace, etc. those Scriptures that
speak especially to thy case. Nehemiah did so, Nehem. 1. 8. I beseech thee
remember the word that thou command thy servant Moses, saying, Ye will
transgress, and I will scatter you abroad among the people. But if you return,
I will bring you to the place that I have chosen to place my name there.

Fifthly, those Scriptures that speak to the present controversy of the Age:
the truths disputed in the times wherein you live, that you may be established
in the present truth

Lastly, those Scriptures that are most comprehensive, that carry with them
the most general Rules to guide a man's life, such as this in the Text, Where
your treasure is, your hearts will be: Blessed is the man that fears always:
Be content with the things that you have: God is a Spirit, and he that worships
him, must worship him in Spirit and in truth: to be carnally minded is death,
to be spiritually minded is life and peace: without holiness no man shall see
the Lord. These in an especial manner the Lord requires you should be exercised
in, that these should dwell richly in you: this is the general Use from the
whole words.

But to come more particularly, there are two Uses more, that are more proper
to this point we have spoken of.

First, is the heart inseparable from the treasure? then this shows to every
unregenerate man, that there is an absolute necessity of conversion and
regeneration. You have many poor carnal creatures, and they complain, I cannot
keep my thoughts in order: my heart runs out sometimes after this, and
sometimes after that thing. I have no command of the aims and studies of the
heart, and the thoughts, and love of my heart: alas very true; what commands
the heart? why, the treasure commands the heart; therefore until thou change
thy treasure, thy heart will go after it: what is Conversion? its the change of
a man's Treasure, of a man's Chief good: till thou change thy chief good, its in
vain to complain of the disorders of thy heart; therefore every unregenerate
man may hence see the absolute necessity of Conversion; now the misery of that
man, whose treasure is on earth, because his heart is there, is seen in two
things: and I speak it to this end, that I may stir up every one to examine his
estate, that if thou find thy self unregenerate, never give rest to thy self
until thy treasure be changed.

First, Let thy actions be what they will, if thy treasure be below, thy heart
will be there; and therein lies a man's misery; a temporary believer may go far
in the change of his actions; but his heart is the same, as long as his
treasure is the same. Simon Magus his acts changed much, he confessed sin,
professed the faith of Christ; but yet notwithstanding, his heart is not
changed: why? his treasure was not changed: money was his treasure when he was
a Sorcerer, and is now he is a Christian, Acts 8. 21. this is the misery of
every unregenerate man; let him change his actions while he will, there is no
change of his heart, because his treasure is the same.

Secondly, there is a further misery; this is the ground of the greatest
bondage to him in the world; let the man be convinced by never so evident
reason out of the word of God, that his state is naught, that his ways are
evil; let him find by woeful experience terrors upon his own soul, that it is
so, let him resolve never so firmly against it, yet the man will never stop;
it is in bondage: unregenerate men take up high resolutions, but they are held;
the heart cannot leave its course: so that all their righteousness is but like
the morning dew: and their purposes are soon broken off: and let a man be of
never so high resolution, and under high conviction; this will keep off a man's
heart still; thou art a miserable man then, that have thy treasure on earth,
because there thy heart is: there is an absolute necessity therefore of the
change of a man's treasure, that is, of a work of regeneration: otherwise there
is a treasure within, an evil man out of an evil heart, and there is a treasure
without: oh pray therefore learn from hence, that there is no living in an
unregenerate estate: change thy treasure, or otherways all thy changes will do
thee no good.

The last Use I especially aim at: see from hence the blessed and happy
condition of a godly man, whose treasure is in heaven: he is blessed every way,
but especially in this: his heart is in heaven, his body is on earth: its true:
and there is a two fold blessedness upon this account.

First, let this man at any time go astray, as godly men are subject to wander:
Oh let me not wander from thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 10. We all as sheep have
gone astray: but when they do wander, there is somewhat still to reduce them:
their hearts will to their treasure: my treasure is not below; therefore my
heart is not below, and this is the true reason, why a godly man cannot fall
from grace; because it is impossible to separate the heart and the treasure;
where the treasure is, there will the heart be: I will return unto my former
husband: as it is the misery of an ungodly man, let him profess what he will,
his treasure will bring him back again still: so its the happiness of a godly
man, though he wander from God, his treasure will reduce him, and his heart
will bring him back.

Secondly, he is a blessed man, who has his heart always in heaven; certainly
he must needs be a happy man, for he is a heavenly man: but now a godly man,
whose treasure is in heaven, his heart is there: but why is he so happy a man,
whose heart is in heaven?

I will give you a brief account: truly, there are four accounts, why he is so
happy a man whose treasure is in heaven, because his heart is there.

First, because he is hereby made and evidenced to be a heavenly man. 1 Cor. 15
48. the first man is of the earth earthly; the second man is of the Lord from
heaven heavenly: here is the difference between all the men in the world: there
are some earthly, and some heavenly men: now this is an evidence thou art an
heavenly man, because thy treasure is in heaven; as that wisdom that is
conversant about earth is said to be earthly wisdom: so that wisdom which is
conversant about heaven is said to be heavenly wisdom: my brethren, an earthly
mind is a plague; an heavenly mind is a blessedness.

Secondly, he that has his heart in heaven, is not subject to those
impressions of change as the men whose hearts are set upon earth; Here every
thing is subject to change, and we have nothing but changes: Changes and War
are against me, says Job: but if a man's estate and condition change, so his
heart do not change, it is no great matter; my heart is not subject to change:
as I remember Tertullian observes of the Christians of his time, Nil crus
sentit in nervo, si animus in coelo: true indeed, they were under great
afflictions of body, but their souls were in heaven out of danger: the heart is
out of danger; its true of a man whose heart is in heaven: and his heart is out
of Gunshot; afflictions may work on the body, make a change in the estate and
outward condition; but his heart is above and out of danger; and therefore the
people of God are said to be those that dwell in heaven, Rev. 13. 6. they
blasphemed the tabernacle of God, and their names who were written in heaven:
the heart changes not for any evil, because its bound up in an unchangeable
good.

Thirdly, he is a happy man whose heart is in heaven, because where his heart
is, his life will be, and his conversation. Phil. 3. 20, 21. Our conversation
is in heaven: now keep thy heart above all keepings, for out of it are the
issues of life, Prove. 4. 23, 24. Therefore if a man's heart be on the earth, his
conversation will be below; but if his heart be in heaven, there his life and
conversation will be; now when other men are making great ado here below, his
heart all the while is taken up about God as his Father, about Christ as
Mediator, the Spirit as the Comforter, the Angels as his fellow Subjects, the
souls of just men made perfect his fellow Citizens. Oh what a happy condition
does this man live in! his heart being in heaven, his life is there.

Note this last head, as an eminent seal to this tract, his life, and Ministry,
they being the last words he ever spoke in the Pulpit.
Lastly, it is a clear evidence to aman, that his heart being in heaven, his
body shall shortly be there: as Christ when he went to heaven, was our better
part, and went to heaven as our forerunner: just so the heart being in heaven;
the better part is there. It is gone to heaven as the forerunner of the body;
and as Christ's Ascension is an argument of our ascension; so the ascension of
the heart is a clear argument that the whole man shall be there where the heart
is, that they may be taken up together with the Lord in the clouds of heaven:
Oh what a Comfort is this! no man is a happy man, but he who has his heart in
heaven, and his treasure there. So much shall serve for the Application of this
point, and for this Text.

Consider I humbly pray you what has been said: It is of great concernment,
and such as should have an influence into your whole lives; and know this for a
Conclusion, the Word of God will not return to him empty and in vain, though it
may be spent upon you in vain.

June 25. 1654.
Elisha his Lamentation, Upon the sudden Translation of ELIJAH.

Opened in a SERMON At the Funeral of Mr. William Strong, That eminently
Faithful Servant and Minister of CHRIST.

By Obadiah Sedgwick, B. D. and Preacher of the Gospel in Covent Garden.

Zach. 1. 5. And the Prophets, do they live for ever?

Heb. 3. 7. To day if ye will hear his Voice.

London, Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton, at the Sign of the three Daggers
in Fleet Street, near the Inner Temple Gate. 1656.

To the Right Worshipful, Colonel Boswell, Henry Scobel, Esquire Mr. Thomas
Rushall; and to all the rest of the Congregation, lately pertaining unto the
care of that Faithful Pastor, Mr. William Strong, Preacher of the Gospel at
Westminster Abbey.
YOu were pleased to put me upon that sad service of Preaching at the Funeral
of your worthy and dear Pastor; And shortly after that, upon another service of
Printing what I then had publicly Preached; I confess that I never Preached a
Sermon (in this kind) with more grief of heart, and never did I discern a
Sermon heard and attended with more weeping eyes: certainly God had given in
unto him the affections of many persons, who loved him in his life, and
bitterly lamented him at his death.

I was almost fallen out with the thoughts of publishing any occasional
Sermons, as being most proper for scope, and use, and working, to the present
Auditory: But your general desire has prevailed upon me to deny my own
judgment; and since it must be so, here you have those sudden and weak fruits
(such as they are) and the blessing of the Lord go with them.

Of what other advantage they may be (besides the keeping up a while the name
and memory of so precious a servant of Christ) I know not; but yet I trust thar
God may intend them, and now does send them abroad for the good of the living.

Of this I am sure, that every personal change in the world is an effect of his
Providence; and that there is a Doctrinal will for the living, in every
providential will of God concerning the dead; and the greater that any person
is in his relation of usefulness and serviceableness to Christ and his Church,
the more emphatical Selah does the Lord (in the removal of him) print out for
the children of men.

There was honey found by Sampson in the carcass of the dead Lion; so are there
many sweet instructions and lessons to be gathered, not only out of the lives,
but also out of the deaths of the Ministers of Christ. The last Sermon which a
people are to study, and diligently to peruse, is the death of their Godly
Pastor; for in this God himself does immediately preach unto them.

As when Ministers do live, it is but hypocrisy to give them only a few good
words: so when they dye, it is but a formality only to shed over them a few sad
tears.

O that you your selves, (and the many other Congregations) who of late have
carried their Faithful and Laborious Ministers to the grave, would seriously
remember that you must answer God for the quick and for the dead, for your
living Ministers, and for your dead Ministers: there are living uses to be made
out of dead instances: Live, and live the better, live up to the power of Truth
and Godliness, live like such as are even parting with life, and in hazard
about a season: Live like such who did enjoy, and who again would enjoy a
choice servant to your Minister.

Though Ministers die, yet Christ lives, and he is present with you, and he
observes all your heart and ways: therefore as you formerly have, so now
especially strive to abound much more in heavenly wisdom, in sound Judgment,
in Faith and Love to our Lord Jesus, in meekness, and gentleness, and
profitableness one toward another, and in all exactness of holy walking before
your God; hereupon shall you find your late great loss graciously supplied in
the answer of your fervent prayers: hereupon shall you find the testimony of a
good conscience; hereupon shall you find peace in death, and after that, the
Crown of life, which God will give to all that love him.

And for other People, let them repent of the evil handling of their Faithful
Ministers, and beseech the Lord to give them hearts in their day of Grace, yet
to know the things which do concern their Peace; which that we all may do,
shall be the prayer of

Your servant in the Faith of Christ, Obadiah Sedgwick.

A Sermon lately preached in the Abbey of Westminster, July 4. 1654. At the
Funeral of Mr. William Strong, Preacher of the Gospel there.
2 Kin. 2. 12. And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My Father, My Father; The
charet of Israel, and the horsemen thereof; and he saw him no more, and he took
hold of his own clothes, and rent them in two pieces. IN the former verse,
Elijah and Elisha are passing on, and discoursing together: What that Discourse
was, it is not expressed. Some do presume to tell us particularly As Lyra and
others of the Papists.
what it was: but very probable it is, that the discourse was altogether
suitable unto so great and Holy a Prophet as Elijah was: It was very
profitable, and very heavenly, he being presently to be taken up into heaven.

Whiles they were thus discoursing, on a sudden there appeared a Charet of
fire, and horses Ver. 11.
of fire, and parted them both asunder, and Elijah went up by P. Martyr. In
Locum.
a whirlwind into heaven. By the Charet and horses of fire, Peter Martyr
understands the Angels of God, who at this time did put on the species or
appearance of fire: And with this fiery Apparition God was pleased to honor
Elijah at his departure: who in his life time had so much honored his God with
the fire of Zeal for his Truth and Worship.

And he went up by a whirlwind into heaven. Some do read it, that he went up by
a whirlwinde of heaven, or by an heavenly whirlwinde: which denotes the manner
of his Ascension: but our general Translation and Reading is best, which does
more significantly denote the place unto which he was then carried, Namely,
Heaven.

Therefore that opinion of the Papists is very fond: who do affirm that Elijah
was carried into Paradise, there to stay with Enoch until toward the end of
the world, and then both of them are to come forth, and to Preach against
Contra perfidiam Antichristi. A threefold heaven.
Antichrist. But this is a mere fancy all along: the Text says plainly, Elijah
went up by a Whirlwind into heaven. But what heaven he went into is somewhat
argued, especially by the Papists, who it seems will by no means have that
zealous enemy to idolatry to be carried into the heaven of the blessed: There
is indeed Coelum Aerium (the Aerie Heaven, where the Fowls of Heaven do flee)
and there is Coelum Astriferum, where the Stars of heaven are; and there is
Coelum Beatorum, the heaven of the Blessed, where God appears in eminency, and
where Jesus Christ is in glory, and the souls of just men made perfect; thither
is Elijah carried up, after all his pains, and sufferings, and troubles, and
fa^thfulness: Thither I say, is he carried up, to receive his Reward, and
Elisha is left behind to do his Master more service.

But how does El^sha take this sudden parting, and loss of precious Elijah? The
Text tells you (Elisha saw it, and he cried my Father! my Father.)

These words may be called, The Lamentation of Elisha, upon the sudden
translation of that eminent Prophet Elijah: In which you may discern.

1. His exceeding grief and sorrow: He cried out, and until he saw him no more
(so Junius and Tremellius Read those words, And he saw him no more) And he rent
his clothes in two pieces, as Anciently was the Practice upon the loss, and at
the Funerals of dear friends, and of choice and eminent persons.

2. The causes of this his great grief and sorrow: And they were,

1. His own particular loss. The loss of Elijah was unto Elisha as the loss of
a loving and dear Father unto a loving and dear Child (my Father! my Father!)
As David once about Absalom, my Son, my Son! So Elisha here for Elijah, my
Father, my Father! Ah my Father! my Father! Oh I have lost a Father, my Father,
such a Father -- The Chaldee Interpreter renders it, Rabbi, Rabbi: my Master,
my Master: But in the Hebrew it is, Abba, Abba: my Father, my Father!

2. The public loss (The Charet of Israel, and the horsemen thereof) As if he
had said, one of the best instrumental helps and safeties that all Israel
enjoyed, is now taken away; O the staff and the stay is broken!

What the Charet and the Horsemen are to an Army, or to a State, and what the
loss of them is unto a State; That was the life, and that was the loss of this
Prophet Elijah unto all Israel.

There are two Propositions only which I would briefly discourse upon from
this Text, at this time, and with respect to this sad occasion.

1. That even the most eminently Faithful and Zealous Prophets of God, may be,
and shall be taken away from a people.

2. That the loss of any one eminently Faithful and Zealous Prophet of God,
should affect the hearts of people with exceeding Grief and Lamentation.

I begin with the first of these: 1. Proposition.
That even the most eminently Faithful and Zealous Prophets of God, may be,
and shall be taken away from a people.

The Prophets or Ministers of God, they are of different parts and gifts, and
they are of different Spirits, and they are of different Use and Service: Put
them in comparison one with another, some are as Stars of the first Magnitude,
and others of a lesser Magnitude: some are as the Cedars, and others are but as
ordinary trees: Some are more richly As Elijah, Paul, Calvin and Luther.
and plentifully endowed and furnished; others are not so, they are lower by
the head: some are vigorously active, and are raised up, and laid out for the
general Advantages and Managements of Religion; yet others are not so; though
all be Builders, yet all of them are not Master Builders. They differ much in
their Gifts, in their Graces, in their Services, Gifts will free from
Indiscretion, and Grace from hell, but nothing from death.
in their Usefulness: Nevertheless they must all agree in this, they must all
dye, they must all be taken away: Here in the text, Elijah was taken away, and
what was he? he was a Prophet, and in some sense more then a Prophet: He was a
Prophet of the highest rate, most eminent for faithfulness and zeal, (that was
his excellency) Noah was eminent for uprightness, and Moses for meekness, and
Job for patience, and Solomon for wisdom, and Joshua for prowess, and Josiah
for tenderness, and Elisha for Miracles, and Elijah for zeal, and courage, and
faithfulness. All the false Prophets were nothing to him, nor Jezabel the
Queen, nor Ahab the King: and although (in his opinion) he was left alone to
sustain the cause of God; yet he alone continued faithful and zealous.
Nevertheless this holy and excellent man of God is taken away, and suddenly,
and in a very needful time.

Zach. 1. 5. Your Fathers, where are they? And the Prophets, do they live for
ever?

No, no, they do not live for ever; Nor yet (many times) very long! You may
find them for a while in the Study, and for a while in the Pulpit, and after a
little while you may find them in their graves.

The Reasons of this Divine 4. Reasons why God takes away his most faithful
prophets
dispensation (besides many other) are these:

1. Because even the most faithful Prophets of God, are Stewards but for a
time; of them as well as of others it must be said, Ye shall be no longer
Stewards: they have their determined work, and their allotted time for that
work; their reward shall be measured by eternity. But their work and their life
are measured by time; so much work for so much time, and then their Master
calls them home.

In Scripture you read that they are sometimes called 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Ambassadors, who are choice persons sent abroad by a special Commission; and
when they have finished their Legation or Treaty, then must they return back
unto their Prince; the Prophets or Ministers of God, are the Ambassadors of God
in a special manner, Authorized to treat with sinners to be reconciled; perhaps
sinners will hearken unto them, and conclude upon terms of saving agreement;
perhaps they will not: These have but their time to hearken, and they have but
their time to offer and persuade, and when that is expired, the Lord calls them
home.

Again, you find them 1 Cor. 3. 9.
sometimes called laborers and workmen; the labourer goes forth in the
morning, and he does his days work, which when he has finished, then he comes
home and takes his Rest. Thus it is, and thus it shall be with the best of Gods
Prophets and Ministers, who are also called the Messengers of God, and must
return unto him an answer, what they have done, and how they have sped.

2. There is a day of recompense for them, their reward is with the Lord, they
are employed by a good Master; and as there are the works of faithful servants
for them to do, so there is the reward of a faithful master for them to
receive: there is a Prophets work here, and a Prophets reward hereafter;
Christ's calls it our Masters joy, and Paul calls it a Crown of Righteousness;
the faithful and laborious Ministers of God, though despised and injured by
men on earth, yet they are loved and encouraged by Christ: and as they are a
means to save others, so they themselves shall be saved, and shall shine as the
stars for ever and ever, they shall be with the Lord for ever, they shall be
everlastingly blessed.

And therefore they must die, they must away: else they cannot take possession
of the inheritance reserved for them, nor of the Crown laid up for them; indeed
in this life they have the assured hopes of eternal blessedness, and the first
fruits, and some tastes; but the full and perfect possession and fruition comes
not to them, nor to any in this life: that comes only after death; and
therefore Paul desires to be dissolved, and so to be with Christ.

3. The Lord does this to punish the ingratitude of people, who do despise, and
disgrace, and despightfully use his servants, the Prophets, injuriously handle
them, and there is no man that will plead for them, and right them.

Of all the men in the world, the faithful Prophets of God do the most good to
others, and find the worst reception from them.

Jesus Christ charge this unworthy dealing upon Jerusalem, Mat. 23. 37. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which
are sent unto thee! And Stephen charge it upon them, Act. 7. 52. Which of the
Prophets have not your Fathers persecuted? And Paul complains in 1 Cor. 4. 13.
We are made as the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things
to this very day. Men do affront and contemn, they do revile and reproach, they
do oppose and contradict, they do threaten and persecute the faithful Prophets
of God: and those of them who are most faithful and most zealous, are most
hated and most persecuted.

Now the Lord will not bear with this odious ingratitude, and with this
barbarous injuriousness done unto his faithful servants; he is extremely
sensible of all the evil done unto them, of all the evil words spoken against
them, and of all the evil counsel and devices taken against them, and of all
the evil works done against them: Touch not mine Anointed, and do Psa. 105. 15.
Act 9. 4.
my Prophets no harm, says God: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? says
Christ.

And therefore he takes away his choice Prophets and Servants in Judgment,
from such an ungracious and ungrateful people, in effect saying unto them thus
much; Ye will not be taught, and you shall not be taught any more; and you will
not hearken unto my messengers, but mock and despise them: therefore they shall
speak no more unto you in my name; your house shall be left unto you desolate.
Ye shall not see me henceforth (said Mat. 23. 39.
Christ) till ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord.

4. The fourth and last reason why the Lord takes away his most eminently
faithful and zealous Prophets from a people, is this, To show unto a people
the uncertainty and instability even of spiritual opportunities, that they are
but a season (which is precious, but unsure) that they are a short day, and a
Sun that may set at noon day.

There are four things which do admit of much uncertainty.

1. One is, all our earthly possessions and comforts; will thou set thine eyes
on that which is not? says Solomon, Prove. 23. 5. There is no earthly comfort
whatsoever, which is not altogether uncertain, nay altogether uncertainty; it
is but as the shade on the Dyal, on which you look, and may be gone before you
turn back to look on it again.

2. The second is, The gracious motions of the Spirit of God working upon our
spirits: My spirit shall not always strive with man, Genesis 6. 3. Rara Hora,
Brevis mora, says Bernard. The dealings of Gods Spirit with us, are many times
like Peter's vision of the sheet, which was let down, but quickly drawn up to
heaven again; and indeed there is no man who resists or neglects any one motion
of Gods Spirit, but he puts it upon an uncertainty whether he shall meet with
any other motion more.

3. The third is, the day of Grace, our Gospel-day, wherein Christ reveals
himself, and offers himself, and mercy, and peace, and salvation; this is a day
for eternity, but it is not an eternal day: It may quickly be lost, and for
ever lost. O if thou had known (said Christ to Jerusalem) even Thou, at the
least in this thy day, the things which concern thy peace -- But now Luke 19.
42.
they are hid from thine eyes: q. d. Thou had thy day, and now thou have lost
thy day.

4. The fourth is, all the life's, and pains, and labors of the Prophets and
Ministers of God, they are all fluent and uncertain.

This day the Minister lives and preaches, the next day he is sick and dies;
you cannot say of the best Minister on earth, he shall be ours for ever, or
long, or a week, or a day: such an instability is there, not only in the best
of our outward comforts, but also in the best of our spiritual helps.

And there is much of the wisdom of God in this very particular contingency; he
has his good ends in it, to awaken the hearts of people from carnal security
and presumption, from all carelessness and neglects, and to stir and quicken
them to all heavenly seriousness, and wise carefulness, both to know the day of
their visitation, and likewise to improve the light, whiles they enjoy the
light.

There are two works upon which all spiritual uncertainties (in Friends or
Ministers) should put us.

1. One is therefore to prize what is present; there is no certainty but in
that which is present; that is ours, and nothing but that is ours: the present
Sermon, that is ours, and the present offer of Christ; prize what is present;
for the future is uncertain.

2. Another is therefore to act with all our power, to do as much in a little
time as others are doing in a long time. Nay, to be striving and treasuring up
in a little time so fervently, and so diligently, as if we had no more time.

There is an uncertainty in the lives of Gods Prophets; therefore people should
ply their doctrine, and their help with all their strength; hear them as if
they should never hear them more, and confer and draw from them, as if they
should never speak with them any more: but more of this in the Uses now
following.

May and does God translate Use 1. A double advertisement.
even an Elijah? does he take away the most eminently faithful and zealous
Prophets? Hence a double advertisement. 1. One to Ministers.

2. The other to People.

First to Ministers; loyter not, lose no time, stand not idle at all, up and be
doing your Masters work; do not talk of this pain, and of that ach, nor of this
weakness, nor of that indisposition, but spend and be spent, be instant in
season and out of season, watch and labor, pray and instruct, reprove and
comfort, pull down, and build up, always abounding in the work of the Lord. O
said that eminently religious, and judicious Calvin, (who had worn himself to
the very bone with often praying, and studying, and preaching, and writing; and
therefore being entreated by his friends a little to spare himself, no says
he, but I desire that when my Master comes, he should find me working: And so
that precious Jewel, his desire Nec propter vitam, vivendi perdere finem.
was that he might die preaching: And learned and pious Reynolds, he would not
lose time; he looked at the end of life, more then at life it self.

O Brethren! Ye also have but your day, ye have but your day to serve the Lord
Jesus Christ, and ye have but your day to save your own souls; and ye have but
your day to save the souls of them that hear you: And your day of working seems
to be more variable and contingent then the day of other men; for if ye be
impartially faithful, and zealous, ye shall be sure to meet with all
discouragements and oppositions from all sorts of ungodly men: who if they
cannot stop your mouths, will yet do all they can to break your hearts. And
besides that your constant studies, and diligent labors, and public
preachings, and private conferences, and several other employments, will weaken
your spirits, spend your lungs, consume your strength, and hasten your death.

However, the Lord will take you away, and perhaps he will come and take you
away suddenly: therefore be diligent still, and laborious still, and faithful
still, and zealous still, and wise still, in giving unto every servant his
proper portion. Blessed is that servant, whom when his Master comes, he shall
find so doing: this is he who shall meet with that welcome, well done, good and
faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

2. Secondly to the People; Seeing that their faithful Prophets and Ministers
shall be taken away from them, let them remember two things for their parts.

1. Let them encourage faithful and zealous Prophets, who do enjoy them: O do
not kill them, and break their hearts, and thrust them into their graves by
slightings, by revilings, by quarrellings, by troublings, by remaining still
ignorant, and unprofitable, and barren; nor by continuing obstinate,
disobedient, hardened, and unbelieving.

No, by no means, but honor them, and love them, and deal kindly with them,
and pray for them, and encourage them all you can. Why Sirs, They do pity your
souls, and they do watch for your souls, and they do pray for your souls, and
they do study and weep, and preach to save your souls. And therefore let them
have love for love, and care for care, and respect for respect; they give you
bread, do not give them stones; they bring mercies to you, do not you cast your
curses upon them; they attend to your salvation, and peace, and comfort; do not
requite them evil for good, but let them have good for good, etc.

2. Improve their present They are g^ven to you, and for you, they are your
servants.
survivance, and your own present freedom: O it is a naughty frame of spirit to
praise the dead, but not to prize the living; To set out with a large
commendation the manifold virtues and sayings of Ministers that are dead; yet
not to regard, nor make use of the parts and pains of those that are living,
and preaching unto us.

But let us be more wise: Elisha here is found traveling and conferring with
Elijah before he is taken away: Now you may hear your Ministers instructing and
persuading you, but within a short time you shall never see, nor hear them
more. Now you may go unto them, and open your doubts, and discover your souls
wants, and diseases, and crave their Counsel, and take their Directions, and
partake of their Instructions, and receive comforts by them; But within a short
time they are changing, and fainting, and dying, and giving up the Ghost, and
can never be instrumental to your souls any more!

O lose not your Tide, and lose not your Spiritual opportunity: Simile.
Every faithful and godly Minister is like a garden in the Springtime, and the
people should be like so many Bees, flying every day unto the Flowers in that
garden, to suck out the honey, and carry it home to the Hive.

You may now get that counsel, that direction, that satisfaction about the
condition of your souls, which may stick by you all the days of your life.

Remember Sirs! As it will be an heavy Judgment if you make no use of your
faithful Ministers, so it will cut you to the very heart when your Ministers
are dead (and then can be of no more use unto you) that you made so little use
of them living, that you traded so slightly, that you have been such strangers
to them, that you did not enrich your souls by them. O that people, who do
enjoy able and faithful Ministers, were (then) possessed of two Graces; one is
of humility, to see their own wants; the other is of wisdom, to see their
season for the supply of them: Wherefore is there a price put into the hand of
a fool, seeing he has no heart to make use of it?

Thus have I finished the first Proposition; namely, That even the most
eminently faithful and zealous Prophets of God may be, and shall be taken away
from a people: I now proceed to the second Proposition, which is this.

That the loss of any one eminently 2. Proposition
faithful and Zealous Prophet of God, should affect the hearts of the people of
God with much grief and lamentation: (my Father, my Father; the Charet of
Israel, and the horsemen thereof!)

When Moses that eminent Prophet died (there arose not a prophet since in
Israel like unto Moses) The children of Israel wept for him in the plains Deuteronomy.
34. 8.
of Moab thirty days; So the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.
When Samuel, that faithful and eminent Prophet died, what a mourning and
lamentation was made for him: Samuel died, and all the Israelites were gathered
1 Samuel 25. 1.
together and lamented him.

The like you read of Steven, Devout men carried Steven to his burial, and made
great lamentations over him. Act. 8. 2.


There are three things which do concern us, when God takes away any faithful
servants of his.

1. One is a serious consideration of the hand of God in this: for though their
death be a mercy unto them, (Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord. And
precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Revel. 14. 13. Psa. 116.
15.
Saints.) Yet their death may be a Judgment to us.

As a godly Ministers life and doctrine is either in Remedium, or in Judicium,
either they are the savor of life unto life, or they are the savor of death
unto death: So the loss of them is certainly an advantage to themselves, and
ordinarily it is a judgment and punishment unto a people: And therefore we
should not slightly pass over their death, but consider, and lay such strokes
of God to our hearts, The living will lay it to his heart: Eccles. 7. 2.
Surely he should, surely he will.

2. The second is a prudent reflection upon our selves; what there is in our
selves which has contributed unto so great a loss: for not only diseases in a
Minister, but also sins in a people may have a great hand to take away the life
of their Minister; and therefore there is reason for us to reflect and search.

In every ordinary loss that befalls us, we should search our hearts, and try
our ways, and say, Why is this evil come upon us? much more should this be
done, when a Spiritual loss befalls us; When the Lord takes away from us the
staff and the Isa 3. 1, 2.
stay, the Judge and the Prophet. When he smites the Shepherd, and the sheep
are like to be scattered; when he removes his Angels from his Churches.

Now is it a time to stand still, and to gather our selves together, and to
say, What have we been? and what have we done? how have we walked? what has
been our deportment under the Gospel? what our answerableness thereunto? has
not our unthankfulness, has not our barrenness, has not our disregard, has
not our disobedience caused the Lord to make this breach? to take away the
light from us?

3. The third is a mournful Lamentation; we should be very sensible of such a
loss: yea, in some proportion unto the kind and greatness of it: For as the
enjoyment of an eminently faithful Prophet (or Pastor) is an exceeding blessing
(it is promised amongst the chiefest of mercies, I will give them Pastors after
mine own heart, and thine eyes shall see thy Isa. 30. 20.
Teacher.) So the death of such a one is an exceeding loss, and consequently
requires exceeding Grief and Lamentation.

There are six great losses, Six great losses.
and do you judge whether they be not so.

1. The first is the loss of a soul, how great is that loss? all is lost if
that be lost.

2. The second is the loss of true Religion; and the glory is departed from
Israel, when that is gone.

3. The third is the loss of Gods smiling favor and presence; when that
withdraws, then the Sun is set, and it is night, and darkness, and fear, and
trouble with the soul.

4. The fourth is the loss of peace in conscience; now begins the wars and
tumults, and the bones are broken.

5. The fifth is the loss of the Gospel; now the gates of heaven are shut up,
and the worst of famines seizes our souls.

6. The sixth is the loss of faithful Prophets, and Ministers of God; now the
stones are fallen, and the shields of the earth are fallen, and the
interpreters, the men of thousands, and the watchmen set upon the Towers, and
Bullwarks, are cut off, and the Ambassadors of Christ, and of peace are called
home, and the servants and furtherers of our salvation are discharged.

Now the more that any loss borders upon souls, and upon salvation, the more
heavy and sharp is that loss, and with that loss we should be much afflicted
and troubled.

Q. But may some say, why all this ado? Why such a crying out, and such a
laying to heart, such a grieving and mourning, and taking on, and troubling of
our selves upon the loss and death of faithful and zealous Prophets? What are
they more then other men, for place, for use, for service, that there must be
such a stir for them? They are a company of busy and troublesome fellows, the
Troublers of Israel.

Sol. So indeed did Ahab speak of gracious and zealous Elijah; Ahab (who sold
himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord) he said thus unto Elijah,
Art thou he that troubles Israel? But to let railers go, there are two Reasons
to be found in the Text for a mournful lamentation upon the death of the
faithful Ministers or Prophets of God; whereof one respects the people of God,
who stood in relation unto them, as children unto a father, and the Prophets
stood in relation to them as fathers unto children; and the other Reason
respects the public civil State.

1. In respect of the Relation between Faithful Ministers and a People.

Their Relation is that of Father and Children (my Father, my Father, cries
Elisha here) and truly this Relation has in it more of Love, and more of Grief
then any other Relation; when Joseph buried Jacob his Father, They mourned with
a great, and a very sore Genesis 50. 10.
lamentation.

Now every faithful Prophet or Minister of God is a Father unto the Saints or
people of God.

1. For Spiritual generation: under God he is a Spiritual Father, and begets
them again by the Gospel; this the Apostle expressly delivers in several places.

1 Cor. 4. 15. Though you have ten thousand Instructers in Christ, yet have ye
not many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel.
He was an Instrument or means used by God for their New Birth. So Philemon ver.
10. speaking unto him of Onesimus, whom (says Paul there) I have begotten in
my Bonds.

2. For loving and tender affection; a Father does not more love his Natural
child, then the faithful Minister does those whom he has begotten unto
Christ: Take thine only Son Isaac whom thou love, said God to Abraham, Genesis
22. 2. The Elder unto the Elect Lady and her children, whom I love in the
Truth. 2 John 1. So Paul to the Corinthians, Apologizing for himself in not
being burdensome unto them, 2 Cor. 11. 11. Wherefore? says he, because I love
you not? q. d. Do you think that the want of love in me unto you is the reason
of that forbearance? God knows: q. d. God himself who knows all hearts, he
does know that I love you.

Nay, so great is the love of benevolence in a faithful Minister unto his
people, That he is contented for a while to delay his own eternal salvation and
happiness, that he may be a little more helpful and useful unto his people;
this prevalent affection you may read expressly in the Apostle Paul.

Philippians 1. 23. I am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart,
and to be with Christ, which is far better. (i. e.) For my self.

Verse 24. Nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for you.

Verse 25. And having this confidence, I know that I shall abide, and continue
with you all, for your furtherance and joy of faith.

The Apostles difficulty and straight was about his own personal interest, and
their common spiritual good. If I die, I shall gain by death, I shall be with
Christ: But then you will lose; I must no more be with you, to serve, and
further your Faith and Joy: well says he, I am content, I am willing to live a
little longer for the beneficial service of your souls, rather then presently
to depart and enjoy my happiness with Christ: O what a love was this?

3. For care and watchfulness; how careful is the Father for his children?
Children are the uncertain comforts, and the certain cares of their Parents:
and how watchful is the father for the good of his children, and against any
evil that they may fall into? they counsel them, they look after them, they
follow them with their tears, and with their many prayers. This likewise is
applied unto the faithful Ministers of God: they do naturally care for the
estate of their People, Phil. 2. 20. As if they were led thereunto by inward
Bowels, and by a natural instinct: and they are watchful for them, and over
them. Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your
selves, for they watch for your souls: Ah Brethren! when you are sleeping, they
are watching; when you are minding your Trades, then are they studying your
salvation; when you are following your delights, then are they mourning and
praying for your souls: they are caring and watching how to get your hearts
changed, how to bring in your souls to Christ, how to get your sins mortified,
your temptations answered, your doubts resolved, your consciences to be settled
and comforted: they fear in your fears, and they are troubled in your troubles,
they mourn in your sorrows, they rejoice in your peace, etc.

4. For all the offices and duties of a Father: you read in Scripture of the
several duties of a Father. As first, Instruction and Direction. Secondly,
Repro of and Correction. Thirdly, Compassion and Comfort. Fourthly, Provision
and Expenses. In all these does every faithful and zealous Minister of God
abundantly appear, and put forth himself: He instructs the ignorant, directs
the doubtful, warns and reproves the unruly, pitties the weak, comforts those
that are cast down, provides food of all sorts for his people, milk for Babes,
and meat for those of full age: Heb. 5. 14. 2 Cor. 13. 11.
lays out himself, spends and is spent; lays out all his received treasure, and
stock of spiritual goods amongst them; is grieved if his children walk unworthy
of the Gospel: and nothing does more rejoice him then to see them walking in
the truth, and prospering in Christ: As his first great desire is to match
every one of them to Christ, so his next great endeavor is that they may abound
with all the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ.

Now judge what the loss of such a person is: It is sad to lose such a faithful
friend as Jonathan, and such a loving and ^ender father as Jacob was; much more
sad and heavy is it to lose such a father whom God has made an Instrument to
regenerate our souls, to rescue us from the power of darkness, to bring us unto
Jesus Christ, and unto salvation by him. When a person can say of a Minister,
Had not the Lord sent such a one, I had (for ought I know) been damned, I had
gone on in my sinful cursed ways, and had everlastingly perished: But it
pleased the Lord by his Ministry to open mine eyes, and to awaken my
conscience, to make me to see my sins, and all my spiritual misery, and to
humble and break my heart, and to direct me in the way how my poor soul might
be brought in to Christ: Yea, and did work so effectually, that at length I did
by faith close with Christ, and since that my soul has been refreshed with the
joys and comforts of the Holy Ghost: And besides all this, I have received (at
several times) special directions for my walking, singular helps against
doubts, fears, and temptations, etc. Truly the loss of such a Minister, of such
a Father will distress us, will melt us, will make our hearts to mourn and
lament.

2. In respect of the Public Civil State,

Unto which faithful and zealous Prophets are the Charet of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof: some render the words, Currus Israelis and militia ejus.

Faithful and zealous Prophets of God are useful and serviceable, not only for
the spiritual estate of men's souls, but also for the temporal interest of a
Civil State; Micah said, Now I know that the Lord Judges 17. 13.
will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest. I dare confidently
affirm that the faithful Ministers of God are so far from being a curse and
detriment unto a Nation, that they are a blessing unto it, and a strength and
safety unto it; Nay, let me speak truly, They are of more strength and safety
then all Charets and horsemen.

There is (I confess) some strength unto a people by them, and so there is some
strength unto a people by wise Counselors, and so there is some strength unto
a people by Unity and Concord at home, and so there is some strength by
consederations abroad; but the chiefest strength of a state (under God) lies in
faithful and zealous Prophets, and in faithful and godly persons.

Quest. You will say, how can this be? what are they but a company of weak men,
and (commonly) despised men? what good can they do to a Civil State, or for it?

Sol. It is granted they are but weak men, and they are despised men in the
world: yet it was the poor man (whom no man remembered) who did by his wisdom
deliver the City: and you read that by a Eccles. 9. 16. Hos. 12. 13.
Prophet the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a Prophet was he
preserved: But I shall by a few Arguments demonstrate that the faithful and
zealous Ministers of God are the greatest strength and safety unto a Nation.

1. There is no greater Romans 8. 31.
strength and safety for a people then this, that God owns them, and God is
present with them: the greatest people on earth are nothing if the Lord leaves
them, and departs from them: therefore said Moses unto the Lord, If thy
presence goes not with us, carry Exodus 33. 15.
us not hence. q. d. Lord! We are nothing without thy presence, we cannot be a
sufficiency to our selves, nor a safety to our selves at all: thy presence is
all in all to us, and for us.

But the faithful and zealous Prophets (or Ministers) of God, are a special
means of Gods presence with a people; which may thus appear.

1. They are a means to engage a people unto God, to bring their hearts unto
him, and to acknowledge and own him only; you read this in Elijah, who brought
back the hearts of the people of Israel unto the Lord, and they cried out, The
Lord is God, 1 Kin. 18. 37, 39.
the Lord is God.

2. They are a means to keep the worship of God, and his Ordinances pure; and
remember this, that as long as a people do own God, and as long as his worship
and Ordinances are preserved pure amongst them, so long God is present with
them, who is their only rock and safety.

2. They are the special instruments which God does use to keep a people from
sin, and to bring them unto repentance in case of sinning: they warn and
threaten them from the Lord, and testify and cry aloud against their
transgressions, and will not suffer them to go on in wickedness, but strive
with them, and exhort them daily, and press upon them all sorts of Arguments
(from Judgments and mercies) to cease to do evil, and to learn to do well, to
forsake their evil ways, and to turn to the Lord: this we find in Scripture,
and this we find in experience, and therefore they are the most eminent means
of safety unto a people.

Beloved, they are our sins (and they only are) the fountains of all our
miseries; our sinful evils bring upon us all our miserable evils; thy ways and
thy doings have procured these things unto thee; this is thy wickedness, (i.
e.) the fruit Ier. 4. 18.
and effect thereof.

And if sins be removed, then miseries are removed, and all danger is over: God
is again wel-pleased, and returns with loving kindness, and much prosperity
unto a people, as you may read in the times of the Judges, and of the Kings.

3. They are the choicest instruments which God does 1 Samuel 12. 23. I will
teach you the good and the right way.
use to teach a people his will and ways; by them does God make known his Laws
and Statutes, and ways; this is the way, walk ye in it; in these paths you
shall find rest unto your souls: and by them does God keep a people in his
ways, they are the Instruments used by God to keep a people upright and
steadfast in walking before him.

And this is a peoples strength and safety: Gods ways (and none but his) are
ways of safety; while a people walks in his ways, he will be their sun and
shield, their rock and strength, their God, and their salvation.

4. They are of singular use and benefit to the Leaders of a people (if they
will receive such among them) the faithful Prophets of God have been a means to
convert wicked Governors, and to keep others of them right in the ways of God:
you read of Jehoash, that he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord,
all his days wherein Jehoiada the 2 Kin. 12. 2.
Priest instructed him: See of what excellent use that good man was unto
Jehoash.

There are none who will deal with the Governors of a people so plainly, so
conscientiously, so seriously, so earnestly, as the faithful Prophets of God:
they will speak to them when none else dare speak to them; they will tell them
of their sins, as well as their inferiors; they will make known unto them all
the mind and will of God concerning them; they will put them upon the power
and practice of godliness, as well as others, nay, more then others; they will
stir up their hearts to be zealous for God, and his truth, and his ways, and
not to suffer any provocation of God in the Land.

Now this comes to be of great strength and safety to a people: as a peoples
misery lies very much in the iniquity of Rulers, so a peoples happiness lies
much in the godliness of their Rulers; if the Judgments of Rulers are right in
the things of God, if their hearts do indeed love God, if they themselves do
make conscience to walk in the ways of God, if they once come to be tender of
the honor of God, and will own and encourage the power and practice of
godliness: why, such Rulers are a singular blessing unto a people, and they are
a means of manifold blessings unto them: And therefore faithful and zealous
Prophets are an eminent strength and safety to a Nation, who are special helps
for all those gracious qualities in such as do govern a Nation.

5. I might add one thing more to demonstrate the assertion, and that is this;
faithful Prophets are much in prayer for a Civil State; and their prayers are
very prevailing with God: Said Samuel, Gather 1 Samuel 7. 5. 9. 2.
all Israel together to Mizpeh, and I will pray for you unto the Lord; and he
cried unto the Lord for Israel, and the Lord heard him. His prayer was a means
to discomfit the Host of the Philistims: so when there was a great drought in
the Land of Israel, that it was like to perish, Elijah prayed, Iam. 5. 18.
and the heavens gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruits: his prayer
was a means to preserve the Land: many more instances might be given, but I
must hasten to the application of all this unto our selves.

Is the death and loss of any Dr. Hill. Mr. Wilson. Master Whitaker, etc.
We have (of late) lost many precious Servants of Christ, many faithful
Laborers in his Vineyard, I fear that we have not laid those losses to heart;
that may be affirmed of most of us which is spoken in Isa. 57. 1. The righteous
perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, and
no man considers that the righteous are taken away from the evil to come.

There are (unto me) yet four sad presages of some future evil, and they are;

1. The great indifferency about the great truths of Christ.

2. The great want of the power of godliness in the Land: superstition and
profaneness still abounding.

3. The great contempt of the Ministers of the Gospel.

4. The great inconsideration of the death of so many choice Prophets and
Servants of God: To many persons their life is a burden, and their death is a
rejoicing.

When Mctellus heard of the death of Scipio Africanus, he ran out into the
public Forum, or Market place, and cried out, O Citizens, come ye forth,
Concurrite cives; urbis vestrae moenia corruerunt.
and consult what is to be done, for the walls of your City are fallen down:
Surely there is matter of deep thoughts, and sad afflictions in these solemn
dispensations of God of late. For an Husband man to pull out the weeds in the
garden, this is nothing: but for him to pluck up the Flowers, and the choice
Plants, there is something in this: for him to take away the rotten Hedge, this
is nothing, but to break down the walls about the Vineyard, there is something
in this. To take off a tile from the top of the house, it is nothing; O but to
take away the Pillars, there is some great change now indeed. We read that when
Noah (that Preacher of righteousness) was taken into the Ark, then the flood
followed; seldom does God gather his Prophets by clusters (as it were) but
there is some great evil near unto a people: nevertheless people (generally)
are secure, and stupid, and foolish, though God smites them in one of the
choicest blessings which he vouchsafes to the Sons of men.

They see loss upon loss, and death upon death; here a Minister dead, and there
a Minister carried to his grave, and usually this is all the fruits of it; Is
such a one dead? and I pray you how long was he sick? and whereof did he die?
and what has he left his poor wife and children? It is great pity, the man
was an honest man, and preached well; and here is all.

Now to such careless, and cold, and dull persons (especially if any such have
had any reference unto faithful and laborious Ministers) who can thus slightly
pass over the death of their Pastors, I have four things to say.

1. It is a sign that you never truly loved their persons; no, no, for all your
complements, and for all your pretenses, yet you never truly loved them; of all
affections, love is most apprehensive and sensible. If it enjoys, there is much
delight; If it loses, there is much sorrow: love is very sensible of what it
enjoyes, and of what it loses.

2. It is a sign that you never prized them in their Ministry; if you make no
more of them being dead, certainly you made little of them being living:
affections do most appear and discover themselves upon death: absense, and
difficulties, and oppositions, and death, these are trials and discoveries of
true love, and therefore if you can so slightly bear the loss of your faithful
Ministers, assuredly you never knew the worth and use of them as Ministers of
Christ.

3. It is a sign that you never received any Spiritual good by them at all, If
you had done so, your hearts would have been knit unto them in life, and at
least have shed a tear for them in death.

Their death would presently call up all those heavenly counsels, and all those
seasonable directions, and all those spiritual satisfactions, and all those
sweet comforts of God, which you by them did receive: At such a time I remember
how he thus spoke, and at such a Sermon, and at such a meeting, and in such a
conference; and now I shall never see him more, nor confer with him more: the
heart would melt to think of these things.

4. It is a sign that God has in Judgment taken away your faithful Ministers
from you, even for your want of love to the truth, and for your slighting and
neglecting the means of Grace, for which you must give a severe account unto
God.

And let me tell you, that so many faithful Ministers as you have heard, and so
many heavenly Sermons as you have heard, (or should have heard) the more heavy
will the account be unto God, and the more dreadful will Gods Judgments be
upon you for your unthankfulness and unprofitableness: I grant that the
Prophets dye, but remember; that a peoples accounts for the pains and labors
of those Prophets never die, but do remain upon Record as a witness against you.

The next use shall be an breach which God has made, and this great loss which
has suddenly, and unexpectedly befallen us! Ah Sirs, Who that saw and heard
that precious Minister of Christ, the beginning of the last week, did think to
hear of his death toward the latter end of the same week? who that heard him
preaching of laying up treasure in heaven, did imagine that such a treasure
should be taken away from earth, and himself (so suddenly) be laid up in heaven!

Alas! for me to speak of this Prophet, and of one common loss, of the many
losses in this one loss: truly, I am not fit, I am not able, because I knew him
much, and honored him much, and loved him much: only this I will say of him;
That one so plain in heart, so deep in judgment, so painful in studies, so
frequent and powerful, and exact in preaching, so laborious with, and useful to
his Congregation, so able to convince the Gainsayer, so zealous in contending
for the Truths of Christ, so fit for all Ministerial Services (besides his
personal and domestical course of Godliness) of his time, I have not known the
like.

Really, he was another Elijah; let me a little compare them: How zealous was
Elijah against the false Prophets of Baal? How laborious was Elijah to bring
back the people of Israel to the true God, and to the true worship of God? How
stout and resolute was Elijah in delivering the Message of God, even to the
face of King Ahab? How quick was he with Ahaziah for sending messengers unto
Baalzebub the God of Ekron? How fervent and potent in Prayer? How diligently
laborious to his dying day? How sudden was his remove and departure? All this
Spirit, and much more then this of the Spirit of Elijah was found in him.

Now if you do but consider what eminent gifts and graces appeared in him, and
how seriously, and humbly, and dexteriously these were laid out for the glory
of Christ, and for the service and benefit of the Church of Christ, we have
cause in the loss of such a Prophet to cry out, My Father, my Father; The
Charet of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof.

But I will speak no more of

1. Grieve in a Spiritual way, and upon Spiritual considerations, that God has
deprived you of such a Spiritual Pastor, and Helper, and Comforter.

2. Remember and lay up those soul-saving Truths, which you have so often heard
from him, and wisely improve them, in all your occasions: when Elijah was wrapped
up to heaven, Elisha took up the cloak which fell from him, and made use
thereof: O take up all those gracious instructions which fell from him in his
life, and make use of them now after his death, keep them alive, and so you
shall find him still living.

3. Hold fast that form of wholesome words by him from Christ delivered unto you;
and as you have received, so walk in them, let not your stedfastness dye, now
he is dead.

4. Most humbly and earnestly strive with the Lord, by Fasting and Prayer, that
seeing it is his will to take away Elijah from you, that he would be pleased in
his love and mercy to give unto you an Elisha in his room.

FINIS.

