ALEX. Van SUCHTEN OF THE SECRETS OF ANTIMONY: IN TWO TREATISES.

Translated out of High Dutch by Dr. C. a Person of great Skill in Chemistry.

To which is added B. Valentine's Salt of Antimony, with its Use.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little
Britain, 1670.

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) CHAP. V. What besides a Physician ought to know
before he uses the Gold of the Physician or {sulphur} Philosophor.
I Acknowledge that in the former Chapters I have said too little of the
{salt}, but the form of stood in the way, that I durst not make farther mention
thereof; for if I should speak what were to be spoken of it, I must also
plainly describe the form, which ought not to be done. Now have I handled
nothing in this Treatise by Similitudes; but as the thing is in it self, so
have I described it: But the Form belongs not to the Physician, but to the
Mineralist, who may find enough written thereof in Peter Bonus Ferariensis.
Therefore is antimony sufficiently declared, and as ye see after the simplest
manner, that none can exclaim against me, and say that I write so obscurely,
that I cannot be understood. To conclude, I warn every man that understands me
not, that he go not about to make what I teach; for antimony is not for him;
but a Secret of God above his understanding: But he that understands me, will
without doubt put his hope in God, and accomplish what I write. The same shall
even know that he has not therefore found the Medicine wholly, but only begun
to learn it; for what is it to have a good Sword in ones hand, if one know not
how to draw it forth against our enemy; we must therefore first know how to use
it; so the Physician also though he has {sulphur} Philos. in his hand, and
knows not the use, what profits it? The knowledge of administering it
requires a very expert Physician; not from the reading of Galen; but from the
knowledge of the Microcosme; therefore it is necessary to write diligently of
the use of this Secret, which I shall (if God give life and opportunity)
speedily do, and not keep it from you; yet thus much will I here manifest to
you, that that {sulphur} cannot be digested in, our stomach; but if it be not
digested, it is not the Physic it should be; for after digestion virtue goes
out of him, and not before. Mankind has a gift that is from God, Paracelsus
calls it Archeus; the office of this Archeus is to make man's flesh out of
Bread, and blood out of Wine; and what man wants, that it makes out of the
Aliment: Now we find that man is not the Medicine, therefore cannot the Archeus
out of {sulphur} or make the Medicine; so it follows from hence that there
must be used another Archeus, that this digestion may be accomplished,
Paracelsus in his Book De tartar, mentions this Digestion, how our Stomach is
comforted, and says this Arcanum is ^, which is true, but it is a Speech too
subtle and short for your young Physicians: Let no Man be so senseless, as to
persuade himself, that this Medicine is to be obtained by the bare letters of
Paracelsus. This say I, that he has a great secret who knows to perfect this
digestion in Man; no ordinary Physician shall know it, for very much belongs
to it; therefore let every one, who by diligent Labor and Operations has
obtained this {sulphur}, not abuse this gift of God, lest he get more shame and
scorn than honor amongst the sick. I could, if it were convenient, in few
words declare this digestion, and annex it to this Treatise; but it is not
convenient, by reason of many secrets which depend thereon; wherefore this
Treatise shall be only of the Preparation of antimony concerning the Use, I
will write another Treatise; by the which, ye shall understand what Paracelsus
has written De Arcanis and Elixiribus, in his Archidoxes. That I write no
Receipts in this Book, is, because I will not seduce you, for Receipts are
Deceipts to the young Physicians. Further, there is no Receipt in Paracelsus
concerning Secrets in Physic, which has not an occult sense, and has either
too much or too little; and this is done, not without great reason.

So has this Treatise of antimony an end; in which we have spoken, What
antimony is, in the first Chapter; in the second, How Mercury is made out of
it; in the third, How it must be regenerated by Heaven; in the fourth, How out
of Luna Physical Sol must be made; in the fifth, What is further necessary for
a Physician to know e're he use this Gold? So much have I undertaken to write
of antimony for the young Physicians sake, who know not what antimony is, that
they may not be seduced by the Galenisis, who are not ashamed to write of this
Mineral that which they never experimented; what I write, I know that it is
true, and this Work has not once only gone through my hands, and I know it
much better than the Shoemaker his Last: Wherefore then may I not write what is
true?

Although the Devil be never so black and base, yet in this he cannot bite me:
Physic concerns the Body and the Life, he that writes any thing thereof,
which he cannot prove by his practice, is a Murderer: For then shall the
Galenists escape, whether will they go? Therefore, Reader, if you will take
pains, apply thy self to this way as to a firm Rock which is unmovable; yet I
pray thee that thou attempt not this Work Illotis manibus, that is, if you
understand it not, it belongs not to you: Ye young Paracelseans, I will also
admonish you, Do not as the contrary part does, dispute not much of Physic in
your Prefaces, and defend your Masters not only with words, but also by your
practice; by your words, you will as soon win the Galenists, as the Apostles
did the Heathen by Preaching. Works do all; ye must therefore work; so much as
ye perform by Works, so much ye are to be called Paracelsians: Be diligent and
careful, for not every one that glories that he is of Paracelsus, can do
Paracelsus Works; keep your selves from undigested Writings; the Rose has time
for its growth; when your time is come, help the Truth by Words and Works; so
shall you triumph over your Enemies, as Theophrastus did in his life time. Thus
I conclude this Treatise. Expect a better.

This have I written in Dutch, that Artificers, Mechanics, Yeomen, who buy
antimony and work on it, may know, that they do ill to meddle with that which
they understand not.

The End of the first Treatise.
ALFX. Van SUCHTEN OF ANTIMONY VULGAR.

The SECOND TREATISE.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little
Britain, 1670.

To the Honorable John Baptista Van Seebach.
Noble Sir,
MY Honorable Patron, and good Friend, my humble Service in the first place
presented to you: At your earnest Request I cannot but accomplish your desires,
seeing you have a great love and and affection, by experience to find out the
Secrets of Nature, which at this time are known to few, and even wholly hid in
darkness. Although many of the Ancients have written thereof, and their Books
dispersed, yet are they written in a Magic style, and profitable to none but
those who from their youth have been trained up in the Magic, or instructed by
God in such Secrets. Therefore the Secrets for which you humble your self are
in a deep pit, strongly locked up, so that no man can open them unless he have
received the Key from the Spirit of Truth. Of the Magical antimony, or of that
antimony of the Ancients will I speak nothing in this Treatise, seeing that men
will know nothing of it; but what they read of it they apply only to common
antimony; of the which you only desire a Treatise, which I will freely
communicate to you, and will write, 1. What it is. 2. Of what parts it is
compounded. 3. Into what it may be resolved again.

And you shall in this Treatise understand me no otherwise than according to
the Letter; for I will use here no Metaphors, Allegories, or Similitudes; only
I will describe antimony with a plain style, that you may not be deceived,
though you prepare it according to the Letter, and ye shall obtain that of
which I write; by these you may also judge whether in common antimony that
secret, or Chemical and Physical Mystery be or not, of the which Paracelsus and
the Magicians have written.

Now antimony as it comes out of the Mountains, is not pure as it should be;
for it is mingled with Stones of the Mine. I never saw any that came forth pure
from the Mountains; therefore ere one use it, it must be purified, which
purification is done by digestion; but this digestion is a sulphurous Fire.
The best {sulphur} is a {sulphur} Metalline, and although Artists do purify it
with the vegetable fire, that is with Tartar, yet is this digestion not
natural, But that the Tartar divides the Regulus from its Faeces, this is the
cause that the {sulphur} of antimony is more Vegetable than Metalline; but you
shall purify it with {sulphur} that is sprung from Mercury, and not from
Salts; for this Metalline {sulphur} will be reduced in the Arg. vive of
antimony into Arg. vive, and lastly, out of this Arg. vive will pure Gold be
made. Now this Metalline {sulphur} that purifieth antimony is only in, and no
where else, and this purification is done thus; R. or Iron 4 (I am wont to take
pieces of Nails which are neither gross nor thick) put them into a strong
Crucible, and set them in a wind Furnace, let it stand so long till you see the
Nails or Iron are soft, then put into the Crucible 8. of antimony, make a
strong fire that the may flow well in the antimony, then cast into the Crucible
with an Iron Ladle a good handful of Saltpeter; let them boil up together in
the Crucible (let the Crucible therefore be considerably great, that it boil
not out) and let it stand till all be quiet and flowing, then cast it forth
into a casting-pot, so the Regulus setleth it self. So soon as the matter is
coagulated in the Puckle-pot, put it out, and let it cool, and strike the
Faeces from the Regulus, which appears and shines like a Marchasite: The
Faeces you may lay up till you know what to do with it; for in it is a Mystery,
of which I will not speak at this time. Put the Regulus into a Crucible again,
and let it flow; when it flows, then cast therein one and of antimony, and
let them flow well to gether, then put in it as much Nitre as you did before,
let it flow as ye did at the first time, cast it into the Puckle, strike the
Regulus off from the Faeces, this Regulus is purer and finer than the first,
cast away the Faeces, for they are nothing worth, let this Regulus melt the
third time in a Crucible, and when it flows, pour thereon a Ladle full of
Nitre, and when you see that the Nitre flows on the Metal as an Oil (which
must be done with a strong fire, otherwise the Nitre coagulateth it self, and
will be hard) then cast it into a Puckle, strike the Regulus from the Faeces;
this Regulus is yet finer, purer and more Metalline than the former; the Faeces
are nothing worth. Fourthly, let this Regulus melt in a clean Crucible, and
when it is melted as pure, cast some Nitre thereon, let it penetrate through
each other, and then cast it into a Puckle, beat the Faeces off from the
Regulus, which Faeces will be of a golden color, and then it is prepared. The
Regulus will be white as, and have above a fine Star; this Regulus if it be
rightly wrought, will weigh four Ounces, and the work may well be finished in
two hours (some Copies say twelve hours) and in this manner is common antimony
prepared, wherein you shall mark this piece, viz. what it is that thus divides
the Faeces from the antimony, you shall not think that Nitre does it; but
antimony draws forth the soul of, and reduces the same into, and this is
nothing else but fire.
know that Antimony draws forth the soul from, that is, his best {sulphur},
and reduces the same into; this is nothing else but fire, and has the
operation of fire, which digesteth the crude into antimony, and divides the
Mine from the Metal; you shall also know that this of is hid in this purged
antimony, under the whiteness of Antimonial Mercury; for this Lunary whiteness
which you see in this Regulus is not from his {sulphur}, but from Arg. vive,
under which lurketh This Martis is, and a Spirit, or Air, and remains in till
it be made a body, that is.
Mercury of Mars, which is nothing else than Sol: this of Mars is also nothing
else in the aforesaid of antimony than as a Spirit or an Air, and remains so
long living in the Arg. vive of antimony, till out of it be made a body again,
that is {salt}, and then divides it self from the of antimony.

So now you understand what that fire is which thus purifieth common Antimony;
you must also understand what that fire is which purifieth and digesteth
Magical Antimony, that is, what that Sol Philosophor. is which we call
potabile, which even so well divides it self in the end from Philosophor. as
the divides it self from the Arg. vive of Antimony. Therefore it is very
necessary that you seriously consider Nature how it works, so shall you find
what Nature is; not only in common Metals, but even in all things, and in the
Metals of Philosophers, which are known to the Wise men. The Alchymists do
assay Antimony by Iron; when they have done this, they know not what they have
made, nor the working of Nature; ^or do they know what Nature is here:
therefore teach they nothing, but remain Fools and Asses. Seeing that they now
have divided Antimony from his Mineral Faeces, they should also know that in
this Antimony there is as yet a Faeces, which is nothing else than a burning
{sulphur}; when this {sulphur} is divided, so comes Antimony again into his
first matter or being, which is nothing else but fire; and this fire is nothing
else but Arg. vive, and this Arg. vive is created out of the greatest Mystery
of Nature; but Plato commands me to rest here. Vide Nicholas the Allobrogian.

To divide the {sulphur} from the purged Antimony is the clear Operation, but
therein is a great knowledge hidden: So much thereof as is necessary for the
knowledge of this Work will I manifest; but the other for diverse Reasons will I
pass by.

A thing if it be destroyed and mortified shall be raised again, and made
living; and the same thing which is the cause of death by separating the life,
must have two powers in it, of separating and vivifying; and these two must be
one in power, but two in numbers; for all Mysteries do spring from this
Fountain, and are one Essence, wonderfully distributed according to the Will of
God; this Will of God is the specific of every Creature, and a being
incomprehensible by sense not less than God. Now is Arg. vive dead in antimony.
Shall it be made living, so must it be raised up by that which it has been ere
it was dead; for that Life is in it very abundant, and incorruptible; there is
nothing which is dead can be made living but by his own and proper life, and
not by the life of other things; who writes and teaches otherwise is no
Philosopher; and the destroyed life when it is again made living, is the
Ferment of the living things by which it was made living; and that thing is his
Augmentation and Multiplication Magical. Hence it follows that in living
things there must be a disposition which is transmutable into the disposition
of other things, if it would be raised again; for the will of God that all
things must die, is that Specific of all Creatures which after death augmented
it self infinitely.

Now it follows farther that those living things which are serviceable to our
work and manual operation, by which the Metals are also transmuted into Sol,
must also have such a Specific, in that they can be brought thus by no art
without Regeneration, as the senseless Alchymists give forth; for were there no
Specific therein, how could they be transmuted, because Species is not
transmuted into Species; for if transmutation be not done, so can also no seed
grow and augment it self; for that is against Nature; therefore must that
living have the nature of water, as you see that a grain of Corn cast into the
Earth is made living by water; that is, in the Grain is a dead water, which is
by water made living again, and the Ferment of water is that which gives the
water his specific Nature, so do infinite grains grow from one: So understand
in this Operation that the Arg. vive of Antimony is dead, and can never more be
made living but by Arg. vive. In this manner is Corruption regenerated, and
Multiplication of the Form of Metals made.

You may here demand, Seeing the water multiplieth the grains in the earth, and
is transmuted into very grains, if also the Arg. vive of Metals multiplied with
common, may be made again into a Metal? To this I answer, that this is not
possible in common Metals, but in Philosophical Metals it may be done very
easily; for our Mercury lays his Specific from him, and takes it again by
Art; that is, from him may be made Sol and Luna, which it was before; but why
this cannot be done in common Metals there are many Reasons, which I will pass
by at this time. Now the Mercury of Antimony shall be living; that is Arg. vive
shall be made per Arg. vive; but this cannot be done without mixture; and
farther we see that Regulus will not mingle it self with common Arg. vive,
because of the {sulphur} which is in the Regulus; for seeing the same is not
Metalline, it has no communion with the Arg. vive that is common, and it
hinders the mixture; therefore must there be a medium betwixt common Arg.
vive and the Mercury of Antimony; and in this medium must be a separative
power, which is not in common arg. vive; for in it is no specific; and the
separative power is a specific, which coagulateth Mercury. God has made this
arg. vive in the will of man, which notwithstanding is nothing else than common
Mercury, and that of the Philosophers. These two remain two in the will of man,
that he can bring a specific into them, which is necessary; for there is none
there: according to these things, viz. the separative is a specific Mercurial;
but one must know in what Mercury it is to be found, and by experience it is
found, that it is in no other Mercury than in the Mercury of Luna.

Therefore take of Luna purissimae one ounce, reguli praedict. half an ounce,
let the glow well in a Crucible, afterward cast the regulus on it, so will
they melt presently, and stand in the Crucible as fine Arg. vive, cast them
into an Ingot, and you shall find a Mass metalline of the color of Lead; beat
this metalline mass to powder, which will easily be done. Afterward take of
fine Arg. vive four or five ounces, pour it in a small Phyal-Glass, and then
pour the powder on it, let it stand a night and day in B. M. so goes the
powder into Arg. vive; stir it well together, and when the powder is well
mingled with the common Arg. vive, then pour it out and amalgam it well on a
stone, so will the Amalgam thereof be red, put this Amalgam into a wooden Dish,
pour water thereon, and rub it well with a Pestel, so will the water be black;
cast this water off in part, put more water on, and rub it till this water be
black also; do this so long till the Amalgam be made white; the blackness which
is washed from the Amalgam setleth it self in the bottom of the water, which
keep, and cast the water away; put this Amalgam again into a Phial, let it
stand in B. a night, pour it out and wash it again, so gives it a blackness
again, which pour to the other; wash it so long till it give no more blackness;
you may also grind this Amalgam with pure clean Salt, so comes the blackness
the sooner from it: Now when the Amalgam is made clean again, set it again in a
Phial in B. a night, and wash it again; reiterate this work so long till no
more blackness goes from the Amalgam, then will it be pure, clean, bright, and
white; and mark the more blackness the Amalgam gives, the more Mercury is
resolved from Antimony: So soon as no more blackness shows Abstract and
cohobat it 7 or 9 times, then it is Philosoph.
it self in washing, presently then distill in a Glass retort the Arg. vive from
Luna; if the washing be rightly done, so shall you find your Luna bright,
clear, and white in the Retort; but if your Luna be of a Leaden color, it is a
sign that it has as yet some Antimony amongst it; therefore must this washing
be done so long and often till no more blacknes; come forth; the Recipient must
be full of cold water e're you distill the Mercury into it, then shall you find
a bright Arg. vive, which now is threefold, viz. Arg. vive Common: Arg. vive
of Antimony, and Mercury of Mars: This you must know, that the Mercury of Mars
transmuteth not the other two into his Nature, as other Metals do, because
Mercurius Martis is not universally and radically mixed with the other two, but
divides it self from them, as you shall hear: Therefore this Arg. vivo is not
called Arg. vive of Mars, but Mercury of Antimony; for Antimony is fuller of
Mercury. That Arg. vive of Mars which is hid in this Mercury of Antimony, is
Sol volatile; and this you may not only believe, but also see it with your
Eyes, if you take a little of the Amalgam washed clean, and gently evaporate
the Arg. vive from Luna, so remains the Aurum volatile, that is the Mercury of
Mars, with the Luna, and tingeth the Luna into the highest color of Sol; but
seeing that this Sol is not fixed, the Fire drives this Tincture from Luna.
Here also is a point to be marked, that this Sol volatile, which tingeth Luna
only into Gold, but not fixed; who understands the cause of this, is not
ignorant of the Sophistications of the Alchymists, who would tinge Luna into
Sol; for they understand that Mercury alone is the Tincture; but when it is
changed into Metals, then it loses the power of Tinging, and if it were fixed,
so is it a fine Metal, for Metals are nothing else than Mercury coagulated or
fixed: But in this Work, how Mercury of Antimony tingeth, is a more subtle
manual operation, he that will make it, must well know the fire; therefore look
well thereto; I my self have oftentimes made it, and I have also often failed.

Now how the of shall be fixed into true, and the of antimony shall be
transmuted from other Metals into this Nature, will I not hold from you; for in
this operation every one sees what the Metals are, who has not his five
senses bewitched (I speak of true coagulation, not sophistical) and can mark
that it is not possible to make from, or out of and Silver; so sees he also
very well that common will not be coagulated artificially; but the Arg. vive of
Metals easily, which before has been coagulated; yet not every coagulated, but
the alone of; for in this of is found the nature of the last fixation; but in
not: therefore cannot any man give them that which they have not from God and
Nature: It troubles me not that many Chemical Books are written against the
Truth, what the searcher of Alchymy imagines and understands in his
Transmutations, is altogether another thing; therefore can I write of this
Sophistry, and speak with Paracelsus, They which und^rstand Alchymy according
to the l^tter, reap nothing but bare straw: Now concerning the before
mentioned, which is distilled from, you shall know that it penetrateth the
Metals, and divides the Elements of the Metals, that is, and {sulphur} from
one another; common does it not; it must then be acuated by the of Antimony,
and be changed in his nature and essence, as now is declared to you in this
operation; you shall also know that every Metal has his peculiar operation,
and is not resolved as another, I will in an hour bring out of, out of can I
hardly do it in two Months; therefore much lies in the manual operation. The
practice how it is performed with the of Venus must I here show, for this cause
that you may find the Gold which coming from, lies hid in the of Venus; that
is it of which I have made mention; this is nothing else than the mercurial
spirit which is in, as the Soul in man; but seeing this Sol is no more
corporeal, as it was before in, but through the mercurial spirit of Antimony is
made a spirit; it can no more be more corporal but only by the Spirit of Salt
of Venus. This Spirit is not the of Venus, also not his {sulphur}, but a middle
betwixt both; when this middle comes forth of Venus, then do his parts fall in
pieces, that is, his and {sulphur}; the of Venus abides in the of Antimony;
the {sulphur} must be washed from it, and is a Sulphurous gray Earth like
Ashes.

Take l. 2. of the best Hungarian Vitriol, dissolve it in common {water}, set
it it in a strong Pot over the fire, and cast half a handful of small pieces of
Iron therein, let them sees therein half a quarter of an hour; then put away
the water, and put to the Iron the which you have distilled from, so the Venus
which the Iron had reduced from Vitr. amalgamateth it self with the Arg. vive:
wash the Amalgam clean, that all the pieces of Iron come from it; now when this
Amalgam is wholly pure and clean, let it dry, and then put it into a
Glass-Phial, set it in B. M. and let it stand therein eight days, so will this
Amalgam be of a dark gray; then pour it out, and wash it clean, as men are wont
to do to wash an Amalgam in a Dish. The powder which is washed from the
Amalgam, put a part; put this Amalgam again eight days in B. and then wash it
as before; this work must be reiterated thrice: But if you would resolve all
the into and {sulphur}, then must you do this so often till that the Amalgam be
made into pure Arg. vive; for it will not be done so quickly. When you have had
this Amalgam thrice in B. and thrice washed, then distill the Arg. vive from
the, as you drew it before from: This is called of for it it is no more vulgar,
nor yet of antimony, but through the of it is fermented and transmuted into the
of. This of is a wonderful, as every one can try who shall use it in Chemical
Operations. The Precipitate also made of this is exceeding bright and wonderful
in the eyes of Alchymists; but as bright as it is, it is a gross poison in
Physic; keep your self from it, and let not his fine appearance deceive you.
In this of is {salt} out of, which I have often mentioned, yet hidden; it wants
the frigidity of the Moon, by the which it shall be coagulated in the perpetual
and first coagulation of Sol; and the process of coagulation is thus:

Take of the fine part 1. wherein is no Gold, of this Mercury of Venus parts 4,
make an Amalgam thereof, and that the Amalgam may the easier be accomplished,
dissolve the Luna in common aq. sortis, and precipitate it with, as it is
commonly done, so falls the to the bottom, and is a fine bright powder, which
may easily by grinding be amalgamated with the Mercury of Venus; wash this
Amalgam till it be clean and bright, put it into a Phial, and let it stand 24
hours in B.M. boiling, then will it be as black as a Coal; take it out, grind
it on a stone, and wash it clean; this blackness is the Soul of, which is drawn
from the Spirit of Antimony, and in this last work is coagulated into Sol; with
this Sol there are as yet Faces of {sulphur}, which separate themselves from
the Mercury of Venus through this coagulation; for the Mercury of Venus is
alway^ green in the Superficies, the Green shall be coagulated wi^^ Sol (other
Copies say Luna) an^ being separated from Arg. viv^ shall be reduced into a
body, an^ so is the Spirit of found; an^ so you see what it was, and again,
what is from him. Now who has a desire to take pains, he may try how much is
in one pound of, so much Sol shall he find therein, and not more, and he shall
also see that more cost go^th to this work than the Sol is worth. The Arg. vive
which is in other M^tals cannot be so coagulated into Sol; but it continually
remains living; the Reasons have been shown before. Thus is the Arg. vive
vulgar acuated with the Mercury of Antimony, that it draws all the Mercury
from imperfect Metals, and is transmuted by them into their Nature; as it
comes to pass in, have I here declared by the way of Sol out of, which must be
in this work for the purifying of antimony; so have you also heard how this Sol
is again extracted out, and appears before the eyes, otherwise you would not
believe that the purification of Antimony is done by the Sol in.

Now will I farther write to you what Medicine there is in common antimony
afterward for a conclusion will I impart to you as to a Brother ^ what farther
out of this Reg^lus of antimony can be made; for I dare not in truth boast, and
say, that it is not unknown to me, and I will write to you for a warning (if
God give you his Grace that you can understand) what it is that seduceth so
many people, yea even the Learned; and captivated them, and brought them even
to their Grave.

De Sulphur Antimonii.
Now concerning the other part of antimony, that is his {sulphur}, you shall
know that it is a fatness, and assimulateth it self to the Fire which is in a
black Coal. Therefore take the blackness which you have washen from the Am^lgam
of and antimony, dry it in the Sun, or otherwise in some gentle warmth; so
shall you have a powder of a leaden color, to the which, as yet, some Arg.
vive vulgar does cleave, abiding with it in the washing: So now if you can
stifle this powder in a close warmth, as Colliers make wood Coals, then will it
be black, and altogether like beaten or powdered Coals: but if you cannot so
stifle it, it is no great matter.

Take this powder of a lead color, put it into a Crucible, put it on the Fire,
but make it not to glow, either inwardly or outwardly; so will the Mercury fume
away: This powder is inflamed by the warmth, and burns not as {sulphur} with
a flame, but as a glimmering dry coal, which gives no flame: When it is so
burnt out, there remains in the Crucible a powder, which may be reduced into
Regulus: Weigh this powder, so shall you see how much of the Antimony is
resolved into his parts, and if you could dry up this powder that it be black,
and the Common Mercury comes from it, so may you reckon how much of the Common
Mercury is come into this Mercury of antimony; and how much of combustible
{sulphur} was in this Arg. vive: So then you have the knowledge of antimony
fully; that is, his Element of Arg. vive and {sulphur}. This is enough to show
what antimony is, and how the Common Arg. vive is fermented and acuated through
and with it; that it thereby can resolve the other Metals, every one according
to his nature and disposition: How it is done in, the process is sufficiently
declared for example sake: But how it is to be done in other Metals, viz. how
by the of antimony, a may be brought forth, that commit I to the experienced
and skilled in the Fire: For it was not my purpose to manifest all things.

The Medicinal sweet antimony.
It Is known to you before to prepare many ways Antimony for Physic, but I have
not as yet seen any who have observed the Arcanum in it: The good people
imagine that whatsoever is written of Antimony is written of Common Antimony,
which notwithstanding they find not by the proof; therefore we may justly
think, that the Medicinal Antimony is much another thing, as indeed it is; for
the Antimony of the Philosophers is their Mercury, and in it are all Medicines
in potentia, therefore it is called Quintessence. In the Vulgar Antimony is not
the Quintessence of Physic, but only the Essence of the Element of water,
which Essence is a Medicine against the Sicknesses which spring out of the
microcosmical Fire: Now the Physic of this Antimony is not in his Mercury, but
in his Fire, of the which I have spoken briefly, which you shall in this manner
understand; In wood there is a Fire which we must have in our Kitchens to
prepare our Meats; so is Antimony a fire by which we digest our Medicines,
which thereby receives the essence of his Elements, and through this Essence
the elemental heat in our sicknesses; for though the Galenists think to drive
forth the heat through Purslane, Endive, Nightshade, and other cold Simples,
but cannot do it, for the heat loses it self naturally; so is this Medicinal
nature in Antimony vulgar, and not only in it, but in all other things of the
which the Element of water is the Mother. Therefore is a Physician even so
little bound to this Antimony as a Cook to Beech-wood; for when he has it not,
then he uses Birch or Willow, by the which he cannot so well dress his Meat.
Besides this Essential Medicine as well in other things as in Antimony, and it
is called in Magic Aurum; but of that Medicine which is prepared by the fire
of Antimony, I have nothing to say; it is known of to God, and to those he has
manifested it: The wise men called it Mercurius Philosophor. and it is an
Essence which may be changed in all the Elements of Nature and Art; for we know
that this Antimony purges strongly upward and downward, which is done not by
the Essence, but by the body to the which the Essence changes. Now who can
divide the Essence from the Body, he has found a Medicine that works neither
upward nor downward, but without purgation finisheth the work, and though
through a strong Calcination with Salt Spirit, which is the cause of a
Metalline Fusion, it be driven from it, that it causes neither Vomit nor
Stool, but forces sweat; yet it is not the Medicine, but antimony calcined,
which is a poison as the other Metals are which are strongly calcined, which
taken in the Body, manifests it as calcined. It may also be well digested by
{sulphur} Metalline, that it may be red and fixed in the fire, yet is there not
in it what the Artist seeks; therefore all is lost which is begun with this
Medicine: there is then a thing which divides his Essence from his Body, and
is to

Of the Secrets in Regulus.
Farther, of diverse Arcana's which are in the abovementioned Regulus, I have
wonders to tell you; he which has not thoroughly searched it will not believe
me; for God lets not such things be common, and come forth publicly,
especially in these base times, in the which Honor and Shame, Virtue and Vice,
Lying and Truth are equally prized: Now we seek not the Truth, but Vainglory;
and therefore does God infatutuate our Senses, and we hate and envy one
another, and destroy our wealth, and we our selves are the cause thereof:
Farther, I warn you, that I have discovered much, and from my writing you may
understand more than I say, but all things shall not be written by reason of
Praters and Sophisters, which flatter themselves that they have been of the
Council of Jove. I will also by this show forth my mind to you, and I wish you
well from my heart, that you may try in these things as much as my self, and I
hope that time will give that which now I cannot, and in time know what I mean.
Now that I may keep my promise, you shall know that this Regulus has deceived
the best Philosophers and Chemists of greatest account and reading amongst us;
for it is such a rare Mineral that there is scarce the like in the world, and
can make even the most Learned and understanding men Fools. What is given me
from it, what I have seen from my good Companions mark. In my little Book
concerning the Mysteries of Antimony which no man understands even to this
hour, have I said that Metal might be made out of it. So much belongs to this
point, I did not then much cumber or trouble my self with it, but only
explained my self, and manifested the Medicines which are in it, and go under
its name; but now know that out of this Regulus all Metals may be made, as
Lead, Tin, Copper, Iron, Silver and Sol, and so made, that to the appearance
and in hammering, melting, casting proof of the Test, and in the driving by
Antimony, they are as good as the natural Metals. Lead which is made thereof is
in all proofs good Lead, only it is a little harder than the Natural; but the
Lead which is made of Antimony crude, not washed, has not that hardness; the
Tin is exceeding fine, and before coagulation, on the Touchstone so certain as
the finest the Nature of Tin easily takes it to its self, and is easily made
Tin.

With the Copper it is thus also; for so soon as the Odor of Venus is
vegetant, it penetrateth the Regulus, and gives it the Nature of Copper; this
operation is done very quickly: I can make an ounce of Regulus into Copper in
the time you can eat a soft Egg.

Iron and Antimony are easily changed one into another, therefore is Antimony
presently, and out of is Antimony easily made, and also and may easily be
reduced into antimony, yet easiest of all. These four Metals I my self have out
of Regulus; the other two viz. and have I seen my Friend make. The is bright,
and may be cast, hammered and beaten, as other natural, and may be driven off
in, and goes not away from the Test; I thought a long time that it was nothing
else but the best; but my Companion said that in weight it was heavier than
other, I therefore being jealous what it was, did endeavor to dissolv it in
aq. fort. made of Vitriol and Nitre, but it would not touch it; then I was much
troubled in my thoughts, and laid it in an aq. Regis, and it dissolved totally,
then I thought that in the reduction it would be Sol; but I found a white
Powder very like to Tin, which is calcined in aq. fortis; when I reduced this
powder, there was thereout a Glass of a Milkie color, so found I what I had
for good; nevertheless I was not content with these proofs, hoping better
things, and therefore I took four Ounces of this, and amalgamated it with
common, and did set it in a gentle heat four weeks, and it was in the
Superficies black and indifferent hard; I took it out, and did beat it to
pieces with a hammer, and then did grind it to powder, and afterward by often
rubbing I made it into an Amalgam again as it was before, then drew I the away
in a Retort, and found my again; this I amalgamated again, not with common, but
with of antimony, of the which I have spoken before.

This Amalgam did I set as before three days and nights, and found that the
Amalgam the longer it stood the moister it was; in eight days it was as
melted, and so it stood in the fire a month, afterward I took it out, and
distilled it by Retort, and the Mercury of Antimony, and the came all from the
Retort, and were a Mercury; so know I that the made of Regulus was nothing else
than Mercury coagulated, and not constant in a Metalline form, but goes away
again, and will be Mercury, which thing might well make a Chemist a Fool. Now
come I to, and to tell you what happened to me is a wonder; when I had showed
to my good Companion, who thought nothing else than that he had got a great
prize, he would not believe it, but took it into his own hands, and at length
found the truth, and began to question his, and he spoke, although I have
oftentimes tried it, yet will not I trust my self, but take this half ounce of
Gold and try it as you please. Mr. Hans the Goldsmith says it is true Gold. So
took I the and brought it to the Goldsmith, and asked him if it were Gold, he
said it was, and he could work it for; for to the Sight, Touchstone and Hammer
it was very good. Nevertheless I took the and did put to it 2 of to granulate
and divide it in aq. fort. the dissolved it self, the fell to the bottom; this
proof was true; this Sol powder I mixed with antimony crude, and cast it
through Regulus; let it flow in a Crucible and cast Nitre upon it, and drew the
antimony from the Sol, and drew it off with, this trial I found it also true.
This Sol driven off did I cast again through, with antimony and {sulphur}; then
took I the Regulus and let them go away before the Goldsmiths Bellows, for I
had none; this trial the Sol stood also, on which every Chemist may justly
rejoice.

Nevertheless seeing the Luna had deceived me, therefore could I not trust the
Sol, but causes it to be beaten thin, and amalgamated it with my of antimony,
and did set it four Weeks in a gentle warmth, and took notice that the Amalgam
was not hard, but soft, which was grievous to me; nevertheless I did let it
stand four weeks, and found my Amalgam much moister than when I put it in; then
did I put it into a Crucible over a small fire, that the Crucible did not fully
glow, and my flew away incredible swiftly from the that I did not mark it, but
thought that my was coagulated into, but when I weighed my, I found no more
than half an Ounce and 2 drams.
2 Quintileins, and thought certainly that the two Quintileins were pure Gold.

These two Quintileins I proved farther with of antimony in the same manner as
at the first time; then at length I evaporated the Mercury from it, and found
my two Quintileins again; then was I merry, and hoped that my Companion would
communicate his Preparation to me, and I had Golden Mountains in my head, and I
brought a good Message to my Companion; but he himself was not merry, but spoke
evil of it. Well, said he, I have had great labor and pains with this, and
more than I do say: What cannot be that cannot I desire: But let it be a fine
sophistication that which has been made, for the Gold-seeking Alchymists which
run hither and thither, to day devouring one to morrow another. The Gold which
remains over and above to thee is not come from the Regulus, but is a
Composition of the Natural; for I could not coagulate the Regulus into if there
be not good Gold with it; this Sol has remained in the Test, but the other
not, I know not how to bring it farther; and now understand the cause well,
that that cannot be that I hoped. This fell into the mind of my Companion, and
I feared the manual operation and thought of my Metals. He spoke that the
{sulphur} of antimony which coagulateth the Mercury is not united to it in
radice, and therefore remains not with it, and if thou searchest thoroughly,
thy Regulus will not be again and remain so, but will be Mercury again, which
neither you nor any other can coagulate to a good Metal, as some imagine, when
they have the of, that the Art will not fail then; but it is a Lunatic
Melancholic Fantasy, from the which they that are not experienced in
Alchymy, but only Book-learned, and have gone on hearsay, can make Arguments,
and conclude by themselves, but when they come to the fire they see their
Folly. Tell me when a dead thing is made living. When is his bound of Nature,
in Death or in Life? What has it been before death or life? Shall any come to
this immutable sixth principle? what seek thou then in Metals vivified? But
these things speak I not to thee, nor of thee, but of the Alchymists, for whom
pray God that he deliver them from such unreasonable men.

Of this sort discoursed we much together, and seeing I then was not so
entangled, as to hold the printed Books of Alchymy for Gospels; but being led
with I know not what Spirit, I doubted more than believed, therefore I always
did think of the cause wherefore Alchymy was written by the first Philosophers,
and did very often treat with this my good Friend and Companion, well skilled
in the Fire, concerning our antimony and, in all which I found that true which
the Chemists put together for the Alchymical Art, and am in good hope that he
will put from him this fantasy, and think after the Philosophical Metals. Now
so much as belongs to you, Noble Patron and Friend, there is as yet one thing
to be handled pertaining to this operation, which I neither can nor will hold
from you the Chemists, as Rhafis, Peter Bonus, Ferrar. Trevisan, and the other
of the Dialogue, and many other who have well examined these imperfect Metals,
and had good experience, they at length remain in this opinion that it is
impossible to make Sol by Art, but out of Arg. vive. Seeing they see that Sol
is nothing else than Arg. vive coagulated with its proper {sulphur} and fixed,
now have they also well understood by their operations, that Mercury cannot be
fixed into perfect Sol, unless Sol be dissolved and brought into Mercury; this
opinion have they taken from this ground, that they see that Nature could not
fix that Arg. vive of with the external {sulphur} which cleaves unto them;
much less shall Art do it; whereupon they thought to take an Arg. vive which
has been perfectly fixed before, and to mix this Arg. vive with common
Mercury, or other Metals, that both may be one Individuum; but seeing this
mixture cannot be done with common Sol, they have taken the Sol in Mars, and
have thought to mix it so with the common Mercury that they should never be
separated, but that the Sol should always remain with the Mercury, and the
Mercury with Sol, that is, where the Sol is coagulated again, and also the
Mercury is coagulated and fixed: in this practice every one has had his way of
working, according to his understanding, and have spent long time herein; but
thus much is certain to me, that they always died ere they obtained the end of
their speculation. Therefore says the worthy Trithemius, That Alchymy is a
perpetual Virgin, and writes of it thus, Chymia is beloved by many, and yet
she is chaste; she has many domestic servants, which keep their Mistress with
watchful Eyes, and often take upon themselves her name, that they may preserve
her from the embracements of so many importunate Lovers, and always unpolluted:
Vanity, fraud, deceit, sophistication, covetousness, falseness, boldness,
lying, foolishness, poverty, desparation, proscription, cheating, are the
Lacqueys of Chemistry; who feigning themselves to be the Mistress, that they
may keep her unravished, do freely prostitute themselves to rich, covetous,
worldly and proud Lovers: Thus much. He that will not believe this true Man,
may search and try according to his fantasy, as I and others have sufficiently
done: What I have told you here, comes from experience that it is so; who has
a desire to spend his Money and Time thereon, he shall also find it so.

Thus have I finished what I promised to write of the of antimony, and also
what the Ancients have sought and found in this of antimony, all which I have
truly declared; on which you may conclude whether this Mineral is known to me
or not: They which boast that they can make the of Metals without Arg. vive,
they give us to understand that they are not Philosophers, and that they know
not what Corruption, Regeneration and the Multiplication of things is, and if
they did rightly behold their work, they would see that they are deceived: Let
Boasters be Boasters; believe in these things nothing but what your eyes see,
and consider always the possibility of Nature, so shall you easily come out of
this Laby^inth.

Lastly, I desire you that you would not be offended that I have held you so
long with this Treatise; the condition which at present I suffer, permits
little rest to write of this Operation; therefore have I cast it on the Paper
so miserably; when I have more leisure, I will finish other Writings, which as
yet for want of opportunity I cannot. The Alchymists everlasting God illuminate
the Lovers of Truth with his Spirit, and bring them out of the Bonds of thick
darkness and unprofitable Talk of supposed Learned men, Amen.

ADDITION OUT OF THE HALIGRAPHIA OF BASIL VALENTINE. How to make the Salt of
Antimony.
POwder good Hungarian Antimony small as Meal, and calcine it over a gentle
Cole-fire, as men usually do, always stirring it with an Iron till all be
whitish, and it smoke no more, but at length endures an indifferent strong
Fire; then put it into a Crucible, and melt it into a transparent Yellow Glass;
beat this Glass small, put it into a retort Glass, and pour on it strong
distilled Wine vin. let it stand in a gentle warmth, and the Vinegar will
extract the tincture of antimony, and will be colored very high, which
Tincture or extract of antimony may be farther prepared, and may be used for an
excellent Medicine. ^ Bas. Val. Trium mag.

Now when the Tincture is all extracted, and colors no more the Vinegar,
then dry the Powder at the bottom wholly, which will be black, grind it with so
much yellow {sulphur}, put it into a melting-pot well luted, and put it into an
indifferent Fire till the {sulphur} be wholly burnt away, then grind the matter
remaining very small, and pour on it new distilled Vinegar and draw the Salt
thereby, and afterward through reiterated distillations draw off the eagerness
of the Vinegar from it, and clarify the Salt with the Spirit of Wine till it
be bright, clear and white, if thou have wrought rightly, thou have the Salt of
antimony wholly fixed and active, although there is another way to make the Salt
of antimony, which is writ elsewhere, Dos. 4 gr. it is equal to the Salt of,
and cures all Diseases, it may easily be made Sol.

THE USE OF THE Salt of ANTIMONY.
THis Salt of Antimony is of a wonderful operation; for it performs almost all
that the Salt of Gold does, given in like quantity; it cleanses the whole body
of man, purifieth the Blood, expels all Evils, consumes all obnoxious Humors,
whence all open Sores have their beginning and recourse to; it cures the French
Pox, taken four gr. at the most with a dram of the distilled water of Lignum
Vitae, sweating upon it, and this used daily till amendment.

The water of Lignum Vitae is thus made; First, Grind it small, then moisten it
with good Spirit of Wine in a Vessel close stopped; let it stand certain days in
a gentle heat; this done, pour a good quantity of Fumitory water, or Scabious
water upon it; digest them 14 days in a Bath, then distill it; reserve the
Liquor apart, and the Oil apart in Glasses close stopped; use the Water with the
Salt of Antimony. It is likewise used with good success in other Diseases,
whereof we treated in another place; but an understanding Physician knows very
well what Virtues are in Guiacum, and what benefit it does in the cure of
diseases. There are other ways to distill a Water and Oil of the said Wood,
which is needless here to be mentioned.

The Salt of Antimony checks the Leprosy, and other deep rooted Diseases; it
is good against the Gout, and weakness of the Joints, purifies and makes good
blood, corroborates the Heart, and the Balsam of man's Body, drunk with a
spoonful of Aqua vitae; it restores lost strength, opens all internal
Imposthumes, clenses all external corroding old Sores, being strewed into them,
or duly applied with good and convenient Plasters or Ointments, Being
dissolved in good distilled Wine Vinegar, it does in a short time bring great
ease to evil and incurable Sores to all Admiration. Being drunk with waters of
Wormwood or Carduus Benedictus, it cures all Agues of long standing, which are
deeply rooted, and admit no Cure, especially the quartane; being drunk with
Mint or Wormwood-water, it causes good Digestion; drunk with waters of
Speedwel, Red Corn-Rose-water causes a good Memory.

This Salt is used in Alchymy or Transmutation of Metals into GoId, if you add
to it the fatness which drops out of the Wheels of the Chariot of the Sun
whenas the Alchymists Phaeton undertook to drive it, as the Poets describe it
in their Alchymistical Fiction. For the excellent Fictions of the Poets which
they produce and write concerning the Celestial Gods, are nothing else but
Covers to conceal the secret Arts and Mysteries of Alchymy; as of Apollo, when
he slew the Serpent Python; as also the Adultery of Mars and Venus; and it
shall be proved, as I am of the opinion, that Chemical Operations are revealed
in Poetical Fictions when they wrote of the Loves and Venereal Actions of the
Gods and Goddesses; as also when they introduce various and wonderful
Metamorphoses and Transmutations; for if we should understand their Fables
literally, we should prejudice wise Antiquity, to think that such understanding
and wise persons should believe, teach and write such and so many wicked things
of their Gods.

FINIS.
These BOOKS are to be sold by Moses Pit at the White Heart in Little Britain.
Folio.
CAssandra, the famed Romance, 1667. Brigg's Logarithms. Francisci Suarez
Metaphysica. 4o. Dr. John Pell's Introduction to Algebra, 1668. Nich.
Mercatoris Logrithmo-Technia, sive Methodus construend; Logarithmos, 1668.
Jacobi Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae, 1668. Dr. Joh. Wallis, Opera
Mechanica, pars 1, and 2, 1670. Banister's works. Hugh Broughton's Consent of
Scripture. Snellii Typhis Batavus, Lugd. Bat. 1624. Observat. Hassiacae.
8o. Petrus Paaw, de ossibus Amst reod. 1633. Bthlia Hebraea, Josephi Athia
1661. Gualieri Needh^m, Disquisitio Anatomica De Formato Foet^ 1667.
Buxtorfius's Epitome of his H^brew Grammar, translated into English by John
Davis, 1658. from, Scriptores in Scripturam Now in the Press. The Fortunate
Fool, 1670. A letter from a Gentleman ^ the Lord Howards Retinue ^ his Friend
in London, Dated ^ Fox, Nov. 1669. A Discourse in vindication ^ D^s C^wles
Systeme, and Opin^on concerning Brutes. Now i^ the Press. The Adventures of Mr.
T. S. a^ English Merchant, taken Pris^ner by the Turks of Argiers.
Pharmacopoeia Land. 24. 1668.

