A SERMON PREACHED before the KING AT White Hall, MAY the Seventh, MDCLXXVI.

BY JOHN SVDBVRY, D.D. And DEAN of Durham, Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

In the SAVOY: Printed by T. Newcomb; and are to be sold by John Herringman
next to the Fountain-Tavern in the Strand. 1676.

1 TIMOTHY 3.15. -- The Pillar and Ground of the Truth.


THE care of all the Churches, which lay upon St. Paul, would neither suffer
him to keep a constant residence upon any one of them, nor to leave them as
Sheep without a Shepherd to have that care of them in his absence, which he
himself had when he was present with them.

And therefore having spent some time at Ephesus, he departed from thence into
Macedonia, leaving the care of that Church to Timothy; and wrote this Epistle
to him, to let him know how he ought to behave himself in so excellent and
worthy a Province as that was, which he had committed to him, as he tells him
in this and the former Verse: These things write I unto thee, hoping to come
unto thee shortly. But if I tarry long, that thou may know how thou ought
to behave thy self in the House of God, which is the Church of the living God,
the Pillar and Ground of the Truth.

In which words he sets before him the Dignity of that Church, which he had
committed to his care, in three excellent Titles; The House of God; The Church
of the living God; The Pillar and Ground of the Truth: Every one of which, is
very worthy of a distinct and particular Consideration; but this last has the
most need of it, because it has been very much perplexed with a great deal of
work about it, to make it serve the pride and ambition of a Church, of which
there is not so much as any mention throughout the whole Epistle. All the
Greatness of the Church of Rome, the Sovereignty of Power and Jurisdiction
which it claims over all other Churches, the Infallibility of all her
Doctrines, and an Immovable Station in the Truth, from which it can never
fall, are charged upon this Text; but how unreasonably, we shall see in the
Examination of these three Particulars.

I. The Church, which is here called The Pillar and Ground of the Truth. II.
The Truth of which this Church is The Pillar and Ground. III. The importance of
these words, The Pillar and Ground of the Truth.
Where it will not be hard to make it clear and evident, that this pretended
infallible Oracle of Truth, is very much mistaken in every one of these
Particulars; The Church; The Truth; and, The Pillar and Ground.

For the Church, of which St. Paul speaks in these words, was not the Church of
Rome. The Truth of which he speaks, was not the Truth of which the Church of
Rome takes upon it to be the Pillar and Ground. The Pillar and Ground in their
sense is not the sense of St. Paul; and in the sense of St. Paul, there was not
any Church in the World to which this Honor of being the Pillar and Ground of
the Truth, was not more due than it is to the present Church of Rome.

And first, for the Church, nothing can be more clear and evident, than that
the Church of which St. Paul speaks in these words, was not the Church of Rome,
but the Church of Ephesus: for Timothy, to whom he wrote this Epistle, was not
the Bishop of Rome, but of Ephesus. There St. Paul left him, when he departed
from thence into Macedonia; and he left him to abide there, and to do the
Office of a Bishop there, as he tells him at the beginning of this Epistle. I
besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into Macedonia, that thou
might charge some that they teach no other Doctrine.

This Church of Ephesus is called the Pillar and Ground of the Truth, not as it
was the Local Church of Ephesus, divided from all other Churches, as the City
of Ephesus was divided from all other Cities: Nor as the Visible Head of them
all: But as it was one with them all in the Communion of that one Catholic and
Apostolic Church, of which that and all particular Churches were so many Parts
and Members. Which one Catholic and Apostolic Church, was One, not by a
corporal assembling together in one place, but by an unanimous profession of
one and the same Catholic and Apostolic Faith and Doctrine, and Discipline,
which was of more Power and Virtue to make them all one, than any distance of
place, or difference of Laws, Languages, Customs, Manners, or any other
difference among them, could be to make them two. Secondly, Catholic, because
it was not limited to any Nation, as the Church of the Israelites was confined
to one Family, which was the House of Jacob; and all their Sacrifices to one
place, which was the Temple at Jerusalem: but extended to all men every where,
without any distinction of Jews and Gentiles, Barbarians, Scythians, bond and
free, male and female. Thirdly, Apostolic, because that one Catholic Faith
and Doctrine in which they were all joined together in one, was that which they
all had received from the Apostles, whose sound was gone out into all the
Earth, Romans 10.18.
and their words unto the ends of the World.

Now as that one Catholic and Apostolic Church was the Pillar and Ground of
the Truth, by their visible profession of that Truth, as we shall see
afterward: So particular Churches, which made a visible profession of the same
Catholic and Apostolic Truth, were one with it, and every one of them might
be called a Pillar and Ground of the Truth, especially such of them as were the
most eminent and conspicuous; and such was the Church of Ephesus. For as the
Churches of the East were more numerous and conspicuous when St. Paul wrote
this Epistle, than the Churches of the West: so the Church of Ephesus was of
great note and eminence among the Churches of the East. It was as eminent a
Church for the profession of the Truth of Christian Religion, as the City of
Ephesus was for Heathenish Idolatry and Superstition, when it was a Worshipper
of the great Goddess Diana, and of the Image which fell down from Jupiter. The
Preaching of the Gospel had such an influence from that City, Act. 19.10.
which was the Metropolis of the lesser Asia, that all they which dwelt in Asia
heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks. The Men of Learning,
who had busied their Wits, and spent much of their time in the study of Curious
Arts, were so taken with it, as not only to renounce all further study of those
Curious Arts; but to show their resolution never to return to that Study again,
they brought their Books together and burned them before all men; Act. 19.19,
20.
and they counted the price of them; and found it fifty thousand pieces of
silver: so mightily grew the Word of God, and prevailed. And the Crafts-men of
the City, who got their Wealth by making Silver Shrines for Diana, were so
alarmed at the success of it, as to perceive that the Temple of the great
Goddess Diana would be despised, and her Magnificence destroyed, whom all Asia
and the World worshipped. And which troubled them more, their Trade was in
great danger to be lost; for that was the first Argument which Demetrius used
to raise them up into an uproar, Verse. 25. Sirs, ye know that by this Craft we
have our Wealth.

The Church of Ephesus had this further Honor, not only to be one of the Seven
Churches which were presented to St. John, in the Vision of Seven Golden
Candlesticks, and Christ in the midst of them, commanding him to write so many
Epistles to them, which he himself dictated to him; but to be the first of
them; Revel. 1.11.
and the Character which he gives of that Church, is such as might well become
a Church which was a Pillar and Ground of the Truth: Revel. 2.2, 3.
I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not
bear them which are evil: And thou have tried them which say they are Apostles,
and are not, and have found them liars; and have born, and have patience, and
for my Names sake have labored, and have not fainted.

Now if the Church of Ephesus, which had all this Honor, had aspired to a
Supremacy over all other Churches, it might have made a fairer Title to it by
St. Paul, than that which the Church of Rome has made by St. Peter. For St.
Gal. 1.15.
Paul was separated to his Office from his Mothers Womb. He was called to it in
a singular and extraordinary manner, by Christ appearing to him in a Vision
from Heaven. Acts 9.3.
He was honored by him with this Character, Verse. 15.
He is a chosen Vessel unto me, to bear my Name before the Gentiles and Kings,
and the Children of Israel. 2 Cor. 11.5.
He was not a whit behind the very chief Apostles. 1 Cor. 15.10
He labored more abundantly than they all. 2 Cor. 11.28.
The care of all the Churches lay upon him. Romans 15.20.
He strived to preach the Gospel not where Christ was named, lest he should
build upon another man's foundation. He conferred not with flesh and blood, Gal.
1.16, 17
neither went he up to Jerusalem to them that were Apostles before him. They
who seemed to be somewhat in conference added nothing to him. Gal. 2.6.
He was so far from learning any thing of St. Verse. 11.
Peter, and from looking upon him as his Superior, that he withstood him to
the face; and told him plainly, that he, and others whom he had misled, walked
not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel. Verse. 14.
And St. Peter was so far from rebuking him for his insolence, as to make an
honorable mention of him: 2 Pet. 3.15.
Our beloved Brother Paul, according to the Wisdom given to him.

St. Paul, who was thus highly honored, had been Preaching the Gospel to the
Ephesians for the space of three years: Acts 20.31.
But there is not so much as any express mention in the Scripture that ever St.
Peter was at Rome; and we may see they are hard put to prove it, when they
cannot allege any one Text for it but that, 1 Pet. 5.15.
The Church which is at Babylon elect together with you, saluteth you.

It was likewise a singular care which St. Paul had of the Church of Ephesus,
that in his absence he commended the care of it to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.1.
a person indear'd to him by many Names; 2 Timothy 1.1. Col. 1.1. Romans 16.21.
His own Son in the Faith; His beloved Son; His Brother; His Work-fellow: and
wrote two Epistles to him, to let him know how he ought to behave himself in so
excellent and worthy a Province as that which he calls The House of God, the
Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of the Truth. Whereas St. Peter
never wrote any one Epistle to the Romans, nor do we read of any one whom he
left to take care of that Church in his absence, though he was so much absent
that it is much doubted whether he were ever there.

For all that the ancient Fathers have written of his being Bishop of Antioch
seven years, and after that Bishop of Rome twenty and five years, and after
that crucified under Nero, is upon the Testimony of Eusebius, of whom
Bellarmine says that he was deceived in some things, and we are very well
assured that he was deceived in this: for three years after St. Paul's
Conversion, he went up, not to Rome, but to Jerusalem, to see Peter, Gal 1.18.
and there he found him, and abode with him fifteen days. Gal. 2.1, 9.
Then fourteen years after he went up again to Jerusalem; and there he found
him. He was present at the Council at Jerusalem, as we read Act. 15. which was
eighteen years after Christ: And in the former Chapters of the Acts of the
Apostles, we find him there, or thereabouts, a great way from Rome. After that
he preached the Gospel to those of Pontus, Asia, Galatia, Cappadocia, and
Bithynia. And if after all this time he sat Bishop of Antioch seven years, and
after that five and twenty years Bishop of Rome, he must outlive Nero more
years than Nero Reigned, and therefore he could not be crucified under him.

But as St. Paul, who knew very well that he was not a whit behind the very
chief Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.5.
did never offer to put himself before and above them all; and among the
Apostles there were some who in regard of their Personal Excellencies are
called Chief and Pillars, yet without any Jurisdiction over the rest: so among
Churches, though the Churches of the East were more numerous, and of greater
note than those of the West, they never required any subjection from them; and
among the Eastern Churches, though the Church of Ephesus was of great note and
eminence, it never assumed any Sovereignty over the other Churches. There is no
ground in Scripture, nor in the Catholic and Apostolic Church, that will
afford any standing for such a Pillar, as that of a Local Church, which is to
all other Churches as the Head in a Body to all the Members of that Body, as a
Foundation in a Building to all the Building that stands upon it, as a Root in
a Tree to all the Branches: For though the Church of Rome arrogates to it self
all these Titles, together with that of the Catholic and Apostolic Church,
this is so far from being Catholic and Apostolic Truth, that it is neither
Catholic, nor Apostolic, nor Truth.

1. It is not Catholic: for though the City of Rome had that Dominion over the
Kings of the Earth, for which it was called Caput Orbis, the Head of the World;
the Church of Rome did never claim any such Headship over all other Churches
for above three hundred years after St. Paul wrote this Epistle: and was so far
from denying her Communion to all other Churches, but those which would accept
it upon such terms as those, which Nahash the Ammonite proposed to the men of
Jabesh-Gilead; 1 Samuel 11.2.
On this condition will I make a Covenant with you, that I may thrust out all
your right eyes. Or from saying to them as the Bramble in the Parable of Jotham
said unto the Trees; Judge. 9.15.
If in truth ye anoint me King over you, then come, and put your trust in my
shadow: and if not, let fire come out of the Bramble, and devour the Cedars of
Lebanon. That in the sixth Canon of the Council of Nice, which in the Arabic
Canons is the eighth, the Bishop of Rome is proposed as an example to the
Bishop of Alexandria to contain himself within his own limits.

2. It is not Apostolic; for the Apostles knew nothing of any Superiority and
Subjection among themselves, or among the Churches which were founded by them.
They knew no other Head of the Church, Col. 1.18.
but Him, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in all
things he might have the pre-eminence. They knew no other Foundation, but that
of Apostles and Prophets; Ephesians. 2.20.
Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone. And in that Foundation all
the Apostles were as much of the Foundation as any one of them, and therefore
are called Twelve Foundations, Revel. 21.14.

The Church of Jerusalem was in some sense the Root of all Churches; St. Paul
calls it so, Romans 11.17. But it never claimed any Superiority over all other
Churches upon that account. But as for the Church of Rome, he says plainly in
the same Verse, that it was not the Root, but a Branch of a Wild-Olive graffed
in among other Branches, and with them partook of the Root and Fatness of the
Olive Tree. And as if he had foreseen how ready that Church would be to boast
it self against other Churches, he gives them an Admonition against it, in the
next Verse: Boast not against the Branches: but if thou boast, thou bear not
the Root, but the Root thee. And argues the matter with them in the next Verse:
Thou will say then, the Branches were broken off, that I might be graffed in.
Well, because of Unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by Faith: be
not high-minded, but fear; for if God spared not the Natural Branches, take
heed lest he also spare not thee. And sets before them the example of Gods
Severity against the Natural Branches, as a warning to them not to be
high-minded, but fear, at the next Verse: Behold therefore the Goodness and
Severity of God: on them which fell, Severity; but toward thee, Goodness, if
thou continue in his Goodness, otherwise thou also shall be cut off.

3. As it is not Catholic nor Apostolic, so it is so far from Truth, that
there never was a more Fundamental Error, than that of a Local Church, which
is such a Pillar and Ground of Truth, that it cannot err. But if in the Epistle
to the Romans there is no mention of such a Pillar and Ground of Truth; and in
this Epistle to Timothy, where these words are found, there is not any mention
of the Church of Rome, I need not say any more to show how much they are out in
the first Particular, which is the Church. Let us proceed to the second
Particular, which is the Truth; and see if they be not as much out in the
Truth, as they are in the Church.

1. The Truth of which the Church is the Pillar and Ground, is not all Truth:
For there are many Truths for which the Church is not concerned; they may stand
or fall according to the strength or weakness of those Arguments by which they
are supported, or with which they are assaulted, without any peril or prejudice
to the Church. God who would have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the Truth, has set up a Church to lead men to the knowledge of
all that Truth which is necessary for them, that they may be saved: but as for
many other Truths, which are professed and taught in Schools and Universities;
as all men are not born to be bred up in them, so the knowledge of them is not
so necessary to them, but that they may be saved without it. When Christ
promised his Disciples that he would send them the Spirit of Truth, Joh. 16.13.
to guide them into all Truth, He spoke of that Truth which was necessary for
them to know, for the discharging of that Office and Ministry which he had
committed to them, not all other Truth. And therefore when the Manichees
gloried in him who was the Patriarch of their Sect, that he was a man full of
the Holy Ghost, and led into all Truth, for that he could discourse of Truths
in Astronomy, and other Mathematical Sciences; St. Austin answered them very
well, That this was no Argument to prove that he was full of the Holy Ghost:
for the Holy Ghost was not given to lead men into such Truths; for he was not
given to make Mathematicians, but Christians. And though it is true that the
Infallible Chair does not in these days meddle with Truths of this nature,
there was a time when it did; but so unluckily, as to condemn one Virgilius for
holding that there were Antipodes, and that the Earth is round, and the Sun,
and Moon, and Stars, move about it in the other Hemisphere, as they do in this;
which is a demonstrable Truth.

But to let this pass, as it is not all Truth, so neither is it all Theological
Truth, or Truth in Divinity: for Divinity is a Science, in which there are some
Truths which dwell in that Light which is so inaccessible, that the most
learned men are not ashamed to confess that such knowledge is too wonderful for
them, and that they cannot attain unto it. And there be many other Truths about
which learned men may differ in opinion, and dispute with so much probability
on either side, that though the Truth cannot be with both of them, because what
the one affirms, the other denies; yet they who are in the Error may be
persuaded that the Truth is with them, and their Error shall not prejudice
their Salvation, unless they suffer themselves to be led into it by some
prejudice or passion, or be so obstinate in it as to show that they seek not
Truth, but Victory; and would rather persist in an Error, than by suffering
themselves to be led out of it, seem to acknowledge that they were in an
Error. The Scriptures, which are able to make all men wise unto Salvation, are
not so clear and evident in all things, but that we may say of other Books of
Scripture, as St. Peter says of the Epistles of St. Paul, There are some
things in them hard to be understood: But the more hard they are to be
understood, the less necessary they are to be known. God, who has made the
Fruits of the Earth, which are necessary for the food and sustenance of men, to
grow upon the face of it, where every eye may see them, and every hand may
gather them; but hid the Mines of Gold and Silver, which serve for Riches and
Ornament, in the Bowels of the Earth, where they cannot be found but with much
seeking, nor be wrought out, and purged from that Dross with which they are
mixed, but with great labor, has likewise made all that Truth which is
necessary to feed the Souls of men to Eternal Life, so easy to be found, that
we may say of that, as the Wiseman says of Wisdom, Wisd. 6.12.
Wisdom is easily seen of them that love her, and found of such as seek her.
But there be many other Truths which serve to enrich and adorn the Soul, which
he has reserved to exercise and reward the labor and study of them that seek
for them as for Silver, and as for hidden Treasures. If there were an
Infallible Oracle to determine all Truths, the easiness of coming to the
knowledge of them would much abate and lessen the value and esteem of them: but
when the difficulty of finding them excites desire, and desire stirs up labor
and study, and labor and study find that Truth which could not be found
without it, it is the more joyfully embraced, and more steadfastly retained.

But, Thirdly, The Truth of which the Church is the Pillar and Ground, is that
Truth which is no where to be found but in the Church; but is so manifest in
the profession of the Church, that they who cannot find it any where else, may
find it there. For as in all Sciences there are some Truths which are proper
and peculiar to them, as Truths in Logic, Truths in Natural and Moral
Philosophy, Truths in all Mathematical Sciences: so there are some Truths in
Divinity which are proper and peculiar to it, which as they could never have
been known but by Divine Revelation, so they have been made known to the
Apostles by the Spirit of Truth, which was given to them to guide them into all
Truth, and by the Apostles to the Church. Such is that which St. Paul calls,
The Truth of the Gospel, Col. 1.5. The Truth of Christ, 2 Cor. 11.10. The Truth
of God, Romans 15.8. And many times it is called Truth, and the Truth, without
any note of difference from all other Truth. Truth, in opposition to the
Religion of the Heathen as Truth, is opposed to Falsehood and Lies: Truth, in
opposition to the Religion of the Jews as Truth, is opposed to Figures and
Shadows: Truth, in opposition to all other Truth, not as contrary to it; for
one Truth cannot be contrary to another, but in a superlative sense the most
excellent and most incomparable Truth. For though all Truth is Truth, yet as
St. Paul says of the Law and the Gospel compared together, 2 Cor. 3.10.
Even that which was made glorious had no glory by reason of the glory that
excels: So we may say of Truths in Philosophy and all Sciences, compared
with the Truth of the Gospel, That which is Truth is not Truth in comparison of
the Truth that excels. Such is the Truth of which the Apostle speaks in the
next words to these of the Text, which some have joined together, expounding
these words by them: Without controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness:
God was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received in Glory. The
Truth which he calls the Truth which is after Godliness in hope of Eternal
Life, which God that cannot lie promised before the World began, but has in
due time manifested his Word through Preaching. The Truth by which we are
begotten again, Jam. 1.18. Of his own Will begat he us again by the Word of
Truth The Truth that makes us Freemen, Joh. 8.32. Ye shall know the Truth,
and the Truth shall make you free. The sanctifying Truth, Joh. 17.17. Sanctify
them with thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. The saving Truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. God would
have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth. And this
is the Truth of which the Church is the Pillar and Ground in the sense of St.
Paul. Now what sense that is, follows in my third and last Particular, which is
the importance of these words, The Pillar and Ground of the Truth.

Here are two words, the Pillar and Ground, but they are very well joined
together, for they signify two things which are joined together in a Pillar
that stands firm and steadfast. The former word signifies that which we call
the Body of the Pillar; the latter word signifies the Basis, or Foundation, or
Foot of the Pillar: both together fignifie a Pillar standing upon a Basis or
Foundation. But the Pillar and Ground of Truth, is a Metaphorical Expression,
and Metaphors are apt to beget Mistakes: for in every Metaphor there is
something which is like, and something which is not like; and as when the
Metaphor is taken from something wherein there is a likeness, the Metaphorical
Expression makes the sense more elegant and clear; but when it is stretched to
something wherein there is no likeness, in stead of making the sense more
clear, it makes nonsense. As in this Metaphor of the Pillar and Ground of
Truth: A Pillar, or rather many Pillars, upon which a House or Church is built,
(as the Temple of Jerusalem was built upon many Pillars, and so was the Temple
of Diana at Ephesus) the Pillars are as the Foundation upon which the House or
Church is built, as the Foot of the Pillar is to the Pillar which stands upon
it. But in this sense neither the Church of Ephesus, nor the Church of Rome,
nor any National Church, nor the whole Catholic and Apostolic Church, could
be well and truly called The Pillar and Ground of Truth; because the Truth is
not built upon the Church, but the Church upon the Truth. And as there could
never have been a True Church, if the Truth of the Church had not been before
the Church: so if the Truth be removed from the Church, it is no longer a True
Church. There is no Power or Authority in any Church, to make any thing a Truth
which was not a Truth before. The Apostles delivered the whole Faith to the
Church; and if all the Churches in the World should join together, they cannot
make one new Article of Faith: All that they can do, is to deliver what they
have received from them who have delivered what they also received, till we
come at last to the Apostles, who delivered what they also received from the
Spirit of Truth, by which they were led into all that Truth, which could not
otherwise be made known to them, and assisted in delivering those Truths which
were by other infallible proofs made known to them.

But beside those many Pillars upon which Houses and Churches were built, there
were single Pillars erected by the Heathen, to such purposes, as do serve very
well to express the sense of this Metaphor, which the Apostle here uses by way
of allusion to them.

As first, There were Pillars which they reared up on high with Images of their
Gods and Goddesses upon them, sitting or standing, or in some other posture to
attract the eyes of men to look up to them with that Respect and Veneration
which is due to Divine things. Of such Pillars we read Lev. 26.1. Ye shall make
you no Idols, nor Graven Image, neither rear you up a standing Image or Pillar,
as it is in the Margin. Now as St. Paul says of the Heathen, Romans 1.25.
that they changed the Truth of God into a Lie; and the Prophet Habakkuk
calls an Idol a Teacher of Lies: Hab. 2.18.
So we may say of those Pillars of Idols, they were Pillars of Lies. And in
allusion to them the Church, which sets up the true Worship of the true God,
above all the false Worship of all false gods, to draw the eyes of all men to
look up to it with that Veneration which is due to it, may be called the Pillar
and Ground of Truth, Excelsa Columna, according to that which the Prophet
Isaiah foretold of it in another Metaphor, Isai. 2.2. It shall come to pass in
the last days, that the Mountain of the Lords House shall be established in the
top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills; and all Nations
shall flow unto it. But in this sense the Church of Rome is more like to those
Pillars of the Heathen, than any other Christian Church. For though it does not
set up those Idols and Images of the Heathen to be worshipped; it sets up
Images and Creatures to be worshipped, which are either made Idols, or are in
so much danger to be made Idols, that by the Confession of Bellarmine, they
that worship God in an Image, or in a Creature, expose themselves to great
peril, and are forced to use the most subtle distinctions, which learned men do
not understand, much less the ignorant and unlearned.

Secondly, We read of many Pillars erected by the Heathen, with Inscriptions
upon them; Inscriptions of Historical Narrations, of which it may be some were
true, and some were fabulous; and many other Inscriptions of Laws, Leagues,
Covenants, Precepts, Decrees, Mysteries, etc. in which sense the Metaphor of a
Pillar is used, Revel. 3.12. Him that overcomes will I make a Pillar in the
Temple of my God -- and I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the Name
of the City of my God, which is the New Jerusalem which comes down out of
Heaven from my God; and I will write upon him my new Name. In this sense the
Catholic and Apostolic Church which exposes the Scriptures, which Ireneus
calls the Pillar and Ground of the Faith of the Church, and in which are
written the Oracles of God, his Laws, Covenants, Decrees, Mysteries of his
Will, Histories of his Providence, and many other Divine Truths, to be as
legible as Inscriptions upon a Pillar; and every particular Church, which makes
a visible profession of all that Truth which it has received from the
Apostles, and the whole Catholic and Apostolic Church, so far forth as it is
one with that Catholic and Apostolic Church, is a Pillar and Ground of the
Truth, Inscripta Columna, a Pillar bearing those Inscriptions upon it, in such
Characters as make them legible to all men. But in this sense the Church of
Rome cannot so well be called a Pillar and Ground of the Truth, as other
Churches.

1. Because other Churches, Hebrew, Greek, Persian, Syrian, Arabian, Ethiopian,
have exposed the Scriptures to be read in their Vulgar Tongue: But the Church
of Rome does not expose the Scriptures to be read but in a Language which the
greatest part of them that are concerned to know the Truths which are revealed
in them, do not understand; by which means they have kept the people in so
great ignorance of the Scriptures, that at the beginning of the Reformation
many of them knew so little of the New Testament, as-to believe that it was a
Book which had been written by Luther.

2. Because they set up unwritten Traditions, of which it may be some are true,
and some are fabulous, and make them all of equal Authority with the Scriptures.

3. Because they make the Authority of the Scriptures so dependant upon their
own Authority, that without it, they are of no more Authority than Esops
Fables, as some of them have said, and others of them commend the saying.

4. Because though they hold the Foundation, they have built upon that
Foundation such things as St. 1 Cor. 3.12.
Paul calls Wood, Hay and Stubble, and would make the World believe that they
are Gold, Silver, Precious Stones; which is not the part of a Pillar and Ground
of Truth.

But, Thirdly, The Pillar and Ground of Truth as it is in the Text, that is a
Pillar set upon a Basis or Foundation, which keeps it firm and steadfast, is a
very good expression of such a profession of the Truth as is without wavering.
In which sense St. Basil calls Abraham a Pillar of Faith, because when he was
tempted with a great temptation, He staggered not through Unbelief, Romans 4.20.
but was strong in the Faith. And in an Epistle written by the Churches of
Vienna and Lions, mentioned by Eusebius; the Martyrs, who suffered a great
Persecution for their Faith, and were not shaken in it, are called Pillars; and
Atalus, one of great note among them, is called a Pillar and Ground of the
Church. And in this sense the Catholic and Apostolic Church may well be
called the Pillar and Ground of the Truth; Immota Columna, a Pillar that stood
unmoved upon that Ground on which it was set. For though some Local Churches,
which were but as so many Candlesticks, though they were of Gold, have been
removed; the Catholic and Apostolic Church was so well settled upon a sure and
strong Foundation, that all the means which have been used to overthrow it,
have served to establish it.

Great Endeavors were used at first to prevent the setting up of this Pillar
upon the Ground of it, by them whom the Scripture calls the Builders: but the
Destruction which they thought to bring upon the Pillar and the Ground, fell
upon themselves; and the Destruction which fell upon themselves, served very
much to the Edification of that Pillar and Ground of Truth, which they sought
to destroy.

No sooner was the Pillar set up upon the Ground, but great Force and Violence
was used to throw it down. The Kings of the Earth were assembled, and the
Princes took counsel together against it, as the Children of Edom in the day of
Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it even to the ground. But all the Force and
Violence which they used to overthrow it, served to let them see that it was so
well settled upon a sure and strong Foundation, that it could not be overthrown.
And as all the Pillars of Heathenish Idolatry and Superstition, which were so
many Pillars of Lies, fell before it like Dagon before the Ark of God; so that
we may say of them as the Angel said of Babylon, Revel. 18.2.
Babylon is fallen, is fallen, So we may say of this Pillar and Ground of Truth, as
Christ says of the House built upon a Rock, The Rain descended, Matthew. 7.25.
and the Floods came, and the Winds blew, and beat upon it, and it fell not;
for it was founded upon a Rock.

There have been from the beginning such as St. 2 Pet. 2.1.
Peter calls False Prophets, who have privily brought in damnable Heresies,
denying the Lord that bought them, and have brought upon themselves swift
destruction. But that swift destruction which they have brought upon
themselves, has served to the Edification of the Church in that Truth which
they sought to destroy.

But this Pillar and Ground of Truth was never in so much danger to be thrown
down by all the force and violence which Jews and Heathens have raised against
it; nor to be undermined by all the Heresies which False Prophets and False
Apostles have devised, as the Truth of it has been to be perverted by that
Church, which has endeavored defendendo concutere, to shake this Pillar and
Ground by seeming to defend it. For though it has not removed the Pillar from
the Ground, but is so far Catholic and Apostolic, as to hold the Foundation
of which St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 3.11.
Other Foundation can no man lay, save that which is laid, Jesus Christ; they
have done great wrong to the Truth, by defacing the ancient Inscriptions which
were first written upon this Pillar, with such Alterations and Additions as
they have made. But all these Alterations and Additions have served to raise up
many learned men, and not a few of them of this Church of England, to revive
those ancient Inscriptions, and make many Truths, which are good and
profitable, to be known more legible than they were before.

St. Paul speaks of a time that should come, 2 Timothy 4.3.
when men would not endure sound Doctrine, but according to their own lusts
they would heap up to themselves Teachers, having itching ears. But as he says
in another place, 1 Cor. 11.19.
There must be Heresies, that they which are approved may be made manifest: So
we may say of these itching ears, and the confused multitude of Teachers, which
they have heaped to themselves, They have served to make them that are approved
for holding fast the form of sound words, and Doctrine, which they have
received from the Apostles, and Apostolic Church, the more manifest.

Some Profane Wits have pleased themselves in making Pasquins, and clapping
them upon this Pillar; but they could never make them stick so fast, but that
they have fallen to the ground, and been trodden under feet of men. But the
Pillar and Ground of Truth can never fall: The Ground on which it stands is the
Rock, Matthew. 16.18
against which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail: The Faith by which it
stands is the Belief of a Kingdom which cannot be moved: Heb. 12.28.
The Doctrine which is built upon this Faith is Sound Doctrine; Tit. 1.9.
and as there have been, so there will be so many holding the profession of
this Faith and Doctrine without wavering, as will keep up this Pillar and
Ground of Truth so long as the Pillars of Heaven and Earth shall stand; and
till He who is the Author and Finisher of our Faith, bring us to the end of our
Faith, which is the Salvation of our Souls.

FINIS.

