THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN TO THE LOWER HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT TOUCHING DIVERSE
GRIEVANCES AND INCONVENIENCES OF THE STATE etc.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson for Thomas Walkley, 1641.

THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN TO THE LOWER House of Parliament touching diverse
greivances and inconveniences of the State etc.
To my Noble friends of the lower House of Parliament.
IF my Country had held me worthy to have served in this Parliament, I had now
been made a member of your lower house as formerly I have been in sundry
other Parliaments, but how unkindly so ever she deals with me, I will ever
show my thankfulness to her, and deliver by way of observation what I have
heretofore learned in that grave and wise assembly for admonishment to the
elder, and a pathway for the younger to walk in.

Parliaments in my time have been wont to take up some space at the first
meeting to settle the House and to determine of unlawful elections, and in
this point they never had greater cause to be circumspect, then at this time
for by an abuse lately crept in, there is introduced a custom which if it be
not foreseen and prevented will be great derogation to the honor and a
weakening to the power of your house, where the law gives a freedom to
Corporations to elect Burgesses and forbids any indirect course to be taken
in their election many of the Corporations are become so base minded and
timorous, that they will not hazard the indignation of a Lord Lieutenants
letter, who underhand sticks not to threaten them with the charge of a Musket
or a horse at a Muster, if that he has not the election of the Burgesses, and
not they themselves.

And commonly those that the Lords recommend are such as desire it for
protection, or are so ignorant of the place they serve for, as that there being
an occasion to speak of the Corporation for which they are chosen, they have
asked their Neighbors sitting by whether it were a Sea or Land Town. If you
seek not to prevent this kind of choice, these mischiefs will follow:

1. The freedom of the Subject will be lessened.

2. The privilege of Corporations will be abrogated, men outlawed, and law
breakers, will be law makers.

3. The voices of your House shall be at the dispose of the Lords of the upper
House, and the assembly of the Commons will be made needelesse.

Gentlemen of far remote Countries, may spare their labor to come up, for
there we shall be contradicted with two years, and that by such men, if they
be examined, and are not liable to taxes, Subsidies, Loanes, or other payments,
they shall enjoy their ends, to wit liberty and freedom, and the Lords dispose
of such laws as they shall purpose.

The next thing that is required, is liberty of speech, without which
Parliaments have little force or power; speeches begets doubts, and resolves
them, and doubts in Schools get understanding, he that doubts much asks
often, and learnes much, and he that fears the worst, soonest prevents a
mischief.

This privilege of speech is anciently granted by the testimony of Philip
Comines a stranger who preferres our Parliaments, and the freedom of the
Subjects in them, above all other assemblies, which freedom if it be broken
or diminished is negligently lost, since the days of Comines.

If freedom of speech should be prohibited when men with modesty make
repetition of the grievances and enormities of the Kingdom, when men shall
desire reformation of wrongs and injuries committed, and have no relation of
evil thought to his Majesty. But with open heart and zeal express their
dutiful and reverent respect to him and his service: I say if this kind of
liberty of speech be not allowed in time of Parliament, they will extend no
farther then to quarter Sessions, and their meetings and assemblies will be
unnecessary for all means of disorder new crept in, and all remedies and
redresses will be quite taken away.

As it is no manners to contest with the King in his election of Counselors
and Servants (for Kings obey no men) but their laws, so were it a great
negligence and part of treason for a subject not to be in speech against the
abuses wrongs and offenses that may be occasioned by persons in authority,
what remedy can be expected from a Prince to the Subjects if the enormities of
his Kingdom be concealed from him, or what King so religious or just in his
own nature, that may not hazard the loss of the hearts of his Subjects
without this liberty of speech in Parliament. For such is the misfortune of
most Princes, and such is the unhappines of Subjects, where Kings affections
are settled, and their loves so far transported to promote servants, as they
only trust and credit what they shall inform.

In this case what Subject dares complain, or what Subject dares contradict
the words or actions of such a Servant, if it be not warranted by freedom of a
Parliament they speaking with humility, for nothing obtains favor so much
with a King, as diligent obedience.

The surest and safest way betwixt the King and his people, and least scandal
of partiality with indifferency, with integrity and sincerity to examine the
grievances of the Kingdom, without touching upon the person of any man further
then the cause gives occasion; for otherwise you shall contest with him that
has the Princes ears open, to hearken to his enchanted tongue, he informs
secretly, when you shall not be admitted to excuse, he will cast your deserved
malice against him to your contempt against the King, and seeking to lessen his
authority, he will make the Prince, the shield of his revenge.

These are the sinister practices of such servants to deceive their
Sovereigns, when these grievances shall be authentically proved and made
manifest to the World, by your pains to examine, and freedom to speak, no
Prince can be so affectionate to a servant, or such an enemy to himself, as
not to admit of this indifferent proceeding, if his services be allowable and
good they will appear with glory: if bad, your labor shall deserve thanks
both of Prince and Country, when justice shall thus shine, people will be
animated to serve their King with integrity; for they are naturally inclined to
imitate Princes in good, or bad: the words of Cicero will then appear, that
malicious and evil men make Princes poor, and one perfect good man is able to
make a Realm rich.

One case I will instance, that is common in the mouths of all people, and
generally vox populi, vox Dei; If one of quality in the last expedition to the
Isle of Rhee endeavored to conceal the number of men lost in the last
encounter, and confidently affirmed their number not to exceed three or four
hundred, till a Doctor of physic out of tenderness of conscience and duty to
his Majesty could not dissemble, the vulgar and true report, but acquainted his
Majesty of 2000. of his Subjects there lost, this was so contrary to the first
information, and so displeasing to the Informer and his designs, that he
caused the Physicians remoove, from his highness presence, who yet remains in
kind of a banished man.

The truth of this two reports is easily determined by the Clerks of the bands
of each Company, and is worthy to be discovered for truths sake, truth being so
noble of it self, as it will make him honorable that pronounces it, lies,
may shadow it, but not darken it, they may blame but never shame it, by this
small precedent his Majesty shall see himself abused, and it may be a means
for him to reflect, both upon men and matter.

The men slain are no less injured by concealing their names, whose lives
were lost for King and Country.

The Romans would have held it the highest honor for their friends and
posterity so to do, and the Parliament may fear that those that stick not so
palpably to wrong a King, may as unjustly cast aspersions upon the house and
other his loving Subjects.

There is no remedy left for thse mis-reports, but a freedom of speech in
Parliament, for there is no wise man, but knows what and when to speak, and
how to hold his peace, whilst Subjects tongues are tied, for fear they may
reach him a rap, whose conscience cries guilty; The King and his people are
kept from understanding one another, the enemy is hartened abroad, and the
malignant humor of discontent nourished at home, and all for one who is like a
Dragon that bites the ears of the Elephant, because he knows the Elephant
cannot reach him with his Trunk; And Princes are abused by false reports,
whispered in their ears by Sicophants and Flatterers. Diogines being asked
what Beast bite soarest, answered of wild Beasts the Backbiter, of tame the
Flatterer.

Now to descend to grievances which are of two kinds:

First, Some concerning the Kingdom in general.

Secondly, Some in particular, which have relation to the general.

The grievances in general are so many as will serve for every member of your
House to present two a piece to your viewes; and because I cannot be admitted
amongst you my self, yet in regard I have been a member of you, I will
presume so far as to rank my self with you, and to tender the number of two
to your consideration.

1. My first complaint is of titles of honor, and that in two kinds.

First, In respect of the parties themselves, their estates, and parentage.

Secondly, In respect of the manner of their attaining thereunto, which is
mercenary, ease, and corrupt, which in reason should not hold, for by Law the
consideration is unlawful.

Trajan commended Plutarch for his precepts in School, when he taught that
men should labor to deserve honor, but avoid the getting of it basely, for if
it were reputation to have it by desert, it was infamy to buy it for money; in
that age, where rich men were honored, good men were despised.

Honor is not to be valued according to the vulgar opinion of men, but prized
and esteemed as the surname of virtue engendered in the mind, and such honor,
no King can or men can purchase; He that will strive to be more honorable
then others, ought to abandon passion, pride, and arrogance; that so his virtue
may shine above others, for honor consists not in the title of a Lord, but in
the opinion people have of his virtue, for it is much more honor to deserve
and not to have it, then to have it, and not deserve it.

There is one of three things that commonly causes a man's advancement, desert,
favor, and power.

1. The first makes a man worthy of it, the other two are but abuses; for
favor is but a blind fortune, an ounce of which at Court is better then a
pound of wisdom; fortune never favoreth but flattereth; she never promises,
but in the end she deceives; she never raises, but she casts down
again, and this advancement is meeter to be called luck, then merit. That
honor, that is compassed by power, takes unto it self liberty, and desires
not to be governed by wisdom, but force; It knows not what it desires, nor
has a feeling of any injury, it is neither moved with sweet words, nor
pitiful tears; such men leave not to do evil, because they have a desire
to it, but when their power fails to do it; The true honor amongst the
honorablest, is where fortune casts down, where there is no fault; but it is
infamy where fortune raises, where there is no merit.

Examine the state and condition of men raised to honor these five and twenty
years past, and whether it be desert, favor, or power that has preferred
them.

Enter into the mischief the Kingdom has suffered, and does suffer by it,
and the cause of his Majesty's great wants will soon appear.

Collect with your selves, how many poor and needy companions have been
raised to the highest top of honor, then will it appear whether desert,
favor, or power advanced them.

After this examine, their Princely expenses in these five and twenty years,
their estates in present, and what is requisite to maintain their future
degrees of honor, to themselves and their posterity, and you shall find his
Majesty's annual revenewes consumed and spent upon those unworthy persons,
besides the impayring and impoverishing of the state, it bringing with it the
contempt of greatness and authority.

It breeds an inward malice in Gentlemen better deserving of their Country,
better able to maintain the degree of honor without charge to King or
Kingdom, and whose houses and alliance may better challenge then the best of
them.

It breeds discontent in the meaner sort of Subjects to see his Majesty's
wealth and revenewes of the Kingdom, thus wasted and consumed, whereby his
Majesty is enforced to exact from them, who would otherwise be able to help
himself.

The ancient and great Nobility of the land cannot choose, but inwardly fret to
see themselves ranked yea overtopped by these men, that once would have thought
it an honor to be a follower of theirs.

The second abuse of honor is the base and mercenary buying of it, observe
commonly what these people are by birth, and mark the manner of their and their
Fathers getting of wealth to compass this title, and you shall find them
people most odious to the Commonwealth, by their extortion usury and other
ungodly kind of getting.

Can there be a greater grievance to a noble mind, then to see these upstart
families by their unsufferable misery, penury, and extortion grown to wealth,
to preceede the best of you in rank, degree, and calling, whose Ancestors have
lost their lives for King and Country, and your selves in many respects more
able and capable of serving your Prince and Commonwealth, then they and every
way better deserving.

The character of a covetous man is, that he gets his goods with care, and
envy of his Neighbors; with sorrow to his enemies, with travel to his body,
with grief to his Spirit, with scruple to his conscience, with danger to his
soul, with suite to his children, and curse to his heirs, his desire is to
live poor, to die rich; But as these vices are made virtues, even so is he
honored for them with title of Nobility.

It is a strange ambition of some of them to purchase the degrees of Earls,
Viscounts, and Barons of other Countries, as of Scotland and Ireland, only for
the name of a Lord, for no other privilege they can challenge in England, if
they commit any criminal offenses, they shall be tried by an ordinary jury,
and hanged, if they stood in danger of arrest (as I think they are not much
enriched by their title) they are subject to catch-pooles, and a Dungion in the
Counter may be their Sanctuary.

And seeing their pride makes them covet to divide themselves from you, and to
become Scots and Irish, you can do no less in requital, but make an Act,
that so long as they hold the titles of Forrainers, they be made incapable to
sit in the House of Parliament, or to enjoy any freedom more then his
Majesty's Subjects of Scotland or Ireland.

Few, of you are there, that have not seen. Nobility highly praised in
England, and much esteemed abroad, and none of you now lives, but to see it
abused, and liberty with too great familiarity in use, the State of the Court,
and reputation of Lords, are much decayed and boldness with contempt crept in,
and no way to be redressed but by a gentle speech in Parliament, that so his
Majesty may see the mischief of it, and reform it, for it rests only in his
power, who only has power to create honor.

When Philip the second King of Spain entered with Arms upon his Kingdom of
Portugal, and that with his sword, he might have any fitting laws, yet were
there four privileges which the Portugals besought they might enjoy; One,
whereof was that the King would make no unworthy person noble without their
approbation, which was granted them, And to this day, they hold that freedom,
which keeps that Kingdom in the ancient state honor and dignity, That is to
say, two Dukes, one Marquess, and eighteen Earls; and thus much for the point
of honor.

The second grievance, I will recommend to your viewes, is the carriage of our
Wars, the excessive charges vainly spent therein, the unworthiness of the
people employed, the grave experience neglected, the designs not warranted by
reason and discretion, and the executions worse performed, with many other
circumstances, that depend upon it.

But before I proceed herein, I must crave leave to speak to two points.

The one to declare the property and condition of Impostures and Deceavers of
Princes.

In the other, I must clear the House of Parliament, of an imputation cast
upon it.

Abusers of Princes are they, that persuade them to War, to become poor,
when they may live in peace, and become rich, when they may be loved, causes
them to be hated, when they may enjoy their lives securely, put them in hazard
of cross fortune rashly; And lastly having necessity to use their Subjects,
puts them into that necessity, as they refuse to do for him, all this is pride
of the perswader as Socrates says.

In the second, I will clear the Parliament, in which I was a member, of an
ungrateful aspersion cast upon it, that is to say, that the Parliament was a
cause to draw his Majesty into War, and failed on their part to contribute
toward it.

These have been often repeated and the Parliament accused, the contrary has
been as often reiterated, and the truth expressed how far the Parliament
proceeded therein, but to stop the mouths of such false reports, and to free
the Parliament of such a calumniation, I must use this Argument.

At the assembly at Oxford, the Parliament being prorogued thither, money was
required of us toward the furnishing of his Majesty's Fleet, then preparing
upon many reasons alleged too tedious now to repeat; with one consent it was
refused, whereupon there was offer made by him that next the King seemed to
have best authority, that if they would, but contribute 40000.l. they should
choose their enemy.

Whereupon I enferre, that before that proposition, there was no enemy, and
therefore no Wars.

The motion of money being denied, the Parliament instantly brake up, and
seeing no enemy was nominated, nor money consented to by us; I see not how the
house can be taxed for peace breakers, but rather the name cast upon some
young men, for youth by nature is prone to pride, especially where experience
wants, they are credulous what they hear that pleases them, and incredulous
with what is told them by wise men, they are despisers of others Councels, and
very poor in their own, they are dangerous for Princes to rely on, for
self-will is of greater force, then precepts.

Now to proceed in October following the Fleet put to Sea, and what they did
is apparent by relation written by their General at his return.

The voyage being ended another followed the next Summer under the command of
that noble Lord the Earl of Linsey, which through the weakness and
dissability of the Ships was not able to perform what he had in charge, and
what he desired.

The last and most lamentable was that to the Isle of Rhee which I likewise
refer to a man I have seen, and to the Books printed and extant.

These, with that to Algiers, to make up a mess of Island voyages, I wish
might be referred to examination of choice and experienced soldiers by land
and by Sea, to report their opinions of it, that so their errors, their
wastfull expenses, their negligences, their weak designs, and want of
experience may appear with the success that might have proved, if advice and
council had had pre-eminence above will and arrogance; for he that is
ignorant of truth and knowledge and led away with pride of his own opinions
must needs err.

After it has past your approbation it is worth his Majesty's view, who then
shall see the difference of actions well managed, and rash and heady
enterprises undertaken by ignorance, and performed with folly.

Business of so great a consequence ought to be considered of Council and not
only of the necessity profit and honor, but of the possibility that was like
to follow, for an action well begun is half ended.

My experience in Discipline of Wars by Land and Sea, can say no more then to
refer it to others, for it is a course, I never was bred to in my youth, and
now to late in my age to practice, only one thing I observe, that in the two
vogayes of Cadeze and R^ee, in the first a Land soldier commanded at Sea, who
knew not what belonged thereunto; And the other was carried by him that was no
soldier neither by Land nor by Sea, and the success proved accordingly in
both, yet their errors were never questioned, but they both highly advanced.

In my opinion the charge they took upon them was as improper as for a
Merchant to become a Judge, for I have ever heard, that there are five things
necessary in a General, to wit knowledge, valor, prevention, authority, and
fortune; The last whereof but one had been better spared at the Isle of Rhee,
for also late authority joined with wilfulness of the Commander was the utter
bane of the action, as the relation tells us.

And it is no marvel, for according to the old saying, the best Fencer is not
always the best Fighter, the fairest Tilter not the best experienced Soldier,
nor the ear of the favorite at the Court, the best General of an Host. And
whosoever every takes upon him that command beholds himself in a false Glass,
that makes him seem what he is not, as on the contrary experience is the
Mother of prudence, and prudence will not take Council, least she join her
will with her will, hastiness causes repentance, and frowardness causes
hinderance.

For the evils that followed upon these two voyages, your selves are sufficient
witnesses, and can judge of it.

As namely the billetting of Soldiers in the Country, and bringing their
Ships in harbors, not abating the entertainment of the one, nor the wages of
the other; And yet notwithstanding, this needless cost and charges, our ships
and coasts are daily infested, in such sort as we dare not peep out of
harbor.

Were the carriage of things now answerable to the prudence and presidents of
former times, we cannot pretend a fear of invasion, because our Ships are
divided into several harbors, and our Soldiers billetted in inward
Countries, besides the season of the year gives no opportunity to an enemy to
attempt it.

Here is a mass of wealth carelessly consumed, whether the King or Subject
bear it, and no man bettered, but only those that have the titles of
Soldiers, yet never had the happiness or honor to see what appertained to
service, they are taught insteade of work, by which they have lived and been
bred, now to spend their time in idleness, and alehouses, and to forget their
occupations, their example of disorder encourages other to follow their
liberty.

People that were wont to live poorly, yet safely, are now by their fellows
and their followers, robbed and spoiled, and no remedy for redress.

The rich stand upon their guard and dare not resort to Church, least in their
absence, their houses be surprised and rifled.

The Justices have only the name of Officers, but have no power to punish
i^justice, all men's prayers are now a days to be de^ended from the wroth of a
mighty man, and the tumult of the people.

Garrisons in England which have no strong walled Towns, nor is used to the
disorder and loose carriage of Soldiers, is more perilous uncouth and
straying then where War is practiced, innovations in all states are
dangerous, especially where there is a diminution of the Laws, or a fear to
execute Justice, through too much liberty given to Soldiers.

No Country but has more hurt by their Garrisons then by their enemies.

Enemies only rob the frontiers, others the whole Country.

The enemy may be resisted, the other not spoken against.

The enemy gives a sudden attempt, and returns, the others do every day rob
and spoil.

The enemy surpriseth with fear, the other have neither fear nor shame.

The first lessoning the greatness of the Roman Empire, who by the insolency
of Soldiers, and the first raising of the house of Ottoman was by promission
and his conniving at his Army.

What man is so old in England that has seen, or what youth so young, that
ever thought to see Scot^ishmen, and Irishmen garrisoned in England, and no
enemy appear against us, or who could have imagined, he should have ever a
seen our own people tyrannized over, in our own Kingdom by this of our own
Nation, and those Scottish and Irish, yea and dare not so much as complain.

Would our Forefathers have thought it safety, or policy to draw 2000.
Scottishmen and Irishmen into the Isle of Wight, for their defense against
France, when they of the Isle desired it not, nay when they opposed it.

Would they have thought it wisdom that 2000. mouths besides the Inhabitants
should live on the food of that Island, and so bring themselves into want and
penury of victuals, if they should in earnest be attempted by an enemy.

Would they have thought fit, the charge of it should be required of them, And
yet they to suffer all injuries from the hands of strange Soldiers, where the
meanest boy in the Island is thought to manage Arms better then the best of
them that are there billetted.

No, but they would rather have thought it discretion, upon the return of
those voyages to have caused the men to repair to the place where they were
pressed, and to have ordered that each parish should have set them on work for
their maintenance, with command to be ready upon warning to repair to the
place of randevous.

There is no part or place in England so remote from the Sea, but they might
have re^orted to the port assigned, before the Ships could be furnished, or
drawn together.

They would have thought it more wisdom to have retired to their own
harbors, and to have had their men discharged, then to have continued this
needless and expencefull course that is taken.

They would have judged it better, to have supplied the Isle of Wight with
2000. men out of the maine land, when they feared any evil to the Island, then
to send for them into Scotland, and to keep them in continual entertainment.

They would have thought it more fit to have returned the barbarous Irish into
the Country from whence they came, then to make them a vexation to the places
and parts where they remain, seeing no shadow of reason can be pretended for
it.

England wants no men, and has as good and able men as either of the other two
Nations, if his Majesty had occasion to use them.

England with small charge and trouble can raise what men his Majesty pleases
to command and that suddenly, and discharge them again without trouble or
charge as quickly.

The Wisemen of England would have thought 2. or 300000. pound better spared
then thus wastfully consumed and disorders committed, we may compute it to
that sum, and yet keep our selves within compass, and notwithstanding the
want of money, and the ways to exact it of the subject, is all the song now
sung; He that sees or complains of the evil managing of things, is either
imprisoned, banished the Court or censured for a discontent.

There is no Englishman, but knows the heart of every other true hearted
Englishman, and with one consent will all obey their Prince, and to his person
owe all due reverence, and we may truly say, no King is more happy in Subjects
for their love, nor never subjects readier to serve their King, with their
purses and persons, nor never people was better blessed with a King, who is
endued with all kind of virtues, and staynd with no manner of vice, his mercy,
his temper, his chastity, and his meekness, is such as we may say of him, as
of David, that he is a man according to Gods own heart.

But, if any man, shall poison, this opinion of ours, by sinister reports, he
is a worker of sedition; He has a lying tongue, and speaks not truth, he
is worthy, to be spued out, not of the Court, but even from the face of the
earth.

False Informers and misguiders of good Kings, are much more perilous, then if
Princes themselves were evil, for commonly as worms breed soonest in soft and
sweet wood, so are the best natures (inclined to honor, and Justice) soonest
abused by false Flatterers.

The evil they commit, under the authority of good Princes is accounted as
done, by the Prince himself; But commonly such people in the end, pay for it,
for he that desires not to do good, cannot be wise, but will fall into 4000.
follies.

One of the first propositions made to the house, will be for money to support
his Majesty's vast expense; at this time, that the enemy threatens thunder
against the Kingdom, your often Alarums, upon such pretenses may make you now
to secure, for true it is, that the last Parliament books were published of
invincible preparations intended against us, and nothing came of it, but beware
you be not deceived, by an old saying, that when one usually tells lies, he is
not trusted, when he speaks truth, for certainly the danger, is much more,
then by the power and greatness of another enemy.

In this case you must give for your own sakes, that so you may be sure to
enjoy what is yours, for your sovereigns sake to maintain his greatness, and
state, and for your Countries sake to keep it from oppression of the enemy,
but withal you ought to lay down the condition of the Kingdom, and to show
that your necessity cannot parallel with your hearts and desires, that your
minds will be carried with a willingness to give, but your hands will keep
back your hearts for want of ability to give.

Themistocles demanding tribute of the Athenians told them he brought two Gods
with him, that is to say, persuasion and violence, they answered that they had
other two Gods in their Country both great and powerful, which were poverty
and impossibility which hindered them from giving, but least this answer should
be poisoned or mis-reported to his Majesty and wrested to the worst sense, I
pray you to examine the state and condition of every man in particular, and
their impossibility of giving will appear.

What can be hoped for, from the Merchant, that is prohibited the greatest
Trade of profit and gain; and daily damnified by the spoil of Dunkirkes.

What can we expect from the owners of Ships, that have suffered more
Shipwracks lately, then in an hundred years before.

What can we look for from the Husbandmen, when Corn and Wool is
underfoote, for it was an observation of the wise Lord Treasurer Burleigh, that
every twelve pence abated in a stone of Wool was 100000. pound loss to the
Kingdom.

What can be required, from the multitude, considering the little commerce,
the daily payments to the King, to the Houses of correction, to the Poor, to
the maimed Soldiers, to the often appearing at Musters, the altering of Arms,
the watching of Highwayes, the garding of Beacons, and other services at the
Justices command.

What can Knights and Gentlemen give, their sheep dying, their tennants
decaying, and their rents falling and failing.

What can be looked for, from the Clergy, considering their charge of
induction, their first fruits, and the maintenance of their Wives, Children,
and Families; yea though they came freely to their benefices.

What can be expected from the Tradesmen or Artificers when all other, either
want or decay; Now people will be contented with one suite of clothes, that
two heretofore would not have served, shoes, boots, hats, and all other
apparel, they will Husband after that proportion.

There are two sorts of people in the Commonwealth well able to give, the one
the Usurer which is commonly free from all payments, in regard the necessities
of most making them beholding to them, in one kind or other, for themselves and
their friends, they in requital show him all possible ease and favor in
public disbursements.

The other are Noblemen and Gentlemen formerly spoken of, that have had their
advancement from the King, and his Father, though not immediately, but
Collaterally, for if you cast your eyes upon diverse servants of great persons
and remember what you have known them, 10. or 12. years past, it would put
you into an admiration, yea some from Horsekeepers other base callings, are now
promoted to the degrees of Baronets, Knights and the like, for though that new
devised order of Baronets was first instituted for money, yet such is the
fortune of servants, if one great man that is their master, once prefer them
to the King, the first day they enjoy the dignities of Baronets; when Gentlemen
of great rank and qualities that have long served their Princes cannot
compass it without consideration of money.

When these things you shall collect and seriously call to mind, you would
think your selves these 12. years last past a sleep, and that you are now
newly wakened, you shall hear of many things past in that space as making and
removing of Treasurers, Keepers, Secretaries, Judges, and all manner of
Councillors and Officers, with a million of such memorable and unlookt for
accidents.

But leaving these as grievances and vexations to the Subject, let us come to a
nearer point which is the safety of the Kingdom that the enemy threatens so in
danger, we may truly say, that God has so placed and seated this Isle of
England, that nothing but evil council can hurt it: but true it is, advice
that is not warranted from wise men, may prove more forcible and perilous then
the power of an enemy, the Scripture tells us that the thought perishes that
takes not Council.

A King of the Lacedaemonians asked how a Kingdom might ever stand; was
answered two ways, if a King take Council of wise honest men, that they
speak freely and do justice uprightly.

There was never Censor that judged, Senator that ordered, Emperor that
commanded, Consul that executed Orator that persuaded, nor any other mortal
man but sometimes he committed errors, and deserved either blame or
punishment for his misdoings, and if he were wise desired advise what to do.

Saint Gregory says, no man can give so faithful Council, as he who loves
one more then his gift, then who are or can be so true Councillors to our
noble King as a house of Commons, that has no relation to a Kings gift, but
only to his honor flourishing estate and safety.

This is the time to amend evil Councels past, and to let evil Councillors
see their errors.

This is the time for all men to put to their helps, some with their hands to
fight, others with their advise to counsel.

And for mine advice, this it is, that you present to his Majesty in all
humbleness your, willing minds and hearts to repair and fit to Sea, his
Majesty navy, your selves to have power to make them able and serviceable, with
the advice of experienced men, that you may call unto you, this is a matter of
great importance at this present, for the safety of the Realm King and
Subject, for the strength of the Kingdom much depends upon this Bulwark, which
we may well term the walls of England.

His Majesty shall find himself much eased by it, businesses shall be carried
without his trouble or care, moneys shall not be sought for to that end, but
provided by you, his Majesty may dispose of the rest of his revenew at his
pleasure.

By your frugality and husbandry, his Majesty shall have occasion to judge of
things past, of yours in present, and hereafter it will serve for a president
to walk after, It will stop the mouths of malignant tongues, that inform his
Majesty of the unwillingnesse of the Subject to give, and it will make it
apparent that their true grief is not in the matter of giving, but to see the
evil employing of it, when it is given.

If any man shall prevent this good meaning and motion of yours and infringe
his Majesty, it is a derogation from his honor to yield to his Subjects upon
conditions. His Majesty shall have good cause to prove such men's eyes malicious
and unthankefull, and thereby to disprove them in all their other actions, for
what can it lesson the reputations of a Prince, whom the Subject only and
wholly obeys, that a Parliament which his Majesty does acknowledge to be his
highest Council should advise him, and he follow the advice of such a
Council what dishonor rather were it to be advised and ruled by one
Counselor alone, against whom there is just exception taken, of the whole
Commonwealth.

Marcus Portio says, that, that Commonwealth is everlasting where the Prince
seeks to get obedience and love, and the Subjects to gain the affection of the
Prince, and that the Kingdom is unhappy where their Prince is served out of
ends and hope of reward, and has no other assurance of them, but their
services.

FINIS.

