THE DISCONTENTED COLONEL. Written by Sir JOHN SUCKLIN.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for Francis Eagles-fi^ld* and are to be sold at the
Marrigold in Paul's Churchyard.

The Scene Poland.
The Actors Names.
SIgismond, King of Poland. Miessa. Melidor. A Lord.
Counselors to the King. Brennoralt, a discontent. Doran, His Friend.
Villanor. Granivert. Marrinell.
Cavaliers and Officers Under Brennoralt. Strathman. Fresolin, Brother to
Francelia. Iphigene, young Palatine of Florence. Palatine of Menser, Governor,
one of the chief Rebels. Palatine of Trock a Rebel. Almerin, a gallant
Rebel. Morat, his Lieutenant Colonel. Francelia, the Governors Daughter.
Orillia, a waiting woman to Francelia. Raguelin, a servant in the governors
House, but spy to Brennoralt. Iailor. Guard. Soldiers.
THE DISCONTENTED COLONEL.
Actus primus.
Scena prima.
Enter Brennoralt, Doran. Bren. I Say the Court is but a narrow circuit,
Though something elevate about the common;
A kind of Ants nest in the great wild field,
Orecharg'd with multitudes of quick inhabitants,
Who still are miserably busied, get in,
What the loose foot of prodigality,
As fast does throw abroad.

Dor. Good.
A most eternal place of low affronts,
And then as low submissions.

Bren. Right.
High cowards in Revenges amongst themselves,
And only valiant, when they mischief others,

Dor. Stars, that would have no name,
But for the ills they threaten in conjunction:

Bren. A race of ^hallow, and unskillfull Pilots,
Which do misguide the ship, even in the calm,
And in great storms, serve but as weight
To sink it,
Alarm within. More, prithee more.
It Is music to my melancholy.
Enter Soldier. My Lord; a cloud of dust and men
The sentinells from the East gate discover,
And as they guess, the storm bends this way.

Bren. Let it be.

Sol. My Lord.

Bren. Let it be,
I will not fight to day,
Bid Strathman draw to the Trenches,
On, prithee on.

Dor. The King employes a company of formal Leards,
Men who have no other other proof of their
Long life, but that they are old.

Bren. Right, and if they are wise,
It Is for themselves, not others,
As old men ever are.

Alarm. Enter Soldier. Sol. Colonel, Colonel,
The enemy's at hand, kills all the Centries,
Young Alermin leads them on again.

Bren. Let him lead them off again then,

Second Sol. Colonel.

Bren. Be gone,
If th'a'rt afraid, go hide thy self,

Second Sol. What a devil ails he?
Exit.
Bren. This Almerin's the ague of the Camp,
He shakes it once a day.

Dor. It is the ill conscience rather,
He never lets it rest,
Would I were at home again,
S'foot we lie here in the ^renches, as if it were
For a wind to carry us in the other
World, every hour we expect,
I Will no more on it;

Bren. Prithee.

Dor. Not I by heaven.

Bren. What man, the worst is but fair death.

Dor. And what will that amount to?
Fair Epitaph, a fine account,
I Will home I swear:

Enter Strathman. Stra. Arm, arm, my Lord,
And show your self, all is lost else.

Dor. Why so?

Stra. The Rebels, like an unruly flood,
Roll over the Trenches, and throw down
All before them.

Bren. Ha.

Stra. We cannot make a stand.

Bren. He would out-rivall us in honor too
As well as love, but that he must not do;
Help me Stratheman; (puts on Armor,
The danger now grows worthy of our swords,
And O Doran, would heaven there were
No other storm, then this worst Tempest here.

Exeunt. Enter Marrinell throwing down one he carries. Mar. There:
The Sun's the nearest surgeon I know,
And the honestest, if thou recoverest, why so?
If not, the cure's paid; they have mauld us.

Enter Granivert with another upon his back. Gran. A curse light on this powder,
It spoils valor er'e it is half way it is journey,
What a disadvantage fight we upon in this age?
He that did well heretofore,
Had the broad fair day to show it in,
Witnesses enough; we must believe one another,
It Is night when we begin.
Smalke, by this hand I can bear with you
No longer, how now? dead as I live;
Stolen away just as he used to a wench,
Well go thy ways for a quiet drinker and dyer,
I shall never know thy fellow; (searches his pockets.
These trifles too about thee.
There was never an honester poor wretch
Borne, I thinks, hum Marrinell (she spies Marrinell,

Mar. Who Is that?

Gra. It Is I, Hem* how goes matters?

Mar. Scurvily enough;
Yet since our Colonel came, they have got no ground
Of us, a weak Sculler against wind and Tide,
Would have done as much, hark,
This way the Torrent bears.

(Exeunt. Enter Fresolin, Almerin, Rebels. Fre. The villains all have left us.

Alm. Would they had left their fears,
Behind them with the enemy,
But come, since we must.

(Exeunt. Enter Brennoralt, Soldiers. Bren. Hoe Stratheman,
Skirt on the left hand with the horse;
And get betwixt these and that body:
They Are rallied up for rescue.

Dor. They Are our^.

Bren. Charge through.

(Exeunt. A shout within. Enter Brennoralt, Stratheman, Doran, Marrinell. Bren,
What shout is that?

Stra. They Have taken Almerin my Lord.

Bren. Almerin, the devil thank them for it,
When I had hunted hard all day,
And now at length unhearded the proud dear,
The curs have snatched him up, sound a retreat.
There Is nothing now behind; who saw Doran?

Stra. Shall we bring Almerin in my Lord?

Bren. No, Gazing is low Triumph,
Convey him fairly to the King,
He fought it fairly.

Doran. What youth was that whom you bestrid my Lord,
And saved from all our Swords to day,
Was he not of the enemy?

Bren. It may be so.

Stra. The Governors son Fresolin his mistresses brother in Dorancare.


Bren. No matter whom.
Pity the rough hand of war, should early
Courages destroy, before they bud,
Or show themselves in the heat of action.

Mar. I threw my Lord a youth upon a bank
Which seeking after the retreat I found
Dead, and a Woman the pretty daughter
Of the Forrester, Lucillia.

Bren. See, see, Doran, a sad experiment,
Woman's the cowardliest and coldest thing
The world brings forth,
Yet love as fire works water,
Makes it boil over, and do things contrary
To its proper nature,
I should shed a tear could I tell how:
Poor Lucillia, thou did for me what did
As ill become thee, see her gently buried:
Boy, send the surgeon to the tent; I bleed:
What lowsy cottages they'ave given our souls?
Each petty storm shakes them into disorder,
And costs more pain to patch them up again
Then they are worth by much:
I Am weary of the tenement.

Exeunt. Enter Villanor, Granivert, Marrinell and Stratheman. Gra. Villanor,
welcome, welcome, when came thou?

Vil. Look, I wear the Kings high way still on my boots

Gra. A pretty riding phrase, and how, and how, Ladies cheap^.

Vil. Faith reasonable.
Those toys were never dear thou know;
A little time and industry they will cost.
But in good faith, not much, some few there are,
That set themselves at mighty rates.

Gra. Which we o'th wise pass by,
As things are valued in the market;
Is It not so?

Vill. You have said Sir.
Your friend the Rivall's married,
Has obtained the long loved Lady,
And is such an ass after.

Gran. Hum. It Is ever so,
The motions of married people are as of other natural violent Gentlemen to
the place and calm in it.


Mar. We know this so, and yet we must be fooling.

Gra. Faith, women are the baggage of life,
They are troublesome, and hinder us
In the great March; and yet we cannot be without 'em:

Mar. You speak very well, and Souldier-like.

Gra. What thou art a wit too I warrant
In our absence.

Mar. Hum. No, no, a poor pretender,
A Candidate, or so, against the next Sessions,
Wit enough to laugh at you here.

Gra. Like enough, valor's a crime,
The wise have still approach't unto the valiant,
And the fools too.

Vill. Raylery apart Granivert,
What accommodation shall we find here?

Gra. Clean straw sweet heart, and meat,
When thou can get it.

Vill. Hum-straw.

Gra. Yes.
Tha^'s all will be betwixt Incest,
You and your mother Earth must Iye together

Vill. Prithee let us be serious, will this last?
How goes affairs?

Gra. Well;

Vill. But well*

Gra. Faith it is now upon the turning of the balance,
A most equal business t'wixt Rebellion and Loyalty.

Vill. What do mean?

Gra. Why which shall be the virtue, and which shall be the vice?

Vill. How the devil can that be?

Gra. O success is a rare point, hides all the ugliness!

Vill. Prithee what is the quarrel?

Gra. Nay, for that excuse us,
Ask the children of peace,
They have the leisure to study it:
We know nothing of it, Liberty they say:

Vill. S'foot Let the King make an act,
That any man may be unmarried again;
The^'s liberty for them, a race of
Half witted fellows quarrel about freedom,
And all that while allow the bonds of matrimony.

Gra. You speak very well Sir;

Mar. Soft, the King and Council.

Enter King, Lords, Brennoralt. Gra. Look, they follow after like tired
spanniells,
Quest sometimes for company, that is, concur,
And that is their business.

Mar. They are as weary of this sport,
As a young unthrift of his land.
Any bargain to be rid on it.

Vill. Can you blame them, who is that?

Mar: Brennoralt, our brave Colonel,
A discontent, but what of that, who is not?

Vill. His face speaks him one,

Mar. Thou Art in the right!
He looks still as if he were saying to
Fortune, huswife, go about your business,
Come let us retire to Burrutheus Tent,
Taste a bottle, and speak bold truths,
That Is our way now.

(Exeunt. Manent K. Lords. Mies. Think not of pardon Sir,
Rigor and mercy used in states
Incertainly and in ill times,
Look not like th^effects of virtue,
But necessity, nor will they thank
Your goodness, but your fears.

Melid. My Lord Revenge in Princes
Should be still imperfect, it is the handsomest,
The King comes to reduce, not ruin.

Bren. Who puts but on the face of punishing,
And only gently acts, but prunes Rebellion,
He makes that flourish, which he would destroy
Who would not be a rebel? when the hopes
Are vast, the fears but small.

Melid. I would not, nor you my L. nor any here,
Fear keeps low spirits in, the brave
Do get above it, when they do resolve,
Such punishments in infancy of war,
Makes men more desperate, not more yielding:
The common people are a kind of flies,
Are caught with honey, not with wormwood,
Severity exasperates the stird up humor,
And state distempers turns into diseases.

Bre^. The Gods de^end great Poland state should be
Such, as it dares not to take right Physic,
Quarters to rebels Sir.
When you give that to them,
Give that to me which they deserve,
I would not live to see it.

Third Lord. Turn over your own
And other Chronicles, and you shall find (great)
That nothing makes a civil war long lived, (Sir
But ransom returning back the brands,
Which unextinct kindled still fiercer fires.

Mies. Mercy bestowed on those dispute with Swords,
Does loose the Angel face it has,
And is not mercy Sir, but policy,
With a weak vizard on.

King. You Have not my thoughts, My Lords,
Nor will it need larger debates to morrow,
In the sight of the bes^iged, the rebel dies,
Miessa, it is your care the mercy
Of high heaven may be offended so,
That it cannot forgive mortals, much more
Which is not infinite, My Lords.

Exeunt. Enter Iphigene, Almerin, as in prison. Iphi. O Almerin,
Would we had never known the ruffle of the world,
But were again by golden banks in solitude,
Where thou and I, sheapherd, and sheapherdesse,
So often by turns, as often still have wished,
That we as easily could have changed our Sex*
As Cloths, but all those innocent joys,
Like glorious morning are retired into
Dark sullen clouds, before we know
To value what we had.

Alm. Fame, and victory are light huswi^es.
That throw themselves into the arms*
Not of the valiant, but the fortunate*
To be taken thus:

Iph. Almerin.

Alm. Nipt in the bud of honor.

Iph. My Lord.

Alm. Foild, and by the man,
That does pretend unto Francelia.

Iph. What is it you do my Almerin?
Sit still and quarrel with the winds
Because there is a shipwreck toward,
And never think of saving of the Barq^e.

Alm. The Barque, what should we do with that?
When the rich freight is lost, my name in arms.

Iph. Who knows what prizes are behind,
If you attend, and wait a second voyage.

Alm. Never, never,
There are no second voyages in this,
The wounds of honor do admit no cure.

Iph. Those slight ones which misfortune gives must needs,
Else why should mortals value it at all?
For who would toil to treasure up a wealth,
Which weak inconstancy did keep,
Or might dispose of?
(Enter Melidor. O my Lord, what news?

Melia. As ^ll as your own fears could give you,
The Counsel has decreed him sudden death,
And all the ways to mercy are blockt up.

Iphi. weeps, and sighs* Alm. My Iphigine,
This was a misbecomming piece of love,
Women would manage a disaster better,
(he weeps and sighs again. Again thon art unkind;
Thy goodness is so great, it makes thee faulty;
For whilst thou think to take the trouble from me
Thou giv'st me more, by giving me thine too.

Iph. Alas, I am indeed, a useless trifle,
A dull, dull thing, for could I now do any thing
But grieve and pity, I might help;
My thoughts labor to find a way,
But like to birds in cages,
Though they never rest,
They are but where they did set out at first.

Enter Iaylour. Iai. My Lord your pardon,
The prisoner must retire,
I have received an order from the King,
Denies access to any.

Iph. He cannot be so great a Tyrant.

Alm. I thank him, nor can he use me ill enough;
I only grieve that I must dye in debt,
A bankrupt, such thy love has made me;
My dearest Iphigene, farewell,
It is no time for ceremony,
Show me which way I must,
Exit.
Iph. Grief strove with such disorder to get o^t,
It stopped the passage, sent back my words,
That were already on the place.

Melid. Stay, there is yet a way.

Iph. O speak it.

Mel. But there is danger in it Iphigene,
To thee high danger.

Iph. F^ight children in the dark with that,
And let me know it,
There Is no such thing in nature if Almerin be lost.

Mel. Thus then,
You must be taken prisoner too,
And by that exchange save Almerin.

Iph. How can that be?

Mel. Why -- studies.
Step in and pray him set his hand
(To the Iaylor About this distance, his seal too.

Iai. My Lord, I know not what that is.

Mel. Settling of money business fool betwixt us.

Iai. If It be no more.

Mel. Tell him Iphigene and I desire it:
(Exit: I Will send by Strathocles his servant
A letter to Morat, thus signed, and sealed,
That shall inform the sudden execution,
Command him as the only means,
To save his life, to sally out this night
Upon the Quarters* and endeavor prisoners,
Name you as most secure, and slightliest guarded,
Best pledge of safety; but charge him
That he kill not any, if it be avoydable,
Lest it should enrage the King yet more
And make his death more certain.

Enter Iailour with the writings. Iai. He understands it not,
He says, but he has sent it.

Iph. But should Morat mistrust now,
Or this miscarry.

Mel. Come leave it to me,
I Will take the Pylots part
And reach the port, or perish in the art.

Actus Secundus.
Enter Almerin in prison. Alm. Sleep is as nice as woman,
The more I court it, the more it flies me.
Thy elder brother will be kinder yet;
Unsent for death will come to morrow.
Well, what can to morrow do?
'Twill cure the sense of honor lost;
I and my discontents, shall rest together:
What hurt is there in this?
But death against the will,
Is but a slovingly kind of potion;
And though prescribed by Heaven,
It goes against men's stomachs,
So does it at fourscore too, when the soul's
Mewed up in narrow darkness,
Neither sees, nor hears,
Pish, it is mere fondness in our nature,
A ce^taine clownish cowardice, that still
Would stay at home, and dares not venture
Into forra^gne Countries, the better then
Its own -- ha, what Countries? for we receive
Description of the world from our Divines,
^ As blind men take relations of this from us,
My thoughts lead me into the dark,
And there they leave me; I Will no more on it.
He knocks within there; some papers and a light;
I Will write toth' King,
Defy him, and provoke a quick dispatch,
I would not hold this lingering doubtful state,
So long again for all that hope can give.
Enter 3. or. 4. of the guard with papers* writing* That Sword does tempt me
strangely
Were in my hands, it were worth the other two
But then the guard, it sleeps
And drinks, may be to contrive,
If so, that I could not pass,
Why if I fall in it, it is better yet then pageantry,
A Scaffold or spectators, more Soldier like.
on^ of the guard peepes over his shoulder. Uncivil villain* read my letter?

1. Guard. Not I, not I, my Lord.

Alm. Deny it too,

snatches his swo^d, strikes him* 1. Guard. Murder, murder,
Arm, arm.

The Guard runs out. Alm. I Will follow, give the Alarm within,
It Is lest suspicious, arm, arm, arm.
The enemy, the enemy.
Exit.
Sol, Let them come* Let them come, let them come.

Enter Soldiers running over the stage, one throwing away his arms. Enter
Almerin. Al. I hear fresh noise,
The Camp's in great disorder, where am I now?
It Is strangely dark, goddess without eyes
Be thou my guide, for blindness, and sight,
Are equal sense, and equal use this night.
Exit.
Enter Granivert, Stratheman, Villanor, Marrinell. Gra. Trouble not thy self,
child of discontent,
Twill take no hurt I warrant thee,
The state is but a little d^unke,
And when it has spu^d up that, that made it so,
Twill be well again, there is my opinion in short.

Mar. Thou Art in the right,
The state's a pretty forehanded state,
And will do reason hereafter,
Let Us drink, and talk no more on it.

Al. A good motion, a good motion, lets drink.

Vil. I, I, lets drink.

Stra. Come, to a mistress.

Gra. Agreed, name, name.

Vil. Any body, Vermillia.

Gra. Away with it.
She Is pretty to walk with,
And witty to talk with,
And pleasant to think on,
But the best use of all
Is, her health is a stawle
And hell s^us, to make us drink on.

Stra. Excellent.
Gentlemen, if you say the word,
We Will vant credit, and affect high pleasure,
Shall we?

Vil. I, I* Let Us do that.

Stra. What think you of the sacrifice now?

Man. Come, we will have it,
For trickling tears are vain.

Vil. The sacrifice, what is that?

Stra. Child of ignorance, it is a camp health,
An Alamode one, Granivert begin it.

Gra. Come give it me.
Let me see,
(Pi^^ up a Rose: Which of them this Rose will serve, hum, hum, hum,
Bright Star of the lower Orb twinkling inviter
Which draw'st (as well as eyes) but sets men righter.
For who at thee begins, comes to the place
Sooner then he, that sets out at the face:
Eyes are seducing lights, that the good women know
And hang out these a nearer way to show.

Mar. Fine, and patheticall, come Villanor.

Vil. What Is the matter?

Mar. Come your liquour, and your stanzons,
Lines, lines.

Vil. Of what.

Mar. Why of any thing your Mistress has given you.

Vil. Gentlemen, she never gave me any thing but a box
O'th ear, for offering to kiss her once;

Stra. Of that box then.

Mar. I, I, of that box, of that box.

Vil. Since it must be, give me the poison then
(Drinks That Box fair Mistress, which thou gav'st me and spits.
Inhumane guess, is like to cost me three,
Three cups of wine, and ver^es six,
The Rhyme will down, but verse for Rhyme still sticks,
By which you all will easily, Gentles know
I am better drink then a Po --

Enter Doran. Mar. La you there now.
Doran, Doran.

Gra. A Hall, a Hall.
To welcome our friend.
Some liquour he
A newer fresh face,
Must not alter our pace,
But make us still drnik the quicker hoe
Wine, Wine
O it is Divine;
Come let us unto our brother.
What Is at the tongues end
It forth does send
And will not a syllable smother.
Then,
It unlockes the breast,
And throws out the rest,
And learnes us to know each other.

Dor. Mad lads, have ye been here ever since?

Stra. Yes faith, thou see the worst of us.
We debauch in discipline,
Four and twenty hours is the time*
Burrutheus had the watch to night,
To morrow 'twill be at my tent

Dor. Good and dee know what has fallen out to night?

Stra. Yes, Granivert and my Lieutenant Colonel,
But they are friends again.

Dor. Pish, pish, the young Palatine of Florence
And his grave guardian surprised to night,
Carried by the enemy out of his quarters.

Gra. As a Chicken by a Kite out of a backside,
Was It not so?

Dor. Is that all?

Gra. Yes, my colonel did not love him,
He eats sweet meats upon a march too.

Dor. Well, hark ye,
Worse yet, Almerin's gone,
Forced the Court of Guard where he was prisoner
And has made an escape.

Gra. So pale and frightlesse a wretch,
Drew Priams Curtain in the dead of night,
And told him, half Troy was burned,
He was of my mind, I would have done so my self*

Do. Well, there is high suspicions abroad.
Ye shall see strange discovery
In The counsel of war.

Gra. VVha^ counsel speaks?

Dor. One called this morning,
You Are all sent to.

Gra. I Will put on clean linen and speak wisely.

Dor. S'foote we will have a round first.

Gra. By all means sir.
Sings. Come let the State stay,
And drink^ away,
There is no businsse above it.
It warmes the cold brain,
It makes us speak in high strain,
He Is a fool that does not approve it.
The Macedon youth
Left behind him this truth,
That nothing is done with much thinking,
He drunk and sought
Till he had what he sought,
The world was his own by good drinking.

Exeunt. Enter General of the Rebels, Palatine of Trock, Minse, Francelia,
Almerin, Norat. Genesis As your friend my Lord, he has the privilege of ours,
And may enjoy a liberty we would deny
To enemies.

Alm. I thank your Excellence,
O Iphigene he does not know
That thou the nobler part of friendship hold'st,
And do oblige whilst I can but acknowledge.

Mi. Opportunity to states men is as the just degree
Of heat to Chemists, it perfects all the work,
And in this prisoner it is offered.
We now are there where men should still begin
To treat upon advantages.
The Palatine of Trock and Minse,
With Almerin shall to the King.
Petition shall be drawn.
Humble in form, but of that matter
As the bold Macedonian youths would send
To men they did despise for luxury,
The first begets opinion in the world;
Which looks not far, but on the outside dwells,
To 'ther enforces courage in our own;
For bold demands, must boldly be maintained.

Pal. Let al go on still in the public name,
But keep an ear open to particular offer,
Liberty and public good
Are like great Oleos,
Must have the upper end still of our tables,
Tho they are but for show.

Fra. Would I had never seen that shape
'Thas poison in it
Yet where dwells good, if il inhabit there?

Min. Press much Religion,
For tho we dress the scruples for the multitude*
And for our selves reserve the advantages
(It being much pretext) yet it is necessary
For things of faith are so abstruse and nice
They will admit dispute continually,
So howsoever other demands appear,
These never can be proved unseasonable
The subject being of so fine a nature,
If not submits himself to sense, but scapes
The trials, which concludes al common doubts.

Fran. My Lord, you use me, as il painters paint,
Who while they labor to make faces fair,
Neglect to make them like.

Iph. Madam, there is no shipwreck of your
Virtues near, that you should throw away
Any of al your excellencies
To save the dearest modesty.

Genesis If they proceed with us, we can retreat
Unto expositions, and the peoples votes,
If they refuse us wholly* then we plead
The King's besieged, blockt up so straightly
By some few, that relief can find no way
To enter to the King, or yet out to us,
Exclaim against it loud,
Till the Polonians think it high injustice,
And with us better yet:
Then easily do we rise unto our ends,
And will become their envy through their pity*
At worst you may confirm our party there,
Increase it too, there is one Brennoralt
Men call him gallant, but a discontent,
My Cozen, the King has used him ill,
Him a hansome whisper will draw,
The afternoon shall perfect
What we have loosely now resolved.

Iph. If in discourse of beauty,
So large an Empire, I do wander,
It will become your goodness Madam
To set me right;
And in a C^untry where your self is Queen,
Not suffer forrainers to loose themselves,

Genesis What making revenges Palatine,
And taking prisoners fair Ladies hearts.

Iph. Yes my Lord,
And have no better fortune in this war
Then in the other, for while I think to take
I am surprised my self.

Fran. Dissembler, would thou we^'t.

Min. You are a Courtier my Lord,
The Palatine of P^ocen^
Will grace the Hymen^alls
And that they may be whilst his stay is here,
I Will Court my Lord in absence.
Take of you the little strangeness
Virgins must wear at first.
Iphigenea swoons. Look to the Palatine.

Mir. How is it my dearest Iphigene.

Iph. Not well, I would retire.

Genesis A qualme.

Mor. His color stole away, sunk down,
As water in a weather-glasse
Pressed by a warm hand.

Min. A Cordial of kind looks from the King,
Let us withdraw and hear him.

Exeunt. Enter Brennoralt, Doran, Raguelin. Dor. Yet to be married?
What? are you mute now?

Bren. Thou came too hastily upon me,
Putst too close the colors to my eye,
I could not (...) is impossible.

Dor. Impossible!
It were impossible it should be otherwise;
What can you imagine there of constancy?
Where it is so much their nature to love change,
That when they say, but what they are,
They excuse themselves for what they do.

Bre. She hardly knows him yet in such an instant.

Dor. O you know not how fire flies,
When it does catch light matter, woman.

Bren. No more of that,
She Is yet the pretiousest thing in all my thoughts,
I if it be so, I am a lost thing in the world, Doran.

Dor. How.

Br. Thou will in vain persuade me to be other,
Life which to others is a good that they enjoy,
To me will be an evil I shall suffer.

Do, Look on another face, that is present remedy*

Br. How ill thou do conclude,
Cause there are pestilent aires which kill men suddenly
In health; must there be sovereign
As suddenly to cure in sickness?
Exit. Enter Aper hastily. It never was in nature.
I was a ^oole to think
Death only kept the doors of ill paid Lone,
When or disdain, or spite
Could let me out as well.

Dor. Right, were I as you
It should trouble me no more
To free my self of Love,
Then to spit out that which made me sick.

Bren. I Will tell her so, that she may laugh at me,
As at a prisoner threatening his Guard,
He will break loose, and so is made the Faster,
She has charms Doran,
Can fetch in a rebellious heart,
Even while it is conspiring liberty,
O, she has all the virtues of her sex
And not the vices,
Chaste and unsullied,
As first opening Lillies
Or untoucht buds.

Dor. Chaste, why do you honor me
Because I throw my self not off a precipice?
It Is her ruin to be otherwise,
Tho we blame those that kill themselves,
We praise not him, that keeps himself alive
That deserves nothing.

Bren. And it is the least,
She triumphs when she does not appear*
I have as many rivalls as beholders.

Dor. All that increases but our jealousies,
If you have now such qualmes for that you have not;
What will you have, for that you shall possess?

Bren. Dull Heretic, know I have these
Because I have not her,
When I have her, I shall have these no more*
Her fancy now; Her virtue then will govern,
And as I watch with doubtful eye
The wavering needle in the best sundyall
Til it has settled, then the troubles ore,
Because I know when it is fixed, its true,
So h^^re my doubts are al a^ore me*
Sure Doran, crowned conquerours are
But the types of Lovers, which enjoy and really possess
What the other have in dreams.
I Will send a challenge to him.

Dor. Do and be thought a madman,
To what purpose?
If she Love him, she will but hate you more,
Lovers in favor Brennoral^ are gamesters,
In good fortune, the more you set them,
The more they get.

Bren. I Will see her then this night,
By heaven I will.

Dor. Where! in the cittad^ll.

Bren. Know what, and why?

Dor. He raves: B^ennoralt.

Bren. Let me al^ne,
I conjure thee by the discretion
Left betwixt us; that is thine,
For mine is divorc't by injury of fortune*
Leave me to my self.

Dor. I have done.

Bren. Is there such a passage
As thou have told me of into the Castle?

Ra. There is my Lord.

Bren. And dare thou let me in;

Ra. If you my Lord dare venture.

Bren. There are no centries near it.

Ra. None.

Bren. How to the Chamber afterward?

Ra. Her woman.

Bren. VVha'ts she?

Ra. A wicket to my Ladies secrets,
One that stands up to marriage with me.

Bren. There, upon thy life be secret. flings him a purse,

Ra. Else all punishments due to ingratitude.

Bren. Enough:
I am a storm within, till I am there,
O Doran,
That that, which is so pleasant to beh^ld,
Should be such pain within.

Dor. Poor Brennoralt;
Thou art still ^he M^rtyr of a thousand Tyrants*
Love, honor, and ambition, reign by turns,
And show ^^eir power upon thee.

Bren. Why let them; I am still Brennoralt,
Even Kings themselves are by their
Servants ruled sometimes,
Let their own slaves govern at od hours,
Yet not subject their person or their powers.

Exeunt. Actus Tertius.
Enter Iphigene as in a Garden. Iph: WHat have I got by changing place,
But as a wretch which ventures to the wars,
Seeking the misery with pain abroad,
He found, but wisely thought,
And had left at home -- weeps,
Fortune thou have no Tyranny,
Beyond this usage,
Would I had never hoped,
O^ had betimes despaired,
Let never in the gentle thief,
Or kept him but a guest,
Not made him Lord at all.
Thus as my storms of grief,
Carry my tears which should releeve my heart,
Have hurried to the thanklesse Ocean clouds,
And showers which needed not at all the courtesy
When the poor plains have languisht,
For the want and almost burst asunder,
I Will have this statues place, and undertake,
At my own charge, to keep the water ^ull.

Enter Francelia. Fran. These fond impressions grow too strong upon me;
They were at first without design or end
Like the first Elements, that knows not what,
And why they act, and yet produce strange things,
Poor innocent desires, journeying they know
Not whither, but now they promise to themselves
Strange things, grow insolent, threaten no rest,
Till they be satisfied.
What difference was between these Lords?
The one made love as if he by assault,
Would take my heart, so forced it to defense,
While the other blew it up with secret mines,
And left no place for it, here he is;
Tea^es steal too from his eyes,
As if, not daring to be known,
To pass that way, make it good cunning grief;
Thou knew'st thou could not dress thy self,
(Iphigene spies Francelia In any other looks, to make thee lovely.

Iph. Francelia, If through the ignorance of places,
I have intruded on your privacies,
Found out forbidden paths,
It Is fit you pardon Madam.
For it is my melancholy, not I offends.

Fran. So great a melancholy would well become.
Mischances, such as time cannot repair,
Those of the war, are but the petty
Cures, of every coming hour.

Iph. Why should I not now tell her all since it is in her,
To save my life, who knows but she may be
Gallant so far, as to undo her self,
To make another happy?
Madam, the accidents of war,
Contribute least to my sad thoughts,
If any such I have;
Imprisonment can never be
Where the place holds what we more love,
And yet,

Fran. My Lord.

Iph. In this imprisonment.

Fran. Proceed my Lord.

Iph. I dare not Madam.

Fran. I see I do disturb you, and enter upon your secrets,
Which when I know, I cannot serve you in.

Iph. Oh, most of any,
You are the cause of all,

Fran. I my Lord.

Iph. You Maddam, you alone,

Fran. Alas, that it is too, soon to understand,

Iph. Must not you marry Almerin?

Fran. They tell me, it is designed,

Iph. If he have you, I am for ever lost.

Fran. Lost? the heavens forbid they should design so ill.
Or when they shall, that I should be the cause.

Iph. Ha, her eyes are strangely kind,
She prompts me excellently,
Stars be propitious, and I am s^fer,
Away: I Will not expect it.

Fran. His passion labors for vent.

Iph. Is there a hope you will not give your self,
To Almerin?

Fran. My Lord this air is common,
The walks within are pleasanter.

Iph Invitation. God of desire be kind,
And fill me now with languages,
Such as thou lend'st thy favorites,
When thou would give them easy victory,
And I forgive thee all thy cruelties.

(Exeunt. Enter Palatine of Trock, Mense. Almerin. Brennoralt, Lords. Min.
Consider too.
That those who are so necessitated to use violence,
Have first been violent by necessity,

Pal. But still you judge not right of the prerogative,
For often it stands with power and law,
As with our faith and reason;
It is not still against, that is above my Lord.

Second Lord. You had of all least reason,
For would the King be unjust he cannot,
Where there is so little to be ha^.

Alm. Where there is least, there is liberty my Lord;
And ^tis more injury to pull hairs
From the bald, then from the bushy heads.

(Exe* talking. Trock pulls Brennoralt. Pal. Brennoralt, a word,
My Lord the world has cast i'ts eye upon you,
And ma^k't you out one of the foremost men.
You Have bu^ied Fame the earliest of any,
And send her still on errands;
Much of the bravery of the Nation,
Has taken up i'ts lodging in you,
And gallant men but copy from you.

Bren. ^is goodly language this; what would it mean?

Pal. The Lithuanians wish you well, and wonder,
So much desert should be so ill rewarded.

Bren. Good.

Pal. While all the gifts the crown is master of
Are placed upon the Empire.

Bren. Still I take you not.

Pal. Then to be plain,
Our Army would be proud of you,
Pay the neglected scores of merit double,
All that you hold here of command, and what,
Your fortune in this Sigismond has suffered,
Repaired, and make it fairer then it was at first.

Bren. How?
That nothing Lord trifle below ill language,
How came it in thy heart to tempt my honor?

Pal. My Lord.

Bren. Do think cause I am angry,
With the King aad state sometimes,
I am fallen out with virtue and my self,
Draw, draw or by goodness.

Pal. What means your Lord-ship?

Bren. Draw, I say,
He that would think me villain is one
And I do wear this toy to purge the world
Of such, they have saved thee,
Enter King Lords, Melid. Miessa, they kiss the Kings hand. Were thou good
natured thou would
Love a King the better during life,

King. If they be just.
They call for gracious answers,
Speedy how ere we promise,

All. Long live great (...),

Bren. The (...) Sir, are of the wilder sort of creatures,
Must be rid with harsh curbs, and since the war
Can only make them tried, what can be used but
Swords? where men have ^alne,
From not respecting Royalty,
Unto a liberty of offending it;
What tho their numbers equals your^ Sir?
And now ^or^'d by necessity,
Like cuts in narrow rooms,
They fly upon your face:
Think you rebellion and loyalty,
Are empty names, and that in subjects hearts,
They give not both and take away the courage;
Shall we believe there is no difference,
In good, and bad? no punishment,
Nor no protection? forbid it heaven,
If when great (...) honor, safety too
Hanges in dis^ute, we should not draw our swords,
Why were we ever taught to wear them Sir?

Mies, This late commotion in your kingdoms Sir,
Is like a growing (...) upon the face,
Which as we cannot look on without trouble
So ^ak't away we cannot, without danger,
War there has ^ouiest face, and I
Must fear it, where the pretext is fairest.
Religion, and Liberty,
Most specious names,
Which like the bills of ^ubtle Mountebanks,
Filled with great promises of Curing all;
Tho by the wi^e passed by unread, as common cou^enage,
Yet by th'unknowing multitude,
They Are (...) admired and flockt to*

King. I* there no way to di^abuse them?

M^^. A I's now too late,
the vulgar in religion are
Like unknown land^,
And those that first possess them, have them.
Then (Sir) consider, justness of cause is nothing,
When things is risen to the point they are?
It Is either not examined or believed*
Amongst the world.
The better cause the Grecians h^d of old,
Yet were the Gods themselves divided in it,
And the foul Ravisher found as good protection,
As the much injured husband*
Nor are you (Sir) assured of all behind you,
For tho your per^^ in the subjects hearts,
Stands highly honored and belo^'d*
Yet are there certain^ Acts of state,
Which men call grievances abroad.
And tho they bore them in the times of peace,
Yet will they now perchance think to be free,
And throw them off for Sir
The Common people are much like the Sea,
Which suffers things to fall,
And sink unto the bottom in a calm,
Which in a storm,
Stur'd and enraged it lifts, and does keep up.
Then time,
Distempers cures, more safely (Sir) then physic,
Or instant letting blood* Religion now
Is a young mistress there, for which each man will ^ight
And dye at least; Let it alone a while,
And it will become a kind of married wife,
People will be content to live with it,
In quietness, if that at least may be,
My voice is therefore (Sir) for peace.

Mies. Were Sir the question simply war or peace,
It were no more then shortly to be ask't,
Whether we would be well or ill,
Since war, the sickness of a kingdom is,
And peace the Health:
But here I do conceive,
'Twill rather be, whether we had not better
Endure sharp sickness for a (...), ^'enjoy
A perfect strength, then have it languish on us;
For peace and war, is an incestuous line,
Have still begot each other;
Those men that highly now have broke all laws,
(The great one only ^is t'wixt man and man,
What safety can they promise? tho they give it*
Will they not still suspect, and justly too,
That all those bonds should be
Broken again to them; so being still in fears,
And jealousies themselves* they mu^t infect
The people, for in such a case,
The private safety is a public troubl^,
Nor will they ever want pretext,
Since he that will
Maintain it with his Sword he is injured,
May say it at any time:
Then (S^r) as terrible (...) war appears,
My vote is for it, nor shall I ever care,
How ugly my Physicians shall be,
So he can do the cure,

Lord. In entering Phy^i^^,
I think Sir none so much considers
The Doctors face, as his own body,
To keep on foot the war, with all the wants,
Is to let blo^d, and (...) ^^rong potions,
In dangerous sickness.

King. I see a wonder not to find my Lords,
This difference in opinion, the subject's large,
Nor can we there too much dispute, where, when
We err it is at a kingdoms charge,
Peace and (...) are in themsel^es indifferent,
And time does stamp^ them, either good or bad,
But here the place, is much considerable,
War in our own.
Is like to heat within, it makes the body (...),
When in another country it is but exercise,
Conveyes that heat abroad, and gives it health,
To that I bend my thoughts,
But leave it to our greater counsels,
Which we now assemble:
Mean time exchange of prisoners only we assent to,

Lord. Nothing of Truces Sir.

King. No:
We will not take up quiet at interest,
Perfect peace or nothing,
Cessations for short times in war,
Are like small fits of health,
In dangerous sickness,
Which while the instant pain seems to abate,
Flatters us in debauch and worse estate.

(Exeunt. Enter Iphigene as leading to his chamber, Francelin, Servant with
lights. Morat, and another Soldier. Iph. I have not left my self a fair
retreat,
And must be now either the blessed object,
Of your love, or subject of your scorn.

Fran. I fear some treachery,
And that my eyes have given intelligence;
Unless you know there would be weak defense,
You durst not think of taking in a heart,
As soon as you sit down before it.

Iph. Condemn my love, not of such fond ambition,
It ayms not at a conquest, but Francelia.

(whisper. Mor. They Are very great in this short time.

Sol. It Is ever so.
Young and handsome,
Have made acquaintance in nature,
So when they meet, they have the less to do,
It is for age or ugliness to make aproaches,
Or keep a distance.

Iph. When I shall see, other perfection,
Which at the best will be but other vanity* not more,
I shall not love it.

Fran. It Is still one step, not to despair my Lord.

Ex^^nt Iphigene, Franco^ia, Servants. Mor. Do think he would fight?

Sol. Troth it may be not,
Nature in those fine pieces does as painters.
Hangs out a pleasant excellence
That takes the eye, which is indeed
But a course canvis in the naked truth,
Or some slight ^tuffe.

Mor. I have a great mind to taste him.

Sol. Fie a prisoner.

Mor. By this hand, if I thought he courted my
Colonells Mistress in earnest.

Enter ^phigene. Woman aft^r^ Woe. My Lord, my Lord,
My Lady thinks the jessamine walks
Will be finer, the freshness
Of the morning takes off the strength
O'th heat she says.

Iph. It Is well.

Mor. Mew, does it so? I suspect vildly,
We Will follow him, and see it he be
So far qualified toward a Soldier
As to drink a -- in's Chamber.

Exeunt. Raguelin pulls woman back. Ra. Where are those Keys?

Wom. Hark ye, I dare not doo'^.

Ra. How!

Wom. My Lady will find.

Ra. Scruples.
Are my hopes your fears?
There was no other way I should be any thing
In this loud world -- and now,
S'foot I know she longs to see him too.

Woe. Does she?

Ra. Dos't think he would desire it else.

Woe. I but.

Ra. Why let me secure it al,
I Will say I found the Keys, or stole them, come.

Woe. Well if you ruin al now,
Here, These enter the garden from the works,
That the privy walks, and that the back-stalres,
Then you know my Chamber.

Ra. Yes I know your Chamber.

Exeunt. Enter Brennoralt. Bren. He comes not,
One wise thought more, and I return,
I cannot in this art separate the foolish
From the bold so far, but still it tastes
O'th rash.
Why let it tast^^^ tastes of love too,
And to all actions't gives a pretty relish that.

Enter Raquelin. Ra. My Lord.

Bren. Oh here!

Ra. S'foot you are upon our centries
More on this hand.

Exeunt. Enter again. Bren. Why are there here no guard?

Ra. There needs none,
You presently must p^sse a place
VVhereon's an a^my in defense,
It is ^o steep and strait.

Bren. It Is well.

Ra. These are the steps of danger,
Look to your way my Lord.

Francelia as in bed, he draws the Curtain^. Bren. I do not find such
difficulties,
Wait me thereabouts.
So misers look upon their Gold,
Which while they joy to see, they fear to loose
The pleasure of the sight scarce equalling
The jealousy of being dispossessed by others,
Her face is like the milky way in the Sky,
A meeting of gentle lights without name,
Heavens, shall this fresh ornament of the world
This precious Loveliness,
Pass with other common things
Among the wastes of time?

What pity 'twere!
Sh^e wakes. Fan. Bless me,
It is a vision, or Brennoralt.

Bren. Brennoralt, Lady.

Fran. Brennoralt, ignorance guard me
What is it you have done my Lord?

Bren. Alas, I were but in too good estate,
If I knew what I did.
But why ask you Madam?

Fran. It much amazes me to think,
How you came hither
And what could bring you too in danger thus,
My honor, and your own life
Nothing but saving of my brother.
Could make me now preserve you.

Bren. Reproach me not, the follies you your self
Make me commit,
I am reduced to such extremity
That love himself, high tyrant as he is,
If he could see, would pity me.

Fran. I understand you not.

Bren. Would Heaven you did, for it is a pain to tell you.
I come to accuse you of injustice Madam,
You first begot my passion,
And was content (at least you seem so)
That it should live,
Yet since never would contribute unto it
Nor look upon it: as if you had desired
I^'s being for no other end,
But for the pleasure of its ruin.

Fran. Why do you labor that to make me guilty of
An injury to you, which when it is one,
Al mankind is alike engaged,
And must have quarrel to me.

Br. I have done il, you chide me justly Madam,
I Will lay it not on you, but on my wretched self.
For I am taught that Heavenly bodies
Are not malicious in their influence,
But by the disposition of the subject.
They tell me you must marry Almeri^,
Sure such excellency ought to be
The recompense of virtue
Not the sacrifice of parents wisdom,
Should it not Madam?

Fran. 'Twould injure me,
Were it thought otherwise.

Bren. And shall he have you then
That knew you yesterday?
Is there in Martyrdom no juster way
But this, that holds a finger in the fire
A little time? should the Crown from them
That have endured the flame with constancy

Fran. If the discovery will ease your thoughts my Lord,
Know Alm^rin is the man I never saw.

Bren. You do not marry then, condemned man
Thus hear, and thus receive reprieves.
One question more, and I am gone.
Is there to Latitude of eternity
A hope for Brennoralt.

Fran. My Lord.

Bren. Have I place at al when you do think of men?

Fran. My Lord, a high one,
I must be fingular: did I not value you?
The world does set great rates upon you,
And you have first deserved them*

Bren. Is this al?

Fran. All.

Bren. O be less kind or kinder,
Give me more pity, or more cruelty Francelia,
I cannot live without this, nor die.

Fran. I fear my Lord,
You must not hope beyond it.

Bren. Not hope?
This is not sure the body to this soul,
It was mistaken shuffled, in through have:
Why else should that have so much love,
And this want love lines to make that Love
Received -- I will raise honor to a point
Studies. It never was,
Do things of such a victorious greatness:
She shall love me, she shall.
I will deserve her, tho I have her not,
The^'s something yet in that.
Madam wilt please you pardon my offense,
Oh fates that I must call thus my affection^.

Fra. I will do any thing, so you will think of me
And of your self my Lord, and how your stay
Endangers both.

Bren. Alas your pardon is more necessary to my self*
Then life's to me, but I am gone
Blessing such as my wishes for you in
Their ecstasies could never reach, fall on you,
May every thing contribute to preserve
Your excellence (my destruction)
Great as the torments I have in it.

Exeunt. Actus Quartus.
Enter Brennoralt. Bren. WHy so it is well: fortune I think thee still,
I dare not call thee villain neither,
^Twas plotted from the first:
That Is certain, it looks that way:
Hum caught in a trap^
Here Is something yet to trust to*
(to his Sword This was the entry, these the stairs,
But whither afterward?
He that is sure to perish on the Land
May quit the nicety of card and compass,
And safe to his discretion put to Sea,
He shall have my hand (...).
Exit.
Enter Raguelin, Orillia, the waiting Woman. Ra. Look, by this light it is day.

Oril. Not by this, by the other it is indeed.

Ra. Thou art such another piece of temptation.
My Lord raves by this time.
An hundred to one the Centinells will discover
Us too, then do I pay for night-watch.

Oril. Fie upon thee, thou art as fearful as a
Young Colt, boylest at every thing, fool, as
If Lovers considered hours, i will peep in.

She peepes. Ra. I am as weary of this wench
As if I were married to her,
She hangs upon me like an ape upon a Horse,
She Is as common too, as a Barbers Gla^^e,
Conscienst like a Dy-dapper.

Oril. Raguelin, there is no body within
My Lady sleeps this hour at least.

Ra. Good, the Devils even with me,
Not be an honest man neither,
What course now?

Exeunt. Enter Brennoralt and a Guard. Sol. Nay sir we shall order you.

Bren. Dogs.

Enter Fresolin. Fre. What tumult's this? ha Brennoralt,
It Is he in spite of his disguise,
What makes he here?
He Is lost for ever if he discovered:
How now companions, why do you use
My friend thus

Sol. Your friend my Lord, if he be your friend,
H'has used us as il,
H'has played the devil among us,
Six of our men has Surgeons work this month,
We found him climing of the wal^.

2. Sol. He had no word neither,
Nor any Language but a blow.

Fr. You will be doing these wild things my Lord.
Good faith you are too blame, if you had desired
To view the walls or trenches, 'twas but
Speaking, we are not nice,
I would my self had waited on you.
They Are the new outworks you would see perchance,
My Lord, we will take the nearer way, and
Privater, here through the sally port.

Bren. What the devill's this sure I dream?

Exeunt. Sol. Nay you are so officious.

manent Soldiers. 2. Sol. Death, could I guess he was a friend?

Sol. 'Twas ever to be thought so,
How could he come there else?

2. Sol. Friend, or no friend he might have
Left us something to pay the Surgeon with.
Grant me that, or ^'le beat you to him.

Exeunt. Enter Fresolin, Brennoralt. Fre. Brennoralt, start not,
I pay thee back a life I owe thee,
And bless my stars they gave me power to do,
The debt lay heavy on me,
A Horse waits you there, a trumpet too
Which you may keep lest he should prate,
No ceremony, it is dangerous.

Bren. Thou have astonished me.
Thy youth has triumphed in one single act
OF eal the age can boast, and ^ will stay
To tell thee so, were they now firing
All their Cannons on me,
Farewell gallant Fresolin
And may reward great as thy virtue crown thee.

Exe. Enter Iphigene, Francelia. Fran. A peace will come,
And then thou must be gone,
And whither? when you are once got upon the wing*
Y^^ will not stoop to what shall rise
Before ye, fly to some lure
With more temptation garnisht.

Iph. Can you have doubts, and I have not my fears?
By this the readiest, and the sweetest oath I swear,
Kisses. I cannot so secure my self of you,
But in my absence, I shall be in pain,
I have cast up what it will be to stand
The Gov^^nours anger, and which is more hard,
The love (...) Almerin.
I hold thee now, but by thy own free grant,
A slight security; alas it may fall out
Giving thy self, not knowing thine own worth,
Or want of mine, thou may like one deceived
Resume the gift on better knowledge back.

Fran. If I so easily change, I was
Not worth your love,
And by that loss you will gain.

Iph. But when you are irrecoverably gone,
'Twill be slight comfort to persuade my self
You had a fault, when all that fault must be,
But want of love to me, and that again,
Find in my much defect, so much excuse,
That it will have no worse name
Then indiscretion, if I inconcern'd do
Cast it up. -- I must have more assurance.

Fran. You have too much already,
And sure my Lord, you wonder while I blush
At such a growth in young perfections.

Iph. Why should I wonder Madam?
Love that from two breasts sucks,
a giant. Must of a child quickly.
Dunces in love stay at the Alphabet,
The inspired know all before,
And do begin still higher.

(Enter woman. Wom. Madam, Almerin returned has sent to kiss
Your hand; I told him you were busy.

Fran. Must I my Lord be busy?
I may be civil, tho not kind,
Tell him I wait him in the gallery.

Iph. May I not kiss your hands this night?

Fran. The world is full of jealous eyes my Lord,
And were they all locked up, you are a spy,
Once entered in my chamber at strange hours.

Iph. The virtue of Francelia is too safe,
To need this little art of preservation,
Thus to divide our selves, is to distract our selves,
A Cher^bin dispatches not on earth.
The affairs of heaven, with greater innocence,
Then I will visit; it is but to take a leave
I beg.

Fran. When you are going my Lord.

Exeunt. Enter Almerin. Morat. Alm. Pish, thou lie, thou lie.
I know he plays with womankind,
Not loves it, thou art impertinent.

Mort. It Is the Camp talk my Lord.

(Exeunt. Alm. The camp's an ass; let me hear no more on it.

Enter Granivert, Villanor, Marinell. Gran. And shall we have peace?
I am no sooner, but the state's so too.
If It be, they will a truce for a month only;
I long to refresh my eye^ by this hand,
They have been so tired, with looking upon faces,
Of this Country.

Vill. And shall not the Donnazella,
To whom we do wish well a,
Look babies again in our eyes.

Gran. Ah* a spritely girl about fifteen,
That melts, when man but takes her by the hand,
Eyes full and quick, with breath
Sweet as double Violet^,
And wholesome as dying straw-berries,
Thick silken eyebrowes high upon the forehead,
And cheeks mingled with pale streakes of red,
Such as the blushing morning never wore.

Vill. O my chops, my chops:

Gran. With narrow mouth, small teeth,
And lips swelling as if she pow^ed.

Vill. Hold, hold, hold.

(Marjoram. Gran. Hair colored and curling like buds of
Part tied in negligence,
Part loosely flowing.

Vill. Tyrant, tyrant, tyrant.

G^a^. In pinke color taffata petty-coat,
Lac't smock sleeves dangling,
This vision stolen from her own ^ed,
And rustling in ones chamber.

V^ll. Oh good Granivert, good Granivert.

Gra. With a wax Candle in her hand*
Looking as if she had los^ her way,
At twelve at night.

Mar. Oh, any hour, any hour.

Gran. Now I think on it by this hand,
^le marry, and be long lived.

Vill. Long lived, how?

Gra. Oh he that has a wife, eats with an appetite,
Has a very good stomach to'^ first,
This living at large is destructive,
Variety is like rare sawces,
Provokes too far, and draws on surfets,
Then the other.

Enter Doran. Dor. So, Is this a time to fool in?

Gra. What Is the matter.

Dor. Draw out your choice men, and away to
Your Colonel immediately, there is work
Toward my boys, there is work.

Gra. Ar't in earnest.

Dor. By this light.

Gra. There Is something in that yet.

This Moity were
Twilight.
Neither night nor day,
Pox upon it.
A storm is worth a thousand
Of your ^alme,
There Is more ^ariety in it.
Exeunt, Enter Almerin, Francelia, as talking earnestly. Alm. Madam, that
shows the greatness of my passion.

Fran. The Imperfections rather,
Iealousi's no better sign of love
My Lord, then fevers are of life;
These show there is a being,
Tho impaired and peri^hing,
And that affection but sick and in disorder.
I like it not? Your Servant.
Exit.
Alm. So short, and sour.
The change is visible.

(Enter Iphigene. Iphi. Dear Almerin Welcome,
You have been absent long.

Alm. Not very long.

Iph. To me it has appeared so.
What says our camp, am I not blamed there?

Alm. They wonder.

Iph. Whilst we smile.
How have you found the King inclining?

Alm. Well; the treaty is not broken, now holds it.
Things are where they were,
^Thas a kind of face of peace.
You my Lord may when you please return.

Iph. I, Almerin.

Alm. Yes my Lord, I Will give you an escape.

Iph. It Is least to my desires.

Alm. Hum:

Iph. Such prisons are beyond all liberty.

Alm. Is It possible?

Iph. Seems it strange to you?

Alm. No, not at all?
What, you find the Ladies kind?

Iph. Civil --

(smiles. Alm. You make love well too, they say my Lord.

Iph. Pass my time.

Alm. Address unto Francelia.

Iph. Visit her.

Alm. Do You know (...)

Iph. Ha.

Alm. Dee know she is my mistress?

Iph. I have been told so.

Alm. And do you court her then?

Iph. Why; If I saw the enemy first,
Would you not charge?

Alm. He does allow it too, by heaven;
Laughs at me too, Thou filcher of a heart,
False as thy title to Francelia;
Thy friendship with this I do throw by --

(draws* Iph. What do you mean?

Alm. I see the cunning now of all my love.

Alm. Why thou came so tamely kind,
Suffering surprise; draw.

Iph. I will not draw, kill me,
And I shall have no trouble in my death,
Knowing it is your pleasure,
As I shall have no pleasure in my life,
Knowing it is your pleasure.

Alm. Oh poor, I lookt' for this,
I knew thou would find 'tas easier to do
A wrong, then justify it, but.

Iph. I will not, first hear me.
If I love you not, more then I love her,
If I love her more then for your sake,
Heaven strangely punish me.

Alm. Take heed how thou do play with heaven.

Iph. By all that is just, and fair, and good,
By all that you hold dear, and I hold great,
I never had lascivious thought, or e're
Did action that might call in doubt,
My love to Almerin.

Alm. That tongue can charm me into any thing.
I do believe it, prithee be wiser then,
Give me no farther cause of jealousies,
Hurt not my Honor more, and I am well.

Iph. But well: of all our passions,
How came it^ nature made the worst,
Foul jealousy her favorite,
And if it be not so,
Why took she care that every thing,
Should give the monster nourishment,
And left us nothing to destroy it with?

Alm. Prithee no more; thou pleadst it cunningly
I fear I shall be made the guilty,
And need my pardon*

Iph. If you could read my heart, you would:
I will be gone too morrow, if that will satisfy,
Indeed I shall not rest until my innocence,
Be made as plain as objects to the sense.

Alm. Come, you shall nor go, I Will think upon it no more,
Distrust ruins not friendship,
But builds it fairer then it was before.

Exeunt* Enter Brennoralt. Captains, Stratheman, Doran. Bren. No more but ten
from every company,
For hands are thieves, and rob the glory,
While they take the share,
How goes the night.

Stra. Half spent my Lord,
We shall have straight,
The moon's weaker light.

Bren. It Is time you call in the Officers*
Friends; If ye were men that must be talked
Into a courage, I had not chosen you.
Danger with its vizard of before this time,
You Have looked upon, and have out faced it too.
We are to do the trick again, that is all,
Draws his sword. And yet we will not swear,
For he that shrinkes in such an action;
Is damned without the help of perjury.

Doran. if from the virgin tower*
Thou spiest a flame, such a^ the East wind sends,
Forth about the time the day shall break,
Tell the King I hold the Castle for him,
Bid him come on with all his force,
And he shall find victory so cheap,
^Twill loose it is value,
If I fall, the world has lost a thing,
It used not well, and a thing that cared not
For that world*

Stra. Lead on Colonel,
If we do not fight like.

Bren. No like,
We Will be our selves similitude.
And time shall say, when it would tell
That men did well they fought like us.

Exeunt. Actus Quintus.
Enter again. WHat made the stop?
One in's falling sickness had a fit,
Which choakt the passages, but all is well,
Softly, we are near the place.
Exeunt. Alarm within fight, then Enter Almerin in his night Gown^. Alm. What
noise is here to night?
Something on fire, What ho^,
Send to the Virgin Tower, there is disorder,
Thereabouts.

Enter Soldier. Sol. All Is lost, all is lost,
The enemy's upon the place of Arms,
And is by this time Master of that
And of the Tower.

Alm: Thou lie.

(Strikes him.) Enter Morat. Mor. Save your self my Lord,
And haste unto the Camp,
Ruin gets in on every side.
Exit.
Alm. There Is something in it when this fellow
F^ies.
Villains my Arms. I Will see what devil reigns.
Exit.
Enter Iphigene, Francelia. Iph. Look, the day breaks.

Fran. You think I Will be so kind, as swear,
It does not now, indeed I will not.

Iph. Will you not send me neither*
Your picture when v'are gone?
That when my eye is famisht for a look,
It may have where to feed,
And to the painted feast in^ite my heart.

Fran. (...), take the Virgin (...) of my hair,
And if like other men thou shall hereafter,
Throw it with negligence,
Amongst the Records of the weak female conquest,
Laugh at the kind words, and mystical contrivement.
If such a time shall come,
Know I am ^ighing then thy absence Iphigene,
And weeping over thy false, but pleasing Image.

Enter Almerin. Alm. Francelia* Fr^^c^lia,
Rise, rise and save thy self, the enemy,
That does not know thy worth, may else destroy it.
he throws open the door. Ha; mine eyes grow sick.
A plague has through them stolen into my hea^^,
And I grow dizzy, (...) lead me off again,
Without the knowledge of my body,
I shall act, I know not what else.
Exit.
Fran. How came he in?
Dear Iphigene, we are betrayed,
Let Us raise the Castle, lest he should return.

Iph. That were to make all public,
Fear not, I Will satisfy his anger,
I can do it.

Fran. Yes with some quarrel,
And bring my honor, and my love in danger
Enter Almerin. Lo^ke he returns. And wreckes of fury,
Like hurried clouds over the face of heaven,
Before a tempest, in his looks appear.

Alm. If they would question
What our rage does act, and make it sin,
They would not thus provoke men.
I am too tame.
Here I denounce a war to all the world,
And thus begin it.

Runs at Iphigene. Iph. What have thou done?

falls. Fran. Ah me, help, help --

Wounds her. Iph. Hold.

Al. It Is too late.

Iph. Rather then she shall suffer,
My fond deceits involve the innocent,
I will discover al.

Alm. Ha, what will he discover?

Ip. That which shall make thee curse the blindness
Of thy rage, I am a woman.

Al, Ha, ha, ha, brave and bold.
Because thy perjury deceived me once
And saved thy life, thou think to escape again,
Imposture thus thou shall.

Runs at him. Iph. Oh hold, I have enough,
Had I hope of life,
Thou should not have this secret.

Alm. What will it be now?

Iph. My Father having long desired
A son to heir his great possessions,
And in six births successively deceived,
Made a rash vow, and O rash vows are punished,
That if the b^rthen my mother went with
Proved not a male, he never would know her more,
Then was unhappy Iphigene brought forth,
And by the women's kindness made a boy,
And since so bred,
A cruel pity as it has fallen out,
If now thou findst that which thou thoughtst
A friendship in me, love forget it,
It was my joy and death. --

^aints. Alm. For curiosity i will save thee if I can,
Know the end, if it be but loss of blood,
Breasts; by all that is good, a woman.
Iphigene.

Iph. I thank thee,
For I was fallen asleep before I had dispatched,
Sweetest of al thy Sex, Francelia
Forgive me now, my love unto this man
And fear to lose him, taught me a fatal cunning,
Made me court you, and my own destruction.

Fran. I am amazed.

Alm. Can it be! O mockery of Heaven,
To let me see what my soul often wished,
And mak't my punishment,
A punishment that were I old in sins,
Were yet too great.

Iph. Would you have loved me then?
Pray you say would,
For I like teasty sickmen at their death
Would know no news but health
From the physician.

Alm. Can thou doubt that?
That have so often seen me extasi'd
When thou were dressed like woman,
Unwilling ever to believe thee man.

Iph. I have enough.

Alm. Heavens.

What thing shall I appear unto the world?
Here my ignorance might have some excuse,
But there, I was distract.
None but a man enraged with anger
To a savagenesse, would e're have drawn
A sword upon such gentle softness,
Be kind, and kill me, one of you:
Kill me, if it be but to preserve my wits,
Dearest Iphigene take thy revenge.
It will not misbecome thy sex at all,
It Is act of pity, not of cruelty,
To dispatch a miserable man.
Fran. And thou would be more miserable yet,
While like a bird made prisoner by it self,
Thou beatst thy self against every thing,
And vexed, pass by that, which should let thee out.

Alm. Is it my fault, or Heavens!
For time while she would play upon me,
Like ill musicians wound me up so high,
That I must crack sooner then move in tune.

Fran. Still you rave, while we
For want of present help may perish.

Alm. Right, a Surgeon, i will find one instantly,
The enemies at hand too* I had forgot,
Oh what fatality governed this night!
Exit.
Fr. How like an unthrifts case will mine be now?
For all the wealth he looses,
Shifts but the place, and still the world
Enjoyes it, so will it you
Sweet Iphigene, tho I possess you not.

Iph. What excellency of nature's this?
Have you so perfectly forgiven already,
As to consider me a loss;
I am in doubt what sex I should
Be happier in: climates of freindship
Are not less pleasant, cause they are
Less scorching with those of Love;
And under them we will Live,
Such precious links of that shall tie
Our souls together, that the chains of tother^
Shall be gross fetters to it.

Fren. I fear I cannot stay the making,
Oh, would you had never undeceived me,
For I had died with pleasure,
Believing I had bin your Martyr now*

Iph. She looks pale, Francelia.

Fran. I cannot stay,
A hasty summons hurries me away*
And gives. -- no -- ( dies)

Iph. She Is gone, she is gone, life like a dyalls hand
A noise within) Stole from the fair figure ere it was perceived,
What will become of me?
she thinks it is Almerin Too too late you are come,
You may persuade wild bird^ that wing the air
Enter Soldiers Into a cage, as soon as call her
VVandring spirits back, Ha these strange faces*
Horror is in them, if I stay
I shall be taken for the murderer,
Oh in what straits they move,
That wander 'twixt the fears of death, and hopes of Love.
(Exit.
Bren. Forbear upon your lives the place,
There dwells Divinity in it, al else
The Castle holds is lawful prize
Your valors wages, this I claim as mine,
Guard you the door.

Gra. Colonel, shall you use all the women your self?

Bren. Away it is unreasonable.
Draws the Curtain. Awake fair Saint, and bless thy poor i^olatour,
Ha, pale, and cold, dead!
The swee^est guest fled, murdered by Heaven,
The purple streams not dry yet.
Some villain has broke in before me,
Robbed al my hopes, but I will find him out,
And kick his soul to hell i^le do it

(Dragging out Iphigen^. Speak. Iph. What should I say?

Bren. Speak, or by all.

Iph^ Alas, I do confess my self the unfortunate cause.

Bren. O do you so,
Had thou been cause of all the plagues
That vex mankind, thou had been an innocent
To what thou ar't, thou shall not think repentance.

Kills Her. Iph. O thou were too sudden, and -- Dies.

Bren. Was I so?
The lustful youth would sure have spoild
Her honor, which finding highly guarded
Rage or fear to be reveald, counseled
This villain, is there no more of them?
Exit.
Enter Almerin. Not Enter,
Yes dog through thee, ha^ a course laid out
Instead of Iphigene, Francelia dead too,
Where shall I begin to curse?
Enter Brennoralt. Bre^. Here if he were thy friend.

Alm. Brennoralt.
A gallant sword could never have come in better time*

Bren. I have a good one for thee
If that will serve thy turn.

Alm. I long to try it.
That fight does make me desperate,
Sick of my self, and of the world.

Bren. Did value him?
A greater villain did I never kill.

Alm. Kill. Bren. Yes. Alm. Ar 't sure of it?

Bren. May be I do not wake.

Alm. Tha'st ta^en then a guilt off from me,
Would have weighed down my sword,
Weakened me to love resistance,
I should have made no sport,
Had thou conceald it,
Know Brennoralt thy Sword is stained in*
Excellence, great, as the world can boast.

Bren. Ha, ha, how thart abused,
Look there, there lies the excellence
Thou speakst of, murdered by him too,
He did confess he was the cause.

Alm. O inocence il understood, and much swore used,
She was alas by accident, but I,
I was the cause indeed.

Bre. I will believe thee too, and kill thee,
Destroy all causes til I make a stop
In nature.

Alm. Brevely then:
The title of a Kingdom is a t^ifle
To our quarrel, sir know by sad mistake
I killed thy Mistress Brennoralt, and thou kil'dst mine.

Bren. ^hine?

Alm. Yes that Iphigene
Tho shown as man unto the world,
Was woman, exce^lent woman.

Bren. I understand no riddles guard thee.

Fight and pause. Alm. O could they now look down,
And see how we two strive,
Which first should give revenge,
They would forgive us something of the crime.
Hold prithee give me leave,
To satisfy a curiosity,
I never kissed my Iphigene as woman.

Bren. Thou motionst well, nor have I taken leave --
Rising it keeps a sweetness yet,
As stills from Roses when the flowers are gone.

Al^. So have two fainting pilgrims scorch't with heat
Unto some neighbor fountain steps aside.
Kneel first, then laid their warm lips
To the Nymph, and from her coldness
Took fresh life again, as we do now.

Bren. Lets on our journey if thou art refresht.

Alm. Come, and if there be a place reserved
For hightned spirits better then other,
May that which wearies first of ours have it.

Fight a good while. Almerin falls. Bren. If I weary, laugh at me, that is all.

Alm. Brave souls above*
Which will be sure inquisitive
For news from earth, shall yet no other,
But that thou art brave.

Enter King, Lords Strathman, Minse, Stra. To preserve some Ladies as we guest.

King. Still gallant.
Brennoralt, thy ^word not sheathed yet;
Busy still?

Bren. Revenging Sir,
The foulest murder ever blasted ^ares,
Committed here by Almerin, and Iphigene,

A^m. False, false.
The first created purity was not*
More innocent then Iphigene.

Bren. Lives he again?

A^m. Stay thou much wearyed guest,
T^ll I have thrown amongst them,
We shall look black else to posterity.

King. What says he?

Lord. Something concerning this he labors to discover.

Alm. Know 'twas I, who killed Franc^lia, I alone.

Minse. O Barbarous return of my civilities,
Was it thy hand?

Alm. Hear and forgive me Minse.
Entering this morning hastily
With resolution to preserve,
The fair Francelia, I found a thief,
Stealing the treasure which I thought
Belonged ^o me, wild in my mind,
And ruined in my honor in much mistaken rage
I wounded both, then O too late I found.
My error: found Iphigene a woman,
Acting stolen love, to make my own safe.
And all my jealousies impossible,
Whilst I run out to bring them cure.
Francelia dies, and Iphigene found here,
I can no more --

(dies. King. More strange, and intricate,
Iphigene a woman.

Melid. With this story I am guiltily acquainted,
The first concealments since her love,
And all the ways to it I have been trusted with.
But sir my grief joined with the instant business,
Begs a deferment.

King. I am amazed till I do hear it out,
But in the mean time.
Lest in these mists. merit should lose it self,
Those forfeitures of Trock and Minse,
Brennoralt are thine.

Bren. It Is princely gift, but Sir it comes too late,
Like Sunbeams on the blasted blossoms,
Your f^vours fall; you should have given
Me this, when it might have raised,
Me in men's thoughts, and made me equal,
To Francelias love; I have no end,
Since she is not: Back to my private life.
I will return.

King. This melancholy June m^st cure.
Come take the bodies up, and lead the p^isoners on^
Triumph and Funeral must walk together.
Cipresse, and Laurel turned make up one chaplet,
For we have got the day.
But bought it at so dear a rate,
that victory it selfe's unfortunate.

FINIS.

