A GOSPEL-GLASSE, Representing the MISCARRIAGES OF English Professors, BOTH In
their Personal and Relative Capacities, for which God is contending with them,
by the Sword, Plague, etc. and (since the writing of the greatest part of the
following Treatise for the Press) by the dreadful Fire in London. OR, A CALL
FROM HEAVEN To SINNERS and SAINTS.

By Repentance and Reformation to prepare to meet God.

Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart: Thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him. Jer. 2.35. Yet thou
say, Because I am innocent surely his anger shall turn from me: Behold, I
will plead with thee, because thou say, I have not sinned. LONDON, Printed
in the Year MDCLXVII.

THE Authors PREFACE.
WHEN it is a day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds, and of thick
darkness, then (says the Prophet) Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, Joel 2.1, 2.
and found an Alarm in my holy Mountain: Let all the Inhabitants of the Land
tremble. Lam. 2.1.
How has the Lord covered the Daughter of Zion with a Cloud in his anger, and
cast down from Heaven unto the Earth the beauty of Israel, and remembered not
his Footstool in the day of his anger? He has violently taken away his
Tabernacle, as if it were of a Garden; Feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten in
Zion, and has despised in the indignation of his anger his Priests. Yea, the
Lord has cast off his Altar, he has abhorred his Sanctuary, the Law is no
more, her Prophet, also find no Vision from the Lord. O that now mine eyes
could fail with tears, and my bowels were more troubled within me! O that my
Liver were poured upon the Earth for the destruction of the Daughter of my
People, there is no more any Prophet, Psalm. 74.9.
neither is there among us any that knows How Long.

When we, 2 Samuel 6.1, 2.
like David, were restoring the Ark of God, I mean, the presence of Christ, in
his Worship and Ordinances, what Stumblings of the Oxen have we seen? What
miserable Disappointments have we met with? And what sad breaches have there
been made? How has God stopped our way, and branded our Enterprises with
wonderful remarks of his sore displeasure?

Hear therefore the word of the Lord, Hos, 4.1.
ye Children of Israel, for the Lord has a Controversy with the Inhabitants
of the Land. We poor Ministers have pleaded with you, till we can plead no
more: the Lord has bid us stand by, whilst he himself takes up the
Controverste. O is it not a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God? Hebr. 10.31.
Are you not sensible what Arrows God has begun to shoot amongst us? How many
thousands, Psalm. 58.9. Isa. 5.25.
and ten thousands has he taken away as with a whirlwind by the Pestilence?
For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
How has God shaken our Heavens, Hag. 2.6.
and our Earth; the Sea, as well as dry Land? How does he contend still by the
Sword? And how much precious blood has the Earth and Sea drunk up? For all
this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

O! Come, Psalm. 46.8.
Behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the Earth.
Every Providence of God, (especially his more notable Acts) has a reason
written upon it, could man's eye read it. When the Church complained that God
was as a stranger in the Land, Jer. 14.8, 10.
and as a wayfaring man, that turns aside to tarry for a night: The Lord
replies to them, Thus have they loved to wander, etc. The Controversy began on
their side: they may see their Sin in the Punishment, as in a Glass. Do they
winder I grow strange to them? The estrangement began on their part. Nothing
appears more our instant Duty, than to enter a serious scrutiny, What have we
done? Wherein have we offended? Lam. 3.40, 41, 44.
Let us search and try our ways, ( says the afflicted Church of Judah, upon
this very occasion, of the Lords covering himself with a Cloud, that their
Prayers could not pass through) and turn again to the Lord. Let us lift up our
heart, with our hands, unto God in the Heavens. O! Hag. 1.5.7.
Consider your ways: The Lord doubled it, Your iniquities have separated
between you and your God, Isa. 59.2.
and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear.

I find men will easily subscribe to this, that Sin is the procuring cause of
all misery; but I find an aptness to transferr the guilt from one to another,
from one party to another; and though people do even sell themselves to work
wickedness, yet so predominant is Self-love, that it sees no spots in it self.
Ahab is not the troubler of Israel, but Elijah: Nay, a good man, Aaron excuses
himself, Exodus 32.22.
and lays the blame on others. The Sin is theirs, not mine. Men have a natural
desire to justify themselves, and their desire is so strong, that they care
not whom they bespatter or burden, so they may but ease and acquit themselves.

And indeed, Sin is such an ugly Monster, that no man will own it, if he can
choose; but had rather lay this Child of Darkness at any man's door, yea at
Gods, than Father it himself.

My Design in this Enterprise, is, to obviate this Distemper, and to bring you,
all of you, to own your iniquity; that you may say (resolve upon it) that you
will confess your iniquity, Psalm. 32.5.
that so God may forgive the iniquity of your sin. My Place, and Duty, as a
Minister (though wholly unworthy of that Relation to God and you) binds me to
cause Jerusalem to know her abominations; Ezekiel. 16.2.
and therefore I have descended to Particulars, that, if it be the will of God,
I might hit the humor, 1 Kings 8.38.
and show to every man the plague of his own heart.

The Lord knows, I take no pleasure to rake in these Dunghills: I dread the
ill uses, that the Sons of Belial may make of this Enterprise: I expect various
Censures from them, who should be otherwise min^ed; but my record is on high,
that the great Design of this Publication is, to reduce Professors to a more
aweful, humble, serious Repentance toward God, and singular Conversation
before men.

I thank God for the freedom that a Reverend Brother has taken with the
ejected Ministers: Vox clamantis in Deserto.
and I must profess, that since the perusal of that most seasonable Pi^ce, I
have had no quiet in my Conscience, till I entered upon this Labor. Though my
bodily Distempers pleaded loud for my silence; though I was told, the prudent
should hold their peace in an evil day; though I know it is an unthankful office
to admonish and reprove, etc. Yet I have laid by all Impediments and Objections
that Self was obtruding; and wish I had such gifts, and such affections, and
such a discerning of the hearts and lives of Professors, as might render me
some way useful, to put you upon self-reflection, upon self-tryal, in order to
a full Repentance: I pray God, I may so far at least succeed, as to obstruct
that cursed exclaiming against the sins of Governors, and the sins of divided
Parties, as at length to make you cry out, What have I done? O! how have I
provoked God?

Out of pity to your souls have I undertaken this subject: Our pangs, like
those of a travailling Woman, are hastening: the Clouds are swelling, I am loath
they should fall on you in a secure and impenitent condition, I am not ashamed
to tell you, that I foresee foul weather; and I would you should be in
readiness for boisterous Seas. I know nothing save guilt will then sink your
hearts: the load of affliction will be so heavy and hard upon you, that I would
have nothing else (not the load of millions of unrepented sins) at the same
time, to press you down. Sins unrepented of, will soon, as poison, drink up
your spirits. If sin be confessed, and repented of, if God has forgiven, no
matter what loads lie upon the back, seeing no guilt lies upon the Conscience.

Having given you an account of my Design, and the reason of it, I shall only
add,

That it may not be expected I should give you a full Catalogue of all your
sins, Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me (and the Land) from all
our secret, Psalm. 19.12.
as well as known, faults.

God forbid I should be so censorious, all Professors guilty of these sins, in
all the Particularities, or in all the Aggravations of them. Some are to be
charged one way, some another: few can wash their hands in innocence, that they
are no ways Principals or Accessories.

Far be it from me to be partial in my Charge,

I desire you would take this Catalogue into your Closets with you, give the
Lord no rest, till he has took his Pen, and dipped it in the blood of his Son,
and blotted them out of his Diary, and remembrance.

And Lastly,

A Brief ACCOUNT OF What may be expected in the following TREATISE, By a Friend
to the Author and Reader.
Professor, In this necessary and seasonable Gospel-Glass, there are many sad,
but useful Sights for thee.

First, Would thou know what may be seen? I Will tell thee; Herein the
Miscarri^ges of Professors (and therefore of thine own self) are enumerated
and aggravated. The Sins enumerated are either against the Law and Gospel
jointly, or against the Gospel and Law severally.

Professors Sins against the Law and Gospel jointly, are hinted in the first
Chapter, which shows their Regardlessness of their own and others Souls.

Their Sins against the Gospel more peculiarly, are spoken to in the seven next
Chapters. The 2d. shows their Want of saving Conviction and Compunction: the
3d. their Want of Despair in Self: the 4th. their Miscarriages about
Soul-troubles, the four following Chapters, their Miscarriages about believing
in Christ: the 5th. their Ignorance of Christ, serving their turns of Christ,
making base Capitulations with him: the 6th. their Delays to close with
Christ: the 7th. their Taking Christ partially, without conjugal Affections,
and without considering the Cost they may be at: the 8th. their Shuffling
together false Signs of closing with Christ.

Their Sins against the Law more peculiarly, are either against the First or
Second Table. Their Sins against the First Table (under the Head of
Ungodliness) are discovered in the Eleven following Chapters. The 9th. shows
their Ignorance and Errors: the 10th. their Want of Love to God: the 11th.
their Evil Surmises of God: the 12th. their Unthankfulness: the 13th. their
Neglect of Prayer, especially of Secret, both Ejaculatory and Closet-Prayer:
the 14th. their Miscarriages about their Prayers: the 15th. their Slighting the
written Word of God, especially in not reading and meditating on it as they
ought: the 16th. their Miscarriages about the Promises: the 17th. their Abuse
of Providence: the 18th. their Hypocrisy: the 19th. their Sabbath-Sins.

Their Sins against the Second Table, are either Personal or Relative.

Their Personal Sins are evinced in the four next Chapters. The 20th. shows
their Miscarriages about Self-tryal: the 21st. their Pride: the 22d. their
Gluttony: the 23d. their Idleness.

Their Relative Sins are spoken to in the Fourteen following Chapters. The
24th. shows their Unmercifulness: the 25th. their Unrighteousness, or
Unfaithfulness in Trading: the 26th. their Covetousness: the 27th. their Envy:
the 28th. their Sins as Superiors: the 29th. as Husbands or Wives: the 30th.
as Parents or Children: the 31st. as Masters or Servants: the 32d. their
Miscarriages toward Ministers, before their silencing: the 33d. Since their
silencing: the 34th. their Miscarriages toward Sinners.

The Aggravations of their Miscarriages, that are here enumerated, thou have in
the two next Chapters. The 37th. shows their Dis-ingenuity and Scandalousness:
the 38th. their Sinning against Knowledge, and impenitently, notwithstanding
all means to bring them unto Repentance.

Secondly, Would thou know, and that experimentally, How useful such Sights
may be unto thy Soul? Read diligently the two last Chapters. The 39th. shows,
What Use thou should make of this Glass: and the 40th. What Reason there is
thou should make such Use thereof.

And now, Conscientious Reader, (so I style thee, because I hope thou resolvest
so to be) having given thee this brief Account of what thou may expect in
the following excellent Treatise, I cannot but assure thee, that if thou
bring hither with thee a serious and teachable Spirit, desirous to have thy
Soul searched to the quick, and the sores thereof launced, and thoroughly cured,
thou will not lose thy cost and pains: The closeness and pythiness of the
Compilement, will not only please; but the Materials, so full of Spiritual
vigor, and Scriptural-experience, will wonderfully advantage thy Soul, and
give thee cause, all the days of thy life, yea to eternity, to bless God, for
putting it into the heart of the Reverend Author (after he has sacrificed his
spirits and strength, in a public way of service to God, and his Church, with
more than ordinary activity and self-denial) under many bodily weaknesses, yea
under a sentence of death, thus to employ his Pen, when he cannot his Tongue,
for the good of thy Soul. Every particular Chapter, will, if God add his
blessing, prove a complete Soul-saving Treatise. I shall add no more, to
persuade thee to Come and see, but this; that nothing but unwillingness to see
what is here to be seen, and unperswadableness to make such improvement of such
Sights, can make thy Case desperate. Be sure only, Before, In, and After, thy
serious perusal of these Chapters, of so much worth, that thou beg earnestly of
God, that he would be pleased, with some of his Sons Eye Salve, to open thine
eyes, that thou may see; and by his Spirit move so upon thy spirit, that
thine eye may suitably affect thine heart, with what so much tends to the
promoting of thine eternal welfare.

The Sins of Professors.
CHAP. I. Their regardlesseness of Souls.
1. HOw Careless are we of our own Souls?

1. Ignorance of their preciousness.
O how few do believe they are men, having bodies that must dye, but Souls that
will never dye? How few do believe that their bodies were given them to be
serviceable to their Souls? Their heads, their hearts, their eyes, their ears,
their hands, their feet, etc. were all to attend upon their souls, and to help
them to Heaven: But this is not believed by many: As they are ignorant of the
blessed God, who made them, and of Jesus Christ, who came to redeem them, and
know not whether there be an Holy Ghost or no: So they are ignorant of the
preciousness of their Souls: Christ has not given them eyes to read and
understand that a man is not, cannot be, profited, if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own Soul. Christ's questions, what will it profit a man,
etc. What shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? Matthew. 16.26.
Put it out of all question. Alas! many, who carry the name of Christians,
deserve not the name of men. When you begin to value your Souls, you begin to
be men. Oh that men would value that, which once they shall, they must, value?
The damned Spirits know now the worth of their Souls: How many will not?

2. Inconsiderateness.
How few consider the worth and preciousness of their Souls? When do such
thoughts, as these, possess you? Here in this earthly tabernacle, in this
house of booths dwells a thing, that I never said, that is worth a world:
though here I crawl up and down, like a worm of two or three Cubits long, and
am in danger to be thrown into an hole every day; yet I carry with me a Jewel,
the loss whereof the whole world cannot repair. How seldom do nominal
Professors consider sadly and seriously, what will become of their souls, when
their excellency, Job. 4 21.
which is in them, shall go, or journey, away, as Eliphaz speaks? Examine your
thoughts all the day long, from morning to Evening, and few are laid out for
the Soul.

3. Caring ^^^e for the body ^han the (...)
Are not all the thoughts and cares laid out upon the body, though the body be
but clay, and the soul is a spirit, the body must dye; but the soul shall never
dye? How frequently do we think of our ^odies, what their wants, burdens,
necessities are? but not so of our souls. How much of every day is spent in
providing for thy body, but how little for thy sou^? The body should be but the
soul's servant, yet men feed the slave, and starve the child. The body must be
fed every day, clad every day, yea adorned every day, and ^hysick'd if
distempered; but the soul needs food, raiment, phy^ck continually, yet lies
unregar^ed, is left miserable, naked, starved, etc. A servant has two talents
to keep, the child, and the child's clothes: will the Master thank the servant,
if he plead I have kept the clothes; but I have neglected the life of the
child? Thy body is but thy souls outward garment. How often have your Ministers
told you, that the soul was better than the body? and that your souls needed
daily care more than your bodies? and yet you look after the one, with the
neglect of the other. A day is coming, when thou will wish thou had been bred
in the Field among the beasts and worms, for that thou regardest thy soul no
more, than if thou had but the life of a beast: thou will wish thou had
been made a toad, a serpent, a worm, a dog, a swine, etc. for then thou
should not have suffered to eternity, as now thou will, unless the eyes of
thy understanding be opened to see, consider, and make provision for thy
precious, but perishing soul. Thy body is perishing every day, and thy soul is
upon the borders of eternity: it must live for ever; and yet all thy care is
for the body, which likely will not live threescore years and ten; but the soul
is neglected, that must live threescore millions of years in hell without
repentance, and then, when that date is over, thou art as far from the end of
thy misery, as thou wast the first day, thou wast thrown among the damned.

4. Strangeness toward our souls.
How many will not speak with their souls? They are greater strangers to them,
than the Londoners are to their next Neighbors. Did thou ever ask thy soul
such questions? O my soul how is it, how will it be, with thee? O my soul, in
what state art thou? O my soul, what will become of thee? O! what will become
of thee in the next world?

5. Niggardlyness toward our souls.
At what cost were we any time for our jeoparded souls? The Physician is
consulted with, if there be an ache upon the body: we will, with the woman,
part with all, beggar our selves, to recover health of body. When did you know
a man starve himself, if he could have bread, and water, what ever it cost? We
will be at any expense of time, labor, and charges, to keep our bodies from
starving; but how are the Ordinances of God, the Word and Sacraments (the
spiritual food of the soul) neglected? The flesh must be satisfied; as for the
soul, there is little regard to its well-being. 1 Pet. 2 2.
We cannot endure to see a Cat, a Dog, a Beast want meat; but how easily do
many digest the want of that milk, whereby they should be maintained and grow?
God (says one) gives to these their requests, he gives them quails, but sends
leanness into their souls.

6. How fearless are many of soul-losses? Fearlessness of souls losses.
how common is it for people to draw back from the service of Christ? O! what
is the matter? I shall lose my estate, liberty, pay such a fine, etc. They
little consider what their souls will lose, if they do not persevere, if they
live not up their light. Professors (pardon me that I miscall you) though you
are blind, and mad; and see not the worth of your souls; yet know, that your
souls are the most considerable Jewels, you stand possessed of. All the world
will not weigh with one soul. Thy money may ransom thy body; nothing save
Christ's blood thy soul. Pause a while (Reader) and reflect on all thy sinful
neglects of thy immortal Soul, lest on thy deathbed thou shriek and cry, O my
soul, whether art thou going?

2. Carelessness of others souls.
How little are the souls of others valued and cared for? how many masters are
there, that care no more for their servants souls, than for the dogs? nay not
so much? Perhaps some of you are careful that the bodies of your families be
clothed, be fed, etc. but the souls lie unprovided for: Soul-poysoners not
censured as they ought to be. Make nothing to lay poison for souls.
more care is taken for the pigs, than for the souls.

1. How do we justly censure them as worthy of Capital punishments, that
murder the bodies of men; but not so others who poison and destroy thousands
of souls?

How do you hate to have an hand in murdering the bodies of any, to lay poison
for the destruction of any? and yet how commonly do men lay the poison of ill
council, and ill example before others to cause them to fall into the pit of
hell, and are not affected with this great evil?

2. Not troubled at soul-murtherers.
How troubled are we at any that kill bodies, or that murder others, but not
so at the millions, that destroy their own and others souls, that have an hand
in ruining, in damning themselves and others?

3. If any neglect means that might have continued the life of their husbands,
children, etc. how are they dejected? how do the wring their hands, and beat
their breasts? whereas, if by carelessness, if by the neglect of their duties,
if by evil example, they have destroyed their souls, they are not troubled
about these matters.

4. Low esteems of those that prize their souls.
How do you account meanly of all that take pains for their souls? that wait at
the pools of Bethesda, that consult Ministers, and books, and attend on the
Ordinances for their souls, whilst you account it your wisdom to lay out the
most, if not all, of your time for your bodies? Have thou the name of a
Christian? I pray God to let one word to sink into thine heart; thou have not
Christ, thou have not the Spirit of Christ in thee; he knows how to value
souls, and therefore shed blood for them, and sends his Spirit in the Gospel to
be importunate for their salvation.

CHAP. II. Their want of saving Conviction and Compunction.
HOw many Professors, like Paul, Alive without the Law. Rom 7.9. Rev. 3.1.
are alive without the Law? How many, like Sardis, have a name to live; imagine
they are alive, when they are dead? How many are alive in their own conceit,
and perhaps in the conceit of others, and yet are void of the true
supernatural life? How many are contented with their being baptized? They see
no need of Christ, they were born of Christian Parents, Luke 3.3.
they are of the stock of Abraham: We have Abraham to our Father. They do not
consider how many baptized persons are deadly enemies to Christ, and to their
souls, and averse to the ways of holiness: they will not consider that
Swearers, Drunkards and Adulterers have as good claims to Christ and heaven as
these have. How many also please themselves with the Religion of Education? God
has not molded their hearts, though Parents their lives: their Parents have
taught them some Principles of Religion, but they are strangers to the
wonderful operations and teachings of the Holy Ghost: they have not the Unction
from above (they know not what it is) that teaches all things; and yet such as
these are alive, i. e. merry, jocund, jovial, confident if any go to heaven,
they shall be of the number. But to speak more particularly.

First, Few convinced of original sin imputed.
How many are there that were never convinced of original sin, imputed, or
imparted? 1. How few are convinced that Adam was a common person, and that we
sinned in his loins; that if he had stood, we had stood; and that it is just
with God, that he ship wracking himself, we should be counted sinners in him?
We did eat of the forbidden fruit in Adam, we in Adam believed the Devil rather
tha^ God, we in Adam broke with God for toys and trifles; we were ungrateful,
disobedient in him; we apost^tized in him, and broke covenant with God in him;
hence by one man's offense sin entered into the world, Romans 5.12
and death by sin; for that (as Levi paid tithes in Abraham, so) we bec^me
rebels against the Majesty of Heaven in our first Parents; when did you shed a
tear for Adam's sin, for your and his grand provocation?

2. Few convinced of original sin inherent. Psalm. 5.9.
How few see Adam 's sinful nature imparted to them? They see not their inward
part is very wickedness, nothing but wickedness. Few see what a sad Apostasy
from the perfection of man's nature Sin has brought into the world; and how
black an Image of Satan it has drawn upon the soul; they never saw what
filthy, dirty, loathsome things they are in the eyes of God: they never saw
their noysomeness and venom, the garbage and malignity of their hearts. How
few see a general defect of all righteousness and holiness, wherein at first
they were created? How few are convinced of an antipathy to all that is good?
That they are haters of God by nature; Ephesians. 2.1.
that they are dead in trespasses and sins (a more dreadful estate than if they
were rotting in their graves) that they have an Ocean of corruption within
them, that will never be dried up in this life; that they have a worse Leprosy
than that among the Jews, which got into the walls, and would never out till
the house was demolished; who almost thinks so sadly of themselves? They bless
God their hearts are good, though they be the worst of men, pray not, slight
Ordinances, closet duties, and family worship lies neglected; yet the Devil
persuades them all is well, their hearts are good; though the heart of man by
nature be like hell it self, whose fire of lust is unquenchable; though it be
like Peter's great sheet, which he saw in the Vision, full of all unclean
things; Acts 11.6
though it be a receptacle of all impiety, yet how few turn their eyes inward,
to see their natural deformities?

Alas! All the venom the Snake sends forth, is nothing to the poison that
lies in its nature: And all those monstrous impieties, which the lives of men
are taunted with, are not to be compared with the venom that lurks in the
heart of every man by nature. Men would not glory in their blood and descent,
did they but believe how sin descended, and was conveyed: Men could not content
themselves to walk heavily under some actual misdemeanors, were they convinced
of the body of sin within them, their greatest sorrows would be for their
sinful propensities: Neither would you wonder at any impieties and enormities
in the Earth, but would admire at the restraints of Heaven, that they are no
greater. Alas! If the Reader were left to himself, he would presently lay
hands on his nearest relations, and on himself: Certainly, the reason why we
turn not Cannibals, why every man is not a Sodomite, a Murderer, an
Oppressor, etc. is, because God has a rein on the heart, and curbs it, for
the continuation of mankind, that otherwise would soon be destroyed. The great
boundary of the Seas, and of the Ocean of corruption, is the Sovereign above.
But O! how do we commend Nature! such a man has a good nature; such a man you
may trust him, he will never commit such abominations: You may as well believe
a Toad will not poison, or the Sea will not overflow the Earth, if God leave it
to its self. But to descend to particulars.

1. Few convinced of the minds corruption. Romans 8.7.
How few see the corruption of their mind? How few are convinced, that the
carnal mind is enmity against God, and is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be? How are our minds delighted with tales and toys, more
than with the serious mysteries of God? How few are sensible, that they are as
foolish and mad as any Bedlams, in that, they please themselves with that,
which should be their greatest burden, namely Sin? They are worse than the Be
or Ant, for these prepare for a severe hard Winter, these provide for
hereafter, whilst most people mind present things, present pleasure, present
profit, etc. with the neglect of heaven, and future glory: They mind more what
to eat and drink here, what to have at present for this life, than what to lay
up for eternity: They busy themselves to know what is of no consequence, but
careless of momentous and eternal matters. How few employ their minds to know
God, and how he is to be worshipped and pleased; but employ themselves in
needless and unprofitable speculations, in this, like fools and children, who
prefer painted glass before jewels of value, they more set by a little mirth
and pleasure, than the matters of their salvation? How are our minds enslaved
to our affections; to the more brutish, inferior and ignoble parts of the
soul, and we love to have it so? Through this corruption of our minds how do we
justify sin, excuse it, and plead for it? Hence also, there are swarms of
idle, confused, impertinent, foolish, ridiculous thoughts, that fill our souls
and duties; seldom in the day, week or year, any conceptions of God, suitable
to his majesty and holiness. How unstable are our minds and judgments, so that
we are as reeds shaken with every wind; now for duty, then soon wheeled off
again; now for repenting and humbling work, then tired, and soon diverted? And
if we know the outside of truths, yet how often is that a bar to our closing
with Christ, and walking in him? And yet, though these poor, blind, deluded
Bartimeus's fill all our ways and paths, so that where ever we go we meet
with them; yet how seldom are any convinced of this, how seldom do any cry
for eye salve, that they may see?

2. Few convinced of the corruption of the Conscience. Tit. 1.15,
And though not only the mind, but the conscience is defiled; though there be a
blindness upon it, whereby it mis judges, and calls darkness light; and
though it be senseless and stupid, as a stone; yet few do believe this
corruption: hence they take sanctuary in their consciences, their consciences
bear them witness; though it be bribed and corrupted; and they have a good
conscience, though they know not what conscience is.

3. How few are convinced of the corruption of their Will? Few convinced of the
corruption of their Will.
How do they wish that drunkenness, uncleanness, etc. were no sins? How do they
choose to live a merry, rather than an holy life; to be the servants of the
Devil, rather than of God; to commit sin, and thereby hazard their damnation,
rather than to suffer, and through many tribulations to enter into the Kingdom
of God? And how gladly would most Professors enter and take up their rest in
somewhat below God, if they could but enjoy the world according to their will?
Few convinced of the corruption of their Affections.


4. Few are convinced of the pollution of their Affections. Though they hate
what they should love, and love what they should hate; though they love sin,
which they should hate, and hate and slight God, to whom they should give the
precedence of their love; though all be in disorder, all be mis-placed; though
God be dethroned, and Sin, Satan, and the World be set up above all that is
called God; yet few do really believe that such a miserable Chaos is upon them.

5. Few convinced of the corruption of their Memories.
How few are sensible of the corruption of their Memory? Though they are
especially charged to remember God, and how to get a possession of him; and to
remember duty, and how to practice; and to remember sin, and how to shun it:
yet how soon do they forget such truths, and lodge in their memories injuries,
that they may avenge them; and vanities, foolish jests, unprofitable to^es and
tales, to please themselves therewith? You can remember how merry you were such
a time, how vain, how your sensualities were abounding; but you soon forget a
Sermon; or if you remember any thing delivered by the Preacher, it is that,
which either concerns others conditions, rather than yours, or which yields you
the least advantages heavenward. We can remember the fall of Peter much easier
than the repentance of Peter, than his bitter weepings; we can remember David's
Adultery, but not his Repentance, and how it broke his bones, and made his bed
to swim. Few convinced that sin i^ the greatest evil.


Secondly, How few have been convinced that sin is the greatest evil? How few
have seen it in its perfect odiousness, in its naked face, as that which makes
Men Devils, fighting against God? How are most strangers to its pedigree, Joh.
8.44.
and consider not the Devil to be its Father? We would be thought to have
nothing to do with the Devil, nor that he has any thing to do with us; we can
live in sin, and yet (hypocritically enough) defy the Devil, and all his
works: We can make more moderate constructions of our sins, and call them the
frailties of our flesh; but he that commits sin is of the Devil, i. e. the
Devil's drudge; Satan works in him, and by him. If men were convinced of this,
they would not drink in the Devil's piss. Sin it comes from the Devil, it is
the Devil's excrement, and yet this is rolled under the tongue as a sweet
morsel. O! with what greediness is the dung of hell devoured and swallowed? How
few see sin to be contrary to the works of God? although God had no sooner
perfected the goodly fa^rick of Heaven and Earth, but sin gave a shrewd shake
to all, it shook and dis-joynted all; and had it not been for Christ, the great
Mediator, it had ruined the whole frame of Nature. How few see sin to be
contrary to the will of God? God says, I will have this done; I Will not do it,
says Sin; I Will have this suffered, says God; I Will not suffer it, says Sin:
Nay so great is the contest betwixt Sin and God, that if it could, it would
unbee God. How few take notice of its contrariety to the very nature of God?
God is good, Sin is evil; God is pure, Sin is impure. How few believe sin to be
universally evil, that there is no good in it? We cannot persuade men, that
there is good in poverty, good in disgrace, good in reproaches with the tongue,
and persecutions unto death; but easily are men persuaded, there is some good
in sin. How few are convinced of the miserable effects and consequences of sin?
The wrath of God is not revealed against their unrighteousnest and ungodliness,
so as to make their knees to tremble. The handwriting on the wall is not
observed. They are still alive. We cannot for our hearts persuade men to go up
to heaven, to see what spoils it made there; could we herein prevail, then
would they infer, that there is more evil in the least sin, than there is good
in all the Angels of heaven; for that one sin conquered them, and spoiled them
of all their beauty, and made them, of glorious creatures, to become such
loathsome and hideous spectacles; neither can we prevail with any (almost) to
take a journey to Paradise, to see its venom there; or to go to the Garden,
or to Mount Calvary, to see what work it did there; or to go to hell-gate, to
hear the doleful shrieks and cries which it has caused there; though God has
said, Psalm. 68.21.
God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such a one as
goes on still in his trespasses; though there is no peace, says my God, to
the wicked; Isa. 57.21.
though sin be the sole object of Gods hatred; for God loved the whole
Creation, till its beauty was blasted and stained by sin) though sin only
seperates between God and souls, Isa. 59.2.
though in the belly of it be found all miseries, deaths, and hells; though it
be the founder of all graves, and of Tophet; though it fill the conscience with
terrors, and hell with fire and brimstone; yet few are affected with the evils
of it, but they drink in iniquity as water.

Thirdly, Few sensible of being under the wrath of God. John 3.28, 36. Eccles.
8.11.
How few Professors are sensible that they are cast by an holy and righteous
Law? that they are condemned creatures? that the wrath of God abides on them?
Few have seen the black cloud full of woes, brim full of wrath, ready to empty
it self upon their souls; they take no notice, that though the sentence be not
executed speedily; yet it is given forth; and there may be but a little breath,
and they are gone to perish for ever. How many senseless souls are there in our
Parishes, whose consciences were never shaken, whose spirits were never
wounded, who never received the spirit of bondage to fear, who never knew what
a fearful expectation of judgment meant, who go dancing to hell in the Devils
chains? and yet count themselves the noble and gallant spirits, and flatter
themselves in their own eyes, and say, we shall have peace, though we walk in
the imaginations of our hearts? Deuteronomy. 29.19. Rev. 3.16, 17.
These are ( Laodicean-like) rich, and full, and needing nothing, when God is
about to spue them out of his mouth, (as we discharge our stomachs of some
loathsome surfets.) Pro. 26.16.
These are wiser in their own conceit, then seven men that can render a reason.
Though one Minister at the heels of another endeavor with Scripture upon
Scripture to convince them of, and to prick them at the heart for, their sin
and danger; yet they are boysterously confident and presumptuous, that they
shall to heaven as soon as any Precisians in the Country. Never did many break
one nights sleep, upon the consideration of their sinful and lost condition by
nature: never did they loath their ordinary food, or feel the smart of broken
bones, as David did; though they have sinned at an higher rate: never did they
know what a wounded spirit meant, what anguish of soul was: never did they feel
Gods wrath, or sin, a burden insupportable; they were never pricked at the
heart, so as to cry out, What shall I do to be saved? What shall I do to have
me sins pardoned? Would you know the reason of all this security? Alas! they
are dead in sins and trespasses. A dead condition is an insensible condition;
death deprives of sense as well as life; the dead are not frighted with the
swords and pistols at their breasts; the dead fear not, though threatened with
fire and brimstone; the dead hear not, though God be on Mount Ebal thundering
curses upon curses; the dead see not, though sin be so ugly a monster, and hell
so frightfull a place; the dead smell not, though sin stinks worse, than the
vomit of dogs; 2 Pet. 2.20.
than rotten Sepulchers, or than the corrupted matter of the most nasty
disease; it offends not the dead to have this stinking Carrion always in their
bosoms; the dead feel not, though that which is heavier than montains of lead
be lying on their backs; they grown not, neither do they complain so much, as
Cain did, they do not go softly in the bitterness of their souls, by reason of
their sins. Many cannot say with Hannah, that ever they were of a sorrowful
Spirit. Though there be so many curses upon the heads of all natural persons,
though there be an entayl of wrath upon the heads of the very sins, they live
in; though their sins are, or may be, circumstantiated to a greater degree,
than any of the Scripture-Offendors that we read of, as being committed under
the open Sun of the Gospel; though Hell be open to receive them every moment,
whilst impenitent, whilst hardened; though the Valley of Hinnom is making room
for them, to entertain them with the vengeance of a justly-provoked God; yet
few fear, few work out their salvation with weeping eyes, and trembling hearts;
they are still alive without the Law; they never walked softly with Ahab, or
were under Soul-trouble with Judas; they fall short of the pangs and sense of
Hypocrites; Oh! Oh! Oh! I pity these secure souls; how short will they fall of
their hopes, and how far short of Heaven?

Fourthly, Few sensible of Satan's working in them. Ephesians. 2.2.
How few are sensible, that all this while the Devil works in them, as in his
workhouse? That he possesses the heart of every unregenerate man? The strong
man keeps the house, and so all is quiet. It was a sad day, when the
abomination of desolation should be seen standing in the holy place; but what
are abominable Men to abominable Devils? They did but exercise their cruelties
on the bodies of the Jews, but how many Devils have their walks in the hearts
of natural men and women? If thou art in thy bloods, the Devil has entered into
thee, as sure as ever he entered into the heard of Swine, and so hurrieth thee
into base lasts, as he carried them headlong into the Sea.

CHAP. III. Their want of Despair in Self.
IF Men are sensible of their sin and misery, Few humbled Souls. Romans 10.3
yet how many are going about to establish their own righteousness? Though some
are convinced of the ugliness of sin, of ^he misery by sin; yet they are not
fully convinced, that the covenant of works requires perfect, personal, and
corstant obedience, that it admits not of repentance, that it accepts not of
the will for the deed; Gal. 3.10.
but Curses every one that continues not in all things, which are written in
the Book of the Law to do them, so that if there be a failer by a vain thought,
the conditions of that covenant are broken; and nothing, save fearful
expectations, should seize on such a Soul. Few (I say) believe this; but though
they are bankrupt Children of Adam, yet they hope by their pedling Wares to set
up again, and maintain themselves, without being beholden to any other, for the
procuring of their salvation; hence they pray, who were prayerless before;
hear, and (perhaps) with much diligence, who were wont to play away the Sabbath
and Sermon time; and reform in many things; and now, Soul, take thine ease,
thou have go^ds laid up for many years, yea for eternity; thou art converted
sure, and so think all the Neighborhood; O! what a change is here? The man
was a Drunkard, not so now; an Adulterer, a profane Belial; but now civilized,
yea a devout man: Serious, that was flashy before; and touching the
righteousness which is in the Law, Phil. 3.6.
blameless. Now he is alive indeed; his Conscience is pacified, which before
troubled him; he can hear the Word gladly, which before was burdensome to him;
he can pray with affection, and with some delight, when before all the
Ordinances of Heaven were tedious and intolerable burdens to him. Now he
thinks, Sure I have life within me, I am not dead. He sees not all this while,
that he must have life from without, and ability from without: He does not yet
say, Psalm. 38.4.
Mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an heavy burden, they are too
heavy for me. Psa. 40.12
Mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up. No,
no he can look up with confidence, and call God Father; Job 12.6.
and though sometimes he provokes God, yet he is secure. He does not see that
he is dead, i. e. damned, 2 Cor. 3.5.
and insufficient as of himself to think any thing as of himself, but all his
sufficiency is of God. He thinks he is not utterly unable to make amends for
his sins, not quite dead, for he can pray, etc. He sees not, that it is as
easy to make new Worlds, as to put up one acceptable Prayer to God. He sees
not, that he needs an Almighty power to enable him to perform his duties, and
infinite satisfaction to discharge him of his debts. He is somewhat sensible of
his danger by sin, Isa. 63.1.
but he eyes not him that is mighty to save. He looks for help within, but not
without. He sees no absolute necessity of Christ all this while. He sees not,
that all his righteousnesses are as filthy rags in Gods sight, Isa. 64.6.
and that all his duties fill up the Catalogue of his sins. He sees not, that
there is no Salvation in any other, save Jesus Christ, Acts 4.12.
because there is no other Name under Heaven, given among men, whereby we must
be saved. He hopes to go to Heaven through doors of his own, the door of
Repentance, the door of Reformation, the door of good Works, etc. hence he
takes hold of the mercy of God, and the promises of pardon, Isa. 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, yea he will
abundantly pardon. Thus have I done, (says this awakened person) and now my
Case is good. O! I would not be in mine old myres for a World: O! what a change
is here? I was a careless Wretch, careless of God, and my Soul, careless of
praying, reading, hearing, etc. not so now. And now that the house, Matthew.
12.43, 44, 45.
out of which the unclean Spirit is gone, is swept and garnished, he carries
it high, and little thinks he, that seven worse Spirits are entering in. This is
the case of multitude of Professors, whom Christ will never seek nor save,
Luke 19.10.
for that they are not lost, they are not succourless and helpless, they think
they may save themselves from wrath to come. They see not, that there is a
Satisfaction to be made to Divine Justice, which they cannot make; wherefore
their hopes are from their reformations, not from Christ; their peace is from
their performances, not from Christ's blood of atonement: All these have I kept
from my youth up. Luke 18.21.
Hence he is consident, not from Christ's coming under the Law: hence he is
diligent in Prayer, etc. but careless of the way of Faith; hence he blesses
himself in his own performances, and is no way taken up with what Christ has
done and suffered for him. Moses is magnifyed, and Christ is slighted: Duties
are set up, and Faith neglected: Works advanced and cried up, and Faith is
little heeded or looked after. How few are there, who count themselves wholly
destitute of every good thing, that should make them acceptable unto God? They
lay not the weight of Salvation upon the grace of God by Jesus Christ, but upon
somewhat that comes from themselves: they will have a Bridge of Duties, that
shall carry them over the Gulf of eternal misery: they hope to quench Hell
Fire by their tears Alas! some years ago, you might as well have drawn Water
out of the Flint, as tears from them; but the case is altered: I was blind, but
now I see the deserts of sin, which I saw not before; I see it is a fearful
thing to sin against God, and now I bewail my sins, and am sorry at heart for
them; sure my condition is monded, I thank God I am not as other men, nor as
once I was my self, I hope by my tears to wash away my sins. All the while
Christ lies without doors, the Soul is a stranger to Faith in Christ, he sees
not his insufficiencies, he sees not his unworthiness to go to Heaven and
Glory, he sees not his inability to think a good thought, he hopes without a
Christ he can do something. If he did judge his condition hopeless, he would
tremble, and have no rest in himself, till God has delivered him; he would see
an absolute necessity of obtaining Christ and his righteousness, and he would
be put off with nothing else. But O! how hard a work do Ministers find it,
first to take off men from their sins, and then from considence in their
duties? We tell men, Christ will have no sharer in the glory of saving lost
man; but people will at least have their works and Christ to divide the
spoils, to share in the glory of bringing back lost Souls to God. We advise
men to lay no weight on their duties, b^t to lean alone on Christ's merits; but
in vain. Christ says, If ye seek me, let these go their way, these duties as
well, as these sins; but the deaf ear is turned, and we find it much easier to
persuade men, their sins will damn them, then their duties, whilst Christ is
thereby neglected.

CHAP. IV. Their miscarriages about their Soultroubles.
IF the Spirit of the Lord have convinced men of their danger by their sins,
Miscarriages about Soultroubles.
and their own righteousness; that they still see God angry with them, and if
their Souls remain under trouble and disquiet; yet are they not guilty of some,
if not all, of the following miscarriages?

1. Few justify God.
How few are there that justify God; Few accept of the punishment of their
iniquities, they do not clear God, as they should, from all unrighteousness.
Commonly proud hearts swell and fume against these methods of God. Though the
filthiness of their hearts be laid open before them, yet they fall not down
upon their faces in the acknowledgement of their unworthiness of mercy: few
charge themselves, and acquit God. They cannot be brought to give God the glory
of his righteousness, if he should condemn them to the pit of hell: they do not
willingly and uprightly own the desert of damnation, and charge themselves with
it, as their due portion, and most just inheritance. Lam. 3.30. Mic. 7.9. Ezra
9.13. Dan. 9.7, 8.
Few give their cheeks to him that smites, as the Church did: they do not say,
I will bear the iudignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, or
with Ezra, thou have punished us less than our iniquities have deserved, or
with Daniel, O Lord! Righteousness belongs unto thee; but unto us confusion
of face. How seldom do you hear Professors with this Confession in their
mouths, Lord, I am thy creature, and thou may do with thy creature what
pleases thee; It pleased thee to put thine image on me, Eccl. 7.29. Isa. 52.3.
to create me upright, but I have sought out many inventions, I have sold my
self for naught, I have preferred the Devils work before thine, and therefore
thou may abhor me, and give me my portion among the damned crew, and if I
feel some sparks of hell fire (in thy wrathful present frowns) it is of thy
rich patience and mercy, that they are but sparks; if thou cast me off for
ever, it is but what I have deserved long ago; it is of the Lords mercy, that I
was not hurled from the womb or cradle to hell, because of my native
sinfulness; but woe is me, I have provoked the pure eyes of thy glorious Majesty
days without number, I have been a Rebel of a long standing against thee, my
will has been justling and quarrelling with thine these many years, and
therefore if I be sent to hell, thou art righteous and clear when thou judge,
Psa. 51.4.
I can blame none save my self, if I perish everlastingly, though I have many
fears and sorrows on me; yet blessed be God, they are not the sorrows of hell,
thanks be to the Lord, that I am not yet among the damned ones, roaring in the
Pit of hell. Few believe they deserve damnation; hence Souls are murmuring at
any affliction, at the loss of an Husband, Child, Estate, etc. as if God had
dealt hardly with them, in depriving them thus.

How few Professors, Few willingly under Soultrouble. Hos. 2.6. Romans 8.15.
when under Soultroubles, are willingly under them? They see not the advantage
of having their way hedged up with these thorns. They do not receive the Spirit
of Bondage. They do not accept this punishment; They take it not kindly at Gods
hands. Their troubles are involuntary, few kindly works that I meet with among
awakened and startled Professors; they are held in the chains against their
will. How many are afraid of sorrow for sin? Some think it will spoil good
faces, and their beauty may he lost through their troubles; but others think it
will bring them to despair, and therefore farewell to such a Preacher; he is
too terrible for their Souls. Hence Saul must have his harp to divert him, the
Cards must be taken up again, some merry Books, some Romances must be read,
perhaps a Play may be seen, jovial frothy Company must be called in, and all
this, to divert the Soul from minding its danger, lest it be swallowed up of
grief, or some unskilful and unfaithful Emperick shall be sent for, to sow
pillows under him, that he may sleep the quieter. Few ( Daniel-like) when their
cogitations much trouble them, Dan. 7.28.
so that their countenances are changed in them, keep notwithstanding the
matter in their hearts. How few are active in their Soul-troubles? Retire, and
go alone that they may search the Scriptures, and ransack their hearts in order
to contrition and humiliation of their hearts? How few are gladded by any
portion of Gods word, that brings their sinfulness and self-fulness to
remembrance, and causes any meltings of heart, and humblings of Souls under
it? How do some Professors quarrel with their Ministers, and snarl at the
Books, that give them trouble of Spirit?

3. Few mourn on spiritual accounts.
How few mourn for Sin upon Spiritual accounts? That their God is dishonored
(their good and gracious God, who has done so much for them, etc.) does not
chiefly cut their hearts; Against thee, Psalm. 51.4.
thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; but perhaps they are
troubled for wronging themselves, endangering themselves, etc. They cry as
dogs: when they have done a fault, they fear the whip, and so they houle.

4. Few reforming and believing mourners.
How many Professors mourn for their sins, yet live in the continued practice
of them? Notwithstanding their tears; yet their hearts are in league with their
lusts: Thus, like the Scolds at Billingsgate, they are soon out, soon in again
with their lusts; but few whilst mourning for their sins are sollicitous and
careful which way God may have satisfaction for the injuries, that have been
done unto him: The mourning of many Professors last no longer than the trouble
of Conscience: as soon as the guilt of sin is removed (as they hope,) their
mourning cease, though the strength of sin be as greatas ever.

5. Few seek comfort aright.
Among the multitudes professing Religion, how many seek for grace, in order to
their comfort? (Joy, Peace, Comfort, being their great end) but how few seek
for comfort in order to grace?

6. Few mourn for unbelief.
How few mourn for their slightings of Christ? (It is more natural and so more
easy to mourn for sins against the Law, than those again Christ and his
Gospel;) Therefore if there be many tears shed for neglect of Prayer, for
Theft, Perjury, etc. yet how few are found mourning for undervaluing and
rejecting Christ and his Tenders? whose Soul cries out, O! how unkind have I
been to Christ? O! that he should come out of his Fathers Bosom for me, come
under the Law, yea Dye for me; and yet I should keep him out of doors: that the
Son of God, that the brightness of the Fathers glory, and the express Image of
his person, the upholder of all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1.3
when he had by himself purged our sins, and sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high, should stoop so low, Rev. 3.20.
as to stand at the door, and knock, and yet that I should not let him in;
break heart, break into small dust, be trembling all over for thy unkindnesses
to so great, so rich, so good a Friend. O wretch that I have been! What! more
kindness to my Dog, my Cat. etc? If my Dog be whining at the door, he has
admittance, and yet thou shut out; O. I abhor my self in dust before thee. I
meet with few of these mourners.

CHAP. V. Their ignorance of Christ: their serving their turns of Christ: their
making base capitulations with Christ.
1. HOw many are ignorant of Christ, Too too many Ignorant of Christ.
and of what use he is to perishing Souls? They know no more the Gift of God,
than the Samaritan Woman did: they know not what an excellent gift Christ is,
John 4.10.
that he is the Fountain of living Water, and therefore ask nothing of him. It
is one thing to hear of a Christ, and another thing to know Christ. How few
know Christ to be their only Life? If you did believe, that he that has the
Son, has life; 1 Jo. 5.12.
and he that has not the Son of God, has not life: And that who so finds me
(Christ) finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord: Prove. 8.35, 36.
But he that sins against me (Christ) wrongeth his own Soul; all they that
hate me (Christ) love death: Upon such a Conviction, what would you not give
for Life? Esau will part with his Birthright, to preserve his Life. The Woman
will part with all her Estate, to recover health, and to secure her self from
the grave. Of all blessings we value Life mostly, but few have such esteems of
Christ. Few can say, as Paul, What things were gain to me, those I counted loss
for Christ: Phil. 3.7, 8, 9.
yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ; and be found in him,
not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.2.
the righteousness which is of God by faith. I determined not to know any
thing, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. Psalm. 73.25.
Or with David, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth
that I desire besides thee. Few look on Christ as the Original of their Life,
that they must live, move. and have their being in Christ, and from Christ
alone; that they are dead without him; and hence their desires are not after
him. If you knew, that you want Christ more than Bread and Water, then would
you cry out, Lord, give me Christ, None but Christ, None but Christ, in him is
my help, in him is my salvation. He is the Author of all our good affections,
and of all our gracious abilities; but alas! blind man sees him not in his
usefulness. Cant. 5.9
What is thy Beloved more than another Beloved? He has no form nor comeliness;
Isa. 53.2, 3.
and when we shall see him, there is no beauty, that we should desire him. He
is despised and rejected of men. Men must dye, and be damned, without a Christ;
but they know it not, they know no good that Christ is, and no good that Christ
brings.

Secondly, Many serve their turns of Christ.
How many serve their turns of Christ, close with Christ for their own ends?
When men have served their turns, one of another, away they go: so these,
troubles they have, and ease they would have; they have stayed off from Christ
as long as they could; they have tried worldly Comforts, they will not do; they
have tried Duties, they will give no rest; and therefore, in the terrors of
their Spirits, they must have Christ, so much of him, as may give them quiet
and rest. Men are weary of the bands and setters, wherein they are held under
the Law; they would fain be delivered from Satan that torments them, and from
the sins that now stare them in the face; they groan under the weight of the
wrath of God, but not under the body of sin; Satan as a Tormentour is
un-welcome, but as a Tempter is still liked well enough. O! I am afraid I shall
to Hell. O! if there be no other way to escape, but through Christ, O! then for
a Christ, then Sermons and Ministers are welcome, in hopes of bringing in (not
so much a Christ, as) peace, and comfort to the troubled Spirit. So that men
use Christ as sick men take meat, not for love of it, or liking to it (for
their Stomachs rise against it) but for fear of death, which makes them force
themselves to eat. Though many come to Christ, it is by constraint, not
willingly; not with delight, not as an healthy man comes to a full table, to
feed with pleasure. Many to avoid a greater mischief, to avoid damnation, to
avoid eternal torments will to Christ in their sore extremities: they will then
make large confessions, take up great resolutions against their sins, pray to
God, and with vehemence and constancy, so as they never prayed before; but upon
ease to the impostumed matter, upon recoveries out of their troubles, they
become if not profane, yet worldly and negligent of Christ, his Person, his
Laws, his Concernments. They have of Christ what they came for: They come to
Christ, as some come to Shops, not to have all in the Shop, but what they
immediately want: They want comfort, and therefore they venture as the Leapers
to the Camp of the Syrians, they had no love to them, they counted them their
Enemies; but if we stay here, we perish; or as Ladies use Litters, to carry
them over the dirt; or as we use a Penthouse, during the Storm, and then
Farewell; or as Passengers the Boat, they cry vehemently a Boat, a Boat, and as
soon as they are Fetryed over the deep, farewell to the Boat, they think no more
of it. When he slew them, then they sought him: Psalm. 78.34.
and they returned and enquired early after God. Then, never before, and never
after. Undoubtedly, multitudes have been affrighted to Christ, who were never
truly and thoroughly converted to him, and have left their Sins from compulsion
of their judgment, not from the propension of their will; not from any love
they have borne to Christ: they love to be safe, but still hate to be holy. O!
O! how many are herein deluded, who have pretended a great deal of love to
Christ, whilst base Self, the love of pleasure and ease, and to be exempted
from horrors and fears, has been the Bias that has drawn them to Christ? I
appeal to thy Conscience, whether Christ be valued, be looked after, save in a
strait? When trouble is upon thee, then this Physician is sent for; but when
the pang is over, the Physicians company is too chargeable, is no way
desirable; the sooner he turns his back, the better. When Women are great with
Child, and when, Men and Women both, hear it thunder, and see it lighten, when
the Arrows of the Lord fly thick, and a great mortality is sweeping many to the
Grave, O! then how shall I get Christ? then Books are read, Sermons heard and
valued, Prayers not neglected; but when the fears of death are over, Psalm. 4.6.
Ephesians. 5.16.
O! then who will show us any good? Then Redeem lost time, not for God and
Souls, but for the World; then head and ears in the world again, then secret
Prayer is neglected; then the Bible lies in a dusty corner, not viewed, till
the next storm arise; and then Christ must be awakened with, Master, Mark 4.38.
carest thou not that we perish? I will tell you what your Ministers have told
you before, Sin and the World were your Companions in days of health, ease and
peace; and Christ your desire in cloudy days. Is it not so? If Christ in the
day as well as in the night, lies chief between thy breasts, thou have cause to
say, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his Holy Name.
But I fear most pitch on Christ for themselves, and not for Christ. Christ in
the time of Contagion shall go for something; but Christ in days of health and
ease shall be valued no more than a mere Chimara, a Cipher, a Nothing. It is
one thing to take Christ to pacify the Conscience and another to take him to
purify the heart. An unquiet Conscience is to most a greater burden, than an
insensible, seared, and polluted Conscience, than an impure heart. Oh! Repent
of thy juglings with Christ. Psa. 78.36.
They did flatter him with their mouths, and they lied unto him with their
tongues. They pretend to come to Christ, in order to service and obedience,
when all the while they serve themselves on Christ. Base Capitulations with
Christ.


Thirdly, How many have base Capitulations with Christ? Many come running to
Christ, and ask him, (as the man in the Gospel) Good Master, what shall I do,
Mark 10.17.21, 22
that I may inherit eternal life? Christ tells him and them, Gee thy way, sell
whatsoever thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
Heaven, and come, take up the Cross, and follow me; But as he, so they are
discontented, And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved, for he had
great Possessions. Undoubtedly many Hypocrites have some glimpse of Christ's
glory, and they run to Christ, whilst others deride him; but they like not the
Price that Christ sets; They would have Christ on their own terms. Christ's
terms are to have the Heart; My Son, Prove. 23.26.
give me thy heart: Do not lend it only, but give; give it cheerfully, give it
presently, give me it now: Now, that it is called to day, To day, Heb. 3.7, 8.
if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation. Give
me thy heart, to be framed and fashioned by me, to be stamped and sealed by me;
be no longer thine own: I will not be content thou lend me thy heart for a
Sabbath, or for a day of Prayer, and then that thou call for thine heart again,
and bestow it upon thy lusts; give me thine heart, and do not sell it for base
ends, for base respects; give me thine heart, do not keep it to thy self; lay
up and leave thine heart in my hand, for me to keep it for thee. But alas! how
shamefully do we break with Christ? We would live as we list, and do as we
list. We are content to give Christ the body, the outward man, the ear, the
tongue, the head, etc. but we reserve our heatts for the service of the World
and of Sin: or if we are persuaded to give the heart; yet it is but a divided
heart, not the whole heart, but a piece of it. Mat. 22.37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, says Christ; but
Pride, Covetousness, and Voluptuousness would fain have a share; hence no ^^l
closings between Christ and many Professors; Christ and they part. They, as
some Customers, seem to commend the wares, but they like their money better.
Few see themselves so miserable without a Christ, as to come up to the price.
Their cursed Leagues with base Lusts bind them so fast in Chains, that they
cannot, they will not come up to Christ's proposals, to Christ's demands; they
will treat with Christ on no other terms, unless they may have the pleasures of
Sin, and may fulfill the lusts of the flesh; but if Conscience be disquieted,
and troublesome, then they make new offers; they will leave many sins, they
will except but one; There is but one exception they have, and if that may be
accepted, then they are Christ's; they have but one reserve. These Swine are
contented to escape the pollutions of the World, 2 Pet. 2.20, 22.
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, so they may have
one mire to return to, and wallow in. If Christ will stoop to these terms, then
welcome Christ; if one sin and Christ may share the heart betwixt them, the man
is contented; but few are contented, that every knee should bow, that every sin
be parted from. The Lord be merciful to me, If I bow in the house of Rimmon.
No, says Christ, All, or none. If the Conscience be not quiet upon this; then,
as Mariners throw overboard their goods, their Jewels, their Bales of Silk,
and other pleasant wares in a Tempest, to ease the Vessel, which they wish for
in a C^lm, and labor to fetch up again, if it be possible, when the Storm is
over: So many Professors will part from all the practice of sin, throw all
overboard, as the Mariners did Jonah, though much against their wills, in
hopes of riding out the storm, 2 Pet. 21.22.
and then wish for their lusts again, yea with the Dog, return unto the Vomit,
and with the Sow to wallow in the Mirc. Doubtless many, (like him, who had a
mind to his Kinsman's land, and would have paid the purchase-money, but liked
not the terms of marrying Ruth.) They would have Christ buy the purchase of
their duties: they hope by the Stock of Prayers, Tears, and Obedience to
purchase Christ; but will not match with Christ, and have the Inheritance by
that way of conveyance. That man liked Ruth's means, but not Ruth's person, and
many like somewhat of Christ, but not his Person, not all of Christ: they like
Christ's pleasant Summers, but not his pinching Winters; love and like his
Heaven, but not his severe Commandments; they like his Sacrifice, but not his
Service. Many Pedling Customers Christ has, but few, very few, who will come
roundly up to Christ's offers, and take all off his hands. They would take off
his Mercy, his Peace, his Righteousness; but not his Spirit, his Grace, his
Holiness, etc. What says Christ? If you will have my Comforts, you must have
Me too; if my Pardons, my Person too; you must take Me, as well as Mine; you
must have Me, as well as my Heaven. This makes many go away sorrowful. Again,
If you will have me (says Christ) you must be at some cost, at some pains and
trouble to enjoy me: nothing of Me, or Mine is got without difficulty and
industry; your cold Prayers must not suffice, your lazy hearings are not
enough: you must watch your hearts all the day long, you must make a Covenant
with your eyes, and keep your lips, as with a bridle. Are ye so contented? Oh!
no (says the slothful Professor) I would go to Heaven on a Feather-bed, I
would be contented to Pray now and then, Morning and Evening, so I may be at my
own dispose all the following hours. Hearken (O Daughter) and consider and
incline thine ear; Psalm. 45.10, 11.
forget also thine own people, and thy Fathers house. So shall the King greatly
desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him. Three Alls I
expect you part with (says Christ.) 1. All your sinful lusts, all the ways
of the old Adam: Our Fathers house. Ever since Adams apostasy, God and man have
parted houses. Ever since, our Fathers house is an house of ill manners, Isa.
55.7.
an house of sin and wickedness. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. 2. All your
worldly advantages. By faith Moses when he was come to years, Hebr. 11.24, 25,
26.
refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in
Egypt; for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward. If any man come to
me, Luke 14.26.
and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and
Sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. He that has all
these must be ready to part with all; they are joined not disjunctively, but
copulatively. 3. All self, self-will, self-righteousness, self-sufficiencies,
self-confidences, and self-se^sings. But, Oh! how do many pretenders to Christ
hate these Proposals? I can tell you what many of your terms are; I will have
a Christ, if I may live as I list, and love as I list, and walk as I list; I Will
indent with Christ to make much of him when my Conscience gnaws and troubles
me, so I may but dismiss him, when I have sung Lullaby to Conscience.

CHAP. VI. Their delays to close with Christ.
4ly. Many delayers to believe.
HOw many do delay in their coming to Christ? And O! what indignities are
herein put upon Christ? How long does he stand at the doors of sinners, ere
they let him in. Cant. 5.2. Hebr. 3.7. Jam. 4.14. Mark 16.16. 2 Cor. 6.2. Genesis
6.3.
My head (says Christ,) is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the
night, Though he limit linners to a day, To day if ye will hear his voice, etc.
Though our life be even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then
vanishes away, ready every moment to expire; though we must needs perish and
be damned, if we believe not in him before we dye; He that believes not, shall
be damned; though now is the accepted time, though the Spirit may never invite
more: My spirit shall not always strive with man; though we are not sure of
one day of grace more; yet how do many hazard their eternity rather than they
will be yet beholding to Christ for Life and Salvation? Though they may have
his Righteousness, his Redemption, his Spirit, his Image, his Heaven, his
Glory, his Love, his Honors, his Inheritance by coming to him; yet what
trifling delays are men's hearts filled with? Though they are actually condemned
by the Law for their Capital Offenses, for high Treason against the Majesty of
Heaven, and pardons be offered freely by Jesus Christ unto them, if they will
but accept of him and them, yet so is Christ fallen in the account of them, who
yet are nominal Christians, that they will hazard their Souls, rather than they
will yet be so much beholding to Christ. This desperate enmity against Christ
and his offers is the condemning sin. This is the condemnation, Joh. 3.19.
that light is come into the world, and men loved Darkness rather than Light,
because their deeds were evil. All other sins are nothing to this; what? when
God has limited thee to A day, will thou, dare thou carelessly mispend that
one day, when thou art not sure of another? Believe it, your trifling delays
are more hideous sins, do more stain your souls, and provoke God, than
drunkenness and unnatural lusts in such, as never had one of your Calls. How
dare thou, having so many ways transgressed against this God, having
provoked him to wrath by so frequent breaches of his Holy Law, to add to all
these iniquities thy trifling delays of coming into Christ, that thou may be
pardoned? How durst thou, when lying under the wrath of a justly incensed God,
send away Christ as Faeli^ did Paul, with Go thy way for this time, when I have
a convenient season, I will call for thee: when (wretch) is that convenient
season? Is it then, when thou have served the Devil some weeks, months, or
years longer? When thou have spent all the flower of thy time and strength in
the service of Hell? Must Then Christ have the dregs of thy time? Must he have
nothing but Satan's leavings? O! Doubtless for these delays is Christ's wrath
ready to be powered out upon this Nation to the uttermost. The Lord Jesus shall
be revealed from Heaven, 2 These. 17.8.
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ: By delaying to hearken to Christ's calls and invitations thou
tellest Christ to his face, that he is not altogether lovely, that he is not
the fairest of ten thousand, that there is somewhat in Sins service and the
Devils, that is more desirable than what can be had in Christ's. And can thou
imagine such Blasphomy, viz. (To tell Christ to his face, that thou valuest thy
lusts above the enjoyment of him,) is not provoking? O! if ever these come over
fully to Christ, if Christ's patience be extended yet longer, and they be at
length wone to him; How will they befool themselves that they came into Christ's
service no sooner? Nimis sero te ama^^. O! I have loved thee too late. Oh the
^oy, the unspeakable Joy I have lost! Oh the peace, that I might have had! Oh
the assurance of Gods love, that my Soul might have been filled with! Oh the
experiences of the grace of God, that I might have had, if I had come into
Christ on Christ's first call and entreaty! Oh the opportunities of service,
that I might have had, when the marrow was in my bones, when I was young and
fresh for duty! Oh! Lam. 3.27.
How good had it been if I had born Christ's yoke (sooner) in my youth? O the
many sins that I have been guilty of! Oh! how long withstood I the Grace of
God, and grieved the Spirit of God? Oh! What a burden was I to Christ's
Ministers, and much more to Christ himself? But God alone knows, how soon his
Spirit shall cease striving with these poor Souls, and how long they shall be
within a capacity of obeying the Heavenly Call. The Jews have a Rule, that if
a man vows any service to God before he dies, he must do it presently, because
he may dye presently. Rev. 6.8.
Death and Hell are described coming on Horseback, in full speed: Ask thy self
therefore Jeremiah's question, Jer. 12.5.
Can I outrun or escape these Horsemen? However, through the great and
wonderful averseness there is in men's hearts from Christ, they stay and linger,
like Lot in Sodom, that if God do not work a miracle upon them, and for them,
they will perish in the flames. They know what the foolish Virgins lost by
their delays; all is one, no coming to Christ, as long as possibly they can
make any shift to live without him, and until an Almighty power exert it self
on their Souls, to make them willing of a Christ. One has a Wife, another a
Yoke of Oxen, all of them some business or other to detain them for the present
from Christ. They do not utterly deny to come, but at present they have such
employments, as that they have no present freedom to wait upon him. The Son of
God must dance attendance on them, they must be banqueting with the Devil
within, and Christ must stand without, yea wait their leisure, till they
receive him in. There are several sorts of these delaying Professors.

1. Delays to come to Christ.
Some (and they the worst sort) from their great love to their lusts, and to
the comforts and sensualities of this life, which they fear, From love to
worldly Lusts.
when they are under Christ's yoke, they shall be bereaved of, delay coming to
Christ. Sin has so rooted it self in their hearts and affections, that they
are loath to take a final farewell thereof, loath to mortify their earthly
members; Sin is so prevalent with them, that they had rather part from their
right eye, hand, and foot, than part from their sins; hence they choke their
Convictions what they can, admit of any pleasures and diversions, to wear out
the impressions that are made in their Consciences, that they may still lodge
sin in their bosoms, and not come to Christ; hence they labor to quench the
Spirit of God, and through the prevails of spiritual sloth, will not use the
means, whereby they may be fully converted to Christ. They pretend they are
desirous of Christ, only they doubt whether Christ is willing to receive them;
but that which lies at the bottom is this, they are loath to leave their
darling lusts, and loath to pray and watch their hearts, and to do what God
requires and expects at their hands, in order to Conversion. You may imagine
God is highly provoked hereby; for God to send his Son unto you, the best Jewel
that ever lay in his bosom, and for you to neglect and undervalue him, and
prefer swinish lusts before him, it is a plain argument, that you never saw sin
aright in its nature and effects, and that you do not credit God in his
discoveries of the glory of his Son. You do not believe you are so miserable
without a Christ, as indeed you are; you slight the greatest Gift, that ever
God conferred upon the children of men; you make void the great counsels of
God, all the thoughts of his wisdom and grace, in contriving such a way, as by
Jesus Christ, to save you from wrath to come; you also frustrate the
expectations of God, Mat. 21.37.
for Surely (says God) they will reverence my Son; whereas, by your trifling
delays, you tell God and men, that you believe not any advantage you shell
have by the Son of God; you think it will be to your loss, to receive in the
Lord of glory. He tells you, Psalm. 36.8.
Ye shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his House, Cant. 5.1, 3.
and ye shall drink of the Rivers of his Pleasures. He tells you, He has
gathered his Myrrh, with his Spices; He has wine, milk, and honey. You cry
out, Prove. 24.33.
I have put off my Coat, how shall I put it on, etc. A little more slumber in
the Devil's Lap, a little more folding of the hands to sleep. You are told of
Joys unspeakable, and full of glory; 1 Pet. 1.8. Phil. 4.7 John 17.3.
of Peace that passes all understanding; of eternal Life by knowing Christ.
You are told, you can never be reconciled unto God, but by Christ; that he must
end all Controversies between Christ, and your Souls; that He is able to save
to the uttermost, Hebr. 7.25. Psalm. 19.10. Acts 24.25. Luke 14.18. Jo. 8.24.
Jo. 3.36. Pro. 8.34, 35. Rev. 3.20.
all that come unto God by him; that His Word is more desirable than gold, yea,
than much fine gold. But all this prevails not with you. When I have a
convenient Season, etc. Yet I cannot, I pray have me excused. He tells you, If
you believe not that I am he, you shall dye in your sins; and that he that
believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him,
yet delays still. He tells you, Blessed is the man that hears me, and who so
finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord. Behold, I stand
as the doer and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come
to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Jo. 6.35
I am the Bread of Life, he that comes to me, shall never hunger, and he that
believes on me, Ephesians. 2.19. Jo. 1.12
shall never thirst. He tells you, Of Strangers and enemies, you shall become
Children, and yet this seems a light matter, to be so near related to the King
of Kings. Is not this Englaeds great Provocation, to refuse so great an honor
and dignity? Romans 8.1
He assures you, There is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ. And shall
he not condemn Wretches, that slight the Pardons that are offered to them?
Hebr. 10.29.
These must expect a double wrath. Of how much sorer punishment shall they be
thought worthy, etc.

2. From believing Satan before God.
Others, in imitation of the old Adam, believe the Devil before God, credit his
Suggestions, beyond all Gods Discoveries. O! O! What a black grained Sin is
this? Says the Devil, You have sinned against Light, and therefore Christ will
not favor you: Says God, Let the wicked forsake his way, Isa. 55.7
and his thoughts, and I will abundantly pardon. Says the Devil, You have
sinned more than others, you have provoked God exceedingly, and therefore never
hope for saving benefit by Christ's death: Says God, Cease to do evil, Isa.
1.16, 17, 18.
learn to do well, come now, and let us reason together, though your sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. Says the Devil, You have sinned not
only against the Law, but against the Gospel, you have neglected Christ: Says
God, Luke 12.10.
Every sin against the Son of man shall be forgiven. Says the Devil, You have
no right to Christ, it is in vain to come: Jo. 3.16
Says God, Whosoever believes shall not perish. Says the Devil, Your day of
grace is past: Says God, To day, whilst it is called to day, Hebr. 3.7, 13.
hear his voice. Says the Devil, God never intended you good, you are a Vessel
of Dishonor: Says God, As I live, Ezekiel. 33.11.
I desire not the death of a sinner, but that he turn and live. Now I pray
consider, whether God takes it kindly at your hands, John 8.44. Titus 1.2.
that you should lay more weight on the Father of Lies, than on the faithful
God, who has promised, and cannot lie; who must cease to be God in that very
moment, wherein he cease to be true. You perhaps deceive your selves with the
Pharisees Comforts, Luke 18, 11.
You are not as these Harlots, as these Publicans, no Drunkards, etc. but
little think that you put the Lie upon God. You believe the Enemy more than the
Friend. O! what a Provocation is this?

3. Through Pride. Romans 10.3.
Others, through the pride of their hearts, will not come (as yet) unto Christ.
They have no mind to submit to the Righteousness of faith. He is judged a proud
man (without a Jury sitting on him) who when Condemned will not submit, will
not stoop so low as to accept of a Pardon. I must indeed correct my self, men
are willing to be justified; but they would have their duties to purchase their
peace and the favor of God: they scorn to be beholding to Christ. Thousands
will dye and be damned rather than they will have a pardon upon the sole
account of Christ's Merits and Obedience. O the cursed Pride of the heart! When
will men cease to be wiser than God? To limit God? When will men be contented
with Gods way and method of saving them by the blood of the Everlasting
Covenant? How dare men thus to prescribe to the infinitely wise God? Is it not
enough for thee that thy destruction is of thy self? But must thy Salvation be
of thy self too? Is it not enough that thou have wounded thy self? But wilt dye
for ever, rather, than be beholding to a plaster of free grace? Wilt be damned
unless thou may be thine own Savior? Jo. 3.16.
God is willing (So God loved the World, that he gave his Son) Art thou so
proud, as that thou will not be beholding to God? Thou will deserve, or have
nothing. What shall I say? Rev. 3.17.
Poor thou art, and yet proud, thou have nothing but wretchedness and misery,
and yet thou art talking of a Purchase. This is a provocation. God resists
the proud, especially the spiritually proud. He that is proud of his Clothes
and Parentage, is not so contemptible in Gods eyes, as he that is proud of his
Abilities, and so scorns to submit to Gods methods for his salvation by Christ
and his righteousness alone.

4. Others, Through hopes to prepare themselves, and make themselves fit for
Christ.
through their ignorance and weakness stay off from Christ, in hopes of working
that, which cannot be wrought without a Christ. Were their hearts so humbled
and melted, as such and such are, could they see all their sins subdued, were
their hearts more fitted and prepared for to lodge so great a Friend, they
would then close with the Promises, with Christ; whereas they should come to
Christ, as soon as they apprehend they are poor, blind, and naked, Rev. 3.17,
18.
for them lie calls and invites. But alas! a sight of their wants, is a bar to
their coming. They would have the Fruit first, and then the Tree; have their
hearts purified, and then come to Christ (Who is appointed by God to be
Sanctification to them.) God comes, by his Spirit, to convince them of their
sinful nature and weakness, on purpose, that they seeing their necessity of
Christ, might fly to him, as their City of refuge, and they are driven farther
off by the sight of their sins and unworthiness. Whereas they should come to
Christ, as to a Magazine and Storehouse, and wait on him, in the use of means,
for the broken heart, the pure heart, and all other spiritual mercies, which
their Souls are yet destitute of, but they will not. O faithless Generation!
How long shall I be with you? Mar. 9.19.
how long shall I suffer you? Christ is put to the utmost of his patience, to
bear with Unbelief.

5. Through seeming modesty.
Others, through some kind of seeming modesty and tenderness, delay in their
coming to Christ. They are afraid of abusing the holiness and justice of God,
if they should hope for any privilege in the blood of Christ, and mercies of
God. What mercy for me? me a proud wretch, an unclean wretch, an enemy to God,
a slighter of his Spirit? I deserve nothing but Hell, what Heaven for me? I
have affronted the Majesty of the great God, and what? This God bestow a Christ
on me? Who can believe, that the Just God, who turned down the glorious Angels
to Hell for one transgression, will save me, who have committed more sins in
number, than the hairs on my head, than the sands on the Sea shore? And what,
Mercy for me? Shall I have a Christ? Will Christ accept of me, who have wronged
his Father and him for so many years together? O! how long does many an
awakened Soul hang in doubts and fears, ere it will venture upon Christ's
graciousness alone; and then, when the Soul has long stood out, the fears
increase. I have refused Christ so long; to all my former transgressions I have
added this, my putting off Christ and Salvation, when freely tendered, and
therefore sure I may not now come. And now if Christ offers them mercy, still
they are fearful; they cannot believe that Christ is serious and real. O! by
these jealousies of Christ, you provoke him not a little. You are ready to say,
This is too good news to be true: What is this, but to say, The Gospel is
false, it is no true and faithful Word, it is not to be received with all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save the greatest of
sinners, blasphemers and persecutours of Christ? This is the great Sin that
made Christ weep. You seldom find Christ weeping over the Idolaters of the
World: I find him not weeping over Sodom and Gomorrah; but if Jerusalem refuse
Christ, this makes him weep indeed, Jerusalem, Luke 19.42.
Jerusalem, O if thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things that concern thy peace! Christ became a man of sorrows, Isa. 53.3
was acquainted with griefs, etc. on hopes he should see of the travail of his
Soul, and be satisfied. It troubles Christ to see thee to go about to make God
a Liar to his Son, and to be denied thy loves and affections, for whose sake he
submitted to his Fathers frowns. O! this sin of Unbelief has great unkindness
in it, Mar. 16.14.
and therefore no wonder if Christ upbraids for it. A man is properly
upbraided, when as the kindness that has been done to him, is revealed to him,
together with his ungratefulness. But what shall I say? So far are Souls from
coming to Christ, that they do seldom bewail this sin, and seldom seek to God
for power against it; and though men pretend they cannot come to Christ, yet
the truth is, they will not (so Mr. Fenner, in his willful impenitency has
abundantly proved.) The immediate cause of your not coming is not a natural
deficiency, but a moral opposition of Spirit against Christ.

CHAP. VII. Their taking Christ partially: without conjugal affections: and
without considering the cost they may be at.
5ly. Many take Christ partially.
IF at length men are persuaded to come to Christ, yet they take him partially,
both as King, Prophet, and Priest. As their King. They are contented he shall
rule in many things, but not in all. Their drudgery to one or two lusts must be
preferred before Christ's Scepter and Government: Some part of Christ's Yoke of
Commandments they will submit to; but are not pleased that Christ shall impose
what they will; they pick and choose: here they will obey, in another thing I
pray have me excused: few are brought to say, Lord what will thou have me to
do? Any thing Lord, I am called to thy foot, as the man of the East was, ready
to trudge after thee to the ends of the Earth. As their Prophet. Here they
divide too; many things they will learn of Christ, but they must partly lean to
their own understandings, and be taught for Doctrines, the Traditions of men,
They are also partial in their close with Christ as their Priest. They hope to
be saved partly by his mediation, and partly by their own. As the Papists, so
many Protestant Professors are for a divided Christ; few are for exalting
Christ alone, so as to renounce all other Lords, who have had Dominion over
them, and to count all other Teachers besides Christ as vain, absurd, unsound,
and weak. Few renounce all their own righteousness, as dung, to put the Crown
on Christ's head alone, to make Christ their alone Mediator, their alone
Intercessour. No, they must have Cisterns of their own to keep their water in,
and Sands of their own to build upon, and so Christ, the Elect precious Stone,
is refused by the Builders. How many hope to be pardoned, partly by Christ, and
partly by their Civility, and new Obedience? They lay their title to God,
Heaven, and Glory, partly from Christ's merits, and partly from their own
deserts; few whose hopes are founded on Christ's satisfaction alone; but their
hopes rise or fall according to what they do for him, rather than according to
what he has done and suffered for them: their hopes of acceptance with God are
more from their reformations, than from Christ's entering within the Veil: If
they have peace of Conscience, they ascribe it to their Prayers, rather than to
Christ's Intercession, and if they Pray in secret in their Closet, and in their
Family too, when both before were neglected, they hope to pass by this Bridge
to Heaven; but if it be too short, they will set Christ to patch up what is
wanting, that they may land on the other shore. Hence it is that many
Professors are much more conscientious in their obedience to the moral law,
than they are to the Law of Faith, for that they hope their obedience will
steed them as much, if not more than Jesus Christ; but if they understand that
without Faith there is no pleasing God, then they will labor for a faith that
may justify them, rather as an act of theirs, than in respect of the object
Christ. Christ is still used only upon necessity, and to make up the want of
somewhat else; but very few dare rest on the merits of Christ alone, so as to
see all their righteousness to be as filthy rags. To few ^s Christ made of God
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Let me ring a peal in
your Ears, Totum Christum et totum Christi.
You must receive Christ entirely, all Christ, and all of Christ, or you are
not Christians, though you have a name to live. Christ is coming to distinguish
names from things, and then you will curse the day you had the Name, or heard
of the Name; you will have your portion with Hypocrites. These are
indispensible terms on which Christ will insist, All, or none; Christ as a
Refiner, as well as a Savior; Christ as a Lord, as well as a Sacrifice.

Sixthly. Many close with Christ without coniugal affections.
If men are persuaded in the horrors of their Spirits to take Christ as
Priest, Prophet and King, as a mere shift, to shift off their troubles and
sorrows, and their sins (the occasions of them;) yet their hearts stand off
from Christ, as an Husband, they have not conjugal affections to him, their
hearts are not brought over to him, they receive him not into their bosoms,
into their choicest affections all this while. There is still some secret lust
more precious than Christ; he is not the chief Cornerstone, whereas to them
that believe he is precious, exceeding precious. Few, like Paul, determine to
know nothing else save Christ, and him Crucified. One Christ was enough to take
up Paul's thoughts to eternity; Si Christum noscis, etc.
he did not care what he was ignorant of, so he knew Christ. Though he was
brought up at Gamaliels feet, he laid down all his knowledge at Christ's feet.

1. Are your hearts so drawn to Christ, From esteeming Christ the most
necessary good.
as to count him the most necessary good in all the World? And all other things
to be but adjuncts, so that you are able to live without them, but not without
Christ? Liberty is sweet to a believer; but he can live in a Prison, yea and
live merrily too, he can sing there, if Christ be within the grate: Bread is
sweet, but he can live in a Wilderness (a desolate houling desert) and sing
there too, as Moses did, if Christ be there, yea and prefer it before Canaan.
If thy Presence go not with us, carry us not hence. A Wilderness with Christ is
more precious than a Canaan without him. If ye were through Believers, the
World would not be accounted among the Necessaries. One thing is necessary,
One, not many. Other things may divert, or may a little refresh, but Christ is
the Necessary.

2. yea, the only good
Is he in a sense the only good to your Souls? Is nothing else good separated
from Christ? give a Believer what you will without Christ; it weighs nothing,
he droops, as the Marygold, when the Sun withdraws. What is all this whilst I
am Christless? There is none good but Christ. Riches are miscalled goods: they
are not good sure in their reference as they relate to Christ, as they come
from Christ, from that bosom of love, and as they advance Christ, and bring
Christ and the Soul to nearer Communion. If the World in its glory, splendor,
and fullness, hinder communion with Christ, by deadning; flatning, and
distracting the heart, it becomes a burden: He is burdened with friends,
relations, enjoyments of all sorts, that rob him of Christ, that eclipse the
face of the Sun of Righteousness, through their unhappy interposals. Phil. 3.7
What was gain is counted loss. As he enjoys much or little of Christ,
thereafter he laughs, or weeps, he rises or falls. In Christ are Riches,
honors and friends: yea Prayers, Sermons, Sacraments, etc. The Lord is the
Temple; He is all in all; Col. 3.11.
He is all things, and in all things, not only by way of merit, whatever they
have, or expect, is on Christ's account; nor only by way of conveyance, through
him we have all good communicated; nor only by way of causality, as he works
all in all; but he is all virtually, he is instead of all things to them, he
makes up the defect of all things. If no Estate, no Friends, no Liberty, no
Health, no Comfort, etc. yet the Believer wants nothing: As having nothing, 2
Cor. 6.10.
and yet possessing all things. Thus the Woman told the Persecutour, when he
threatened her, to deprive her of her Husband, Christ is my Husband.
Professors, look to your hearts, Isa. 24.16.56.3.
to your affections, and then you will have cause to cry, My leanness, my
leanness, woe unto me, I am a dry tree.

Seventhly, How few Christians have, Few consider the Cost beforehand.
in their closing with Christ, considered the Cost they may be at? They were
told of the Cross, but the Cross was at a great distance, and things, when
remote, seem little. How many little studied the import of that word Cross?
What a shameful, painful, tedious death it imports? Something of trouble they
would undergo for Christ, but really they never thought of dying for Christ,
of spilling their hearts blood for Christ: So that they did not close with
Christ understandingly, either they were ignorant of Christ's person, or of the
consequents of closing with him; that they should be hated of all men for his
Names sake; Mat 10.22. Acts 14.22.
that they must through much tribulation enter into his Kingdom; that they
shall be put out of the Synagogues, and that the time comes, Jo. 16.2.
that whosoever kills them, will think that he does God service. Hence when
unexpectedly the rain descends, Mat. 7.27.
the floods come, and the winds blow and beat upon their houses, (the stately
spiritual buildings, which they have been erecting) they do not only totter,
but fall, and great is their fall. Even Cedars are taken up by the roots. How
many in such times put away a good Conscience, and concerning Faith have made
shipwreck? 1 Timothy 1.19. Jude v. 12.
How many are Trees, whose fruit withers, without fruit, twice dead, plucked
up by the roots? They see not the riches of Christ will make them amends for
all these losses and perils: they cannot balance the troubles of the Flesh
with the comforts of the Spirit; the present evil things, with the future
inheritance in Heaven: the Temptations they meet with are unexpected. They are
like some Ladies, that put forth to Sea for pleasure; they launch forth toward
Christ, but as the King of Navarre, who said, he would not venture farther,
than he could quickly retreat, in case of danger. The Storm makes them return
to their Harbor; yea, with the Dog to the vomit, 2 Pet. 2.22.
and the Sow to the mire. These poor Souls (O that my heart could bleed for
them) were willing to come up to some of Christ's terms, Gal. 3.4.
to lose a little, nay, to suffer many things, but they cannot endure to lose
Life. O my Soul! weep in secret for them, when thou considerest, that the
Children of the Kingdom (Church Members) shall be cast out into outer
daarkness, Mat. 8.12.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Matthew. 5.18. Luke 9.23. Luke
14.26.
God will not abate a punctum of what he requires, he expects that we take up
the Cross daily, that we hate Life it self, as well as whatsoever else is near
and dear unto us. The Conditions imposed on his fallen Creatures are
irreversible, he will never stoop lower. O! this makes many a man to go away
sorrowful. I beseech the Reader to go over with the work of Conversion again,
now that the Cross is in sight, now that Tribulation arises; Now let him see,
whether Christ is better than Name, Liberty, Friends, Relations, Livelihood,
and Life it self; and whether he can believe, Luke 9.24.
that he that will save his life, shall lose it, and he that will lose his life
for Christ's sake, shall find it, and that with advantage.

CHAP. VIII. Their shuffling together false Signs of closing with Christ.
8ly. HOw do many Professors shuffle together a company of false Signs of
closing with Christ? Many rest in false Signs of closing with Christ.
How do they count them true and infallible, which are but questionable; yea,
which have been found in unsound Hypocritical hearts; and so deceive
themselves, Their groundless Pleas, that they have closed with Christ.
as if they had a Christ, and real Grace within them? How do they live upon
these Signs comfortably all their days without a Christ? Excuse me, if I
bring in their Pleas, and answer them briefly.

1. I am changed from what I was, nay, changed inwardly. So was Saul, And it
was so, 1 Samuel 10.9.
that when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, God gave him another
heart. Thou may have another heart, and yet not a new heart.

2. I have extraordinary Gifts: I was dull, unable to speak of God, tongue-tyed
among the Saints; but I can now hold a discourse with them, and manage some of
the highest services, as well as they. Might not Saul say so much for himself?
had not he the Spirit of Prophecy to admiration? When a company of Prophets
met him, 1 Samuel 10.10, 11.
the Spirit of God came upon him, and he prophesied among them: Then the people
said one to another, What is this that is come to the Son of Kish? Is Saul also
among the Prophets? The Spirit of God was upon him also at another time, 1 Samuel
19.23, 24.
and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to Naioth in Ramah; and he
stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before Samuel in like manner, and
lay downnaked all that day, and all that night. He was so great a Proficient,
that (as one observes) As soon as he was admitted into the Society, he
commenced Doctor, and prophesied with the best of them: They stood and
prophesied, he went on, he could run and prophecy; yea, he was so full of the
Spirit of Prophecy, that he neither eat, nor drank, nor slept, nor rose; but
lay down naked all the day, and all the night; he was as in a trance all that
while, and wanted neither meat, nor drink, nor clothes, nor sleep.

3. I was full of revenge, but now I am come to such a pitch of Religion, that
I can pass by Offenses; yea, pass them by, when I have an opportunity of
punishing them that affront me. Had not Saul so much Religion? The Children of
Belial said, 1 Samuel 10.27.
How shall this man save us? and they despised him, and brought him no
Prosents; but he held his peace. He bears much, that can bear being derided.

4. Though I am meek in mine own Cause, yet when the Name of God, and the
Church of God suffer, I can be very much inflamed. So was hypocritical Saul, 1 Samuel 11.2, 6.
When Nahash the Ammonite told the men of Jabesh, On this condition will I make
a Covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes, and lay it for
a reproach upon all Israel, the Spirit of God came upon Saul, when he heard
those tidings, and his anger was kindled greatly.

5. I am merciful to men, to mine Enemies, because God has showed me mercy. So
was Saul, And Saul said, 1 Samuel 11.13.
There shall not a man be put to death this day, for this day the Lord has
wrought Salvation in Israel. Though he was incited to revenge, yet he would not.

6. When I have any Mercy from God, I see God in the Mercy, and is not this a
good Sign? Truly no better than Saul had, 1 Samuel 11.13.
To day the Lord has wrought Salvation in Israel.

7. I engage God with me; before I set upon any considerable Undertakings. Did
not Saul so much? Then said I, the Philistines will come down now upon me to
Gilgal, and I have not made Supplication to the Lord; 1 Samuel 13.12.
I forced my self therefore, and offered a burnt Offering. And Saul said unto
Ahiah, Bring hither the Ark of God, etc. And Saul asked counsel of God, Shall I
go down after the Philistines?

8. When I Pray, I look what becomes of my Prayer, and I suspend many of my
Motions, till I have an Answer. Saul the Hypocrite went so far; he looked
after his Prayer, and would not go down after the Philistines, 1 Samuel 14.37.
because God answered him not that day.

9. If I have no Answer to Prayer, I examine the Reason, and I am sure this is
more than most Professors do. But not more than Saul did, When God answered
him not that day, 1 Samuel 14.37, 38.
Saul said, Draw ye nigh hither all the chief of the people, and know and see
wherein this sin has been this day.

10. I am troubled for other men's sins, and cannot but reprove sinners; Is not
this a Sign of Sincerity? I answer, No, unless Saul were sincere: When he was
told, the People eat the blood, he was troubled, and reproved them too; 1 Samuel
14.33.
He said, Ye have transgressed.

11. My Zeal against Sin is such, that I punish it wherever I find it; I am
impartial in my rebukes of sin: my Children, as well as my Servants, are
corrected, if they trespass against the Lord. Hence I conclude mine estate is
good. And so might Saul. 1 Samuel 14.29.
As the Lord lives, who saves Israel, though it (the sin) be in Jonathan my
Son, he shall surely dye.

12. I conclude God loves me from a constant series of smiling Providence,
that follows all that I take in hand: I find that the Lord blesses me in my
goings out and comings in; whatsoever I do does prosper. And had not Saul
strange Successes and Victories? When Israel was so low, that they had no
weapons for War, nor Smiths to make any, Saul took the Kingdom over Israel, 1 Samuel 14.47.
and fought against all his Enemies on every side, etc. and whither soever he
turned himself, he vexed them.

13. I find a readiness to confess others better than my self; so did Saul with
tears in his Eyes. And Saul said, 1 Samuel 24.16, 17.
is this thy voice my Son David? And Saul lift up his voice, and wept, and he
said to David, thou art more righteous than I.

14. I continue my duties when I fear God has rejected me; even in desertion I
keep on worshipping. So did Saul, when Samuel told him, God has rejected thee,
1 Samuel 15.25, 30, 31.
he desired Samuel to turn again with him, that he might worship the Lord, and
he prevailed with Samuel to turn again, and Saul worshipped the Lord.

15. I see a beauty in the Church and People of God. So did Balaam. How goodly
are thy Tents, O Jacob, and thy Tabernacles, O Israel! As the Valleys are they
spread forth, Numb. 24.5, 6.
as Gardens by the Rivers sides, as the Trees, etc. which the Lord has
planted, and as Cedar trees besides the waters.

16. I cannot for the greatest advantage be brought to sin against God. Neither
could Balaan. Numb. 24.13.
If Balak would give me his house full of Silver and Gold, I cannot go beyond
the Commandment of the Lord, etc.

17. I live up to the dictates of Conscience, though I hazard the displeasure
of great men thereby. Numb. 24.10.
So did that Sorcerer, though Balaks anger was kindled against Balaam, and he
smote his hands together.

18. I have some sights of another World, and I desire to spend an eternity
with the Saints. So had Balaam, Numb. 23.10.
and did not he desire so much? Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let
my last end be like his.

19. When I think of the day of Judgment, I am affected with it, whereas
before I was sottish and secure. So was Felix. As he (Paul) reasoned of
Righteousness, Acts 24.25.
Temperance and Judgment to come, Felix trembled.

20. I am an Orthodox Protestant; so thou may be a Teacher too, thou may
not only know Gods will, and approve the things that are more excellent, Romans
2.18, 19, 20, 24.
being instructed out of the Law, but confident that thou thy self art a guide
of the blind, a light of them, which are in darkness, an Instructor of the
foolish, a Teacher of babes, which have the form of knowledge, and of the truth
in the Law; and yet fall short of Christ, and of Heaven, yea the name of God
may be blasphemed among the Gentiles, through thee.

21. I am free from the scandaious evils of the times, So were they in Peter,
They had escaped the pollutions of the world, 2 Pet. 2.20, 22.
yea and that through the knowledge of Christ (which is more than the moral
Heathens ever had) and yet were dogs and swine still.

22. I live inoffensively, none can lay any thing to my charge. But was not
Paul, whilst Christless, Phil. 3.6.
touching the Righteousness which is in the Law blameless? At the same time he
was Persecuting the Church of God.

23. I have obeyed the Commandments of God for a long time. I am not like a
Mushrom, soon up, and soon vanishing; I am a constant Servant to the
Commandments of God. So was the young man in the Gospel; Matthew. 19.20.
he said unto Christ, All these things I have kept from my youth up; what lack
I yet?

24. I have inlargements in duties, and satisfy not my self with ordinary
duties, Matthew. 23.14. Luke 18.12.
but make Conscience of extraordinary duties, I fast, and that often. And did not
the Pharisees make long Prayer, and fast off? I fast twice in the week.

25. I have joys in Ordinances. the word of the Lord is sweet and precious, I
know the time when it was not so. But did not Hered hear the word of God
gladly? Did he not see an excellency in John? Mar. 6.20.
Had he not his Virtues and Graces in great esteem? Had he not a Reverend
behavior toward him? Did not he observe him, and care to please him? He heard
him, and that gladly: He was much delighted in John's Preaching.

26. Nay but I go farther, for I stir up others to frequent Sermons. So did
the Elders of Israel, Ezekiel. 33.30.
Come I pray you, and hear what is the word, that comes forth from the Lord,
etc.

27. I obey as well as hear; I hear in order to practice. And was not Herod
conformable to John's Doctrine? though John Preached not placentia, Mar. 6.20.
he was a rough Preacher, a burning, as well as a shining light, yet the Text
tells us, ^e did many things.

28. Matthew. 7.28.13.54. Mar. 1.22.11.18.
When I hear the word, I am strangely taken with it. So were the people, when
they heard Christ, they were astonished at his Doctrine.

29. Many a time under a Sermon my knees and heart ache. So it was with Felix.
As he reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, etc. Felix trembled.

30. But I Pray and Pray often as well as hear, and therefore is it not well? It
may be ill enough, if thou have no better evidence. When you make many Prayers
(when you multiply Prayer, when you add Prayer to Prayer) yet I will not hear.
Isa. 1.15


31. There was a time, when I felt sin no more, than a dead man feels a
mountain upon him; but now it is heavy; it is burdensome. And was it not so to
Cain? And Cain said unto the Lord, my punishment (or, mine iniquity) is greater
than I can bear. Was it not so to Judas, Mat. 25.8, 10.
when he repented himself, and restored the thirty pieces of silver, saying I
have sinned, in that I have betrayed the Innocent blood, and went and hanged
himself?

32. I have desires after grace, and am willing to be at cost for it. So the
foolish Virgins. And the foolish (being awakened out of their security in their
form of Godliness) said unto the wise, give us of your Oil: Matthew. 25.8, 10
yea they went to buy. They were willing to be at cost for the power of
Godliness.

33. I associate only with Gods people, yea with the purest and holiest. So did
the foolish Virgins, they associated not only with Virgins, but with the wise
Virgins. Matthew. 25.1.
Both wise and foolish went out together to meet the Bridegroom.

34. I consult Ministers for my Soul, and have high seize. But wherein
do thou go beyond those, of whom it is said, Isa. 58.2.
They seek me daily, and delight to know my ways; as a Nation that did
Righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance of their God: they ask of me the
Ordinances of Justice: they take delight in approaching to God? Wherein do
thou go beyond those in the Hebrews, Hebr. 6.4, 5.
who were once enlightened, and had tasted of the Heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, Hebr. 6.9.
and had tasted the good word of God, and the Powers of the world to come. If
thou have not better things than these, thou have not savingly closed with
Jesus Christ; for as yet thou have nothing that accompanies Salvation, from
which Salvation cannot be separated.

O! I cannot but pity these poor hearts, these Almost-Christians. Almost
Christians, and Almost Saved, I may say they are not far from the Kingdom of
God, and yet in a sense they are farther than any others. Our greatest
difficulty has been to undeceive these, to unchrist these, I mean, to take off
these figleaves, with which they have covered themselves, that they may come to
Christ for clothing, and so prevent the appearing of their nakedness. O! It is
hard tough work to persuade a proud Pharisee, that all his Righteousness will
not steed him, that he must fling away all, that he must have something else to
show for Heaven and Glory. O! How have men fled in our faces, when we have told
them, that yet they have nothing that is essential to a Christian, as a
Christian, or which makes a Christian a Christian, no more than a picture has
of the essence of a man? You may imagine a man, that has bestown 20 or 30
years in building, how loath is he to pull down all again? Though he fears the
foundation is but on the Sands; he will rather venture, than begin all anew: He
is even ashamed to unravell all the Clue of his ungrounded confidences. What
begin upon a new bottom? No, not he; and so Christ and he part. He takes his
supposed grace to be a Christ, or at least, that there must be Christ, where
such changes are, and so cries out, Soul take thine ease, thou have goods laid
up for many years, yea for Eternity.

CHAP. IX. Their Ungodliness: their Ignorance: their Errors, etc.
HAve not many Professors been ungodly men, (...), men without worship?
Profectors Ungodliness.
If to deny or withhold any part of that respect or honor, that is due unto
God, Jude 4.
be ungodliness; how much ungodliness has there been, and is there still
amongst us? Which of us has not been guilty of not giving God his right or due
honor? Have not we sucked in many ungodly Principles? As that it is in vain to
worship God, there is no happiness (comparable to what the World does afford)
in communion with God; Religion is but a notion and fancy; Policy is the only
Piety; This world must be looked after, whatever becomes of Conscience, etc.
Psalm. 50.21. Job 22.12, 13. Psalm. 14.1.
Have not we been guilty of ungodly thoughts? have not we thought, that God is
not so harsh, but we may take liberty in sinning; that he takes no notice of
what we think, speak and do, yea that there is no God? Have not we spoken
ungodly words? have not we uttered those very hard speeches which ungodly
sinners speak? Have not we spoken against Gods servants? yea have we been
afraid to speak against his Servant Moses? And have not many of our deeds been
ungodly, yea though we have not ungodly committed them? God has always been
sorely provoked by ungodliness; The Flood swept away the World of the Ungodly;
2 Pet. 2.7.
but yet we might have been ungodly under the Law, at a cheaper rate, than
under the Gospel; because the Gospel gives us more clear, and certain notions,
of Gods excellency and glory, and lays more obligations upon us to respect God,
and therefore is called a doctrine according to godliness. 1 Timothy 6.3. Psa.
1.5. Jude 15.
The ungodly shall not stand in judgment, neither in the world to come, nor in
this world. The day of Judgment is appointed on purpose to take vengeance of
ungodly persons.

First, Their Ignorance of God. 1 Cor. 15.34. John 4.22.
Have not some Professors been, and still are, altogether ignorant of God? Some
have not the knowledge of God, I speak this (says the Apostle) to your shame.
May it not be said to many of us, Ye worship ye know not what? Do not many
Professors worship God upon no other account, than the Romans did their
Jupiter, or the Ephesians their Diana, viz. because he is the God of the Nation
wherein they were born; because he was their Forefathers God, because his
worship is in credit, and because the Magistrate commands that God be
worshipped? Have not we worshipped God by Tradition, more than out of
Conviction of Judgment? Has not our worship been to the unknown God? Acts
17.23,
God is truly, in a Scripture sense, unknown to all, that do not know him
experimentally and practically. Now, have we tasted and seen, Psalm. 34.8.
that the Lord is gracious? Have not we said, we knew God, and yet kept not his
Commandments? He that says so, is a Liar, 1 Jo. 2.4, 3.
and the truth is not in him: Hereby know we that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments. If we do not thus know God, we are none of his Children; he has
no Child so little, but he knows his Father: Jer. 31.4.
They shall all know me, from the least to the greatest. Our being the People
of God in Profession, will not secure us from ruin. Hos. 4 6 2 These. 1.8.
My People are destroyed for lack of Knowledge. The Lord Jesus will come in
flaming Fire, to render vengeance on us; for he will so deal with all that know
not God.

Secondly, Their E^rours;
How erroneous have been Professors? None can be such a stranger to our
Israel, as to be ignorant, that a Spirit of Delusion has been let loose
abroad, from Dan to Beersheba, so that the Pillars of Religion are shaken, the
most concerning Truths questioned, if not exploded with scorn and contempt.
Have not some made God the Author of Sin? Have not others forgot that they were
Creatures; and have assumed the liberty, or rather highest impudence, to say,
that they were Godded, and that the fullness of the Godhead does dwell bodily
in every Saint, in the same measure as it did in Christ Jesus, whilst he dwelt
upon the Earth? Nay, have not others affirmed, Jesus Christ to be a Bastard?
Have not others said, They were Christ, and would, in the pride of their
hearts, have others to worship them? Have not some denied Christ's Deity,
affirming, That he was not God essentially, but only nominally; yea, that his
pure Nature was stained with Sin? How many have denied the Trinity of Persons?
How many, under pretense that the Law of Works binds not, have abrogated all
the Laws of Christ, and turned cursed Libertines? How many have, under pretense
of advancing the Spirits testimony, maintained Sanctification to be a dirty
qualification, and cried down all marks and signs? How many have held, that
the Doctrine of Repentance, Fasting, and Humiliation, are too Legal for the
Spirit of a Christian? How many have denied Christ's sitting in a Body at the
right hand of God? How many have denied his Satisfaction and Purchase? Have not
some held, that there is no Heaven, no Hell, no Resurrection from the Dead, and
that the Beast and Man have one common end? How many have been altogether for
Inspirations, and professed themselves above the Sphere of all Ordinances? How
many have denied Water Baptism, the Supper, the Ministry, yea the Scriptures of
God? How many have accounted it their highest Perfection, to sin away all
tenderness of Conscience; and looked upon themselves the more holy, by how much
Villainy they could be guilty of beyond others?

How can we refrain from weeping out our eyes, how should our ears tingle,
Considerations to promote mourning for errors.
to see and hear these Abominations? How has the God of Truth been provoked by
these cursed miscreants? What horrible affronts have been offered to the dread
Majesty of God thereby? How many thousand Souls have perished by these
Delusions? And what a^dishonour has come to the Christian Religion by reason
thereof, I cannot express. Certainly (says one) there is more deadly mischief,
Bp. Hall.
and higher offense to God in them, than in those practical evils, which honest
hearts profess to abhor: These, as they are immediate fruit of our spiritual
part, so they do more immediately strike at the God of Spirits in his truth and
holiness: And as Religion is the highest Concernment of the Soul, so the
depravation of Religion must needs be the most dangerous and damnable. When
Hezekiah heard the blasphemies of Rabshekah, it is said, He rent his clothes,
and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the House of the Lord, and
said, This is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy. If an Assyrian
Blasphemer was so great a troubler, what troublers are Nominal Christians, thus
abusing their Profession, and the God they pretend to serve.

But alas! Professors miscarriages as to errors, Not mourning for them,
How little have we been affected with the Flood cast out of the Serpents mouth
after the Woman? Though the Trumpet has sounded, Woe, Woe, Woe, to the
Inhabitants of the Earth, because of Spiritual Plagnes; We have been puffed up,
and have not mourned; We have spoken laughingly of those sins; We have not
considered this Judgment, as coming from the Lord, as a token of his wrath (in
giving up so many of our Countrymen to strong delusious, to believe lies) We
have showed little Zeal for Gods glory, that has been blemished by these
detestable things: Neither have we pitied the many that have followed these
pernicious ways. How little have we mourned for them, though the Apostle says,
their damnation slumbereth not.

How few means have we used for their reducement? Not using mouns to reduce the
erroneous.
hardly put up a Prayer for them? not admonished them, but let them alone to
perish in their delusions? Not so much as requested an able Minister to have
recourse to these poor deluded Souls in order to the turning of them from the
Idols of their own brains?

How little have we endeavored to strengthen our selves? Not preparing
Antidotes against the Infection.
to prepare Antidotes against this Infection? We have not studied the
Scriptures, that we might warn the unruly, and resist gainsayers, and be
established in the present Truths; but, though we have seen so many shipwreck
their Faith and Consciences, yet we have been high-minded, and have not feared.

Have we not been guilty of not expressing our dislike of the ways of
Heretics as we should? Not disliking them.
We have not shunned them as we ought. To maintain a Party, to strengthen a
Faction, how have we too much countenanced them? their fellowship has not been
enough avoided. How little have we regarded those Apostolical injunctions? Now
I besiech you, Brethren, mark them, Romans 16.17, 18.
which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have
learned, and avoid them; for they that are such, serve not our Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own bellies; and by good words, and fair speeches, deceive
the hearts of the simple. 2 These. 3.14.
And if any man obey not our word, note that man, and have no company with him,
that he may be ashamed. We have shunned the house where one with the Plaguefore
dwells, Prove. 19.27.
but we have not withdrawn from them that cause to err from the words of
Knowledge.

What shall I say? Nor contending for the Faith.
We have not so heartily and vigorously contended for the Faith, which was
once, and but once, delivered to the Saints, as we ought. The Lord humble us
for our luke-warmness. We have cried up Moderation, and counted him an Hagio
mastix, that has appeared against the abominations of the Head. Sure we have
not been valiant for the Truth upon the Earth. Jer. 9.3.
We have not sparkled so much the more in an holy Zeal, because others have
perverted the right ways of the Lord. Because Fools have not been answered,
Prove. 26.4, 5.
they have grown Wise in their own conceit. We have been afraid to meddle with
some, because they have (unreasonably) shrouded themselves under the name of
Saints; Gal. 2.11.
but Paul with-stood Peter to the face, when Truth was like to suffer. I do not
in all this go about to justify undue rigours. God knows how for base
respects, interests, names of our own, we have been too severe against some
things of less moment, some circumstances of Church Government, etc. too much
zeal about mint and anice: we have been too imposing of what lies dark and
obscure in the book of God: and this while the Enemies tares have been suffered
to grow, and the Fundamentals of our Religion have been (at least) endangered.
But that which has been Englands Sin is too much permitting and countenancing
of damnable Doctrines. What shall I say? When God has said, Who is on my side?
who! We have hardly answered for our selves. We have been doubtful in the
Faith, wavering and reeling, not quite on, nor quite off, but staggering and
tottering: Our Religion has been rather Opinion, than Faith, so that we have
stood looking on as Neuters, whilst Heretics have made Merchandise of Souls
with fained words. 2 Pet. 2.3.
The great Truths of God have lain loose upon our hearts, they have not been
fastened by the Master of the Assemblies, as nails in a sure place: and having
little experience of what we profess to know, hence luke warmness follows on
course, or blind zeal for our Ancestors Religion.

O how by reason of the great defection amongst us has the way of Truth been
evil spoken of? 2 Pet. 2.2.
The common Enemy fastneth all upon Religion. They will not distinguish between
Truth and Error, yea between Truth and Heresy, and never would put a
difference between the Orthodox and the Heterodox; but if any one that had been
called a Christian fell into any damnable Errors or Practices, all Christians
suffered thereby; which forced the Primitive Fathers to Pen Remonstrances,
Confessions of Faith, and Apologies, that they might clear Christ and his
Church from being Mother or Nurse to such a cursed Progency. And though some
amongst us have by Confessions of Faith, and otherwise, born witness against
Errors, yet doubtless our Consciences will tell us, that we have not by
Fastings, Prayers, Studies, and all Endeavors improved all our time and
Spirits for the suppresssing and drying up the flood of the Serpent, the
Soul-destroying flood, as we should; but if we have had any Acrimony of Spirit,
we have let it forth upon them, that have crossed us about Modes of Government;
rather than against them, who have shaken the Foundations of our Religion. When
I consider the multitudes of Sects that have been, and are still amongst us, I
wonder not that the Gospel has had a miscarrying Womb and dry Breasts. In all
times Christianity has suffered hereby. Zozomen says, that many would have
followed Christ, Noscio quod dogma eligam, quod praeferam.
but they were discouraged by the diverse Doctrines amongst his followers.
Chrysosteme professes that an Heathen told him, He would become a Christian,
but he knew not to what party of them to join, there are so many opinions and
contentions among Christians. When the multitude of Christians were one-soul'd,
Act. 2.32, 33.
then Fear, and Aw, and Reverence upon all the people; But now that one says I
am of Paul, etc. Now Religion is had in derision, and Atheism grows
exceedingly. O that mine head were as waters, etc.

CHAP. X. Their want of Love to God,
3ly. WAnt of Love to God is another great branch of ungodliness abounding
amongst Professors. Professors want of Love to God in Christ.
This is ^o great a branch of ungodliness, that Jesus Christ has reduced all
the Commandments of the first Table concerning the Worship of God to this
great one, Matthew. 23.36.
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and all thy Soul, and all
thy Might. Indeed every one pretends to love God: I hardly ever met with a
person but said he loved God: He that hates, dissembleth with his lips. Prove.
26
God may say truly, How can thou say, I love thee, when thy heart is not with
me? God is loved, but not for himself, but for what he brings. God is used, and
the World is embraced. If God comes empty handed, or with his hands full of
trouble, misery, etc. Farewell. God is loved, 2 Timothy 3.4. Job. 21.
but with a secondary love; Professors are lovers of pleasure more than lovers
of God. God must stand by, and give place to sensuality, therefore they say
unto God depart, etc. They like God whilst they may enjoy their pleasures too,
whilst they may not be infringed. Let but a few things be considered, and we
will see how much want there is of love to God in Christ.

1. Whom we love we are not ashamed of. Evidenced in being ashamed of a
Relation to him.
The Mothers is such to her Child, and Gods to us, he is not ashamed to be
called our God. But do not we conceal our Title to God in some Companies that
hate him? How do we throw off our Livery, Mar. 8.38.
and dare not to be known to have walked with God. Remember he that is ashamed
of me, etc.

2. Not troubled for his dishonor. 2 Pet. 2.8. Psa. 119 53. 158. Not hating
Gods Enemies. Psalm. 139.21. Not hating self for not loving God.
Parents are troubled when their Children are dishonored, and so Children when
their Fathers: but are our Souls vexed, racked with the filthy couversations of
Sodomites? Where are the Rivers of waters? Where is thy horror because men
keep not Gods Commandments?

3. Those we love, their Enemies are ours; Parents Enemies are the Childrens
Enemies. But do we hate them, that hate God, yea with a perfect hatred?

4. True lovers of God hate themselves for not loving God enough. How often do
they thus sigh? Wretch that I am, to grieve God, to estrange my self from God,
so seldom to be with God, to stay with him no longer! How can I content my
self with these transient glances, with these sudden casts of mine eye, and to
be instantly wheeled off from my God again? O this fleeting mind of mine! when
will it fix on God, and abide with him? O this gadding heart of mine! when will
it center in its true and perfect happiness? When I turn mine eye from earthly
objects, either I am displeased with them, or there is some better thing that
draws off my mind and heart: But dare I say so of God? that be is unlovely? and
yet I have been weary of him.

5. Not trusting him.
Did we love God, we would trust him, we dare trust our very lives in a Friends
hands: But we dare not so trust God. What would a carnal man give that he had
but his life and health in his own dispose? When he is poor he had rather it
were in his own hands to supply his wants, than in Gods; for he thinks it would
go better with him. We trust God for little. We think our selves quite undone,
when we have nothing save a God and a Promise to trust to.

6. Not joying, nor grieving as they ought.
How little do we joy in the presence of God and Christ, and grieve for their
absence? Is God all in the want of all, and is God the All in the enjoyment of
all? Can we say, show us the Father and it suffices us. When we have no
Fig Tree left, can we rejoice in the God of our Salvation? Can we say, Take all
Ziba, now that my Lord is come, now that the Lord stoops to dwell in houses of
clay. O worldlings! take your riches, and make the best of them, I envy you
not, I have enough in God. Do we so grieve for the absence of God and Christ,
that nothing but God and Christ can make amends? O that our happiness, life,
comforts, were folded up in God and Christ! Can we live no more without God and
Christ, than a Beam without the Sun?

7, Not thoughtful to please him. Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 5.10.
True Lovers are thoughtfull to please the Beloved. But is there any thing that
we think less of than pleasing of God? A true lover of God is always proving,
what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God. Proving what is
acceptable unto the Lord. He is still searching that he may know more wherein
he may please God, as willing always to be more useful for God: What have I to
do more? but how seldom do we ask our hearts, what way may we walk in all well
pleasing? How seldom do we design for the glory of God?

8. True Lovers are open handed, and bountiful to God: they bestow readily and
freely any thing they have on him: they will part with their Isaaks, their
dearest things, with Limbs, etc. Rutherford that man of God, wished every limb
a man, every bone a man, yea every hair a man to set forth the praises of God.
When God calls for limbs, can we say Farewell to them? Are there not some
things so dear to us that we cannot spare them to Christ? Are we so taken with
Christ, that our hearts are dis-ingaged from the love of other things? is every
thing vile, but Christ? Is all you part from instantly supplied in the loves
and smiles of Christ?

9. True Lovers of God are contented with nothing by way of return from God,
save only love from him: returns of love they must have. They do not pray save
for love, they go not in before God for Corn, Wine, Oil, etc. but for love,
for God to open his heart, to take off his mask from his lovely face, and show
them the light of his countenance. They are not like the Raven, that came to
Noah: more for necessity, Isa. 26.8, 9.
than delight. Yea in the way of thy Judgments, O Lord, have we waited for
thee; the desire of our Soul is to thy Name, and to the Remembrance of thee:
With my Soul have I desired thee: in the Night, yea with my Spirit within me,
will I seek thee early.

10. Not praising him.
True Lovers are wont to praise each other: But how seldom do we set forth the
praises of Christ? Love is witty, full of eloquence, Cant. 5.10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16.
witness the Spouse, My Beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten
thousand, his head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushy, black as a
Raven, his eyes are as the eyes of Doves by the Rivers of waters, washed with
milk, and fitly set, his cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers, his
lips like Lillies dropping sweet smelling myrrh: his hands are like gold
Rings set with the Berill, his belly is as bright Ivory overlaid with Saphires,
his legs are as Pillars of Marble set upon sockets of sine gold, his
countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars, his mouth is most sweet,
yea he is altogether lovely. This is my Beloved, etc. I Will praise thee with
uprightness: Psalm. 119.7, 164. Septies, i. e. Saepissime. Psalm. 148.
I Will praise thee seven times a day. Yea, David thought seven times a day too
little, and therefore he called in all the Creatures of Heaven and Earth, Air
and Sea, to praise God: the Dragons in the deep must not be silent. True Lovers
praise God as much as they can, they exalt God to the utmost of their power;
and then, from a sense that God is above all their praise, they would have
every thing that has breath to praise the Lord, yea and inanimates too for to
join in the Quire, Does Praise wait for God?

11. Did you love God, Not loving all of God and Christ. Jo. 13.34, 35. 1 Jo.
4.19.
you would love every thing of God: Do you love his Omnipresence, his Justice,
his Holiness? True love to Christ sticks not barely in the Person of Christ,
but reaches to all that have an Union with him. Do we love Christ mystical, as
well as personal? Are we of Catholic Spirits? The Apostle is peremptory, and
brandeth them all as Liars, that pretend to love God and Christ, and do not
love Saints.

12. Not thirsting after nearer Communion.
True Lovers of God thirst after nearer Commuion with God. My Soul follows
hard after thee. The Soul still encroacheth upon God. Let me see thy Glory,
says Moses, though he saw more than Mortals were (commonly) permitted to
behold, yet Semper avarus eget, Much would have more. Psalm. 42.1, 2.
As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O
God: my Soul thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come and
appear before God? A true Lover of God is under an holy impatience, till he
cease to see darkly in a glass: He would fain see with open face. O! (says
such a Soul) the distance between Christ and me is too great: O! I cannot but
groan earnestly, when I consider I am absent from the Lord, whilst present in
the body. Lord, (says Austin) I will dye, that I may enjoy thee; I will not
live, but I will dye: I desire to dye, that I may see Christ; and refuse to
live, that I may live with Christ. The broken Rings, Contracts, and Espousals,
content not the true Lover; but he longs for the Marriage day. Here are Clouds
that often pass 'twixt God and my Soul, O that I were above them! Here, if I see
and enjoy, the fear of losing so sweet a sight, abates the comfort of fruition;
but then welcome an eternal day, that shall never have a night.

13. Being weary of his Commands.
If you loved God, his Commandments would not be grievous to you. Love cannot
be easily poised: Love has a kind of Almightiness in it, so that heavy burdens
are made light, 1 Jo. 5.3
and almost impossible things become feasible. But of how many things do we
say, Mal. 1.13.
What a weariness is it? How are you haled by Governors, by Conscience, and by
the terrors of the Law unto Duties? How like Slaves chained to Galleys, you
must work, though sore against your wills? Did you love God, you would count
nothing tedious, Hebr. 12.1.
save dullness, in his service. Sin would only be the Weight. O the burden of
Formality, Pride, etc! But O the pleasures of the ways of God! His yoke is
easy, his burden light.

14. Did you love God, Not fearing how it goes with Gods affairs. 1 Samuel 4.13.
you would be jealous, lest it should go ill with Gods affairs. The loving
Mother trembles, lest the Child should suffer, when she is off from it. But
alas! how few Elies are there, whose hearts tremble beause of the Ark? Do you
really fear, lest Formality should eat out the Power of Godliness, lest
Traditions should make void the Commandments of God, lest your Trades should
spoil your Communion with God.

You may easily imagine, Considerations tending to humble us, for want of Love
to God.
the want of Love to God, must needs be a great Provocation. O to pretend love,
and yet Judas-like, betray Christ with a kiss; to say, Hail Master, and yet
prefer a base Lust before him? What an indignity is it to the Husband, that
the Wife loves the Slave before him? The World should be your Slave, but it
has got the heart, the bosom; and Christ must stand without doors till his
locks are wet. Cant. 5.
O that God should stoop so low, as to love you, as to make you the birth of
his everlasting counsels of love; that he should carry you long in the womb of
his eternal purpose! This goodly Fabric of Heaven and Earth had not been
erected, but as a Stage, whereon he would show his love to you. And did he not,
in the fullness of time, purchase you by the blood of his Firstborn, yea of his
only begotten Son, and for this very end, that he might gain your love, as well
as reveal his own love? And yet that your love should not be like an Echo,
which returns what it receives? Sure you should cast back Gods beams of love
upon himself. This is all he expects, My Son, give me thine heart: All the
command he lays upon you, Mat. 22 36, 37.
is, in one word, To Love him. God might have commanded our Children to be
sacrificed, to pass through the Fire. O! what a favor is it to love the Lord?
That God will honor us so far, as to suffer us to love him? And yet we love
any thing, any sordid base Lust, rather than God. We would count it a favor,
if a Prince would give us a privy Key, to come to him when we please: Here is
more honor, we may have recourse to the bosom of God when we will. God would
have us to love him with all the heart, with all the soul. The Lord would not
lose one grain of our love. O that we should deny him that which he (with
reverence be it spoken, and thought on) is so fond of. Deuteronomy. 10.12.
And now Israel, what does the Lord require of thee, but to love him, and to
serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul. God requires
not now Cattle upon a thousand Hills, or Rivers of Oil, Only, Love me, Love
me, Love me heartily, constantly, chiefly; and yet we deny him our loves. O! I
hate my self whilst writing this, that I love the Lord so little, so seldom: It
was he that made me, and not I my self: He has wonderfully formed me, and
wonderfully preserved me, and showed many wonders in the deeps to me. O! what
shall I do to love the Lord with a superlative love? O I am ready to say, Let
me love nothing, if I love not thee; nay, love nothing, till I love thee! O
that you would grieve abundantly for want of Love to God! You have past as
through the Red Sea, you have been as the flaming Bush, God has looked after
you, as if he minded none but you, you have been as the Signet on his right
hand, nay more, you have been engraven on his Palms, and what, not love the
Lord? Shame upon you, that you can dote upon the dark, filthy, dirty World, and
neglect the Lord of Glory. All the Affections you have, God gave them, (when he
gave thee a reasonable Soul) but for this end, that you should place them on
himself, and not on his Enemy. Is it not hard measure that God should be denied
Love, when he gave you power to love? If a Friend sends you Bottels of Wine, it
is hard, that when he comes to you, you should deny him a taste of his bounty.
Believe it Sirs, whatever you do for the Lord, unless you Love him, yea, unless
you Love him more than any thing else, it is not accepted. 1 Cor. 13.3.
Though you give your Body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profits you
nothing. Though you bring forth Fruit, yet you are empty Vines, Hos. 10.1.
because you eye Self, not God. Your most exquisite Services are but pieces of
dead Carrion, unless they be seasoned with the Salt of Love. This People draw
nigh with their lips, but I abhor them, and their Duties, because the silly
Dove is without an heart. Whatever a man gives me, if his heart be not in it, I
slight it: God much more. What shall I say? The Holy Apostle counts him worthy
of a Curse, that loves not Jesus Christ. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, 1
Cor. 16.22.
let him be Auathema Maranatha. And is it not sad to be cursed to the coming of
Christ? He deserves it, that loves not Christ, and he must and shall be forced
to own the Righteousness of God in sentencing him to Eternal flames, who might
have been secured against them, had he but loved Christ more than a base
dunghill Lust.

CHAP. XI. Their evil surmises of God.
4ly. Their evil surmises of God.
EVil surmises of God is another piece of ungodliness found too frequently
among some of the more raised Professors, even such as have the root of the
matter in them. I shall the rather insist on this sin, because right thoughts
of God are the fuel which maintains the fire of Religion: without which it
soon decays and is extinguished.

1. Miscalling his love-to-kens,
Do not we miscall Gods love tokens? Has not God sent thee many love tokens by
his Spirit to assure thee that he owns thee and delights in thee, as his
Spouse? For thee to question thy relation to him upon every turn must needs be
grievous to him, how grievous then is it for thee to deny all his tokens of
grace and love to thy Soul, and to count them but delusions, but the works of
the Infernal Spirit, transforming himself into an Angel of Light? To call
light, darkness, good, evil, sweet, bitter, the work of Christ, the Devils
work, is ill resented by the Lord, it goes unto his heart. You that are
Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children, cannot endure to have your love and
fidelity suspected upon every base suggestion and whisper. Believe it God takes
notice, and lays to heart all your jealousies of him, all your base unworthy
censures of him.

2. How ill are Gods Providence resented? III resenting Gods Providence. 1
Cor. 3.22. Romans 8.28.
Although God has told you there is a beauty in their contexture, that things
present and things to come are yours, that all shall work together for good,
that your Providential losses, as well as your Providential enjoyments, that
your changes, as well as your setlings, your wants as well as your abundance
shall all be Sanctified to you: yet how few, with that blessed man, bless the
Lord, Job. 1.21. Romans 5.2, 3.
when taking away? And with Paul, rejoice, yea glory in tribulations? God
assures you, that your sicknesses, reproaches, wants, shall do you good, yea
death shall do you good, all shall be good, or do you good, all shall be food,
or physic, out of the eater shall come forth sweetness, even from Gods
desertions you shall have advantages, your very thorns shall drop honey, shall
bear grapes, yet notwithstanding what hard thoughts have you of God under such
dispensations? Did thou only accuse thy self, judge thy self, abhor thy
self, it were well; but in speaking against thy self, thou fallest foul upon
God himself by questioning his love from these providence. Deny thy self what
thou will, but beware of a denial of Gods love, and of the Spirit of grace,
that has taken up his lodgings within thee: O that all melancholy doubting
Christians would consider of this (too seldom suspected) provocation and
unkindness of theirs toward God! O! take up, and keep up better thoughts of
God, what ever his carriage be toward you. Though he slay you, yet trust in
him. When will you be as David, who though beleaguered with Enemies, yet kept
up good thoughts of God, he doubted not of Gods pity, of Gods favor, and
protection, and therefore I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, Psa.
3.6. Psa. 27.3. v. 1.
that have set themselves against me round about. Though an host should encamp
against me, my heart shall not fear, etc. in this will I be confident. In what?
Why that the Lord is my Light, and my Salvation, and the strength of my life.
God has not spent all his stores, he has enough for me, he will not suffer me
to be tempted above what I shall be able to bear, but will with the temptation
make way for my escape. And has not God told thee, that the mountains shall
depart, Isa. 54.10.
and the hills be removed, yet his loving kindness shall not depart from thee,
neither shall the Covenant of his peace be removed? But alas! Thou can
entertain good thoughts of God in fair weather, Mar. 4.38.
but let them fall in a storm: then it is, Master, carest thou not that we
perish. Thou can trust in God when he carries himself as a Friend, and
answers all thy requests, and grants all thy desires, but not so, when he
seems an Enemy. Can thou with Paul say, I am persuaded, that neither Death,
Romans 8.38, 39.
nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord? Whilst the
Candle of the Lord shines on thy Tabernacle, whilst thy bones are full of
marrow, whilst thou washest thy feet in butter, whilst every Mordechai boweth
in the gates, whilst thou have dews on thy heart, meltings and enlargements in
Ordinances; so long thou can keep up good thoughts of God and his love; but
let the Scene be altered, let the Sun wrap up it self in a Cloud of darkness,
let the rod lie on the back, and the Arrows of the Almighty pierce the heart,
and then not only grace within is questioned, but the love of God without. I am
cast out from before thine eyes, his mercy is clean gone. Then all men are
liars, even Samuel himself. But alas! how ignorant art thou of the methods of
God? Heb. 12.6, 7, 8.
Does not he chasten every son that he receives? Should not he have liberty to
use what rod he pleases, whilst all are for thy Profit, that thou may
partake of his Holiness? Romans 8.29. Phil. 3.20. Matthew. 20.23. Col. 1.24.
Might not Christ have had ill surmises of his Father upon higher grounds, than
any thou can name? Who art thou to hope for milder usage from God, than he
showed to his own Natural Son? If thou art predestined to be conformable to
Christ, to be partaker of his sufferings, to drink of his cup, will thou doubt
thy filiation from thy filling up the sufferings of Christ?

3. Concluding thence sadly of Gods intentions.
How do some draw sad conclusions from Gods Providentiall dispensations
concerning his intentions for the future? When they lose dear Relations, an
Husband, or the Wife of the bosom gone, a sweet Child snatched away, and
perhaps by inadvertency; O then no sooner can we enter into the house of
mourning, but we hear cries from you, O my hypocrisy! O my formality! O this
is one of Gods Arrows of Vengeance! O! God is beginning his Controversy, which
will never end, till it lays me as low as Hell! Whereas you should entertain
other thoughts of God, viz. That now he is removing the Idols of jealousy; now
he is weaning your hearts from Creatures, that he may have all your love; he
knew how much Spiritual Communion you have lost by the company of your
Relations, and now he himself would have more of your company; now he would
have you to delight your selves more in himself; now he has but dried the
stream (a weak, unsatisfying stream) that you may drink and drink abundantly of
the purest Crystal waters, that drop from the blessed Fountain immediately;
now God has a blessed design of grace to prepare you for glory; he is now
making the earth an howling Wilderness, that you may long for Canaan; he is now
leaving you to naked walls, that he himself may fill them; he is now turning
all out of doors, that you may have the more liberty to treat with his Majesty
with the less disturbance, without interruption. Alas! you know not how unkind
and burdensome, yea treacherous your Friend, your Relation might have been, if
continued longer to you; you know not what a dishonor to God and to your
selves, he might have been, if longer continued in the land of the living, and
therefore to preserve him from scandal, and your selves from heart-breakings
thereby, God has in mercy, pity, and faithfulness, removed him, taking him
away (it may be) from the evil to come. Few put these Comments upon Gods
Providence toward them; but commonly take all in the worst sense they can.

4. Calling Gods love in question for want of Evidences.
How do some instantly call in question Gods love, if Evidences be not seen, if
they be not fairly writ, so as the Soul can read them? But may not the money be
in the Saeks mouth, though the Brethren see it not for a while? Yea though the
Soul has had a welcome from God, yea many a welcome, yet how soon is the Soul
so crest-fall'n, that it is afraid to go into Gods presence? and through the
power of Satan and Melancholy, duty, yea many duties have hereby been
intermitted? This provokes God exceedingly: What? When you have had his St^ffe,
and his Bracelets, when you have had such admirable proofs of his Love, in
sending his Son, and Holy Spirit after you, to work so great and glorious a
change in you, coming in the still voice, and whispering Love unto you,
dandling you as on the knee, welcoming you again and again to the Throne of
Grace, often filling your empty Bottles, answering your thousand Doubts, sealing
the Covenant of Grace, and granting and confirming to you all the Patents of
Love: And yet at every turn have you doubted, whether God loves you or no? God
chides Zion for this, Isai. 49.14.
Let not Zion say, the Lord has forsaken, etc.

5. Concluding God no Friend because Satan is an Enemy and does tempt them.
Are there not some good Souls (though their goodness lies not in this) that
are apt to question the Love of God to them, from the blasphemous thoughts and
injections that they are harrazed with? But what, because Satan is your
Adversary, must God therefore not be your Friend? Because Satan does tempt you,
will it therefore follow, that God does not love you? Were we not wonderfully
prone to evil surmises and distrusts of God, we would not make Satan's Malice a
ground sufficient to doubt of the Love of God. Does the Husband love his Wife
the less, for that she is tempted, whilst she defies the Tempter, and is
burdened with his foul and daring solicitations?

O how is Satan gratified hereby? Considerations against evil surmises of God.
He is the great Accuser, the great Talebearer, that seperateth choice
Friends: He goes betwixt God and Saints, as a Mediator of Differences, to
accuse Saints to God, and God to Saints, and will you any longer be
Tale-hearers against God? Believe it, the false witness which he brings, is
against him, who has given you wonderful proofs of his everlasting Love
toward you. When, O! when will you complain of Satan, in the words of the
Psalmist? The Enemy has persecuted my Soul, Psalm. 143.3.
he has made me to dwell in darkness, like those that have been long dead. It
is the Enemy that vails and obscures the work of the Spirit what he can, that
you shall see it no more than a dead man can behold any company that is in the
Room, Vault or Grave with him. When Satan tells you, your Graces are
counterfeit, your Faith but that which a temporary may have, your Graces but
moral Virtues; O! how soon is your Enemy credited? how much more believed than
God, his Ministers, and all the testimonies of Gods Love that are brought you?
Hence you are one day jealous of the Kindness of Christ, another day of the
Fullness of Christ, then of the Intentions of Christ, he means no good to me:
Hence also you doubt of the acceptance of your Persons, and Duties; There is a
Cloud hangs over my Prayers, that they cannot pass up: If I come to Christ, he
will not look on such a Wretch as I am. Many such hard thoughts of Christ are
suggested by Satan, and too soon entertained by us: Whilst so, you can never
thank God for any Mercy; for you doubt whether it be a Mercy to you. Can you
bless him for life, health, and length of days, whilst you have this
Suggestion, that your account swells with your time? Can you bless God for
Estates, Honors, Friends, etc. when you have this jealousy, that God is
fatning you as Hoggs for the slaughter? Can you bless God for Ordinances,
whilst you suspect, that there is a Commission given forth, that though you
have eyes, yet you shall not see, etc. And that the Sun is to harden you,
whilst it softneth others? Yea, how can ye bless God for Christ, when you
imagine he is set for your fall?

By giving way to these Jealousies, you dam up the Springs of Praise, that
should slow from your lips day and night. Hereby you will also be hindered from
waiting on the Lord, with that free and cheerful Spirit as ye ought. I cannot
wait on an Enemy, as on a Friend. If I have cursed jealousies of any man, I
find no pleasure to be in his company; and if he employs me about any thing, I
go grudgingly about it. The truth is, So long as you entertain suspicions of
Gods willingness to make you happy, Patricks Parable of the Pilgrim. P. 27, 28.
and to afford you sufficient means to make you happy, all your Religion will
degenerate into a spurious and base-born Devotion. Instead of that free and
friendly converse that ought to be maintained between God and your Souls, you
will only flatter him in a servile manner, and bribe him not to be your Enemy.
Worship God you must, for fear of incurring his displeasure, and lest your
neglects of him should rouse up his anger against you; but you cannot entertain
any cheerful and friendly society with a Being which appears in a dress so
horrible to your Souls. Now between this necessity of coming to him, and that
fearfullness to approach him, what can there be begotten, but a forced and
constrained Devotion, which, because you do not love, you would willingly
leave, did not the dread and horror you have in your Souls of him, dragg you
to his Altars? And what are you wont to do there? Truly nothing but cry, and
look as if you were going to Execution, till you can flatter your selves into
some hopes, that he is moved by your cries, and forced submissions, to lay
aside his frowns, and cast a better aspect upon you: But your hard thoughts of
God returning, you are constrained to renew your slavish Devotions, that you
may purchase another gracious look from him. In this circle do your poor Souls
spend many days, and advance not one step toward the New Jerusalem. No wonder
therefore if God be so provoked at this sin of evil surmises. This is what I
have observed very common among the Lords People, they will pray with some
earnestness, and perhaps have some confidence; that God is gracious, and will
answer their prayers, and grant all their desires; but no sooner off from their
knees, but (if they think of God, yet) they lay down their expectations of
receiving any thing from God, and fall to distrusting and to renew their
jealousies of God as soon as they have done Praying. What? Is God yea and nay?
Is he kind, when thou art on thy knees, and unkind as soon as off? Will God
take it well from thee, that in thy duties thou shall put to thy Seal that God
is true, and loving, and minds thy good? And presently take off the Seal, yea
rather Seal to a parchment of the Devils drawing; that God is false, churlish,
and one that seeks thy ruin? O! whilst there is a Devil, and a
melancholy-humour to be wrought upon, I do even despair to see this cursed
God-dishonouring and debasing sin, to be quite rooted out of the hearts of
Christians; but yet it is a Provocation, and Let it be for a Lamentation.

CHAP. XII. Their unthankfulness.
5ly. Professors unthankfulness.
UNthank fullness is another piece of ungodliness that Professors are very
guilty of. Praise, or Thankfulness is as the Penny or Pepper-corn, which God
expects as acknowledgement, as high Rent, to be paid him for all we hold of
him. But how has this been denied? And thereby how justly have we forfeited
all into the hands of God? Psa. 65. ult. Isa. 46. ult.
Though the paying of this rent penny be the only Heavenly work that can be
done on Earth; the only joyful employment, that shall last to all Eternity in
another life; a work that should ever wait for God in Zion, and therefore Zion
is called Israel my glory; not only because God glories in Zion, but because
Zion should continually glorify God: yet how unthankful are the most
Professors? The very Heathens will rise up in judgment against unthankful
Christians; They had their hymns to their Gods. Plato when ready to die, gave
God thanks for three things, that he was made a man, that he was born in
Greece, and that he lived in the time of Socrates. How much more should our
lips show forth the high praises of God, who has made us not only men, but new
men? That we are born of God, adopted the Children of the most high, and
regenerated by the Spirit? That we have breathed not in Greece, but in England,
in Ariel, a place of Visions, in the Valley of Vision? O the riches of free
grace I that our Mothers Conceived with us in this place of light, and at such
a time when the Nation was most enriched with the light of the Gospel, when it
was full of gracious Ministers, the best that ever the world saw since the
Apostles days! Why had not God brought thee out of the Womb when this land was
overrun with Paganism? with Popery? Why had not the Lord shut thee up and
imprisoned thee with the rest of the World in darkness, and in the shadows of
death. O that when the Gospel shines but upon a little spot of ground, which
God has enclosed for himself, and styles it his pleasant place, his garden,
that thou should be the man born there! That when the rest of the world is
like the barren mountains, on which no rain falls, and brings forth nothing but
briars, that God should bring thee forth in the place of his Tabernacle! And
yet thou ungrateful wretch will hardly confess, that the lines are fallen
happily, and that thou have a goodly heritage. How seldom is such language as
this heard from thee? Blessed be the Lord that my lot is fallen in so fair a
ground; blessed be God that I was born in England, and not in the Wastes of
Arabia, or America; thanks be to the Lord, that I have had more than the light
of the Sun, Moon, and Stars to conduct me to Jesus, that so many wells of
Salvation have been opened unto me, which have been shut unto the most of the
World. But to return to Plato: If he thanked God for living in the days of
Socrates, we may say that greater than Socrates have been amongst us. We have
had those, with whom we have taken sweet counsel, with whom together we have
gone to the house of God, who have been burning, as well as shining lights;
many examples of close-walking heavenly Christians have we enjoyed, such as
have had the wisdom from above, and more pure learning, than ever Socrates or
Plato could pretend to. The Society of how many heavenly, grave, serious,
active, fruitful Christians have we been blessed with, such as have been
faithful admonishers, such as would not suffer sin to rest upon us, such as
have daily told us here is the way, walk herein? O the helps we have had! But O
the cursed unthankfulness of our hearts toward God, notwithstanding his
bestowing upon us so many lights to guide us, so many fires to warm us, and so
much salt to season us!

1. Instead of giving God the glory of all, O! Evidenced in their Sacrificing
to Instruments. Hab. 1.16.
how have we sacrificed to our own nets and to other Instruments? We have
praised our selves, rather than God for what we have. We have not ascribed the
glory to God, but to Instruments: like that Cardinal, who writ down how much
such a Prince honored him, what such a Lord did for him, and what such a Pope
conferred on him: whereupon another infers, This man remembered his Friends, but
forgot God. Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands; but God
has little or no share in the Triumph.

2. Too much Complaining.
How sensible are we of our wants and straits? But O how unaffected with the
goodness of God toward us? How full of complaints are we? but empty of
acknowledgements? Has not the want of some one thing robbed us of the comfort
of all our enjoyments, and God of the praise that was due to his name? We have
been (such is our wayward Nature) more troubled for the want of some one thing,
than thankful for many mercies: Like Haman, one Mordecai not bowing to our
desires, has made us heavy and senseless under all our honors, and Gods
vouchsafements: Like Achab, we have been more dejected for want of Naboth's
Vineyard, than we have blessed God for a Kingdom.

3. Being most in the Petitionary part of Prayer.
Are not we oftener, longest and heartiest in the Petitionary part of Prayer? We
are still craving the supply of wants; but seldom, very seldom, too too
seldom blessing of God for what we are stored with: Our Petitions are long,
but Praises are short; To whom be praise, honor and glory, serves for a
sufficient Doxolgy: Yea, how earnest, how fervent, how importunate are we in
the Petitionary part; but how dull and heartless are we in the Gratulatory part
of Prayer?

4. Setting up their rest in Gladness.
Do not we set up our rest in being glad of Mercies and Deliverances? Whereas
it is one thing to be glad of a Mercy or Deliverance, but another thing to be
thankful for it. Then are they glad: I but that will not serve the turn; Psalm.
107.30, 31.
it is a return of an higher nature, which God looks for: O that men would
praise the Lord for his goodness!

5. Forgeting Mercies. Isa. 17.10.
Are not we unmindful of the gracious dealings of God with us? Have not we
forgotten the God of our Salvations, and been unmindful of the Rock of our
strength? He is an unthankful man (says Sekeca) that denies a Benefit
received, so is he that dissembles it, together with him that requites it not:
but of all the rest, he is most unthankful, that has forgitten it.

6. Not making Catalogues of Mercies. Psalm. 78.5. Deuteronomy. 4.9.6.7.31.19.
Have not we neglected to make Catalogues of the Mercies we have received, to
help our memories? How can we, that have not, and will not submit to this
Divine Ordinance, look upon our selves as some of Gods Israel! This God has
ordained for a Law, and a Statute for Israel: What was this Ordinance? That
they should write it (what God had done for them) and so provide, that the
Generations to come might know what God had done. But alas! how little care
have we, that whatsoever God does, may be for ever to his glory? Eccles. 3.14.
How injust are we unto our Children, and the Generations to come, in depriving
them of a faithful Record of Gods Mercies to us, in which God speaks to them,
as well as unto us? What God spoke to Jacob at Bethel, he spoke to Israel, that
lived in Hosea's time, Hos. 12.3.
above a thousand years after it: There he spoke with us. How injurious to
them? By such a faithful Record, they might read the right way in sailing
Heavenward; by our Falls, they might know where lie the Rocks and Quicksands;
and by our Deliverances, where Outgates are to be found. Not speaking of Gods
Mercies unto others. Psalm. 66.16.


7. Have not we been too silent concerning the Goodness of God toward us? How
seldom do we with David say, Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will
declare what he has done for my Soul. How unlike Saints are we? Thy Saints
shall bless thee, they shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, Psalm. 145.10,
11, 12. Isa. 63.7
and talk of thy power, to make known to the sons of men thy mighty acts. I
will mention the loving Kindnesses of the Lord, and the Praises of the Lord,
according to all that he has bestowed on me, etc. So sings Zion.

8. Not stirring up others to join with them in praising God.
Have not we neglected to call on others to join with us in the blessing of
God? When did we make a Collection of Praises from our Friends, that would
gladly have been in the Quire? A thankful heart is filled with enlarged
desires, that others, that all, would join in the work of Praising God. A
gracious heart does not think it enough to praise God alone; though it would be
praising God, were there none in Heaven or Earth to bear it company.

But I shall speak more particularly, Their Unthankfulness.
and instance in some of those choice personal Mercies (to wave national ones)
for which the best of us are too too unthankful.

How have we forgot the hole, For Conversion.
and deep pit, and miry clay, out of which we were dug? Have not we been
unmindful of the blessed Jubilee, when the Prisoners were let out of the
Prisonhouse? Paul remembers many Circumstances of his Conversion, the Place
wherein, Acts 22.6, 7.
in a journey nigh to Damascus; the Time when, about Noon; the Manner how,
suddenly there did shine from Heaven a great Light round about me, and I fell
to the ground, and heard a voice, etc. He remembered also what he was before
Conversion: 1 Timothy 1.13.
I was a Persecutour, a Blasphemer, and injurious. What says God? Remember
this day: What day? The day wherein you were delivered from the house of
bondage under Sin, the World, and Satan, O! how have we forgotten, that the
Lord, by a strong and irresistible work of his blessed Spirit: translated us
out of the Kingdom of Satan, into the Kingdom of his dear Son? It was he that
made Jordan to give back, and delivered us from Egypt, and the Wilderness, that
we might inherit the good Land. O! what Enemies were we, studying to be damned,
galloping to Hell, till God met us?

How seldom do we look back to the Spring from whence all our Mercy flows?
For Election.
How unthankful have we been for that Original-fountain-Mercy, eternal
Election? Why should God single us out a People for himself? Why did Grace
blossom from Eternity? Why did God plot and study my happiness before I had a
being? What was there, that Jacob is smiled upon, and Esau not so? God might
have had his Revenues of Glory out of my ruin. O that he should glorify the
riches of his mercy in my Salvation! And yet how little is God magnified for
this?

How little do we bless God for Christ? For Christ.
Though he be the Stream that alone refreshes the City of God, yet how seldom
is his Love, his stoops and condescentions for us, his bleeding and dying for
us, remembered by us, with hearty Praises and Thanksgivings? For the Covenant of
Grace, and the Spirit.


How little do we bless God for the Covenant of Grace, which Mr. Allen
excellently calls, The Bow in the Cloud, after a Deluge of Sin and Misery, the
forfeited Lease of Eternity renewed, the Magna Charta of the City of God, the
Hopes of Sinners, and the Riches of Saints? And in particular, for the Promise
of the Spirit, in all his Offices and Operations, for the application of the
purchased Possession? Ezekiel. 36.27. For outward Salvations.
I will put my Spirit within you.

How little do we remember to bless the Lord for outward Salvations? You begin
perhaps with a little, as Jacob, and now behold you have two bands, a troop of
Children, Friends, etc. and an Estate to maintain them. When others have had
one Mess, you have had Benjamin's Portion, the silver cup put into the sacks
mouth; Riches, and God too; Estate, and Christ too; Peace, and the God of Peace
too; the World, and a good Title to it: and yet do not you seldom cry out,
Bless the Lord, O my Soul! and let all that is within thee praise his holy
Name? How seldom do you consider who has maintained you all this while? Who
has delivered you, and pulled you as brands out of the sire? You have had the
Sentence of Death in your selves; you have been, with David and Paul, in the
mouth of the Lion, and yet saved; near to perish by the Bullet, Sword,
Pestilence, Fever, and other dangers, and yet your Lives given you for a prey:
But how soon have you forgotten the wonders shown unto the dead? O the many
preventing Mercies that you have been made partakers of! Has not God secured
you in many travails? How many have died much younger than you, whilst the Lord
lengtheneth out your days in order to Repentance? How many have died in an
instant, and been snatched away, without any warning given of Death's approach;
whilst you have had many an Harbinger, to give you to understand its nearness
to you? How many have been crushed by falls from houses, and c^^oured by
beasts, and by other accidents have been hastened to their long home; whilst
God is long-suffering to you? How many have you seen drawn on Sleds, led to
shameful and violent Deaths, whilst you have been kept from such dismal ends?
And are there no thanks due to the Name of God? And yet how seldom do you
admire at distinguishing Providence, and preventing loving kindnesses? You have
a guard of Angels to attend you day and night, to secure you from danger; but
how little do you bless the Lord for the Heavenly Host? And yet, if you do
thank God for some signal outward Mercies, perhaps for ease from the Stone,
Gout, Cholick; perhaps for security from the rage of the devouring Pestilence:
if you thank not God more for deliverance from Hell, from the guilt and power
of Sin, than for outward Salvations, you discredit God, and his choicest
Mercies, by under-rating Spirituals to Temporals.

We should have blessed God for his Rod, For sufferings for Christ
as well as for his Staff, for both are Mercies; but how unthankful are we
even for sufferings for righteousness sake? God expects, that in every thing we
give thanks; as we should not be partial in our Obedience, so neither in our
Thanksgiving. How little have we imitated the ancient Christians, whose mouths
were always full of Thanks be unto God? They saluted one another with Deo
gratias; and when they heard tidings of Persecution or Protection, of Crosses
or Comforts, still they cried out, God be thanked. How unlike are we to famous
Bradford? If (said he) the Queen will release me, I will thank her; if she will
keep me in Prison, I will thank her; if she will burn me, I will thank her.
Thou should say from thy very heart, Though sick, though scorned, though
threatened, though all the day long counted as a sheep for the slaughter; yet
blessed be God that I am counted worthy to suffer for his Name: Blessed be God,
that he counts me for a Son, and chasteneth me for my profit, that I may be
made partaker of his holiness: Blessed be God, that I am chastened, that I may
not be condemned. But how few give thanks always in all things unto God? Ephesians.
5.20. Isa. 24.15. 1 Pet. 4.16.13.
We have been too backward to glorify God in Zion, much more in the Fires. The
Apostle Peter would not have any man, suffering as a Christian, to be ashamed;
but to glorify God on this behalf, and to rejoice, in as much as he is
partaker of Christ's sufferings. But God knows how far from Praises we have
been, when the Storms have been high, and threatened our Tabernacles.

How has God charged us to remember Mercy, Confiderations against
Unthankfulness.
and to praise him for it? Ye that fear the Lord, praise him: Praise him, O ye
Servants of the Lord! Praise thy God, O Zion! Psalm.
22.23.135.1.147.12.148.1.150.1, 2.
Praise him in the heights: Praise God in his Sanctuary: Praise him for his
mighty acts: Praise him according to his excellent greatness. Does not the
innumerableness of Gods requiries of Praise and Thanksgiving, aggravate our
neglect of this Duty? What Provision has Christ made against this Sin? Has
not he appointed the Sacrament of his Supper, on purpose to help us to Remember
him, and his saving benefits? Do this in Remembrance of me. But have not many
Professors been so resolved to be unthankful, that they have neglected this
great Ordinance, which was appointed to strengthen their Remembrance of past
Mercies? Has not God told us, that he has formed us for his praise? And what,
yet backward thereunto? We can never love God to an height, whilst we forget
his loving Kindnesses. I wonder not, that many complain of their decays of
Love to God, whilst they forget his wonders of Grace and Love to their Souls.
Even Publicans will love those of whom they are beloved. And did we oftener
recount the Mercies of God, they would work endearments betwixt God and our
Souls: Did we consider, what a wonder it is, that God should draw us out of
nothing; that he, who stoops to behold the things of Heaven, should put his
singer to our workmanship; that he should curiously work us, as Needle Work, in
the dark Vaults of Nature; and that when we were fuller of sin, than the Toad
of poison, that yet he should feed a Toad, and cloth a Cockatrice: the Fire of
Love to God would burn within our breasts. How is God provoked by this sin? God
took it ill at the hands of the Israelites, that they remembered not his hand,
Psalm. 78.42.
nor the day in which he delivered them: How much more do we grieve the Lord,
who remember not the goodness and salvations of the Lord in Canaan, yea in
Zion? Our Savior was grieved, that his Disciples remembered not the five
Loaves, Mat. 16.8, 9, 10.
and the seven Loaves, and how many Baskets they took up: Innumerable greater
favors has God showed to us, and yet we forget them. How have we forgot the
God that bridled Natures proud waves, and said, Hitherto ye shall go, and no
farther? When we were ripe for Judgment, then Mercy stepped in, and yet how slow
to give thanks? Hardly one of tea blesses God for cleansing Mercy, as they
ought. Were there not ten cleansed, but where are the nine? This makes me fear,
People have not had a deep sense of the misery and stains of Nature, for that
their Savior is no more thanked. Did not the Lord force thee, by an
over-powering work of Grace upon thy Soul at first Conversion, to be willing to
be made happy? Did not he compel thee to come into the Feast? Was it not God
that brought thee to such a Parish, to such a Minister, and to such a Text? And
did not he, by his Almighty power, enable thee to believe and apply? Was it not
he, that broke thine heart, when as hard as a nethermost Millstone, and made
it soft, malleable and pliant to his will and pleasure? And what, forget the
wonders of the Lord in the deep? This vexes the Lord to the heart. Did not he
cause the Walls of Jer^co to fall, as by the voice of Ramshornes, by weak
inconsiderable means? Did not he alienate thine heart from Lusts, that were
dearer to thee than thine eyes? Did not he present the face of Christ, as
lovely to thy Soul, who before was despised aend rejected? And has not Christ
fed thee with fresh supplies of free Grace, that have watered thy Soul every
moment, so that you have been kept through his mighty power? How many doubts
has Christ answered; and how many scruples has he, by his Holy Spirit,
satisfied thee in? And yet, O wretched heart! how unthankful have thou been?
Thou have forgot all his benefits. A man would think it were impossible, that
every unpleasing Providence should make us so forgetful of all the mighty
Works, that have been done within doors upon our Souls. How just is it with God
to plague us; for this our unkindness unto him? Isa. 17.10, 11.
Because thou have forgotten, etc. therefore the harvest shall be an he^^. In
the beginning all succeeded well, (says Vatablus upon the place) according to
our desire: In the day the Plant grew, and in the morning the Seed flourished;
but because of unthankfulness, extreme misery followed. Wonder not, that the
Showers are withheld, that the Lord causes the Sun to set on the Prophets at
Noon day, that the Manna falls not before your doors, that the hidden Mannah,
Ingrato quod donatur, deperditur. Sen.
and white Stone, are denied you, you have been unthankful, you have not taken
care for the fragments, that nothing be lost. Gods Mercies have been lost upon
you. Or Waters were become Wines, our Gleanings were better than the Worlds
Vintage: God dealt with us as Sons. But now, if he draws in his hand, and make
his Garden as a desolate Wilderness for this sin, who can say unto God, What
do thou? Must not all of us put our mouths in the dust? Did not we sit under
our own Vines? Had we not our solemn Assemblies? Did not we go in troops to
the house of the Lord? Was not Holiness in credit? Did not the mixed multitude
join with us, and desired to be numbered amongst us, because God was with us?
Did not fear come upon all the People? And had not the Churches rest? Did we
fear the shaking of the Spear? Might we not have been as holy as we pleased?
Had not we as much liberty as we desired? But O then how unthankful were we?
How troubled were we, that every Mordecai did not bow; that every one would not
be of our mind, and dance after our Pipe? God knows what a Controversy there
is with the Land, for the Unthankfulness of them that dwelt therein. O how glad
would ye be of one of the days of the Son of man; of your old Privileges, and
Spiritual Liberties? Because ye have not served God with joy and praise in
days of plenty, therefore it is but a righteous thing, that you serve in
scarcity and famine of Bread: of the Word of the Lord.

CHAP. XIII. Their neglect of Prayer, especially of secret Prayer.
6ly. NEglect of Prayer is another part of Ungodliness, Professors neglect of
Prayer.
too common even among Professors. Request and Thanksgiving are (says one)
like the double motion of the Lungs, by which they suck in, and breath out the
air again. In the Petitionary part of Prayer, we desire either the bestowing of
some good thing, or the preventing or removing of some evil from our selves, or
the inflicting of some evil on Gods implacable Enemies: And in the Gratulatory
part of Prayer, we return the praise of glory, of what we have received from
God, unto God. Though the Thanksgiving part of Prayer be most, yet the
Petitionary part of Prayer is too much neglected. It is Ungodliness to go
about any Business, or Journey, to fix our Abode, to use any Creature, Food, or
Physic; without asking Gods leave and blessing in Prayer: Yea, it is a branch
of Atheism; this Brat of irreligion is laid at the door of Atheism by the
Psalmist. Is it not a Lamentation, Psa. 14.1, 3, 4.
and should it not be for a Lamentation, that so many Professors should be
guilty of such Ungodline^^?

Are there not many, that never prayed in all their lives? Never Praying.
Professors are looked upon by the world as Praying people; but O! how is the
world mistaken in many of them? Thou have not called upon me, Isa. 41.21, 23.
O Jacob! Though Jacob was a People severed into a Church State, with an aim at
Gods praise, yet Jacob prayed not: This was grievous unto God. Do not many
Professors clearly evidence, that they are prayerless Souls, by their
disobedience to the Preceptive, their impatience under the Providential Will of
God? By their distrust of the All Sufficiency and Faithfulness of God? Zeph.
3.2.
She obeyed not the voice: she received not correction: she trusted not in the
Lord: she drew not near to her God. By their entering into so many Temptations?
Matthew. 26.41. Jer. 10.21.
Watch and Pray, lest you enter into Temptation. By their being deceived, and
laboring to deceive others in the things of God? The Pastors are become
brutish, and have not sought the Lord. By their Backslidings, Zeph. 1.6.
Considerations against this sin, Psa. 10.4. Joh. 21.15.
and Apostasies? And them that are turned back from the Lord, and those that
have not sought the Lord.

Does not this sin speak out high contempt of God? That God is not entertained,
so much as in a thought? He will not seek God: God is not in all his thoughts.
That the thoughts of God are blasphemous? What profit should we have, if we
pray unto him? Yea, Does not this sin speak out the hearts denial of God? What
says the Psalmist? Psa. 53.1, 4.
The Fool has said in his heart, there is no God: he calls not upon God. To
live without Prayer, is to be dead while alive; for it is to live without God.
Jer. 10.25.
The Families that know not God, and that call not on his Name, are the same.
What? Will ye not do so much as Pray unto God? What can you do less for God,
than by this homage, to own him for your Maker? Or less for your own Souls,
than to beg their lives of him, whose hand of Justice is lift up against them?
Their Souls (and theirs only) shall live, Psa. 69.32.
that seek the Lord. No Malefactors dye more unlamented, than those, that when
cast, will not beg for their lives.

How many also are there, Restraining Prayer.
that have cast off Prayer? How many have restrained Prayer? And that both when
they have thought they have prayed themselves out of affliction, they have had
no more to say to God, Job 15.4
till under affliction again: and when they have for some time prayed for
deliverance to no purpose. This evil is of the Lord, why should I wait any
longer? This is worse, than not to pray at all. Not to pray at all, notes only
the neglect of duty; but to cast off Prayer, a distaste of duty. But I shall be
more particular.

Though Prayer be the only Key, Neglecting E^aculatary Prayer.
to unlock the Storehouses and Treasuries of all Blessings; yet how little
has this Key been used? I shall wave public and private, and only instance in
secret Prayer, and that both sudden, and composed, and solemn. How few
Professors have made conscience of Ejaculatory Prayer? How seldom have we
darted up our Souls to Heaven, upon sudden emergent occasions, in some short
desires? As when we are hearing, Lord, set home this Word upon my heart: When
in Prayer our hearts are melting, etc. Lord, suffer not my heart any more to be
hardened from thy fear: When we are about our worldly employments, Lord, keep
my heart with thy self, etc. Are not some of us wholly unacquainted with this
kind of Praying? Not such a Dart (says one) to be found in all their Quiver.
They know not how, in the midst of their worldly businesses, and company, yea
in the midst of their solemn religious duties, in hearing, reading, conferring,
praying, etc. to send their thoughts to give God a visit, though a short one,
in a desire or two, to speak at least one or two heart-words unto him. Have not
most Professors too much contented themselves with their solemn Visits of God,
but between their solemn Duties have scarce ever conversed with God? What
account shall we be able to give of our thoughts (the firstborn of our Souls)
from morning to evening? Is not this the highest improvement of them, to send
them in embasies unto Heaven, and by them to converse with God? Do not the best
of us find strangeness apt to grow between God and our Souls, between our set
Duties? And may we not impute that strangeness to our omission of these more
^^ansient and occasional talkings with God? How many precious things, in
Christian conference, in Sermons, in our solemn joint Prayers, are lost, for
want of present li^ting up our hearts to God, for his presence therein, and
blessing thereupon? How many blessed motions or the Holy Spirit, suggested to
us in our particular Callings, are quenched, for want of these short sallyes of
our Souls to Heaven, for more grace, that these sparks may be kept alive, yea
blown into a flame? Neglect of this kind of Prayer is no small provocation: it
grieves God: there is much unkindness in it, that God should be so gracious, as
to let his door stand wide open at all times, and that he should assure us of
welcome, when ever we come to him, and yet that we should not be so kind, as to
step in to visit him, with a desire, hour after hour; and that, though we may
thus visit him, and not neglect (but rather further) any business we have in
hand, and without being uncivil to any company in which we are, He cannot but
take this udkindly.

How few Professors have made conscience of closet-Prayer? Neglecting closet
Prayer.
Though Christ takes it for granted, that his Disciples will thus pray, and
has annexed a sweet promise to the due performance of this duty, When thou
prayest, enter into thy Closet, Mat. 6.6.
and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father, which is in secret, and
thy Father, which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly: Retire thy self,
get thee a place, set thy self a time, wherein thou may vacare Deo, be at
leisure to make it thy business to pray to God, etc. Yet how is this duty
wholly omitted by some, and too too seldom performed by others? Satan prevails
with some (otherwise honest Souls) to put off this duty from time to time, by
telling them, either that they will but play the hypocrites therein; or that
the time is not convenient, by reason either of some bodily, or of some soul
distempers; or that this and the other worldly business must of necessity be
dispatched at such a time, etc. O how little do such love the Lord, that are
afraid to talk too secretly, or too often in secret with him! But alas! how
many omit closet-Prayer altogether? Some content themselves with praying with
others, either in the Church, or in the Family: How can such look upon
themselves as Saints, whatever Profession they make? What? a Saint, and yet
never desire any privacy between God and thy Soul? a Saint, and yet find no
errand to invite thee to speak with God alone? Sure thou rather seek to
approve thy self to men, than to God. Thou may for a time be the worlds
Saint, but God will at last un-case thee, and present thee before the eyes of
all the world for an Hypocrite. Mat. 6.5, 6.
The tr^e Lover delights to visit his Friend, when he may find him alone: like
that good man, who, when the set time for his closet-Prayer was come, would
break from any compony he was in, with this handsome speech, I have a Friend
that stays for me, Farewell. Others put off this duty, by pretending they pray
always, every hour they are darting up Ejaculations to Heaven. As the pretense
of every day-Sabbath (says one) comes just to no Sabbath; so the continual
Pray^^; of some carnal Professors, is not Praying a^ a^^. E^aculatory Prayer
should not hinder, but rather fit for, solemn set Praying. Fire must be kept
upon the Altar continually, but that must not hinder the Morning and Evening
Sacrifice. True Christians cannot be satisfied with a bit and away, but they
must ^^ve their set meals. Others look at Closet Prayer to be at the best but a
Free will Offering (as they term it) which they may offer, if they will, but
will not own it a duty: Surely such are little sensible of their heart-plagues,
or else they would alone, one by one, make Prayers, 1 Kings 8.38, 39. Zech.
12.10, 11.
and Supplications. Such either have (...) Spirit at all, or else but little,
very little of the Spirit, (or else they would be Praying apart. In all my
observation, ^^e raines of Christians have begun in their Close^ neglects,
either by omitting the duty totally, or by ^areless, formal, customary
management of it. The truth is says a late neat Writer) this is the first step
toward Apostasy: Back-sliders grow first out of acquaintance with God in
secret, then delight in this duty declineth by little and little, then are they
less frequent in their visits, upon which follows a casting off the duty, and
yet they may appear great sticklers and zealous in public Ordinances; but if
they recover not what they have lost in their secret Trade, they will ere long
break here also.

No surer sign of an Hypocrite, than to neglect secret Prayer, it turns thee
into a Nebuchadnezzar, into an Heathen; nay into a Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 10.21.
a Beast: They are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord. Thou
pretendest a love to God, did thou love him, thou would love to be with
him, yea lovers covet to be alone, where they may more freely impart their
mutual affections: perhaps in thy family, Religious worship of God by Prayer is
(yet) kept up, to keep up thy credit with men, that thou may not be thought
an Atheist, that thou may be trusted; an hundred things may keep thee, and
hold thee to public duties, but herein is the trial of thy uprightness, what
thou do in secret for God, and with him: when the Masters part (the two great
ones, God and World) then is the trial of thee, whose Servant thou art; but oh!
when the Master is alone, then he is mostly neglected.

When alone thou art fittest for this duty of calling upon God; when the World
is shut out, then thou have a discharge from the cumbers of the Earth: an
Heathen (Scipio) will tell the; I have never better company, than when I have
no company; for then can I freely entertain my own thoughts, and converse with
all the learned that have been in former ages. But thou art called to greater
honor, to improve thy solitude, Joh. 16.32.
to converse with God, when alone to have thy Father with thee.

Yea God, like a modest lover, communicates most of his affections, to his
people, when they are in secret: Psa. 63.6.
when David was in the night watches, then his Soul was filled with marrow and
fatness, not that he wanted Gods presence in the day; for seven times a day he
praised God, but his day-sacrifices yielded him not that marrow and sweetness,
as he tasted in the night, when he was sequestered from all company and
business. O! the hidden Mannah is the sweetest. Cant. Hos. 2.14.
The Church leans on the breast of Christ in the Wilderness, and there he
speaks to her heart. Unhappy Soul! innumerable are thy losses, by neglecting
Christ's calls, Come my Beloved, Cant. 7.12.
let us go forth into the Fields, there will I give thee my loves: That God
should so lovingly invite thee, to take a turn or two with him every day,
inorder to his opening his breast to thee, and yet be denied?

Again: When alone, and not with God, thou art liable to Satan's foulest
Temptations, to Atheism, Discontent, or Pride of heart: When the Devil finds
the house empty, he will furnish you with company enough, seven other worse
Spirits, if worse may be; you shall be employed: Fear a Rape at least, if God
be not engaged to be a little Sanctuary in thy Closet and retirements: Satan
frequents the high ways, and that Robber takes men aside into a corner, and
then pillageth them of their treasure: He thought so to have dealt with Christ,
and therefore takes him into a Mountain alone: Mat. 4.8.
When alone your dangers are greatest, therefore should your cries to Heaven be
most vehement.

How few Professors have observed the fittest time for secret Prayer? Not
early enough in the Closet. Mark 13.33.
God would have us, in this sense, Watch unto Prayer: God would have us early
to tell the world whose Servants we are, and that we dare not undertake any
business, without first engaging God with us; Mark 1.35.
that we dare not enter on Satan's territories, without Christ, our great
Champion with us: This Post should be sent to Heaven in the beginning of the
day; for no sooner in the morning, do we begin to live, and stir, but we need
fresh succors and Auxiliaries from Heaven.

True Christians count that the sweetest air they breath in, which is the fruit
of Prayer; and all things relish well with him, that (...) through this golden
Pipe of Prayer; and therefore he is up early in his Closet, that (...) may
receive all, this way, from the Lords bounty, and faithfulness: Therefore (...)
sooner does he open his eyes, but he opens his heart to God; and before he puts
on^ ragg, he must to Heaven in secret Ejaculations, at least, before he goes to
his Closet, to pour out his Soul more plentifully before God: He expects no
good day, unless i^ be begun with a good duty; and therefore my voice shale^
thou hear in the morning, Psa. 5.3.119.147.
in the morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee: David prevented the dawning
of the morning; na^ he prevented God, (i. e.) his Providence and Favors which
he expected, he loved to have them in the Channel of Prayer.

But alas! how do Professors shuffle with God, by deferring and deferring? And
hereby many mischiefs attend.

The World, that Pest of Souls and Graces, is admitted, before we have got our
Antidotes against the Infection of it: Hence deadness of heart ensues,
multitudes of worldly distractions; so that after a few hours, the Soul has no
mind at all to speak with God; but though it must to the Closet, yet there is
it pestered with wandering thoughts, discontented thoughts, worldly thoughts; so
that the time which should be spent in pure Communion with God, is taken up in
driving these Fowls from the Sacrifice.

Besides, God is an holy God, and jealous for his Name, and he esteems it a
reflection on him, to be so neglected, that he must be served last of all, and
therefore withholds his influences from the Soul, to condemn such salocy abuses
of his great Name; and then no wonder if thou be soon overcome with a world of
vain impertinent cogitations. By neglect of early going into your Closets, you
credit the World too much, as if it were more worthy of your time and strength,
than the Lord is: Whereas you should profess, that all your hours are Gods, and
therefore you dare not, Prove. 3.9.
but honor him with the first Fruits of all your increase; you will thereby
sanctify all the Harvest, all the Vintage, by presenting God with the green
Ears.

By neglect of your Mornings, you hint to other Observers, as if you were not,
First to seek God, and his Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof.

You neglect the sit season, for then the mercies of the night are
freshest, smell sweetest, which after a while, like Flowers, will lose their
scent with us: Whilst the Iron is hot, it is our wisdom to strike; His Mercies
are renewed every Morning, so should our Praises.

By entering on business without calling on God, you declare, you need not the
Lords assistances, and that you depend not on him for every thing, but can make
a snift to live without him: Whereas God feeds us from hand to mouth, and has
not left any stores with us, that we may make our addressments to him night and
day, who must water us every moment. Poor Souls, did you but see your dangers,
by reason of the three great Brigades of Enemies, the World, the Flesh, the
Devil, you would not be so foolhardy, to venture abroad, until you have
beseeched God, to help poor, needy, indigent Creatures: Remember, You want as
soon as you wake, and those things you want, as none but a God can supply you:
You need Divine Power to follow your Callings.

By neglecting this season, the Devil, and the World, have often made you
forget, or omit the Duty for the day: You have no leisure in the Morning, and
what then? the Devil fills thy hand with unexpected business, that the excuse
grows stronger, and more plausible: But must we serve the Slave, and neglect
the Lord of glory?

By omitting this hour, you are the unfitter for Family Worship; were the
Instrument tuned before, it would be the fitter to play in consort.

But oh! what hazards do thou run, not only by preferring other things and
business before God, but by neglecting the first hour of the day, when thou art
not sure of a second? Thou purposest such an hour to pray, but what is thy Life
save a Vapor, which may expire before that hour?

CHAP. XIV. The miscarriages of Praying Professors about Prayer.
7l. Praying Professors miscarriages,
THere is not only Ungodliness in not Praying, (Prayerless Souls worshipping
God no more than Beasts, an Ox, or an Ass, etc.) but in Praying amiss. And O!
how many ways do Professors fail in and about this Duty, both before, and in,
and after?

First, before the Dury.
How do Professors fail before their entrance upon this Duty of Prayer?

1. Neglecting Meditation, Psa. 5.1. of God,
By neglect of Meditation? Few can say, Consider my Meditation. Have not we
rushed upon this Duty, before we have meditated of the God we were approaching
to? What an holy God he is, and how unworthy we are to take his Name into our
mouths? What a consuming fire he is, and what dry stubble we are?

Have not we rushed into Gods Presence, his Holiness, Omnisciency, Heb. 4.13.
as the Horse rusheth into the battle?

Have we considered, that his eyes are piercing, as flames of fire? That all
things are naked and open (as it were dissected) before him, with whom we have
to do? We have not set God before our eyes: neither have we believed, that he
is as certainly an Observer of us, as we are with our selves. Our thoughts
would not be so low, so earthly, so distracted, did we believingly consider
into whose Presence we are coming.

Have we considered Gods Almightiness? Omnipotency,
That He can do more for us, than we can ask or think? He that comes to God
(in Prayer) should believe that God is, 1 Samuel 15.29.
that He is the Strength of Israel, that what we are to beg of God, Pardon of
Sin, Victories over our Lusts, etc. are Mercies beyond the Creatures power to
reach forth to us; but the Lords arm is not shortened, that he cannot help.

Have we meditated on Gods bounty, Gods goodness and grace,
pity, and tender compassions? As one more ready to give, than we to ask; as
one who gives liberally, and upbraids not with our often coming? We want vast
thoughts of the great goodness and mercy of God: we have base beggarly thoughts
of God, as if we should trespass too much upon him, and weary him by coming to
often to his door.

Have we mused upon the Faithfulness of God? his Faithfulness,
Who is under engagements to relieve us, to ease us, to be found of us, when we
seek him with our whole hearts. 1 John 5.14.
And this is the considence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing
according to his will, he hears us.

Have we meditated of the Way, of the Way unto God. Odi Deum absolutum. Luth.
by whom we must come to God? How daring are Souls to venture on an absolute
God? How is the new and consecrated Way neglected? How is Christ laid by, as if
there were no need of a Mediator, of an Advocate with the Father? How seldom
do we pass through G^lgotha, to the heavenly Jerusalem; and see, that none can
come to the Father, but by the Son? We see not our need of Incense and Odours
to be mingled with our Sacrifices: Revel. 8.3, 4.
little do we consider, that the Opportunity of speaking with God, is the price
of blood, of the precious blood of the Son of God.

Have we meditated of our Sins, of their Sins,
of those to which we are by nature and custom mostly addicted; and of those
with which we have since the last Duty polluted our Souls? From the want of
Meditation hereof, arises formality in Duties, the heart is not humbled in
Confession, neither is the Soul importunate with the Lord for pardon and
victory.

Have we made conscience to meditate upon our Wants, what Graces we mostly
need, of their Wants,
what we are most defective in? From this neglect we pray as if we did not
pray, without zeal, earnestness and importunity: Whereas, had we viewed our
Wants of God, of his Grace, Spirit, Protection, Mercy, and Presence, we should
pray as for Life; and those straggling vain thoughts would hereby have been
suppressed. When the Malefactor is begging his Life at the Bar, his Soul is
not running adrift after every Feather, but he minds his business, it is Life,
and his Life that is endangered, and therefore he gathers up all possible
arguments, that may induce the Judge to abate of the rigor of Justice toward
him. But how often have we been on our knees, and have been ignorant of what
ailes us, so that we might truly say, we knew not what to ask? When you go to
your Markets, you consider what you and yours want: but do we so, when we go
to our Spiritual Markets?

Have not we neglected to meditate of the Mercies of God, of Mercies received.
which we have received? Hence we come either customarily before God, or not
with that holy boldness, as we should. One Mercy opens a door to another: The
Valley of Achor was given as a door of hope to Israel: Hos. 2.
Forgetting the returns of Prayer, makes our hearts ache, and knees faint. We
should book the passages of Gods grace, how he remembered us in our low
condition, how he has visited us day by day; when we have come in as the
parched ground, we have found God a dew to us, and springs of water have
appeared in the wilderness: When we have come in before God with our Shackles
on our Feet, with Irons that have entered our Souls, God has made it a Jubilee,
he has proclaimed the acceptable year, he has let us out of the Prisonhouse,
and has set our feet in a large place: When we have come in before God with
guilt on our Souls, and with fearful expectations, how has God given us the
white stone, and sent us away with his blessing; and with gladness of heart?
The neglect of our Diaries of the Providence and Mercies of God; the want of
reflecting on all the Rings that God has sent us, makes us more like Slaves
than Children. Do we with David cry out, Psa. 40.5.
Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works, which thou have done, and thy
thoughts, which are to usward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee:
if I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered.

Have not we neglected to meditate on the great and wonderful things, of the
prevalency of Prayer.
that have been done upon the Prayers of Gods People? We should have in
everlasting remembrance, what a powerful Engine Prayer is. Genesis 32.28. Exodus
32.32. Jam. 5.17, 18.
It has held the hands of the Almighty: Jacob and Moses prevailed over God: It
has been a Key to open and shut the Heavens; Elias was a man subject to like
passions as we are, and he prayed earnestly, that it might not rain, and it
rained not on the earth, by the space of three years, and six months: And he
prayed again, and the Heaven gave rain, and the Earth brought forth her fruit.
And O what wonderful things has God promised to a Praying People! Jer. 33.3.
Mat. 21.22.
Call unto me, and I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things,
which thou know not. Whatsoever ye ask in my Name, etc. Here is more than
Herod offered, that was but half the Kingdom; here is a Whatsoever. Did we
appear before God with these instances of grace, and promises, fresh in our
thoughts, we should not say, What a weariness is it? Or that there is no profit
in serving God; and gallop through our duties as we are wont.

2. Not stirring up Grace received.
Another neglect before Prayer, is, The not stirring up our Graces, before we
set upon the Duty. We too much rest on habitual preparation, whereas actual is
necessary. He that leaps immediately from the Shop to the Throne of Grace, and
labors not to quicken his dull Soul, and to leave worldly businesses behind
him, (as Abraham his Servants, when he goes to sacrifice) no wonder if he lose
the Duty, and provoke the Lord, rather than be accepted with him. The Well is
seldom so full, but that you may, nay you must, throw in a little, to fetch up
the more. It is thought, by the redoubling of David's charge, that he found not
his heart in a good frame, for the exalting of God, and therefore cries out so
vehemently, Psa. 103.1, 2.
Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name:
Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits.

2ly. When Praying.
How have we failed, when we have entered upon the Duty? And that in Invocation,
in Confession, in Petition, and in Thanksgiving?

1. In our Invocations? In Invocation,
We call God Father, and yet how unlike are we unto him: we resemble not him we
call Father: we reverence not him we call Father: we trust not to him with that
confidence we would, to receive of our Fathers of the Flesh: we fear, when we
ask Bread, he will give us a Stone: we have lower thoughts of Gods bowels, than
of our own: we think our selves more pitiful, better natured, than God himself:
If I were a Mother, and my Child in distress, I should deny him nothing.

2. In our Confession of Sin? Confession, Psa. 119 26.
We are not full, and free, and ingenious: we sit with Rachel upon some Idols:
we do not declare our ways unto him, but rather cover our transgressions as
Adam. Few can clear themselves as Job did. You will perhaps confess, Job 31.
We have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep: We have left undone,
etc. Dolus in generalibus. Psa. 32.3.
but still in generals. David was in this gravelled, When I kept silence, my
bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long. But you descend not to
particulars, or if to particulars, yet the Benjamin is reserved, loath to let
Benjamin go, loath to confess envy, pride, breach of vows, want of love to
Saints, loving the rich only, neglecting the poor. You will confess what every
man knows you are guilty of, or what every man is addicted to; but you shame
not your selves, by instancing in the particular neglects and commissions, by
which you chiefly provoke the Lord: the Agags are not brought to execution, the
best of the Cattle are kept back, one Wedge is hid in the Tent. Or if you
confess most particularly, yet it is without hatred of the sins confessed: You
confess sin, yet hugg it, bosom it, plead for it, within one quarter of an
hour: You confess sin, but without self-abhorrence: 1 Kings 8.38. Job 42.6.
you loath it not, as the Plague of your hearts. I abhor my self, says Job:
This implies a dislike, an hatred, an indignation against, an utter alienation
from, and an opposition against sin. God knows how little of this is mixed with
the Confessions of most Professors.

3. Petition, as to the Matter,
In their Petitions? Both Matter, and Manner, and End? Have not we been faulty
in the Matter, Have they been always for the best things? Life, Liberty,
Estate, etc. are desired; but Grace, Victory over Pride, Passions, Worldliness,
etc. lie unsought for. We fail also, when we pray simply that we may not
suffer; for there is no foundation in the Promise for such a Prayer, and we may
not pray, save for what God has promised.

Have not we failed in the Manner? Manner,
Have we always prayed with Earnestness, Humility, Faith, Sincerity, etc. Has
the whole man been employed? Few can say, as David, Psa. 109.4.
But I Prayer. He was all Prayer: or all of David, or in David, was herein
employed. Few can say, With my whole heart have I entreated thy favor. 119.58.
Alas! few pray effectually. The heart and soul is not at work in the Duty.
James 5.16.
It is the effectual fervent Prayer that avails. We pray as if we had a mind
God should deny us. Qui frigide rogat, docet negare. Colos. 4.2.
We are too much like Children, scribbling over a piece of Paper, which when
they have done, lay it aside, or break it, or think no more of it. We have not
continued in Prayer: we have not backed our Prayers with Prayers, reinforced
them: we have soon fainted: we have not been the right seed of Jacob, I will
not let thee go, until thou bless me: we soon faint, and our desires expire.

Have not we failed in the End? End. James 4.3.
May I not say as the Apostle James, Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask
amiss, that you may consume it upon your Lusts. Has not our level been too
low? We should have made Gods Glory our End, and we have made Self, to quiet
Conscience, to obtain pardon of sin, rather than purity of heart and life: Hos.
7.14.
They assemble for Corn and Wine. You have been perhaps earnest for the pardon
of your own and Englands sins, and yet selfish in all: You fear (and well you
may) temporal Plagues, you are afraid that Sodoms sins may bring down fire and
brimstone; and therefore, for your own sakes, rather than Gods, you pray, and
with some vehemence; but your End is still too low. Never do you pray aright,
till you pray more for Christ's sake, than for your own: for his glory, rather
than for your own present, future: temporal, or eternal advantages. It is one
thing to seek our selves, and another thing to seek God in a duty. They that
pretended so highly, begin to expostulate with God, Isa. 58.3.
Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not, and take no knowledge? Men's
Lusts Pray, rather than their Graces. Pride and self-love endite the Petitions:
You have been suckling your lusts, whilst seemingly devout: You make Provision
for the flesh, whilst about spiritual work, and whilst your inward man seems to
be exercised.

4. Thanksgiving.
In our Thanksgivings? who is free from guilt in the gratulatory part of
Prayer? Some bless God for Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, etc. and
are strangers to these Privileges, yea, if catechized know not what these
mercies are, no more than Parrots know what they prattle: Others if, like the
Leapers they are cleansed, yet return not to bless the Lord: They are large in
Petitions, but very sparing in their Praises. Unthankful Beggars are an
abomination to God and man. We should be thankful for the least mercy; but
though we have had the honor to be admitted into the Presence Chambers as
Favorites (an honor not vouchsafed to the most of mankind) yet we are sullen,
and slow to return Praises for so great a vouchsafement: You have not come to
dry breasts, you are every day full of mercy; 2 Chronicles. 32.
but alas! You render not according to what you have received, therefore wrath
is against you. Have thou had no meetings in Prayer, no enlargements, no
desires to fear the Lord, no importunities, no wrestlings? why yet it is mercy,
that thou live upon the patience and bounty of God: It Is much, that thou
should have a being, and be preserved to this day: It Is a wonder he should
feed thee, cloth thee, protect thee, strive with thee, suffer thee, who art but
dust and ashes, to speak with him: The last night thou might have lain on a
bed of fire, or by the hedge, or have been in the great deeps; but alas! few so
ready to praise, as to pray. We are too much like the Vagabonds, when we have
what we come for, away we go, and come no more till pinching necessity drives
us: Yea, we too often aggravate our miseries, and overlook the benefits we
enjoy, that are mixed with our crosses.

3ly. How have we, After the Duty.
when our Prayers have been ended, failed of our duties toward God, by running
post have from the Throne of Grace to the World, if not to our Lusts? Not
considering how our hearts were in time of duty, whether straightened, or
enlarged; Nor examining how the Duty has been done,
whether composed, or distracted; whether we had the face of God toward us, or
his face veiled; whether we were lively, or lifeless; dead-hearted, or
quickened; serious, or slight; what Faith was stirring, what Repentance
exercised? The Church and People of God observed their hardness in duty: Isa.
63.17.
Why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear? We should look back upon our
Prayers, that we may be humbled for all our vain thoughts, untowardness,
distractions, and unbelief in the duty: and we should do it, then, whilst we
are in the highest capacity to know the miscarriages of the Soul, what the
aggravating circumstances thereof are, etc. And not only in order to
Humiliation, but Reformation, that for the future we may not dare to touch the
Mount of Gods Presence with such beastly frames.

In case we were in a good frame in the Duty, quickly losing what was got in
the Duty,
Did we labor to retain the influences of the Ordinance upon our hearts? Did
not we let the fire go out again? Have not we, like some in a great sweat,
gone into the open air too soon, and took a cold? That Is dangerous. David was
more careful to maintain his fresh and lively frames, and therefore he
entreats the Lord to keep the same in his Servants heart for ever.

How have we been faulty, not looking for an answer, Psa. 5.3.85.8.
in not believing that our Prayers shall be answered We direct our Prayer unto
God, but we do not look up, till God look down, as David. We do not hearken
what God the Lord will speak. Paul observed how long the Lord was silent to his
Prayer, 2 Cor. 12.8. Hab. 2.1.
For this I besought the Lord thrice, and yet no answer. O! when shall we
resolve with Habbakkus, to stand upon our watch, and look and see what he will
say to us? The neglect of this has bred so many Formalists in our
Congregations. After we have put our Prayers into Gods hands, we never mind
them more. We would be angry with Beggars, if they begged an alms, and away
presently, as careless of answers.

The sincerity of thy heart would be more evidenced, Not blessing God for
answers.
if thou did consider what returns thou have that thou may bless God for
them, and improve them for God, and in case of denials, 1 Samuel 1.15.
to be of a troubled Spirit as Hannah was, for that her Prayer for a Child was
so long denied.

What mournings have thou for that thy Pride, Not mourning for denials.
Worldliness, Unbelief, hardness of Heart, etc. are not yet pardoned and
subdued. Poor creature, thou continuest in the road of Duty, but observest not
whether God hears thee, or not, Saul went beyond thee: 1 Samuel 28.6.
He observed, and was troubled, that God answered him not by Urim, nor yet by
Prophets. Have not we by carelessness, by returning to our vomits and mires,
intercepted our own Prayers.

Have not we torn our own Petitions, Tearing their own Petitions. Isa. 59.1, 2.
and snatched them out of Gods hands? Behold the Lords hand is not shortened
that it cannot save, neither is his ear heavy that it cannot hear; but your
iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his
face from you, that he will not hear?

How seldom have we took Bernards advice in his gloss upon, Not joining
endeavors. Oremus and Laboremus. Jo. 8.21. Ezekiel. 39.23.
Let us lift up our hearts with our hands, that is (says he) let us pray and
endeavor. We love to employ God to subdue our sins, etc. But we sit idle, we
hate taking pains; we are not co-workers with God. I may say unto you, as
Christ, I go away, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins. The
Heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity for their
iniquity: because they trespassed against me, therefore hid I my face from
them. Then shall they cry unto the Lord, Mic. 3.4.
but he will not hear them, he will even hide his face from them, at that time,
as they have behaved themselves ill in their doings. Prayer is a Key to open
Heaven to Believers; but it may be so managed, as to open Hell to thee.

CHAP. XV. Their slighting the written Word of God, especially in not reading,
and meditating on it, as they ought.
8ly. Professors despifing Gods written Word.
SLighting of the written word of God is another piece of ungodliness, which
English Professors have been very guilty of. There is not a surer sign of
despising any person, than the setting light by what he says unto us; for
according to the honor we give unto the Speaker, the words spoken will be of
weight with us. But alas! how has the Bible, Gods written word, been
undervalued by us?

How little have we credited Gods written word? Evidenced in their not
crediting it.
And yet it is natural for us to believe whatsoever is said by one, of whose
truth we are confident. Have not Scripture-affirmations been doubted of by us?
How little has our knowledge of them been attended with building a Christian
life upon them as a foundation? Have we believed that Scripture commands come
from God, and are most just and fit for him to lay upon us? Has this belief
brought forth obedience? Have we believed that Scripture-threats are
Gods-threats, and will therefore be performed to every impenitent Sinner? And
has this belief kept us from sin, or promoted repentance? Have Scripture
promises been believed to be Gods-promises, and that therefore all the absolute
ones shall certainly be performed to the Elect, and all the conditional ones,
to those that perform the conditions? And has this belief stirred us up, and
helped us to perform the conditions?

God has magnified his Word above ell his Name; but so have not we. Psalm.
138.2. Not honoring it above Gods other Names.
We are apt to be afraid at the appearances of the great God in his
extraordinary works in the World; but who trembles at the appearances of God
in the Scriptures? And yet God appears more in the glory of his Majesty
therein, than in all his other works, whether of Creation, or of common
Providence. Mat. 5.8.
God makes more account of his written Word than of Heaven and Earth: he had
rather lose Heaven and Earth than one jota or tittle of his Word. Accounted it
a small matter to swerve from it.


But have not we accounted it no great matter to swerve a little from the
written Word of God? Yea have not we made a light matter of leaving undone what
is therein required, and of doing what is therein forbidden? Were the
Scriptures high in our esteems, did we look upon Gods testimonies as wonderful
things, our very Souls would be in keeping them? Psalm. 119.129
Thy testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my Soul keep them.

Have not we accounted them fools that have preferred the Word before
whatsoever has been near and dear unto them in this World? Accounting tender
Consciences more nice than wise. Rev. 6.9.
Have not we accounted them more nice than wise, who have been slain for the
Word, who have lost Name, Liberty, Livelihood, Friends, Relations, yea Life it
self, and endured all Torments and Tortures, rather than they would offend the
written Word of God in any one thing, either by omission, or commission?

God has written to us the great things of his Law (or word) but have they not
been accounted a strange thing, Accounting it a strange thing. Hos. 8.12.
a thing that we should have got little good, if we had obeyed them, and little
hurt by disobeying them? Have not we used the Word as a stranger, only for our
own ends, to serve our own turns, as we have had advantage thereby?

Have not we made the Word a stalking horse for our own carnal designs? Making
the Word a stalkinghorse.
Have not we pretended very great Zeal for the Word, when all the while we have
been Zealous for self, either our own opinions and persuasions, or our own
honor and greatness, or our own livelihood? Have not we, like boat-men, looked
one way, and rowed another, cried, the Word of the Lord, but meant the other
thing? Have not even Scripture Doctrines eb'd and flowed upon politic
considerations?

How seldom have we discoursed with others Seripturally? Not talking of it.
Deuteronomy. 6.7.
The Scholar is upon every occasion discoursing of those Notions, which he
prizeth; but has not our speech bewrayed our low esteems of the Word?

Have not we been willingly and contentedly ignorant of Scripture-discoveries?
Willingly ignorant of it. Job. 21.14.
So is not the Scholar of those Notions which he affects and valueth. Haven ot
our hearts cried out many times unto the Bible, depart from us for we desire
not the knowledge of Gods ways, either as to worship, or manners, and that
because knowledge is an obligation, yea a provocation to duty, and a sting in
case duty be neglected?

What things we prize we search into; Not searching the Scriptures. Jo. 5.39.
But how little have we searched the Scriptures, as diggers in Mines do search
for gold and silver in the Earth, as the Word signifies? And this leads me to
those two main Evidences of our slighting the written Word of God, our not
reading, and not meditating upon it, Not reading them. Dent. 31.11. Matthew.
12.3.5.21.16. Luke 10.26. Deuteronomy. 17.19.
as we ought, which I shall a little enlarge upon.

How have we been guilty of not reading the Scriptures as we ought? That every
one ought to read them, is so evident, that there is no way for the Papists to
keep men from believing this truth, but by keeping of them from reading the
Scripture. No business can discharge any from this duty, and yet how is this
evident duty neglected? Some have not been so far wrought upon, as from sense
of their own ignorance and blindness in the things that concern their
Everlasting welfare, and from conviction, that they can know such things only
by the help of the written Word of God, to take up firm resolutions to
undertake the study of the Scripture?

Others notwithstanding their resolutions never set upon the reading of the
Bible over. At all.
They have seen no excellency in this book: they have seen more in a piece of
Philosophy, in a rational discourse of Divinity, in an ingenious History, in a
politic discourse, yea in a Romance, or in a Play, Polititian-like, who
preferred an Ode in Pindar before all David's Psalms.

How many read the Bible too seldom, Often enough.
thinking it too much to read it daily, to spend one hour therein every day?
Have not some spent several hours in a day, in reading some good books of men's
inditing, but not a quarter of an hour in reading Gods-book? I even hate mine
own works (said Luther) and often times wish they were burnt; because I fear lest
they should withdraw men from reading the Scriptures.

How much greater is the Number of those, Aright, not reverently. 2 Samuel 7.18.
that have not read the Bible aright? Are not all of us in this number; When
have we prepared for the reading of the Scriptures, as becomes those that are
going in unto God (so going into the Sanctuary, where the Word of God was kept,
is termed.)

Have not we read fearlesly? Tremblingly.
When we were going to take the Bible into our hands, have we trembled at the
Word? Isa. 66.2
lest we should not sanctify the Name of God, yea, lest we should take the
Name of God in vain in our reading?

Have not we read heedlesly? Attentively.
Not diligently marking the Duties commanded, the Sins forbidden, the Rewards
promised, and the Punishments threatened therein? Have not our thoughts been
wandering and gadding, and not fixed upon what we read? When did we attend to
Scripture words, as heedfully, 1 Kings 20.33.
as Benhadad's Messengers did to the words of Ahab?

Have not we read unbelievingly? Believingly Deuteronomy. 29.9. Romans 15.4. Josh. 1.5.
compared with Hebr. 13.5. Conscieneiously. For right Ends,
Not believing that the Scripture is the Word of God; that whatever we read
therein is true and good; that the Spirit of God, the Inditer of every word in
this Book, did particularly intend our good in every Verse; that in the
Scripture Life and Death is set before us; yea, that Scripture words are our
Life?

Have not we read out of custom, and not conscienciously, in obedience to the
command of God?

Have not we read for wrong ends? Either to satisfy our curiosity, and not to
regulate our hearts and lives: or to have matter of discourse, but not matter
of practice; to have Scripture at our tongues end, not at our hearts: or only
to know, being ashamed to be ignorant of those things, which all Christians
know; and to be able to say nothing of such matters, which we cannot but have
occasion diverse times in company to talk of, but not to do? When did we read
the Scriptures with this particular intention, that they might be a Lamp unto
our feet, Psa. 119.105.
and a Light unto our paths? That we might thereby be helped to order our
conversation aright? When did we read the Bible with the same attention,
reverence, Quid est Scriptura Sacra nisi quaedam Epistola Omnipotentis Dei ad
Creaturam suam. Greg. Hos. 8.12.
and resolution, to follow every rule therein; as we think we would (if we had
lived when Christ was upon Earth) received a Letter from him, directing us what
to believe and do, that we might be saved? Or as we think we should a Book writ
immediately by the singer of God, as he wrote the Ten Commandments in two
Tables? Why, the Bible is Gods Letter to every one of us in particular, written
by himself, though mediately: I have written to him the great things of my Law:
To him, it is in the singular number, because to every man and woman
particularly. When did we read the Bible, as Children read the last Will and
Testament of their deceased Parent?

Have not we read the Scripture, With Prayer.
without begging of God his Spirit, to help us to understand what we read, and
to practice what we understand; at least, not so importunately, as we would, if
we had been begging for our Lives, at the Bar of a Judge? Have not we sown
this seed among thorns, in unplowed hearts, Jer. 4.3.
and have not so much as prayed to God, to take away the heart of stone, and to
give an heart of flesh, a teachable, pliable, tractable spirit, ready to
receive every Divine impression? O! when shall we make conscience of reading
the Scriptures daily as we ought? The Emperor of Heaven (says Gregory the
great) the Lord of Angels and Men has sent to you, that which concerns your
life, and will you (still) neglect to read it with a fervent and zealous Spirit?

How guilty have we been in not meditating in the Word of God as we ought? How
little, Not meditating.
if at all, have we dwelt in our serious thoughts upon the matters contained in
the written Word of God, to the end we might understand how much they do
concern us, and that our hearts may thereby be raised to some holy affections
and resolutions? Though meditation be commanded as a chief means sanctified by
God for the keeping of his Word; Josh. 1.8. Psa. 1.2.
though we cannot be holy and happy without it altogether; though it be one of
the Profitablest duties of a Christian: the Reader and Studier of Scripture may
see the beauty, and smell the sweetness of the flowers that grow in this Divine
Garden; but it is the Meditater, the Christian-Bee, that gathers the honey out
of them; though it be the duty by which the Soul digesteth truths, and draws
forth their strength for its nourishment and refreshment; yea the duty by which
all other duties are improved; yet how much is this duty neglected by all sorts
of Professors, because though it be the delightfullest task to the Spirit, yet
it is the most tedious to the Flesh, that ever men on earth were employed in.

Have not many been long Professors, At all.
and yet if they would tell all the truth, they will confess they never spent
one hour together in mediating on the most weighty Scripture-truths, on God, on
Man's Estate by Creation, Degeneration, Regeneration, Glorification, on Christ,
on the Vanity of the Creature, on the Beauty of Holiness, on Death, on
Judgment, on Heaven, and Hell. Meditation (says Mr. Baxter in his Saints
rest) is confessed to be a duty by all, but by constant neglect denied by most:
and (I know not by what fatal customary security it comes to pass, that) men,
that are very tender Conscienced toward most other duties, yet do as easily
overslip this, as if they knew it not to be a duty at all: they, that are
presently troubled in mind, if they omit a Sermon, a Fast, a Prayer in public,
or private, yet were never troubled that they have omitted Meditation, (perhaps
all their life time unto this very day.)

How few have managed this duty aright? Aright.
Has not that which we call Meditation been Study only? Has not some
controversial point, or some nice speculation been the matter of our
Meditation? Hereby we evidence that we have not so great spiritual hunger after
Righteousness, as we should: Hungry men (says one) do not use to stand and
pick bones, when they have meat enough to eat. Has not our end in meditating
been only the increasing of our knowledge, and not the improving of our
knowledge? Have not we begun this work without God? When we were going about to
Meditate, have not we neglected Prayer for help from Heaven to go through with
the work, though without God we can neither know, resolve upon, nor perform
what is good; for from him, yea from his own good pleasure comes both the will
and the deed? Have not we idled away our meditating seasons? If we have
sequestered our selves from worldly businesses, and company, for meditation at
any time, have not we idled away that time, by suffering our thoughts to gad
and wander up and down to no purpose, to be sure not to fetch in considerations
for the stamping holy impressions upon our hearts and lives? Have not we in
meditating been without a due sense of Gods presence? May not we cry out, Genesis
28.16.
surely the Lord was in such and such a place where I have been meditating, and
I knew it not, i. e. I considered it not. Has not the work of our
understandings in this business been to retain, and not to convey truth into
the heart? Have our understandings represented what should work holy affections
and resolutions aright? Have they presented things good, of a Divine and
Heavenly nature as God, Christ, Heaven, etc. in their prime and beauty? Have
they presented things in their nature simply evil, as Sin, Gods wrath, Hell, at
their worst? Have not we left off meditating before we attained the end of
Meditation? before holy affections and resolutions are wrought? Have not we
rushed out of this duty as well as rushed into it? Have not we gone from this
work, as a bird out of the snare, with joy and speed? Have not we ended as well
as begun this work without God? not praying to God for strength to perform,
what we have been enabled by grace to resolve upon for God; and for pardon of
what has been amiss in the duty? O! when will English Professors be prevailed
with to make conscience of this duty of duties? I once more entreat thee (to
use Mr. Baxters words) as thou art a man that makes conscience of a revealed
duty, and that dare not wilfully resist the Spirit, as thou valuest the high
delights of a Saint, and the Soul-ravishing exercise of Heavenly Contemplation,
and as thou art faithful to the peace and prosperity of thine own Soul, that
thou speedily and diligently set upon this great duty.

O! Considerations against flighting Gods written Word.
what a mighty blessing is it to have such a book, wherein are written by God
himself the great counsels of his will concerning man's Eternal Salvation? What
a sin is it then to have low, mean, yea vile and base thoughts of it? Is not
our slighting of the Word of the Lord the cause of all the wickedness in our
hearts and lives? Whence are all our omissions and commissions, but because we
make a light matter of sinning against the Scriptures? Certainly this great
provocation has a great hand in our miseries, and threatens utter ruin to
us. Prove. 13.13. Isa. 5.24.
Who so despises the Word shall be destroyed: Therefore as the fire devoureth
the stubble, and the flame consumes the chaff; so their root shall be
rottenness, and their blosome shall go up as dust; because they have cast away
the Law of the Lord of Hosts, and despised the Word of the Holy one of Israel.

CHAP. XVI. Their miscarriages about the Promises.
9ly. Professors miscarriages about the Promises.
MUch Ungodliness is also evidenced in Professors miscarriages about the
Promises of the Ward; the promises being the great promoters of godliness in
the world, not only as arguments to induce it, by showing how God will reward
it; but likewise as principles of godliness, or the chief instrument, whereby
God makes Souls partakers of the Divine nature.

1. Not believing their truth.
How little do we believe the truth of the Promises? How little do we believe
that the Spirit of God and glory rests on them, that suffer for Christ, and his
Gospel? and that as tribulations do abound for Christ, so shall consolations by
him? or that we shall have an hundred fold advantage by any loss we sustain for
Christ and his concernments? All that fear of man, all that cowardice, all
those tremblings of heart, that are upon Professors this day; all that enmity
against the Cross of Christ, which appears on the faces, and hearts of men, are
clear demonstrations how little the promises for the bearing up under
suffering, for the deliverance out of suffering, or rewarding of suffering for
Christ are believed: We cannot set the Promises against all Crosses.

2. Not prizing them enough.
How low are our esteems of the Promises of God, of the great and faithful God,
in comparison of what they are concerning the Promises of honest and sufficient
men? I appeal to thee, if a King should promise thee a thousand pound per
annum, whether it would not more rejoice thine heart, than the Promises of
eternal Life, which God has made unto thee, do? With how few Professors are
the Promises of God exceeding great and precious? 2 Pet. 1.4. Not admiring Gods
condescension therein.


3. How little do we admire at Gods stopping so low, as to oblige himself by
promise to such varlets as we? God might have dealt with us by way of absolute
Sovereignty and Dominion, imposing only upon us commands to do our duty,
without adjoining any promise of a reward, he being our Creator, and we his
Creatures: It is his great condescension, to deal with us by way of Promise,
which is not only an insinuation and signification of what he will do, but a
laying a bond or obligation upon himself to do so and so. Herein God did more
condescend unto Man, than unto the fallen Angels: they have not any one, not
the least Promise of any good, made by God unto them. And yet how little are we
in admiration? Not blessing God for them. 1 Jo. 2.25.


4. How little do we bless the Lord for those Jewels, that are wrapped up in the
Promises; for the Fruit, that hangs on this Tree of Life? This is the Promise,
that he has promised us, even eternal Life. A Crown is promised: Jam. 1.12.
He shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that
love him. A Kingdom is promised: Hearken, Jam. 2.5.
my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in
Faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him?
Yet how unthankful? This doubtless proceeds from our diffidence of the reality
and faithfulness of the Promiser, and therefore that shall be another Question.

5. How little do we rely upon God, Not relying on the Promiser.
to make good his Promises? How many think God the Promiser as changeable as
themselves? Men in Boats, being in constant motion upon the Waters, are apt to
fancy, that the Land and Trees move, as they themselves do: So many Christians
think, as often as they fail in point of strict duty, God will fail too. Who
lays all the stress upon the faithfulness of him that has promised? Do not we
lean partly to the Promises, and partly to our own endeavors, and the means we
use, and so divide our dependencies betwixt the Promises of God, and our own
Duties, to bring in pardons, peace, holiness, or any outward comforts?

6. Do not we eye Promises, Not eyeing Christ in them.
without eyeing Christ? Do not we dote on the Bracclets, but neglect the
Friend? Do not some set a greater value on the Promise, than on Christ's
Person: Though the Promises are only the Crystal Streams of that River of
Life, Rev. 22.1.
which proceeds out of the Throne of God, and the Lamb; yet do not we make
them the Primary, and not the Secondary Object of Faith? Who look upon Promises
only as Instruments, to bring Christ and the Soul together?

7. Not hoping for the good of them.
How little do we hope for the good laid up in the Promises? What fearful
expectations have many Prosessours, though they walk close with God, though
they abstain from that which is evil, though they fulifill after God to the
utmost of their power, though they design which way to walk in all
well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good word and work; yet how cast down,
how discouraged are they? how do they pine away, and their hearts dye within
them? how are they as Reeds shaken, as Ships driven, and cannot cast anchor
within the Vail? Moses himself was shaken, when a deliverance of Gods own
promising met with opposition: And Moses said, Lord, wherefore have thou so
evil entreated this people? Exodus 5.22, 23.
why is it that thou have sent me; For since I came to Pharaoh, to speak in thy
Name, he has done evil to this people, neither have thou delivered thy people
at all. It is Gods wonted course, to bring signal mercies under a sentence of
death, before we enjoy them: and yet how prevailing is unbelief, when God
deferrs, and the Promise is obstructed? How faint are we? Our hope is not
lively.

8. Noc waiting for the good of them. Heb. 10.36.
How little do we wait, till that good, which is in the Promises, be given out
to us? I may truly say to many, yea to most, Ye have need of Patience, that
after ye have done the will of God, ye may receive the Promise. Sure, The
Vision is for an appointed time, Hab. 2.3.
and God would have us to wait, though it tarry; because it will not tarry,
beyond the time appointed by the wise and saithful God: But, though God never
fail of his own time, yet he seldom comes at ours, and then we run into
unbelief, if not impatiency of spirit. How often do we Antedate the Promise, and
set it a time before Gods time? Jam. ^.4.
Patience has not its perfect work, so that if God save us out of our
miseries, we shall not be able to say as the Church, Lo, this is our God, Isa.
25.9.
we have waited for him, and he will save us: This is the Lord, we have waited
for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. This limiting the holy
One of Israel, either as to means, (when we tie up the Lord to work by ways
and causes of our own) or to days and hours of our own bold and impudent
prescription, is no small provocation. Psa. 78.40, 41.
How often did they provoke him in the Wilderness: and grieve him in the Desert?
Yea, they turned back, and tempted God, and limited the holy One of Israel.
Some will wait a month or two for the Promise of Pardon, that they may have
peace in their Consciences, and for Promises of outward; but when they see
nothing comes of their waiting, 2 Kings 6.33.
then there is no hope, why should I wait on the Lord any longer? That Wretch
waited a little, but not long enough. We allow time to the Physician to cure
us, we yield, that he knows the fittest time to apply cordialls; but we yield
not so much to God: We would have the smarting Plaster pulled off, before the
Wound be healed; whereas it is best for us, to have it kept on. David's foot
was almost slipped, when he saw the Promise of the Kingdom deferred, he makes a
bad inference from the delay, One day I shall fall by the hand of Saul. 1 Samuel
27.1.
We do not stay our selves on the Promises, till the thing promised be given
into our bosoms. David waited patiently; but so do not we: Our hearts are not
at rest, but we stagger like Drunkards, we reel this way, and that way, but are
not established and settled: In this we are not consident, that God who has
promised, cannot lie, and therefore will perform the word, that is gone forth
from an unfeigned lip: We are too hasty in our desires, whereas God knows the
fittest season for the Promise to bring forth: We shall have it, when the time
is come; but we hasten the birth, and spoil the conception. The Prophet of old
complains of some, Isa. 35.4. Isa. 28.16.
that they were of an hasty heart: whereas, He that believes, makes not have.
God deferrs, to put an edge on our desires, a value on what is promised, and to
exercise our Faith. The Word, that is gone forth out of the mouth of the God of
truth, should quiet; but it does not. Isa. 60.22. Psa. 102.13.
I the Lord will hasten it in its time. The Lord will arise, and have mercy
upon Zion, when the time to favor her, yea, when the set time is come. And is
not Gods time the best?

9. Abusing Promises.
How have many abused, rather than applied Promises? How many dogs take the
Children's bread? How many Hypocrites taste of the forbidden fruit? Lay hold on
that which does not belong unto them? When they read those sweet delicious
promises of the pardon of Sin, of the love of God, of the freeness of grace, of
the glory to come, they count them as theirs, whereas they are but Usurpers,
they set their mark on another goods: they are thieves and robbers; for they
are strangers to the Promises. How many abuse the mercy of God in the Promises,
so that even the Promises become an occasion of stumbling, whilst they continue
in sin, in hopes of pardons through the Promises? We are not led by the
sweetness of the Promise to Repentance; but rather harden our hearts, presuming
of pardons on course from the God of grace: Gluttons surfeit soonest upon the
greatest dainties: thus many venture to continue to sin that grace may abound:
hence Repentance is put off; because men hope God will abundantly pardon, when
ever the wicked forsakes his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts. The
Promises are not made a Sanctuary unto which men fly from sin, but as a
Sanctuary to protect them in their sinful courses. God is merciful, slow to
wrath, he will abundantly pardon, etc. therefore etc. Do not we overlook all
the threatenings and terrible denunciations of God against our sins, and wholly
pitch on the comfortable Promises of the Gospel? Do not we eye Promises, and
yet hate Commands? Do not we mind Temporal Promises, with the neglect of
Spiritual, and therein disparage God, by setting a deeper value on Earth than
on Heaven, on our back and bellies, than on God? Do not we eye the Promises
that speak of mercy, but pass over those that lead to duty? View with pleasure
pardoning Promises, but neglect the Promises of sprinkling us with clean water,
and that Sin shall not have Dominion over us? We like it, that God will be our
God; but we love not to be Gods people, under his command, and at his dispose.
How do we eye the absolute Promises, but neglect the conditional? We take hold
of Promises of deliverance, when under any misery; but we forget the condition:
If my people shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from
their evil ways, etc. little is that minded by us, which the Prophet speaks,
At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, Jer. 18.9, 10.
and concerning a Kingdom to build and to plant it, if it do evil in my sight,
that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good wherewith I said I
would benefit them. We love, we like, Promised mercies, and every one is looked
upon as an unbelieving Thomas, that doubts of the mercy, but we overlook the
preparatory duties of Fasting, Praying, Repenting and Reforming our hearts and
ways, etc. Hence men dote almost on the Promises of grace; but secretly hate
the Promises to grace; because they find no gracious qualifications in
themselves: they love to hear of Gods readiness to pardon; but they are loath to
hear that they must come to Christ for Repentance and then for Remission; they
would fain have the penny, but they cannot endure labor. God has linked his
Promises and our seeking together. Ezekiel. 36.37.
Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this be enquired of by the house of
Israel, to do it for them: But how many of us do either altogether neglect, or
slothfully go about to perform the condition of the Promise? Are not some of us
altogether strangers to faith, the condition of the whole covenant of grace?
know not what an heart purifying faith means? We never gave our selves unto the
Lord, yet run away with the Promises of forgiveness: though ignorant of the
Mediator betwixt God and sinful creatures, though full of pride and high
concerts of our own Righteousness, though we live in an open disesteem of the
Gospel of Christ, though we cannot but find an incompliance of heart with
subjection to Christ, yet we boast Abraham is our Father, the blessing of
Abraham is come upon us, the Promises are ours. How do the Promises of God make
some slothful in the use of appointed means? How formal in duties are we? May
it not be said of us, Deest aliquid intus.
as of the Image, there is somewhat wanting within^? Are not we silly doves
without heart? Are not we only bolstred up with the Promises? O! these pillows
under our heads make us slumbring Virgins: All is well, God is merciful, etc.
but we do not sweat and get our living by labor, we strive not to enter in at
the straight gate, etc. We look for the blessed hope, but we live not soberly.
I know (says God) the thoughts that I think toward you, thoughts of peace,
Jer. 29.11, 12.
but not of an evil, to give you an expected end; but be sure, that ye call
upon me, and go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you.

10. Nicely applying them.
How nice and curious are some in applying of Promises? They forsooth take no
pleasure in any Promises, but such as they think no hand touched before their
own: They neglect the plain, clear, open, rich Promises of the Gospel; and if
any be more abstruse, and hard to be found out, by an ordinary eye, they are
greedily sucked in: They are only or mainly for mystical Promises. Such think
they are delighted with the goodness of the Promise, whereas they are only
pleased with the newness of it, or with their own invention, and that they can
see farther into a Millstone than another. I have known some of these, and I
have seen what is become of them: their pride and affectation has led them
also from the plain paths of holiness.

11. How many will not close with a Promise (such is their folly) till the
thing promised be found within them? Not applying them, till they have what
they should apply them for.
Because their hearts are so corrupt, therefore they will not apply the
Promises of subduing iniquity, and of purifying the heart: whereas there is no
way to get their corrupt hearts cleansed, but by laying hold on such Promises;
and the longer they keep off the Promise, the worse it will be with them: There
is no other way, but by this Ark, to escape drowning; and the longer they
wander in this Wilderness, the more hard it will be at last to enter into
Canaan: the longer they keep off from the promise, the more corrupt will their
hearts grow, and the more corrupt they grow, the work of the
heart-purifying-faith will be the more difficult.

12. Eyeing Providence more than Promises.
How many of us eye Providence more than Promises? and make the Providence,
rather than the Promises of God, the Ground of their Faith? One says well, The
Starlight of one single Promise, is of more use to Christians, than a
Constellation of many Providence, both to assure them in their ways, and to
support them under any difficulties.

13. Do not we pretend to eye the Promises, using indirect means for getting
what is promised.
and yet use indirect means to bring our devices to pass? We have pretended to
live the Life of Faith; but God knows what shifts men have had, and wicked (at
least questionable) courses men have taken; how much evil has been done, that
good may come. Have not we, to help Gods Promises to bring forth, turned out of
Gods way, resisted Dignities, offered Violence to known Laws, wronged
Conscience, forgot all Obligations upon us, Not looking that they attain their
ends in our Souls. 2 Pet. 1.4. 1 Jo. 3.3.
regarded nothing that stood in our way of compassing our designs?

14. How little do we exmaine the Fruits of Gods Promises in our own Souls? The
exceeding great and precious Promises are given, that we might be partakers of
the Divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through
lust: that we might purify our selves, even as God is pure: But do we look for
these ends to be attained by the Promises in our Souls? Do we look not only for
a Change from Looseness to Civility, but a through Sanctification in Body,
Mind, and Spirit? 2 Cor. 7.1.
Alas! which of us can say, Having these Promises, we do cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and are perfecting holiness in the
fear of God.

CHAP. XVII. Their Abuse of Providence.
10ly. Professors Abuse of Providence.
ABuse of Providence is another branch of Ungodliness, too much spreading among
Professors. God is to be honored, not only as the chiefest Good, and as the
supreme Truth and Authority; but as the first Cause, that gives Being to all
things, and therefore orders and disposes of all things as he pleases,
having absolute Dominion over all events: But O! how is God dishonored, by
abusing his Providence? The blind World are not only guilty, who do not
acknowledge God at the other end of Causes, as swaying all things by his
Wisdom and Power, but set up an Idol, called Chance; but even Professors,
eminent Professors, are herein very guilty.

1. Evidenced in their nonobserving it.
How seldom do we observe Gods Providence? The Finger of God is in all the
Creatures; not only We, but all Creatures live, move, and have their being,
from God, and in God: The whole course of Nature moves, as it is turned by the
hand of God, and directed by his counsel: It is not with the work of God, as
with the Artificers Clock, which, put into a frame, and hanged with weights,
will go, though the Artificer be off from it; but though God set all the
Creatures in frame, yet the motion of every wheel depends on God. There is not
a drop of rain falls, till God utter his voice, Jer. 10.13.
and cause the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth: Yet how is God not
minded? We see not his footsteps: We may say in this, He passes this way, and
that, and we see him not. Our eyes are held to secondary Causes: We look when
the Wind, or Moon, will change; but we are so short-sighted, that we reach not
God. How seldom do we consider, that though Gods Providence does deliver up
his choicest Friends, into the hands of his and their Enemies, yet does it not
deliver them up unto their will: they cannot do what they please, but only what
pleases God: Such of Gods own are still engraven on the palms of his hands,
though turned over into the hands of the Ungodly: they are Gods Favorites
still, though the wicked say, Persecute them, and take them, for God has
forsaken them. How little do we mind, that our times are in Gods hands; and
that as Satan is in a Chain, so are his Instruments: We fear Men more than God.
O! when shall we hear that Word of God, Say not a confederacy to all them to
whom this people shall say a confederacy; Isa. 8.12, 13, 14.
neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid: Sanctify the Lord of Hosts
himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread; And he shall be
for a Sanctuary, etc.

2. Not being affected therewith.
How little are we affected with the continual course of Providence, though it
guards and keeps us every moment? The Stars in their courses would fight
against us: the Sea would swallow us up, and break in as a devourer: the Beasts
of the Field would arm against us; if God did not check them, and bound them:
yea, one man would eat up another, were it not for the Lord, who sets bounds to
the rage of all the Creatures. It is the eye of jealousy that is still wakeful
for us: it is the Lord, that puts the hook into the nose, and the bridle in the
lips, of the Senacheribs of the World; and yet how little are our hearts
affected? how little are they comforted, and born up? how little do they cleave
unto the Lord?

On the contrary: But distrusting ^t.
How distrustful are we of Gods Providence, in a time of seen dangers, though
we are wonderfully delivered from invisible ones every day? Who can number the
legions of Devils? so many deliverances have thou by Gods Providence every
moment; and yet how diffident and doubtful are we, upon all new imminent
outward dangers? How little do we believe, that God will bring in good to us,
by such Providence as are ungrateful to Sense, to Flesh and Blood? Though
nothing is more usual, than for God to take away some comforts, and lay in
better comforts; to take away an Abel, and make it up in Seth: to deprive Noah
of the comforts of the whole World for a while, and then to wash it from its
filthiness, and to deliver him the possession of it, with manifest proofs of
his singular distinguishing care of him and his Family, whilst all the rest of
the Creatures perished in the waters: to deprive Mary and Martha of their
Brother Lazarus, and to return him from the dead unto them with great
advantage: to deprive Job of his Children and Estate, to make his last days
better than his first, Job 1.3. compared with Chapter 42.10, 12.
and to give him twice as much as he had before; for seven thousand Sheep, he
had fourteen thousand; before he had three thousand Camels, afterward six
thousand; before five hundred Asses, then one thousand; yet how little can we
trust Providence in such cases? How hardly were the Disciples persuaded, that
the absence of their Lord and Master, Jesus Christ, should be supplied in the
Spirit? And yet says Christ, Nevertheless I tell you the truth, ^fo. 16.7.
it is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him to you. Christ in his
Spirit, dwelling in our hearts, is better than Christ in Flesh, dwelling in our
houses. When the unclean Spirit departs from a man, Mat. 12.43.
and returns again, he brings seven Spirits worse than himself, and the latter
end of that man is worse than his beginning; but when Christ withdrew from
Earth to Heaven, he brings seven consolations better than at first, in the
pouring forth of the Comforter, and the end of such (in whom the Spirit
supplies the want of Christ's bodily presence) is better than the beginning. Why
cryest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable for the multitude of
thine iniquity, Jer. 30.15, 16, 17.
etc. Therefore all they that devour thee, shall be devoured, etc. for I will
restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, says the Lord,
because they called thee an outcast, etc. Nothing more usual with God than to
make the loss of one comfort, the means of enjoying another with advantage, yea
with the advantage of the hundred fold: But alas! most fear they shall be
losers by Christ and for Christ. God does as Mariners, row one way, and look
another: he brings most of his great ends about by looking quite aside from
what he has a special intent to bring to pass: the Lord seldom proceeds in a
direct way to his ends, i. e. in a right way to our apprehensions, in such a
way as we would have him go in; but he leads us about, Psa. 107.7.
as he did Israel, and yet that was the right way indeed: though the means seem
to oppose the end; yet he works to the praise of his Name: he can write right
by a crooked pen, and bring honey out of the Carkas of the Lion: make use of
strange instruments, break down Jerichos walls by the sounds of Ramshorns: But
O! how little do we trust Providence when the means are not probable to effect
our expected end? Zech. 14.7. Hebr. 11.12.
Who believes there shall be light in the Evening? And that Sarah shall have a
posterity as the Stars in the Firmament for multitude, and as the sand on the
Sea shore, which is innumerable, when she was old, had been barren so long, and
her Lord old also? Who will think that the Sun and the Stars shall bow to
Joseph, when he lies in the Pit, or is in the Dungeon of the Heathen King? How
slow to believe were the Disciples, when Christ is dead and buried, Luke 24.21,
25.
and lies three days in the Grave? We thought this should have been he that
should have delivered Israel. How little does the Worm Jacob ( Jacob when
reduced as low as the earth, when creeping into holes for security, when as
contemptible as a worm, that no man scruples to tread upon, when so easily to
be destroyed, as a worm) believe, Isa. 41.15, 16.17.
that yet the Worm Jacob shall thresh the mountains and fan them, and the wind
shall carry them away? Alas! how unseemly is the behavior of many, if
Providence thwarts them in taking away a Child, an Husband, an Estate, how
discouraged and cast down are we, as if God in his Providence had pulled down
that, which he could never build again, or rooted up that which he could never
plant again. O! how few believe that if God pull down their brickhouses, that
he will build them again of hewn-stones, and that if he consume their Firtrees,
he will build again with Cedars? Do not many afflicted Christians think it
impossible for their sorrow to be turned into joy?

Whence is all our dejectedness under Cross-Providences, Hence dejectedness
under Cross-Providences.
but from our not believing that all things are disposed by the wife and
gracious Providence of God? We believe not enough that the Eyes of our loving
Father run to and fro throughout the Earth, to show himself Mavelous for our
help in a time of need and danger. David was thus overtaken, till he schooled
himself into a better frame, with Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, Psa. 42.5.
and why art thou disquieted in me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise
him for the help of his countenance. Few can say, God is our refuge and
strength: Psa. 46.1, 2.
a very present help in trouble. Therefore will we not fear, though the Earth
be removed: and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. Few
believe that if the Lord be pleased to lay a great burden upon their shoulders,
he will give great strength to bear it, and if he gives but little strength, he
will surely proportion the burden to it. Whence are all our uproars of Spirit,
and disquietness of heart, but from our not trusting upon Providence? When God
is working desolation, did we see it his work, we would be still. David was so,
when strangely provoked by Shimei's insolency and railings. God has bid Shimei
curse. Abisha was not so much concerned in the affront, as David, but he sees
not God in the lips of Shimei, and therefore his Spirit is inflamed.

All the boylings of Revenge that are in the hearts of men one against another
may be Boiling of revenge.
attributed to man's blindness and injudicious view of things, they see not the
wicked to be Gods Sword to let out their corruption: they do not believe that
God intends to pursue gracious designs by such instruments. Joseph was easily
conquered and persuaded to forgive the unkindness, yea the cruelty of his
Brethren in making Merchandise of him to the Ishmalites, he could say, Genesis
45.8.50.20.
It was not you that sent me hither, but God, etc. As for you, ye thought evil
against me, but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass as it is this day, to
save much people alive. He insinuates to them, that they had no cause to fear
his revenging himself on them; for that he could easily pardon that offense of
theirs, out of which God has drawn so much good to his people, and so much
glory to his own Name. How silent would we be, yea how full of praises, if by
an eye of faith we did see the end of God in all his Providence, that they
lead to holiness: Before I was afflicted I went astray; Psa. 119.67, 75. Hebr.
12.10.
but now I keep thy Word: I know O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and
that thou have afflicted me in faithfulness. He for our Profit, that we might
be partakers of his holiness. Can we fume at the Physician for prescribing a
diet, or bitter pills and potions, if he provides these for the purging away
diseases, that threaten our ruin? Shall we fly in the face of him that binds
us, in order to the Saving us? and yet what murmurings have we, whilst in the
hands of the Physician? Prove. 19.3.
The folly of a man perverteth his ways, and his heart fretteth against the
Lord. How should we honor God, if we did believe, that in his hand our breath
is?

How careful are we to please them that have power over our lives, And
carelessness to please God. Dan. 5.23.
and to whom we are beholding for every breath we breath? O! study how much you
labor to comply with men, and how little with the Lord, and you will find your
distrust of Providence, that you do not believe, that God sits upon the
floods.

3. Justifying their actions and states by Providence.
How often have we made Providence an argument to justify our actions and
states? That, because God does not punish us, but tolerate us, therefore he
loves us, and approves of our way? Whereas the Scriptures and Experience show,
that there is a just man that perishes in his righteousness, and there is a
wicked man that prolongs his life in wickedness: The Lord sometimes puts his
Hoggs into the fattest pastures, in order to the Slaughter; yea, sometimes his
not punishing, is the greatest punishment. Hos. 4.14.
I will not punish your Daughters for their Whoredoms: God lets Adulterers and
Adulteresses to prosper and thrive. Hierome observes, that God deals with us,
as Parents with Children, whilst there is any hope of reclaiming them, Vae illi
ad quorum peccatae connivet Deus. Luth.
they are corrected; but otherwise they are let alone, to do as they list: Or
as Physicians continue their applications, whilst there is any hope of the
Patients life; otherwise they let them alone. How do some bless themselves,
that they never fasted and prayed as others, and yet they ride on horseback,
whilst others foot it out: But what says Hierome to there? Quando videris,
etc. When thou leest a sinner flow with wealth, and braving of his power: when
thou see him very healthful, and to have a company of brave Children bravely
arrayed; then say, the threatening of God, by the Prophet Hoseah, is full filled
upon that man. Dives had his good things here, and Lazarus evil: Dives fared
deliciously every day, his misery is reserved to hereafter, as Lazarus his
comforts are reserved till death. Mark the perfect man, Psalm. 37.
and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace. i. e. a confluence
of all good. What said one of the late English Bishops? It is the common lot of
the true Children of God, because they have many out-flyings, wherewith their
holy Father is not well pleased, to come under the scourge oftener than the
Bastards do. If they do amiss, they must smart for it either here or hereafter:
now God means them no condemnation hereafter, and therefore he gives them
more chaslning here. 1 Cor. 11.32.
It is a considerable passage of a very learned man, in weakening the late
position of some, that God had borne Testimony to their cause, by the many
Victories which he had given them, says he, This concluding of yours will by
the same reason infer that Christianity is not, and that Mahumetisme is the
true Religion; because when the Turks asserted one, and the Greek-Church the
other, and that difference begat a War betwixt them; it is clear that the Turks
were successful, and the Greek-Church was sadly wasted and subdued by them, and
so remains to this hour in that un-returned Captivity. Do not all things com^
alike to all? Eccles. 9.2.
And yet good men, some of the best that ever breathed, have been stumbled at
these dispensations: Lord (says the Prophet Jeremiah) thou art righteous, Jer.
21.1.
yet let me reason with thee, Why does the way of the Wicked prosper? Thou art
of purer Eyes (says the Prophet Habakkuk) than to behold evil, Hab. 1.13.
and can not look on iniquity: Wherefore look thou upon them that deal
treacherously, and hold thy tongue, when the Wicked devoureth the man that
is more righteous than he? The Saints also of the New Testament were apt to
stumble at the Cross, at Gods Providence toward his Saints and favorites,
that they should suffer such hard things: so that the Apostles were forced to
counsel them, and to rectify their thoughts, in this particular; My Brethren
think it not strange concerning the fiery trial: 1 Pet. 4.12. 1 These. 3.3, 4.
And the Apostle Paul sent Timothy on purpose to comfort them, and to establish
them, that no man should be moved by these afflictions: Yea our Lord himself
knowing how apt his Disciples were to stumble hereat, preaches on purpose on
this subject. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye be not offended:
What things were these? They shall put you out of the Synagogues (excommunicate
you, cast you out like dogs:) Yea the time shall come, that whosoever kills
you will think he does God service. Good men, when they see the wicked thus
walk on every side (go where they please, and do what they please) they are
apt, either to doubt of Gods Providence, Whether he governs the World, or to
call in question whether they have any relation to Gods special care. But do
not we know that the Child is often beaten, whilst the Servant or stranger is
spared? Do not we know that judgment begins at the House of God, yea, 1 Pet.
4.17.
yea, and stays long there, and all that while the tents of ungodliness may be
free: these may wash their steps in butter, and the Rocks may pour them out
Rivers of Oil: they may wax old and grow in a wealth; Job. 21.7 ad 15.
their seed may be established: the Rod of God may not be upon them: they may
rejoice in in the sound of the Organ, etc. and yet wicked enough: All this they
may have with the Curse of God, for they say unto God depart, etc.

4. Censuring others and themselves upon the account^ of outward Providence.
How often have the generation of the Just been censured for Hypocrites and
ungodly, merely because of outward Providence? Thus was Job censured by good
men; because he sat on the Dunghill, who was wont to sit with Princes. Let a
man be under grievous losses by Sea, or by Land, yea let but a Viper hang upon
the hand, and what then? This man (say they) surely is a murderer, Acts 28.4.
who though he has escaped the Seas, yet vengeance suffers not to live: Men's
outward conditions is made by Barbarians, yea by Christians, the line to
measure Men's relation to God by, they interpret love by prosperity, and hatred
by adverlity: whereas the Lord tells us that through many tribulations we must
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. I wonder not at this, when I consider, that
the Servant is not above the Master: Isa. 53.3, 4.
When Christ was a man of sorrows, they did judge him smitten of God. How ready
also are we to say this is a just Judgment of God upon such a suffering
Professor, for --? Yea we censure our selves for Hypocrites, when God crosses
us in some earthly comforts, and designs. If a Child dies, etc. then we
question the root of the matter, whether there be a spark of grace.

5. Making Providence an hinderance to depending on God.
The more Providence has favored us, have not we the less roled our selves on
the Covenant of grace? Has not God had the less of our dependence and faith?
Have not the promises lain more neglected, so that God has been even
necessitated to draw in his hand of bounty, that, like the Widow, when
destitute, we may trust to him? The Cisterns leak apace, that the Fountain may
be in greater request.

6. Being discomenced with. Providence.
How discontented are we to this day with Gods Providential administrations
toward us? How do we prescribe to God? Some would be richer than they are;
others more honorable: Some covet to be above others. We have bad memories, or
else we cannot but remember how ill some of us improved our talients of power
and honor, when we had them. Is it reasonable that God should be charged for
an hard Master for not entrusting ten talents in our hands, when we have been
so unfaithful to our former allotments? Jesurun-like we waxed fat, and never
were more beast-like, than when we were in the greenest pastures. God would be
charged even with indiscretion, if he should commit ten talents again to thee,
till thou art humbled for thy former unfaithfulness.

7. How do we take Gods work out of his hand,? Taking Gods work out of his
hands.
How careful are we in many things, though we should be careful in nothing?
Though we cannot add one Cubit to our Stature by all our cares; yet what
sollicitudes eat into our hearts, and cut them in twain? We should serve
Providence in the use of means, but should have nothing to do with the issues
and events of the means we use, but leave them to God. That which is not under
our Power, should not be under our Care. Eccles. 9.11.
All things are ordered by the deliberate Counsel of God. I returned, and saw
under the Sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong,
neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet
favor to men of skill, but time and chance happens to them all.

8. Distasting Religion because of adversity.
How do rotten-hearted Hypocrites distaste God, grow careless of serving God,
yea fall into an abhorrence of Religion because of Gods frowning upon his
people in Providential dispensations? Hence innumerable sorts of these
hollow-hearted Professors, desert their former Profession: when the Wind and
Tide of Preferment is against them, they will not hazard their outward
comforts, for all the Promises of the Gospel: whilst they see how little
Providence favors the Saints as to the comforts of this life, and that
Providence suits not their desires, they rage and swell, and are ready to cry
out, like that wretched King, 2 Kings 6.33.
This evil is of the Lord, wherefore should I wait on the Lord any longer? Now
Farewell to God, Farewell to Profession: if when the Children ask bread, he
gives them stones, Farewell to such a Father.

9. Neglecting Providence, and shifting for themselves.
How commonly do men neglect the Providence of God, and betake themselves to
their own shifts to extricate themselves from their miseries? Is man wiser than
God? And yet men hope rather to help themselves by their own wits, wiles, and
endeavors, than by leaning to the Providence of God. Such there were in
Jeremiahs time: God had told them that he had brought them into straights on
purpose to engage them to repent of their sins, and to turn to the Lord: Thus
says the Lord, behold I frame evil against you, Jer. 18.11.
and devise a device against you: return ye now every one from his evil way,
and make your ways and doings good; But they loved not humbling work; v. 12.
And they said there is no hope, but we will walk after our own devices, and we
will every one do the imagination of his own evil heart: They had devices of
their own, such as God approved not: And have not we (some of us) had such?
Has there not been devising how to sow discords between superious and
inferiors, betwixt Magistrate and people? v. 15.
Has their not been stumbling in our ways from the ancient paths in a way not
cast up, in an untrodden way? O! how have men run to extraordinary courses to
deliver themselves out of their miseries? For this, God may make our land
desolate and a perpetual hissing, or derision: v. 16. v. 17.
he may justly scatter us as with an East wind before the Enemy, and show us
the back and not the face in the day of our ealamity.

10. Being partial in viewing Providence.
Have not we been partial in viewing the Providence of God? Have not we taken
some one Providence, and fixed our eye upon it so long, till our hearts have
been ever overwhelmed with sorrow? But we have not viewed the Providence of
God in their contexture, nor in their relation to gracious ends for our good:
some take more notice of smiling Providence than of frowning, of what in
Providence makes for them, and their courses, than of what makes against them:
but others take more notice of frowning Providence than of smiling, of what
makes against them, than of what makes for them. In this we have shown our
selves fools; for who is wise shall understand these things: Hos. 14.9.
These words are restrictive: Who? That is few or none are such, and then there
is an earnest wish or desire of the Prophet, O that men were wise to understand
these things: the ways of the Lord are right, though men think them not so.

CHAP. XVIII. Their Hypocrisy.
11ly. Professors Hypocrisy
Hypocrisy is another piece of Ungodliness, which like leaven, has diffused
it self through the whole body of Professors. It is the greatest ungodliness,
that can be, to rob the Lord of his dominion over the Conscience, and therefore
Hypocrisy is called Blasphemy. Rev. 2.9.
I know the blasphemy of them that say they are Jews, and are not. God is not
honored unless he be acknowledged as the supreme Authority, not only over the
life, but the heart; and therefore his Authority is never more undetermined
than by a mere form of godliness. 2 Timothy 3.5.
Hypocrites are clouds without rain, wells without water, trees without fruit,
though not without leaves: Yea (to use Christ's similitude) they are garnished
tombs: they appear to be one thing, Abscondit quod est, quod non est mentitur.
Bern.
but are another thing: they appear to be the greatest Worshippers of God; but
are the greatest dishonourers of God: They profess that they know (worship)
God; but in works they deny him, being abominable, and dis-obedient, and to
every good work reprobate. Tit. 1.16
The Hypocrites piety is not piety, his religion is not religion; but doubled
and trebled iniquity. Quis non itascatur videns homines, ore Deum confitentes:
negantes moribus? Seculum verbis, et non factis renunciantes? Aug. Evidenced,
in their Professing.
Should not this make us to tremble at the greatness of the hypocrisy of this
age? O! How many Apothecaries-boxes are there, that have golden titles and
nothing in them? How many curious pictures drawn to life; but look behind them,
and there is nothing but dust and cobweb? How many have glorious signs, but
within ill customs: an Angel for a sign, a Lamb for a sign, but within are
Devils and Cheats?

How many have taken up Religion under pretense of its being an help to Heaven,
when they have made it a means to get earth, to get custom, credit, etc. Hence
when they cannot compass, but rather obstruct their worldly designs, Farewell
to Religion: if it contribute not to their private ends, they give it up again.
O! How few have embraced Christ and Truth, for Christ's sake, for Truth's sake?
Have not most embraced Christ and his Gospel, as they have Servants, for what
they can do for them? and adhered to Profession as the Ivy to the Tree, not
because it loves it, but sucks from it, and is succored by it? Have they not
always worshipped the rising, and not the declining Sun? How few own the
declining sinking cause of Christ? How hard is it to persuade men to stand for
truths, that stand not with their advancements and accommodations? Hence many
now stand idle, as the people in the Market place, who would not go into the
Vi^^y^^d (...) they were hired. How few will own any way (...) be Christ's, till
they see how it stands with their secular advantages? How many Newters now, who
once were forward Professors? If we entertain him (says they) the Romans will
come, and take away our place and Nation. We find the truth of a learned man's
Assertion: He that will serve God for the world, will serve the Devil for the
world: He that serves God for a little, will serve the Devil for more: where he
can mend his wages, he will give his service. How many Professors have with
Absolon gone to Hebron to worship, but all the while have promoted their own
ambitious designs, raising even sedition in order to their earthly advantages?

In how many has the tongue prayed, Speaking to God.
when not the heart? These have been much in fasting and prayer, and have
thought themselves much wronged that they were not heard: Isa. 58.4.
but God gives them a reason: Ye shall not fast as ye do to make your voice to
be heard on high. The Hypocrite may lift up his voice strongly, and yet never
be heard: his voice for want of the heart therein may never come up to Gods
dwelling place: his Prayers many times fall back upon his own face, like
spittle against the wind. How many have used Prayer as an hook to draw in
outward from God and Man; but not as a sword to destroy their lusts? How many
have cried vehemently unto God for assistances in their duties, chiefly, if not
solely, to get themselves a Name in the Earth? How many tell God with a brazen
face that they love him, yea that they love him with all their hearts, whereas
they love not God, but God's, somewhat of God: they flatter God with their
lips: they delight not in his presence: yea all the while they are serving
their turn on God? Fain they would partake of Gods bounty, of Gods protection,
and Gods pardons, but they love neither God nor his Image: when God puts them
to express their love by self-denial, then you shall see the graves to be full
of rottenness: they hate to spend and to be spent for God. How many tell God
that they are troubled for offending him, when they are only troubled that he
is displeasing them, and about to correct them for their abuses of him? They
will cry out in Prayer, O my carelesseness! etc. But alas! It is not Sin, but
the Judgments of God, and the consequents of Sin that disturb them. How many
will tell God twenty times over they are ashamed of their Sins, and within one
hour after they are not ashamed to commit them again, no more ashamed are they,
than the Sow is to lie tumbling in the Mire? How will many tell God they fear
him, and his Judgments, when indeed and intruth they fear neither, witness
their frothy loose spirits and conversations? How will they tell God that all
the world is but as a drop of a bucket in comparison of his Majesty, and that
all flesh is contemptible, when weighed with him, and yet they fear the wrath
of Man more than the wrath of the Almighty God? How many will tell God that
they are contented with all his will, and yet their hearts are full of inward
risings against the Providence of God? How many tell God they believe in him,
trust to his Mercy, depend on Christ, and O! forsooth all their cares are cast
on Christ, when God knows, their care and work, like Bees, is to get honey to
their hives? They mind earthly things, and are scraping the dust of the Valleys
to themselves, as if they thought it their wisdom rather to lean to their own
providing, than to be beholding to the Lord and dye beggars? How earnest are
some in their cries to God for victory over Sin; but secretly hate it not? And
does it not appear in this, for that having directed their Prayers to the Lord,
they do not look up, to see whether the corruption be more mortified, and their
love to it abated yea or no?

How have the speeches of many in their converse one with another bewrayed
their hypocrisy? To men, concerning things.
How do many covet mightily to insist on the refinements of hypocrites, and
thereby they escape (as they hope at least) from being judged such themselves?
How have some studied to disgrace Sin to the utmost, and yet secretly cherished
that, which they labored to make odious to others? In company they cry down
self-love, hypocrisy, formality, earthlyness, and pride, but privately they
keep up these, and make them their companions. How Zealous have some been in
discourse for the Protestant Faith? How have they cried out against errors,
and for a reformation; but can tell no more of a work of God upon the heart
than an Heathen? How have some contended for opinions, and have put a jus
divinum upon such and such a way, and counted others as little better than
Pagans, that would not submit to their way, and yet by fear and flattery have
soon faced about.

How will some cry up such and such for most eminent in grace? Persons, Others.
and O how do they love them! when all the while self-love acts them, and if
they gain not by them, they will surely have an howbeit to blot them? They are
as the foreman to praise the rich, from whom they hope to squeeze some of their
gold; but bring up the rear, are the last to commend them, from whom they
expect nothing of advantage by their glavering tongue. How much Hypocrisy has
appeared in our declaimings against others sins? O! we must not suffer this:
the House of God must be kept clean: it must not be made a Den of Thieves, an
Hog-sty, and cage of uncleanness: and all this while their zeal is nothing but
revenge; a secret grudge there is against the Delinquent, and now that an
advantage offers, they will have their pennyworth out of him.

How many are always finding faults, Themselves.
blaming Magistrates, Ministers, all but themselves? This man wants courage,
and another wants another grace, whilst they themselves want all grace, as
being mere pieces of pageantry. How many whining Hypocrites have we, that will
in all companies, especially where Ministers are, be crying out against the
baseness and treachery of their own hearts, and the wickedness of their own
lives, and rest in their lazy complaints, but reform not?

How severe are some in their censures of sin in others, Censuring.
as Judah against Thamar, she must be burnt? who will now suspect Judah to be
unclean? Mat. 7.3.
How ready have we been to judge and censure others, rather than our selves? To
behold a mote in others, but not the beam in our selves? How many censure
Ministers for too seldom preaching in private, and yet are themselves
Sermon-glutted, as yet they have not got a stomach, so great was their surfeit
with the former plenty; yea, when they have Sermons, neglect them; or if they
attend with their Bodies on them, yet have no fellowship with Christ in them?
We are just like Consumption people, apt to be angry, and fret, if we have not
our wonted meals, and the Cooks are blamed for negligence; and when the meat is
brought before us, we are even weary of the smell of it. How many censure
others for being to talk ative, Acting, better abroad than at home, in public
than in seeret ditties.
and therefore would impose silence upon others, because they have neither
heart nor tongue, to vindicate God, and to promote Religion?

How many are full of persuasions of the love of God, and of the grace of God,
and yet ignorant of the first Principles of Christianity; neglecters of
Family Prayer, or Closet-Duties? They think well of themselves, because in
their Duties before men they are devout and zealous, and carried forth to the
wasting of much time; but in their Closets they are straightned, and put the
Lord off with a short Collect. How many, like your City Maids, go in their
best, are neat, cleanly, and in gorgeous apparel, when walking in the views of
others; but if you follow them home to their houses and chambers, how nasty,
how foul are they! How many are there whose Religion lies in their face, habit,
gesture: seem demure, humble; walk with their eyes looking downwards, bow with
Absolon to the people, and yet their hearts full of pride and loftiness? How
often even on Fast-dayes have you had sour faces, and inwardly light, frothy, and
unserious hearts? As an evidence observe when the day ends, the Dog returns to
his vomit, the heart becomes vain, or rather, the vanity that was smothered and
pent up in the day breaks out as soon as the duties are over: We can hang down
our heads like a bull-rush, we can rough cast our faces, but it is hardly for a
day.

How has Hypocrisy followed thee from the corners of the streets to the very
closet? Seeming to be more in secret duties than they are.
Thou have shut thy door, as if thou would shut out World and Devils, and
there have fallen asleep, or (which is as bad) have parlied with the Devil, and
pampered thy lusts: Hypocrisy, like the Frogs of Egypt, has crept into thy
most secret retirements.

How few can pretend to Uniformity in their obedience? Being not universally
obedient. Psalm. 119.6.
How many will be ashamed, because they respect not all Gods Commandments?
still they clip the Law: still some reserves: they will let go profaneness, so
they may but reserve covetousness: they will pray, hear, etc. so they may cheat
their Neighbor under a demure behavior: or they will be strict to rules of
Justice and equity among men: but they will rob God of his honor: some of them
are punctual to a day, to a farthing (Blush, Reader, if thou art short of the
Hypocrites stature) they will not cheat you with a brass Shilling; but rob God
of his due, of his due in the Closet, and in the Family too.

How frequently do we hear some desiring to know the least measure of saving
Grace, Desiring to know the least degree of saving grace.
and why? because they would sit down therewith. There is not a surer note of
an unsound heart, than to be contented with the least degree of grace, and not
to press forward.

How generally do men hate to be examined and tried about their state? But not
to be examined, nor to consult with Ministers about their condition, much less
to follow their directions.
This is a sure sign of a rotten heart, of a painted-Christian; paint will not
endure the fire: Hypocrites hate lancing and piercing work. How many continue
in a course of Religion, and yet their hearts are hardened more and more, and
they know it, and yet will hardly consult with Ministers about their sad
condition? or if they do, yet practice nothing more than before? I am confident
there are many who make it their business to keep up their reputation among the
Saints, but have lost (and know they have) their credit at the throne of grace;
and though they have their reward, the Saints embrace them for Precious, yet
Christ neglects them, and when they spread out their hands all the day long to
the Heavens, they have no welcome with God. Isa. 1.11.
To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord, I
am full of the burnt offerings of the Rams, and the fat of fed beasts, and I
delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of He-goats. And when you
spread forth your hands, v. 15.
I will hide mine eyes from you: yea when you make many Prayers, I will not
hear.

O! Considerations against hypocrifie Isa. 48.1, 2.
What a Controversy has God with England for its great Hypocrisy? We have
called our selves of the Holy City, and have maede mention of the God of Lrael,
but not in truth, not in righteousness. Though you have past for Saints in the
account of blind, and short-sighted men; yet you are but Devils in Christ's
account: So was the arch-Hypocrite Judas, One of you is a Devil. Of all Devils
none so bad as the Professing Devil. Remember the vengeance which fell on
Belshazzar, when he carouzed in the Bowls of the Sanctuary. 2 Pet. 2.3.
Their damnation slumbereth not, who through covetousness make use of the
covering of feigned words. O! When will ye put on the new man, which after God
is created in righteousness, and True holiness? Ephesians. 4.24.
Believe it, if thou art a whited wall God will smite thee. Though thou get
some present glory or profit by thy outside holiness, yet God more abhors thee,
than the bleer and imperfect observing World can applaud thee. Will a King
endure it, that thou take his Robes, and cloth a Swine with them? or that thou
take his Crown and set it on the head of a base Varlet? God is coming against
the Hypocritical Nation. And he accounts it a disgrace, for thee to voice thy
self to be the Son of so great a Prince, whilst thou art a Slave to Hellish
lusts. All you do for God will not profit you, you lose all you have wrought,
whilst acted by self, and corrupt in your ends and aims. Though you trust in
lying words, Jer. 7.8. Isa. 57.12.
in your outward shows, yet I will declare thy righteousness, and thy words,
for they shall not profit thee. What shall I say? There is no acceptance for
you to be had without the Benjamin of sincerity with you. A day of trouble is
hastening, and you think then to pray, but will God hear your cry when trouble
comes upon you? Job. 27.9. Psalm. 106.15. Psalm. 51.6.
If you deny God your heart, never expect his ear. Quails you may have, but
with a vengeance, with leanness in your souls. That which God desires and
looks for, is truth in the inward parts. God and Religion have received so
much dishonor by pretenders to Christ and Truth, and so many Atheists have
been made, confirmed, and hardened in England, by the Observations they have
made on Professors hypocritical pretensions, that I fear the stains will
hardly be washed away without blood, and some probably will be called forth to
seal to the Truth of Christ by their death, to convince men, that there are
some real Christians, who will spend, and be spent for Christ; and that whilst
many have but a Name to live, yet there are a few in our Sardis, who are not
defiled with hellish Hypocrisy, but love Truth in their inward parts.

CHAP. XIX. Their Sabbath-Sins.
Lastly, WHen you remember the evil of your ways, Professors Sabbath-Sins.
of your ungodly ways, you may not omit your Sabbath-Sins. God has appointed
the Sabbath: He has sanctified it for special and entire communion with
himself. The Law of the Sabbath was given before the Fall; because man was to
labor and dress the Garden on the six days, and therefore could not have that
complete and indistracted communion with God, even in his estate of innocence,
which he might enjoy by a total separation from all earthly and heterogeneous
employments: But since the Fall, this Rest is of more absolute necessity; for
that we cannot now apply our minds entirely to matters of so different a
nature, as heavenly and earthly things are. The Sabbath is many ways
honorable: it was anciently set apart by God; it was written with Gods own
finger in the Tables; God rained Mannah on that day; it is called an Everlasting
Covenant, by way of eminency, as if nothing of Gods Covenant were kept, if this
were not: Yea, God puts a Remember on this day, and no other: Remember that
thou keep holy the Sabbath day. If a Friend sends to you, that he will come
and solace himself in your company such a day, and tells you the set time, when
he will come; will he not take it ill, if you neglect him then? If you are full
of employments, and other guests, and have no leisure to attend communion with
him? Thus says God, Remember such a time, I will set it apart on purpose to
enjoy you, and feast you; I will then take you into my Cellars, my Wine
Cellars, and (after an holy manner) inebriate you with Divine comforts: You are
on your other days clogged and cumbred with earthly affairs, so that I can
have therein but broken communion with you; but pray Remember to lay aside all
other business, to rest from all your other works, that I and you may freely
converse together. But instead of this,

How little Preparation do we make for the observing of this day unto the Lord;
Their not preparing for it.
Though Remember be a Watchword of solemn Preparation for it? Remember it,
think of it before it come, that so thou may be ready to sanctify it,
without any distraction by worldly business. Which of us dispatcheth his
worldly business seasonably on the six days? Nay, is it not a wicked custom,
to engross more business into our hands and hearts the day before, than on any
other day of the Week? Do not greedy Professors sit up later on Saturday
Night, than any other Night? Hereby their hearts are cumbred with the World,
and their natural strength and spirits wasted and spent, so that they cannot
with a free Spirit wait upon God. Such is the reverence that is due to the
solemn and public Duties of Devotion, that they require, not only a surcease
from other works and thoughts, for the time of the performance; but also a
decent preparation beforehand, that we look to our feet, etc. that so our
thoughts and affections, which are naturally bent upon the World, and not
easily withdrawn from it, may be raised to a disposition becoming the day. God
alone knows, how often the Devil, and our own hearts, have entangled us with
occasions on the Saturday, whereby our minds have been distracted on the
Sabbath: Yea, have we not at times even secretly wished, that the Sabbath were
over, or might be adjourned, that we might pursue some worldly design, which is
obstructed by its interposal? The Sabbath is the Saints Market Day, or
Fair-day: You know what preparations are made, by Worldlings for their days of
gain; would to God we had learned wisdom from carnal men, so to fit and
prepare for the advantages to our Souls we may reap upon Gods day. Their
curtailing it. Amos 8.4.


How have we curtailed the Sabbath? Have not we risen later on the Lords day
than on any other? and gone sooner to bed on that day than on any other? When
will the Sabbath be gone? Do not we make it the shortest day of the Week? O! If
God had reserved all the days to himself save one, how diligent would you have
been, to take all the day to your worldly business? This is a clear evidence,
that your minds are more on your Profits and Pleasures, than on the Service of
Christ.

How lowering are our countenances, Being sad when the Sabbath begins, and glad
when it ends.
and how lumpish and heavy are our hearts, in the beginning of a Sabbath, much
more than upon any other day? Does not this prove the day to be no way pleasing
to us? And how cheerful are some of us, when the Sabbath is ended? The heart
is not so well pleased all the day, as then: yea do not some cheat and delude
themselves hereby, as if they had joy in the Lord, and had received comfort
from the Word and other Ordinances; whereas they are glad that the yoke of
Ordinances, the burden of the Word of the Lord, and the burden of the day of
the Lord is taking off their Shoulders? Being hindered from profaning it only by
external motives.


How many are there, who would profane Gods Sabbaths and wholly neglect the
Ordinances of them, were it not for the Laws of men, and the eyes of their
Relations?

How quieted are some when they have attended the public service? Satisfied
with worshipping God publicly.
and do they betwixt and after those solemn duties refrain their lips from
worldly talk, from impertinencies, from such discourse, as bears no proportion
with the holiness of the day?

When works of Necessity and Charity happen out beyond our expectation or
forecast, Glad to be hindered from works of piety.
are we (at all) troubled at them? Do not we rather rejoice, because we have
thereby a dispensation to withdraw from the immediate worship of God? And how
many neglect to do all their works on the six days, Exodus 20.9.
though the Lord so expressly charge them so to do, that they may have a
pretense of necessity to do much servile work on the Sabbath? How common is it
to dress meat on the Sabbath, more than on any other day, when there is not the
least pretense of weakness, etc. Hereby not only Servants, but the whole house
are too much in labor and destraction, and hindered (if not from the solemn
Assemblies, yet) from Family, and Closet worship.

How do many gossip, complement, Eating too much on the Sabbath.
and feast away (abroad) the day of the Lord? or else eat to an excess at home,
and thereby make themselves fitter for a bed, than to wait on the Sanctuary, to
hear Christ's voice, to meditate on his love, and to feed in his pleasant
pastures?

How careful are we to keep our selves, Stealing Gods time.
and ours, from pilfering from our Neighbor? but not from stealing from God
his time? yea are not some Governors so ungodly, unmercifull, that they will
allow their people no time but the Sabbath to recreate themselves from their
labors? If they need recreation, you have more time than God has reserved,
sure you should not steal from God to pleasure them.

In the discharge of the works of mercy to Man and Beast, Not performing duties
of mercy aright.
Do not we respect more our own commodity, than the will of God, than the
dispensation of God, and the creatures necessities? Are these works of mercy
attended with such spiritual meditations, as they do afford us, if our hearts
were holy?

How few bless God for giving them one day, Not blessing of God for the Sabbath.
wherein they may lighten their hearts of all worldly cares, and throw off all
griefs and secular cumbers, and may seek for relief and comfort in their God?

Perhaps the Master observes a day unto the Lord; Careless whether those under
them observe the Sabbath.
but how careless is he, that his Sons and Daughters, and all within his gate
honor the day of the Lord? Do not many Professing Governors of Families let
them sleep away the Sabbath, that they may be the fitter for their drudgeries
the following week? O! when will Governors be as diligent, that their Servants
and Household serve the Lord, as that they serve themselves? You have been
careful that your work were done on the week; but careless whether Gods work
were done by them on the Sabbath: careless whether your Servants profited by
the Sabbath yea or no? When will Gods glory and the good of your peoples Souls
be nearer to you than your worldly advantages? You ask your Servants, what work
they have done for you every day, and call them to frequent accounts for your
gains-sake, and what? never reckon with them about their Spiritual Soulwork? O!
how little is the love of God shed abroad in your hearts?

How justly may God be angry with us, till he has consumed us, for our
desiling the day of the Lord? It was Gods express Law, Exodus 31.14.
that every one that desileth it should surely be put to death. When the people
were weary of the Sabbath, when they said, Amos 8.5. v. 7.
When will the new Moon be gone that we may sell corn? and the Sabbath that we
may set forth wheat, etc. v. 7.
The Lord swore by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget any of
their works. v. 8.
Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that dwells
therein? and it shall rise up wholly as a flood, and it shall be cast out and
drowned, as by the flood of Egypt. v. 9.
And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord God, that I will cause
the Sun to go down at Noon, and I will darken the Earth in the clear day. v. 10,
And I will turn your Feasts into mourning, and all your Songs into
lamentation, etc. v. 11.
Behold the days come, says the Lord God, that I will send a Famine in the
land, not a Famine of Bread, nor a thirst for Water, but of hearing the Word of
the Lord. v. 12.
And they shall wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North even to the East,
they shall run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not find it.

CHAP. XX. Their miscarriages about Heart-examination.
THe more that the Lord of Heaven charge us with a Duty, Professors
miscarriages about Self-examination.
the more inexcusable are our neglects of it: There are few things more
commanded us, than to try and examine our hearts and lives: 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves, etc. Prove your selves, etc. We are apt to be strangers
to our selves, to cheat our selves with vain presumptuous hopes, to rest in
notions; therefore (...), Examine your selves, take an experimental knowledge
of your selves: We are apt to prove others, and censure them; therefore (...),
Prove your own selves, begin at home, try your state, try your actions, bring
the metal to the touchstone, see whether it be sound or counterfeit; try your
Faith, whether it be temporary or saving; prove your Repentance, whether it be
through or superficial; examine your Love, whether it be sincere or
hypocritical; and your Obedience, whether it be universal or partial. Deuteronomy.
4.39.
Know therefore, and consider it in thine heart, make a return or answer to
thine heart. Commune with thine own heart, Psa. 4.4 1 Cor. 11.28. Lam. 3.40.
Their omitting the Duty altogether,
hold intelligence with it. Let a man examine himself. Let us search and try
our ways. But yet notwithstanding these Injunctions,

1. How many are there, that never set about this Duty? They will Pray, etc.
but will not be persuaded to look inward: They are as great strangers to their
own, as to others hearts. They are at no pains, to try in what state they are:
They will not try, Nor examining their Estates,
whether they are newborn, or not; whether sanctified, or not; whether a
saving change has past upon them, or not: They will not compare themselves
with the Characters, which are given by Ministers and Books, to see whether
they be in the gall of bitterness, or not, in the bond of iniquity, or not:
They never examine what Justification, and justifying and saving Faith be, and
whether they are justified, and shall be saved, like Gallio, Little caring for
these things: They examine which way they may be greater in the World, how to
add to the heap, how to load themselves with thick clay, how to escape the
wrath of man, how to prolong their days; but not how to prepare for Eternity,
and how to make sure of Heaven: You ask one another, what news from Navies,
from Armies, from Court, from Country; but when did you spend one hour to ask
your hearts this serious question, O my Soul! what will become of thee, when
thou leavest this earthly Tabernacle? We travel any where, but where we should:
We are better read in any Book, than in the sealed Book of our own hearts: We
are not at all for a personal treaty with our own Consciences: We are too much
prying into other men's hearts, but our eyes turn not inward: We know not how it
is with our Souls, and what will become of them, and we have no mind to know
such matters.

As we commune not with our hearts about our States, Nor Actions.
so we do not commune with them about our Actions, neither before, nor after
the doing of them: Before we act, we do not advise with our Consciences,
whether, what we be about to do, be lawful or unlawful; and if lawful, whether
expedient or inexpedient: After we have acted, whether our actions be good or
evil. How many are contented, so the matter be good, but examine not themselves
about the manner, principles, ends, and motives? Though the Children of Israel
knew, by the Word of the Lord, and from Abraham their Father, that Canaan was a
Land flowing with milk and honey; yet they sent Spies, and searched it, and
thereby were confirmed: If men had never so much confidence of the goodness of
their Prayers, etc. yet for Confirmation-sake, they should send down Spies into
their hearts, to see the Clusters of their Zeal and Affections, the utmost of
the goodness of them: But alas! how many wholly neglect this necessary and
possible Duty? If all were like these, God might take up his old complaint, No
man cried out, Jerem. 8.6.
What have I done? Or, O my heart! What has God done for thee?

2. The backwardness of the best hereunto.
How backward are a more refined sort of Professors to a compliance with this
Duty? How often have your Ministers invited you, beseeched you, to hold
intelligence with your own hearts, and yet cannot prevail? How backward are the
best to keep a strict eye upon their little house within, to see what is done
within those doors? We are apter to study others lives, yea hearts, than our
own. If the best knew, how much work lies within doors, they would not be so
much abroad, as they are.

3. If we do examine our hearts, Not making use of the Word as the Rule.
yet not by the Word of the Lord. God would have us to try and prove our
selves; then there must be some measuring Line, some Standard, some Rule, to
try our selves by; but herein we are hugely defective: We try our selves by
some sudden pangs, or by the good opinion of others concerning us, or by the
lives of others, (we being in an Hospital, where every one almost is lame and
defective) or by some other easy Rule, that we our selves frame unto our
selves, and so miserably cheat our selves. O! how loath are we, that the light
of Gods Word should be let down into the dark Cells of our hearts, for want
whereof, there is much dust unobserved, and not swept away? How loath to try
states or actions by the Scripture, though thereby they must be tried at the
last day? He is a good Text-man, that compares Scripture with Scripture: and he
is a good Christian, that compares the Scripture and his own heart together,
that credits his own heart only, when it has the consent of the Prophets and
Apostles, making them Umpires in the decision of all his Soul-controversies.
Have recourse to the Light that shines in a dark place: 2 Pet. 1.19.
But alas! Who obeys this form of wholesome words?

4. Being superficial therein.
How overly and superficial are many in the examining themselves by the Word?
How few do examine their State, or their Actions fully? Though our hearts be
very great Impostours, Jer. 17.9.
deceitful above all things, great Supplanters, full of guile; though there be
thousands and thousands of Lusts that lie hid in our hearts, and Deceits like
the Sands on the Seashore, yet how carelessly do we set upon this work? We take
no pains in it.

5. Being too seldom in it.
How seldom are we in this work? Some deferr it till a Sacrament, and then
perhaps the house is searched for the leaven: whereas we should keep a petty
Sessions in our hearts every day, and do what we can to know the bottom of the
projects, devices, workings of our heats. When going to Prayer, we should
examine our selves, whether we have clean hands, and pure hearts, whether we
are double-minded; James 4.8.
if so, there is no drawing nigh to God: And when we come off from the Duty, we
should conferr with our hearts, what enlargements, quicknings, meltings,
humblings we had in the Duty; what promises, what threats were applied by the
Spirit; whether we saw the face of our Beloved, or not? When going to a Sermon,
we should examine in what posture we are to meet with God, what Oil we want,
that we may be supplied? When going to our Beds, we should examine our hearts,
how the day has been spent, what sins were committed, what Duties, and how
discharged, what temptations were resisted, what mercies received, and what
growth and increase of grace we have obtained? When going to Visit, this Duty
should be taken up before and after: Before, thus, Wherein may I honor the
Lord my God in such company? what are their wants, that I may endeavor to
supply them? what are their temptations and discouragements, that I may labor
to support them? what are their graces and best seize, that I may profit
by them? After, thus, O my heart! What good did thou do or receive in that
company? wast thou eyes to the blind, feet to the lame? did thou labor to
bring thy Friends nearer to Jesus Christ? or have thou more estranged and
prejudiced them, from and against the way of truth? O my heart! Did thou take
heed to thy ways, that thou did not sin with thy tongue? Did thou keep thy
mouth as with a bridle? When going into the Shop, or Field; yet with Isaac
thou art to meditate there, and conferr with God and thy heart, thus, O my
heart! for whom do thou labor, for Self, or for God? whose Servant will thou
be to day, the Worlds, or Christ's? O my heart! How many snares are there in the
World? what a dirty place ^is the World? and how great is thy danger, if God
prevent not by special grace? O my Soul! What need have thou of Almighty power
to keep thee, that thou may retain thy sweetness in salt waters?

But alas! How seldom do we reflect on our words, or silence; on our speaking,
or hearing; on our behavior abroad, or at home? When do we consider, what our
affections were most set upon, in such and such a place, in such an hour; and
what our demeanor Godward, and toward our Neighbor, was? We do not believe
Bernard, who tells us, If we would examine our selves as often as we need, Bern.
in Cant.
we must do it always. And Chrysostomes paraphrase and counsel on Psalm 4. is
of as little credit with us, Let this account be kept every day, have a little
Book in thy Conscience, and write therein thy daily transgressions, and when
thou layest thee down on thy Bed, bring forth thy Book, and take an account of
thy sins.

6. Crowing weary of the work, before they have brought things to an issue.
Do not we grow weary of this work, before it be brought to any considerable
Issue? We flagg before we come to the up-shot. Still some were learning, and
never came to the knowledge of the truth: And so some (pretend at least to) be
always trying; but they hold not fast: They try their hearts, as some did
truths, till they be wholly skeptical, as ignorant whether converted, or no, as
ever: They know not more this year, than they did seven years since; but hang
betwixt Heaven and Hell, in a dubious state, for want of skill or pains to
decide this matter. We are not resolute and peremptory enough to have an
account of our Souls, yea such an one, as that we may have boldness in the
presence of Christ. When David thought on God, and was troubled, Psa. 77.3, 6.
he never gives over his heart, till he ended this controversy: He communed
with his heart, and made a diligent search. We should commune, till we know,
whether we be natural or spiritual; and accordingly be humbled greatly, or
greatly rejoice in God our Savior. But alas! This Age is strangely dull and
sluggish: those Duties, that will cost expense of spirits, and call for the
labor of the mind, we wholly omit, or do them very negligently. Reader, Could
I but prevail with thee, to set in good earnest upon Occasional Meditation, and
Heart-Examination, and Solemn Meditation, and Self-Tryal, I should bless the
Lord as long as I breath for this enterprise of mine. The searcher of hearts
knows, that I took Pen in hand on this design, to labor with thee in order
to inside Duties, that thou might not be contented with a Form of Godliness,
and rest in the external part of Religion: that more work might be done within
doors, in Closets, and Hearts. O that you would reform! Not pass on to another
Chapter. till you have engaged your slippery incconstant hearts, to attend on
this necessary Duty! Take a few Considerations to impell you.

1. Motives to this great duty, Heathens else will rise up in judgment against
us.
The very Heathen will rise up in judgment to condemn you, if you neglect this
duty. A Roman Philosopher every night, before he slept, would examine himself
thus, Quod malum hodie sanesti, etc. What sin have thou opposed? wherein art
thou bettered? Cato also would daily at evening call to mind, what ever he had
seen, read, or done that day. I use (says Senica every evening) to plead my
cause with my self: when the candle is gone, and all silent, I review all that
I have said or done in the day: I hide nothing from mine own scrutiny: I pass
by nothing. Pithagoras gave also this severe rule to his Scholars, that they
should no night suffer sleep to seize their senses, till they had three times
recalled the accidents and passages of the day, what evil have I committed?
what good have I omitted? Except your Righteousness, exceed the Righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees (says Christ) (may not I say, of the Heathen) how
can you hope for Salvation? O! how has thine heart cheated thee with vain
confidences? How have thou cried, the Temple of the Lord: I have Abraham to my
Father: whilst moral Heathens have been better acquainted with their hearts,
than thou art?

Yea, Sensitive creatures will else shame us.
2. The very sensitive creatures may shame thee into the practice of this duty.
Go thou sluggard to all the souls of Heaven. Do they not sit in the Sun, and
view themselves, look inward to themselves, turn every feather to set it at
rights? Do they not look over their feathers, and pick out and throw away that
which is bad, and set others in their places, when misplaced.

Nay, 3. We shall else be self-condemned.
You your selves will be judges of your selves. You take the glass, and what is
amiss in the hair; in the face, in the body, you rectify by it: and what? no
observation to be made of the faces of your Souls? O! take the word of God; and
make use of this glass, which now is in thine hand: does it discover no spots,
no neglects, no failings? O! view thy self, and humble thy self, reflect on thy
self, and conserr with thy self, till thou art ashamed, till thou abhorrest and
loathest thy self before the Lord.

4. You have a sure sign of hypocrisy on you, The neglect of this duty a sign
of hypocrisy.
whilst this duty lies neglected; for all the upright have been very careful
to commune with their hearts, to search their hearts, to make diligent search,
lest any lust should be covered, as Rachel covered her Idols, or as Saul was
hid in the stuff. Nothing is more desired by a sincere Soul, than to be
thoroughly searched: examine me O Lord, Psa. 26.2.
as Artificers do whether their gold be weight or no: and prove me, as
Artificers do their silver in the fire: try my reins and my heart, the most
inward motions of my Soul: search me more deeply and thoroughly than the world
can do. Unfound hearts have one Dalilah, they have one house of Rimmon, that
they cannot endure to be examined and found out: they are loath to search too
far, lest they should see what they are unwilling to see, and so be put upon
judgeing and condemning themselves for that, which they love beyond an Eye, or
an Hand.

5. The sad consequences of the neglect of this duty.
O the sad consequences of the neglect of this duty! By this neglect your
hearts will become careless, for that they are not called to an account, as
Servants and Factors are wont, when their Masters neglect to examine them.
Hereby Sins will grow bolder with you, and the more easily beset you; for that
you examine not wherein their strength lies, and which way they oftnest prevail
over you. Hereby the work of Repentance will be obstructed; for that
innumerable Sins, which you are daily guilty of, will pass away unobserved,
with those circumstances attending them, which make them of the greater
magnitude. Hereby your uncertainties about your spiritual estate will remain:
it may be converted, it may be not, it may be a Son of God, it may be not, but
a Child of Hell: it may be a Believer, it may be an Enemy to God, and ^^e of
Gods curse. Hence will follow great dejectedness under every Providence of God:
no condition will please you, whilst doubting and staggering: you will be apt
to fear whether your food be in mercy, your days in mercy, your liberty, yea
the Gospel in mercy to you: you will sink under adversity; for you cannot say,
the Lord is my portion; you know not whether God will be your strong Tower,
Fortress, etc. you cannot manage any duty well, whilst this lies neglected.
Mica. 6.8.
How can you walk before God with an humble heart, when you know not what your
hearts are? How can you serve him with an upright heart, whilst a stranger to
this duty? The very Heathens knew how necessary this was to all their duties,
and therefore discreetly caused to be writ over the Temple at Delphos, (...),
Know thy self. Miserable are the disappointments that will attend English
Professors, unless they fall into a compliance with this duty: you will dye
deluded: like the foolish Virgins, you will not know your undone condition,
till it be too late: you lie deceived in matters of the greatest and highest
concernment: you are cheated hitherto in things of eternity: you are vexed,
when deceived by a Friend, when supplanted by a Neighbor: O! how will it
pierce your Souls, to be cheated by your selves? When we would exclaim against
a Knave, we say, he will cozen his Father; the nearer the Relation, the more
sordid the Cheat: O! but here is one that lies in thy bosom, and thou and it,
go to cheat each other continually. Let no man deceive himself: 1 Cor. 3.18.
it seems we are apt to do so: But O! how great will your confusion be when
this deceit shall be manifested, when you shall see your selves frustrated of
all your hopes, and the glory, your hearts promised you? How will you be
confounded, when you shall say, we looked for Heaven; but behold Hell: we
looked for Salvation; but behold Destruction: we looked to be made perfectly
Happy; but (O how our hearts have cheated us!) we must be damned: we thought we
had as good hearts as any, as true Faith, as sound Repentance, as cordial love
to God, as any of our Neighbors, as any Precisians of the Country: we fools
counted their life madness, etc. O! what daggers and swords will these
frustrations be to you?

6. We and our hearts shall not always be strangers.
If you be loath to see how it is with you now, how will you be able to behold
what shall be seen at the day of Judgment? Though you now will not know your
hearts; though you are so stately, as not to speak with them, or loath to
examine the dirty Corners; yet God is coming with his Fan: the books must be
opened, and every page of thy heart will be unfolded; for God will bring to
light every hidden work of dishonesty: God will pluck off the rough garment,
which thou wearest to deceive: thy inward parts, which are very wickedness,
shall be made manifest: and then thou shall be speech-less, as if thou had a
muzle put upon thy mouth, as the word signifies. Well, seeing murder will out
(as we say) the secrets of the Soul must be brought forth, is it not better by
judging our selves by a severe trial and sentence on our selves to prevent the
wofullness of the last day? Judged we must, and shall be: is it not then thy
wisdom to judge thy self here in thy Closet, that thou may be judged by God
with a judgment of Absolution, and not of Condemnation? Is it nothing to have
all thy unrepented and unforgiven sins published on the housetop, made known
to all the World, Ezekiel. 22.14.
at the great day? How will thine heart endure then, when the Lord shall come
to deal with thee? You will not see; but you shall see: Isa. 26.11.
You will not retire, the World lies in your hearts, Business comes in, and
takes up all your time and spirits: God is about to strip you, to ease you of
your Callings, you shall come naked to the Bar of God, you shall have no
Family business to distract you: a fair trial there shall be, but a sad one for
thee; Your sins shall find you out. Numb. 32.23.
You have had many Calls: once more I call upon you, in the Name of Christ, to
examine your hearts, by the words of this Book, which you have, or shall read:
And be sure of it, If you will not nor try your selves by the Word, God will
try you by his Works. Thus says the Lord, Jer. 9.7.
I will melt them, and try them: But how will God melt them, and try them?
Shall I not visit them for these things, says the Lord: v. 9.
Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? For the mountains will
I take up a weeping and wailing, v. 10.
and for the habitations of the wilderness a lamentation; because they are
burnt up, so that none can pass through them, neither can men hear the voice of
the Cattle, both the Fowl of the Heavens, and the Beasts are fled, they are
gone. And I will make Jerusalem heaps, v. 11.
and a Den of Dragons; and I will make the Cities of Judah desolate, without an
Inhabitant.

CHAP. XXI. Their Pride.
BEhold, Professors Pride, Ezekiel. 16.49. Evidenced in Irreverence in addresses
to God. Genesis 18.27.
This was the iniquity of thy Sister Sodom, Pride, etc. And is not this
Devilish Sin become our National Sin?

1. With what a bold and impudent face have we come and appeared before God?
Who has sensibly expressed himself in Abraham's words, Behold now, I have taken
upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am but dust and ashes. Instead of a
reverential fear of God, our behavior has been stout against God, and we have
not trembled in his presence, no not whilst we have been terribly threatened by
God, yea when his dreadful threatenings have been terribly executed upon us:
Even in such times we have irreverently rushed into his Presence.

2. Not stooping to the Will of God.
How have our Wills risen up against the Will of God? The humble Soul stoops to
Gods Preceptive and Providential Will; but we have wretchedly thwarted God in
all his Counsels and Dispensations. The great Controversy betwixt God and man,
is, Whose Will shull stand, God or man's? O! How impudently have we contended
with the Lord about this? We have even thought our selves too great to be
crossed. How many think it even a disgrace to their noble Spirits, to be still
and silent, even under the hand of God, but they must be clamorous, and
speaking against the very Heavens? They are ready to say, This was not well
done by God, he might have given, or continued to us, this and the other mercy:
They mislike many of Gods Dispensations of Providence: they cannot heartily
say, that God holds the reins best, and and guides all his affairs with the
greatest wisdom: they think if they were the Orderers of matters in the World,
things would be better governed: like proud Absolon, 2 Samuel 15.4.
who wished he were in David's stead, they wish they were in Gods stead. A
proud man would have others under him, yea, he would have the great and
glorious God subject to his will, to do what he pleases, to yield to his
desires. Whence are all your disputings and quarrellings with God, save from
the Pride of your hearts? The humble Soul cries, Not my will, but thine be
done. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good; But so overgrown are
we with an opinion of out own wisdom and worth, that we must limit the Holy
One, and order him how to rule the World: God must stoop to our prescriptions,
or else we swell and break with discontent. O! Is not God wiser than man? Shall
the clay say to the Potter, Why have thou shaped me thus? Rather let the
potsheards strive with the potsheards (worms with worms) about the
preeminence of wills, than we contend with God. O! When will your proud hearts
stoop to God? when shall his Will be the Rule? when will you be willing to be
dealt withal as God pleases?

3. Lothness that God should be exalted, unless they be instruments and sharers.
How loath are we that God should have any glory in the World, unless we share
in it, or unless we be the immediate instruments of exalting of him? We are
willing God should have some glory, so we may share with him: content that
Free Will and Free Grace should divide the spoils: the honor of our salvation
shall be ascribed, partly to our endeavors, and the honesty of our wills, in
choosing the way of life, and partly to Christ's merits. We are willing God
should be exalted, so it be by our selves, so that we may be famous in
promoting the design; else we are discontented. Few are contented that Gods
work should be carried on by any hand save their own, that some glory may
descend on them. Most are like the proud Senators of Rome, that could have
been contented, that Christ should have been numbered among their Gods, but that
the Motion began not with themselves. O! Think with your selves, how many good
motions, tending to the edification of the body of Christ, have miscarried upon
this account, because others should not have the honor of beginning them?
Whence can it be, save from the Pride of our hearts, that we have so little
rejoiced, when God has been advanced by others, and we had no hand therein? We
are afraid that others glory will eclipse ours.

4. Scorning some Divine Command.
How scornfully do we look on some of the Lords Commandments? To reprove
Offenders, to visit the Poor, and conferr with them, yea to be seen in the
company of poor Christians, is accounted a disgrace; we think it an abasement
to our Spirits, and a discredit to us, to be known in any relation to them. Who
can bow to the meanest services of the Sanctuary?

5. How unwilling are we to come to Christ, unwillingness to come to Christ,
till worthy of him.
till we have our double money in our sacks, till we have fitted and prepared
our selves, and made our selves worthy of him? Hence all the offers of Christ
are neglected, till the Soul has wrought it self into a better disposition for
Christ's embraces and loves; and therefore when we can weep bitterly, and pray
fervently, we will come to Christ, but will not be beholding to him to work
both to will and to do: We would be the Alpha, and he shall be the Omega: We
would begin some glorious work, and then tie him to our performances, and
oblige him by our great and glorious services and reformations: We hate to be
Almes-people; To beg I am ashamed: We are loath to receive all from God, we
would purchase and merit somewhat.

6. How Unthankful are we? unthankfulness.
A Proud man is always an Unthankful man, and an Unthankful man is always a
Proud man. He thinks he deserves all that is conferred upon him. The humble man
counts himself less than the least of all Gods mercies; but the proud man
reckons all that he enjoys too little. Do not we think God is beholding to
us for our Duties and Services, more than we are to him for Life, Breath, and
all our Possessions?

7. Setting upon great works in their own strength.
Dare we not set upon the highest Services in our own strength, without calling
in the help of the Almighty? The Proud man seldom believes his own
insufficiencies to think a good thought: He can rush upon Prayer, reading the
Scriptures, Meditation, and such difficult works of Christianity, without
imploring the aid and succors of Heavens Influences:

8. Being hasty Beggars.
Are we not hasty Beggars? If we petition for Pardons, or Holiness, and God
comes not to the door at the first or second knock, away we are flinging: There
is no hope, why should I wait on the Lord any longer? We dare prescribe God a
day, and by thus limiting God, our Pride appears, as if we knew the fittest
seasons for deliverance and mercy. Were we of an humble heart, we would wait
all our days with patience, yea we would resolve to be exalting of God,
whatever becomes of our selves, and to pay him the homage of duty, though he
for just reasons be pleased to frown upon our Prayers, and to deny us all the
requests of our Souls. I hear some say, they would pray, hear, read, wait upon
God all their days, so they were sure God would accept them, and smile upon
them in the last hour: I say to these, You ought to serve God with all your
time and strength, you are bound to God in duty, though God were under no
obligations by promise unto you. O the Pride of our Spirits! that we dare tell
God, We will not serve thee unless thou humor us.

9. Accounting Gods Judgments greater than their Deserts.
Do not we think God has punished us above our Deserts? Do not we hence cry
out more of our smart and pain, than we do of our sins and provocations? Were
we humble, we would bless the Lord, that he has restrained his rough wind in
the day of his East wind: We would wonder, that it is so well with us, that we
are not in a worse condition: We would cry out, Lam. 3.40.
It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed. Wherefore does a living man
complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? How loath are we to confess our
iniquities have deserved all that we suffer, and a great deal more, and
therefore to humble our selves for our sins? How do we endeavor to hide our
sins from God, Man, and our selves?

10. Admiring what they suppose they have.
How apt are we to admire our selves for supposed Excellencies? For supposed
Beauty, Parts, Reason, Wit and Understanding, yea and for supposed Grace? Man
(says one) is a proud piece of flesh, and a small matter will make him show
his pride, and spread his plumes.

11. Boasting of what Good they have and do.
How apt are we to boast of any Good we do? Of our Valor in the Field, of our
Discourses in such and such Company, how wisely we discharged such a Service,
how well we behaved our selves, in such an Action? Come see my Zeal for the
Lord. Look to your hearts, you will find them unduly transported, as with the
thoughts of your gifts and graces, so with what you do through the gift of
grace. Our very Graces are often an occasion of boasting. It Is a rare thing to
see a man rich in gifts, 1 Cor. 8.1. Puffed up with any thing of theirs.
and poor in spirit. Even knowledge puffs up.

12. Does not any thing of ours swell us? Are not some puffed up with their
fine Clothes, new Attires, Ribbons, Dressings, yea with their very Spots? Their
Feathers, their Hair, the excrements of Beasts and Men, make them fly high.
Are not some puffed up with their Birth? Hence they boast, that they have the
Blood of Kings and Nobles running in their Veins; or else that they are of the
Stock of Abraham, descended from Parents eminent for Piety, though they have
sadly degenerated from their lives and walks. How many are swelled with their
Estates? That they have Shops full, Houses full, and Baggs full, puffs them
up. Whilst all the treasure is showed, how glad is the heart? Even Hezekiah was
glad to show the Ambassadors the house of his precious things. Isa. 39.^.
How are others puffed up with the smiles and respects of great men? And yet
how soon may the Sun be over-cast? Then they are no more heeded than the Dial
is, when the Sun is in a Cloud, How does the bodily strength and perfections of
others swell them, though every moment they are going down into the dust? What
is your life? It is even a vapor, James 4.14.
that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. How are others
swelled with their Church Priviledges? The Temple of the Lord, Ezekiel. 7.4.
the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are we. These are lying words
not to be trusted in. Others with their revelations and high enjoyments? 3 Cor.
12.7.
Paul was in danger of being exalted above measure through the abundance of the
revelations, therefore was given to him a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet him, lest he should be exalted above measure. Romans 12.3. Gal.
6.3.
How few have heeded that of the Apostle, Let no man think of himself more
highly than he ought to think? and that, If a man think himself to be
something, when he is nothing, he deceives himself. How have we been puffed up
with our Reformation, Ministers, Churches, Professors? Preferring them before
others at home and abroad.

13. How little suspicion have we of our selves? Not suspecting themselves.
Of our baseness, and sinfullness, the deceits and treachery of our own hearts?
With how much confidence do we thrust our selves into wicked men's company, and
fear not to be leavened with them? How little do we suspect that we shall fall
from the grace we have, or seem to have? We are high minded and therefore fear
not. We do not suspect that there are worse abominations within than yet are
discovered. How do we (pretend to) bless God that our hearts are good? We fear
not the worst of our selves. If others be overcome with uncleanness, passion,
etc. we are confident we shall never so dishonor God.

14. Fuming at plain dealing.
Do not we fret and fume when any go about to discover the vileness within? I
have heard of some Ladies, that have hated the glass that gave them a true
sight of their spots, Psa. 141.5.
and deformities. Humble David loved them best who most convincingly reproved
him for what was amiss in him.

15. Not being able to deny themselves in any lawful content. Being troubled
that any Rule besides themselves.
We must be pleased: we must have our sports, and the utmost of our liberty,
though GOd and man suffer by it never so much: we cannot stoop to deny our
selves some lawful contentments, though God be to be honored thereby.

16. How have we been troubled that any save our selves have Ruled and been in
Authority? Few have learnt the Humility of Jothams Olive Tree, Fig Tree, and
Vine? The Bramble thinks himself worthy to be in the highest place. O! what
fightings, what sidings, what Plots to get higher? Haman was never contented
till every knee bowed: not so much as one Mordecai must be excused. If men
would but speak out, they think they are fitter for Magistrates and Ministers,
than those that are employed: so that whereas the humble man thinks every one
better than himself, they on the contrary think themselves the only men. 1 Pet.
2.13.
Do not we account it below us to to submit to every Ordinance of man, though
for the Lords sake? And when we cannot do what we are commanded, who suffers
meekly and not in anger against the highest Powers? Do not we suffer in proud
wrath? Prove. 21.24. And glad to be commended by others, though they discommend
themselves.


17. How glad are we if others take notice of our actions? And how are we
pleased if they commend us for them; and yet we would not have them think so?
We will discommend our own Prayers, for deadness, straitness, and our selves
for want of parts, etc. on purpose to draw forth others praise. How few are
unwilling that others should have good thoughts of them, in reference to
themselves? How few are troubled at the praises of their friends more than at
flashes of lightning cast into their faces?

18. How do we rejoice, when others cry us up, yea to be cried up undeservedly.
even when we know it is unjustly, when we know how hollow-hearted,
low-spirited, and selfish we are? Are not we exceedingly pleased at the flowers
that are spread upon our dead Corpse? Though the praises be not due to us, yet
how do we drink them in as the Heart does water.

19. How Magisterial have we been? Being Dictatours to others.
What great Dictatours to others; as if all were bound to dance after us? We
will not abate at all, but every poor Mordecai must do obeisance to our opinion.

20. How are we guilty of despising, Despising others.
yea scorning those that are (as we think) below us in Birth, in Estate, in
Power, in Parts, and Gifts, yea in graces? Isa. 58.9.
How do we evidence our slighting of them in our looks, in our words, in our
gestures and behaviors? Pride (says one) is a bad Mother of many bad
Children, these three especially, boasting of our selves, contending with, and
despising of others. Job. 35.6.
How unlike are we herein unto God? Behold God is mighty ( i. e. most mighty,
most great, the positive is put for the superlative degree) and yet he
despises not any, i. e. any of those who have no might, no greatness: yea how
do we herein reproach our Maker? God (says one) made every man an object of
respect, or pity, it is Pride that makes any the objects of contempt, Prove. 17.5.
and in them their Maker. Who so mocketh the poor, reproacheth his Maker.

21. unwilling to confess their faults unto others.
How few will confess their faults unto others? Perhaps they will reform, but
hate it to the death to go and acknowledge their trespasses to others, whom
it is clear and proved they have trespassed against. How many have you injured
by tale-bearing, backbiting, etc. Must not God work a miracle to persuade us to
make reistitution, to go to the parties wronged, and confess the wrong there,
and then to go from house to house to vindicate and clear the party, there
where before we had wickedly stained and aspersed him? This makes me cry out,
Lord, who shall be saved? Lord, many are called, but few are chosen.

22. Reproving haughtily Isa. 3.5.
When we go about that too too much neglected duty of fraternal correption, how
loftily do we manage it? How do our words, yea looks, and gestures, evidence
our haughtiness? The Child behaveth himself proudly against the Ancient.
Vindicating themselves maliciously.


23. What a stir, what a noise do we make to vindicate our selves when
aspersed and calumniated? Whereas the humble Soul would never stir to clear
himself (as knowing how much guilt and sin there is within) were it not for the
honor of God, and the edification of the Lords people, which may be hindered,
if prejudices and unjust reproaches be not removed: Alas! most men study
revenges, and like the Grave are unsatiable in their malicious vindications.

24. Being bloudily minded toward their dissenting Brethren.
How bitter have we been against dissenting Brethren? Would we not have cast
them out of the Land, if we might have had our wills? Did not we talk of
shipping away all that would not submit to our way of worship? Did not we count
them, who were divided in circumstances and ceremonies from us, like Dogs and
Pagans, unfit to subsist among us?

No wonder if for these things God make us a shame, and a derision, a Proverb,
and a byword to all the Nations round about us. O! our Pride testifies to our
faces: we are guilty of what brought down fire on Sodom: This is the sin, that
God sets himself in battel-array against, Jam. 4.6.
(so the word for resisting in that Scripture, God resists the proud,
signifies:) It Is that which makes God abhor us and our offerings. Prove. 16.5.
Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the Lord. Believe it,
Gods eyes are upon the haughty, that he may bring them down, and he watches
his opportunity to do it. Psa. 38.6.
The Lord knows the proud afar off. When God meets with a spectacle, that he
cannot endure to look upon, he turns from it, whilst it is afarr off. What
shall I say? Pride is the first of those seven things, Prove. 6.17.
which are an abomination to the Lord. And no wonder that God so loatheth it,
whilst it crosses the great design of God in the Gospel, which is to humble
the mountains, 1 Cor. 1.29, 31.
that no flesh should glory in his presence, but that he that glories, should
glory only in the Lord.

CHAP. XXII. Their Intemperance in Eating.
THough Pride was the first spark that blowed up the glory of Sodom, Professors
Fullness of Bread.
yet there was also Fullness of Bread, that made the flame the greater. Behold,
This was the iniquity of thy Sister Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.49.
Pride, Fullness of Bread, etc. Their Pride was evidenced in their Fullness of
Bread, as the Cause in its Effect. The word (...), which signifies to be
temperate, is (as one well observes) applied frequently to the Mind, in
opposition to Pride; because Sobriety proceeds from an humble sense that
nothing is ours, but all that we have is Gods; and all Intemperance is commonly
the issue of a proud Spirit, which makes men look on themselves as Owners, and
all Creatures as their proper Goods, which are perfectly at their disposal.
Hence the Crown of Pride, Isa. 28.1, 3.
and the Drunkards of Ephraim, are both names for the same persons. And is not
our Pride evidenced in our Fullness of Bread? Sodoms intemperance in eating (not
to insist on intemperance in drinking) was very great, but I fear Englands has
exceeded Sodoms: I will not say all your labor is for the mouth, Eccles. 6.7.
(as Solomon complains) and yet the appetite is not filled; but this I say,
that some live to eat, some sacrifice all to the belly, to some the belly is a
God. Few can displease their appetite: like profane Esau, they part from their
heritage, from the blessing of the firstborn, for a mess of pottage, for a
little pleasure to the taste. How will we deny our selves in respect of Life,
when we cannot deny our selves in respect of a little Meat? As Heaven and God
are low, very low with them, that cannot deny themselves in a little
Iudian-Smoke, in a Pipe, in a cup of Liquor, but will be immoderate in these,
though thereby they hazard the displeasure of God: So are they very low with
us, if we cannot deny our selves in our Morsels. All our ruin came in at this
door, that Adam ventured the displeasure of God, to eat a little pleasant
Fruit. A man would think, Evidenced in their much eating.
that the wounds we received by the mouth, should make us check our appetite
all our days.

1. How have we been guilty of eating too much? A little would content Nature,
which has therefore given us a little Mouth and Stomach, to teach us (says an
Ancient) Moderation. How have our hearts been overcharged with surfeiting,
whilst wicked men with drunkenness? Luke 21.14.
How have we forgot Christ's charge against this sin, even to his own
Disciples? Have we not hereby been disabled to perform the service which we owe
to God? As some have been strong to drink, so others to eat: Both have been
unfitted to wait upon God thereby. The end of our eating should have been to
fit us, not to indispose us for the service of God. We should measure our Cheer
by that which Nature requires, and not by that which a greedy Appetite
desires. We divest our selves of Man, of Reason, that should guide us, when we
are led by a sensual Appetite. And yet alas! When we have eaten enough, and
perhaps more than enough, a new Dish at the second course makes us fall on
without fear or wit, and we put not a knife to our throat. Prove. 23.2.
Serving diverse lusts and pleasures, is the high way to damnation. This way sin
entered into the World, and in this way, O! how many are posting to Hell? If you
would adopt your selves Children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3
then fulfill the desires of the flesh. O that we should be so senseless, so
brutish, as to venture the eternal ruin of our Souls to gratify our
appetites for a quarter of an hour! She that fared deliciously, Rev. 18.7.
has torment and sorrow given her. If that you will choose to be beasts here,
and to eat as beasts, as much as you can, Know that Heaven will not (as Noah's
Ark did) admit of any Beasts within it. When Tertullian gives an account of the
Christians Feasts; In our feeding (says he) we remember that we are to pray at
night: Prayer is the first and last dish of the feast: and when we depart our
behavior is so religious and modest, that one would have thought, we had
rather been at a Sermon than at a Supper. Blush, O Reader! to consider how far
short we fall of these Christians in our banqueting hours. Believe it,
Intemperance and Luxury are National sins, the sins of England. It was spoken
(unless I am misinformed) of our Nation, That we build as if we should live
for ever, and eat as if we should die presently. O! when shall we imitate that
great Apostle? 1 Cor. 6.12.
All things (says he) are lawful for me; but I will not be brought under the
power of any. It is a base thing for a man to be under the power of Drinks,
Apparel, Recreations, and so of Flesh, of Meats, to be a Vassal to those things
over which the Lord has given him dominion. He that loves any thing too much,
Qui nimis rem aliquam amat quodam modo servus istius efficitur. Romans 6.16. Mat.
24.38.
(says Aquinas) is in a sense Servant thereunto. And what says the Apostle?
Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants
ye are, to whom ye obey, whether of sin, etc. How many serve not our Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own bellies? How many are like the men of the old World,
Given to eating? so the word in the Original properly signifies.

2. The costliness of their Diet,
How have our meats born no proportion to our gains and incomes? The rich man,
that fared deliciously, had some pretense for it, for he had riches to
countervail the expenses of his Table: Above their Estates,
But does not the lowness of our Estates require a meaner Table? God knows we
have been worse than Infidels on this account, in that we have been so far
from providing for our own, that to pamper the flesh with costly diet, we have
suddenly impoverished our selves, and brought our Children to live upon others
trenchers, whereas we should have abated of our superfluities for their sakes,
if not for our own. Go voluptuous wretch, unto the Ant, and to the Be, they
provide for Winter; but thou have had no forecast, and so Poverty comes in on
thee and thine, as an armed man, irresistably.

3. unsuitable to the Times.
How have our Tables been unsuitable to the Times we live in? Whether Zion wear
the garments of joy, or of heaviness, all is one, the belly must be served, our
dishes must not abate. Thou farest deliciously every day: All times are alike
to thee. This is a great sin, and I cannot but charge many Professors with it.
Respect is not had to the tokens of Gods wrath. Jude v. 12.
We eat without fear: Without fear of the wrath of God, that is ready to break
forth upon us. In this day does the Lord of Hosts call to weeping, Isa. 22.12,
13, 14.
and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth: And behold,
joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, (actions lawful enough at
another time) eating flesh, and drinking wine, etc. And it was revealed in mine
ears by the Lord of Hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you
till ye die, says the Lord God of Hosts. We have made little or no distinction
of times: Perhaps a Fast every month is (carelessly) kept; but every day should
be a day of abstinence, every day we should abate of what we might enjoy, if
the judgments of God were not amongst us, and others impending over us: God
has a controversy with us for feasting, when Joseph is in the pit, Amos 4.6.
and for our eating the Lambs of the Flocks; for that we are not grieved for
the affliction of Joseph.

4. Not respecting the Saints necessities
How little respect have we had to the necesities of the Saints? O! if there
were any true love to God, to Religion, to the Church of God, and to the Saints
of the most high, we would abate of our worldly comforts in this day, Membra
putida and mortua quae sensum non habent; tales sunt Christiani, qui de alienis
affectionibus non dolent. Aug. in Psalm. 130.
we would cut our selves short of what we were wont to lay out, not only in
fine clothes, but in housekeeping, in expensive meats and drinks, we would not
give such liberty to the satisfying of the flesh, we would be more sparing in
our diet, that we might be in the greater capacity to promote pious and
charitable designs. But alas! iniquity abound, and the love of many (save to
their guts) waxes cold.

5. Eating without fear of God.
Do not we eat without an holy fear of God? The Elders of Israel did eat their
bread before the Lord. Exodus 18.12.
But so have not we, so do not we, eat as in the presence of God. Have not some
been so eager upon the pleasing of the flesh, and gratifying of their sensual
appetites, as that they have (secretly at least) been troubled at a long grace
(as it is called) before meat? Have not some fallen to their meat without
invocating God to be with them? How unlike are such unto Christ, whose usual
practice it was, to lift up his eyes to Heaven, and crave a blessing upon the
creatures before he did partake of them? How distracted have been the thoughts
of others that have prayed, in that short time? How were their thoughts on the
meats and drinks? How hastily do men after a blessing is craved run to the
Dish, without any the least pause or consideration whether God heard them yea
or no, when they called to him? How commonly do we raze our Petitions, snatch
them out of Gods hands, I mean, contradict all our Prayers? We pray our
discourses may be heavenly, and they are altogether earthly. Few can say as
Blessed Dod was wont at the close of the meal, Blessed be God, not one word of
earthly things since we sat down? We pray we may eat for God, and we eat for
our selves. We cannot say that our Spikenard sends forth his pleasant smells,
whilst we are at the Table. We have not so good a plea to make as some, we have
eat and drank in thy presence. This is not written over our Tables, Thou God
see. We can seldom call our Table Penuel, because we have seen God in this
place. Hos. 2.8.
How little do we consider, that they are Gods creatures. She did not know that
I gave her Corn, etc. And that as the meat is Gods, so it is he who gives us
appetites, and strength and ability to put every crum into our mouths; for in
him we live and move. How little do we believe that we must account fore very
bit and drop? How little do we consider that God stoops the creatures to us,
that we may stoop to him, and lay down our lives as willingly for Gods honor,
as God causes the creature to bleed and die for our use? How little do we
think of the Heavenly banquet, that our Father is preparing for us; where the
cloth shall never be taken away, where we shall hunger and thirst no more, but
be fully satisfied, and that for ever and ever? Examine your spirits and frames
at your Tables, whether the fear of God be before your eyes, whether you stand
in awe of him? It may be found that you never more forget God, than when God is
mostly remembering you: When his goods are most in your hands and mouths, your
mouths are so full, Deuteronomy. 8.10, 11.
that they cannot show forth his praise: your eyes are so held to your
Belly-gods, that you forget Jehovah. Are there not some that will crave a
blessing before they eat, that yet fail to return thanks afterward, Joel 2.26.
Of scandalizing others.
though Joel says in his Prophecy to Gods people, ye shall eat and be
satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord your God?

6. Have not we fed without a Christian fear of scandalizing others upon our
eating profusely? What says the Drunkard? Why may not I toss the Kan or Pot
(in plain English) be drunk as well as such and such gormandise? why may not I
drink immoderately as well as such eat immoderately? Jude v. 12.
why may not we sit one or two hours to drink, as well as such sit one hour or
two to fill their panch with meat? Gluttons harden and justify Drunkards. Ecce
qui jactant se redemptos, etc. Cyp. de duplici Martyrio. Romans 14.21. Of snares
in eating.
Jude will tell you, that sensual persons are the Spots of a Christian society.
The old Gentiles in Cyprians days were much scandalized at the intemperance of
Christians. Lo, these great Boasters, who pretend to be redeemed from the
tyranny of the Devil, and to be dead to the World, what slaves are they to
their own sensual desires? O my Brethren! It is good neither to eat flesh, nor
to drink wine, or any thing else, whereby they Brother stumbleth, or is
offended, or made weak.

7. Do not we eat without a prudent fear of the snares that are in our Dishes?
In eating there ought to be much caution. Job. 1.5, 6.
Job was afraid of the entertainments of his Children. He was a wise man, and
knew that there were more guests than were invited. I wish we knew it too. We
think if the Sons of God come together, the Devil will not come with them,
though the Scripture assures us he will. It would be some check when we sit at
the Table to consider that the first immoderate Sop is handed over by the
Devil, and in goes he with it into our Souls. Eating for low and base ends.


8. How have we had low, base, earthly, sensual, and Devilish ends in our
eating? not to refresh our bodies, but our pallats, not to glorify God, but to
pamper the flesh? yea have not some men fed on such and such dishes on purpose
to irritate and provoke their lusts? Sure our Enemy is strong enough, we had
need beat down the body and keep it under, and not put weapons into our Enemies
hands. What says the wise man? When thou sit to eat with a Ruler (such
keep plentiful tables, especially Magistrates on their Feast days) consider
diligently what is before thee, and put a knife to thy throat, Prove. 23.1, 2.
See the large English Annot.
if thou be a man given to appetite, i.e. Bridle thine appetite by diligence,
yea force, let not the slave always be on horseback, always rule, be as
circumspect, as if thou were under the razour: or thus, consider diligently
what is before thee, else thou put a knife to thy throat, i. e. thou
endangerest thy life, yea thy soul, should thou give way to thy greedy
appetite to feed upon all the dainties on the Table? it is a thousand to one but
thy meats will be incentives to lust. 1 Cor. 10.31.
What says the Apostle, Whether you eat or drink, etc. let all be done to the
glory of God. Why does the Apostle name those actions of eating and drinking,
but because we commonly eat and drink (at best) merely to please the appetite,
and not to fit for Gods Service? When we have taken as much as serves this end,
yet we must have one bit more, or one dish more to please our fleshly desires,
and so God and the Devil must part stakes.

To shut up this: I believe many men dig their graves with their teeth, and
their hells with their tongues, their liquorish tongues. Among the millions
that are now in the grave or hell, their inordmate appetite sastned most
thither. I say not but we may please our palate, at some times especially, a
great liberty is indulged to the sick; but if we have not an higher design than
to please the appetite, our Belly is our God. Little do many think that they
are setting up another God at their Tables. The Babilanians had Bell for their
God, a God of Brass; but these men have a God of flesh. The Rabbis say, he is
a Glutton or Belly-God that eats a pound of flesh, and drinks a quart of wine.
Have not we many such? and do they not sacrifice to their God with a bowed knee
too? Repent, O England! repent, of thy abuse of the good creatures of God, and
thereby of thy sacrilegious robbing of God of his worship and time. How often
have ye so cramb'd your selves that you have been unfit for any acts of
worship, yea for any of the works of your particular callings? Your heads have
been heavy, and spirits dull, and so God has had the Carkas, but excesses have
taken away the heart. The tabret and wine are in your feasts, Hos, 4.11. Isa.
5.11, 12, 13.
but you regard not the work of the Lord, etc. therefore my people are gone
into Captivity. I wish two things for you, First, That you would be as
ingenious as Austin was, who confessed he was no drunkard; but yet sometimes
too immoderate in eating. And Secondly, That you would be restless till God
has taught you, what he did him: Lord (says he) thou have now taught me to
use my meat, as my medicine, to repair, not to oppress nature. O! Tit. 2.11, 12.
when will the grace of God appear, and teach us to deny worldly lusts, and to
live soberly?

CHAP. XXIII. Their abundance of Idleness.
A Third Sin of Sodom was Idleness, Professors Idleness. Ezekiel. 16.49.
Behold, this was the iniquity of thy Sister Sodom, etc. an abundance of
Idleness was in her and in her daughters. This Sin is the Companion of the
former: when the belly is full, the bones would be at rest, and when men have
eat and drunk to excess, then they rise up to play. This, and the former, are
City-sins, they were found in Sodom and Gomorrah, and I wish they were not
among us also.

1. In their particular callings.
How are we guilty of abundance of Idleness in our particular callings? Few
have this for their Motto, Laboremus, Let us be working, I mean, working that
which we ought. How many at the great day will God upbraid with, O wicked and
slothful servant! Every man has a Talent of time and strength, but it is hid,
it is not employed, at least as it ought. God made not man to play, but to
sweat out his living. 'Twas Gods Ordinance in Paradise, and since that we are
enjoined to labor with our hands, Ezekiel. 18.18.
and not to eat the bread of Idlenest. How many, because they have not done
good among their people, shall dye in their iniquity? Our land is full of
drones; and no wonder; for we train up our Children in Idleness, and indulge to
them, whilst wasting the first of their days in foolish pleasures and
recreations. Forraigners breed their Children (to our shame be it spoken) to
work those gaies with their hands, which our Children must play away their time
with: hence they having inured themselves to Idleness they hate labor for the
future. Christ saw some standing Idle: Mat. 20.3, 6.
here he might see many: He could not endure it, he thought it unreasonable,
why stand ye here all the day Idle? O! how many are idle all the days of
their lives? How many Gentlemen and their Sons are there without a calling?
They live as if God had sent them into the world to make their hands as pirches
for birds to sit upon: they are of no use to the Public. In Cities how Idle
are the Dames? They live as if God had given them reasonable Souls, and the
light of the Sun only to dress themselves, to view a glass, and to paint and
adorn their Carcasses. There are some among you that work not at all; 2 These.
3.11. Nihil agentes, fed curiose saragentes.
and yet busy-bodies, busy to invent ways to pass away time, though time be
still running, and they are hastening into Eternity. Doing nothing (says the
Apostle) and yet working every where, save where they should: busy to go from
house to house to complement friends, to devour others times: busy to carry
tales and news, but hating the work of their calling, wherein God has set
them. The whole life of many is to eat, and drink, and sleep, and sport, and
sit, and talk, and laugh themselves fat (but there is leanness in their Souls.)
A kind of vagrant people they be, that having little to do, the Devil is loath
they should be idle, and therefore he hires them to devour time, to carry news
and tales to mispend others times: 1 Timothy 5.13.
They learn to be Idle: they study which way they may mispend time, wandering
from house to house, and yet they are not only idle, but busybodies. One
compares them to Pedlars, opening their Packs, and dropping here a tale, and
there a tale. These are at leisure to hear the Devil, and to observe his
Orders. He that will not serve God at home, the Devil, rather than he shall
stand out, will send him of his errands, and get him to put his Sickle into
another man's Corn. Go (says Satan) into that house, and rail against such a
good man, carry his miscarriage from one to another, till his name rots and
stinks in their Nostrils: Go to such a man's door, he is employed in reading the
Scriptures and good books, or Catechizing his Family, etc. Go and divert him,
eat up his time, that he may have no leisure for such works. He goes, he is a
busie-body, a tatler too. He must go whom the Devil drives; Hence occasion is
given to the Adversary to speak reproachfully, for that so many are turned
aside after Satan. Let it be considered and lamented, how much precious time is
devoured in the Bed; Five hours sleep will suffice for some constitutions: The
utmost that Physicians allow, is seven hours; but some waste and bury
themselves in their Beds almost half their time. How little do many consider,
that in the Day of Judgment, they must give account, as for every idle word,
so for their idleness in their Bed-chambers? Sluggard, view the Sun, its
running a race, whilst thou art tumbling on thy Bed, and crying, O that this
were to labor! View the Wind and the Air, they are in motion: View the Waters,
they stink and corrupt, unless running: nay view the dull earth, it is not so
dull as thou art, it brings forth for the use of Man. Go to the Ant thou
sluggard, Prove. 6.6.
yea any where, consider the ways of all, save thy self, and be wise. What! a
Professor, and yet guilty of an unnatural sin? Nature puts all creatures into
motion, and to provide for themselves: 1 Timothy 5.8.
thou art worse than an Infidel: yea worse than a Beast: The poor Infant cannot
suck without labor, and yet thou would live without labor. God takes this
so ill, 2 These. 3.10.
that he would not have them to eat, who will not labor, and if we know such,
we sin if we feed them. God has not forbid meat to be given to any other
sinners, only these are not to be fed, let them starve and die, if they will
not labor. The sluggard will not plow by reason of the cold, Prove. 26.4.
therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have nothing: God has no pity for
drones, and he would not have us to pity them: Drones are to be beaten out of
the Hive, and starved in Winter: It is the Workman that is worthy of meat in
Christ's account: Mat. 10.10.
Idleness has brought much evil upon you, and bred many in you, it begets many
diseases in the body, but many more in the Soul: Psalm. 91.11.
it exempts a man from the protection of Angels, and it exposes to Gods wrath:
it brought ruin upon Sodom, and the Cities round about, Jude v. 7.
and they are set forth for an example suffering the vengeance of eternal fire.

2. In their general callings.
How are we guilty of abundance of Idleness in our general callings? And above
all Idleness, Spiritual sloth is most dangerous. I find some, with unwearied
diligence, laboring to enlarge their Possessions, and to raise their
Posterity; they rise early, and sit up late, and eat the bread of carefulness,
but all is for the Body: they do little or nothing for their precious Souls,
and for Eternity. Christ and Heaven stand by, and few regard them: Few work out
their Salvation with fear and trembling. Some will not be at so much pains for
their Souls, as to perform the common outward Duties of Religion. They will go
to the Market, or to be merry with Friends, many a mile; but if a Lecture he
but a few paces from their thresholds, they count it intolerable to wet their
^^et, to expose themselves to the air: Well, Well; God has eased you of this
labor. But if men are for some easy parts of Religion, yet how few are for
the difficult parts thereof? They cannot endure to watch their hearts, to
sanctify the Lords day so strictly, as not to think their own thoughts, nor
speak their own words, nor do their own deeds. How many Professors have so
long given way to their lazy distempers, have lain so long upon the Bed of
sloth, that when we press them to any painful and laborious Duties, they think
it excuse enough, to say, We have put off our Coat, and loath we are to put it
on: We have given way to sloth so long, that we hate to take pains for Christ,
and for Eternity? Hence Self-examination, Meditation, Watchfulness against the
first risings of sin, Mortification of inward heart-sins, etc. these works are
totally laid by; and the longer we neglect them, the more ado there is to
persuade us to take them up. We are like truant-Boyes, who hate their Book
after a long vacation. All we have to uphold our selves with, is this, that the
Spirit is willing, when God knows the contrary. We are willing to be rich, and
therefore take pains: So we would in Spiritual things too, if we were so
desirous of them. If we were willing to enjoy Christ in our Closets, would we
be even asleep there upon our knees? If we were willing to know the way to
Glory, would we not take so much pains, as to go to the Shepherds tents, and
ask for the good old way? O! O! It will cut you to the heart, when you come to
Hell-gate, that you mist of Heaven, for not enquiring the way thither; and that
you took more pains to be rich, and to damn your Souls, than to save them. Had
that time been spent in Prayer, holy Conference, and in Self-arraignments,
which was wasted in the Bed, Shop, Fields, unnecessarily, you might have had an
eternal rest; whereas Hell will be, as intolerable to all, so especially to
them, who have stood idle all the day long.

CHAP. XXIV. Their Unmercifulness.
THE Fourth Sin of Sodom was this, Professors unmercifulness. Ezekiel. 16.49.
Neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy: That is, they were
unmerciful and inhumane. And are not some Professors even in England very
hard-hearted and cruel? I have often thought and said, That Our late Civil Wars
have had too great influence upon us, to make us cruel. If there be among you a
poor man, of one of thy Brethren, within any of thy Gates, Deuteronomy. 15.7, 8.
in thy Land, which the Lord thy God gives thee, thou shall not harden thy
heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor Brother; but thou shall open thine
hand wide unto him, and shall surely lend him sufficient for his need, Luke
14.13.
in that which he wants. O! The poor we have always with us! But, When we
make a Feast, do we call the poor? Who invites the Guests that Christ has bid
for our Tables? When I consider how rare, Bowels of mercy and kindness are,
Col. 3.11.
it makes me fear (and I have Scripturegrounds for my fear) that few are the
Elect of God. O hard-hearted Professors! Hear ye the Word of the Lord: Jam.
2.13.
He shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy. He shall
have all judgment, pure judgment, without any mixtures of mercy, unmixed
wrath shall be his portion: Christ is so resolved to punish the Unmerciful,
that he will overlook any sinner, rather than him; yea, for the greater honor
of the Justice of God, Mat. 25.41, 42, etc. Mat. 9.36.
The Lord seems to begin and end the great Assizes with the Arraignment and
Sentencing of the Unmerciful man. How few compassionate Professors are there?
The proper, vital act of Mercy, is Compassion. How few resent the miseries of
others, as if they were their own? Luke 10.33.
How few set themselves to do good, to those who are miserable? Such, whatever
they pretend, are indeed unmerciful; for Mercy is an active, and a
communicative thing. How few are merciful to others Souls? How few pity, and
set themselves to help sinning Souls? (but more of this under another Head.)
How few are merciful to the Bodies of others? How many are there, that will not
spare of their superfluities, to cloth Christ's naked shoulders, or to fill his
hungry belly? Men lay out more to adorn a Cup-board, or the walls of their
houses, than ever they gave to Jesus Christ, and his Servants, all their days:
Men can feed their Birds, their Catts, their Dogs, their Swine; but the
Sucklings and Lambs of Jesus Christ perish for want: Christ tells you, what
kindness you show to his Spouse, Matthew. 25.40.
his Friends, his Children, he counts as done unto himself: and believe it, all
the scorns, and neglects you have cast on, either, his Ambassadors, or poor
Saints, he will remember, another day. Go to thy Closet, and carry this with
thee, who so stops his ear at the cry of the poor, he also shall cry
himself, Prove. 21.13.
but shall not be heard. If you give, to whom is it? Is it not only to the poor
of your own party? But has not the Lord charged you, to give to every man that
asks? Luke 6.30. Gal. 6.10.
Has he excepted any, but idlers? Are not you to do good to all, though
especially to the Household of faith? And among them, should not your greatest
charity have been set forth on them, who are become poor, not by vile courses,
but by Gods Providence, and for Conscience sake? But alas! how few can appeal
to the heart-searching God concerning their mercifulness? How few (if
destruction from God be any terror to them) dare imprecate upon themselves,
what Job did in case of unmercifulness? How few dare say to God, If I have
withheld the poor from their desire, Job 31.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
or have caused the eyes of the Widow to fail, or have eaten my morsel my self
alone, and the Fatherless has not eaten thereof, etc. If I have seen any
perish for want of clothing, or any poor without covering, etc. then let mine
arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone.

CHAP. XXV. Their unrighteousness, or unfaithfulness in Trading.
ALas! Professors miscarriages in Trading with reference to Buyers and Sellers.
Alas! Instead of Mercifulness, Behold Oppression, Violence, Deceit, Fraud,
etc. This is a Lamentation, and should be for a Lamentation. Instead of giving
to others that which is our own, we deny them that which is their own: Instead
of letting go our own right, and those dues, which in Justice others are bound
to pay unto us; yea, instead of giving more of our own, to help them in their
necessities, (which Mercy calls for, even not only not to require, what others
owe us, when Providence has dis-enabled them to pay us, but also to give them
more to support their feeble state withal) behold Injustice, in propriety of
speech. What defraudings is there one of another? How do men, not only take all
advantages of their Brethren, to get what is due to them, as to seize on a
Mortgage, when the Mortgage-money cannot be paid, or to sue a bond, or turn a
man out of his lease, when the day of payment is mist, etc. but also take
advantage from the necessities of the poor to over reach them, to get from
them, either their houses or goods, to be sure what is not their own? Have not
we grinded the faces of the poor? God will reckon for this speedily. Look over
the Prophets, and see whether unmercifullness and unrighteousness ever went
unpunished.

How few are there who mete to others, as they would have them to measure to
themselves? The rule of Christ, whereby peace among men would be preserved, and
much scandal prevented, is not heeded by us. We do not deal with others, as we
would be dealt with, though Christ says unto us, Mat. 7.12. Phil. 4.8.
All things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto
them: for this is the Law and the Prophets, and though we are also exhorted by
the Apostle to follow what ever things are true, and honest, and just, and
pure, and lovely. We are apt to follow a multitude to do evil, what the greater
part of the world are wont to do, is the rule whereby we steer; hence we vary
from that rule of righteousness, which the Lord has prescribed: through the
prevalency of self-love, through a covetous humor, As to Sellers, selling for
as much as can be got.
we are loath to heed, what may any whit thwart a worldly interest.

How common, but cursed a principle is it, that every man may get for his
wares, as much as he can? Hence men take advantage of others necessities, or of
their want of skill: Hence bad wares are put into men's hands for good wares, or
else unreasonable demands are made to the prejudice of the buyer: would we be
so dealt with?

When men depend upon our honesty and ingenuity to sell them a good pennyworth,
Overreaching those that trust.
how common is it with a glavering tongue, and seeming affection to our
Neighbors good, to overreach him, and cheat him, though he reposeth
confidence in us?

How commonly do men demand a far greater sum for their wares, Asking more
than they will accept.
than they will accept? Hereby they show an oppressing mind, if their Customers
would but comply with them. The Quakers will rise up in Judgment, to condemn
this generation. Is it not a foul shame, that they by their light within (which
at best is but the light of a natural Conscience) should exceed others, who
pretend to an higher principle, even the light of Grace? But O! how do men mind
profit more than their own honor and reputation, yea (which is more
inexcusable) than the reputation of Christ and his Gospel? The name of God
suffers, not so much when thou art rotten hearted in thy Closet, as it does
when thou art a Cheater in thy Shop. But woe and alas! Men are so set upon gain,
that they can be contented to be voiced for Cheats and Couse^ers, so they may
but greaten their Estates: This is a salve for their soar: they cannot be
ignorant how the Gospel suffers, and how many prejudices are strengthened in the
hearts of wicked men against Religion, by observing Professors unseasonable
demands for their Wares, and yet they continue grievous exacters. Is it not
matter of lamentation, that some profess, they had rather deal with a Turk, or
with a Jew, than with such and such a Christian? And that they meet with fairer
Quarter from Drunkards, etc. in their Trades, than from Precisians? Romans 2.24.
By reason of you the Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles. Wherein
does your Light shine before men? They cannot dive into your hearts, they can
only discern your actions: They know not what your Love to God is, though you
pretend much to knowledge, yet knowledge void of charity and honesty, is to
them an abomination.

How few trade in fear, Not fearing Soullosses even in their gains.
lest by getting an Estate, they lose God, and a good Conscience? When one told
Latimer, That he was consened in paying for a Knife double to what it was
worth, No, (said he) He has not cousened me, but his own Conscience. No wonder
that Tradesmen complain of deadness in their Familsies and Closets, and impute
it to their Callings, (and thereby charge God implicitly) Alas! it is not their
Calling has straightened and deadned their hearts toward God; but their
oppression and deceit in their businesses, has provoked God to leave them; and
then they are, in the business of God, like a silly Dove, without an heart.
Has not God expressly charged you, Let no man go beyond, 1 These. 4.6.
or overreach another in any matter, because that the Lord is the Avenger of
all such? The vengeance of God is upon thee, in the straitness of thy Spirit in
Duties, and without Repentance it will follow thee, till it has laid thee in
the Pit of Hell.

How do men labor to ingross all Trade to themselves, Engrossing all Trade.
by exclaiming against their Neighbors, and by under-selling them, at one
time, that they may engage the Buyer to become their Customer, of whom they
will surely fetch out their penny-worths, in the next bargain that is driven?

How do men boast of their selling their Commodities at such and such Rates,
Boasting of selling too dear.
though their Consciences must needs suggest to them, that they have over-sold
them, and therein have declined the rules of moderation and righteousness?

When you have selled too dear, Loath to make Restitution.
and so cheated your Brother, though Conscience, in times of sickness and
danger, begins to contend with you about it, yet how loath are you to make
restitution for the wrong you have offered? How unlike are you to them in
Nehemiah? Then said they, We will restore them, and will require nothing of
them; Nehem. 5.12, 13.
so will we do as thou say. If a Nehemiah should say, So God shake out every
man from his house, and from his labor, that performs not this promise, even
thus be he shaken out and emptied, you would hardly say Amen, and praise the
Lord.

When men buy a Commodity, As to Buyers, crying out it is naught.
how apt are they to discommend it, to bring down the price, to say, It is
naught, when all the while they know it is offered on easy terms? How do
Buyers take the Advantage of the Seller's Ignorance of the worth of his own
Goods? There is a cursed Proverb amongst Englishmen, but in too great request,
That a man may not only sell as dear, but buy as cheap as he can. Few like
Austin, that bought a Book, at an unskilful Stationer's hands, for an
inconsiderable price, and afterward gave the value of it. Prove. 20.17.
Bread of deceit is sweet to a man, but afterward his mouth shall be filled
with gravel.

How often do Buyers (even as Sellers often say, they will not, Saying, They
will give no more, and yet do.
they cannot take a penny less for such a Commodity, so) answer, that they will
not give a farthing more, for what they have cheapened, and yet all the while
intend to come up to the Seller's price?

How common is it, Falling at the day of payment.
for men to take up Wares, and to promise payment at such a day, and yet fail?
Yea, how do they promise, though they know they shall not be able to be as good
as their word? It were better for thee to beg thy bread, than thus to steal
from thy Neighbor. Thou art ashamed to beg, as he of old: thou should be
ashamed much more to do worse, viz. to defraud thy Neighbor. Prove. 21.6.
The getting of treasures by alying tongue, is a vanity, tossed to and fro of
them that seek death: It is a thing very frequent, tossed to and fro, but it is
a vanity, and they that use it are Felones de^se, they do but seek death and
destruction by it.

How few are there, As to Buyers and Sellers both.
that in their buring and selling, give a proof of their loving their
Neighbors as themselves, their Neighbors goods and welfare as their own?

O! 1 Pet. 1.15.
When will ye be holy in all manner of conversation? Holy in your Trades, as
well as in your Church Assemblies? Holy in the Shop, and in all^secular
employments? So holy, as to abide with God in your Calling? When will ye trade
for God, rather than for Self? When will ye labor with your hands, Ephesians. 4.28.
that ye may be able to give, and not only to receive? When will ye trade in
fear, and be in the fear of the Lord all the day; and that, lest your Shop
should prove your bane; and whilst seeking after the Mammon of this life, ye
lose the true Substance? Is this thy Prayer before thou enterest upon thy
Calling? (O that it were! Lord help me to trade for thee, whilst for my self;
and for the good of my Neighbors Soul, Body, Goods, as well as for my own.

How few, With reference to the King, Stealing Customs.
among all the several sorts of Traders, render to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's? Hierome long since has told you, That Caesar is not Proper, but
Appellative. All the Emperors were called Caesar's, from Julius Caesar.
Confiderations against it.


How can you quiet your Consciences to steal Custom, as many of you do? What
is it, save the Law, that gives you right to all you have? And by the Law, so
much of your Goods is the King's: it is alienated from you to his Crown and
Revenue: How dare you cheat him? Should you think it hard measure to pay so
great a tribute? Have you forgot what Christ (who came under the Law) d^d? Mat.
17.24, 25, 26, 27.
Though tribute was exacted of him, when the Children were free, yet he would
work a Miracle, rather than give offense, in denying to pay the Fine, that was
imposed on him. Why do ye not take the safest course, if it be a disputable
matter? To be sure you will not give offense to God, to the King, to your
Conscience, by paying Customs; but you may to all by defrauding. Do you herein
as you would be dealt with? If you were the Head, would you have the inferior
Members impoverish the Head? If you were the Political Father, would you have
your Children cheat you? Do not you by bribes and otherwise, tempt the King's
Officers to be false to their trust, and to damn their Souls by perjury and
treachery?

Lastly, Consider, that self-love, and self-interest are prevalent, as to make
you to favor and enrich your selves, so also to bribe your minds and
judgments, and to enslave them to your base passions. O! Consider how apt is
every one unequally to favor himself, and to suck in any corrupt and absurd
reasonings, whereby he may greaten himself, though by the ruin of others? If
you say (as they of the Silver-shrines, This brings in our gain) We cannot
subsist without stealing Customs: How else can we live? A Father will tell
you, Indigna vox Christiano, etc. It ill becomes a Christians mouth, to ask,
How shall I live? Not one that Christ called to forsake Trades and Professions,
did ever answer him, I must not give over my gain. They only reformed, or
relinquished their Trades, when Christ called them. Till you can relinquish
unlawful gains, you are none of Christ's Disciples. Those in the Acts, that
burnt their unlawful Books, to the loss of thousands, Acts 19.20.
showed themselves true Converts, so mightily grew the Word and prevailed. O!
When Tire shall be converted, her trading and dealings shall be sacred, Isa.
23.18.
Her merchandise, and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord.

Here give me leave to add the Sin of Lyeing, Their Lying.
too too common among all sorts of Traders, as well as others. And truly this
Sin comes not improperly under the Head of Injustice. V. Patrick's Epitome of
Man's Duty. P. 45, 46.
Justice, even when it is not taken most largely, (so it is taken for all
Religion) comprehends our whole duty to our Neighbor, as to matters of right:
Thus, by virtue of the fifth Commandment, to do justly, is to give our Parents
their due honor, whether they be Natural, Civil, or Spiritual: In respect of
the sixth, it is to preserve the Life of our Neighbor, and to have a care,
that we injure him not in his being: In reference to the seventh, it is to
preserve his just Relations, and not touch them, or cause the violation of
their faith to to him: in reference to the eighth, it is to preserve his
estate, and not meddle with his goods: the 9th. requires that we preserve his
good name, and not defame him, nor do any prejudice to his credit, no more than
we would to his estate: and by virtue of the tenth, we are to moderate our very
desires, so as not to envy him that which is his, nor to long to have it in our
possession. To be sure there is righteousness to be looked after in words and
expressions, as well as in deeds and actions. But alas! How does the sin of
lying abound among us? (And no wonder when Perjury is so common a sin) for
this God has a controversy with the Land. Hos. 4.1, 2.
Is there not need to take heed every one of his Neighbor, and not to trust in
any Brother? Jer. 9.4, 5.
will not every one deceive his Neighbor, and not speak the truth? Have not
they taught their tongue to speak lies? If you are not couzeninglyers, or
false-witness-lyers, yet are you not reviling-lyers? Do you not upon every
petty difference speak of one another ye care not what? do ye not spread lying
defamations? Jer. 20.10.
I heard the defaming of many -- report say they, and we will report. Is not
the fawning-lyer common among us? Their words are the words of Jacob, but their
hands are the hands of Esau. Psalm. 55.21.
The words of their mouths are smoother than butter, but war is in their
hearts: their words are softer than oil, yet are they drawn swords: their is no
faithfulness in their mouth, their throat is an open sepulcher. Upon this
occasion give me leave to use David's Prayer, Help Lord, for the godly man
cease, Psalm. 12.1, 2.
for the faithful fail from among the Children of men. Why, wherein consists
their ungodliness? they speak vanity every one with his Neighbor: with
flattering lips, and with a double heart do they speak. Is there not also many
a Newes-telling liar among us? They believe in their Consciences, that it is
false, Hos. 7.3.
what they relate; and yet, to promote an interest, for to make hearts glad
with lies, they will spread that which is false. How many officious-lyers have
we, who tell lies for some good end (as they think?) The highest end is Gods
glory; but will ye speak wickedly for God, Job 13.7.
and talk deceitfully for him? The Vulgar reads the Text, Numquid Deus indiget
vestro mendacio? It contains a truth, though not the sense of the place: What!
has God need of your lie? It is a dishonor to God to be thus helped. And if
we must not speak evil, that good may come to God, sure then we may not
(whatever the Roman Doctors teach us) speak evil, that good may come to our
selves.

How can you think you are Gods Children? Considerations against Lying. Isa.
63.8.
God engages himself for his people, that surely they will not lie, surely
they are my people, children that will not lie. Austin long ago gave his
judgment concerning lying, that a man must not tell a lie to save the whole
world: if it were (says he) to save thy Father or thy Mother out of Hell, if
possibly it could be, thou must not tell a lie, or if it were to save a Kingdom
from destruction: And yet to gain a little mirth, or to gain a penny, or to
prevent the frowns of a Superior, how do some teach their tongues to lie? Not
considering, Prove. 6.17.
that among the seven things that are an abomination to the Lord, lying is one,
yea, (as one observes) he repeats lying twice, though under several names: Rev.
21.8. Tit. 1.2.
that all liars shall have their portion in the burning lake: that herein they
are like unto the Devil, who is the Father of lies, and most unlike unto God,
Ephesians. 4.25.
who cannot lie. O then! put away lying, and speak the truth; away with mental
reservations, and Jesuitical aequivocations. Let thy tongue be the faithful
interpreter of thy heart. Be faithful in your promises and engagements, be not
yea and nay. Remember Cicero the Heathen's saying: None but the most villainous
will deceive him, who had been safe, if he had not trusted.

CHAP. XXVI. Their Covetousness.
IF there be so much unrighteousness, Professon Covetousness.
no wonder that there is also much covetousness that must not be forgot, when
we remember the evil of our ways. Covetousness is the seed of all
unrighteousness, 1 Timothy 6.10. V. Wells on Mich. 6.8. P. 18. Mat. 21.38.
the r^ot of all evil. It was Jezabels covetousness that made her unjustly
deprive Naboth of his Vineyard. This is the heir, come let us kill him, and
seize on his inheritance. Flectere si nequeo Superos, acheronta movebo, If I
cannot prevail with Heaven, I will to Hell for an Estate is the voice of
covetousness: yea (which is more sadly to be considered) this is that which
will put men, not only upon injustice to others, but to God himself; it will
make them offer violence to Religion, to Divine honor, and whatever is sacred
in the world, all these shall be prostituted to serve the ends of covetousness.
That man will stick at no abuse of God, whose God is his gain. How notorious
was that of one of the holy fathers of Rome, a Pope, O quantas divitias peperit
haec fabula Christi! O how gainful unto us has been the fable of Christ! And
is not covetousness and earthly mindedness an Epidemical sin? Eccles. 6.2.
Solomon calls it an evil disease. It Is called by one Aurugo, the yellow
jaundise, which makes the sick person look yellow all over. This is the Grave
which never says, Prove. 30.15.
it is ^^^gh, but like Solomon's Horseleech it cries give, give. O! what
boundless appetites have many, who can neither use what they have, nor put a
period to what they desire: as in the Sea one wave rises above another, so
here every desire of having is out-gone by a new desire of getting.

Are not your great cares for riches? Evidenced in several particulars.
Do not your thoughts thus run out, O! how shall I thrive more in the world,
get more estate, custom? but not, O! how shall I get the favor of God, the
pardon of my sins, and victory over my lusts? how anxious and sollicitous are
you, every day for the world, but how flat in your coming to have the Image of
God renewed? How dejected are you when you miss of a good bargain? or when you
meet with some loss by Sea or Land? But how little troubled if you lose an
opportunity of communion with the Lord? How joyous are you when a little of the
world comes in? But how little pleased with the galleries, wherein the beloved
may be held? How are men pleased with the earth, but find no more relish in
Christ and his ways, than in the white of an egg? What great journeys have you
taken, even compassed Sea and Land, to gain riches? and hardly can go a mile or
two to meet with God? How is every opportunity laid hold of to get more to the
heap? But do not you remain contented, with the least measures of grace, yea
with somewhat below grace? How often have you left your meat to serve a Customer?
but when so, to serve the Lord Jesus Christ? How few design for riches, as a
means to carry them to a further end? They should be but as the rounds of a
Ladder, not to stand upon, but thereby to ascend higher, even to glory, and to
the new Jerusalem: But alas! few desire the world in subordination to God, and
as a means to glorify God; but the more they love the World, the less God is
loved; and the more their desires are carried out after riches, the less after
God. How few pursue earthly things in obedience to Gods call? How many out of a
desire of filthy lucre? How few seek the World with an holy indifferency? How
few reserve their zeal, and hottest endeavors, for heavenly things? Is not the
general cry, Psa. 4.6.
Who will show us any good? We need no proof of this, there are instances every
where. How, for the getting of a penny, Note.
will some debarr themselves of Ordinances? Is it not a sufficient excuse with
some; for not attending on the Worship of God, that they met with a Customer,
that kept them from the Ordinance? Does not the Clock strike too fast, whilst
thou art selling to advantage? Does not time run away too fast? Do thou not
wish thou could with Joshuah cause the Sun to stand still on a Market Day, or
on a Fair-day, when trading is quick? But O! The Sexton is blamed for suffering
the Clock to stand still on a Sabbath day, and when thou art in the Worship of
God, O! When will the Sabbath be gone? Amos 8.5.
When will the Duty be over, that we may fell? How many Hypocritical outcries
are there against the World? O! It eats up my time: O! It eats up my spirits:
It robs me of communion with God: We say it is an Enemy, and yet we can bosom
this Snake, lodge this Enemy, Col. 3.5.
that God would have us to kill. Mortify Covetousness.

How often has God charged thee against Covetousness? Take heed and beware of
it: Considerations to withdraw the hear from Covetousness Luke 12.15.
Two words to the same purpose, all little enough to take thee off from earthly
pursuits. How apparently has God withdrawn from thee, ever since thou wast
taken with this Dalilah? How hardly art thou pulled out of the deep pit, and
miry clay, to Duty, much more to God? And will thou be rich? Art thou resolved
to run into the briars? Then farewell to thee, not only in time, but to
eternity. Mat. 13.23.
How many convictions and impressions of the blessed Spirit have your worldly
cares choked? How have your inordinate desires of riches puzzled your Souls,
and diverted them from minding and improving the counsels of God and
Conscience? But O! How unreasonable are earthly prosecutions in this day of
Gods wrath; When God is plucking up by the roots, now to be seeking great
things for our selves, to have Baruck's sore running on us, Jer. 45. ult.
this makes us the more inexcusable sinners. This is altogether unseasonable,
this is no time for it, this is ignoble, yea base. O that we were ashamed of
it! We say, The last days are perilous days; we pretend to expect the Cross,
and is this good preparation for the Cross of Christ, to load our selves with
thick clay, to crack our Consciences, and thereby to incurr Gods farther
displeasure? How unlike art thou to the primitive Converts? Paul, when
converted, Phil. 3.8
counts all things but dung in comparison of Christ. And Zacheus no sooner had
a work of grace begun upon him, but down went the World, faster than ever it
went up: He parts from riches with more freedom than he sought them: The half
of my goods I give to the poor; Luke 19.8.
and if I have wronged any man, I will restore fourfold. John, the beloved
Disciple, affirms, That there is an inconsistency between loving the Father, 1
John 2.15. 1 John 5.4.
and the World; and that Whosoever is born of God, evercometh the World: But
alas! Our hearts are as Cities without walls, the World has a thorow-fare in
them, and may come and go without any Pass from Heaven. How has God put a
remark of his sore displeasure upon our worldly endeavors? We have, to dwell
in our seiled houses, neglected Gods house, Hag. 1.2, 4, 6.
and said, The time is not come for the building the waste places, for the
restoring the Worship of God, for the building of the house of God; and how
has God caused many of us to vomit up our sweet morsels, which we rolled under
our tongues? O! Consider your ways: Ye have sown much, and bring in little;
ye eat, but have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not silled with drink; and he
that earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bagg with holes. How has
this Sin deadned you to all the Worship of God? How, by the interposition of
this dark body of the Earth, has the light of Heaven, yea the light of Gods
countenance, been darkened? and how has thy Soul been benighted and clouded?
They say, If a Knife be put into the Earth, it will lose its edge: I am sure of
this experiment, That Christians, who were once lively and active for God, yet
by engaging their hearts to the World, they have lost their zeal, their
keenness, and their luster, which once they had. When thou have gained time
from thy business to think of God, and to discharge duty, have hot thou missed
thine heart? have not thou left and lost it in the crowd? How do thou debase
thy self hereby? The curse of Cham is upon thee, a servant of servants thou
art, a slave to that which thou should rule over: God did not give thee a
reasonable Soul, that thou should choose the Serpents curse, to crawl and
live upon the Earth. O! What sordid practices have some stooped unto, for the
getting this Worlds riches? Ahab, to gain a few handfulls of earth, dares walk
to it through Naboth's bowels. Judas, to pocket thirty Pieces, will venture to
betray his Lord, and the Lord of Heaven and Earth. O! tremble to think what sad
effects your Covetousness may have upon you before you dye. Demas left Christ,
lost his Soul, shipwrack'd his faith, and all to embrace this present evil
world. Prove. 28.20.
And if thou make have to be rich, shall thou be innocent? Whether thou place
thy confidence and hope in thy gold, or in a golden calf, thou art guilty of
Idolatry, Col. 3.5.
of having other Gods besides the true God, and so do as highly offend the
true God: and God usually gives up such men unto spiritual judgments. Romans
1.21.24.
It makes me fear you have not tasted of the upper springs, because the puddle
of the World is still sweet to your taste. Luke 5.39.
No man (says Christ) having drunk old wine, straightway desires new, for he
says, the old is better. If you had tasted of the joy, peace, mercy, and
comforts of Christ, your earthly comforts would be disrelished: Gal. 6.14.
If you did glory in the Cross of Christ, the World would be crucified to you,
and you unto the World. The sweetness of Christ would drown all
Creature-sweetness. But alas! Psa. 84.10.
To which of us, is one day in Gods Courts better than a thousand elsewhere?
Austin said, If one drop of the joys of Heaven might fall into Hell, it would
drown all the bitterness of Hell: So would it drown all bitterness in the Soul,
and all the sweetness in the World. Worldly comforts would be too course, too
slat, too low to recreate your hearts. Did ye but know the honey and milk of
Canaan, ye would not so much mind the Onyons of Egypt. Mat. 6.24.
No man can serve two Masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the
other; or he will cleave to the one, and despise the other: ye cannot serve God
and Mammon. O! What a surpassing indignity is this to Christ, Si terram amas
terra^es. Aug.
to set him below the footstool, to value thirty Pieces of Silver before him,
to prefer Earth before Heaven, present things before future; that the love of
God, the recompense of reward, shall not lie nearer the heart, than the
treasures of Egypt? O! What a miserable life do thou live? This Sin brings an
Hell with it: thou art the Devil's Martyr. 1 Timothy ^.9.
They that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many
foolish and burtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. Thou
enjoyest neither God, nor the World: Thy only happiness is a fancy: And this is
thy great misery, that thou still desire that which will never satisfy thy
desires; The more thou have of the World, the more thou want: the more thou
drinkest, the more thou thirstest: a Dropser is upon thee, Semper avarus eget.
Hor. Hebr. 13.5. Prove. 23, 5. chapter 8.21. Eccles. 5.1.
and thou know it not. Discontent is always the Companion of Covetousness.
Let your conversation be without covetousness: and be content with such things
as you have. Why will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? Grace and
Godliness is substance: Why, with Esop's Dog, will thou let go the substance
for a shadow? The things of the World are fancies, the things of God realities.
What good is there to the Owners of riches, saving the beholding them with
their eyes? Do not you all this while bear false witness against God; Do not
you proclaim to the World, that God is not enough to answer, to fill your
desires, and that therefore you go out after the Creature? Is it nothing to
you, to call God, who is all-sufficient, who is a fountain of living Water, a
barren Wilderness? Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be horribly
afraid, Jer. 2.12, 13, 31.
be ye very desolate, says the Lord; for my people have committed two evills's
they have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out
cisternes, broken cisternes, that can hold no water, O Generation, see ye the
Word of the Lord; Have I been a Wilderness unto Israel? a Land of Darkness?
Wherefore say my people, We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee? Hereby
you break the conjugal Relation: God looks on you as Adulterers and
Adulteresses, James 4.4. Prove. 5.19.
and will judge you accordingly. God expects that his breasts should satisfy
you, and that you be always ravished with his love: and dare you tell the
World, that your God has deceived you? and that you were mistaken in your
choice of God? and therefore after other Lovers you will go? No wonder, that
for the iniquity of our covetousness, Isa. 57.17.
God be wroth, and smite us. We are greedy of more, but what have we done with
our former talents? Account we must for one, Mat. 25.5.
for two, for ten talents: the more we have, the greater still will be our
account. There is a reckoning day at hand. O that our moderation were known to
all men, Phil. 4.5
because the Lord is at hand. If thou art not sincere, I am as sure as this
Book is in thy hand, thou will curse the time that ever thou had an Estate,
and wilt wish thou had been a Beggar, for then thou had not so much to
answer for before God. It is certain (though some doubt it) that thou shall
carry none of thy estate away with thee; 1 Timothy 6.7.
nothing is to be carried away, save guilt, to Hell; in case of mis-improvement
of an Estate; yea, if you have not rendered unto God according to what you have
received, 2 Chronicles. 32.25.
the heaping up of wealth, is but the charging of thy account: thou must
account, how thou have disbursed to a farthing. I will suppose thou have (by
neglects of thy general Calling, and by rising up early, and sitting up late)
gained an Estate, thou may put all thy gain in thine eyes, and never see the
worse. What will thy Estate advantage thee, when the Arrows of the Lord enter
into thy Soul? What will the World advantage thee, when the Gout, Fever,
burning Pestilence, etc. are upon thee? What, have thou got only that which may
stand with Gods eternal hatred? Never count thy gains, till thou have got that
which is inconsistent with Gods wrath. What have thou got, above that which God
throws unto the Dogs; Show me Childrens bread, or never boast of thy gains.
Did you ever find any Child of God worse for afflictions? but have you not
found many worse for their thrivings in the World? Jeshurun waxed fat, Deuteronomy.
32.15.
and kicked. Whilst you have Bonds and Bills upon others, do not you run into
arrears unto God? And how will you discharge those Suits, which God will
commence against you? When you lie a dying, will ye not wish, that your time,
your strength, your spirits, had been powered forth upon better things, than
those of this life? That you had traded for Grace and Glory, rather than for
the Gold of Ophir, for a little gilt Clay? O ye great Projectours for the
World, I do even foresee the troubles and horrors, the doubts and fears, the
anguish and amazements of your Souls, which your un^^^^^^ties, as to your
future estate, will put (...) into, in your dying Rooms. How (...) take up such
language as this; Fool that I was, to cumber my self about many things, and
neglect the one thing necessary! Fool that I was, to set my thoughts and
affections on things below, (none of which now give me a drop of water to cool
my tongue) and to neglect the things above! O! If I had never heard of Christ
and Glory, I had been more excusable for my earthly prolings. Psalm. 69.6.
O! How have I disquieted my self in vain? I have heaped up riches, and know
not who shall gather them. Had I been as faithful to Christ, as I was to
Mammon, O! with what joy might I have removed hence? What abundant entrance
into the everlasting Kingdom might I have had? O! Labor to prevent the
horrors of Death, and the gnawing Worm of Conscience. It is sad, when the
Sting of Death, and the Worm Conscience, Prove. 11.4.
bite the man together. Riches avail not in the day of wrath: but righteousness
delivers from death. Believe it, it will cut you to the heart, to think, that
less pains might have served for eternal Life, than you have bestowed for
temporal Goods. This plague attends the covetous man, the more he desires, and
heaps up, the less he is desired, and the less he is lamented when he dies. He
is like a Swine, that is good for nothing, whilst he is alive; not good to bear
and carry, as the Horse; nor to draw, as the Ox; nor to cloth, as the Sheep;
nor to give milk, as the Cow; nor to keep the house, as the Dog; but ad solam
mortem nutritur, fed only to the slaughter: So the covetous man does no good
with his riches whilst he lives; but when he is dead, his riches come to be
disposed of. Prove. 13.22.
The riches of a sinner are laid up for the just. How can you choose but
tremble at Doomsday? You cannot desire the coming of Christ: If the Church
cries, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, you cannot join in that Prayer; for that
your hearts are glued to this present World: You prefer Paris before Paradise.
It is to the Saints loss, to be kept so long from Heaven; but you count it not
so. You cannot say, Thy Kingdom come. What will you do in that day, when all
the Estate and Friends of Dives cannot relieve with a drop of cold water?
Riches are like briars and thorns, good to stop gaps, but not to lay in our
beds, and set our hearts upon, lest we lie down in sorrow. Few remember the
Devil's offer, ( All these things will I give thee, is the last temptation that
old Professors are baited with.) Take heed therefore and beware of
Covetousness.

CHAP. XXVII. Their Envy.
ENVY is a Sin seldom confessed, Professoss Envy. James 4.5.
but yet much diffused among Professors. The Spirit that dwells in us,
lusts to Envy. And indeed Covetousness and Envy are never asunder: they are
sins against the same command: Such as long, that what is their Neighbors,
should be theirs, envy to him that which is his: and such as envy to him that
which is his, long to have it to be theirs. How desirous are Professors to
grasp all to themselves? And therefore how apt are the very best to be envious
at the power, greatness, riches, if not goodness of others? Does not the
experience that you have of your own hearts (if you be not strangers at home)
testisie, that this Spirit is stirring and acting in you? The poor envy the
rich, the base the honorable, as if they had the less, because others have so
much. Some think that this was the sin that threw down the Angels from Heaven,
that they envied Adam's glory, in that he was made after Gods image, and that
they relinquished their glory to divest Adam of his: To be sure, the Devil was
restless, till he had implunged Adam in the same sin and misery, that he was
brought into. Sure, maligning the prosperity of others, is not from the Spirit
of God. He that gives freely to all, would not have us to envy those, to whom
he gives more freely, than to our selves; and he that gives us more, does not
envy us for what we have. If you have not so much as others, it is because you
are unfit to receive, not because God is unwilling to give. Do not we see how
this poison diffuseth it self? An early sin it was, if not in the Angels, (as
some think) yet it was in Eve: She envied the all-knowledge of God, and must
forsooth have at least an equality with God himself: It was also strong in the
first man, that was born of a woman: and we still suck it in with our Mothers
milk, and it seldom dies till we dye. This sin is commonly among people of
the same Profession: One Mechanic envies another, one Merchant another, one
Scholar another, one Gentleman another, one Commander another, as Saul envied
and hated David, because the Women sang, that Saul slew his thousands, and
David his ten thousands, one Minister another, as those in Paul's days, that
envied him, and affected an high strain of eloquence, on purpose to obscure
that reputation which Paul had got among the Churches. And happy had it been,
if this cursed sin had dyed in that age, but it has been still working in
all ages of the World.

Is there not a greater promptitude in us, Evidenced in detracting from others
worth,
to detract from men's worth, than to credit and exalt them? To write down their
blots and imperfections, than to set forth their due virtues and graces? If we
cannot reach others by imitation, we will by calumniation; and therefore Luther
says, Envious men feed upon the dung of other men: They are like flies, that
love to be upon sores. It is admirable to see, how dull sighted we are, as to
the virtues and graces of our Brethren, but quick sighted as Eagles to discern
their imperfections: Mat. 7.3.
The beams of Virtue are not seen, i. e. not taken notice of, but a mote in a
Brother's eye is soon espied.

Are we not more greedy to receive and spread any thing, Readiness to receive
and spread defamations.
whereby our Neighbor is infamed and obscured, than we are to entertain and
diffuse what tends to his praise and glory? And is not this the reason hereof,
viz. the great desire we have to shine alone, and that we would none to vye
with us in glory, much less to excel us therein?

Is there not (oft-times) a secret gladness in our hearts, Gladness in their
being brought lower.
when some sad Providence afflict others, in their Names, Goods, Health, and
Relations, that thereby they may be brought to a level with us, or to an
inferiority, in a lower estate? When you have seen some Congregation wedged in
with a concourse of hearers, and yours thin and naked; and when some have been
cried up for their purity, gravity, activity, and zeal; and when others have
greatened their parts, or estates, and yours rather have been impaired, have ye
not been ready even to burst with Envy? Have you not been glad, when some blot
has attended these, whereby they have sallen in that esteem, which once they
had above you?

There is no Envy in God, Disliking their own enjoyments.
and his holy Angels: they rejoice at our advancement, and at the glory of the
humane Nature, that it is so exalted above theirs; but unhappy we! that cannot
see any excellency in another, but we dislike our own enjoyments, and are more
vexed at the welfare of our Neighbors, than we would be at our own calamities.

The Beasts do not envy one another, Considerations to withdraw the heart from
Envy. Gal. 5.20.
but Men do: yea, the Devils envy not one another: some Professors are herein
worse than Devils. No wonder if there have been hatred, variance, emulations,
wrath, strife, seditions, and heresies, whilst envyings have abounded amongst
us. You know the miserable effect of Envy in the first man, that was born of a
woman: through Envy Cain hated, Prove. 27.4.
and then killed his Brother Abel. Wrath is cruel, and Anger outrageous, but
who is able to stand before Envy? This is so filthy, so shameful a sin, that
few will own it: Observe the confessions of men in Prayer, and Conference, and
you will hardly find a Professor acknowledge Envy. The malignity of this sin
appears, in that it strikes directly at the Providence of God, who disposes of
the inequality of men's conditions, according to his sovereignty and wisdom: It
has a tacit accusation of God, for raising up some so high, and laying others
so low: It is deeply unsatisfied with Gods bounty to the Children of men, that
he gives so liberally to some, whereas he is not bound to any. Whilst others
complain against God, for making the World no better, the envious man is
troubled, that he has done so well, for some of his Creatures. Gal. 5.19, 20,
21.
No wonder the Apostle reckons Envy among the gross sins of Murder,
Uncleanness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, etc. and concludes, Heaven is no place for
such. They which do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. This is
a sin so damnable, and so ugly, making you so much like the Devil, that it is
high time you watch against it, mourn for it, and seek its ruin. O! When shall
we hear the Exhortation, Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one
another, envying one another? When shall we in honor prefer one another? When
shall we, like Barnabas, Acts 11.23.
When we see the grace of God, rejoice? When shall Ministers reprove the
Joshuahs, that are envying for their sakes, in Moses words, I would to God all
the people of the Lord did prophecy? When shall we like John the Baptist, be
contented to decrease, so that Christ may increase? and to be laid by, if
others more able may be substituted to do Gods work? When shall we rejoice if
God uses others to convert by them, more than by us? and with famous Mr. Dod,
I would to God (says he) that I were the worst Minister in England: his
meaning was, that all should excel him in gifts and graces. We pretend to
evidences of our conversion from our love to the Saints, but let us hear what
the effects of true love are: 1 Cor. 13.4, 5.
Love seeks not her own, love envieth not, love is not puffed up. As love is
the fulfilling of the Law, so envy is the dissolution of it. O! when shall we
instead of envying our Brother, bless God for him? If he has more than we
have, more strength, parts, riches, honors, graces, etc. the account he must
pass with God is the greater: let us pity him rather than envy him: Believe it,
God is wiser than we are, and if his distributions are various, we have as many
talents as we can well improve. Let us look to our own duty in the places
wherein God has set us; and pray for them, that have ten tallents more than we
have, that they may serve the Lord ten times more than we can. O that thine eye
might affect thine heart, that thine eye should be evil because Gods is good.

CHAP. XXVIII. The sins of Family-Governours. Professors miscarriages in their
Families, As Governors, Not commanding their household to serve God. Genesis 18.19.

1. HOw guilty are such of you, as have families to govern, of not commanding
your household to serve God? Of how few can God say, as he did of Abraham by way
of approbation, I know him, that he will command his children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to justice and judgment,
that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. By your
Authority you should command them to subject their hearts, wills, and
consciences, to the will and pleasure of Jehovah; but alas! how many of you
have been careless in this? your Children and Servants, yea Wives, must know
your Authority upon worldly accounts, you command them (imperiously enough) to
fulfill your will and pleasure, to serve you, but how Gallio-like are you,
little caring whether they obey the Lord?

2. Being Zealous against disobedience to themselves, not to God.
How much passion have you discovered when Children, and Servants, yea and
Wives too, submit not to your will and pleasure? But when do they see so much
Zeal against their neglects of Gods work, as they find in you, when they
neglect your secular commands? These passions are of a scandalous nature, and
may make your inferiors to believe, that you value more your Authority, than
Gods, the having your own will to be obeyed, than that Gods requiries should be
observed.

3. Not caring for the Souls of their Families.
How many Professing-Governours are there, that show great care for the bodies
of their Families, but not for their Souls? Meat, and drink, and clothes, or
money to buy them, they shall have, but none, or little, instruction.

How little do you Chatechise your Families? Not Chatechising them. Heb. 6.1.
Prove. 22.6.
How seldom do you ask them any questions concerning the first Principles of
the Doctrine of Christ? If you do Chatechise your Children, as you ought in
obedience to those Divine commands: Train up a Child in the way wherein he
should go. Bring up your Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
Ephesians. 6.4.
Yet how few of you do Chatechise the rest of your household, your Servants and
Wives, Heb. 6.1.
though they be but Babes in Religion, Children in Understanding, and this Milk
is appointed for Children in Understanding as well as Age? Neither does the
work of Chatechising them, belong only unto Ministers (to them indeed it does
belong as such as watch for their Souls) but unto you; Heb. 13.17.
for it belongs to all that have the charge of Souls, and you are charged not
only with your Children's, but with your Servant's, and with your Wives Souls.
Whatever any of you may fancy, there never comes a Wife, a Child, or Servant
into any of your Families, but with this warrant from the great Lord of Heaven
and Earth; keep the Soul of this Wife, this Child, this Servant; for if it be
missing amongst the number of my sheep at the great day through thy neglect in
instructing, etc. thy Soul shall go for it. Hence not only should your Children
be taught by you, but your Wives and Servants. The Wife is commanded to learn
of her Husband at home, and the Husband to walk with her as a man of knowledge:
and your Servants should be trained by you in Religion, Genesis 14.14.
as Abraham's Servants were by Abraham, thus some of the Hebrew Rabbis think
that Abraham's trained Servants are therefore so called. Not conversing
personally with them ab^ut their Souls.


How seldom do you converse personally with every one in your Families
concerning the practical part of Religion? How seldom do you ask them any
questions, how it is with their Souls? and what they think will become of them
to all Eternity? Are you not as great strangers to the inwards of their Souls,
as you are to the Souls of the Indians? If their bodies be in danger, meat,
physic, attendance are procured; but their Souls may perish in formality and
carelessness for any help you will afford them. Some Professing-Governours
never treat with their households about their Spiritual Estate from one year to
another: Hence comes the great Apostasy of our times. The Lord humble us, and
deliver us from bloud-guiltiness. Many an Husband may cry out, O my Wife's Soul
is like to perish, through my default: many a Parent may shriek, O! I am verily
guilty of the blood of my Child: and many a Master may impute to his own
account all the disorders of his Servants; for that they have no personal
conference with them about Original Corruption, Regeneration, Justification,
Sanctification, Glorification, etc. Perhaps thou prayest in thy Family every
day, but not knowing the inward lusts and workings of their hearts toward God
or Sin, thou know not, how to pray as thou ought: thou know not what to
confess, and what to pray for, nor what to bless God for.

4. Not walking with gravity.
Have you walked with that gravity before your Wives, Children, and Servants,
as ye ought? Have you not made your selves vile by lightness, frothiness, and
unseemly carriages? Governors of Families are the Viceroy's of God: they are
in the place of God; and therefore should keep up their Authority, and not
sinfully run into such vanity and familiarity with their inferiors, as to
breed in them contempt of the Ordinance of God.

5. Not giving them time to serve God in.
You have given your Children and Servants time to work for your selves, but
have you afforded them time to serve their God in? Too too many use their
Inferiors, just as they use their Beasts; they work and feed their Beasts, but
never instruct: no more do they instruct their Inferiors. When do you call
your Wives, Children, Servants, into your Closet, and not only press them to
look after their Souls, and in order thereunto, to spend some time in Prayer,
Reading, Meditation, etc. but tell them how God wrought on you, how he awakened
you, what corruptions prevailed with you, and how God helped you to crucisie
them: How do you know, but the same motives might melt, reduce, and turn their
hearts too?

6. Have not you miscarried, as to the time, Taking undue time for
Family Duties. In the Morning, too early.
for the management of your religious work, in your houses? Some Governors
Pray in the Morning too early: so early, with a small part of their Family,
whilst others are in Bed, or in the service of the World, so that they worship
not God together, as they ought: and this is past over with silence; but if
they miss of their Servant in the Shop or Field, O! how does the fire of Hell
break forth at their lips? How angry is the Governor? he cries out, O! I shall
be undone by the unfaithfullness of my Wife, Children, Servants; but sees not a
greater danger, a more probable ruin falling on him for not having his Family
to worship God with him.

Others deferr Morning Prayer till it be almost Noon. Too late.
They will adventure into all worldly employments, (as we say) without fear or
wit: they see no need of God to protect them from outward or inward dangers, no
need of Gods blessing, till they are ready to fill their panch, and then some
Collects must be said, some short Prayers; it is the Custom of their fore
Fathers, it is the Religion of their Ancestors, or Conscience will trouble at
the total neglect of the Morning Sacrifice, and therefore the Prayer shall be
run over with more have, than the boy that says his lesson; that they may rise
up to eat, drink, and play.

And as some are unseasonable in their duties in the Morning, At Evening too
late.
so at Evening. Whilst their strength lasts to serve the world, they attend it,
some 'till even midnight, and then; come let us go to Prayer; when the poor
Wife, Children, and Servants, had rather be in bed, than on their knees. The
Governor Prays dully enough, 1 Samuel 2.17. Putting off family Prayer with a
long grace.
and that while the poor family sleep, or nauseate the duty; and so like Elies
Sons, these Sons of Belial cause their people to abhor the offering of the
Lord.

Are there not also some Professing-Governours (unworthy of the name of
Christian) who think to please God and the family with a long grace before
meat, which shall be in lieu of all the service of the day?

7. Not reading Scripture and good books.
How few are there that read the Scriptures and good books in their houses? O!
this will take up too much time; as if God had given men all their time to
neglect him in, and to indulge to the services of the Flesh, World, and Devils.

CHAP. XXIX. The sins of Husbands and Wives.
HUsbands and Wives are called to reflection on their miscarriages, jointly,
Husbands and Wives sins.
severally.

Jointly, for their not being so careful of their choice, as they should have
been: not seeking God enough in a matter of so great consequence, which was for
term of life, and wherein the Souls of each other were so highly concerned. 1
Cor. 7.39.
The Wife is bound by the Law as long as her Husband lives; but if her Husband
he dead, she is at liberty to be married to whom she will, only in the Lord. 2
Cor. 6.14.
Be ye not unequally yoaked together with unbelievers: for what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with
darkness? That they came together upon low, earthly, and lustful motives, for
profit, pleasure, beauty, rather than to further the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus
Christ. The Sons of God saw the Daughters of Men, that they were fair; Genesis 6.2.
and they took them Wives of all which they chose. That they did not by Prayer
and Fasting try to live unmarried, though the Apostle told them of the
advantages of serving Christ thereby. 1 Cor. 7.32.
He that is unmarried, cares for the things that belong to the Lord, how he
may please the Lord.

Severally. The Husbands sins in not loving as Christ.
Husbands, ye have not loved your Wives, as Christ the Church; though the
command be express, Husbands, love your Wives, even as Christ also loved the
Church, Christ is faithful to his Spouse. I will abide for thee. Thou shall
abide for me many days, thou shall not play the Harlot, Ephesians. 5.25. Hos. 3.3.
and thou shall not be for another man, so will I also be for thee. But though
you have not been Adulterers in any gross act, yet how often have you wished the
bond of marriage were broken? and have not you had eyes full of Adultery? has
not your love to others degenerated into secret lust? Christ is patient to his
Church, but has your love suffered all things? upon light matters, what
frowns, I will not say what blows? Has not family prayer been neglected
through your wrath? Christ gives no occasion of jealousy; but have not some of
you? The Lord searches hearts. Christ's love is bountiful; how short have you
kept your Wives, contrary to your engagements to endow them with all your
worldly goods? Christ keeps company with the (...) of his bosom; but have not
some of you been more abroad than at home? Christ edifieth his Church: Do ye
dwell with your Wives as men of knowledge? Christ does communicate secrets to
his Spouse: Are not ye strangers to the hearts, though perhaps not to the
bosoms, of your nearest Relations? Christ does confer often with his Church
about the mysteries of God: I wish you did so. I fear some of you are silver
tongued abroad, to get you a name, forward to speak of Christ, but dum^ at home
even to your Wives as well as Children. The Woman learns not, 2 Cor. 14.25.
though she ask her Husband at home. Christ gives the s^^^pest rebubes to his
offending Spouse priv^^ely, and when he gets her alone; But do not you r^bro^e
before Servants and Children? Hereby they learn frowardness, when brought into
this relation, and at present slight the Wives of your bosoms. Christ does not
blaze his Wifes infirmities; but so have ye. Christ puts the best construction
on what his Spouse does. The spirit is willing, though the flesh be weak. But
do not you put the worst? When your lusts are quenched, your love is gone.
Christ does pity his Church as the weaker vessel; if ye did so, the family
would be the better governed. Christ does sympathize with his Church: In all
her afflictions he is afflicted; but how fretfull, churlish, and Nabal-like are
you, when the hand of God is heavy on your nearest Relations? Christ does
vindicate his Spouse, and is greatly displeased when she suffers from the
world; but cannot some of you help to deride your Wives (...) and not frown
when they are wronged and abused. Christ does not upbraid his Spouse with her
low condition before he he put honor on her; but alas! How often have ye cast
into the dish what the condition of your Wives was before you cast your eyes
upon them? Christ gave his life for his Church: what have thou done and
suffered to save the Soul of thy Wife? Christ rules his Church, not with a rod
of Iron, but with a Scepter of Love: Is your dominion exercised with discretion
and love? Are all things done in Charity? Is she to thee (...) a loving Hind or
Roe? Prove. 5.19.
Christ does not count his Spouse as a Servant, but a Friend; he does not
domineer over his Church, but has high thoughts of her; but how many husbands
use their Wives hardly better than Servants? Christ notwithstanding keeps up
his authority over his Church, but do not many Husbands loose it through too
much uxoriousness, and make themselves contemptible, by yiedling to their
Wives, as Adam to his, whence came at first all sin, disorder, and misery into
the world? How did Solomon fall? Christ yields to many of his Wives petitions
and suits to him: but many are worse than the Heathen was to his Wife, He said
unto her, What will thou Queen Esther? Esth. 5.3.
and what is thy request? it shall be even given thee to the half of the
Kingdom. The poor Wife must use the mediation of others to have her desires
accomplished. When Christ does command his Wife, his Church, he does it mildly:
We pray you in Christ's stead. But many Husbands imperiously enough, too much,
God knows, Philem. v. 9.
when for loves sake they should rather entreat. Christ does love his Spouse,
though he gains nothing by her; but alas! How many are severe enough to their
Wives, when they fail of that Estate, etc. that they expected from them?

As Husbands fail, so do Wives; Wives miscarriages, in not loving their
Husbands as the Church Christ. Ephesians. 5.24. Psalm. 73.25.
even as the Church is subject unto Christ, so should ye have been to your own
Husbands in every thing. But how have ye affronted your Light? The true Church
of Christ loves him inwardly, as well as outwardly: so should ye have loved
your Husbands; but alas! How little have ye showed the union betwixt the Church
and Christ by your affections? The Church loves Christ more than Angels: Whom
have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth that I desire besides
thee. But how many Wives are commending others Husbands more than their own? If
my Husband were thus, and thus, etc. Thy Husband should be to thee the most
precious of all persons, the most lovely in thine eyes. Not parts and gifts,
but the good pleasure of God, should be the ground of this special love. The
Church honors Christ above all other persons in the world; but have not some
of you mean, low and base thoughts of your Husbands? The Church is subject to
Christ in all things; but will not some of you wear what you please, go where
you please, eat what you please, and employ your selves in what you please?
Yea, though contrary to your Husbands just commands, and meek entreaties? The
Church fears Christ: so should Wives: I say not either should, with a slavish,
but both should, with a reverential fear. Remember Michal, 1 Chronicles. 15. ult.
She despised her Husband in her heart, (She did not exprefs her slighting of
him, as many do, in words) and she had no Child unto the day of her death. God
took the Husband's part, and put a remark of displeasure upon that her
sa^ciness. For slighting the Ordinance of God, her Head, (though but in her
heart) God plagued her in her Womb with barrenness. The Church loves Christ
more and more; but O the decays of Women's affections to their Husbands! Partly
through levity, and partly through age, and partly through cross Providence!
Prove. 2.17.
Whereas thou should have kept the Covenant of thy God. The Church does
commend Christ; but seldom are Wives careful herein, to imitate the Church of
God. How many do blazon their infirmities more frequently, than commend their
graces? The Church is careful to please Christ in all things: 1 Cor. 7.34.
The married Woman should care (study) to please her Husband, by her attire,
behavior, words; She should go, speak, and do so, Ephesians. 5.24.
as may render her most acceptable in his sight, in every thing. How many cross
Wives are there, that love to vex, rather than to delight their Husbands? They
will cloth and adorn their bodies, to make them lovely to strangers, rather
than to their own Husbands. The Church bears patiently rebukes and blows from
Christ: so should Wives; as Sarah was commended for her meekness. 1 Pet. 3.4,
5, 6.
The ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, is in the sight of God, of great
price; for after this manner, in the old time, the holy Women adorned
themselves, being in subjection to their own Husbands, even as Sara, etc. The
Church gives Christ reverend Titles of honor and esteem: but alas! Wives are
so proud, so self-conceited of their own worth and merit, that they cannot but
disrespect all others, even their own Husbands. Hereby they show not themselves
to be the Daughters of Sarah; Genesis 18.12. 1 Pet. 3.6.
She having occasion to think of her Husband, presently this title Lord came
out of her heart into her mouth: and the Holy Ghost takes notice of it: yea a
second time, sure it was for some high end; and proves that she obeyed Abraham,
because She called him Lord. Perhaps the Wife will tell me, these are but
trifles that I cross my Husband in: I must tell thee, to break the order of God
for toys and trifles will greaten thy sin at the day of accounts. What will thou, dare thou for so slender a matter tread down the Law of thy God, and
hazard the ruin of thy Soul? O! consider this, and turn not your duties to
your Husbands into matter of talk and pastime, as the manner of most Women is.

CHAP. XXX. The miscarriages of Professing-Parents and Children.
PArents, As Parents.
O! how little do you plot for the good of future generations? how little do
you care whether God has a Name when you be dead and gone, that Christ
survive, and holiness flourish, when you shall be rotten in your graves? O!
it is through your default, that the name of Christ is not had in everlasting
remembrance: if you were faithful, how would the generations to come bless the
Lord in your behalf? If you were active and diligent, you might convey holiness
down to your posterity, as you have been unhappy instruments to convey down a
stock of sin, you have been instruments to convey down the curse; but are not
you careless to convey down grace? The World would soon me^^, the Church of
Christ would soon regain its ancient luster and beauty, if ye did but
faithfully discharge your duties to your Children: you might suffer little
Children to come to Christ, yea you might fill the Kingdom of Heaven; but do
not you rather fill the Kingdom of Hell? And as Jereboam made Israel to sin, do
not you instead of leading them the way to Heaven, lead them the way to Hell?
O! consider seriously and sadly how far you are guilty with respect to the
Souls of your Children.

1. By giving them bad examples. Giving their Children bad examples.
Chams not covering his Fathers nakedness was a sin conveyed down to all his
race, and therefore God charge the Church of the Jews against that sin, under
the expressions of walking in the manners of the Nations. Levit. 20.11. and 23.
compar.
Ye shall not walk in the manners of the Nations; which I cast out before you;
for they committed all these things. Your pride, sensuality, carelessness in the
worship of God, your passions toward your Wives, and Wives toward their
Husbands, your frowardness toward servants, etc. teach your Children so to
carry themselves toward others. One checked his Son, and said, never Parent
had so wicked a Child; yes (said the Son) My Grandfather had.

2. Cockering them in sin.
By humouring and cockering your Children in their Sins: Teaching them early to
be proud of their fine clothes; and to revenge, Come, give me a blow, says the
Mother to the Child; whilst it sits on her lap. By indulging to his voluptuous
course of life, it is thought Isaac smarted in his Son's future disobedience,
even by suffering him to sport and hunt away too much of precious time. Many,
like Apes, kill their Children with culling them. Austin tells a sad Story of
one Cyrillus, who loved an only Son immoderately, and let him do (without
correction) what he would: afterward this cockered Son, in a fit of
drunkenness, offers violence to his Mother, killed his Father, wounded mortally
two of his Sisters, and would have ravished another. Through foolish pity,
Parents, especially Mothers, give the reins unto their Children, when they are
young, and thereby they grow headstrong, Prove. 29.15.
and are a shame to the Mother that bore them. The sparing of the Rod is the
ruin of the Child. Do not you reprove your Children, as old fond Eli did?
Thereby he brought a plague upon himself and upon his posterity. What says
one? never cease convincing or correcting till thou have subdued the spirit of
thy Child, if he contends with thee. You pretend such harshness is inconsistent
with love; but I say from the Lord, such fondness and indulgence is consistant
with hatred; and I am sure the Lord is on my side, in this. Prove. 13.24.
He that spares his rod hates his Son, he that loves him chasteneth him
betimes. Is it love to suffer a wound in thy Child to fester (and thereby to
destroy him) rather than to apply a painful corrosive for the expediting the
cure? But what says the fond Mother? O! If the Child should be the worse for
my correction, it would be a trouble to me whilst I live. O that such a doting
Mother would hear the Lord himself! Correct thy Son, Prove. 29.17. Prove. 23.13.
and he shall give thee rest, yea he shall give delight to thy Soul. With hold
not correction from the Child: for if thou beatest him with the Rod, he shall
not dye. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a Child, Prove. 22.15.
but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.

3. By not acquainting them with the Lord, Not instructing them.
and his ways, and that betimes. Has not God commanded, that his Laws should
be whetted by you, upon your Children? Deuteronomy. 6.7.
Thou shall teach them diligently ( Hebr. whet or sharpen) unto thy Children,
and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk
by the way, and when thou lie down; and when thou risest up. Some conceive,
that Catethiling of Children is not obscurely hinted in this ancient Precept.
And is not Childhood and Youth the time, wherein Solomon advises the Children
of men should be trained up in the way wherein they should go? O Parents!
Prove. 22.6.
If God be worth your own acquaintance, is he not worth the acquaintance of
such as are so near and dear unto you? Can you without trembling think, that as
soon as Death breaks up your house, you may to Heaven, and your Children must
to Hell, and thither through your default? But if you should dye in this
neglect of instructing your Children, you will be miserable as well as they:
And O! What a greeting will there be hereafter between ungodly Parents and
Children? What an hearing will it be to your tormented Souls, to hear your
Children cry out against you, All this that we suffer was long of you, you
should have taught us better, and did not: What an addition will such outcries
be to your misery?

4. Suffering Children to fall out with one another.
By not redressing the disorderly carriages of your Children toward one
another. How few Reboccah's are there? She was careful to remove jars and
mischiefs that might arise between her two Sons.

5. Not praying for them.
By not praying for your Childrens Souls, and against those very particulars,
which their natural constitution leads them mostly to.

6. Not correcting aright.
By not correcting them aright: as to time, not early enough; He that loves
him corrects him betimes: not, whilst the fault is fresh in his thoughts,
with all the aggravating circumstances thereof; Not, with compassion enough.
You have reason (says Mr Dod) to be angry with your selves, rather than to be
bitter to your Children; for you correct your own sin in your Children. If the
Child be cursed and froward, has he not seen his Parent brawling and
contentious, etc? not ushering correction with Prayer, that God would bless
word and rod. Commonly Parents correct in an high passion, whereby Prayer is
hindered, and the Medicine becomes invalid.

7. Being over-angry
By being angry without a cause, or above the desert. Anger must be let out
according to the nature of the offense. If Parents be always chiding or
correcting, they make their Children resolute, like Hagar and Ismaei, to take
up their heels, and into the Wilderness will they, any where to be delivered
from such hard usages. Provoke not your Children to wrath. Ephesians. 6.4
Some Parents want natural affections: are too severe; Correction like Physic,
if too frequent, will work no more with Children, than our meat with us.

8. By loving your Children more than God, Loving inordinately.
loving them as they are yours, not as they are Gods, as they bare your Image,
not Gods, for their beauty and parts, rather than for their graces; loving a
beautiful Child; that is void of grace, more than a deformed Child, though
eminent in grace, loving one excessively, as Jacob, Joseph, hence Joseph is
envyed by the rest: prodigal favors to some, especially if without reason, are
offensive to others, who are less respected: Loving so, as loath to let them go
when God calls for them, you cannot say as Eli, it is the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.18.
let him do as seems him good. God pulls and you pull, and you quarrel with God
about the goard, and you think you do well to be angry. Job blessed God, when
God took all away at once by one blow.

9. Not providing callings for them, or not the best.
By not devoting them to some honest calling, but letting them live in
idleneness, and so they grow up monuments of your neglect. Some Gentlemen train
up their Children to hold an Hawk, to follow a Dog, and commonly they dye in an
Alehouse, or shorten their lives thereby. But if you do provide a calling for
your Children, is it not what is most gainful, rather than what will be most
useful to the good of the Soul? Had you not rather have them rich Factours
among Idolaters (where they learn the manners of the Heathens) then to have a
meaner calling at home, where the Gospel is preached in power and purity?

10. Not matching them aright.
By not matching them to godly persons, but rather to the rich: Hereby ye show
that the silver shrines are in higher repute than grace and Godliness.

11. Giving away all to them.
By giving all to your Children, though the Church of God has more need of it.
Hereby you evidence that you prefer not Zion before your chiefest joy: that you
love the outward grandeur of your Children more than the prosperity of the
Church. It is a wonder (says Mr. Baxter) how so many seemingly holy, can quiet
their Consciences in such a sin as this is? If one of you have two or three
hundred pounds per annum, it is a wonder if you leave an hundred pounds a year
of it to pious or charitable uses. Nay do not Parents leave all to their
Children, when they have apparent proofs that they will spend it in the service
of Hell? O! Let Parents tremble. What will thou enable and strengthen thy
Children to rebel against God? put fuel to the fire? put swords into their
hands to sight against the most high?

Parents I beseech you look diligently to your duties, be humbled for these and
such like miscarriages. O! look about you, and you will see a sad Apostasy in
Children, Parents civil, the Children debauched: Parents godly, the Children
formal or loose: Parents eminent for grace, Children notorious for lewdness.
Let your bowels turn within you to see so great a degeneracy. Double your
diligence, that there may be an holy seed. Knock off the chains of Hell from
your Children what you may: lay not out all your time how they may be rich. It
is no time to seek great things for your selves; seek them not. Pity the Souls
of your Children, that are slaves to the Devil. How can ye mind your trades,
fields, bodies; whilst the Souls of your Children are in danger of perishing?
How can ye see the Devil driving your Children to Sin and Hell, and ye stand
still with a Gallio-Spirit? Go to your Closets, and ask your hearts, whether
the Soul be not the principal part of the Child? and whether that needs not
your care more than the body? Do not throw away the Blade to preserve the
Scabbard. God has set you to watch their Souls, to train up their Souls, to
provide for their Souls: if you do not, what is your love more than a Pagans, a
Turks, toward your Children? You think you should be unnatural if you should
not lay up for your Children (though many Professors upon pretense that God
will provide, indulge to the flesh, pamper their bodies, and starve their
Children) but here is the best laying up to lay up a stock of Prayers for them,
and a stock of Counsel and Instruction in them. O Parents! Once more I beseech
you, put on bowels of pity and compassion. Pity the perishing Souls of your
own Children. Command your Children to keep the way of the Lord: suffer them
not to fashion themselves according to the course of the world. Connive not at
them in practicing what you think is abominable in the worship of God. Remember
they are Gods Children more than yours. Ezekiel. 16.20.
All Souls are mine. God claims a special right in them, thy Sons and thy
Daughters whom thou have born unto me. If you neglect your duties, you and your
Children are like to have sad greetings, when you meet before the Lord another
day. How will your Children lay their hells and torments to your doors? how
will they curse the day they were born of such fond women, who indulged to them
in their neglects of God? Cursed be the day that ever I saw the passions, the
pride, the formality of my Father, or of my Mother; for thereby I learned to
sin against the Lord. O your examples undid me! I had not come to this place of
torment had it not been for you.

Children, As Children, evidenced in several particulars.
Are not you also greatly faulty toward your Parents? If Children be richer
than their Parents, how irreverent are they? how over familiar with their
Parents? as if they had forgot the first Commandment with promise. How
disobedient are they to their lawful commands? though the command of God be
express, Col. 3.20. Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3.
Children, obey your Parents in all things, and it is added, for this is
well-pleasing unto the Lord. Children obey your Parents in the Lord for this is
right. Honor thy Father and thy Mother (which is the first Commandment with
promise) that it may be well with thee, and thou may live long on the Earth.
Was Christ subject to his Parents, Luke 2.51.
and should not you be subject to yours? Sure you should have obeyed them as
far as without sin, though their commands crossed your natural desires: as
Joseph, when Israel said unto him, come I will send thee to thy Brethren at
Sechem, though he knew he should be sent to them who hated him; yet he said
unto his Father, Here am I. How stout and rebellious are Children when
corrected? Hebr. 12.9.
How few can say, we have had Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we
gave them reverence? This Sin so provoked God, Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20, 21.
that he made it Capital in the days of old. If a man have a stubborn and
rebellious Son, which will not obey the voice of his Father, or the voice of
his Mother, and that when they have chastred him, will not hearken unto them:
then shall his. Father and his Mother lay hold of him, and bring him out unto
the Elders of his City, and shall say, this our Son is stubborn and rebellious,
etc. and all the men of his City shall stone him with stones, that he die: so
shall thou put evil away from among you. How rebellious are Children in
refusing the eallings which Parents have appointed for them? If the Parent be
bound to bring them up to a calling, are not the Children bound to attend that
calling? Brethren, let every man wherein he is called; 1 Cor. 7.24.
therein abide with God. Christ probably was brought up in his reputed Fathers
calling. Is not this the Carpenter? Mar. 6.3.
How disobedient are Professing-Children in their marriages? Children are the
Parents goods, so God reckons them, yea so the Devil reckons them. When the
Devil had commission to meddle with Jobs goods, he falls on the Children. Some
are worse than Ishmaels, Genesis 21.21.
Nature and Civility made him submit to his Mother for the choice of his Wife.
If Children must obey their Parents in littles, much more in weighty matters.
How little have you requited your Parents? This you are bound unto, To show
piety at home, 1 Timothy 5.4.
and to requite Parents, is good and acceptable before the Lord. Your Parents
took care of you when you were as beasts, you had your life and education from
them, and what now slight them when old or weak? What laugh at their follies?
What when you are high, reject your parents that are low? The very Heathen
Orator declaims against this; We are not born (says he) for our selves, but
partly for our Country, partly for our Parents. How are you degenerated from
your Parents commands and examples? There are few true Rechabites, who forbore
wine from generation to generation. It makes my heart ache when I read that the
people served the Lord all the days of Joshuah, and all the days of the
Elders that outlived Joshuah, Judges 2.7, 10, 11, 12, 14.
who had seen all the great works of the Lord, that he did for Israel; but
there arose another generation after them, which knew not the Lord, etc. and
the Children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim:
and they forsook the Lord God of their Fathers, which brought them out of the
Land of Egypt, etc. and provoked the Lord to anger: and the anger of the Lord
was hot against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands of spoylers, that
spoiled them; and he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so
that they could not any longer stand before their enemies. O! in vain will ye
relieve your selves in your Baptismal relations unto God, that you have Abraham
to your Father: Mat. 8.11.
Gods judgments will be more bitter to you, more heavy on you, than on others,
when the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out. You will be ready to curse
the day you came of such Parents, that ever you had such holy instructions and
examples, to no purpose, save to greaten your condemnation. The Lord said unto
Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.16, 17.
This People will go a whoring after the Gods of the Strangers of the Land,
whither they go to be amongst them, and will forsake me, and break my
Covenant, which I have made with them: Then mine anger shall be kindled against
them in that day, and I will forsake them, and will hide my face from them, and
they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them; so that
they will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because our God
is not amongst us? Nay, Abraham (whom you trust to, and the Privileges by him)
will upbraid his Son Dives with his former good things: Son, Luke 16.25.
remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise.
Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. O most
dreadful! Your very righteous Parents shall rejoice in your ruin. The
righteous shall rejoice, when he sees the vengeance, Psa. 58.10, 11.
etc. So that a man shall say, Verily, he is a God, that judges in the Earth.

CHAP. XXXI. The sins of Professing-Masters and Servants.
FIrst you Masters, As Masters,
see how guilty you are in the Relation of Masters.

1. Not chooling godly Servants. Psalm. 101.6.
Should not your eyes, like David's, have been upon the faithful of the Land,
that they might dwell with you? How curious should you have been in this
particular? But alas! ye would not buy an horse, an house, a Field, but ye
would try them; but how careless have ye been whether your Servants were godly,
yea or no? If they were strong to labor, was not that all ye looked after? you
looked that they should be diligent in your work, your interest made you look
to that, but have you looked for such as walked in a persect way to serve you?
Hence many have been taken into Professors families, who were found wanton,
and unclean, and thereby Religion has suffered exceedingly: and others sweet
tongued, gossiping, gluttonous, drunken Servants, and so Acteon was devoured by
his Dogs: All the Masters ge^^ng^^^v^ been put into a bag with holes: a just
an^ ^^ghteous j^dgement upon the Master for ^is preferring self before
Religion: yea (which is a s^dder consequent) hence the Children are cerrupted
by evil exam^^ (...) ^^ey being more apt to smitate the (...), than the Parent
in (...) you had been curious in (...) you procured holy serva^^ (...) zeal
forwardness and care of (...) Children, what families might you have (...)
would have been pliable to your holy counsels.

Should you not have removed wicked Servants as soon as all your counsels would
not take effect on them? David did so. Not removing wicked ones. Psa. 101.7.
He that work^^h deceit, and tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight. You on
the contrary keep them as you do horses, if good for labor. It will never be
said to your glory, the Church in your house: but may it not be said, there is
a nest of Snakes, a cage of Devils in your house? Being overrigorous. Genesis
31.2, 5. Mat. 5.22.


2. Are not you too rigorous toward your Servants? Do not you too much frown
upon them, as Laban on Jacob? Do not you use words of reproach in your speaking
to them? Whosoever shall say, thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell sire. Do
not you strike them unnecessarily or immoderately? Have you forgotten the
commands from Heaven? Thou shall not rule over him with rigor, Levit. 25.43.
Col. 4.1.
but shall fear thy God. Masters, give unto your Servants that which is just
and equal, knowing that ye also have a Master in Heaven. And ye Masters, Ephesians.
6.9
forbear threatening, knowing that your Master also is in Heaven, neither is
there respect of persons with him Do you herein as you would be dealt with?
Would you have God to deal with you, as you deal with your Servants? Remember,
you and your Servants have one and the same Master, to whom you are both
accountable, you for your rule, and they for their subjection.

3. Nor directing them distinctly.
Have not you neglected to give that direction to your several Servants, as is
proper for them, so that they entrench upon each others work, and the painful
work lies neglected, to your trouble, and to the raising of strife and passion?
How few Mistresses, yea or Masters, are like Solomon's virtuous Woman, of whom
it is said, She looks well to the ways of her household? Frov. 31.27.
Every one should know his place and work in the Family, that all things may be
done decently, and in order: But in how few Families is it thus?

4. Not being diligent themselves in their company.
Do you give your Servants examples of diligence? So did that virtuous
Mistress: She rises also whilst it is night, etc. She girdeth her loins with
strength, and strengthens her arms: She lays her hands to the Spindle, and
her hands hold the Distaffe: She makes her self coverings of Tapestry: She
makes fine Linen, etc. She eats not the bread of idleness.

5. Not showing special respect to those that are godly. Philem. 16.
What love do ye show to your Servants that be godly? Do you receive them as
beloved Brethren? As Paul would have Philemon receive his Servant, after his
Conversion: Receive him not now as a Servant, but above a Servant, a Brother
beloved. A Christian Servant should be in the place of a beloved Brother, and
should be preferred before a lewd Son. Prove. 17.2.
A wise Servant shall have rule over a Son that causes shame: and shall have
part of the inheritance among the Brethren. How seldom do you show them good,
as well as receive good from them? When they are sick, how little attendance
and necessaries have they as to diet, fire, and physic? 1 Samuel 30.13.
Are not too many like the Amalakite, who left his man on the plain fields,
because he fell sick? How are many poor Servants (who contracted their diseases
by the unmercifull commands of some Professors) cast off by them when sick as
unprofitable burdens?

6. Do you pay your Servants their wages? Not paying wages as they ought,
Do you not pay them dodgingly? Have thou not forgot that the Isralites were
required, when they set any servant free, not to let him go away empty, Deuteronomy.
15.12, 13, 14.
but thou shall furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy floor,
and out of thy wine press: of that wherewith the Lord thy God has blessed
thee, thou shall give unto him? Have not thou abated them of their dues for the
time of their sickness, or the time they have spent in the service of God?

7. Not suffering them to speak. Job. 31.13.
Do not you deny liberty to your Servants to speak unto you? Job would not
slight his Servants cause. God has set Masters over Servants; but he has not
given them liberty to trample them under their feet. Servants are under their
Masters power, but not their lusts. You show your selves Nabals by this
churlishness and austerity. He is such a Son of Belial, that a man cannot speak
to him.

8. Suffering tyranny among them. As Servants. Being apt to think, that they
must be subject to none but Christ.
Do not you suffer one Servant to tyrannize over another?

Secondly, You Servants that Profess; I have somewhat in charge against many of
you.

1. Your Pride, sawciness, familiarities with your Governors, make me think
you would easily swallow the error of old, that we are to be subject to none
but Christ, as if your freedom by Christ, had exempted you from all civil
subjection to men. By your refusing the yoke of your Masters commands, you
reflect more upon your Master in the Heavens, than upon your earthly Governor:
What says the Apostle? Let as many Servants as are under the yoke, 1 Timothy 6.1.
count their own Masters worthy of all honor; that the name of God, and his
Doctrine be not blasphemed. Servants, Ephesians. 6.5
be obedient to them that are your Masters according to the flesh with fear and
trembling in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ. Servants, be subject to
your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
foward.

But alas! how saucy are Servants? Carrying themselves proudly, saucily, and
too familiarly with their Superiors. Mal. 1.6. Blazoning their Masters
Infirmities. Obeying them only in what they please. Col. 3.22. Tit. 2.9. Mat.
8.9.
May not your Master say, If I be a Master, where is my fear? How fearless are
you of your Masters, especially if your Masters be not very rich and honorable
in the earth? who respects Gods Ordinance? Hence many Professing Servants sland
covered in their Masters presence, sit before them, bow not to them, nor rise
up before them.

2. Do not you when you meet together blazon the infirmities of your Masters?
Do not you carry your selves as Spies rather than as Servants? you do not
herein as you would be dealt with.

3. Are not you disobedient to your Masters commands, unless in what pleases
you? You are rather the Servants of your own lusts, rather than your Masters
Servants: you do not obey in singleness of heart, yea, you are not indeed
obedient. The Centurion could say to his Servant, go, and he went, etc. The
Heathen Servants excel some that pretend to great seize of Religion. He
is the Master, that must have his own way; Judge ye then in your selves,
whether you abide in the place, wherein God has set you?

4. Not answering, when called. Job. 19.16.
Do not ye refuse to answer when you are called by your Masters? This was Job's
plague, I called my Servant, and he gave me no answer. Silence is sometimes a
sign of consent, but here of contempt. If a Servant answers not, when he is
called, he forgets what his calling is. The Servants in David's days were of
better dispositions, they did pick out their Masters mind out of every motion
and turning of his eye, and hand, and so were tontinually in a posture for
obedience. The eyes of Servants look unto the hand of their Masters, Psalm.
123.2. 1 Timothy 6.1.
and the eyes of a Maiden to the hand of her Mistress. For want of that honor
that is due from Professing Servants to their Masters, the name of God is
Blaspemed.

5. Answering again. Tit. 2.9.
As some by silence, so others by their tongues dishonor their Masters by
answering again. They should not answer by way of contradiction, or reluctance,
as Servants are very apt to do. Some will even brag, how they gave word for
word (perhaps blow for blow) nay two words for one. Hereby their Governors, if
ungodly, fall foul upon Religion. Is this the fruit of your profession?
prayers? running after Ministers?

6. Diligent only under their Masters eye. Ephesians. 6.5, 6. Not designing to please
God in their pleasing their Masters.
How lazy are some professing Servants? Diligent only when under their Masters
eye. Few serve their Masters, as Jacob, Laben, with all their might. The
command is that you should obey in singleness of heart, not with eye-service as
men pleasers. Mark, eye-service stands not with uprightness of heart. As you
would not be branded for Hypocrites, work behind your Masters backs, as if
their eyes were upon you. Consider how short you fall of this, and mourn before
the Lord in secret for your eye-service.

7. How do some, yea many servants, eye only the pleasing their Masters, Ephesians.
6.5. Tit. 2.9.
but do not their work so spiritually as to seek to please the Lord? Not with
eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the will of
God from the heart. It is true Servants should labor to please their Masters,
yea in all things; but they should seek more to approve themselves to God, than
to any earthly Superior.

8. Mis-timing duties
How imprudent are some Professing Servants as to the timing of their duties?
Some, when never so urgent business is to be dispatched will then go in secret
to call upon God; whereas going to bed later, and rising earlier, would prevent
much straitness as to time, and spirit in that great duty: Some will fall a
talking of the things of God to their fellow servants very unseasonably, not
when they are at leisure, but when they are most busily employed for their
Masters, to the hindering of their work.

9. Defrauding their masters.
How many cheat and defraud their Masters? Some cheat them of their time, by
idling it away, being tattlers, and busybodies, or gossiping it away: Others
cheat them of their money or goods, hiring others secretly to do their work,
and pay them with their Masters money or goods. Is not this purloyning? and
therefore forbidden? Tit. 2.10. Not provident for their gain.


10. How many are improvident for their Masters goods and gain? They will see
things spoil before their eyes: they will give what is not their own to give:
they make no conscience to eat and drink what their Masters do not allow them:
they are not contented with his allowances: they will steal small matters, and
yet whatever they take, though but little, is the breach of the 8th.
Commandment, and the less the temptation, the greater the sin, that they will
break Gods Law for trisles; and serve the Devil for pieces of silver, and
morsels of flesh. What says Mr. Dod? If ever they look for sound peace of
conscience, they must make restitution of all such things: How much soever they
steal, Numb. 5.7. Zech. 5.4.
so much they must restore, and the fifth part thereto, or if they keep it,
unless they repent, they keep Gods curse with it, and a woe unto their
Consciences.

11. Regard. less of their Souls.
How many are altogether careless to get any good to their Souls whilst under
Religious Governors? They ask not the way to Heaven, and if examined, they are
tonguetyed, will give no account of the hope that is in them.

12. Murmuring at reproofs and corrections. 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20.
How do many murmur under reproofs and corrections? What says the Apostle?
Servants be subject to your Masters, not only to the gentle, but to the
froward; for this is thankworthy, if a man for Conscience toward God endure
grief, suffering wrongfully: for what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for
your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for
it, ye take it patiently: this is acceptable with God. Unfaithful to Children.


13. How unfaithful are many to their Masters Children? Not heeding them, and
providing meat, and other necessaries for them in their Masters absence?

14. Receiving scornfully a Catalogue of their duties.
How scornfully do even Professing-Servants receive a Catalogue of their
duties? How loath are they, yea how do some un^^ to know the mind of God, as to
the extent of their obedience?

15. Their miscarriages toward their Fellow Servants.
How many ways do you fail toward your fellow Servants? Do not you seek to
undermine them of the respect their Masters bare them? Do not you labor to
supplant them? Do not you envy them? Are not you unfaithful to one another
Souls? Do not you wast time in idle and impertinent-discourses? Are not you
evil examples to each other? Do not you suffer Sin to rest upon each other? Are
not you guilty of not easing and relieving them, when they are overcharged with
businesses? Do not you carry your selves proudly and magisterially toward
Apprentices? Do not you join in a confederacy to tell tales against your
Governors? And do not you charge your Fellow Servants with secresy therein,
whereby the Name and Authority of the Master is lost, and all hopes of edifying
are taken away?

CHAP. XXXII. Their miscarriages with reference to the Ministers of Christ,
whilst they were resident with them.
1. Professors miscarriages toward Ministers before their removal, Not
esteeming, but slighting them. 1 These. 5.13.
HOW little have you esteemed them, and how much have you slighted them? Though
they were the Ambassadors of the Lord of Heaven, and should have had respect,
according to the rank of their Master, that sent them; yet how little did you
honor them in your hearts? Did you know them, and esteem them highly, for
their Works sake? Have you not very much slighted both their Persons and
Message? How many have thought they knew as much as their Ministers, and
therefore under-valued them? How many Ministers have been slighted for their
mean Parts? As if the efficacy of the Ordinance depended on the Rhetoric of
the Preacher: as if no dainties could be brought them in a homely dish, no
treasure in an earthen vessel: as if God could not speak out of the mouths of
Babes: as if the using Jordan were too contemptible a means? I have feared the
unsoundness of many hearts from the itching of their ears: Paul was careful to
preach not with enticing words, 1 Cor. 14.18.
with the wisdom of words: Though he could speak with tongues more than all,
yet he desired to speak rather to edification. It is likely your Ministers
could have been Seraphical, and in the clouds, but they stooped and descended
to your capacities, and denied themselves that they might gain you: more
desiring that you should be brought in love with the naked truth of the Gospel,
than with the dress it comes in; But nothing has pleased your squeamish
stomachs, but meat so sawced: you have loved the meat for the sauce, when there
was no sauce you cared not for the Sermon, and when the sauce was gone you were
weary of the Sermon; you would have no more of the meat. A Sermon full of plain
naked Scriptures would not down in our last times: We were Christ-glutted,
Gospel-glutted. It Is observed by an Historian, that before the great Massacre
in France, the Protestants were for a luscious wanton kind of Preaching. Truly
(says one of our own about 18 years since) We cannot absolutely determine what
will become of us: only we have cause to fear that conscientious, Sermons, as
much despised as they are, may be a commodity dear enough in England ere long,
1 Samuel 3.4.
and visions may be less open, that they may be more precious. How unworthily
have the Ministers of Christ been slighted by even such Professors, who a
little before, pretended at least, to have had their life and growth from them,
and that they were the Seats ^^^^etr ^^^istry, that they were begotten and bred
up under their shadow; and yet in process of time have had low, mean, base and
unworthy thoughts of them, debased them as brats of Antichrist, as limbs of
Babylon? Have not many eminent Professors been ready to entertain reports
against their Ministers? and have they not lost their esteems of them for one
real or supposed weakness of theirs? though you have been under so many
engagements to them for your spiritual life, etc. yet if you have seen a little
failing or miscarriage in them, have not you forgot all their worth, and all
their many years labors and cares for your eternal welfare? Have not you been
so far from esteeming the Messenger for the Message, that you have slighted the
Message for the Messenger? Has not this been the language of your hearts, if
not of your months, What nothing but this preaching? Have not those that at
first admired, afterward made nothing of this Heavenly Manna, because of the
commonness thereof? When pearls were common among the Romans, they wore them
upon their Shoes. Uniones emergere e luto cupiunt Tert.
Has not even the pearl of the Gospel been trodden under foot by you? Have not
you considered only the matter, and not the stamp of the Coin? Have not your
Ministers, though they have not kicked the dust of their feet against you, yet
often complained to God of the contempt you have put upon them, and how much
their Embassy has been undervalued by you? It may be you have thought it was
no great matter to slight them and their counsels: but know for your trembling
and amazement of Spirit, therein you have slighted Christ himself. He that
despises you, despises me. Luke 10.16. Mat. 10.15. Prejudiced against them.
May you not fear it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day
of Judgment, than for you?

2. How full of undue prejudices have your hearts been against your Ministers?
and you have not had the honesty to examine the grounds? When they have
delivered truths of a sublimer Nature, than ordinary; or have delivered any
thing more obscurely, than at other times, how rarely have you conferred with
them thereabout? Have not you gone among your Companions and filled your own
and their hearts with prejudices against them? When they have insisted long
upon one subject, have not you been offended? But when did you ever cry out of
others for being too long telling Money to you, for spending too many hours
therein? Hereby you have done the Devil as great a piece of service as any you
could have done him in your life time. Let me publish that to thine eye, which
was once whispered in the ear: Take heed what thou do, this man is a Roman:
Should not you much more have taken heed of filling your own and others hearts
with prejudice against your Ministers, seeing they were the Prophets of the
most high: these men were men of God: they were the special Ambassadors of
Heaven? I think he said well, that Prejudice against the Preacher is the great
prejudice to the hearers. This Fever of prejudice has made many, like the
full stomach, to loath the honeycomb. Has not God met with repulses, whilst
your Ministers have been entertained with prejudice? So long as you have been
prejudiced, though you were convinced of many duties, yet you have not been
persuaded to obey the truth. This hindered the Jews from closing with Christ,
and made their house desolate, over-turned their Temple, so that a stone was
not left joined to a stone: it brought a kind of Doomsday on them.

3. Not blessing God for them.
How little have you blessed God for the Gospel Ministry which you have
enjoyed? and yet has it not been the best under the Cope of Heaven? This
distinguishing Mercy did not affect your hearts as it ought. Some there were
(but very few) would say, Brown Bread, and the Gospel, is a Feast. Few, like
the Christians at Constantinople, cried out, Better the Sun not shine, than
Chrysostom be silenced. You could bless God for Health, Estate, etc. but not
for these great Luminaries of Glory, who were appointed to conduct and guide
you unto the Heavenly Jerusalem.

4. Not praying for (...).
How little did you Pray for them? How little have you prayed for gifts and
abilities to go through their whole work, for preservation for them, and for a
sanctified use of all Gods dispensations toward them? How little did you
deprecate the stopping of their mouths, and supplicate that their mouths might
be kept open, Ephesians. 6.19.
and that utterance might be given unto them, that they might open their mouths
boldly, to make known the Mystery of the Gospel? Have not they often begged your
Prayers, in the words of Paul, I beseech you, Romans 15.30, 31.
Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the Spirit,
that ye strive together with me, in your Prayers to God for me, that I may be
delivered from them that do not believe in Judea (in England?) and yet have not
you neglected to call upon God for their deliverance? How can you tell, but
their mouths had still been opened, had not you neglected Prayer? Mat. 7.7, 8.
Has not Christ promised, Knock, and it shall be opened unto you: To him that
knocks, it shall be opened?

5. Making Excuses for not hearing them.
Have not you made sorry Excuses for not hearing them? How little have you
believed that Word, He that hears you, hears me? And by consequence, that
not-hearing of them, was not-hearing of Christ himself. What slight excuses
have been deemed sufficient to keep you from the Shepherds Tents? The Apostle
would have us Swift to hear: James 1.19.
Swiftness notes diligence in taking the first occasion; but how have you, to
complement with a Friend, to indulge to the flesh, for fear of a little rain,
for fear of wetting your feet, for fear of losing a six-penny, yea a
penny-Customer, declined several opportunities of attending the Ambassadors
God sent you? For these things the wrath of God is breaking out upon you: the
day is come, or coming, Amos 8.12. Cant. 5.3, 6. Their miscarriages before, in
and after hearing, Before, Hearing without antecedent meditation.
when ye shall wander from Mountain to Hill, from Sea to Sea, and se^k bread
and find none. This very excuse, the fear of defiling her feet, would not serve
the Spouse.

6. How did you miscarry, both before, and in, and after hearing? How slender
was your preparation to attend upon these Deputies of Christ? How little did
you meditate on the Word you were to receive at their lips? Did you thus
consider? The Gospel that I am about to hear, will be the savor of life unto
life, or of death unto death: I shall be nearer Heaven or Hell by this Sermon I
am going to: If the Gospel be always hid, I am a lost Soul and shall perish:
is my Soul hungry? This is the bread of Heaven: Is my Soul thirsty? this is the
water of life: this is the milk whereby I must grow up unto eternal life: this
messenger of Heaven will be for the fall as well as the rising of many in
Israel: If he be not instrumental for my Salvation, he will be for my
Damnation: Isa. 55.10, 11.
As the rain comes and waters the Earth and returns not thither, etc. So
shall Gods Word that goes forth out of this Ministers mouth, not return unto
him void. How little did you consider the excellency and necessity of the Word
that you were to partake of? What ^reasure was afforded you in an earthen
vessel? That the Truths and Doctrines that your Ministers taught you, were of
as much worth, as your Souls, as Heaven, as Salvation?

How little did you pour out your Souls in Prayer unto God before you went to
hear your Prayer.
Ministers^ E^^her (...) your Ministers, that God would open their mouths to
speak the word truly, sincerely, powerfully, and seasonably, and suitabty to
your condition: or for your own Souls, that God would open your hearts, to
ente^tain the word so as to profit by it, that you might not have open ears,
and shut hearts, that you might not have ears, Prove. 20.12.
and yet hear not, as knowing that the hearing ear, and seeing eye, the Lord
has made even both of them?

How careless were you to purge your Souls before you came to hear the word?
Putting off the shoe,
Moses before he was to hear God speaking put off his shoe, to intimate that
you should put off your carnal and earthly affections before you come to hear
Gods word; But have not you rushed out of your worldly employments to many a
Sermon? How careless were you to lay apart all filthiness, Jam. 1.21.
and superfluity of naughtiness, that you might receive with neekness the
engrafted word, Eccles. 5.1.
which is able to save your Souls? If you have not come without habitual; have
you not neglected actual preparation?

When you have been actually under the Ministry, Have not you heard
irreverently? In hearing irreverently.
without awful apprehensions of Gods Majesty and presence? Have you said of
the place where any Minister of Christ has preached unto you, as Jacob of
Bethel, how dreadful is this place? Have you in your hearing Sermons set your
selves in the presence of God, Acts 10.33.
as Cornelius did, when Peter was preaching unto him? The King of Moab will
rise up in judgment, to condemn the irreverence of many of our Professors;
when Ehud told him, Judge. 3.20.
I have a message to the from God: the King arose from his Throne, and bowed
himself.

Have not you evidenced your irreverence in hearing carelessly, Carlesly.
dully, drowsily, sleepily, etc. Have not you lent a more attentive ear to a
Tale, to a Fable, to a Romance, to a Ballad, to a Stage Play of several hours
length, than to a Sermon of an kour? Have not you come to Church, as to an
Apothecaries Shop, for a recipe to sleep? Has not the Gospel come unto you in
word only, and not in power? When the Minister threatened you from the Lord,
could you say, My slesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
righteous judgments? How many months and years did Gods Servants threaten you
with a Famine of hearing the Word of the Lord? but did this Judgment fright
you, and humble you, whilst it lay in the cloud of the threa^ning, as the least
appearances of an outward Famine have awakened you? When your Ministers came
with the tidings of Peace to you, were their feet beautiful? May not your
Ministers complain of you, as Christ of the Jews, John 8.^^.
My Word takes no place in you? So careless have you been of any thing that
has been spoken to you by them, though in the Name of the Lord. When your
Ministers declaimed against your sins, did you so mind what they delivered, as
to be any whit troubled? Zech. 7.11, 12.
Did you not harden your hearts as an adamant? Were you not so far from being
troubled for your sins, that it was your only trouble, you could not commit
them without control? Were you not even troubled with admonitions and
counsels, commands and threatenings, that crossed you in your sins? Can you say,
Acts 17.11.
that you Received the Word with all readiness of mind?

Have not you heard heartlesly? Heartlesly.
without a real sense of your want of the Word, and without an appetite to it?
Had you such vehement desires after the treasure your Ministers were bringing
you, as covetous men have after the treasures of the Earth? Could you ever,
with David, say, Psalm. 119.20.
My Soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all times?

Have not you heard unbelievingly? unbelievingly.
Not crediting your Ministers Doctrine, and not applying it to, but shifting it
off from your selve? Have not their Sermons been therefore unprofitable to your
Souls, Heb. 4.2
because not mixed with Faith? Can you say, that you received their Word, 1
These. 2.13.
as the Word of God? That you applied it to your Souls, as that which concerned
you? May not we say, with grief of Soul, as our Lord has said already, John
5.37.
You have not heard his voice at any time? When you heard the Word, which is
Gods Word, did you hear God himself speaking his own Word unto your hearts?

Have you not been cautioned by the Lord Jesus Christ, and by his Ministers,
with a Take heed how you hear? Luke 18.18. Carpingly
And yet how often have you heard the Ministers of Christ carpingly? Not with a
willingness to be judged by the Word, but to judge it, and the Preacher for it?
Have not you let slip the most material passages of the Sermon, and pitched
upon the weaknesses or impertinencies of the Minister? How often have you, when
you could not blame the subject matter, found fault with the method, and the
manner of delivery; and overlooked that, wherein your Souls were especially
concerned?

Have not you heard Non-obediently? Non-obediently.
Have not you been untractable and unteachable? Have you not heard proudly, and
not humbly? With hard hearts, and not with hearts of flesh, ready to receive
the impression of the Word, and willing to be molded and fashioned according
to it? When could you say to any of Gods Ministers, as Cornelius to Peter, We
are all here present, to hear all that is commanded of God? When wast thou of
such an yielding Spirit, Acts 9.6. Job. 34.32.
as Saul was of, Lord, What will thou have me to do? His ear and heart was open
to every command: So was Job's, That which I see not, teach thou me. Have not
you had your Exceptions? If Ministers have enjoined you to pray in your
Families, perhaps you heard them therein; but if they enjoined from the Lord
(the same Legislatour) that you pray in your Closets, that you examine your
selves, that you fill your hands with both the Tables, they could not be heard;
one reserve at least: Whereas the right hearer cries out, Lord, What will thou
have me to do? I will do any thing, Lord, actively or passively, to get Hill
out of my Soul now, and to keep my Soul out of Hell hereafter.

After hearing the Ambassadors of Heaven, After, Not examining what they have
heard.
how faulty have you been? In not examining what you have heard by the written
Word? The Bereans consulted with the Oracles of God, brought the Doctrines they
heard to the measuring Line of the Sanctuary; but so have not you: They say, a
man will tell money after his Father; but you have been too careless, to tell
over the Doctrines you have heard. How many were there, to whom the reputation
and worth of the Teacher, was sufficient proof of his Doctrine, receiving all
that was stamped with his tongue? Mat. 23.9. Jude v. 16.
Have not you called such and such a Minister, Your Father on Earth, in the
same sense in which Christ forbids it? Have not you had the Persons of men in
admiration, and that for advantage? No wonder that Errors have abounded. Men,
that through an over-esteem of the Minister, take all upon trust, or through
sloth will not examine Doctrines, are like to be deceived.

May not Christ check you, Not remembering it: Mar. 8.18.
rather than the Disciples, with, Why do you not remember? Have not you heard
the Word, and instantly forgot it? Has not the Word gone in at one ear, and
out at another? Have not you let slip the Word? Jam. 1.25.
The word (...) is metaphorical, taken from a Sieve, or leaking Vessel, when
the liquor runs out as fast as it is put in. Heb. 2.1
Have not you hereby been ever learning, but not come to the knowledge of the
truth? Your Memories should be like the Ark, wherein the Pot of Mannah was
kept; but alas! When you heard the Word, then came the wicked One, Mat. 13.19.
and catched away what was sown in your hearts: and was not the Word, and the
labors of Christ's Ministers fallen so low, that you were contented, at least
little troubled, thus to be pillaged of this heavenly treasure?

Have not you neglected Meditation upon the Word you have heard? Not meditating
on it.
It was one special way, whereby, in time of the Law, the clean Beasts were
known from the unclean, chewing the end. Levit. 11.3. Luke 11.25.
But how few ruminate upon what they have heard and received? They do not, with
Mary, keep the sayings, and ponder them in their hearts. Blessed are they, that
hear the Word, and keep it. How few retire into their Closets, and reflect on
the usefulness of the Word, for the nourishment of their graces, for the
destruction of their sins? How few consider, whether they have met with God in
the Sermon, yea or no? You should have gathered up the words of Christ's
Minister, as Christ said of the fragments, so as none should be lost; or as the
Goldsmiths looks after the very dust of gold: but as soon as Conscience was
quieted, did you ever think more of the Word?

How few have gone from the Church to the Closet, Not praying over it.
there to pour out their Souls for a blessing upon what they heard? From the
Pulpit to the Trade is bad; but from the Pulpit to the Alehouse, that is
abominable: but all are not clear herein. O! If when your sin was discovered,
you had gone into your chambers, and begged humiliation for it, and victory
over it: and if when neglected duty was pressed in public, you had retired, and
prayed to God to incline your hearts to keep Gods statutes, would it not have
been better with you, than now it is?

Have not you neglected to talk of what you have heard? Have not some, Not
talking of it.
as soon as dismissed from the Sermon, fallen into impertinent discourses,
about news and trifles, or into worldly business; Mat. 13.7, 22.
and so the thorns choked all the convictions, which they received under the
Ministry? They consider not, that the Word they have heard, has been the
savor of life, or of death; 2 Cor. 2.16.
and that every one that goes from a Sermon, goes off either with God, or the
Devil, in his company.

Have not you been hearers of the Word only, Not practicing it. Jam. 1.22.
and not doers of it? Have not you so deceived your own selves? Your Ministers
have pressed you to secret Prayer, and to constancy in it; but have not you gone
away, and continued in the neglect of that, wherein the power of godliness, and
heart-sincerity mainly consists? Blessed are they that hear the Word of God,
Luke 11.28.
and keep it, i. e. that are good Practitioners, that have a conscionable care
to regulate heart and life according to what they hear and know: They are
rather blessed, than the Mother of Christ was, for bringing him into the World:
Christ puts a rather upon the good Practitioner, than upon the Virgin Mary. But
alas! Let it be for a Lamentation, that so many Professors have been for
hearing; but for doing only what they listed: Amos 8.5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Saying, When will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell Corn? and the
Sabbath, that we may set forth Wheat? Making the Ephah small, and the Shekel
great, and falsifying the Balances by deceit? That we may buy the poor for
silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the
Wheat? The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never
forget any of their works. Shall not the Land tremble for this, etc? The
Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, Mat. 21.43. Luke 12.43.
and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof: But Blessed is that
Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing. When did you find
the Glasses to discover and amend your Spots? Have you been cast into the Form
of the Doctrine, which ye have received? Have you obeyed from the heart the
Form of Doctrine delivered to you? Has your profiting appeared answerable to
the many months and years you have sat under the Dews of Heaven? What do you
know more than you did before? What do you believe, love and hope for, more
than you did? Have your hearts and lusts stooped more and more to this Scepter
of Christ? Believe it Sirs, If Sin be not more odious, and Christ more sweet
and precious, after you have been in the Shepherds Tents, you have lost your
hearing hours, yea contracted more guilt to your Souls. That you have not been
changed from glory to glory, is a great stain to the Ministry, and a great
ground of sadness to the poor Ministers, who fear they have labored in vain.
And yet have not you been such unprofitable hearers, that Seekers, Ranters, and
Quakers, have took occasion to cry down the Office of the Ministry, as a Cheat,
as an old Almanac out of date; because they have seen how unsuccessful the
labors of Christ's Ministers have been upon your Souls? If you had come down
from these Mounts with your faces shining, if you had received more of God upon
your hearts and lives, you had more credited the Ministry, and put to silence
these foolish men. What shall I say? A worse Famine is coming on Professors,
than what happened to Egypt, and if you have laid up no store, what will ye do
in the years of lean Kine?

7. Have not you greatly miscarried, Their miscarriages, as to consulting with
their Ministers. Mat. 16.19.
as to consulting with them? Though one great work of your Ministers was, to
deal personally with your Souls; and God entrusted them with the power of
binding and loosing, (doctrinally at least) and has promised to loose in
Heaven, what they loosed on Earth; and to confirm the Word of his Servants,
Isa. 44.26.
and perform the Counsel of his Messengers; yet how little weight have you laid
upon their judgments?

Have not you more credited the Physicians opinion of your Bodies, Laying
little weight on their Judgments. Not consulting with them at all.
and the Lawyers about your Estates, than you have your Ministers concerning
your Souls?

How seldom are Ministers consulted with about the business of the Soul and
Eternity? Will not they in the Acts rise up to condemn this Generation? They
repaired to Christ's Ministers, with, Men and Brethren, What shall we do to be
saved? Acts 2.37.
But alas! How many have sat 30, 40, 50. Years under a Minister, and never
advised with him what to do?

They have been no more moved, Through hard. Heartedness. Bride.
than the Rocks were, that Bid preached to.

Or else, through the Pride of their hearts, they have thought to heal
themselves: They have been so puffed up with their own knowledge, that they
have not cared to hear what their Ministers could declare unto them. If they be
to take a Journey, they will ask the Way of every one they meet; but so
unreasonably consident are they of their knowing the Way to Glory, (though
there be many Ways, Prove. 14.12.
that do indeed lead down to Hell, yet seem the right Way to Heaven) that they
will not so much as ask the Way thither-ward of any Guide. Prove. 26.16.
The Fool is wiser in his own conceit, than seven men thas can render a reason.

Or else they have thought as well of their Souls as some do of their flesh,
Thinking the wound will heal of it self.
that the wound will heal of it self. And has it not so done? no body knows,
how? Can you tell how the troubles and impressions made by the Ministry in your
own Souls have worn away? have not Ministers sound after the House has been
swept and garnished, that seven worse Spirits have entered into the Souls of
many convinced, and terrified Professors, and their latter end was worse than
their beginning? Many (says famous Hooker) in a stupid kind of sottish
senselessness, wear out the blow, and so wast away to nothing: as many out of
sorrow have become like senseless blocks.

How often has Satan, like a Cutpurse, drawn thee into solitudes, dissuaded
thee from going near thy Minister, that he may rob thee of thy Convictions? and
the better to effect this, has he not persuaded thee to look on the Minister
as proud, high, scorning to condescend to hear thy Soul grievances, and
complaints, whereas he has many and many a time with the greatest importunity
begged this trouble of dressing thy sores?

If you have consulted with your Ministers, Not consulting with them soon
enough. Acts 24.25.
have not you delayed going to these Soul-Physicians? When the wound was newly
given, and bleeding, you should have repaired to them; but like Faelix, you
have dismissed your convictions to some other opportunity. How has Satan
befooled many? persuading them that there needs not so much ado, that the
Minister is too legal, that he will drive to despair, that (as Ahab thought of
Michaiah) he will not speak one comfortable word, or that he will blazon the
secrets of their souls, and so they shall get a blot by unbosoming themselves.

8. Their low and base ends in visiting them.
Have not you had low ends in visiting them? yea, not only low, but base in
going to your Shepherds Tents? Perhaps they are full of History, and you would
enrich your selves with the knowledge of the times of many generations past:
perhaps they were merry, (too merry God knows, too full of squibs and jests,
the Lord forgive the unseriousness of Ministers) and you have delighted in
them, as Saul did in David's Harp, to drive away sadness and melancholy: or
perhaps your Ministers had quick, nimble parts, and you went to them to pick a
Sallet from their Gardens, to pick some flowers of Oratory, or to please your
fancies, or to spend away time; but how seldom to receive virtue from Jesus
Christ through these pipes? how seldom to have your rockie hearts broken, and
to be cured of your earthly Spirits?

9. In inviting them to their houses.
How often have you invited them to your houses only to feast them, and to show
outwardly your respect unto them? but have not put the opportunity to such
uses, as Mary did Christ's coming to her house? how light, vain, unserious, and
jesting have you been in their company? It had been more your wisdom, as well
as duty, to have proposed some necessary Queries to them with respect to your
eternity: you should have drawn out their gifts and graces by proposing such
Questions as these.

How Sir shall I know the difference between the assisting, Questions to be
asked Ministers,
and the informing and inhabiting presence of the Spirit? How shall I discern
the Spirit of bondage, from that bondage Satan works in the Children of
disobedience? How shall I know the difference betwixt temporary and saving
Faith? 'twixt legal and evangelical Repentance? How shall I know moral Virtues
from Graces? How shall I know that I am gone beyond the utmost refinements of
Hypocrites? How shall I know whether the Gospel has had a saving efficacy on
mine heart? How shall I know Satan's temptations, from the suggestions of mine
own heart? How shall I know when Satan, and when the Spirit applies Promises?
How shall I discern the motions of the Holy Ghost, from the impulses of Satan,
when transforming himself into an Angel of light? How shall I know the
teachings of the Spirit, from the teachings of Men? How shall I distinguish
Fancy from Faith? How shall I know, whether I have only dreamed, that I am
full, when all the while I have been empty? How shall I know the Devils black
temptations, from mine own corruptions, that I may know whom to charge? How
shall I get assurance that my Sins are pardoned? How may I obtain victory over
the World? How may I be delivered from spiritual sloth? What shall I do, that I
may retain the influences of Ordinances upon my Spirit? How may I be more
useful to all my Relations? How may I bridle my tongue, so as to speak evil of
no man? How shall I know what is the work of my Generation? How shall I do to
work the works of God? What shall I do to get a trembling heart under the Word
and Works of God? How shall I get a soft heart, to mourn for my own and others
Sins? How shall I know what is my constitution sin? How shall I know whether
my courage be from natural temper, or the grace of God? How shall I know
whether my Patience be natural or spiritual? How shall I know, that I shall
spend an eternity with God?

Such Questions as these should have been seriously debated with your
Ministers; but woe and alas! When you and your Ministers have spent hours
together, have not you contracted guilt, and made your selves unfit for secret
duties, nay perhaps have not time for the discharge of them?

10. Their wasting Ministers time.
How have you devoured much precious time in the presence of your Ministers?
Both your own, (which is short enough, therein to make your calling and
election sure) and (which is a much more heinous evil) your Ministers time?
Have not you diverted him from his great meditations and projects for the
everlasting good of your Souls? Have not you called your Ministers from their
knees and studies to entertain you? and have not you proved Wells without
water? Have not you by needless vain conferences obstructed your own good, and
hindered your Ministers from being useful to your own, and many more Souls.

11. Being swift to speak before, and slow to hear their Ministers.
When you have met with your Ministers, have not you been swift to speak (when
to little purpose) and slow to hear, what your Minister, Gods Deputy, would
have said unto you? whereas God requires you to be swift to hear, and stow to
speak. I have wondered to see the impudence of some women herein, who (as if
none had tasted of the tree of knowledge, save themselves) have been like
bellies full of wind, ready to burst till they had vent, and had no respect to
the presence of their Minister, who could not be heard, because of their noise
and clamor, though the Apostle has sealed up their lips, by sending them to
ask questions of their Husbands at home; yet they must be prattling, 1 Cor.
14.35.
as if they had a Monopoly of all knowledge, and as if their MInisters were to
learn of them, rather than they of their Ministers. I am confident it is not
the Spirit of God; but the Spirit of Pride, Self-conceit, and vain Glory, which
puts private persons upon these bold intrusions: so that the Minister, who
is the mouth of God, 1 Timothy 2.11, 12. Prove. 10.19.
is made dumb by their overmuch speaking, who should learn in silence. What
shall I say? hear not me, but the wisest of men, yea the only wise God in him:
In the multitude of words there wants (...) sin; but he that refraineth his
lips is wise. Believe it, there has been wanting in most Professors much
humility, much ^^^ousness, much reverence of their Ministers: you have not had
that fear and awe which because you: 1 Samuel 16.4.
few have trembled at their approach to their Ministers, as the people did,
when Samuel drew near.

12. Their niggardliness to them.
Your Niggardliness to your Ministers is none of the least of your sins; and
therefore I shall take liberty to enlarge upon it. If men's titles to their
Cottages, their watercourses; their ways, their easements be questioned,
presently a Lawyer is see'd: we will be at any cost to settle the world surely
ours: if our health be in danger, the Physician is sent for: both Lawyers and
Physicians houses and rooms are full of Clyents and Attendants; but men are
contented to clear up their own titles to Heaven and glory, and to heal
themselves of their sin sicknesses: a plain argument, that they thought the
Ministry but useless, and that they could make a shift to live without
Ministers. Thou have had Prescriptions for thy Souls recovery and health for
these many years, and yet perhaps have not given one farthing to thy
Soul-Physicians. If a Physician write a few lines, purses are opened: if a
Lawyer plead a quarter of an hour, yea if he plead not at all, but only give
his advise, you think he deserves a fee; but the Ministers work is so low in
thy esteems, that he might have starved if all were as niggardly as thou have
been. Let this be considered and lamented. Your Ministers have been under a
temptation to withhold the pressing of this duty upon you; for that many lay in
wait to discredit them, as if they preached for nire, and sought yours, rather
than you? but let me be your Remembrancer this day. We cannot say of you, as
Paul of the Galathians, that you received us as Angels of God, yea as Jesus
Christ, and that you would have plucked out your eyes for us: Alas! what did you
for us more, than the constraints o^ the Law compelled you to? And how many
wishes had you, that all the Laws for Tithes had been abrogated, upon pretense
that Ministers should have had a better maintenance by a voluntary contribution?

But do not we know that the great sticklers for this have been most
close-fisted to the Ministers? Giving nothing to them for their maintenance.
Have not some of them refused to give one penny to the Ministers, whom they
waited on for years together? I wonder how you could in your reading the
Scriptures (if you have indeed read them) so long overlook, 1 Cor. 9.7.
who goes a warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth a Vineyard and
eats not the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the
milk of the flock? Say I these things as a man? v. 8.
or says not the Law the same also? v. 9.
For it is written in the Law of Moses, thou shall not muzle the mouth of the
Ox, that treads out the Corn. Does God take ear for Oxen? Or says he it
altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt, v. 10.
this is written; that he that ploweth should plow in hope: and that he that
thresheth in hope, should be partaker of his hope. v. 11.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall
reap your carnal things? v. 12.
If others be partakers of this power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless
we have not used this power: but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the
Gospel of Christ. v. 13.
Do ye not know, that they which minister about holy things, live of the things
of the Temple? And they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar?
v. 14.
Even so has the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel. That you may be the better convinced of the neglect of your
duty, see the Apostle claims it as his (...), his Power, his Right, and lawful
Authority, to receive maintenance from the Corinthians: And indeed Christ has
empowered his Ministers, and they may demand it, without any just imputation of
covetousness and self-seeking, as the Labourer may his hire. The Apostle had
power to forbear working, i. e. at his Trade: He implies, that the Ministry
would be the saddest employment, because of the laboriousness of it, if
Ministers should not live of their Ministry: Be sides, Ministers give people
gold for brass: Again, They who ministered about the holy things, lived of the
things of the Temple, yea and plentifully too; for they had the Tenth, and yet
were scarce the Sixtieth part of the People; for the number of the People,
without the Levites, amounted to a thousand thousands and three hundred
thousands: and the Levites, numbered from the Infant to the old man, were found
but two and tweenty thousands. But alas! Though the Apostle be so peremptory
here and elsewhere, Gal. 6.6.
Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that teaches in all
good things: And the Wiseman, Prove. 3.9.
Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all thy
increase; Yet I may renew an old complaint: Many have dealt by their Ministers,
as Carriers do by their Horses, they lay heavy burdens upon them, and then hang
Bells about their necks: hard work, and good words they shall have; but easy
commons, and slight wages: as if they were of the Camelion-kind, and could live
by the air.

But if you have parted with any thing to the Minister, has it not been as
Alms, Or else giving only in charity, not in justice: as an alms, not as due.
not as Dues, not as Right? Have not you excused your selves from giving what
was due from you, with, The Minister needs it not, He has a fair Estate, or at
least a competency? Yea, but what says the Apostle? Have ye not reaped our
spiritual things? and should not we your carnals? Have ye not been instructed?
Why then did ye not communicate to your Ministers in all good things? Has not
the Lord expressly alienated a proportion of Goods for the Ministers labor? How
dare you live in the Sin of Sacrilege? Is it not Sacrilege for you to detain
from God what is due to him? You are in the snare; Prove. 20.25.
for you have devoured that which is holy. Suppose a man should work for thee
all the day long, would it be an excuse for thy detaining his dues from him, to
say, The man has a competency, yea he is rich, he is richer than I am, my
Children want it more than he does, he has little or no charge? O! says the
Lord, The Labourer is worthy of his hire. Would thou not say so in that man's
case? O! Live up to the Light of Nature, or throw up thy Profession. It is no
less than a wonder to see how little honesty there is among men, yea among
Professors. To defraud a Minister is hardly counted a sin. The rise of this is
the great contempt of the Ministry: A Sin that God is now reckoning with you
for. The Lord God of your Fathers sent to you by his Messengers, 2 Chronicles.
36.15, 16, 17.
rising up betimes and sending; because he had compassion on his people, and on
his dwelling place; but you mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his
words, and misused his Prophets: May it not be added? Until the wrath of the
Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy. For this Sin, God
brought upon the Israelites the King of the Chaldees, who slew their young men
with the sword, in the house of their Sanctuary, and had no compassion upon
young man or maiden, old man, or him that stooped for age, he gave them all
into his hand. Have not you cause to fear, lest you shall also be so given into
the hands of worse Babylonians? You can judge what is a Ministers competency;
but when have ye a competency? You can add field to field, house to house,
hundreds to hundreds, and yet the Horse-leach cries Give, Give: Yet do not you
judge a small stipend, that will hardly keep body and soul together, a
competency for a Minister? What is that great service you do for God above the
Minister, that you should think it reasonable, to leave hundreds, yea thousands
to your Children, and that the Minister should be kept so short, that he cannot
leave them a groat? What shall I say to you? Let me borrow the words of God by
the Prophet: Will a man rob God? Mal. 3.8, 9, 10.
Yet ye have robbed me: But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and
Offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole
Nation, Bring ye all the Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be meet in
mine house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not
open you the windows of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall
not be room enough to receive it.

O! Restitution to be made by such, as have not given what was due from them to
their Ministers,
Do not any longer detain what is due to your former Ministers: make
restitution of unjust gain, as ever you hope to be saved. It is not enough to
say, Lord, forgive me, I thought it not my duty; but thou must reckon how many
years thou have reaped Spirituals, and pay what thou owe, or Judas will
condemn thee, for he thought it unsafe to keep what was unjustly got. Remember
Zacheus, he thought it not enough to give over his oppression, but, when
converted, he made conscience of making restitution. Let the Elders that rule
well, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18.
be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the Word and
Doctrine: For the Scripture says, thou shall not muzzle the Ox, that treads
out the Corn; and the Labourer is worthy of his reward. Here you see double
honor, honor of reverence, and honor of maintenance, was due unto your
Ministers: Here is an allusion to the right of the firstborn, who were to have
a double portion: Their maintenace was due from you; neither should their
maintenance have been ordinary mercenary wages, but such as is given by way of
honor, as well as by way of reward. Have not you lived in the contempt of an
Ordinance of God? 1 Cor. 9.14.
The Lord has ordained, etc. as before. Do not any longer delude your
Consciences, by crying against Tithes, as Antichristian, as Jewish. Did not
Abraham, before the Jewish Laws, pay Tithes to Melchisedech? And are there not
from thence arguments drawn that you cannot answer? Why do ye not fear, lest,
through the prevalency of Self, you should be too base, covetous and partial in
your own matters? O! Give to God, what is Gods: Deny not your Ministers their
dues: You owe vaste sums to them, which if you detain in this day of their
wants, God will call you to a speedy account for the grinding of the faces of
these poor, yea he will make you vomit up such sweet morsels, with all the rest
of your substance, Jam. 5.4.
if not with your blood. Behold the hire of the Laborers, which have reaped
down your Fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, crreth: and the cries of
them, which have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath.
Lydia even enforced the Apostles to accept of her gift. The Macedonians
beseech'd Paul with much entreaty, to accept of their bounty. If thou were
converted by one of them, thou did owe to him no less than thy self: What
thou art and have, should not have been counted too dear for him, who was Gods
Instrument, to pull thee as a brand out of the fire, even when thou wast half
burnt. Say at length with David, I will not serve my God with that which cost
me nothing. I shall conclude this head with the saying of a Reverend man, It is
a plain argument of a base esteem of God, of Grace, of the Kingdom of Heaven,
that a Servant, a Factour, should have twenty times the alloance of Heavens
Factour for your Souls: You are not come up to the honesty of the Pharisee,
Mat. 23.23.
He gave Tithes of all that he possessed, even of the smallest things, of Mint,
and Annis, and Cummin: Luke 11.42.
And does not Christ say, These things ye ought to have done? What were your
Ministers more unworthy than the Priests of that Age? Their regardlessness of
the Widdons and Children of their dead Ministers.


13. If you have not been niggardly toward your Ministers whilst alive with
you, have not you been niggardly toward their Wives and Children after their
deaths? Verily not minding the Widows and Children of deceased Ministers is a
sin that God will remember in the day of accounts. David enquired after the
seed of Jonathan: he evidenced his true love to the Father in remembering the
posterity. O! when shall love be without dissimulation?

14. Their grieving their Ministers.
Have not you been a very great trouble to their Souls? Your Ministers were so
affectionately desirous of you, that they were willing to have imparted to you,
not the Gospel only; but also their own Souls; because ye were dear unto them:
And is this your kindness to your Friends? to break even their hearts, who were
glad to spend and be spent for you? How proudly have you carried it toward
them? God threatened the Israelites that the Cananites should be pricks in their
eyes, and thorns in their sides: Surely it better became Cananites to be thorns
to the Israelites, than for you to be thorns to your Ministers. How often have
you grieved them to see your stoutness; and rebellion against all their
Counsels! May not your Ministers say as David, Psalm. 119.158.
I beheld the Transgressors, and was grieved: because they kept not thy Word?
May they not say, We have seen your lukewarmness, your sloth, your earthliness,
etc. and our Souls were troubled? You should have been like the Thessalonians,
1 These. 5.19.
the crown of our rejoicing; but you have been crowns of thorns, which have
pierced not our heads, but hearts: You should have refreshed our Bowels, been
as Cordials, and sweet refrectives, after all our wearisome labors; but have
not you dealt unkindly with us? and the more we have loved you, have not we had
the less love from you? Have not you be^^ more merciful to your Horses and Dogs
than to your Ministers? You have baited, and been kind to those creatures; but
God knows how, after all our toil, our rising up early, and sitting up late,
our spending our strength, our lungs, our spirits, yea and our estates among
you, you have requited us evil for good, even to the spoiling of our Souls.
Acts 7.51, 52.
Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the
Holy Ghost: as your Fathers did, so do ye. Which of the Prophets have not your
Fathers persecuted? etc. Have not you in your hypocrisy made outcries against
others for silencing your Ministers? for taking away the bread out of yours and
your Childrens mouths? and for removing them from their stations and dwellings?
But may not I profess in the name of all my Fellow Sufferers, that your
misimprovements, your inconstancies, your pride, and earthliness, have been,
and are our chiefest burdens? a greater pressure to us, than any burdens, that
lie upon our names, bodies, or estates? I cannot but think of a passage of holy
Mr. Shepherd: The Jews (says he) did long for Christ, and when he came, they
Crucified him: and you would have Ministers, and you had them, and though you
did not (immediately) cast them out of their places; yet you so wearied their
Spirits, and grieved the Spirit in them, that you made them glad to bury
themselves, and leave their places: you had Prophets and their te^^s and their
sorrows too, yea and their bl^^d too, and O! what a light matter was it te^^s
you to break their very hearts? How little did you obey them that ruled over
you, Hebr. 13.17.
and submitted your selves, that they might give their account with joy, and
not with grief? How little did you believe, that that is unprofitable for you?
Have not you made nothing of it, for your Ministers to lose their labor, to
put them upon crying out, I have labored in vain? Isa. 49.45.
Yea how have you grieved their very Souls with reproaches? Some who have
pretended affection to them, yet have had their reproachful Names of Priest,
Parson, Vicar, etc. Though God has put a Crown of honor upon them, by making
them his Ambassadors; yet how have some impudent Professors blasted them with
their stinking breath, and prosane scoffs? Ambassadors are inviolable by the
Laws of Nations. The Lord (says one) has set a better mark on them, than Cain
had, and given them a better pasport: touch not mine anointed, and do my
Prophets no harm: yet you have made a light matter of vexing their very Souls.
When you could have nothing else against your Minister, have not you been
censuring him for his manner of speaking? 2 Cor. 10.10.
His Letters (say they) are weighty and powerful, but his bodily presence is
weak, and his speech contemptible.

Lastly, And being weary of them.
Have not your Ministers been so troublesome to you in your sins, in your
formality, worldliness, lukewarmness, etc. that you were even weary of them?
Have not you been as weary of them, as the Children of Israel of Angels food?
as weary as weak somachs are of feeding on one dish? Your Ministers urged
flesh-displeasing and self-denying duties: they would not suffer you to sin
quietly; and were not you therefore burdened with them? they would not stand
and comply with your carnal ends and sinful interests; and did not your hearts
therefore cry out away with them? Have not you been like the Gadarenes, more
willing to part with your Ministers, than with your swinish lusts? Romans 1.28.
Because you did not like to retain God in your knowledge, it is no wonder if
God give up many of you to a reprobate mind. Has not the Gospel been too
costly, too chargeable to some of you? and too irksome, requiring too much
pains taking, to others of you? O! when you Remember your crying iniquities,
for which God is chiefly contending with you, forget not this dreadful sin
of being weary of Gods Ambassadors, of being weary of speaking with God, and
of hearing God speak unto your Souls.

CHAP. XXXIII. Their misearriages with reference to the Ministers of Christ,
Professors miscarriages toward their Ministers since their removal. Not
finding the want of them. Not esteeming the loss great enough.
since their removal.
1. H How many of you do not find them wanting? This will be evident by the
following Queries.

Have you indeed accounted that none in the world want help like your selves
upon this very account? Do you look upon your selves as litting in darkness,
yea in the region and shadow of death? under a worse Plague than the
Egyptian-darkness? that was a darkness, wherein men lived; but do you look on
this as a darkness of death? Do you account a Throne without the Gospel but the
Devils Dungeon? Wealth without the Gospel, fuel for Hell? Advancement without
the Gospel, but a going high, to have the greater fall? Do you look upon your
selves as under a worse famine than that of bread? Cannot you your selves make
up this great loss? cannot you set other things in the breach?

Do not some of you set good books in the room of your Ministers? Going about
to make it up, by good books.
I confess (says a Reverend Man) Reading has its use; but the voice has a
secret force upon the Soul, it has a Ministerial efficacy, by which the
Authority and Sovereign efficacy of the Spirit is conveyed. I pray God the
fruitfullness of the Press may not beget a dis-esteem and contempt of the great
Ordinance of the Minister already: you have been told already that Luther had
rather his books should be burnt, than the Scriptures suffer a dishonor and
neglect by perusing his papers.

Do not some of you set your own parts and gifts in their room? Their own parts
and gifts.
Do not some of you think that you have so profited by their Ministry, that you
have no further need to attend upon any Ministers of Christ? May not such doubt
whether their experience of the power and efficacy of the Ministry has been
true, seeing true experience thereof sweetneth the Ministry unto Souls, raises
up their esteems of it, and engages them to a further and more cheerful
attendance upon it. A true taste will sharpen the Souls appetite: the true
Christian gets a Stomach by eating, as the new born babe by sucking. 1 Pet.
2.2, 3.
As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that you may grow
thereby, if so be that ye have found that the Lord is gracious.

Do not some of you go about to make up your selves by attending on Christ's
companions in the sense of Solomon? And Christ's companions. Cant. 1.7.
by going to Wells without water? by sucking empty breasts, whence you can draw
nothing, but wind or blood? what is this but seeking the living among the dead?
expecting gracious showers from Clouds without rain? making up the want of
bread with stones, if not poison? O! why do not you say, Tell me, O thou whom
my Soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou make thy Flocks to rest at
Noon? for why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy
companions?

What sighs, Not mourning enough for the want of them.
sorrows, tears, etc. has the removal of your Ministers cost you? Cannot you
rub it out very quietly? If you lose your Jewels, Estates, Names, Friends,
Children, etc. we can read the sorrows of your hearts in your countenances: you
are almost angry with God when a goard is smitten. O! what sinkings of heart
are there among Professors? what cares? fears? griefs? not only to the sadning
of their hearts, but altering of their countenances, when the world vanishes?
And yet no aching hearts, no dejected countenances for the glory's departing,
for Gods shutting up house and departure? I am confident it has not broke one
nights rest to many, who yet will think themselves wronged, if they be not
placed in the highest form of Profession.

What time have thou set apart to humble thy Soul for all thy abuses of the
Gospel and Ministry thereof? Not Fasting under this Judgment.
If a Child be sick, time must be set apart to humble thee before God: this is
your duty; but the other should not have been neglected. Thou may subsist
better without Children, than without these Spiritual Fathers: a Gospel
Ministry is a greater Jewel, than many Sons and Daughters. Thy having sinned
away the food of thy Soul should have put thee in Sackcloth, and upon Fasting
with mourning long ago. All Israel lamented after the Ark; But are not you as
merry and sensual at your tables as ever?

Yea are not you secretly glad at the removal of your Ministers? yea secretly
being glad for their removal.
Ministers and Ministry (says Shepherd) are bills of charges to a
Congregation, and too costly Inhabitants among them.

2. Not justifying God in their removal.
Have you justified God in the removal of them? God as a wise and provident
Master gave you glorious lights to do his work by; but you have played away your
time: is it any wonder that he has put out your Tapers and Candles? Have you
confessed the righteousness of God herein, that he will not be at cost to find
you Candle light to play by? Has this been thy hearts acknowledgment, God gave
me these lights, that I might work for him by them; and because I did not, but
wrought the works of darkness; therefore he has most justly left me in
darkness, and in the shadows of death: 2 These. 2.10, 11
because I received not the truth in the love thereof: I took it into mine
head, but not into mine heart; God may justly send me strong delusions, that I
should believe a lie. Vide Pareu^^ in Act. 5.36.
It is the observation of Pareus upon many of the Jews being seduced, that it
was just with God, that they should believe impostours; because they would not
give credit to Jesus Christ. O! God may make short work with us in his
Judiciary proceedings. When God has departed upon repulse, he has left a
dismal curse behind hind him: I say unto you that none of these men, which
were bidden shall taste of my Supper: If the meat be on the table; yet it is
just with God that I shall never taste of it; for I have controuled the Spirit
again and again: twenty, thirty, forty years have I vexed the good Spirit of
the Lord; and therefore he may swear in his wrath that I shall never enter into
his rest: If some shall never taste that have neglected one Call, woe is me, who
have neglected thousands. Take words and say; because I have not obeyed the
voice of thy Servants, Job. 36.12.
it is righteous that I perish by the Sword, and dye without knowledge.

3. Not blessing God for former opportunitles.
How little have you blessed, and do you bless God, that once you did enjoy a
Gospel Ministry? and such a Gospel Ministry? How seldom are such words as
these, Blessed be they, and blessed be their Counsels, and blessed be the Lord,
that sent them out to meet me in former days, and for so many days, months,
and years together, found in your mouths? It is a sign that your disesteems of
the Gospel and Ministry do still abide, whilst you cannot find in your hearts
to thank God for enjoying so choice a blessing for so many years together.

4. Not crying for their return.
What cries have you sent up to Heaven for the return of your Ministers? Dare
you thus imprecate, Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I forget
to pray for Zions welfare in this particular? Had the Ministry of the Gospel
been counted a glorious blessing, you would have sent strong cries to Heaven,
for the return of it: Had you believed, that they came to treat with your
Souls, about your peace with God, and that God has appointed this as the great
means to bring your Souls to himself, you would not have parted with your
Ministers so easily, being as little moved, as at the withering, and throwing
to the dunghill, of a formerly flourishing Nose gay of Flowers; and you would
have wrestled with the Lord, for the return of these glorious Lights of Heaven.
How can you choose but feat, the Lord has no more Souls to convert in that
place, from which the Gospel is removed? Jesus Christ prayed, Isa. 49.8.
compared with 2 Cor. 6.2.
that the Gospel might be sent to the Gentiles: In an acceptable time have I
heard thee. O! How should you have prayed for the fruit of Christ's prayer? Have
you backed prayer with prayer? Have you doubled your Prayers for the return of
your Fathers? Have they not begotten you? Judge. 9.17.
Should they not be unto you as Fathers? Will not Idolatrous Micah else condemn
you?

5. Not preparing for such a mercy.
How little do you set your selves in a posture for the return of the Gospel
and the Ministers of it? Until you have humbled your Souls as low as the dust
for your unprofitableness, pride, sensuality, earthliness, dis-esteems, and
neglects of the Gospel, for your abuse of the talents of Gold, that you hid or
wasted, can you imagine that God will entrust you with more talents? Alas! few
put themselves in a readiness: few prepare to meet God, as formerly they have
met him in the solemn Assemblies. Verily, God is gone and returned unto his
place, Hos. 5.13.
till you acknowledge your offenses (your Gospel-sins) and seek his face. But
if ye seek him not early, how can ye hope for the bringing back the Captivity?
that the glory and strength will return?

6 Being niggardly even now toward them.
How little do ye now lay out for the refreshing and feeding of your poor
Ministers, now that their necessities are so growing? you cannot now excuse
your niggardliness with this, they have a competency: Alas! most of them, and
their many little ones are in great straights and exigencies, and what, still
straightned in your bowels? Is not the Proverb made good, Out of sight out of
mind? If all were as unmercifull as some of you, they and their Children would
swoon away in desolate Wildernesses. Remember Hagar and the Child: Did God pity
that Egyptian? and have you no pity on your poor Ministers? Are not you so far
from the Macedonian bounty, 2 Cor. 8.3.
of giving above your power, that you will not afford them your superfluities?
Who is there that redeems from his table, from his belly, from his clothes, to
cover these naked shoulders, and to fill these empty bellies? Does not Baruck's
sore run upon you, you trade for your selves, seek great things for your
selves, and send away your spiritual Fathers, with, I pray God bless you, etc.
be ye clothed, etc. but do not give according to their necessities, and your
abilities. O! Jam. 2.15, 16, 17.
How dwells the love of God in you? Boast what you will of your Profession
and Faith, your Faith without Works is but dead.

CHAP. XXXIV. Want of Love among Professors.
AS touching brotherly love (says the Apostle Paul to the Thessalonians) you
need not that I write unto you; A complaint of the want of love among
Christians. 1 These. 4.10.
for ye your selves are taught of God to love one another, and indeed you do
it: But may not I say to English Professors, As touching brotherly love, you
need that I write unto you, for you are not taught of God? The fire of
brotherly love (says one) is almost ready to go out, scarce any spark of it
yet remaining among us; but instead of the fire of love, the wildfire of
passion rages vehemently, and is predominant. Many live as if they had been
born on the Mountains of Bether, the Mountains of Division; and as if they had
been baptized in the Waters of Meribah, the Waters of Strife. Oh! that my head
were waters, and mine eyes fountains of tears, (...) weep day and night for the
want of love in the Christians of this generation toward one another. How
common has it been, to confine our love to our own party? We have not loved
all the Saints. Col. 1.14.
How few Bucers are there? How few love all in quibus aliquid Christi vident,
in whom they see any thing of Christ? Many even hate those that differ from
them, though but in Circumstantialls: Others, though they are ashamed to
profess their hatred upon such an account, Prove. 26.26.
yet cover their hatred by deceit, till their wickedness can be hid no longer,
but showed before the whole Congregation. The Devil began his Legerdemain this
way, by covering his Enmity with pretense of Friendship. What says the
Apostle? Let love be without dissim^lation: Romans 12.9. Psalm. 12.2. 1 Pet. 1.22.
1 John 3.18.
But alas! With a double heart how do Professors speak? How few have turified
their Souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the
Brethren? Most love in word and in tougue only, but not in deed and in truth.
Many, like your Feather caps humble Servant, pretend love; but it never appears
above-board: it is Dear Friend, Good Soul; but their hearts are not with you.
Evidenced in calling for Fire from Heaven against those of different
persuasions,
In order to the convincing of us of our guiltiness herein, O that our
Consciences may be suffered to give in full answers to the following Queries!

1. How have we called for Fire from Heaven, (like the two Disciples) when we
have thought our selves dishonored, in that others have not given such a
reception to our ways and practices in Religion, as we expected? Have not
Magistrates been instigated against godly persons, if of a different persuasion
from our selves? Have not we wished others, that divided from us in some
Circumstances of Worship, even banished? Have we not cried out, the Land is not
able to bear them? Have not we been glad, when such were put out of all Offices
and Places of Profit? And have not some thought it good service to God, if they
had been killed? Whilst some, under color of mercy and tenderness, oryed for a
general Toleration, even of blasphemy: Others ran into the other extreme, and
would endure nothing, that they deemed an Error. Even to this day, if men
scruple at the lawfulness of some Ceremonies and Gestures in the Service of
God, they are thought worthy, not only to be cast out of the Church; but to be
delivered over to the Secular Magistrate, for Imprisonment, and Confiscation of
Goods at least: So much is Paul's meekness forgotten and un-imitated, who
(though zealous against the Faith-destroying Errors of Hymeneus and Philetus,
yet) would have much forbearance for others, when doubting of the use of Meats,
and the Jewish Ceremonies. Baxters Saints Rest Edit. 8. part 1. chap. 7. p. 111.
I read indeed in Pagan Writers (says one) that Christians were as cruel as
Bears and Tigers against one another, etc. But I had hoped that this accusation
had come from the malice of Pagan Writers: Little did I think to have seen it
so far verified, etc. Lord, What Devils are we Unsanctified, when there is yet
such a Nature remaining in the Sanctified? Such a Nature has God in these
days suffered to discover it self, even in the Godly, that, if he did not
graciously and powerfully restrain, they would shed the blood of one another,
and no thanks to us, that it is not done.

2. un-Sainting of them upon that account. Hildersham on Psa. 51. P. 691.
To facilitate the destroying of such without remorse, Have not we blotted out
the reputation of their holiness, and represented Saints even as Devils? It is
utterly a fault mong you, (said one of our English Worthies formerly) that the
difference in judgment and practice about the Ceremonies of our Church, has
caused such strangeness, and alienation of mind and affection, between such as
do truly fear God, both Ministers and People; We are so far from receiving,
esteeming, loving and maintaining society one with another, notwithstanding
this difference of judgment about these things, that we are apt to despise and
judge one another for it, and doubt whether there be any truth of grace in
them, that differ from us in these things. Surely, (says the one side) the
indifferency and lawfulness of these things, is now so clearly manifested, as
these men must needs be wilfully blind, that do not see it: Nay, certainly
they cannot choose but see it well enough, and were it not for a carnal respect
to their credit with the people, among whom they have gotten a great Name and
Applause, by standing out so long, they would doubtless conform themselves, And
surely (says the other side) the utter unlawfulness of these Ceremonies is now
so clearly revealed, that these men must needs be wilfully blind, that see it
not. Nay, they do see it well enough, and were it not for a carnal respect they
have unto their worldly peace, and estate, they would never use them; certainly
they sin against their Conscience in observing of them: And what truth of grace
can there be in them, that are wilfully blind? and for carnal respects do
thus sin against their own Conscience? Thus do both sides grossly and
dangerously err, and sin against their Brethren: 1 Cor. 8.12.
And when ye sin so against the Brethren, ye sin against Christ. For the
experience of all times, and of this present age, proves evidently, that there
be of both sides, that fear God unfeignedly, and in the whole tenor and course
of whose conversation, the life and power of true godliness does manifestly
appear. And if thou do not see this (who-ever thou art, that art most bitter
and violent of either side) then art thou certainly thy self most wilfully
blind. And I do assure thee (in the Name of the Lord, and by good warrant out
of his Word) that if thou can not unfeignedly love every one that truly
fears the Lord (whether he conform, or not conform) If thou can not bewail
and strive against these hard conceits thou have been wont to entertain against
such, thou can have no comfort at all in thine own estate before God.

Thus far he that was in his time Englands best Preacher. And is the matter any
whit amended now? O! How have Professors spoken all manner of evil against
those that have differed from them in circumstances? Have not they publicly
railed one at another? What filthy Names have they given one another?
Schismatics, Rebels, Dividers, Peace-breakers, enemies to the State, etc. even
as bid as the Heathens gave the Christians? Have not we been so eager against
such, that all the peoples time has been swallowed up in invectives of one
party against another? Have not we been cooled and blunted, and lost our zeal
in matters of greatest moment, by letting out our zeal against the supposed
errors of our Brethren?

3. Backbiting them. Levit. 19.16. Deutr. 27.24. Romans 1.29, 30. Prove. 10.12.
If we have not been guilty of Un-sainting them; yet how little have we heeded
the commands of God against backbiting? Thou shall not go up and down, as a
Talebearer among the people. Cursed be he that smites his Neighbor secretly.
When the Apostle would set forth the great abominations of the Gentiles, he
says, they were whisperers and back-biters. Were there love, it would cover
all sins. Whom we love, we are wont to commend and praise; but instead of this,
how do we speak against those that differ from us, behind their backs, though
we speak fair to their faces? O abominable Hypocrisier! Have not some commended
an action to the face of the man, and presently in another place and company
censured the same? whom we love we would have others to love; but by back
biting we seek to draw off others also from their duty. Herein, O! how do we
serve the Devil, who is the great mediator of differences? I have often thought
upon the Artificial kind of Backbiting in Bernards time: When they slander,
Videas praemitti alta suspiria, Doleo vehementer de co grande damnum, etc.
Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 24.
they will fetch deep sighs as if they were much grieved, that others should be
so and so guilty; yea they will say, I am exceedingly sorry for such an one,
that he should commit so heinous a crime: when perhaps it was all the while but
a base lying report. Besides they will charge the Tale-hearer with the greatest
secresy, when they will take liberty to asperse as far as they have
opportunity, they tell the fault only to a Friend, that will tell no body, but
Folks, of it. But why may not he have forfeited the gift of keeping Counsel, as
well as thy self? Why should thou think that the Hearer will conceal, when
thou the Teller can not? And if thou have a mind the Brothers infirmities
should be hid, why do no^ thou hide them? Or why do thou disclose them to
one; whom thou suspectest to be no way friendly to the infamed person? If a man
of a different persuasion live so humbly; that we are forced to commend them,
yet we will surely bring in one Calumny or other, that shall blot the person,
and weaken all our encomiums of him: when we have been forced to speak of
others good actions, how commonly do we lay in a But, something or other, to
abate the esteem, that is due: it were well done, if the ends were right, if
from good principles, if not done in hypocrisy, etc. and by these insinuations
we restrain others from loving proportionably to the merit of the person. This
is Doeg-like: he told the truth; but he insinuated as if David had an evil
intention, and the Priests were in the Confederacy. Or we add, we should like
him well, if he were not thus and thus; but he is a leaper, etc. proud,
covetous, etc. At feasts, if not in more solemn meetings, what liberty have we
taken to speak against our Brethren? When Dionisius feared Plato would revile
him in the Academy among his Companions: God forbid (said Plate) that there
should be such scarcity of matter to talk of in the Academy, that they should
talk of thee. Believe it, we had spent our time better to warm one another
hearts with the love of Christ, than to exasperate and inflame the Spirits of
each other against our Brethren. What says Plutarch, another Heathen? You have
matter enough at home, and within, to busy your selves about.

4. Harkening to backbiters.
How easily have we entertained a report, and credited it against Brethren of
different persuasions? The love of Mothers makes them incredulous as to any
charges laid against their Children; Prove. 25.23.
but how seldom have we driven away a backbiting tongue with an angry
countenance? how have we been Talehearers; how have we encouraged the Backbiter
to open his pack? how have we received all the defamations he would bring us?
how have we credited reports upon heresay, without any examination? Qui statuit
aliquid part inaudita altera; Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequum fuerit. Sen.
Trag. Prove. 14.15. Psalm. 101.5.
how apt are we to censure and judge before he, which is the Accused, have the
Accuser face to face. This was the Romans Law: I wish it were the Christians.
Some of you learnt long ago, that it is injustice to determine without hearing
both parties. Have we loved our Neighbors Name and Credit, as our own? May we
not conclude that God will measure to us, as we have to our Brethren? Is it our
wisdom to believe every word? Would, not David cut off those whom we embrace?
We pretend we are not the first reporters; but are not we glad the report is
spread beyond recall? are not we glad that others good names are stolen away?
and do not we harbor the stolngoods? When others set our Neighbors Names on
Fire, do not we look on, and gladly warm our selves by it, and cry Aha! So
would we have it? But when do we go to the defamed Neighbor to hear what
Apology he can make for himself? were we not willing he should fall in our
esteems, we would have the Accuser and Accused face to sace.

5. Aggravating their offenses.
How have we amplified and aggravated the offenses of differing parties beyond
their due proportion? For ^^fty have not we set down an hundred? Have not we
represented that as done against light, which was done ignorantly? and that
done with deliberation, which was done rashly? We have not made a difference
between reigning sins, and humane frailties: between ins repented of, and not
repented of. How have we been guilty in drawing consequences from our
Adversaries Assertions, and fastening such opinions on them, as we knew their
Souls abhorred? and yet hardly has one of a thousand retracted these unjust
charges, or humbled himself for this great iniquity before God, or Man.

6. Not silencing Names of distinction.
Have we silenced our characterising Names even to this very day? These have
been the Devils-bellows, which he has put and kept to our mouths, to blow up
our differences to the greater flame: These one calls, the trumpets of discord,
and a main obstacle to peace.

7. Not endeavoring peace as we ought.
Did we begin to stop breaches betimes? did not we suffer our wounds to be kept
open too long? and how few yet are there that endeavor to compose the jars and
differences that are among us? When there were bickerings concerning Moses, the
Law, Circumcision, and Sacrifices; how does Paul beseech Enodias and Syntiche?
How few are like one of the Fathers, who was so much affected with the
divisions of Christians, that he professed himself ready to let out his
heartblood to cement them together? I hear many outcries against division: and
now it is in every man's mouth, it is time to agree; But ask them; what they
mean by agreement? and you will find Conformity is intended: they would have you
to stoop to them, even against Conscience: they will not abate an inch of what
they have pretended, and professed as their principle? Few entreat for peace,
and those few that do indeed endeavor to hinder the strife of Brethren, fare
no better than Moses: He is thought to carry on a design for a party that sues
for peace, and desires brotherly and amicable Conferences. Many cry for peace,
and commend it; but they will not be at cost for it. The cursed principle is
still harbored, that it is a dishonorable thing to yield first; but that
others must begin to stoop to us: Whereas it is Gods honor, that he stooped to
us first. We are loath to sue for peace, and to beg reconciliation with those,
that have been more in the offense than we. I find little condescending to
remove mistakes and prejudices. If we have once offered terms of peace and
reconciliation, we satisfy our selves therein; but have not pursued and
followed after peace: we have not used means upon means: This is a clear
evidence of our too much indulging our discords and animosities. When there is
a dislocation of one Member of the Natural Body, if one Bone-setter sets it not
right, we try another: and leave no means unessayed, till all be brought into
Order again. Sure our hearts are not overcome with the love of peace: I wish we
could say as Luther once in an Epistle to the Pastors of Straesburgh, I pray
you be persuaded, that I shall always be as desirous to embrace concord, as I
am desirous to have the Lord Jesus propitious to me.

8. Our differences making us to mislike good enterprises, and discommend what
we have approved, and that in the whole party.
Have not our differences come to that height, that we have condemned those
actions of Dissenting Brethren, which before they dissented from us we approved
and commended? Demetrius of Alexandria liked Origens making himself an Evenuch,
till they fell out, and then he wrote against it. Yea, have not we discommended
some very good enterprises, merely because they had an hand in them? Thus some
confessed that they had liked many of Luthers Reformations, but that so
contemptible a Monk should have the honor of beginning them. When men are
highly inflamed for some one thing, they will dis-like all the party does,
whilst they are in that passion. Besides have not we been apt to quarrel with,
and mis-like whatsoever is done by, a whole society, if we be fallen out with
one of that society? Not confessing their faults one to another; but upbraiding
one another as the causes of all our miseries.
Has not a whole family sometimes suffered, because we have been angry with
one of that Family?

9. How few are there that mutually confess their faults each to other? though
doubtless both sides have had their failings in such a time of darkness and
temptation? But instead of this are there not mutual upbraidings? if not to the
face of each other, yet (which i^ more criminal) behind each others backs? Do
they not impute the cause of all the miseries felt and feared to such and such
disorders of such parties? Who is so ingenious as to confess, and take shame
for his own, and his parties miscarriages?

10. Not forgetting unkind passages.
How strong are our memories (even to this day) to retain all bitter, and
unchristian passages of one party toward another? And if some have buried them;
yet are there not some of the Devils agents, that are raking them out of the
dust, to exasperate Spirits afresh, and so to widen our difference?

11. Suffering Sin to rest on them.
How have we suffered Sin to rest upon others? and why? They are not of our
Church. Thou should not deal with a Turk, as thou have dealt with Christians:
nor with a Beast, going astray, as thou have with thy Brothers-Soul. O! Into
what times are we fallen? That the Jews were kinder to Beasts, than we are to
one another: if any go astray, we help them not to return into the right way:
if they perish, let them perish, for any care we take to reclaim them: if
non-members, they must not be regarded. Thou should not hate thy Brother in
thy heart, but reprove him: and not foolishly confine and narrow Brotherhood to
thy particular Congregation, and suffer others to be damned, when thou by a
faithful reproof might have saved them. Whilst you care so little whether
God be honored, or dishonored by others, your zeal against Sin in your own
bosoms, or in your Society, may justly be called in question, whose Image does
it bear? Instead of reproving a Christian, that differs from us, according to
the rule of Christ, for any miscarriage, that we are privy to, have not we let
him run on, and then told on the house top, what was done in secret? We hide
their imperfections, whom we love, and faithfully, but secretly, admonish them;
but have not some pretended an high Friend-ship to others, on purpose to espy
their liberty, that they may afterward have an occasion to reproach them, and
all their party on their account? He that sees his Brothers face fowl, and
tells him not of it, has a mind that others should see his spots as well as
himself. And is this love to thy Friends? O! How have we uncovered that, which
ingenuous Humanity should have concealed? Can you talk so of your Friends, that
are most dear to you?

12. Restraining Prayer for them.
Have not we restrained Prayer for such Christians, as have differed from us?
Whom we love we pray for: But have not our differences been so great, that we
have excluded one another out of our Prayers, unless to reproach each other
before the Lord? If any man see his Brother sin a Sin, 1 John 5.16.
which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them,
that sin not unto death. How seldom are we very serious and earnest in
wrestling with God for others, if in some things divided from us? Mat. 5.44.
If we had counted them Enemies, we should have so loved them, as to have
prayed for them. O that Abraham should pray so vehemently for the Sodomites,
and not we for Saints! That Samuel should pray for Saul, and not we for the
Lords anointed ones! Have not our differences interrupted not only civil, but
all religious communion? Yea, have not we neglected to pray, not only for
dissenting Brethren, but for the reconciling of them? How few are there, that
pray heartily, feelingly, believingly, for the Peace of Jerusalem; though
there are many Promises to encourage us therein, Zech. 14.19.
that his Name shall be one, and they shall worship with one shoulder, and
Judah shall not envy Manasseh, Jer. 32.39.
nor Manass^h vex Ephraim: And I will give them one heart, and one way, that
they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after
them? should we not also have been encouraged to pray for that, which Christ so
affectionately desires? Will not Petitions be welcome to Heaven for that, which
would be the joy of all the Heavenly Host to see effecten? Peace on earth among
the Saints would be the joy of God, who is the God of Peace: of Christ, who is
the Prince of Peace. May we not confidently pray for what Christ sweat and
bleed?

13. Not priling their gifts, not blessing God for them.
How unready have we been to respect and value the gifts and enoblements of
such Christians? We have neither heartily prayed to God, that they might be
useful, with all their Talents, for the good of many: nor blessed the Father of
Lights for communicating so much to them.

14. Envying them.
Has not the Spirit in us lusted to Envy? Whom we love, we rejoice at their
gifts and enjoyments; but has not a Spirit of Cain prevailed among us? Have
not we envied, if others had greater acceptance with God, than our selves? Have
we rejoiced at the gifts and graces of differently-perswaded Brethren, as if
they were our own? or have not we (secretly at least) repined at others
praises? Have not we been afraid that we and our party have been obscured
thereby? Has not this been evident in our being more backward to speak of
their graces, than of their imperfections? Do not we gaze only on the Sun, and
call in others to be spectators of it, when ecclipsed? Do not we like Kites,
pass over the sound sheep, and pitch on the weak and dead Carrion? or like the
Butchers Dog, not touch the sound flesh, but the offals and putrified pieces?
or like Swine, pass over the flowers, and wallow in the Mire? If we know one of
a differing Congregation from ours, that has a blemish, our mouths are full of
him; but others graces, and heavenly walks we can pass over in silence.

15. Not helping them.
Have not we refused to help such Christians? We help what we can those whom we
really love; But are not we like Spectators in a Tragedy ( Austin complains of
such in his time) who mourn much to see a sad story acted; but let the Play go
on. True pitiful love would express it self by the hand, Heb. 6.10. 1 Cor.
13.4.
as well as tongue. We read of the labor of love: love is bountiful. We
pretend to love all Saints; but what do we for those that are of different
persuasions from ours? If such an one be in Prison, do we visit him? If Naked,
do we cloth him? If hungry, do we feed him? If we remember all the Lords
people, that are in bonds, as if we were bound with them, then do we really
love them. We love our selves, and we are liberal to our selves; we can bestow
time, care, estate, good things upon our selves; but not so on divided
Brethren. We have words at will, Oil and butter in our mouths to supply them,
Depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled; but we give not those things, that
are needful. Love will suffer any pains for the sake of the Beloved: So Paul
loved all the Saints, that he was willing to spend and to be spent, like a
Candle, to wast himself for their good. Which of us has so spent himself? Love
will counsel the Beloved, especially if in any straight; But God knows how
little others have been beholding to us even this way: possibly we have
afterward insultingly told them, this you should have done, and herein you
failed; but as we found them in a Ditch, so we left them, and directed them not
to a way of deliverance. The best counsel we can give is for the Soul; but let
the divided parties, yea and others, consider seriously and sadly how backward
they have been, and are to this day, to advise to the best way for peace,
holiness, and glory. If we believe such an undertaking will impair our
Neighbors Name, estate, to Soul; yet how slow are we to interpose for the
dissuading of him from so unhappy an enterprise? I should hardly think that
Parent loves his Child well, that sees him run over a cliff, and withholds him
not, what he can.

16. Not sympathizing with them.
Have not we been so far from helping them, that we have not sympathized with
them? Love is pitiful. When they have been sick, when did we get over our
thresholds to enquire how it fared with them? How seldom have we felt their
pains? If they be in an error, in a dangerous one, the more we should
compassionate them, considering our selves also, who have the seeds of the same
errors within us; considering the blindness of our own minds; how we also
differ from others in some matters; how it is the Spirit, that leads into
truth, etc. But have not some rejoiced, when any of a different persuasion have
fallen into the Bogs of Familisme, Ranterisme, Quakerisme, etc. that they may
thence draw their absurd inferences against the whole body, whereto such an one
was related? Yea how little have we laid to heart the afflictions of any of
Gods people? Have not we been as unconcerned in their sufferings in Germany,
France, Holland, Piedmont, Ireland? etc. How seldom have we had any great
conflict for those whose faces in the flesh we never saw? Have not we been like
Jacobs Children, unmercifull enough: sat down to eat and drink, and forgot
Joseph in the Pit? Have not we had a late instance of this our
hard-heartedness, when the Plague so forraged in London, and the parts
adjacent? How little did we mourn with them that mourned? Perhaps fear lest the
Flying Role might visit us, caused us a little to put finger into the eye. I
must tell you (I wish I could weeping) that iniquity abounds, and the love of
many waxes cold.

17. Insulting over them. 1 Cor. 13.4.
Have not we been so far from sympathizing with them, that we have insulted
over them? Real love vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up; But how have we
vaunted over fallen Brethren, fallen into misery: that is bad; but fallen into
sin, that is abominable? How often have I known some high Professors making it
an entertainment, a banquet for their Friends, to speak of the Spots, Vanities,
Gestures, etc. of others different in some Opinions or Practices, from them,
when their laughture has given evident proof what contentment they took in the
infirmities of their Brethren? Ye are puffed up, 1 Cor. 5.2.
and have not rather mourned, etc. said Paul to the Corinthians: and may not I
say so to English-Professours? Have not we been worse than Dives's dogs; seeing
they licked the soars of Lazarus: whilst we have rubbed and fretted them, and
insulted over his miseries?

18. Publishing their secrets.
Have not we very unfaithfully published their secrets? We are wont to keep the
secrets of those we dearly love, especially when they charge us, and we promise
so to do; But how many of us are swift to hear, but not slow to speak of what
we hear even under the rose? Few faithful Spirits, Prove. 11.13.
that conceal the matter. How many are there that creep into houses, yea
farther into bosoms, to know secrets, that they may inslave them to their
wills, for fear of their publications, or else when they have got what they can
of them, most wretchedly betray the trust reposed in them? This makes me even
to cry out, trust not in a Brother.

19. Selfishness. 1 Cor. 13.5.
Have not we been selfish in our love? Charity seeks not her own. Observe it,
the most love, that is going is Publican-love: we are careless of their
company, or to have any intimacy with them, from whom nothing is likely to be
returned: if a Professor be rich, he has many Friends, such as they be; but
the poor is despised of his Neighbor. O! how base and mercenary is our love?
Even your Ministers, to whom you have pretended dear and high affections, yet
if they be laid by, or removed at a distance from you, that you cannot have
them as a pleasant song to you, how strange are you instantly to them? How soon
do you forget them? Judas may kiss you; but he has a design upon you: Joab may
salute; but he is working nothing but his own base design.

20. Inconstancy.
Has not our love been inconstant? Real love is abiding; but do not we quickly
exchange Friends? Do we keep them as long as an Almanac, to the end of the
year? Do not new picked flowers tempt us to throw by the old? 1 Cor. 13.4.
Charity suffers long; But how soon is our love quenched? It makes a blaze;
but soon is out, soon kindled, soon quenched: like Children, won with an Apple,
lost with a Nut: How have we been at swords point for every trifle? Those seven
ones, one Body, one Spirit, one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one
God and Father of all, should have been as so many quoines to lock together all
parts of the building into one; But alas! every extravigant, or extrinsecal
opinion has broken us and our hearts to pieces. Have not we been humourish,
peevisn lovers? Our love is dearly bought, and more hardly kept. Humor is like
tinder, as soon on fire as touched: no love without conformity in every thing:
we could hardly bed, board, or house together, unless we all said the same
thing: we loved only whilst pleased, and our humors were not crossed; but the
least unkindness, the least difference, though our agreemenss were more by
hundreds than our differences) would quench, or at least abate, our love.
Charity is not easily provoked. 1 Cor. 13.5. Gal. 6.1.
And to fulfill the law of love its requisite in the Apostles Judgment, that
we bear one another burdens. But O! ever since I can remember, what a rigid,
imperious, and tyrannical commanding of an Uniformity in every punctilio has
there been? Though the pretense be love to Christ's Church; yet if men would
consult their own hearts, it is love of their own power, and rule, and Lordship
over their Brethren: and therefore the same party of men, when in the Saddle,
when uppermost, have cried for this rigid Conformity, away with cursed
tolleration, etc. and when reduced and brought lower, have as much commended
Charity, Love, Forbearance in matters less momentous.

Now, when these things are thus amongst us, The greatness of this evil.
shall we sit still in silence and stupidity, and suffer the sweet and soft
fire of love quite to expire, and the wildfire of passion and contention to
spread and prevail, without moving a tongue or hand toward the repressing of
the one, and reviving of the other? This were enough to make the dumb to speak;
and therefore may justify my writing, when I may not speak, yea my expatiating
a little, in venting my thoughts about this great evil, and the desires of my
heart to redress it.

Is it nothing to us, In its disobedience. See Williams transcendency of
Christ's love. Chap. 9. Sect. 3, 4, 5. John 13.33, 34, 35.14.12.15.12, 17,
that hereby we are in a special manner guilty of disobedience to Jesus Christ?
That all Christians would love one another, was our Lord Jesus his dying
charge, which he frequently inculcated, sweetly insinuated, and powerfully
enforced it as a Commandment, not a bare advice and counsel: It is a
Commandment of Christ's own prescribing, A Commandment I give unto you: It is
a Commandment given, as a special Love-token, in his last Will and Testament:
It is a new Commandment, A new Commandment I give unto you: It is a most
excellent Commandment, in a new Edition, corrected and amended, from the false
glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees, and enlarged from his own example; Before
it was only, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; now it is, Love one
another, as I have loved you: This new Commandment is not once only given, but
given again, and again, and again, by our dying Lord, to intimate, that as he
had one Disciple, who went by the name of the Disciple whom Jesus loved: So he
would have a darling Commandment, and that this should be it, Love one
another; Yea, he calls it, These things, as if this one thing were all things,
and disobedience to this Commandment, were disobedience to all.

Is it nothing to us, that hereby, Crossing Christ's Prayer.
as much as in us lies, we make the Prayer of Christ of none effect? Christ
knew the evil of heart-burnings and divisions, of wrath and bitterness against
one another (though we do not) and therefore having preached up love among his
Disciples on earth, he sets upon praying down Union from his Father in Heaven,
and what he insisted most upon in his Sermon, that he enlarges most upon in
his Prayer. John 17.11, 21, 22, 23.
And now I am no more in the World, but these are in the World, and I come to
thee, holy Father, keep through thine own name, those whom thou have given me,
that they may be one, as we are: That they all may be one, as thou Father art
in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: That the World may
believe, that thou have sent me: And the glory which thou gave me, I have
given them: that they may be one, even as we are one. I in them, and thou in
me, Throwing off Christ's Livery. John 13.35.
that they may be made perfect in one. and that the World may know, that thou
have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have loved me.

Is it nothing to us, that hereby we throw off Christ's distinguishing Livery?
By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if you have love one to
another. He does not say, Hereby you shall be my Disciples; but hereby it shall
be known: Nor does he say, Hereby I shall know; nor hereby you shall know; but
hereby shall others know: Nor does he say, Hereby they shall ghes and
conjecture; but hereby they shall know, as by a sure and infallible sign: Nor
does he say, Hereby some, a very few, shall know this great secret; but hereby
all men shall know: Nor does he say, Hereby all men shall know, that you seem
to be my Disciples; but that you are so indeed.

Is it nothing to us, Representing Christ as an Imposture.
that hereby we make the Jews and Heathens look on Christ as an Impostour? How
can they look upon him otherwise, whilst they see his Coat so full of seams,
yea his Body so full of rents? Hereby we hinder the World from being convinced
that Christ is sent of God: Christ therefore prayed, John 17.21, 23. Making
Christ's doath of none effect.
that His might be one, that the World may know, that God sent him.

Is it nothing to us, that hereby we make (as much as in us lies) the Cross of
Christ of none effect, and his blood to be shed in vain? Christ not only
preached up Love, and prayed for it, but also paid for it. As he went from
preaching up Love on Earth by his Sermon, to pulling it down from Heaven by
Prayer: So he went from praying to paying for it; and the Price which he laid
down for it, Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16.
was his Blood, says a late ingenuous Writer. For he is our Peace, who has
made both one, etc. having abolished in his flesh the enmity, etc. for to make
in himself of twain, one new man, so making peace. And that he might reconcile
both unto God in one body, by the Cross. Shall Christ dye to break down
partition walls: and will we dare to keep them up? Shall he shed his blood for
peace? and shall we employ our wit and interest to blow the trumpet to War?

Is it nothing to us, Calling in question Gods Promises. Isa. 65.25.11.6.
that hereby we make Jews and Pagans call in question the truth of Gods
promises? What can they think of those promises (that the Wolf and the Lamb
shall feed together, they shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my holy mountain,
says the Lord. That the Wolf also shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard
shall lie down with the Kid: and the Calf and the young Lion, and the failing
together, and a little Child shall lead them.) When the Lambs cannot fold
together without pushing at one another.

Is it nothing to us, Grieving Christ, and the Spirit.
that hereby we grieve our dear Lord Jesus, and the ever blessed Spirit? May we
not easily imagine what a grief it is to the head, to see the members of his
body renting and tearing each other? to see heirs of the same hope, those that
lie together in the same bosom of Election, and whose Names are on his Breast,
and whom he presents before his Father together in Heaven, to be thus broken
asunder on earth? O! me thinks if we had any love to Jesus Christ, we should
study to be of one affection. What Luther said once to the Ministers of
Norimberg is very considerable: Suppose (said he) you saw Jesus Christ standing
bodily in the midst of you, and thus bespeaking you, What do you; O my dear
Children! whom I have Redeemed by my blood, that you might mutually love one
another. -- There is no danger in your difference, but there is much in your
dissension: Do not thus sadden my Spirit: do not thus spoil the holy Angels of
their joy in heaven: Am not I more to you than all your matters of difference.
How can we expect the company of the Spirit of grace and peace, whilst such
fiery contentions are amongst us? Were the Disciples quarrelling and
contending, when the Holy Ghost fell on them? No, They were all with one accord
in one place. Acts 2.1, Psalm. 133.10
Where men dwell together in Unity, there the Lord commands the blessing for
ever. God will not (says a learned man) sow the precious seed of his grace and
love among briars and thorns, the enemies of peace.

Is it nothing to us, Rasing Sion.
that hereby we do (what in utlyes) to raze Sion, even to the foundation
thereof? The stones support the building, by being coupled together. Mat.
12.25. Making real Saints weaty to support the World any longer.
How can the house stand, when the stones are severed, when not a stone is left
joined to a stone? Every Kingdom divided against it self, is brought to
desolation: and every city or house divided against it self, shall not stand.

Is it nothing to us, that hereby we make real Saints, the pillars of the
World, weary of staying in the World; to support it any longer? It was the
sight of the divisions among Christianss, that made Grynaeus, Melancthon;
Strigclius, those pious and precious Souls weary of earth, Psa. 55.6.
and to wish and desire the wings of a Dove, that they might sly away, and be
at rest in that place, where there is a rest remaining for the people of God,
Hebr. 4.9.
as from all other evils, so from this of divisions and dissentions among
Brethren. It was ^^e conjecture of one that as Go is first Judgment against
the old World was by Water, against the heat of Lust: so his last Judgment
upon the World that now is, will be by Fire against the coldness of Love. If
this be true, how do we hasten the great and terrible day by our coldness in
Love one toward another?

Is it nothing to us, Gratifying the Devil, rejoicing the wicked, and
Justifying their reproaches of Saints.
that hereby we gratify the Devil, rejoice the hearts of the wicked, and
justify their reproaches of Saints? The great stratagem of Hell is to promote
our differences, and to keep us from Union: all the bones they throw among us
are to set us by the ears: the Devil knows that Societies of Christians are
immortal, if they do not kill themselves by Division: Divide and impera, Divide
them, and rule them is a maxim in Hell, and among the Antichristian party.
Gal. 5.15.
If ye bite and devour one another a Consumption will be the consequent. Why
should we be employed in the Devils work? Has he not instruments and tongues
enough of his own? O! how does Antichrist yet ground by the Animosities and
Divisions among Christians? Certainly what Tacitus says of some in his time,
we may of the Papists and all our Foreign Enemies, Nihil spei, nisi per
discordiase habent. All their hopes of ruining us aris^ from our homebred
discords and divisions: Were all the Arrows in one bundle, they would by trial
and experience find it next to an impossibility to break them. Methinks the
proud boasts of the Man of Sin should make us bury all our discords: were we
but of one heart before God, and uniting our Prayers, the Mountains would
become Plains, yea the seven Hills among the rest. Sure we do not consider
where, and among whom we are. Are we not in the world, where Satan rules? Shall
the Children quarrel in their Enemies quarters? Genesis 13.7.
Abraham sues for peace upon this, as a taking consideration, that we are
Brethren and the Perrizzite dwelt in the land. Wicked men are Spectators of our
fewds and discords. The very Heathen have calmed the mutinies of their
Soldiers, by saying, your Enemies yonder behold your mutinous behavior. What
one said prophetically some years ago, Europae Speculum. p. 173.
I cannot but recall: that unless God did stir up some in the Protestant
Churches, and cloth them with a mighty Spirit to accommodate our differences,
the end of them may be, that our Enemies will laugh, when we shall weep. Have
we not Enemies enough, but must we be dogged and cruel to one another? We say
the Fire burns the hotter for the cold weather: Would to God the Antiperistasis
were blessed, that the cold abroad, the oppositions against us, may intend our
affections the more to God, to his ways, to his people. And are not the wicked
justisied in their reproaches of the Saints, whilst they do but write after our
Copy?

Is it nothing to us, Perjury
that hereby we are perjured, yea often perjured, as often we have received the
Communion? Christians (says our great Usher) should remember, that as often as
they come to the Lords table, so often do they enter into new bonds of peace, and
tie themselves with firmer knots of love together, this blessed Communion being
a Sacred Seal^ not only of the Union, which we have with our head by faith, but
also of our conjunction with the other members of the body, by love.

Lastly, Is it nothing to us, Hindering pardon.
that hereby we hinder the forgiveness of our own iniquities? How can we hope
we shall be forgiven, if we forgive not one another? How can we look that
Scripture in the face, Mat. 6.14, 15.
if ye forgive men their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will also forgive
you: But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses? Or that, with what measure you mete, Mat. 7.2.
it shall be measured to you again? Would we have God deal with us, as we deal
with our Brethren? These, and such like considerations, have made some, even of
the Episcopal persuasion, to complain for want of love, Bishop Reyn of the
peace of the Church. p. 16.17.
and to sigh for more Charity toward Christians, though of different
persuasions: That in the case of unavoidable differences among good men (says
one) there should be no more mutual charity, meekness, moderation, tolerance,
and ^^manity expressed, etc. this is a lamentation, and will be for a
lamentation. Between the Episcopal, Presbyteria^, and ladependent parties
(says a second) much of the acidness and sharpness of the humor would be
alayed, Bishop Gaudens Sermon. Printed 1660.
if this policy of charitable censure and interpretation were applied on all
sides, etc. I should be glad to see the beams of this candor, this kindness,
this charity, shine in all saces from all sides, that the Shiboleths of
different dialects and designs, etc. might be laid aside by being all for
Christ, Bishop Hall's Sermon. before his Majesty, 1641^
etc. A third presses to a charitable construction of each others acts and
intentions; because there is nothing in the world, which may not be taken with
either hand, whether the right hand of favor, or the left of malice. We see
the Son of God himself, in whom the Prince of this World could find nothing,
yet was exposed to mis-construction, Matthew. 11.19.
Behold a Glutton, etc. Good Lord! what uncharitable censures are men apt to
pass upon each other: Let a man be strict and austere in moral and divine
duties, though never so puaceable, he is a Puritan, and every Pu^itan is an
Hypocrite. Let him be more free, and give more scope to his concersation,
though never so conscionable: he is a Libertin: Let him make scruple of any
innovated form, he is a Schismatic: Let him ^^and for the anciently received
Rites and Government, he is a time-serving Formalist. -- Let me tell you he is
right, that has a right heart to his God, what forms soever he is for. The
Kingdom of God does not stand in ^^eats and drinks, in stuffs, or colors, or
Fashions, in Noyses or Gestures: it stands in Holiness and Righteousness, etc.
Let us study now, not to widen, or gall, or ranckle; but how to salve, and
heal, etc. I shall conclude this Chapter with beseeching, yea conjuring you in
the words of the Apostle Paul to the Philippians: Phil. 2.1, 2. O quam sacro
fascino usus est? Ipsa suada credo, si loqui posset, not potuisset (...), ubi
quot verba, tot tela, quae nimium animos nostros percellant, etc. Mortoni sent.
de pace procuranda inter E^^^^gel. p. 25.
If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if
any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels, and mercies; Fulfill ye my joy,
that ye be likeminded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind.

CHAP. XXXV. The faults of Church Members toward those of their particular
Congregations. Church Members miscarriages.

1. uselessness and unfaithfullness.
YOu have Professed in your Creed to believe the Communion of Saints: You have
been admitted to the Privileges of this Communion: you thought it not safe, or
good for man to be alone; to live retired from the Society of Saints: you have
been enrolled among the Saints in Jerusalem, which came down from above: you
have with some Solemnity engaged your selves to be faithful to the Souls of
your Brethren: and yet what an unprofitable Hermit have thou been in Zion? Like
a wild-beast thou come out of thy Den for thy prey, to feed upon the
Mountains of Spices, to enjoy the provisions of Gods house; but immediately
thou retirest, and art no way serviceable to the Body. It is a wonder to me,
how Christians can content themselves with the Privileges of Gods house, and
neglect the mutual duties, that are incumbent on them. A learned man complains
of many Ministers, that they are but Traditional-Preachers: and I fear there
are too many Traditional-Christians, who are very zealous for the practicing of
some Duties, which they have received from their Forefathers, whilst they can
overlook many express Commandments, obliging them to take care, as Members of
the Natural Body do, each for other. The Apostle tells us, that the meanest
Members in the Church yet are necessary. But alas! How many are there, who shut
up their Light in dark-lanthornes? who immure themselves within their own
walls? who are so involved in worldly businesses, and have so little care and
zeal for the house of God, that they no way profit, no way edify their
Brethren? How can such overlook those plain express requiries of Christ by his
Apostle? Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, Romans
14.19. 1 These. 5.11.
and things wherewith one may edify another. Wherefore comfort (or exhort)
your selves together, and edify one another, I wish I could add, as the
Apostle does, even as also ye do. 1 Cor. 14.12, 26. Ephesians. 4.16.
For as much as ye are zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to
the edifying of the Church. Let all things be done to edifying. From whom ( i.
e. Christ) the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which
every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the measure of
every part, makes increase of the body, unto the edifying of it self in love.
v. 29.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good
to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers. Romans 15.2,
3.
Let every one of us please his Neighbor, for his good to edification. For
even Christ pleased not himself, etc. But exhort one another daily, Hebr. 3.13.
while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened, through the
deceitfulness of sin. And let us consider one another to provoke unto love,
10.24, 25.
and unto good works. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as
the manner of same is, but exhorting one another: and so much the more, as ye
see the day approaching. Look not every man on his own things, Phil. 2.4, 5.
(...) man also on the things of others. (...) excluded: it is every man's work.
(...) mind be in you, which was also in Christ jesus. Hebr. 12.15.
Look diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God, lest any root of
bitterness spring up, trouble you, and thereby many be defile^. If they do not
overlook, how dare they ^^ntemn, all these Commandments of our (...) Jesus
Christ? How can they look upon themselves as no way concerned in these duties?
(...) a Lamentation, and should be for a La^^ (...) on, that so many
Church Members, like (...) of prey, slye always alone; and through (...)
ritual sloth, through a lothness to displea^^ through want of charity and pity
to the (...) of their Brethren, suffer them to perish in carelessness,
sensuality, formality, etc. rather than they will labor to quicken, restore
and save them. An Ingrosser is hateful to men; But of how much sorer punishment
shall ye be thought worthy, who ingross your graces, your gifts, your
experiences, wherewith a Church of Christ might be edified (...) Every man is a
Steward, (Give an account of (...)) But you are Stewards in an (...) meaner:
You are Stewards of the (...) the spirit, which are given to profit (...). How
dare ye hide your Talents in a (...). You have a greater trust committed (...)
others have: You have Souls (...) to your care; for Churchmember are to care
even naturally one for ano^^. If God has two Servants, and he in^^ one with
his Lumber, the other with (...) children; and if both be negligent: sure (...)
all suffer the highest indignation from the Lord, who neglects the Children.
What are you afraid, you shall have the less light, the less grace, the less
comfort from Christ, for that others share with you? And therefore will ye turn
Ingrossers and Monopolists? O! Know the more useful you are to invite the
Children to their Father, the more you your selves will be enriched and
supplied; and whilst you are dividing your loaves, God will act at a wonderful
rate for you: the bread will multiply: you shall receive, whilst you are
disbursing: your light and heat will increase by your holy dispersing it.

2. Neglecting godly Conference.
How is godly conference neglected even among Church members? What! are you
ashamed of your God? is the speaking of grace and glory some kind of
disparagement to your tongues? When Saints come together, (...) precious time
is devoured in back-(...) undue, unseasonable censuring of (...), who are not
capable of making (...) esence, or else in foolish impertinent discourses of
worldly matters. Few, like the Disciples in their journey to Emaus, discourse
of such matters, as Christ himself joins with them in, and causes their hearts
to burn: When do you warm one another hearts, and sit each other to enter into
Communion with God in secret? How do many complain of you, that their hearts
are estranged from God by converses and intimacies with you, and that they
loose their affections by keeping up correspencies with you? and therefore
count it their wisdom to retire into their closets, rather than mispend
precious hours in foolish communications with such barren, frothy, empty
Professors. How many weak Christians are there, who are not acquainted with the
wiles of Satan, and they sit down pensive and dejected, thinking no condition
like theirs, and conclude hereupon that they are none of Gods Children, whom
(if you were spiritual, pitiful, active, and free to acquaint them with your
own experiences, that you have been tempted as they) you might succor under
their temptations, and comfort with the comforts, wherewith you have been
comforted, and ease them by harkening to their doubts and complaints, and
showing them a way how to deliver their Souls; Were you of a Christ-like
Spirit, you would not break these bruised reeds, nor quench these smoking
flaxes; but rather blow up their graces, and labor to scatter and disperse
those fogs and mists, which over-cloud their Souls: you should be eyes to the
blind; but you are not: you should be of a merciful Spirit to all Souls: more
especially to the Souls of all Saints, most especially to the Souls of those
Saints, to whom you are peculiarly related; but you are not. Exodus 23.5. 1
These. 5.14. 1 Cor. 12.7. Mal. 3.16.
In the old Law God took care of Asses: if they lay under a burden, Israel was
to help them. Does God take care for beasts? and will not ye for men, for
Saints, for the redeemed of the Lord? God requires of you, that you comfort the
feeble minded. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit
withal. Christ expects his own with increase. They that feared the Lord spoke
often one to another, to comfort one another with the promises of God made to
his people, against the flourishing of the wicked, and overflowing of
ungodliness: and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of Remembrance was
written before him, etc. the Lord book't that good service, Nihil de
Scripturis, nihil de salute Animarum agitur; sed nugae and risus, and verba
proferuntur inventum.
he pur it upon record; But though the Lord hearknet^ and hears, yet he seldom
finds us so employed: our neglects are sealed up in his bag. I pray God we may
lay it to heart, repent, and reform. Bernards complaint may justly be revived:
Not a word of the Scriptures, nothing of the Salvation of the Soul; but trisles
and to yes, laughter, and words as light as the wind, eat up the time. I know
there have been too many Uzza's amongst us, who have had an itching desire to
be fingring of the Ark, thinking of themselves more highly than they ought to
think, and like the ambitious Sons of Levi, taking too much upon them, whereby
the Ministry has suffered much contempt. The Lord forgive these daring
Phaetons, who have set the world in a slame hereby: But let not us run from one
extreme into another. Let us give to the Ministry their due; Jude v. 20.
and yet not neglect to build up our selves in our most holy faith. Mutual
duties should be exercised between Christian and Christian: The Apostle is
express for it in the places already quoted: I shall add one more, Col. 3.16.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another. O! if God would be with me so far, as to make me an
instrument to prevail with you to go, and visit one another, and stir up one
another, that knowing the terours of the Lord, you may persuade men. O! bewail
thy unserviceableness, thy private spiritedness, thy want of love and bowels to
others; especially now, when the Ministerial help fails to such a degree, and
when there is so great an Apostasy. Sure, then is no time, wherein
Christian-fellowship is more called for, and wherein it may be more profitable,
than at this time; But alas! How are the wise as well as the foolish, Virgins
asleep, generally secure, without action, no way useful to each other, no more
than they are, who are fast asleep in their beds of rest? O! how few are there
like Jonathan and David? how few enter into a brotherly promise to exhort one
another, to call one another to account, to tell one another their fears, to
know of one another their growth in Religion? We are proud, and loath to have
our nakedness appear: yea some of us have few stories to tell of Gods goodness
and bounty to our Souls, and we hate a discovery, how low, earthly, vain;
backsliding we are: Hence reserved to each other; But God will bring forth the
hidden works of dishonesty.

3. Not admonishing, or not aright.
How is Fraternal correption neglected or spoiled in the managing? Some totally
neglect reproving their Brethren: Gallio-like, they little care for these
things, they are little concerned whether God be honored, or dishonored.

Others delay admonition. Either neglecting it altogether, or delaying it.
The Flesh is backward to this self-denying work, and so the many weighty
circumstances, which should bring the Offender to Repentance, are forgot: The
Offender is also hardened in his Sin. He thinks by thy silence, thou art
altogether like unto him: so he judges of Gods silence, these things have thou
done, and I kept silence, Psa. 50.21.
thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy self: so he judges of thy
silence. It Is much easier to fetch out a spot of inck from a cloth the day it
is stained, than afterward. Sin like a Mole, will quickly bury it self, and
the longer let alone, the harder it is to dig it up. The longer a disease is
let alone, the harder cured: Cronical diseases are seldom a credit to the
Physician. Besides if you neglect the Reproof this day or hour, perhaps by the
next he will commit the same Sin again; for either he knows it not to be a sin,
or in case he knows it, yet every new act does strengthen the habit of sin. It
is the nature of sin to blind the Mind, to stupifie the Conscience, and to
harden the heart. Exhort therefore one another daily, Heb. 3.13.
while it is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. If the finner add sin to sin, put that to your account
for neglecting the Ordinance of God for his reducement: If he loses the favor
of God, and neglects hereupon all private communion with the Lord, put that to
thy account: If at length he becomes impudent in sin, so that, like a Bedlam,
he feels not the pricks of sharp admonition, put all this to your account,
because you have delayed to cure, to heal, to save the Soul of your Brother. A
timely reproof might have saved a Soul, and covered a multitude of sins.
Besides, have you time at your command, that you with Faelix, will do your duty
at a more convenient season? May not thou dye? or the Offender dye? and both
in sin, thou in the sin of Omission, and he in the sin of Commission unrepented
of, before the day comes, wherein thou art resolved to tell him roundly of his
fault? Why art not thou trembling with fear of blood-guiltiness? Is
Soul-murther no sin with thee? Or have you the Holy Ghost at command? Without
the Holy Spirits a sistances and concourse, your labor will be in vain, you
will get a blot by reproving, the delinquent will fly in your face, hate you
for telling the truth, he will add sin unto sin, and perhaps put you into a
flame too: and must the Holy Ghost dance attendance on you? If you observe his
hour, you must go presently whilst the wound is fresh and bleeding; but if you
neglect his call, it is a question, whether your hour will be Gods.

Others miscarry in reproving. Some reprove, Or miscarrying in it, not
reproving privately. Matthew. 18.15. Prove. 10.12. Si solus nosti, et vis coram
pluribus arguere non es, Corrector, sed Proditor. Augustine.
but not privately; though Christ be so expres^ for it, If thy Brother shall
trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone:
though the Law of Charity binds us to cover our Brothers nakedness, as much as
we can. Love covers all sins; yet some Doeg-like backbite their Neighbor,
and tell it to every one save him, who should hear of it. How few modestly,
affectionately and humbly, in the most private manner communicate their fears
of sins, decays, and infirmities to the supposed delinquents? Are not most too
forward sinfully and wickedly to divulge their undue suspicions to others,
whereby the names of some suffer, Souls lie neglected, prejudices and
heart-burnings are promoted. Schism is made in the body of Christ. Though the
Law of Wisdom bind us not to use more means than needs must, if gentle private
reproofs will serve to reclaim, not to blazon infirmities, yet Professors
through pride, envy^ want of Charity, at least want of wit, publish on the
house top what is done in a corner. Herein we do, as we hate to be dealt with,
were it our own concernment: Hereby we make the Offender to hate us, and beget
in him due prejudices against us, viz. (...) we th^^^ to draw the blood of his
Name^ yet how many Church Members are pe^can^ herein? It will be hard to make
him believe thou come^ to heal (...) Soul, if thou ha^^ already wounded his
Name. Have not some Churchmember (...) ^or bringing it immediately to the
(...)? Hereby innumerable evils ensue, many are grieved, many offended, the
party that is impeached stands on his guard pleads for his sin, extenuates it,
or is strengthened in his sin by the uncharitable proceeding, and irregular
acting of the Brother, who first took cognizance of the miscarriage, and so
Judah justifies Samaria.

Others reprove that those injuries that have been offered to the (...) may be
recompensed, Reproveing selfishly.
rather than tha^ their Brothers Soul may be healed, and it appears ^erein, if
the wrong done them may be remidied, little do they heed, whether there be any
other Repentance. They reprove not to gain their Brother; but to make gain of
him: and therefore Jehu-like, they drive furiously in their own cases, but in
Gods they are dumb and dull enough.

Other busybodies would be thought very tender of Christ's honor, Reproveing
only for disputable things.
they tithe Mint and Annise, etc. they reprove such things as are disputable,
and neglect to teprove, where there are too many just accusations to lay in.
They will be very severe in censuring their Brethren for their Hair, Clothes,
or some controverted recreations; and yet let them alone to live in
worldliness, sensuality, lukewarmness, pride, sloth, etc.

Others are so Magisterial in their reproofs, Reproveing Magisterially.
as if they had forgotten that they are in the body, as if they had no native
corruption remaining in them, they want the Spirit of meekness, they have
forgotten the Apostles Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, Gal. 6.1.
ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the Spirit of meekness, etc. O!
how haughtily do some carry it toward offending Brethren. I wish you would
sling the first stone at your selves. If you are not guilty of the same
offense, yet you are of others, at least you have the seed of the same Sin
within you. O that offending Brethren might know that it is only Conscience of
duty, that brings you to them, and that it is love to their Souls puts you upon
such displeasing work to your flesh; But woe and alas! How few will condescend?
The work is not managed with that humility as it ought, and therefore no
Brother is gained.

Others are so light, frothy, Reproveing lightly.
and unserious in this business, that they spoil all. They do not invocate God
to accompany them in the work, they do not cry out, who is sufficient? They
forget it is Soul-work they are employed in, they forget how abortive such
labors have been, they do not set upon it with that fear and trembling, which
they should. Few rebuke with authority, as having Gods Glory, and men's
Everlasting Salvation in their eye: and hence, when they come off from this
work, their Conscience smites them, that they have been no more serious and
fervent in a matter that concerns life and death.

Few continue their admonitions, Putting an end to Reproof too soon.
and follow them, till the Delinquent be brought to conjession, repentance and
amendment. We soon tire, and put the ill names of Dogs and Swine upon our
offending Brethren, to excase our sloth, and to take off that diligence about
their Sou's, which their dullness, and hardness of heart calls for. We should in
meekness instruct them, though they oppose themselves: We should bear with
their present stubbornness and abuses, and wait if God peradventure will give
them repentance: We forget how many years God waited on us, though we were
stout, stubborn and refractory, how patient and long-suffering he was unto us.
Though the more we love, the less we are beloved; though men even fly in our
faces: yet we should do as our Lord, and his Ministers, not presently shake off
the dust of our feet against them.

4. Not bearing Reproof Christianly.
How few behave themselves Christianly under Reproof? When men come to you from
the great God, to discharge the duties they owe to your Souls, your behavior
is such, that none will meddle with such Patients, to dress their wounds, if
the Lord had not charged them with this Commission.

How few receive a Reproof kindly and affectionately? Not lovingly.
This makes me fear, that there are more H^pocrites in Churches, than we are
aware of. It is a great mercy to be reproved, As many as I love (...) rebuke.
Rev. 3.19.
To sin against Reproof, is aggravated wickedness. The revolters are profound
(...) make slaughter, Hos. 5.2.
though I have been a r^buker of them all. It is an argument of ^atred, not to
reprove, Levit. 19.15.
Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart, thou shall in any wise rebuke
thy Neighbor, etc. Yet how are they counted turbulent, pragmatical, void or
affection, rig^d and censorious, who will not let them go on in their sin. He
that hates reproof, Prove. 15.10.
shall surely dye. There is not a sadder Omen, that God has an endless
controversy with thee. I know (says the Prophet to Amaziah) the Lord has
determined to destroy thee, 2 Chronicles. 25.16.
because thou have not hearkened to my reproof. Others seem to earken to the
Reprover, and give him verbal thanks for his plain dealing; but from that day
their hearts boil inwardly, and they are filled with prejudice, which will
express it self, when ever it meets with a fair opportunity. How few do engage
some Friend, to be a faithful Monitor to them, to be open-hearted to them, in
telling them their faults? We are so overrun with self-love, that we think no
stander by can discern so much as we; and we are so unwilling to be censured,
that we stand aloof from having such a Looking glass near us, to reflect our
spots to us: Few, with David, would count it a kindness, for the righteous to
smite them.

How few do amend upon a solemn serious reproof? How few retire to their
Closets, Not obediently.
and there upon their knees bless God for emboldning any to tell them of their
Sins, and there beg pardon and strength to reform, and enter into a religious
vow by the grace of God to amend whatever is amiss?

5. Minding only the pl^^^ing of ^^^mselves. Romans 15.1, 2, 3.
Most Professors seek to please themselves and not their Neighbor. A man
would think they never read, we that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities
of the weak, and not to please our selves. Let every one please his Neighbor
for his good to edification; For even Christ pleased not himself, etc.
P^ofessours are self-willed, they will walk to the utmost of their liberty, and
if others be offended, they little care for grieving and stumbling their weak
Brethren. They will tell you in the pride o^ their hearts and loftiness of
their Spirits, the weak must be satisfied: But what if they cannot? O! how
opposite are Professors to the Apostles condescending frame? They think that
in different c^^cumstantial things the weak should sollow the strong, and
therefore slight what they think of their actions. Gal. 5.13. 1 Cor. 8.1.
But what says the Apostle? Use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh.
Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifyeth. A firm and full knowledge of our
liberty in things indifferent, (says a learned man) if it be separated from
Charity, is apt to swell the mind with Pride, and make men to despise, and set
at naught weak, doubting, and scrupulous Brethren; but Charity is careful to
avoid what may stumble the weak, and cause them to fall into Sin, and therefore
judge this (...), Romans 14.13, 22.
that no man put a stumbling or occasion to full in his brothers way by the use
of ^^differerts. Have thou faith, concerning the ^^^ullness of the use of
things indifferent (for of them the Apostle speaks) have it unto thy self
before God, make not a vain publication thereof, to the exasperating, grieving,
or stumbling of the weak, who may by thy example, even against Conscience, use
the same liberty that thou do, and so through thy knowledge shall thy weak
Brother perish, 1 Cor. 8.11.
i. e. thy using this liberty has a tendency to destroy him. You may think
this is no great matter; But the same Apostle informs you, 1 Cor. 8.11, 12.
Romans 14.20.
that you hereby sin against Christ, you destroy the work of God, the Soul of
thy Brother, and no man on earth can privilege you from the wrath of God, if
you destroy them with your meats (with the use of your ^iberty) for whom Christ
dyed, and therefore the Apostle professes, 1 Cor. 8.13.
if meat make my Brother to offend, I will eat no flesh, while the world
stands, lest I make my Brother to offend. O! that men were s^^^uole as Paul,
in the condescension of their Charity; But alas! All men seek their own things:
if they are satisfied concerning the lawfulness of the things, they look no
farther: they little mind the souls of their Brethren; but are securing
themselves some outward peace, and earthly advantages. Few naturally care for
the good of others, for the glory of God, and the edification of their Brethren.

6. Valuing Christians by externals.
How are Christians valued and preferred by externals, rather than by
internals? By gold-rings, by outward honors and privileges, rather than by
their graces? They who should have most o^ your esteem, love and respect, have
least. A rich Formalist's company is more prized, than an humble, mortified,
poor Christian's. The miscarriage that was in the Apostles days, is descended
to this age, and is a blot upon many of the Professors of it: Jam. 2.1.
O my Brethren! Have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory,
with respect of persons. How are men's judgments blinded by some external glory
and appearance, so that a little in a great, rich, honorable man, is counted
much; and much grace in a poor man is despised, 1 Cor. 11.22
over-looked, and accounted but littie^ How do the rich contemn the poor? How
are the poor neglected in visits? But a rich, though form^l Professor, shall
have many Friends. How common is it for the rich to enjoy Ordinances together,
and exclude the poor? You go to the houses of the rich, but seldom go over
the threshold of the poor: and yet what said Christ to him that bade him? Luke
14.12, 13, 14.
When thou make a Dinner or Supper, call not thy Friends, nor thy Brethren,
neither thy Kinsmen, nor thy rich Neighbors, lest they also bid thee again,
and recompense be made thee; but when thou make a Feast, call the poor, the
maimed, the lame, the blind, and thou shall be blessed; for they cannot
recompense thee; but thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.
You do not value men by their eminency in grace, but in parts and worldly
endowments: as if gold did set men off more than grace. Those who have most of
Caesar's Image, are held in higher reputation, than those who have most of
God's Image. What a reflection is this upon the great and blessed God? 2 Cor.
5.16.
Paul durst know no man after the flesh; yet dare you esteem men by their
fleshly greatness in the world. When you should fix your affections, where you
see most grace, you are taken where you see, either most of the world, or most
gifts, prudence, learning, or most morality. You know, 1 Cor. 12.
that you bestow not most honor on the uncomely parts, on them who have least
of worldly Privileges, though the Apostle, yea God expects it. How rough and
rigorous are you to poor men, if over-taken in a fault? how is his offense
aggravated? how severely is he censured? But if a rich man's transgression be
the same, or more to be aggravated from the light it has affronted, and from
the danger of its scandal; yet how is it past by, extenuated, if not excused
and pardoned? O! This having men's persons in admiration, over-reverencing men
for worldly things, is a great disparagement to the grace of God, as if riches
and honors were more excellent than Religion and Grace: They who are highly
descended, or who relate to the Courts of Princes, or who have their stores in
their houses, are in greater esteem than others, who are descended from above,
who are related to the God of (...), who are Favorites in the New Jerusalem,
and who have store of grace in their hearts. O my Brethren! Jam. 2.2, 3, 4, 5.
If there come into your Assembly a man with a gold ring, and there comes also
a poor man in vile raiment, and you have respect to him that wears the gay
clothing, etc. are not you partial in your selves? Have not you made a
difference, a groundless difference, a difference grounded on carnal respects,
and not upon solid reason? Are not ye become judges of evil thoughts? Have not
you made your judgment of such persons, according to the dictate of your own
evil thoughts, and not according to the rule of the Word? O! how seldom do
Professors value and respect as God does? Let rich Professors be sick, or
under any other stroke of Gods hand, what a do is there? what running to him?
what sending after him? what endeavors to comfort him? But O! how are the poor
of the Church despised? Little sending to them, though they want necessaries
for their Bodies, in the time of their Visitation, and their Souls are ready to
sink, for want of a word in season. Your frequent visiting of some, when under
Gods hand, and seldom resorting to others, when in the same extremity, Jam.
2.6. Hebr. 2.11. John 20.17.
evidenceth, that you despise the poor: Yea, are not you ashamed to be in the
company of a mean Christian? or to call a poor Christian, Brother? to own any
such near relation to him? And yet the Lord is not ashamed to call such,
Brethren: Go to my Brethren, etc. But woe and alas! the same mind is not in
us, which was in Christ Jesus: Matthew. 11.29.
Learn of me; for I am lowly. But we are proud and haughty, and we learn of the
high and mighty of the Earth to despise others of a lower condition, than our
selves. The proud rich man can be content to claim kindred of Abraham, he calls
him, Luke 16.
Father Abraham; but you read not that ever he said, Brother Lazarus. It will
not serve us, nor save us (says a late Bishop of England) to be able to say,
Abraham is our Father, except we will charitably acknowledge the poorest
Christian, even Lazarus for our Brother. Besides how soon is a rich Formalist
admitted to Fellowship? How hardly the Godly, if poor?

7. Slighting weak, as well as poor Christians.
How do they who count themselves Christians of the highest form, who have had
great acquaintance with Christ and his ways, who have had a long experience of
Christ's sweetness, and Satan's deceits, keep by themselves, with the neglect of
the lambs, of them who are but of yesterday, and know little of the mind of
God? How do we slight them (Christ did not so) who have but a mite or two for
to cast into the treasury, I mean, who can contribute but little to their gifts
or graces. They that are poor in spirit, as well as poor in the world, have but
very little respect now adays: whereas we should treasure and respect the
smallest dust of Gold and Pearl: we should resemble the Lord Jesus Christ: his
greatest care seems to be of the Lambs. Feed my Lambs. The Children in the
Cradle, and when they begin to take then feet should then be most dandled,
should then mostly be, help up, they then should be never out of hand. If ye
are Fathers, ye are unnatural ones, if you throw off the care of all the
Children, that need your care, and take care of them who need it not. As grace,
so growth in grace, is given to edesie the body of Christ, the eye is not for
its self, but for the blind members, to lead them in paths of Righteousness.
Your care should be like Gods: his care is for the least sly, as well as for
the greatest of the creatures. Christ did not will the Salvation of one
believer more than another, he dyed equally for all, all believers stand alike
justified through the blood of Christ, Christ knocks at the poor man's door, as
well as the rich, if Christ makes any difference, it is in this, the poor weak
Christian has more expressions of his love and affection, than the strong
have, he shows most pity to the greatest objects of pity, to those that are
in greatest want: yea the young Saint at his first Conversion, when he lately
dropped from the Womb of the Gospel, when he is but a Babe in Christ, a
sucking-Infant, he has more kisses and embraces, more joy and comfort, than
(perhaps) he meets with till he be a grown man, and old man in Christ, till he
be not only a gracious, but a glorified Saint. The very Philosopher observes
that by Nature Parents are still carried with their greatest affections to the
Child that is youngest; because that is commonly most indigent, that is most
hugged in the bosom, dandled on the knee, kissed and smiled upon. I wish there
were more of this Nature even among supra-natural Christians. It is lamentable
to see how little honor is bestowed upon the weaker Vessels, and how few there
are to be found, that carry the lambs in their bosoms (next their hearts) and
gently lead those that are with young.

8. Not compassionating fallen Brethren.
How little compassion is showed to fallen Brethren? to such as are overtaken
with a fault, yea with many? When their hearts, like the sluggards fields, are
overgrown with weeds, we do not lend them our Spade, and Mattock and Knife: we
do not labor to pull the brands, that are half burnt, out of the fire: to save
our selves this labor, we deem them Ca^^-awayes, as if there were no hope of
their Restitution and Salvation, we never more look after them, to be sure, we
do not as the blessed Apostle John did, who (as Eusebius relates in his
Ecclesiastical History) ran after the back-slidden Professor, who was turned
an High way-man, to take him by holy guile, and to recover him out of the
snares of Hell. We carry it, as if we held, that sins committed after
Conversion were unpardonable. Art thou a stranger to thy own heart? If not,
thou know God pittyeth thee, though thou fallest seven times a day, and it
ill becomes thee, who have been so often helped out of the deep ditch, to deny
help to thy Brother, that lies there, and perhaps will perish, if none be more
merciful than thy self. Are there no solemn engagements upon thy Soul toward
thy Neighbor? Will not God take thee by the throat for thy unmercifulness?
Mat. 18.32, 33, 34.
O thou wicked Servant, I forgave thee all thy debt, because thou desiredst me:
should not thou have had compassion upon thy Fellow Servants, even as I had
pity on thee? Verily, the Lord is wroth with you, and if this be not amended,
he will deliver you to the Tormentours, till you shall pay all that is due unto
him. O! Repent of your defectiveness in this thing. Multitudes are hastening to
the Valley of Decision, multitudes are departed from their former Profession,
some of them are become scandalous: their sins will lie at your doors, and
their blood too, if you, through unfaithfulness, or through negligence, or
through fainting, endeavor not to restore them, to set the bones again, that
are unhappily dislocated. Ye which are Spiritual, restore, Gal. 6.1.
etc. Are ye all Carnal? are none of you Spiritual? If there be one, here is
work for him, as he will answer the contrary at his peril.

9. Groundless separation.
On how uneasy and sinful (because unwarrantable) accounts, do many withdraw
from the Communion of their Brethren? What, have not they read, or heard,
Forsake not the assembling of your selves together, Hebr. 10.25.
as the manner of some is? It was then dangerous not to separate; but it was
more dangerous to separate: Not to separate was dangerous to the outward (...)
to separate was dangerous to the inward man. When ever you hear of Demas, that
he has left us, the next news you will hear of him, is, he has embraced this
present World. If the Devil can, like a subtle Cutter on the road, draw thee
off from thy company, he will soon cut the throat of thy Profession. It Is no
wonder to hear an house is robbed, that stands alone from Neighbors. Two are
better than one. The Church of God is compared to a City, the weak walls of the
houses therein, would never endure a blustering wind; but by their
Neighborhood and Contiguity, they succor each other: But when one stands
divided, the next news you may expect to hear of, is a sall, and if it be a
towring-house, the fall is great. And yet alas! upon every prejudice and
discontent, if one Brother falls out with another, presently the whole
Congregation is threatened with the loss of the prejudiced and discontented
party's company, and condemned for the miscarriages of one, and perhaps the
supposed Offendour has not the liberty to know his Offense, in order to his
Repentance, nor the Church regularly acquainted therewith.

10. Not seperating from Persons under Censure.
The last great Evil among Church Members, that I shall mention, is, Their not
withdrawing from every Brother that walks disorderly, when under Censure. How
solemnly is this required by the Apostle? Now we command you, Brethren, 2 These.
3.6.
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every
Brother, that walks disorderly. Who can tell what blessed effects of Gods own
Censures their eyes might have seen, had not Professors been herein guilty? By
a general dislike the person censured might soon be convinced and humbled.
Undoubtedly it was your duty to have added weight unto the Discipline of
Christ, what you could, and to discountenance those, whom the Lord had
discarded. Instances are not wanting of such as God has brought to repentance
by the strangeness of such as were once their Fellow Members. Possibly you may
be condemned for such a carriage, but if ever God bring such Censured persons
to Repentance, though it be upon their death bed, though it be in a foreign
Country, God will not suffer them to dye quietly, till they have acquitted, yea
justified your carriage toward them.

CHAP. XXXVI. Their miscarriages toward Sinners.
1 MAy not too much familiarity with profane wretches be justly charged upon
Church Members? Church Members associating with the Profane.
I know man is a sociable creature; but that will not excuse Saints as to their
carelessness of the choice of their company. The very Fowls of the Air, and
Beasts of the Field, love not Hererogeneous company: Birds of a Feather flock
together. I have been afraid, that many, who would be thought eminent, of an
high stature in grace and godliness, yet see not the vast difference there is
between Nature and Regeneration, Sin and Grace, the Old and the New Man,
Whence? From not believing the enmity that is in the feed of the Serpent
against the feed of the Woman. Psalm. 14.4. Prove. 28.15. Isa. 51.20. Psalm.
22.12. Mat. 7.6. Ezekiel. 2.6. Prove. 4.16.
seeing all company is alike unto them. And is it not thus with thee? Is it not
all one, whether thou art with a Child of God, or with a Child of the Devil?
Are not those fit Companions for thee, who slight and rebel against God every
day?

O! How few consult and believe the Scripture's setting forth the enmity of
wicked men against Gods people? The Scripture tells us, They eat up Gods
people, as bread, which implies a strange inclination in them to devour the
Saints, and that they take as great delight therein, as an hungry man in
eating, and that it is natural to them to molest them: The Scripture compares
them, for their hurtful qualities, to Lions and Bears, to Foxes for subtilty,
to wild Bulls, to greedy Swine, to Scorpions, to Briars and Thorns, (grievous
and vexing things.) The Scripture represents them as industrious and unwearied
in their bloody Enterprises, they cannot sleep without doing mischief: Herodias
had rather have the blood of a Saint, than half of a Kingdom: Haman would pay a
great Fine to the King, so the scattered Jews (who keep not the Kings laws) may
be cut off. Wicked men will run the hazard of damning their own Souls, rather
than not fling a dagger at the Apple of Gods eye: though they know, what one
word (Aha) cost; yet they will break through all natural, civil, and moral
obligations to ruin Gods people: The Holy Ghost calls them implacable men, 2 Timothy 3.3.
fierce and headstrong: they are like the hot Oven for fury, like the Sea for
boundless rage: yet who has believed this Scripture Report?

Did we believe what Enemies all wicked men are unto all Saints, Evidences
thereof.
We should not lean to our own prudence and discretion to secure us from any
danger by these men: we would get an Ark to secure us from the deluge of their
wrath: If at any time we be cast among them and delivered, we would bless God
with the three Children, that the hot fiery Oven did not consume us: we would
not wonder, when we hear of any of their barbarous cruelty; but rather wonder
at Gods restraining them every day: we would be suspicious of receiving hurt,
when cast among light and frothy Companions: we would shun their company, as we
do Lions and Scorpions: we would never commit any trust or secret into their
hands: we would not be light hearted, whilst in their Society: we would not
rely on their promises any more than we would on the promise of the Devil,
their Father: we would long for Heaven to be delivered from the tents of Kedar:
we would not count any of the Saints secured from danger, though related to any
great wicked man: we would not twist our selves with them by matching our
selves or Children to these Sons and Daughters of Belial: neither would we make
choice of Devils to be our Servants

How few do believe what a quarrel God has with wicked men? From not believing
Gods quarrel with them. Act. 2.40.
And that not only with the loose; but the formal and hypocritical also? If we
did, we would tremble as much to be among them, as to be in an house, that is
falling: we would endeavor to save our selves from this untoward generation.
The Apostle would not so have adjured them, so charged, so entreated them, had
he not known the danger of wicked company. Psa. 7.11.
God is angry with the wicked every day; his bow is bent, his arrows are on the
strings, the instruments for their ruin are all prepared. And is it safe to be
there where the Arrows of God are ready to fly about our ears? How was the
Apostle afraid to be in the Bath with Cerinthus? Numb. 16.26.
Depart (says God by Moses) from the tents of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, lest
you be consumed in all their sins, How have the baskets of good figs suffered
with the bad! Is it not prejudicial to the gold to lie with the dross? Lot had
been ruined by his Neighborhood to the Sodomites, if God had not wrought
wonderfully for his deliverance. Will you put God to work miracles to save you
from your ungodly company? It is dangerous being in the road with thieves,
whilst Gods hue and cry of Vengeance is at their backs. Prove. 13.20.
A Companion of fools shall be destroyed. The very beasts may instruct you to
consult better for your security, the very Deer are afraid of a wounded chased
Deer, and therefore for their preservation thrust him out of their company.

How few believe their own experiences, From not believing that they have
suffered from them.
what they have suffered by the company of the Ungodly? It had been better we
had gone to the Pesthouse, and eat and drank with persons infected with the
Plague, even whilst the soar and botch was running on them, than to accompany
with wicked men: our bodies would have been endangered only by the one; but our
Souls are by the other. Is not the poison of Asps under their tongues? Does not
the Devil act them? Ephesians. 2.2.
Does he not work effectually in the Children of disobedience? Does he not
inform them? Is there any breath, that is not infections, coming from their
lips? How soon could Joseph rap out an Oath by living with Pharaohs Courtiers?
It was not long time, that Peter was (^nnecessarily, without a Call) in the
Highpriests Hall, and how quickly do we hear him Curse and Swear, and deny his
Lord and Master? We are insensibly ensnared, and defiled, by wicked men, as we
are black'd and discolored by lying long under the hot and scortching
Sunbeams. Do not we yet know and feel how a little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump, and that one sinner destroys much good, and that those that were mingled
among the Heathen, learned their ways? Have not you found after such
company-keeping, how your hearts have been dead, dull, straightened, loath, and
unwilling to come into Gods presence? It is difficult (says a late ingenious
Writer) even to a miracle to keep Gods Commandments, and evil company too. How
suddenly after your Soul-refreshments in your Closet Communion have you lost
all your heats, and spiritual fervencies, which you had in secret, and have
instantly cooled by going forth into cold and corrupt air? When a Saint has
been in private ravished with the love of God, and the joys of Heaven^, and
afterward meets with company, which neither does, nor can speak one word of
such matters, what a damp is it to him? What a quenching (as it were) of the
Spirit of God in him? Nay is not that true which one says, that the people of
God do generally lose more by worldly men (that are of a blameless conversation
before men) than they lose by wicked and profane men? O! how often has communion
with carnal men been at least an occasion of blotting your evidences? and of
your suspecting the truth of your own graces, whilst you have omitted the
duties of admonition and reproof, when there was a call thereto? O! how often
have you said, If I cannot suffer such a man's frowns and displeasure, and
therefore have omitted my duty to their Souls, and durst not appear for God
against their sins, how shall I deny my self in greater matters? How shall I
suffer at a stake for Christ? How shall I resist to blood, fighting against
sin? You hold the Wolf by the Ear, whilst among them: If you reprove them, you
get a blot; if not, you fear, you are too cowardly to be enrolled among the
Saints. I will acquaint you with an Observation of mine: When I have seen a
Christian fall into an intimacy with vain and erroneous company, I have counted
it a mark of a backsliding heart, and have found it so too too often: And no
wonder; for we our selves count it a disgrace to us to accompany with them, who
associate with people suspected for uncleanness and dishonesty, and so does the
Spirit of God, who will not partake in the scandal of such Association: Verily,
He will not be a Partner with you, when you are not choice of your Fellowship.

How few consider, From not considering, how hereby they harden them in their
wickedness.
how they harden wicked men, by an intimacy with them, Whereas withdrawment
from them, might be a means to make them ashamed? Whilst we are merry and
jovial with them, we make them believe their condition is not deplorable, their
danger is not great; whereas, if we shunned them, as we would a Bowed-Wall,
whilst they remain enemies to the Lord, this might do them good, for the
startling of them, and rouzing of them, out of their unhappy security, and
strong delusions, wherein they are held. Not discharging Duty in their company,


Secondly, May not neglect of discharging the Duties owed to wicked men, whilst
in their company, be also justly charged upon Church Members? Professors
carelessness of the perishing condition of the Souls even of the vilest, is a
sin much to be lamented. It is an Iron Age we live in, and men's hearts are
strangely hardened, as to any pity they show to the multitudes, who are in a
natural and damnable condition. Methinks you should reflect on the misery of
an unconverted state, whilst you your selves were so lately in it.

Are not you convinced, Several weighty Considerations, to persuade Professors
to be treating with Souls about their eternal Estate, whatever company they
are in.
that those with whom you converse daily, have reasonable, immortal Souls,
capable of eternal life or misery? Have not they the same common Nature with
you? Are there not (at least) many civil bonds, wherein you stand related to
them? Does not their misery call aloud for your compassions? Are they not in
the gall of bitterness, and bonds of iniquity? Have they yet any part or
fellowship in the pardon of their Sins? The endeavoring to heal the
backslidings of Christians, though a very necessary work, is not so necessary
(for they will surely be pardoned and healed, they are not in such hazard of
damnation) as to endeavor to open the eyes of these poor blind wretches, and
to turn them from the power of Satan unto God. Would you not make more haste to
cure a man, that is taken with a swooning fit, than one that has a little
swelling in his singer? I wonder you are no more affected with the miseries
that attend your Unregenerate Friends and Acquaintance, who must suddenly be
Converted, or Damned: Methinks you should pity them the more; because they
pity not themselves. Methinks the value that Christ has put upon Souls, by
bleeding for them, the ransom that he has given for miserable man, and the
unwearied pains he takes for the reducement of fallen man, should teach us to
open our lips, to give some directions and counsels to them, who are within a
stride of Hell, but a breath between them and eternal ruin: And yet how are
Gods people straightened toward these forlorn and miserable, undone, condemned
Creatures? Though they are under the curse of the Law, though the sentence of
death be past against them, and is ready to be executed every moment; yet you
exhort them not to fly from wrath to come: If they will perish, they may
perish, for any spiritual contribution that you will afford them. It grieves me
sometimes, to see how Gods people eat up their own and others time, with vain,
frothy and unsavory words: When they should be speaking some rouzing, startling
words of Hell and Damnation, of the necessity of Regeneration, of Eternity, of
the foolish choice men make in preferring the pleasures of sin, which are but
for a season, before eternal joys; of the deceits of the heart, of the cheats
of the Devil, of the malignity of sin, of the curse of the Law, etc. they are
talking of this fashion, or of that, they are perhaps censuring one another,
but endeavoring nothing for the undeceiving their deluded Companions. You
cannot but know what advantages you have by your intimacies with them, to
deliver that to them, which they will receive from you, when Satan perhaps has
imbittered them against their Ministers, so that all Pulpit-counsels and
reproofs are lost upon them. Besides, You are in private with them, and you
know by your selves, how loath, how backward you were, to apply the truths of
God to your own Souls, but you, as Nathan to David, may go and say, Thou art
the Man, thou the Woman: You may hear their pleas for themselves, and so have
an opportunity to confute them; whereas they are reserved to their Ministers,
though they have been friendly, earnestly and frequently invited to a Christian
conference: And yet how do you neglect all these Opportunities of serving the
Necessities of your Friends: You pretend love unto them; but how can ye see the
blind before your eyes tumbling into the Lake of Hell, and yet not call on them
to return and live? It is admirable, that you should think you have the Divine
Nature within you, and yet be void of compassions to these miserable Objects,
who lie wounded before you, wherever you go or come. O! Methinks, when you
enter the house of an Unregenerate, you should thus meditate, Now have I an
opportunity to save a Soul from Hell, to have a greater conquest than Caesar or
Alexander could boast of: Now may I show my self a Friend of God, by pleading
his right to the Creature: Now may I have an occasion to make all the Angels of
Heaven laugh and sing, and all the cursed Devils to roar, by saving a lost Son.

And will you see these wounded in your way, and pass them by with an
unmerciful Spirit? If you see your Brother have need of outward things, (much
more if needing Grace, the Image of, and Peace with, God) and you shut up your
bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in you? You have
some pity left, when you see a man fallen under his horse, or struggling for
life upon the waters, or in an house fired, your bowels are turned within you;
But alas! here are they that are dropping into the Lake of Fire every moment,
that are dragged up and down, from one Lust to another, by the Devil, (a sorer
bondage by far) and yet you do not pity them. O! Pity them, pity them; Go
over to Macedonia, and help them. It is a grief to my Soul, to consider, how
dull, how useless Christians are, in the Towns and Villages, where Providence
has cast them: If they meet with a man, they will not so much as ask, whether
he be bound for Heaven, or Hell? whether he knows the necessity of the new
Birth, yea or no? whether he has left Sin, as his greatest burden, whether he
be willing of Christ, and Salvation by him, upon his own terms? Nay,
Professors will not so much as counsel them to read a good Book, or lend them
one, if they are poor and unable to buy: they will be at no cost to save a
Soul, that is really of more worth, than a World. How is it, that you account
your selves Christians, whilst you have no higher esteems of Souls? Or how can
you have any assurance, that you hate Sin, whilst you labor not the removal of
it, in whomsoever you find it? If you see men trifling away their time, why do
you not put them upon redeeming their time? If you find them lovers of
pleasures, why do you not invite them, and press them, to look after cordial
joy and mirth, and the true pleasures, that are at Gods right hand? If you are
the Subjects of Christ, how can you endure Treason against him, and not
suppress it? I Will never believe, that man ever mourned for sins of his own,
that does not for sins of others; or that he ever hated sin in himself, that
does not endeavor to ruin it in others Souls, as well as in his own. Be
ashamed at your pretensions, as if you had hearts of flesh, when you have
hearts of stones, the hearts of Tigers, the hearts of Infidels, or else you
would pity the miserable unconverted Souls. And what, if they desire not your
help: the more need you have to pity them: the less awakened they are out of
their cursed security, the more miserable and dangerous is their state. O! Put
on the bowels of Jesus Christ: carry not your selves in an high, proud way, in
a lofty, magisterial way, toward these poor Souls: Do not think thou have
discharged duty toward them, by running into a corner, and backbiting them for
blindness, hardness, contempt of Christ, etc. but rather help them to some of
your eye salve, that they may see. Consider you have Tallents, and account you
must for them, and be-think your selves, whether you may not give a better
account, by endeavoring to reduce these poor Souls, that are straying to Hell,
than by letting them alone to damn themselves: Consider sadly what answer you
will make, when Christ shall arise and plead with you, when Christ shall say,
Where is thy Brother? Will Cain's answer serve? Am I my Brothers keeper? Will
not Christ reply on you? Did not I come from Heaven on purpose to redeem these
perish Souls? Did not I charge you to exhort one another daily? to do good to
all? Did not I furnish you with wisdom and experience, that you might be able
and ready to help others? Did not I by wonders of Providence prolong your
days, that you might be useful? Did not I give you an interest in the
affections of your Neighbors, that you might be as the Dew, and as the Rivers
of Waters to the parched ground? that you might be the Light and Salt of the
Earth? Nay, did not I remove the Ministry, (among other weighty grounds) to try
your affections to perishing Souls? And is this your answering all my designs
and expectations, to rail at them, as the ungodly party, and not to endeavor
to make them better? O! Consider how sad your case will be, if the blood of
thousands of Souls shall be lain at your doors, for your neglects, for your
carelessness, for your being worse than Balaams Ass; for he once reproved,
perhaps you have never. How do you know, but a few words of yours might be as
forcible as Jonah's to Nineveh, as the Samaritan woman's was to the City? Is
this to love thy Neighbor as thy self? Do love thy self, and not regard thy
Soul? And can thou love thy Neighbor, and not endeavor to save him from
perishing? to pull the brand out of the fire? Have you so learned Christ? When
our Lord dwelt in flesh among us, was he dumb before sinners, as you are, when
he saw the multitude wanting bread, did not he deal forth the bread of life to
them? did not he prefer this work before his meat and drink? had not he
compassion for the ignorant? did not he enlighten poor ignorant Souls? and
reprove the Hypocrisy of others? When he went into the Publicans houses, did
not he preach of the Kingdom of God unto them? And has not he given you an
enample, that you should do as he has done? Should not you make it a matter of
Conscience to write after so great, so safe, so glorious a Copy? to follow so
worthy a Leader and Pattern? Add withal, what stumbling blocks you have laid
in the ways of sinners? how many have been offended by your conversation? And
will you send so many hundreds to Hell, and not endeavor the conversion of
some? You pretend the want of parts: But alas! you want bowels, you want
affections, you have not a real sight, and deep sense of eternal matters: If
you had, you would with tears in your eyes beseech your Neighbors to mind
their perishing Souls. Have not you so many parts as to say to your Neighbors,
Repent, and Pray, if perhaps your sins may be forgiven. Go into thy Closet,
Professor, and there mourn over thy hard heartedness, and unmercifulness to
the Souls of thousands, of whom thou might have been an instrument of
Conversion, if thou had but attempted it. Or could you not have gone and
beseeched your Ministers to lay to heart the perishing estate of such a man or
woman? Or might you not have entreated those Souls to consult some Minister
about their Everlasting State? You have not done what you could: you pretend
you cannot convert them; but you will not, you will not try whether you can
work them over from sin to God. You say they are dead in sins and trespasses,
they have hearts of stone, as insensible as stones, as stupid, as blockish, as
impenetrable as stones: And wast not thou so some years ago? Have thou forgot
the rock, out of which thou wast hewn? Nay, is there not too much stone in thy
heart, that thou can see thy God so dishonored, Christ so reproached by
those, who are baptized in his Name, and wear his Livery,, and yet not
endeavor to pull them out of the fire? Thou relievest thy self with the mercy
thou show to the bodies of the poor, that beg at thy door: when thou see
their soars, their lean cheeks, and naked shoulders, thou succourest them,
there things thou ought to do; but not to lay aside the Spiritual Alms,
that were due unto them: thou should have counseled them, admonished them,
enlightened them; and now if they perish in their ignorance, will not their
blood be required at thy hands? O! tremble at your blood-guiltiness. The Lord
of Heaven and Earth, who lays his claim to Souls, All Souls are mine, has
charged thee, not to hate thy Brother in thine heart, not to suffer sin to rest
upon him, but to reprove him: And yet thou let him alone, to perish in his
iniquity. You are so taken up with your own temporal or eternal good, that you
little regard what becomes of others to all eternity. How do some hope to slink
to Heaven alone? Perhaps they seek their own profit; 1 Cor. 10.33.
but not the profit of many, that they may be saved. O that men would cast
their eyes abroad (says one) the very dumb inanimate Creatures would teach
them better; every Creature assimulates, Fire turns what is near it into Fire,
Earth converts into Earth, Flowers will be scattering of their seed and scent.
How can thou hope the blessing of the new Creation rests upon thee, when thou
do not increase and multiply? O that you would be prevailed with, to help,
counsel and direct others to Heaven! If you have found the way thither, be
pleased to show others the way to life, the way to glory. O! Pity them, as
Christ pitied you; Christ has led you out of the wilderness of sin and
trouble, Be you eyes to the blind, direct them the right way to the Land of
Promise, tell them what course you took, declare unto them what God has done
for your Souls. Do not you see how industrious Christ's enemies are to diffuse
their poison? Do not Turks and Papists endeavor to proselyte? Will they not
compass Sea and Land to spread and diffuse their Leaven? Do not all people
(besides you) labor to win to their Gods? Do not unclean persons and drunkards
entice others to the same wickedness? shall Satan's Vassals be filling Hell? and
will you not labor to fill Heaven? Is it not your Honor to bring many Sons
and Daughters unto God? What will become of the next Generation? How few
Servants (if any) will Christ have, if others take no more pains, than you do,
to convince, to allure, to convert? I fear Christ will take up the old
complaint, Mat. 8.20.
The Foxes have holes, and the Birds have Nests, but the Son of Man will not
have where to lay his head. Consider how often your poor Ministers have beseeched
you to enter on this work, lest other-menssins prove your damnation; and yet
how has a dumb Devil possessed you? O that yet you would commune with your own
hearts, whether you are willing that thousands should perish, and go to Hell?
and if they answer, No, Ask them a second question, why do not you use the
means to prevent it, Namely Exhortation, Reproof, and Counsel? You have
covered over your want of Zeal and tenderness with a pretense that you have not
the gifts of Ministers, you cannot so exhort as Ministers, etc. But have you
not been told that God can work by small means, as well as by great, and that
by things that are not God can confound the wisdom of the flesh, and bring to
naught the things that are? Is not this like the pretense of not being
eloquent? Do you not know, have you not heard, that the issue, and event
depends on the blessng of the Lord, rather than on the work it self? Is it not
all one to the Lord, to wound by a short, as by a long sword? Cannot God bless
a few words in thy mouth, as he did in Christ's, and the Apostles? Can not
thou say, follow Christ? and may not presently a Matthew, a Publican leave his
sinful courses and embrace the Christian faith? Can thou not say, Repent
and Believe, that your sins may be blotted out? and may not God concur with
thee, as he did of old times? Is the Lords hand shortened, that it cannot help?
If Israel be not gathered, yet thy reward is with the Lord, if thine heart were
upright, and could testify that night and day thou have not ceased to warn, to
rebuke, and counsel. Certainly your memories are not so bad, but you must
remember the weight of sin, and of the wrath of God: you have seen the wonders
of the Lord in the deeps: you, that have escaped to shore, can tell of the
Rocks and Shelves, and Storms, which you have been delivered from; and will you
set other Shipwreck their Souls, rather than hold out your light unto them,
(...) may avoid their ruins? What shall I say to humble you? There is more
(...) in Hell, than you can afford: Blush, blush, and be ashamed to have less
zeal, love, and pity, to perishing Souls, than Dives in Hell had, he would
have his Brethren saved from the Valley of Hinnom. Your silence will make
others think that Hell is a tolerable place, that sin is not so evil and
bitter a thing, that to lie under Gods wrath is not so great a misery, whilst
you are so slow and backward to warn your Friends and Acquaintance that they
slay from these, and take Sanctuary in the true City of Refuge, the Lord Jesus
Christ. O! If you know the worth of a Soul, pity the multitude, with whom the
day is not broke, whose forlorn Souls are under a continual Massacre from the
bloody Butcher of Hell: Besmear your Souls no longer with the guilt of their
blood: Let them not starve for want of bread, whilst you have to give them. I
shall bless God for ever and ever, if this your negligence of the Souls of
those, whom you may account without, may be cordially bewailed, and you for the
future double your diligence for their conversion. Ministers cannot convert
without the Concourse of Omnipotency, neither can you. Though Satan and thy own
lazy heart has told thee, thou art unfit to set upon this work, yet better do
it meanly, than wholly omit it. God (like Parents on earth) loves to see his
Children lift at those duties, which are too hard for them, and then he steps
in and is a Co-worker with them. What God did by illiterate Fishermen, by
Priscilla, he can do by thee. The Lord pardon thy former unmercifulness to the
Souls of men; But if thou continue careless and cruel, if thou will not by
Prayers for them, and counsels to them, seek their reducement, as sure as thou
art reading, the voice of thy Brothers blood is crying against thee from the
earth. By your example before (if not since) Profession, you have been the
cause of the destruction of Souls, of how many who can tell. And, as Jeroboam
made Israel to sin many years after he was rotten in his grave, so your sin,
your wicked examples may propagate the trade of sin from generation to
generation, until Christ shall come to Judgment. Tremble, tremble at the
thoughts of it, if thou have not the heart of a Beast in thee. O! how many
Souls are crying in Hell against thee, cursing the day they knew thee, or their
Ancestors knew thee; for that by thee they learned to sin the more, and were
strengthened in their wickedness by thy tongue, and by thy life? And now are not
you bound to do your utmost to make restitution? to labor to save them that be
alive? Is it not reasonable that you should labor to win Souls to Gods, as you
have to the Devils, service? and to have many blessing God in the Heavens for
you, that ever they were in the company of such an active zealous Christian,
who by word and life was instrumental to bring them to the knowledge of
themselves, and of their God? And is it not a glorious work, to hold forth such
Light to the World, that they seeing your good works, may glorify God, and you
may be Propagators of Zeal and Holiness, from Generation to Generation, till
Christ shall appear to judge the World, and to reward you for all the services
you have done to his Name? O! how welcome shall that man be to Heaven and
Christ, who has fed the Souls, and clothed the Souls, and visited the Souls,
which he has purchased with his own precious blood? Christ will own thee for
his Benefactour.

CHAP. XXXVII. The Dis-ingenuity and Scandalousness of their Miscarriages.
WHen God had given the Prophet Ezekiel a large Catalogue of Judah's
Abominations, The wickedness of the former miscarriages. Ezekiel. 8.9. V. 6, 13,
15.
he then showed him the Wickedness of their Abominations: He said unto me, Go
in, and Behold the wicked Abominations they do here. He commanded him once, and
again, and again, to turn him yet again, and he should see greater
Abominations. I cannot indeed promise thee, that thou shall now see greater
Abominations, than those already mentioned: All that I shall now do, shall be
to represent the former Miscarriages in their crimson dye, and scarlet color.
And,

The First Thing I shall mention, Commitred against so good and kind a God.
Ephesians. 4.30.
as making your Sins (Professors) out of measure sinful, is your Dis-ingenuity
in so sinning against God. O! You have sinned against a gracious God: You have
grieved the good Spirit of God, whereby (some amongst you) have been sealed to
the day of Redemption. I am bold to say, that one godly man's sinning against
light and mercy, does more break the heart of God, than the brutish Sins of a
Pagan Kingdom. Ezekiel. 6.9.
I am broken (says God) with your whorish heart, which has departed from me,
etc. And ye shall loath your selves for your evils, which ye have committed in
your abominations. Amos 2.13.
God has been pressed down with your sins, as the Cart with sheaves, till he
has even Creak'd under the weight. God expected more from the Treet planted in
Zion, than from the wild ones in the Wilderness. Luke 13.9.
Grief and Burden springs much from unexpected Unkindnesses. I looked for
Fruit, and there was none. How were David's and Readiness Sins aggravated from the
merciful Dispensations of God to them? 1 Samuel 15.17, 18, 19.
And Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast not thou made
the Head of the Tribes of Israel, and the Lord anointed thee King over Israel,
and the Lord seat thee on a journey, and said, Go, and utterly destroy the
Sinners, etc. Wherefore then did thou not obey the voice of the Lord? And
Nathan said to David, etc. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9.
I anointed thee King over Israel, and delivered thee out of the hand of Saul:
And I gave thee thy Masters House, and thy Masters Wives into thy bosom, and
gave thee the House of Israel, and of Judah, and if that had been too little, I
would morcover have given unto thee such and such things. Wherefore have thou
despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? And has there
not been as much disingenuity and unkindness in our Sins? The Lord has given
his Statutes to us, and his Laws, He has not so dealt with all the Nations
under Heaven: He has nourished and brought us up as Children; Isa. 1.2, 3, 4.
but we have rebelled against him. The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his
Masters Crib: but Israel does not know, my People (my People) does not
cousider. Ah sinful Nation, a People laden with iniquity, etc. God fetches a
deep sigh (Ah!) under the burden of this Ingratitude: His Spirit is laden and
troubled with it. They have provoked the Holy One of Israel. Mis-improvements
of Mercies are very provoking. When God comes for Bread, to be sent away with
Stones, must need vex the good Spirit of the Lord. Hear, O Heavens, and give
ear, O Earth; for the Lord has spoken it. Oh for Professors to be worse than
Publicans; for they will be kind to such as are kind to them! Have not we
sinned against God, even with his favors, and requited him evil for good? May
not the Lord say unto us? Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Do ye thus require the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy
Father, that has bought thee? All the mercies we have received, greaten our
sins. The more richly that God has heaped his Blessngs upon us, the more
wantonly we have followed the swinge of our own Lusts, and the more
contemptuously spurned at his holy Commandments. We have great cause to be
ashamed, for that all our sins have been (...) against mercy, and therefore
against the Principle and Law of Nature. It is a perpetual Spot, not to be worn
out by time, that of King Jeash, that he slew Zechariah, the Son of Jehojada,
the High Priest who had been loyal unto him in the getting of the Kingdom, and
faithful in the administration of it. ^ Chron. 24.22, 23.
Thus Joash the King remembered not the kindness which Jehojada his Father had
done to him, but slew his Son, and when he dyed, he said, the Lord look upon
it, and requite it. And it came to pass, at the end of the year, that the Host
of Syria came up against him: and they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and
destroyed all the Princes of the people, from among the people. But alas! What
Engagements could Zechariah possibly lay on Joash, that may weigh with the
Mercies of our God to us? And yet how have we made his choicest Favors as
Arrows, to shoot at the God that sent them? What wretched Prodigals have we
been, to wast all in the service of Hell, which were conferred with so open an
hand, to draw forth our time, strength and spirits, in the praises and services
of God? For this our Ingratitude, Ezra 9.13, 14.
the Lord may justly be angry with us, till he has consumed us, so that there
shall be no remnant, nor escaping. O that you would remember the Lord from
Shittim to Gilgal, Mica 6.5.
i. e. from the beginning of Mercy, to the end of it! And you will hardly find,
that you (any of you) have been the better for it; but many, Jeshurun-like,
have waxed fat, and kicked. God is this day calling out of Heaven to England,
and to each particular person in it, Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish
people, and unwise? I could even wish, for the thousands of our Israel, that
they had received fewer Privileges, or had had the grace to serve the Lord in
the abundance of all things, better than they have to this very day. If ever
you purpose sound Repentance, then take a view of all the Mercies of God
toward you: Go back to the time, when the first stone was laid; yea go back
to the eternal projects of God, to make thee out of nothing, and to redeem
thee, when worse than nothing: Review the upper and lower Springs, with which
Soul and Body have been refreshed: Remember how many eminent Deliverances and
Salvations God has wrought for thee: And if at any time thou have been
straightened in outward comforts, yet remember how thou have been enlarged with
spiritual graces; if God has denied thee in one kind of mercy, he has
supplied it by a gracious wonderful commutation, in another, in a better: if
thou have been denied the fleshpots of Egypt, and the land flowing with honey,
yet it has been all made up in the bread (the Mannah) that fell from Heaven:
if thou have had sometimes bodily infirmities, yet thou have been strengthened
with all might in the inward man: if thou have been denied thee the gold of the
earth, yet God has supplied thee in making thee rich in faith: If sometimes
Friends have been unfriendly, inconstant, or treacherous; yet God has stood by
thee, when all left thee. God has dealt with you, as with Sons: your gleanings
are better than the Vintage of the world. Having laid these, and innumerable
such mercies in one Scale, now lay in the other Scale thy soul ingratitude, not
only that particular sin of unthankfulness, that thou have been guilty of (of
which before) but the ingratitude that has been in all thy sins, in thy pride,
hypocrisy, formality, self-love, self-seeking, impatience, neglect of duty to
Superiors, Equals, and Inferiors, profaneness, intemperance, unrighteousness,
etc. that Remembering the Lord and his goodness toward thee, together with thy
cursed returns, thou may yet abhor thy self in dust and ashes. Take words,
and say, My Salvations are more than I can number, Blessed be God, the Father
of all mercy; But my sins also are innumerable, I cannot recount them, shame
upon me, O! how vile have I made my self, whilst by abuse of rich mercy, Mat.
5.47. Isa. 1.3.
I have lived below the ingenuity that is found in Publicans and Beasts? O that
God would give me the success, that the Angel had on such a sinful people as
you are! Judge. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
And the Angel of the Lord come up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said I made you
to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you into the land, which I swear unto
your Fathers, and I said I will never break my covenant with you, and ye shall
make no league with the Inhabitants of this land, etc. but ye have not obeyed
my voice, why have ye done this, etc. And it came to pass, when the Angel of
the Lord spoke these words to all the Children of Israel, that the people lift
up their voice, and wept.

Secondly, Very scandalously.
The scandalousness of your miscarriages is another aggravation of them. Had
all the forementioned abominations been committed in Defarts and Holes of the
earth, where none had been privy to your irregularities, you had had no sin in
comparison of what you (now) stand justly charged with: If you had been only
rotten hearted, that would not have been under the eye and censure of the
World: Religion would have had no blemish, no loss, no considerable loss
thereby: But men have looked to your hands and feet (whilst God to your hearts)
and finding so many defilements on you, hereby the Name of God has been
blasphemed, God is spoken evil of, whilst you have done evil before men. You
knew the world was an observing world, greedy to espy all the Errata's of your
lives: you knew spots in Cambrick would sooner be marked, than in course cloth:
you knew how apt the world was to condemn all Saints for the miscarriages of a
few pretenders to Christianity: you knew how the world lay in wait, like the
Arabian for his prey, waiting for somewhat to calumniate Christ and his
followers with: you knew the tongues, that are set on fire of Hell, would belch
out their emnity upon the sight of your sins: you knew how apt they were to be
prejudiced against you, and (as the people in Elies days, from the
miscarriages of them, that pretended to draw near to God) would by your
occasion abhor the Offerings of the Lord. 1 Samuel 2.17. 1 Pet. 3.16. 2 Samuel
12.14. 2 Timothy 2.26.
You should have walked with such a good Conscience, that, whereas the world
would speak against you as evildoers, they might be ashamed: But instead of
this you have opened the mouth of Blasphemy: you have gratified the Devil
exceedingly: were he capable of joy, you have furthered it, by being contented
to be winnowed by him, and to be led captive at his will: The scandals of men
reputed for holiness have been his greatest Harvests, his greatest advantages:
He hopes by the falls of Cedars to break down and crush the Shrubs and tender
plants, that grow nigh. God alone knows what mischief you have done to Religion
already, and where the mischief will end. Jeroboam made Israel to sin, many
years after his death. Whereas ye should have left a precious Name behind you,
holy exact copies of Righteousness for succeeding generations to write after,
you have laid the stumbling block of your iniquity before the faces of
hundreds and thousands, to cause them to fall. Give over wondering that for
these last ten years the Gospel has had a a miscarrying Womb and dry Breasts,
know, you have, like the Serpent, the Dragon, stood as in the place of bearing,
you have hindered the Birth, or devoured the Child as soon as Born: you have
been of the old generation of Gods Curse, you would not to Heaven your selves,
Luke 11.52.
and hindered others, that would, if you had not laid your offenses in their
way. Perhaps some of you may think to relieve your selves, that you know none
are taken in these Gins and Traps: you will know shortly that he that tempts
to evil commits an heinous sin, though his temptation prove not effectual. God
will not reward men altogether by the event of scandals,; but by the tendency
of Scandal in its own nature: Others not sinning after your example will not
excuse and lessen your faults, which were so apt to lead them into sin. Matthew.
18.17.
Woe (says Christ) to him, by whom the offense comes. Woe to them that take
offense; but greater woe to them, that give it. If God threatened Eli to take him
up by the roots, for not punishing Scandals in his Sons: 1 Samuel 3.13.
because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. What
dreadful judgments are we exposed to, who are the offence-givers? Wonder not
if having caused many to stumble at the Law, that God will make us contemptible
and base before all the people. Ye are departed out of the way: Mal. 2.8, 9.
ye have caused many to stumble at the Law, ye have corrupted the Covenant of
Levi, says the Lord of Hosts: therefore have I also made you contemptible and
base before all the people. How often have we been as unsavory Salt? Mat. 5.13.
and is it any wonder if we be cast out, and thrown to the Dunghill? O that you
would remember David, take him into your Closet with you, he was scandalous in
the matter of Uriah and Bathsheba: it is true, he repented in dust and ashes,
he abhorred himself, made his bed to swim, the sin was pardoned, the guilt
thereof removed, a solemn absolution was sent him by a Prophet, and yet how did
God follow him with misery upon misery? He might in the death of the Child, in
the defilement of his Daughter, in the murder of Ammon, and in the treason of
Absolon, in his weeping and going barefoot, in his Concubines being defiled,
and his own Crown and Life jeoparded, in all these things he might see the
woeful fruits of Scandal. 2 Samuel 12.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
Wherefore have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his
sight? Thou have killed Uriah the Hittite with the Sword, and have taken his
Wife to be thy Wife, and have slain him with the Sword of the Children of
Ammon. Now therefore the Sword shall never depart from thine House, etc.
Behold, I will raise up evil against thee, out of thine own House, and I will
take thy Wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy Neighbor, and he
shall lie with thy Wives, in the sight of the Sun. For thou did it secretly:
but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the Sun. And David said
unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said unto David, The
Lord also has put away thy sin, thou shall not dye. Howbeit, because by this
deed thou have given occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the
Child also that is born unto thee, shall surely dye. If David, repenting of his
Scandals, be thus punished, what will become of you, who have made Religion to
be abhorred? and yet are insensible, unbroken and unhumbled to this very day?
Well may (unrepented of) Scandals lie in your bones many days hence, Psalm.
51.8. Psalm. 38.8.
seeing David's did, yea he roared because of his sin: Well may you go
drooping to your graves, being bereft of all joy, and comfortable looks from
Heaven, whilst repenting David lost so long the joy of Gods salvation. Psalm.
51.12.
What shall I say? O all ye, who have lost your Virgin affections to Christ,
who have gone a whoring from your God, who are covetous to a wonder, and over
run with carking cares, and sinful despondencies, who break out daily into
scandalous passions, who by divisions, envies, animosities, overreachings,
perjuries, and hypocrisy, have made Religion vile! Know from Christ's mouth,
Mat. 18.6.
it had been better for you, that a Millstone had been hanged about your necks,
and that you had been drowned long ago in the depth of the Sea, than to live
so offensively toward men, as you have done; Jer. 34.16.
because hereby the Name of God is polluted. It had been better you had never
known the ways of God, 1 Pet. 2.20, 21.
than after Profession and Knowledge to depart, and to be as Dogs and Swine.
If you had never professed Gods Name, you had never polluted it; but God will
reckon with you about it. I am bold to say, that a Drunkard, Adulterer, Robber,
etc. does not so provoke the Lord to wrath, as a Professor may, even by an
impatient, discontented word: and for this compare two Scriptures: In the
former there is unbelief, and quarrelling with God (face to face, as it were)
and yet God passed that by, Numb. 11.21, 22. with Numb. 20.10. and Deuteronomy. 32.51.
it being in secret, with a short check, Is the Lords hand waxed short? But in
the other place, Because ye believed not, etc. to sanctify me in the eyes of
the Children of Israel, etc. therefore ye shall dye in the Wilderness, and
never set foot on the Land of Promise. One scandalous Professor does more
hurt, and more stain Religion, than hundreds of Drunkards: and therefore their
Hell shall be the standard to that, of all other sinners. Atrocius sub nominis
Christi Professione peccat. Salvian. Mat. 24.51.
Appoint him his portion with Hypocrites. Thousands in Hell will curse the day,
wherein they saw your looseness on Earth; for thereby they have blasphemed
Christ, as a Friend of Publicans and Sinners, and as if he countenanced you
(secretly) in your Lusts, though (for state and form) he has spoken great
things against such courses in his Word. O! how frequently have you made boasts
of God, Romans 2.23, 24.
and the Law; but by breaking of it, ye have caused his Name to be evil spoken
of. When you should have been leading others to Heaven, you have by your
example lead them to Hell. How deep shall their Hell be, who are plunged
thither with their own, and other-mens sins also? Though God should give you
repentance and pardons; yet how often will your Souls bleed to consider, how many
you have compelled by your example to sin and blaspheme, who are actually in
the chains of darkness, Gal. 2.14.
or hastening thither in a full career? O that you would no longer be like the
body of Amasa, to cause others to stand still, or go back from the ways of
Holiness! O thou scandalous Professor! What account must thou pass with God
shortly, before (perhaps) thou have turned thine eye to the next page? Will not
the blood of multitudes, who perish by thy means, be required at thy hands? One
sin may become many millions of offenses, as the Numbers may be that shall hear
of it. No wonder that men are emboldned to sin, that the Adulterer cares not
for the Curtains of the Night, nor the Drunkard for the shadows of the Evening,
no wonder that the Swearer can spit the Name of God so impudently out of his
mouth: these have been encouraged by thy revolts, backslidings, careless, and
seldom duties, and violent earthly seekings. O! if you would consider, you
bore the Ark of the Lord, you were entrusted with his honor, but you have let
it fall, yea cast it in the dirt. O! tremble at what the God of Heaven has
made a standing decree upon this occasion, 1 Samuel 2.30.
them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed. And though it somewhat comforts me, that God will wipe off whatsoever
can be cast on him; yet know to your sorrow, you shall not so easily discharge
your selves of the Plagues, that are ready to be powered out upon you. God
expected that you should have been Kings and Priests to him: Rev. 1.6. Jo. 3.35.
you should have been burning and shining lights; you should have been like
Innes, which have their Signs on both sides: you were of the King guard, you
should have had the Arms of the Crown on your Breasts, and on your Backs, so
that if any had viewed you, had met you, or had followed you, they might have
known you for Gods Servants, by the stamp and cognizance of Heaven upon you:
But you have rather been like those Pictures, that if you look on one side, you
may see an Angels face, but on the other the Devils. O my Soul! how can thou
write of these, speak or think on them without weeping? O Reader! retreat,
retreat quickly to thy Chamber, and spend some considerable time to reflect on
thy scandalous Words and Actions, and how much the Name of God has thereby
been blasphemed, and thousands endangered to stumble and fall through thy
occasion. How many, that should have ^een as Shields to ward off those blows of
reproach, that would fall on God and Religion, have proved Swords in the hands
of the wicked, wherewith the Name of God is wounded, and whereby multitudes are
in danger of perishing: yea, and the poor real Christians are even ashamed to
look up, and to show their faces, and profession to the world; because there
have been such Spots in their communion: Jude v. 12.
such unclean, scabbed, and unsavory Sheep, that have walked among them.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Their sinning against Knowledge, and impenitently,
notwithstanding all means to bring them to Repentance for their Sins.
3ly. Against much light.
YOur Sins are yet further accented by being committed not only against such
means of Knowledge, but against much Knowledge got thereby. You have had the
most powerful Ministry under the whole Heavens: And believe it sirs, if you
had not heard him that spoke from Heaven to you, If Christ had not come, Joh.
15.22.
you had had no sin (comparatively.) But now you have no Cloak for your sin.
You have sinned against more light than the rest of the World. You know that
covetousness is a sin, Isa. 57.17. Isa. 45.5. Tit. 3.2.
and that for the iniquity thereof God has been wrath; and yet you seek great
things for your selves still: you know that you are to speak evil of no man;
and yet you bespatter every man, almost, to set off your selves by staining and
blotting of others reputations: Isa. 58.5. Luke 12.47. Ezekiel. 21.10.
you know God abhors them, that, for a day only, hang down their heads, like
bull-rushes; and yet this has been your manner from the beginning of your
Profession: you know your Masters will, you know you should not make mirth when
the Lord is angry; and yet you dare, even then be vain and frothy: you know the
Lord is much grieved at the backslidings of his people; and yet you have lost
you ancient faith, love, tenderness, zeal, publick-spiritedness, and communion
with God: yea you have not only known these to be sins, but you have spoken
against them, as evils; you have told men how heinous a thing it is to sin
against the Lord, and yet you your selves have added iniquity unto iniquity:
What cloak have you for your sins. And very impenitently.


Fourthly, You have sinned impenitently, notwithstanding all means for your
repentance and reducement, which God has most wonderfully vouchsafed you. The
Lord has for many years striven with you to put a stop to your sins, and to
reclaim you from your miscarriages: Sometimes God has gone up to Mount Ebal,
and threatened you with Sword, Famine, Fire, and Pestilence, and yet you have
refused to hear from thence: he has leapt up to Mount Gerazim, and allured you
by all kind of blessings; and yet you have carried your selves stoutly and
impudently toward all the offers and tenders of grace for your recovery. Jer.
3.4, 7.
God would have healed you: he has said, will thou not from this time cry unto
me, my Father, thou art the guide of my youth, turn thou unto me; yet you
returned not. You have had many of the Lords faithful Ambassadors, who have
laid siege at you hearts, to engage them to the Lord, and to take you off from
your sinful ways; but alas! all the glad tidings of mercy have not affected
you, have not won you: all the Ordinances of Jehovah have found little place in
you, have left no impre ^ion upon your Souls: Ezekiel. 16.51. Hos. 4.17.
You have justified Judah and Samaria in all their stubborness and rebellion
against the Lord. How righteous is it with the Lord to call upon the Ministers,
Let them alone, threaten them no mo^e, promise them no more. Rev. 22.11.
Let him that is filthy he filthy still: you have broken through Armies of
Ordinances to commit sin; therefore Gospel and Gospel Ministers let them alone:
judgments overtake them, my plagues, my curses seize upon them, Let them
suddenly be destroyed, Prove. 29.1.
and that without remedy, because they have hardened their necks, though often
reproved. God has waited more than three and three years on you, expecting
fruit; but he sees little save the Clusters of Sodom upon you: he has born
with you so long, he has held his tongue; and said nothing (so long) that you
have (wickedly) thought God to be such an one as you; Psalm. 50.21.
So that God must needs be a swift witness against you for the vindicating of
his great and glorious Name, unless you speedily repent, and seek the Lord,
Zeph. 2.3.
if perhaps he may be found. O! how long has God commanded you every where to
repent; not only by his threats, but by his judgments, which have begun at the
House of God: What loud calls have we had? Joel. 2.11. 1 Pet. 5.6.
Turn to the Lord with weeping, Let your laughter be turned into weeping:
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God; and yet how stupid, how
insensible, how impenitent have you remained to this very day, though you have
felt the Arrows of the Lord stying amongst you; yea though you have been told,
Jer. 18.8.
If you repent, it shall repent the Lord of the evil he had thought, either to
continue upon you, or to bring down on you: yet alas! where are the stirrings
of your affections, the soundings of your bowell, the meltings and relentings
of your repenting hearts? O what marble breasts, and hearts of Adamant have you?

How few are there mourning for all the wrongs they have done to the Majesty of
God? Evidenced in their being infensible of their own sins.
for all the abuses offered to the grace of God? Perhaps the fear of Hell (and
so indeed self-love) has humbled some Ahabs, and made them crouch, because
they would not be miserable; But how few are humbled for their abuse of the
love and grace of God by their great offenses? Wha^ the Lord complains of by
the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 3.8.
of the house of Israel, that they would not hearken to the Messengers be sent
them; but were impudent and hard hearted may be again renewed against England,
and all its dominions: the heart of stone is not yet taken away, where is the
man, almost, that can say, God has made m^ heart soft? Job 2^.16.
Though you have born arms against God; though you have sinned against the Lord
with an high hand; though upon self-tryal you may sind those very sins am^ngst
you, which brought Fire and Brimstone on Sodom and Gomorrah, Psalm. 42.3.
and desolation on Israel; yet alas! when were tears thy drink? When did thou
make thy Bed to swim? Is thy beauty gone away for trouble? Do thou abhor thy
self in dust and ashes before the Lord? Know (Reader) that the Authors Pen had
proceeded thus far, before he heard of the late dreadful Burning of London: the
following lines show thee what impressions it made on his thoughts, and should
on thy Soul.
Perhaps in Rama there is a voice heard, Lamentation, and weeping, and great
mourning: Rachel weeping for her children, that dye by the Sword, or
Pestilence, or are burnt in their beds: Perhaps in London, and throughout the
Land, there are some tears shed for the Coals of fire that God has scattered
(the last week) over that famous and ancient City; But how few are mourning for
their pride, worldliness, contempt of the Ministers, and Apostasies, for which
God seems to be contending not only by the Sword, and the Pestilence; but by
Fire with us? where are the Dov^s of the Valleys, all of them mourning, every
one for his iniquity? A ^haraoh may so far repent, as to say, Take away the
Plague; but few cry out, Take away iniquity: Few detest their sins, few loath
them, few are so burdened with them, as that they desire heartily to have them
taken away. Possibly Sin in its effects, in its sad consequences (as it
consines men to the Pesthouse, as it endangereth health and life, as it is the
founder of graves and hells, as it burns up your houses and goods) is someway
burthensom, but few are troubled with it, Ezekiel. 10.2.7.16 Hos. 14.2.
as it grieves, resists, and quenches the Spirit of God, as it is a piece of
the highest ingratitude, and as it kicks against the breasts of mercy: And
therefore no wonder if Few are to be found mourning for other men's sins.

Though Jesus Christ be crucified afresh, Of other men's sins,
and put to open shame: though the blessed Spirit of our God be always vexed
and resisted: though there be so much Atheism, Epicurism, contempt of God, and
his Ambassadors and Gospel, Blasphemy, Violence, Falsehood, Pride, Adultery,
Sodomy: though there be setting up the posts of men, with an apparent contempt
of Gods holy institutions: though all the sins, for which God cast out the
Heathen, and cast off his Israel oe found amongst us, and these highly
aggravated, and innumerable circumstances; yet how little are we concerned
therein? How seldom do we express our inward sorrows by Tears and Fasts? David
beheld the Transgressors, a^^ was grieved; because they kept not Gods word:
Horror seized on him; because they made void Gods Law: Yea Rivers of water ran
down his eyes? because men kept not Gods Law: Psalm. 119.158. v. 53, 136. 1 Pet.
2.7.
But where is the sorrowing after a Godly sort? Where are the weeping
Jeremiah's, Naltons, Midhopes? or whose Soul, like Lots, is vexed (pierced)
with the unclean conversation of the wicked? If ever God did call us to weeping
and to mourning, this is the day; but behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen,
killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine; Let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall die. And it was revealed in mine ears, says the Lord of Hosts;
Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you till you die, Isa. 22.12, 13,
14.
says the Lord God of Hosts. When Elijah saw how iniquity abounded, how the
worship of God was crushed, how things went among the great ones of those
wicked times, how Idolaters were countenanced, the faithful prophets durst not
show their faces, he is so burdened at what became of this, that he knows not
how to live: 1 Kings 19.4.
It is enough, take away my life: He is weary of the world, weary of his own
Land, though the best under the cope of Heaven: yea he thinks it a good time to
remove, that his eyes may see no more of these detestable things, and that his
Soul may be no longer pricked with these scratching Briars: But the searcher of
Hearts knows how little we have been affected with all the shipwrackt faith and
conscience, that our eyes have seen, how seldom our heads have been fountains
of teart, how seldom we have made our houses Bochims, how insensible we have
been of all the ungodliness and unrighteousness, which we and our people are
guilty of. Woe is us, we have not been wounded through Gods sides: we have not
sympathised with a Christ Crucified every day; But like Gallio, we have not
laid these things to heart: And yet we have still (impudently enough) laid
claim to Christ and the privileges of the New Testament, purchased by his
blood; Though we never followed Christ to the Cross weeping; though we have
hardly shed one tear for all the contempt and abuse of him, which is
Epidemical, which abounds from Dan to Beersheba, from one part of the Nation to
another. We pretend we have great sorrows, though they are not expressed by
tears, in a sensitive manner: we think to relieve our selves with the dryness
of our constitution; and yet we have tears more than a good many, to express
our sorrows by; if a Relation drops into the Earth, we can follow the Hearse
wringing our hands and beating our breasts: if an Estate (which we have got by
carking cares, by neglect of duties, heart-duties, and family duties) be in one
day consumed, and dissolved by a flame into ashes, we then can express our
sorrows by weeping and lamentation: witness some of your howlings, your cries
at the late Desolation by Fire; But commune with your own hearts, whether you
were ever made so sensible, ever so affec^^ ^and ^unk with the consideration of
the honor, that God has lost by you, and by thousands like your selves? Was
God ever more affronted by a professing people, than by us? Was ever Christ so
set at naught, as of late times? Was he ever more despised in his Person,
Offices, and Institutions, by the Rhabsheka's of the Earth, than he has been
lately by them, who have had a form of godliness? Zech. 7.12.
and yet our hearts are bard as an Adamant. O! what grounds have you to
question all your mourning for your own sins, whilst you mourn not for the sins
of others? Did you mourn for sin, as it is against God? You would mourn for
other men's sins; for they are against the Lord also: Ezra. 9.3.
You would be like Ezra, he rent his garments, pulled off the hair of his
beard, sat down astonished for the sinful marriages of the people: But we are
insensible; though God be much more dishonored by the Adulterers and
Adulteresses; by the Blasphemers and Atheists; by the Worldlings and Apostates,
who swarm in the midst of us. How can we persuade our selves that the love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts, whilst he is so much reflected on; and yet we
no way (suitably) affected therewith? If a Child, if a Father, if an Husband,
if a Friend, be injured, thou art much affected with the injury; but not so
with all the affronts that the Sons of Belial put upon the blessed God every
day. How can we imagine in the least, that we have any true love to the Souls
of our Neighbors, wh^^^^ we behold them lifting up the heel against their
Maker, wounding and destroying their Souls by their sins; and yet we not sign;
if not weep in secret for the desperate nazards they are running? Nay, how can
you imagine you love your selves, your estates, liberties, lives, etc. whilst
God is provoked to ruin you and them for their great provocations? Josh. 7.
You know one Achan brought a Plague upon the whole body of Israel; and yet his
sin was secret; But we have Street-Drunkards, Street-Swearers,
Street-Adulterers and Adulteresses, Street-Scoffers at Piety and the Worship of
God: And are ye not in danger to partake of the Plagues that these sins are
crying for? And what yet are your hearts as insensible, as Rocks? The Lord be
merciful to you, and take out the heart of stone. How can you be free from
being guilty of all the known sins of the land, whilst you do not mourn for
them before the Lord?

Nay, yea, of the ^okens of G^ds disp^^asure against Sin. Isa. 22.45. Joel 2.2.
to show yet the greatness of your stubbornness, you are insensible not only of
your own, and other men's sins; but of the tokens of Gods displeasure against
those sins. God has emptied us from Vessel to Vessel; followed us with the
Sword and Pestilence, and wonderfully so lately by dreadful flames: God has
spoiled us of our glory, and humbled us as low as dust and ashes: it is a time
of treading down; and therefore we should weep bitterly: it is a day of
darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds, and of thick darkness: We have had
such a Plague, as never the like: such a Fire has been kindled, as never the
like amongst us: the Protestant Nations are very low, and the Antichristian
very bold and consident; yet we can hardly hang out harps upon the Willows;
Ephesians. 4.19.
but as if our hearts were past feeling, we are insensible both of sin and
wrath. O! I hear some cry out of hard times; but there is much more reason to
cry out of hard hearts. We are too much like Gideons dry fleece, and like the
Mountains of Gilboa, or rather like Jonah fast asleep; though the Winds blow,
the Seas roar, and make a noise, and we are ready to be dashed every hour
against the Rocks. I confess Israel was an hard hearted people; but yet they
mourned, Psa. 137.1.
they cried with a voice, they wept when they remembered Zion: So have not we:
The Rod of old was the only engine, by which Moses was to work all his
miracles, on the Rock, on the Egyptians, on the more obdurate Israel: But the
Rock, Pharaoh, and Israel, were sooner sensible of the Rod, than we have been.
How do we evacuate and reproach, frustrate and defame all Gods Methods? and
pronounce to all the world, that God has miscarried in his design upon us? God
has not yet heard Ephraim bemoaning himself. Jer. 31.18.
It is true God has chastised us; but we have not been as sensible as the
Bullock, nor so soon tamed: we have not been mended under the Rod, nor edified
by the doleful Lectures, that God has read us. Therefore thus says the Lord
God, Woe to the bloody City, Ezekiel 24.9.10, 11, 12, 13.
I will even make the pile for fire great. Heap on wood, kindle the fire,
consume the flesh, and spice it well, and let the bones be burnt: Then set it
empty upon the coals thereof, that the brass of it may be hot, and may burn,
and that the filthiness of it may be molten in it, that the scum of it may be
consumed. She has wearied her self with lies, and her great scum wene not
forth out of her: her scum shall be in the fire. In thy filthiness is lewdness,
because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee.
Jerusalem shall be burnt, and why? In thy filthiness is lewdness, thou art
obstinate, hardened in wickedness: Obstinacy in Sin is worse than the Sin it
self. Jerusalem had Prophets, Ordinances, Sabbaths, Sacrifices, Mercies,
Judgments, by which God would have purged her, but she was not purgged, She
did not humble herself for her sins, the scum went not off. Therefore thus
says the Lord God, Woe to the bloody City, Ezekiel. 24.6.
to the pot, whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it, bring
it out piece by piece, let no lot fall on it. Thou have stricken them, but they
have not grieved, Jer 5.3.
thou have consumed them; but they have refused to receive correction, they
have made their faces harder than a rock, they have refused to return. This is
a Nation, Jer. 7.28.
that obeys not the voice of the Lord their God, nor receives correction.
How many years has the word of the Lord come to y^^, Jer. 4.4.
that you should circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the
foreskin of your hearts, ye men of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, lest
my fury come forth like Fire, and burn, that none can quench it; because of the
evil of your doings? And has not the Lord cut off in his fierce anger the horn
of Israel, and burned against us like a flaming fire, Lam. 2.3, 4.
which devoureth round about? He has poured out his fury like Fire. And yet
how few behold the desolations that he has made? How many look on this
Judgment as chance, But consider not the hand of the Lord that is gone out
against us? Do not some say in the pride and stoutness of their hearts, Isa.
9.10. Isa. 26.9.
the Bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the Sycamores
ar^ cut down, but we will change them into Cedar^? When judgment is executed,
and Gods hand is lifted up, men should fear, and learn righteousness; But if
you will still go on in wickedness, God will reckon with you for despising him,
and his judgments. I doubt not but thousands and ten thousands are sensensible
of poverty coming in upon them and theirs, as an armed man, irrisistably: But I
fear we are too insensible that it is the Lords controversy with us. How soon
was the Pestilential Judgment forgot? Were not men as vile Drunkards,
Sensualists, Sabbathbreakers, Oppressors, and Unclean since the dreadful
Plague, as before? and others as proud and formal since the Plague, as before?
That Arrow shot so remarkably from Heaven, was soon forgot: And now that the
fury of the Lord has been upon the City (and therein upon the whole Land) in
the late shower of Fire, I am afraid, that even this Dispensation will be
forgotten, at least not improved as it ought to be: Many and many a time have I
feared, Isa. 29.10.
that the Lord has powered upon us the spirit of a deep sleep, and that the
Judgment on Ariel, is descended on us: Like men in a deep sleep, we are not
able to with-stand the Judgment, and like such, we have been insensible who
has wounded us, or why we are wounded: We have not considered the deserving
Cause, (Pride, Carelessness, Intemperance, Idleness, etc.) and what way to heal
our selves, and extricate our selves out of our miseries? Like a wild Bull in a
net, Isa. 51.20.
that can hamper and entangle it self more and more; but takes no course to
wind its self out of its misery. Who searches for the Achan, that has
troubled our Israel? Who sits down, and justifies God? Who condemns himself
for Pride, for contempt of the Gospel, for Luxury, for Idleness, for
Covetousness, and profaning Gods Sabbaths? The Lord humble us; Jer. 6.29.
for the Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed, and yet the Founder melts
in vain. The Lord took it ill from the men of Judah, when they were not turned
by the signs he gave them by Ezekiel, When he was to take a Tile, Ezekiel. 4.1,
2, 5, 11, 12.
and pourtray Jerusalem upon it, and lay siege against it, etc. When he was to
lie upon his left side 390. days: When he was to drink Water by measure, and
to bake his Cakes with the dung of man: When he was to take a Rasor, and shave
his head and beard, and to burn a third part with sire, Ezekiel. 5.1, 2, 3.
and to smite a third part with a knife, and a third part to scatter in the
wind; and to bind up a few hairs in his skirts, and to take of them again, and
to cast them into the midst of the fire: When by these and such like signs,
they were not awakened out of their security, when they reformed not, when they
feared not the wrath and judgment of God; but said, It is not near, Ezekiel.
11.3, 23.
Let us build houses: Then the glory of the Lord went up from the midst of the
City, and stood upon the Mountain, which is on the East side of the City. And
when the glory departed, then. Thus says the Lord, of the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and of the Land of Israel, They shall eat their Bread with
carefulness, Ezekiel. 12.19, 20.
and drink their Water with astonishment, etc. And the Cities that are
inhabited shall be laid waste. Therefore, thus says the Lord God, As the
Vine-tree among the Trees of the Forest, which I have given to the fire for
fuel, so will I give the Inhabitants of Jerusalem. Ezekiel. 15.6, 7.
And I will set my face against them, and they shall go out from one fire, and
another fire shall devour them. Such ruins were to attend them, that Ezekiel
(though the Messenger of them) yet must sigh, Ezekiel. 21.5, 12.
with the breaking of his loins, and with bitterness; yea, he must cry and
howl, and smite upon his thigh. You may easily imagine, if God were so angry
with Judah for their insensibleness of his wrath, when it hung in the cloud of
threatenings and Types: How much more will he be provoked to fury, if we lay not
to heart those fearful signs and tokens of his wrath now that the cloud is
dissolved into the Pestilence, Sword, and Fire? Is. 16.11.
O that my bowels may sound like an Harp for England! O that my head were
waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, Jer. 9.1.11.
that I might weep day and night! O that for the mountains I could take up a
weeping and wailing; because they are burnt up; because Jerusalem is made
heaps; because Gods fury went out like Fire, and burned that none could quench
it; because of the evil of their doings! O ye Sons of men, Jer. 21.12. Ezekiel.
24.2.
write you the name of the day, even of the same day, the God of Heaven set
himself against Jerusalem this same day. How often did we profane that day by
gluttony, ex^essive feastings, gossipings within doors, by unnecessary walks
and sports, without doors? How did we cry, when will the Sabbath be gone, Amos
8.5, 8, 9.
that we may attend our callings? Shall not the Land tremble for this? and
every one mourn, that dwells therein? Your Sun is gone down at Noonday. God
has turned your Feasts into mourning, and all your Songs into Lamentation. How
dare you now make mirth? What, Now drink Wine in Bowls? The Lord take away the
heart of stone, and give us hearts of flesh. The Lord power out a spirit of
mourning upon all the Land, that we may lay to heart the wonderful effects of
Gods sore displeasure. Woe to them that are at ease, and are not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph. Shall not the Isles shake at the sound of thy fall? Amos
6.1.6.
Shall not the Princes of the Sea come down from their Thrones, and lay away
their Robes, and put off their broidered garments, and cloth themselves with
trembling, Ezekiel. 36.15, 16, 17, 18.
and sit upon the ground, and be astonished at thee? and take up a lamentation
for thee, and say, how art thou destroyed? thou that wast inhabited by
Seafairing men, the renowned City which was strong in the Soa, She and her
Inhabitants? Now let the Isles tremble in the day of thy fall. Come behold the
works of the Lord, Psalm. 46.8.
what desolations he has made in the earth. Desolations by the Sword,
Desolations by the Pestilence, and desolations by Fire. Some smart that others
may Fear. Now all these things happen for examples, and they are written for
our admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come. 1 Cor. 10.11.
God means not only to punish, but to teach, and not only the present
generation, but all generations to the end of the World? O the much precious
blood that the Sword has devoured! How many thousands has the Pestilence
swept away? And now one of the most flourishing Cities of the Christian World,
famous for the Gospel, famous for frequence of Traffic, in a few days lies
buried in Ashes, or Rubbish. If we have any bowels of pity, let us weep with
them that weep, let us commiserate the grievous sufferings of multitudes of
Men: Women, and Children. It is certainly now, a time to weep, Eccles. 3.4.
Jer. 7.28.
and not to laugh. And must our Jeremiah's complain of England. This is a
Nation that obeys not the voice of the Lord their God, nor receives
correction? If some amongst us are sensible of the heat of the Fire, and other
plagues, yet we mourn not, Isa. 28.21.
we do not habitually mourn for those sins and provocations, which have moved
God to do this work, this strange work upon us and against us: Possibly some
cry and howl for the Goods and Houses, that are consumed by Fire, and for their
Friends whom the Sword and Pestilence have devoured: But how few are mourning
in secret for their contempt of Christ and his Gospel, for controlling and
checking the Spirit of God, for their spending away so much time and strength
to get a little money, and neglecting to give all diligence to make their
calling and election sure? you have mourned for your silver shrines; but not
for the pride, carelessness, and covetousness of your hearts: you fear poverty
and reproach will be your portion; but why do you not fear what will be the
issue of the hardness of your hearts? Hear ye the Word of the Lord, They are
not humbled unto this day, Jer. 44.10, 11. Jer. 23.39, 40.29.17, 18.
neither have they feared, nor walked in my Law, therefore thus says the Lord
of Hosts, the God of Israel, Behold I will set my face against you for evil,
and to cut off all Judah. I even I will utterly forget you, and I will forsake
you, and the City that I gave you, etc. and will bring an everlasting reproach
upon you, etc. And if you will not, after all this, turn unto the Lord, read
your doom, I will make them like vile figs that cannot be eaten, they are so
evil, etc. I here publish my fears to all the World: I am afraid that our view
of the desolations that God has wrought, are too short and transient, and that
some want humanity in their being insensible of the plagues and miseries of
their Brethren, and more want the spirit of mourning for their own and other
men's sins. Nay are there none of the Race of Ammon left, Ezekiel. 25.3, 6, 7.
Prove. 17 5. Luke 13, 2, 3, 4, 5. Ezekiel. 25.8 9. Psalm. 137.7. Ezekiel. 12.13, 14.
who say Aha against Gods Sanctuary, when it was profaned, and against the Land
of Israel, when it was desolate? at least rejoiced in heart? Behold God will
stretch out his hand upon such a people. He that is glad at cala^^ities, shall
not be unpunished. The Tower of Silo fell to lead others to repentance. If any
will scoff and blaspheme as the Moabites, by saying, the House of Judah is like
unto all the Heathen, who have not suffered more, nor so much as they: God
knows how to open the side of Moab, and to let in the Sword and ruin upon
their strongest Cities: And if the Children of Edom, who were long ago for
razing down our Jerusalem to the foundation thereof, rejoice, God will remember
them, and make them desolate, and lay his vengeance on Edom: And if any of the
bordering Philistines shall deal by revenge, V. 15, 16, 17.
and take vengeance with a despightfull heart, God knows how to stretch out his
hand upon them, and to destroy the remnant of the Sea coast, and to execute
great vengeance upon them: And if any of our Neighbors round about shall with
Tyrus say against Jerusalem, Aha she is broken, Ezekiel. 26.2, 3, 4.
that was the gates of the people, she is turned unto us, we shall be
replenished, now that she is laid wast: God can soon stoop these Mountains by
causing many Nations to come up against them: as the Sea causes his Waves to
come up, and scrape their dust from them, and make them like the top of a Rock.
Amos 3.2.
God cannot bear it that the Heathen should be insulting, whilst he is
correcting his own: and therefore God has confirmed it by an Oath that he will
deal severely with such Mockers. Zeph. 2.8, 9, 10.
I have heard of the reproach of Moab, etc. therefore as I live says the Lord
of Hosts, the God of Israel, surely Moab shall be as Sodom, etc. Zech. 1.15.
And I am sore displeased with the Heathen, that are at ease, for I was but a
little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction. Leave we these to
the Righteousness of God, and let us return to our selves: whilst they are
insulting, Isa. 64.4. Numb. 16. Job 31.3.
may we be on humbling, and repenting Work. God is come down, and has done
terrible things, that we looked not for: we have been visited; but not with the
common visitation of all people. God has strange punishments for the workers
of iniquity. And no wonder, when strange Oaths have been minted of later times
that our Forefathers never heard of: there have been strange ways of
Epicurisme and Gluttony: strange ways of uncleanness: strange unknown fashions
in apparel: and for Fraud, cheating and Tricks of Legerde main they have fresh
and new, and frequent every day. Has not God then a just controversy with his
people? If the Lord draw out Judgments that were never heard of before, and
make us signs and wonders to the world, and an astonishment to all Nations, may
we not justify his proceedings? If we exceed our Forefathers Sins, what wonder
is it, if we feel Judgments, that they were never sensible of?

CHAP. XXXIX. What use Professors should make of this Gospel-Glass.
ANd now (Professor) to all thy former Sins, Quarrel not with the Glass.
do not add this great abomination, that, having had the Glass of the Word, so
faithfully revealing many of thy sins to thee, thou should go away and strait
forget what manner of man thou have been. Let not Satan tempt thee to quarrel
with the enterprise; for that the Glass is not broad enough to show to thee all
thy stains and deformities: know here are enough, presented to thy view, to lay
thee low enough in Hell without Repentance. Perhaps also by thy corrupt reason
thou can plead for one or two particulars, or bring it under debate, whether
they are stains or not? But know to the confusion of thy face, here are spots,
unquestionable spots discovered, and such as are not the spots of Gods
Children. But would thou improve this (or any other such) Glass for the good
of thy Soul? Let Gods Honor, and thy precious Souls everlasting welfare
persuade thee to receive in meekness and love the following Counsels.

1. Reflect on all the particulars, Improve it for promoting Consideration and
Meditation.
that thou may see what are thine iniquities. Do not behold only, and so go
away: be not contented with slight apprehensions; but muse, that the Fire may
burn: Consider how often in the Bill of Attainder, thy Conscience tells thee thou
art guilty. O! ponder these things in thine heart; chew the Cud, recoyl upon
thy self: Let the Lord hear one the more for thee crying out what have I done?
How have I provoked the Lord? By meditation retain the memory of thy sins, with
all their aggravations, as much as thou can: set past sins in present view,
and possess the sins of thy youth, as if they were just now committed: now
track the abominations of your lives: charge this duty upon thy own Soul, as
that which must be done, as thou will answer it at thy peril before God and
Angels. Perhaps hitherto you have forgot your corrupt lives, and hearts, as you
have your natural faces forthwith; but let it be so no more for Christ's sake.
Consider not only how many of these sins you have been guilty of; but how
frequently, and for how many days, or years, thou have lived in some of these
abominations, having often been guilty of the same sin; though perhaps thou
knew'st it to be a sin, and have prayed and resolved against it: And because
the particulars may seem little sins (though in a sense there is no little sin;
because there is no little God, and sins have their accents and aggravations
from the person, who is affronted) yet because it is with sin, as it is with
stones, you may carry this stone and that stone without trouble, with much
case; but when many little stones are heared together, they become weighty and
heavy to bear: therefore I advise that by serious meditation you sum them up
jointly, till your backs, or rather your hearts be broken, and you take up the
language of the Prophet, My sins are passed over my head, Psalm. 38.4.
they are become too heavy for me to bear: Reflect not only on thy Pride, and
carelessness, and other particular miscarriages; but put all the Items into one
main Sum, that it may stoop thy heart.

2. Confession.
Away now, and present thy self before the great and holy God, whom thou have
provoked by these, by all these great abominations, and upon thy knees give
glory to him by confessing to him as many of thy sins, as thou can remember,
with all their aggravating circumstances. Josh. 7.19.
It is the same advice, that Joskuah gave to A^chan, tell God what thou have
done, and what thou^^ast left undone, Hide it not from him: Confess to God all
thy low unworthy thoughts of him, all thy enmity against him, his Laws, and
People, etc. Go, and confess what envy, what malice, what ranckour has lain in
thine heart against thy Neighbor: Confess to the Lord how often thou have spoke
evil of dignities, of the blood royal, of the favorites of Heaven, of the Sons
and Daughters of the most High, who were more righteous than thy self. Many
times thou have bragged with the Pharisee, what sins thou have not been guilty
of: now confess what thou have been guilty of. I know if thou art an Hypocrite
thou art loath to bring it forth, thou think it will be a shame to thee; But
let me tell thee, it is a shame that thou art guilty of so much sin; but it is
no shame to acknowledge it. Only in your Confessions take this advice. Set your
sins in order: enumerate the several sins you have been guilty of, and though
every numerical thought and Act of sin is not possible to be cited; yet give
diligence to find out as many as thou can, and spread them before the Lord.

Bring forth especially that sin or sins, All your special sins.
which are thy special sins, whereby thou have most provoked God. David gave a
touch at his Sins in the beginning of his Penitential Psalm; but his Adultery
and Blood-guiltiness lay most upon him, and he is never at ease till he has
vomited them up in confession.

Be sure then that, Of all of them.
upon a review of this, or any better Catalogue, thou cry unto thy heart, as
Samuel to Jesse, Are here all thy Children? Are here all thy sins? He that does
not confess a sin, has a mind to commit to that Sin again. An hypocrite will
confess some, nay many, sins, but there is one sin he is loath to bring forth:
it is a Jacobs Benjamin, Job. 20.1^.
they would keep it back: one sweet bit is covered under the Tongue. But
certainly it is extreme folly to impose upon God; for he knows every thought of
thy heart, yea he knows thy thoughts before thou know them: he knew what
thoughts Israel would have in the Wilderness. David lay somewhile under this
piece of Hypocrisy: he kept silence a long time, which made his bones wax old,
his moisture was turned into the drought of Summer: Psalm. 32.3, 4, 5.
But at length (though it was long first) his sin came out, I acknowledge my
sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said I will confess my
Transgressions unto the Lord. Be not like Judas: he confesses his betraying of
Christ, but there was a close sin which he would not uncover, viz. his
covetousness. I meet with many who will confess such sins as are most in
fashion, viz. their dullness under Ordinances, their formality, their vain
thoughts in duty, etc. But when did you hear Professors confessing their envy
at the gifts, graces, and privileges of their Brethren. Paul's sin was
persecuting Gods Church, and how ready is he to tell God and all the world of
it? A good Copy to write after.

Bring forth the aggravating circumstances, With all their aggravations.
and lay them before the Lord. Some confess sin, but their confessions are
accompanied with strange excuses and extenuations, viz. it was done through the
instigation of the Devil, it was done inconsiderately, etc. Such are not for
shaming themselves before the Lord; but like Lawyers, plead as well as they can
for a bad cause. Avoid all extenuating Confessions: Father not thy Brats upon
the Devil, lest thy account swell even for wronging Satan, when indeed thou
wast enticed and drawn aside by thy own lust. Beware of this folly; for know
that extenuating sin aggravates it, and aggravating extenuates sin before the
Lord.

Let thy Confession be ingenuous and free. Freely.
Sometimes Conscience, like an overcharged Stomach, does so over-press men,
that they cannot hold, but must out with their uncleanness, etc. Thus it is
especially when the Horrors of Death have compassed them round. This
confession of sin proceeds not from hatred of sin, and displicence with it; but
from fear of punishment: they hope if they confess sin any how, any way, they
shall obtain mercy, and this makes many throw up what otherwise they would hide
for ever. But O! that you would be more ingenuous in your acknowledgements than
Pharaoh and Judas were, who should say something upon the Wrack, when Gods Hand
and Conscience pressed them down. I know what you will do upon the perusing this
sad Catalogue, if God do not sanctify the book unto you: you will confess sin,
but not your own: you will fall a censuring the person or party you do not
love, crying out O! how guilty are such and such before the Lord? O! how is God
dishonored by them? how does Religion suffer by them? yea, but how much has
Gods Name suffered by thy lightness, frothiness, pride, sensuality,
backsliding? etc. O! run with tears, and confess all thine own sins before
God. God requires it, Only acknowledge thine iniquity, Jer. 3.13
that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy God: And God tells you it is
a means to obtain remission, 1 John 1.9.
If ye confess your sins he is just and faithful to for give. Some say,
confess, and be hanged; but I say confess, or you will be damned. If you had
rather be damned than be shamed, thou love thy Name better than thy Soul: The
Lord be merciful to thee, or else thou will lose both, when Christ shall come
to Judge the Earth; for then whatsoever is hid, shall be published.

Let your Confession be frequent, Frequently.
yea constant, until at least God has done away thy sin. It may be you may
fear your heart is so hard, that you shall but sin by a formal dull confession,
or enumeration of your sins; But yet do it as well as thou can, and if thy
heart be hard, go, and complain of it to God, and beg him to take away the
heart of stone: let the sight of this hardness drive thee the soonner and the
oftener to the Throne of Grace, and there lie before the Lord, till he cleave
the Rock, that the waters gush out, till thy tears vye with thy sins: Do as our
English Martyr, who ceased not his Confessions till his heart was melted and
broken for his sins.

3. Contrition.
Labor to get your hearts broken for all your Rebellions against God, for all
the impurities of your hearts and lives. Son of Man, Ezekiel. 21.9, 10.
Prophecy and say, thus says the Lord, say, A Sword, a Sword is sharpened, and
also furbished: it is sharpened to make a great slaughter: it is furbished that
it may glister: should we then make mirth? Heb. 12.25. Ezekiel. 22.19, 20, 21.
Even our God has been a consuming fire: and shall not we mourn? The house of
Israel is become dross, even the dross of silver, and therefore God has
gathered them into the midst of Jerusalem, as they gather silver and brass,
iron, and lead, and tin, into the midst of the Furnace, to blow the fire upon
it, and has blown upon them in the Fire of his Wrath, and they have been
melted in the midst thereof; and shall not we lament? Yea God has been
exceedingly dishonored by Hypocrisy, falsehood, breaking of Vows, Murmurings,
cruelties, neglects of his Worship, etc. Should we then make mirth? Have not we
great cause, even more cause than ever any people had, to tremble, not only at
the dreadful Judgments of God, that are already upon us, and that hang over
our heads, but at the hellish impieties, that swarm in our hearts? View not
only this imperfect Catalogue, but look from Genesis to the Revelation, and
what ever filthiness wa^ found in Men or Kingdoms, may be foun^ upon our
skirts: and shall not we hang up our harps? refuse to be comforted? shall not
we lie down prostrate before God, and pour out water before the Lord, and weep
till we can weep no more? Tremble O my heart! under all these provocations: And
let your hearts be as the leaves of a treee that is shaken by the Whirlwind.
What so many hellish lusts to swarm in thy heart? What guilty of so many
millions of iniquities against the God of Heaven, and yet thou secure, light,
vain and frothy? I profess if I did not know what a stone I have within, I
should wonder all the day long, how it is possible we can stand under so much
guilt without shreiks, cries, and lamentations: I should wonder how you eat,
and drink, and sleep, how you can laugh or sing, whilst God is so provoked. Can
I think that man lives, who is not moved by the weight of a mountain on his
back. Professor, thou have that which is heavier than Mountains of lead upon
thy Soul, and yet thou hardly feel it: Thou do not groan under that, which
drew not only tears of water, but of blood, yea clots of blood, from the eyes
and veins of Jesus Christ. I wonder how you continue your claims to Christ, how
you can call God, Father, Christ, Redeemer, whilst you have so little love to
him, and whilst you were never pricked at the heart, for all the injuries that
you and others have done him: Whom you love, you are troubled for, if he be
injured, by your selves, or others: But where is your Soul-trouble for your own
and other men's sins? Are not many as sensual as ever? as great servants to the
flesh as ever? Have you not your Feasts and Entertainments as formerly? Though
it be a day, Isa. 22.12, 13, 14.
wherein the Lord calls to weeping and mourning, to baldness and girding with
sackcloth: yet behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating
flesh, and drinking wine: And has not the Lord sent you a word, that may make
your knees to tremble? Is not the handwriting plain? It was revealed in mine
ears, by the Lord of Hosts, Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you,
till you dye, says the Lord God of Hosts. O! Fall down amazed, fill thy Spirit
with horror, away into thy Closet: though thou art in the gall of bitterness,
and bond of iniquity; yet pray to the Lord, if perhaps the thoughts of thy
heart, and the wickedness and profaneness of thy life, and particularly thy
unseasonable mirth, and fleshly indulgencies, may be forgiven. How can you
trade with so much guilt upon you? You have had your pleas for your
covetousness, and inordinate affections to the World, that God bids you provide
for your own: But what think thou of thy Soul? Is that no part of thine own?
Is that no piece of thy charge? O! Provide for thy Soul: Thy Soul cannot be
safe, whilst stained with so many thousand impurities, which were never mourned
over to this day. O! Let sorrow enter into the very inwards of thy heart, and
let the insupportable pressures of sin sink thy very Soul: Zech. 12.10.
Mourn as the tender Mother for her only Son: be in bitterness, so as thou
can not relish those things, which thou have hitherto followed with so much
eagerness: Let the loathsomeness of thy sins be continually before thine eyes,
as thy standing dish: So it was with Repenting David, Psa. 51.3. Lam. 5.16.
Lam. 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 13, 21.
My sin is ever before me: So it was with the Church, Woe to us, we have
sinned. It is true, they were under fearful Plagues: How does the City sit
solitary, that was full of people? How is she become a Widow, She that was
great among the Nations, and Princess among the Provinces, how is she become
tributary? -- Among all her Lovers, she has none to comfort her, all her
Friends have dealt treacherously with her, etc. She dwells among the Heathen,
she finds no rest: all her Persecutours overtook her between the straits. The
ways to Zion mourn, etc. She came down wonderfully, and she had no Comforter,
etc. The Enemy has magnified himself, etc. From above has he sent fire into
my bones, and it prevails against them, etc. All mine Enemies have heard of
my trouble, they are glad that thou have done it. Lam. 2.3, 15, 16.
The Lord has burned against Jacob like a flaming fire, which devoureth round
about, etc. All they that pass by, clap their hands at thee: they hiss, and
wagg the head, at the Daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the City, that men
call, the Perfection of Beauty, Lam. 4.6, 11, 16.
the Joy of the whole Earth? All thine Enemies have opened their mouth against
thee: they hiss, and gnash the teeth, and say, We have swallowed her up:
Certainly this is the day we looked for, We have found, We have seen it. The
punishment of the iniquity of the Daughter of my people, is greater than the
punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment, and no hand
stayed on her. The Lord has accomplished his fury, he has powered out his
fierce anger, and has kindled a fire in Zion, and it has devoured the
foundations thereof. The anger of the Lord has divided them, etc. Lam. 5.2, 8,
10, 11.
Our Inheritance is turned to Strangers: our Houses to Aliens. Our Necks are
under Persecution, We labor, and have no rest. Servants have ruled over us:
there is none to deliver us out of their hand. Our skin was black like an Oven:
because of the terrible Famine. They ravished the Women in Zion, and the Maids
in the Cities of Judah. But yet they mind not their misery, so much as their
sin, Woe unto us; for we have sinned. In order to the promoting of this godly
sorrow, I do importune thee, with the highest fervency I can, that thou
separate some extraordinary time, to humble thy self, by Fasting and Prayer,
that God would give thee Repentance, for thine own, and thine other men's sins:
Perhaps to this day thou have never observed one in order to the getting of a
broken heart. O that I could now prevail with thee; for this is the means, that
God has blessed again and again: On such days God has softened many an heart,
and cast out the Devil of security and hardness, which could not be cast out in
ordinary times of waiting upon God: Let thy main request on that day be for a
deep consideration of all thy sins, with all their several aggravations, and a
deep humiliation for them. O! I beseech you, if you have any love to Christ, to
the credit of Religion, to your perishing Souls, break through all businesses
and impediments, and retire your selves, and fall down at the footstool of God,
more solemnly, than ever you did: If you are, by the consideration of your
provocations, humbled in the very dust, be sure to keep Conscience tender; Let
not your convictions dye, strike again and again, smite on the thigh again and
again, whilst the Iron is hot: This fire may be kept alive, by bringing new
fuel to it. Labor exquisitely to afflict your Souls, that you should be so
foolish, so vile, as under Christ's Livery, to commit so great, and so hideous
abominations. Take words, and say, O the Light that I have abused! O the means
of Grace that I have slighted! O the little service that I have done to Christ!
O the many dis-services! Let these things cut, and grave, and afflict, and
humble thy Soul exceedingly from morning to evening, and from evening to
morning, till God be pacified toward thee: beware lest the motions of a lazy
heart cause thee to desist sooner. A patient that has had a long disease, must
continue in the use of the prescriptions, till the ill humor be purged away.

4. Indignation.
Let your sorrow be accompanied with detestation. See all your sins and loath
them, and your selves too. This is promised, they shall loath their ways and
doings which are not good? O! how much sin have we confessed, which yet we have
secretly hugged in our hearts? Labor to have your hearts rise against your
pride, hypocrifie, etc. Hate sin not only for Hell, but as Hell, yea hate your
selves for your sins, yea hate your selves that you can hate your sins no more.
O that my hatred of my Lusts might be greater than ever my love was unto them!
I wish from my Soul Professors were more apprehensive of Gods Judgments, that
are upon them and the Nation for their sins: I wish many of us were come up to
the frames of the hardhearted Jews, and expressed so much tenderness, as they
did, when Gods hand was heavy upon them, their sins also were an heavy burden:
Hos. 7.14.
In their affliction they sought God early: they mourned and humbled themselves
very much; though with the removal of their trouble, their sorrows wore away.
However be not satisfied with this sorrow; but labor for such sorrow as David
had, when he was wounded in his heart for sin, though Nathan told him his sin
was forgiven, yet he continued his sorrows for his great transgressions: Labor
I beseech you for tears of hatred and indignation, be greatly displeased with
your selves, because you have so foolishly and wretchedly dishonored God, and
ventured your eternal undoing; and if yet thine eyes be not like the Fishponds
of Heshbon for thy sins, take words, and sament before God thine hardness of
heart, that thou should so grievously offend and provoke God, so good, so
gracious a God, and that notwithstanding thine heart should remain unbroken.

5. Supplication.
Let there be added hearty cries to God for pardon of all these and all other
abominations. Who forgives him, that scorns to sue for Remission? Here is your
work in this day: the Devil and a false heart will put you upon other work; but
this is your present work: Cant. 1.6.
They made me the keeper of the Vineyards; but mine own Vineyard I have not
kept. But O! do not leave the work that God sets you about. I know it is your
duty to provide for the bodies of your Children; but consider the danger of thy
Soul, what guilt thou art under, and give the Lord no rest till he has blotted
out all thy sin, and art assured that he will remember it no more. Relieve not
thy self with the general bounty of God, or with the free grace and rich mercy
of God, whilst thou neglectest to cry to God for grace and mercy. He will be
sought unto by the house of Israel. Prize thy condition, that thou art alive to
pray: (thou might have been in Hell, there to howl for ever and ever) Seek
the Lord, whilst he may be found: Seek in time before it be too late: And if
thou doubtest whether thou have an interest in Christ and the promises, because
of thy hideous transgressions; yet remember the gracious words that tell once
from the mouth of Christ to the Samaritan: John 4.10.
If thou did know the gift of God, thou would have asked, and he would have
given thee living water. Though thou art unworthy of Childrens bread, and have
deserved to be cast forth among the dogs; yet thou have to do with a bountiful
and merciful Lord: and therefore be not cast down, so as to be discouraged
from waiting on the Lord. It was ill said of him, why should I wait on the Lord
any longer? There is no hope. I would have thee take better words into thy
mouth, and say, Lord I am unworthy to be the object of thy mercy, unworthy to
live, worthy to be denied, because thou did call and I did not hear,
therefore if I call, thou may justly turn me off in thy fury: thou might
answer me by terrible things in righteousness, But deal not with me according
to my deservings: O! make me the great instance of the power of thy grace, let
thy mercy in pardoning be great, exceeding great O God!

Do not delay the suing out thy pardon, Without delay.
away quickly to the Throne of Grace. Remember Faelix put off his work till
some other time. There is danger in delays, lest your sense of sin and sorrow
for it vanish and decay: blow up the first sparks of grace, lest they go out
and dye again: take the first advantages of the grace of God. Have thou an
inclination to humble thy self, to pray, to seek Gods face, improve it quickly,
lest the wrath of God (who is nighly provoked already against thee) break form
upon thee, and there be no remedy. Do not you know that you have lost the sense
of the love of God? But have you also lost all sense of Gods wrath! Do not you
wonder you escape? that you are yet alive? that you are not free among the
dead: incorporated with the Hypocrites and damned crew? Will you, dare you, go
on in your hardness of heart? Will you treasure up wrath against the day of
wrath? O! God forbid. Lay by the world (thy false friend, thy treacherous Joab,
that has smitten to the earth, with its kisses, and its smiles) Here is a
business on which thy life, the life of thy precious Soul depends. Prepare to
meet thy God: wrath is gone out from the Lord, howl, weep, cry, it may be you
shall be hid is the day of the Lords wrath, it may be your sins shall be
forgiven. Though the law be a looking-glass to show you your spots (the Baver
under the law was made of looking-glosses) yet it cannot cleanse you: it is the
Gospel alone, that pardons Away ye wandering Sheep to the great Shepherd of
your Souls: Hebr. 13.20.
great he is in affection and love to his flock, he has laid down his life for
you, he has purchased you with his own blood. Nathans parable of the Ewe-Lamb
is most true of Christ, and his beloved Flock: he has nourished you up, and he
is willing to lay you in his bosom. View your great Surety this day. He came
under an Arrest for you, he has discharged the debt of all that come by faith
to him. Romans 4.25.
He was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification.
He is willing the incestuous (when penitent) should not have his wounds lie
undressed, lest Satan take any advantage thereby. Act. 20.21.
I^ there ^e Repentance toward God, let there be Faith toward the Lord Jesus
Christ. If he has given you the forerunner, you have his pledge, his pawn,
that he will forgive you. Do not say, God hears not sinners, whilst there is
a Fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness. All thy sins cannot shut it;
because it is opened to wash away sin.

6. Add to Supplication Resolution. Resolution.
How can you pardon your very Child, that will not promise to do so no more?
Let it be in the purpose of your hearts to neglect meditation no more, to keep
up bitterness among Christians no more, etc. Enter into an holy Vow against
your sins. Be a through Protestant, protest against the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil. It will be thus if your hearts be thoroughly humbled for your sins,
and truly inflamed against them. O say! what have I to do with Idols any more?
O that you were very resolute, come Life, come Death, come Heaven, come Hell;
yet I will change my course: I will not (through Gods grace helping me) do as I
have done, omit as I have omitted. If you are not very peremptory to resist
Satan and Sin, not to yield unto Temptation, you encourage the Enemy to tempt
you, whilst you are not resolved to deny his (...) citations. That woman is in
danger of new solicitations to uncleanness, who does not resolutely bid
defiance to the first Temptation of the Ruffian. Perhaps you wonder, that after
many prayers, etc. your sin still prevails; But know (says one) sin will be
your Conqueror, if you be not resolved to be its enemy. Till resolution
against all sin be wrought in you, God will hate all your prayers for the
pardon of your sins. He has an impudent forehead, a forehead of Brass, that
dares go in before God, and say: O Lord! I beseech thee to pardon my
worldliness, and earthly-mindedness, for I am not yet resolved to be Heavenly
minded: O Lord, pardon my envy, and I trust thou will do it, for yet I am
unresolved to part from it: Pardon my Rebellions; for I am not yet resolved
whether I shall cease to be a Rebel. Believe it, whilst you do not resolve to
hate sin, it is a clear sign you have nor a spiritual knowledge of its evil:
Did you in the light of the Spirit see sin in its nature, and in its bitter
effects, did you see it as utterly inconsistent with all real happiness, and as
the infallible and unavoidable precipice of your intolerable and eternal
damnation, this would make you hate sin, and to be irreconcilable to it.

But here I must give you this caution, In the strength of Christ.
that you raise not your resolutions on your own strength, for then you will
soon quit them by reason of your own weakness. When you bind your self by a Vow
against such a sin, take Christ into the Bond to be sure^y for you, to give you
help and strength to perform in the hour of temptation. Augustine professed
that though the thoughts of leaving his sins were once a great burden to him,
yet at length being peremptorily Resolved, he found it a most easy and
delightful thing to live without them. Friends, your sufferings may be nearer
than you are aware of: Your sands I am sure run fast, and no stop is put to
them: you may not expect that the shadow will go backward ten degrees, it may
rather go forward: you may hardly have one hours warning before you must remove
hence: how suddenly has God cut down the Cedars and the thistles amongst us?
O! in that day it will be as scalding lead to thee, that death and judgment
surprised thee, when thou had not so much as resolved to leave thy cursed
Rebellions against thy God.

7. See what becomes of your Resolutions: Reformation. Psalm. 119.106.
how they are made good: thou have purposed not to offend, yea covenanted with
thy God for better obedience, yea thou have sworn to keep his righteous
Judgments. But have thou dealt uprightly with thy God? O! be not satisfied
with purposes and resolutions; but look to the performances of them. Blessed
are ye of God, if all the sins you have been convinced of, and have engaged
against, be now put away: if there be no more pride, covetousness, contention,
self-seeking, etc. returning with seven worse Devils upon you. I pray God we
may see (more than Resolution) some real and permanent effect of all your
Confessions, Sorrows, and Resolves. O! O! O! how would it rejoice my Soul to
see an effectual alteration in the Faces, and Lives, and Conversations of
Professors? How shall I bless God for ever, if by seeing your Faces in this
imperfect Glass, you be transformed, and your hearts and Eves be put into a new
frame of obedience? Among all the sig^ts in the World, none sadder than to see
multitudes, that had their Faces Zion-wards now facing about to the vanities of
the Gentiles. O! how glorious, how desirable a sight will it be to see these
returning with weeping and supplication.

Here remember your Reformation must be general and special, General
O! Labor to do as much for God and Grace, as you have done for the World and
Self. As ye have yielded your members servants to iniquity unto iniquity: Romans
6.19.
So now yield you members Servants of Righteousness unto Holiness. Redeem all
former omissions by a double diligence: you having idled away much of your
time, had need spur up your selves. See that you walk circumspectly, not as
Fools, but as Wise, redeeming the time.

But it is not only a general Reformation that I advise you to: Special.
Watch also and pray against those sins by which you have most dishonored God.
If thou a^^ recovered of a dangerous disease, thou will general^y me a good
diet; but especially get Antidotes and Preservatives against that disea^e thou
wast so lately cured of. O, where the enemy has made the greatest breaches,
there let there be double guards, and double ^o^^^cations. Be Tertullians, true
penitents: Nonvult iterum Divinae misericordiae oneri, etc. Tert.
He would not burden the Spirit of God, again to deliver him from that sin.
Follow a worthy Pattern, When David had shed blood, and had prevailed with God
to pardon that sin, afterward, though he longed for the waters of Bethlehem,
yet he abstains, and checks himself, because it did but hazard the blood of his
Captains.

CHAP. XL. Motives to make sueh use thereof.
ANd now (to hasten to a conclusion) O that it would please God to make my
words as an Hammer, Motives to let our hearts be broken for and from our Sins.
to break the Rocks! O that I may be thus useful to your Souls! O that
somewhat at last may be hinted, that may, through the blessing of Go^, break
your hearts for, and from sin! that may promote your Repentance for your own,
and your othermens sins! And indeed unless your hearts be broken for sin, they
will never be broken from sin; But the more bitterness of Spirit you are in for
sin, the more probability there is you will not return unto sin. When men have
furfetted upon a Dish, and are greatly afflicted and pained by it, the more
unlikely they are to return again unto that Dish. That is certain (says Mr.
Buroughs) either a man's sin will make an end of his mourning, or his mou^ning
will make an end of his sin. Yea, if your hearts be not broken for other men's
sins, they are not kindly broken for your own sins. You will never put it out
of all doubt that your sorrow is right and genuine, unless you mourn for
others, as well as your own, sins; for it will always be objected, that if Sin
as Sin were your Burden, if Sin as dishonouring God, as wounding Christ, as
grieving the Spirit, then other men's sins being reslexions on the Authority and
Will of the great God, Father, Son, and Spirit, should have some considerable
weight upon your Souls. The truth is, others sins become thine if thou know
them, and mournest not for them. O then! In what a case are all the hardened
jolly Professors, who can make a sport of Drunkeness, Uncleanness,
Superstition, Perjury, etc. in others. Consider therefore by the Help of this
Glass others sins, as well as thine own to help on thy brokeness of heart for
and from sin. Psalm. 119.158.
Behold (with David) the transgressour, and be grieved; because they keep not
Gods word: Let your Souls (with Lot) be vexed: there are greater sins found
among Professors in England, than were in Sodom: Let thy Soul be (as his was)
as in Hell, as upon the Rack. How can you evidence that you are translated from
death to life, because you love the Brethren, whilst you are not troubled to
see them wounding and damning their souls by their sins: you are grieved to see
any Friends of yours in great hazards and dangers by the Sword, by Sickness, by
Fire; but the Souls of your Friends are in the greatest danger, yet you lament
not the sight of these deplorable spectacles. God forbid that any of you should
have grounds of hope to gain Liberties and outward Privileges by others
provocations, whilst all their sins become yours, whilst you are not humbled
for them. But to lay before you some Considerations, that may (set home by the
Spirit) draw water out of the Flint.

1. God is greatly incensed.
Should not your hearts be broken for and from sin, seeing sin has so incensed
God against the Land of your Nativity? Can you retire from the World, and
seriously consider the Prints of Gods displeasure against poor England, and yet
remain impenitent? Is it nothing to you, that God has for many years been
withdrawing from his Sanctuary in England? O! Your Ministers have had
miscarrying Wombs, and dry Breasts: Though they rose early, and sat up late,
were much in watchings, and in labors, for the Conversion and Edification of
Souls; yet how seldom have any been under the Pangs of the New Birth? How
seldom were any pricked at the heart? How seldom have any cried out, What
shall we do to be saved? And for others (concerning whom we hoped better
things) How have they shed their Leaf? How have they pined and withered away,
as to Practical Godliness? How have they lost that Seriousness, that
Heavenlyness, that Power of Godliness, which before they seemed to have had?
Your Ministers saw this, and lamented it, they acquainted you with it, invited
you to remember from whence you are fallen, to repent, and do your first works;
But yet You returned not unto the Lord. Should not this pierce your very
hearts? Is it nothing to you, that not only your selves, but so many
Professors in England, should lose their faithful and painful Ministers? Is it
nothing to you, for God to call home by Death, and otherwise, so many of his
Ambassadors, whom you have grieved, whom you have despised and affronted, and
who have been more burdened with your Pride, Earthliness, Divisions,
Sensuality, etc. than they are with their present Poverty and Dishonours, under
which they lie? What does it portend, save War and Hostility, when Ambassadors
are called home? And may not you fear, that the wrath of God is, and will be
against you, till there be no remedy? They mocked the Messengers of God, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
and despised his Words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord
arose against his people, till there was no remedy. If God will treat with you
no more: believe it, he will fight with you. And O! O! O! Who will set the
Briars and Thorns against him? He will go through them, he will consume them
in his wrath. Is it nothing to you, that there is yet such a Spirit of Division
in the Land? O! What heats and heart-burnings, what animosities and jealousies
are there? so that a Brother cannot trust a Brother. Is it nothing to you, that
God has been so long contending with the Land, by the Sword, and by the
Pestilence, and so lately by Fire? Is it nothing to you, that God permitted
that dreadful Fire in London to break forth about Three of the Clock on a Lords
Day morning? Did he not thereby cause his Sabbath in a manner to cease in
London? Did not he make his holy Day of Rest, a Day of labor and disquiet? Did
not he hereby as it were anticipate his Peoples conventions to expiate him, and
so drew them as it were off from the Remedy, that his hands being loosened, he
might punish, 2 Chronicles. 7.12. Deuteronomy. 9.14. Jer. 2.2.
and not be prevailed with to pardon? May we not say with Jeremiah, even upon
this account, The Lord has swallowed up all the Habitations of Jacob, and has
not pitied, he has thrown down in his wrath the strong Holds of the Daughter
of Judah, he has brought them down to the ground? Is it nothing, that at the
same time, God should send forth such a boisterous Wind, to fann and blow up
the Fire, East, West, South, and North, God therein executing the Judgment
threatened against Elam, Jer. 49.36.
of bringing the four Winds from the four Quarters of Heaven, etc. If the
punishment of one Element (says a late Writer) be dreadful, as the Water was
to the old World; and the Air is in Pestilential Infections; and the Earth was,
when it opened its mouth to swallow up Corah, and his company; how dreadful is
Gods punishing a Land or Person with double and treble Judgments in one? What
vengeance is that like to prove, which has Gods Armies of Fire and Wind
united? Is it nothing, that the Fire burned at some time contrary to the Wind,
and as it were in opposition to it, and was then as uncheckable, as when it had
the Winds raising and chasing it? Is it nothing, that in the drought of the
season, and the want of water, God seemed to hinder the application of Remora's
to both Wind and Fire? Was not therein the Judgment executed upon England in
its heart, which God threatened against the Chaldeans, a drought is upon her
Waters, and they shall be dried up; Jer. 50.38.
for it is a Land of graven Images, and they are madd upon their Idols? Is it
nothing, that the rational and probable anticipations of the constagrating
progresses of the Fire, which might have been, were hid from the eyes of those,
whose interest it would have been to have improved them? Did not God at that
time take courage from the mighty, and wisdom from the wise? Is it nothing,
that London, the great Bulwark of the Reformed Religion, against the assaults
and batteries of Popery and Profaneness, is in a great measure destroyed? But
(above all) Is it nothing, that generally there is so little sense of any of
these Judgments? The Wine of Astomshment is given us to drink, and we reel to
and fro like Drunkards; But alas! 2 Chronicles. 7.14.
Who humbles himself, and prays, and seeks Gods face, and turns from his
wicked ways, that God may heal our Land?

2. The sins of any one of us may be the Incendi^ aries.
Should not your hearts be broken for and from your sins, seeing the sins of
any one of you in particular may have been the great Incendiary? This is
certain, God has, for the delinquency of one man, yea for one sin, brought
Plagues upon many. If any thing will move thine heart, this will; but nothing
will without Gods concurse: The Lord fasten this nayl, the Lord fix this upon
thy Soul, and let it be as Frontlets between ^^ine eyes day and night. When
Achan was guilty of one sin, and that a secret one, when he had stolen a wedge
of Gold, when he had impropriated it to his own use, which God had destined to
another, he troubled the whole Church of God: the Armies of Israel fell before
the men of Ai, the generation of Gods curse, yea Joshua, their Prince became
dejected, and his communion with God was thereby for a while broken. And the
Lord said unto Joshua, get thee up; Josh. 7.10, 11, 12, etc. 22.20.
wherefore lie thou on thy face? Did not Achan the Son of Zerah commit a
trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the Congregation of
Israel? And that man perished not alone in his iniquity. The iniquity of Peor,
though committed long ago, yet raised a cloud of wrath, which was ready to
empty it self upon the whole Church of God for it many years after. Is the
iniquity of Peor too little for us, Josh. 22.17.
from which we are not cleansed to this day, although there was a Plague in the
Congregation of the Lord? The Gibeonites (who had craftily secured their Lives,
by an exchange for their Liberties) got an Oath from Saul, and almost 500.
years after, when this Covenant was broken, in the slaying of many of them, and
Saul was dead, the flourishing Church of God suffered three years Famine for
this Perjury. Then there was a Famine in the days of David, 2 Samuel 21.1.
three years, year after year, and David enquired of the Lord: And the Lord
answered, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house; because he slew the
Gibeonites. Manasseh sinned, and that cost the Liberties and Lives of many,
good as well as bad: Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of
his great anger, 2 Kings 23.26.
wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the Provocations
that Manasseh had provoked him withal. Pharaoh refused to give liberty to Gods
Church, to worship their God, and this brought unparalled Judgments and
Plagues upon the whole Land of Egypt. Amalecks abuse of Gods people was not
forgotten for an hundred years; but God took up an everlasting quarrel with
them; till he had rooten them out of the Earth; Thus says the Lord of Hosts, 1 Samuel 15.2.
I remember that which Amaleck did to Israel, how he laid wait for him in the
way, when he came up from Egypt. Yea, the Sins of one good man; have brought
down Plagues upon many. David (whether out of curiosity, or vainglory, or
confidence in an arm of flesh) would needs number the people, (a little sin in
comparison of what we are guilty of) yet it cost the lives of 70000. by the
Pestilence. So the Lord sent a Pestilence upon Israel, etc. 2 Samuel 24.15.
and there dyed of the people, from Dan even to Beershe^a, seventy thousand
men. Solomon was a good Prince, and yet by his sins he brought miserable
confusions on the most considerable part of the Church of Israel, by that great
revolt which it occasioned. Wherefore the Lord said to Solomon, 1 Kings 11.11.
For as much as this is done of thee, and thou have not kept my Covenant, and
my S^atutes, which I have commanded thee, I will surely rend the Kingdom from
thee, and will give it to thy Servant. Eli, a good man, and a good Magistrate,
yet because too indulgent to his Children, (a Vice common, but seldom
considered and bewailed) what a fearful Plague brought he upon his Posterity,
as well as himself? And the Lord said unto Samuel, Behold I will do a thing in
Israel, 1 Samuel, 3.11, 12, 13, 14.
at which both the ears of every one that hears it shall tingle. In that day
I will perform against Eli all things which I have spoken concerning his House:
When I begin, I will also make an end; for I have told him, that I will judge
his House for ever, for the iniquity which he knows; because his Sons made
themselves vile, and he restrained them not. And therefore I have sworn unto
the House of Eli, that the iniquity of Elies House shall not be purged with
sacrifice nor offering for ever. Luke 11.50, 51. Mat. 23.35, 36.
The blood of all the Prophets, (says Christ) which was shed from the
Foundation of the World, shall be required of this Generation, from the blood
of Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, which perished between the Altar and the
Temple: Verily, I say unto you, it shall be required of this Generation. And
yet who holds up his hand to Gods Bar, and cries, Guilty, Guilty? Who says as
David, when the Angel forraged among the People, 2 Samuel 24.17.
Let thy hand be against me; for these sheep, What have they done? We are
quicksighted enough, yea too much, to espy and aggravate the sins of others:
We expect fearful Plagues for others Adulteries, Drunkennesses, Swearing and
Blaspheming; But the Lord hearkeneth when we will own our Sins to be the
Incendiaries, Jer. 8.6.
saying, What have I done? And What have I done, to stop the mouths of so many
of Gods faithful Ministers, to unsheath the Sword, to bring forth the
destroying Angel, to kindle the dreadful Fire in London? Are there not such
sins amongst us, for which God has plagued much people? If secret sins of
particular Persons, have drawn down wrath on whole Nations, Why not thy
scandalous sins? Say no more, Such Opposition, Oppression, Idolatry,
uncleaness, etc. will bring in misery, as an armed man: but say, there is
danger lest God should make an utter end of poor England for my pride, for my
unthankfulness, for my trusting in an Arm of flesh, for my backslidings: O!
how many have I caused to fall by the Sword? and how many by the Pestilence?
And how many have I caused to be ruined by the Fire? Verily, if thou art guilty
of no other sin, save pride, yet thou can not clear thy self from being one
of Englands Incendiaries. O! how was the wrath of God upon Jerusalem, and
Judah, because Hezekiah's heart was lifted up? But Hezekiah rendered not again
according to the benefit done unto him; 2 Chronicles. 32.25.
for his heart was lifted up: therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon
Judah, and Jerusalem.

3. No Repentance, no returns of mercy, but more wrath.
Should not your hearts be broken for and from your sins, seeing without
repentance the mercies you are deprived of, because of your sins, will never be
returned, or not in mercy, yea greater judgments will follow? Unless you
return unto God, from whom you have departed, God will not return unto your
Souls. If ye forsake him, 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
he will forsake you, imports as much as, if you continue to forsake him, he
will continue to forsake you. If you repent not, God will not return your
liberties, your trade, his own Ordinances in purity and power, or at least he
will not return these, or any other mercies, you have sinned away, in mercy:
But you may expect greater judgments than ever yet you saw, to fall, not only
upon your selves and families, but upon the Land. Think not that they were the
greatest sinners in England, upon whom the Sword, or Pestilence, or Fire fell:
Remember Christ's I tell you Nay, Luke 13.3, 5. Luke 6.25.
but except you repent you shall all likewise perish. Woe unto you that laugh
now, for ye shall mourn and weep: And will you run the hazard of this dreadful
Woe? Will you run the hazarding of perishing all, and altogether? Is it not
better to mourn now, than to cry and howl in the pit of Hell for ever? God has
determined within his own breast, nay he has expressed this to be his pleasure
to the Children of men, that sooner, or later, all shall mourn for sin, either
in this life, or in the next: And is it not better to feel the weight here,
than on a death bed, or in Hell? What said a Ruffian once; when in the midst of
his jovial Companions he clapped his hand on his breast, and cried out well, one
day I must know what a wounded Conscience means. God is resolute in this, you
shall one time or other find it an evil and bitter thing to provoke him. And
shall this consideration nothing move you: I know this should not be the chief
ground of your sorrow: But yet Christ was no legal Preacher, when he cried out,
sin no more least a worse thing happen to you. Go thou sluggard to the Ant,
provide in Summer for the Winter. But O the great cheats that poor souls put
upon themselves! they hope, though they repent not, though they remain
careless, worldly, etc. yet others are not so careless as they: though they
fast not, yet they hope some do: though they spend not days in prayer, they
hope others do; and they hope to fare the better for them. This is like the
Doctrine of Rome: the Romanists teach that there are some opera paenalia, some
penitential works, that you may have others to do for you, and yet fare as well
as if you did them your selves; But for my part I shall as soon believe that I
shall be cured of the stone in the bladder, or of a filthy Leprosy by another
taking Physic for me, as that I shall be saved by another repentance. O! what
folly is this to take relief and sanctuary in others fervent Petitions and
deprecations of wrath, whilst thou thy self cryest out, Soul take thine ease,
store is laid up for thee by others? Alas! how do thou know what others are a
doing? Do they blow the Trumpet, when they go to fast? the more likely it is
that they be Hypocrites. But has not God said, Ezekiel. 9.4.
Go through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a
mark (only) upon the foreheads of the men, that sigh and that cry for all the
abominations that be done in the midst thereof? and again, Son of man, when the
Land sins against me by transgressing grievously, then will I stretch out
mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread thereof, and will send
a famine upon it, Ezekiel. 14.13, 14.
and will cut off man and beast from it. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel,
and Job were in it, they should deliver but their own Souls, by their
righteousness, says the Lord God.

4. Impenitents lose all they do and suffer for God.
Should not your hearts be broken for, and from your sins, seeing so long as
you are impenitent, all you do, and suffer for God is abominable in his sight?
Hardness of heart is a nasty disease; it is like a Leprosy, that makes all to
shun a man: If you had such a disease, that all would abhor you, would it not
humble you to the very dust? your impenitency makes you neither fit company for
God, nor his Saints: you are loathsome in the sight of both, whilst you are
under so much guilt, and yet insensible of it. A tender broken hearted
Christian is lovely in Gods, and his peoples, eyes; but how ugly a sight is it
to see a daring, bold, insensible sinner, persisting in a course of sin,
without repentance? If the wicked will turn from all his sins, that he has
committed, and keep all my statutes, etc. in his righteousness that he has
done shall he live, etc. But when the righteous turns away from his
righteousness, Ezekiel. 18.21, 22, 24. 2 Ep. of John v. 8. Gal. 3.4. Their persons
are loathed.
and commits iniquity, and does according to all the abominations, that the
wicked man does, shall he live? all his righteousness that he has done shall
not be mentioned. And is it nothing to you to lose the things you have wrought?
Is it nothing to suffer, and to suffer so many things in vain?

5. Should not your hearts be broken for, and from your sins, seeing so long as
you are impenitent God does not only loath your services, but he cannot take
any delight in your persons, yea you cannot be restored into his love and
favor? without Repentance there is no Remission: Repent ye therefore, and be
converted, Act. 3.19.
that your sins may be blotted out. And what? have you no mind to be forgiven
your own and your other men's sins? Deus no^ infund it oleum misericordiae nisi
in vas contritum. Bernard.
have you no will to be at peace with God, and to be restored into his love and
favor? Are you content that all these, and innumerable sins more should be
charged upon your Account? O then! beg of God to break your hearts for, and
from your sins. A broken vessel, a broken heart, will hold best the oil of
mercy. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit: a broken and a contrite
heart, O God! thou will not despise.

6. But their Repentance would exceedingly please God and refresh his Ministers.
Should not your hearts be broken for and from your sins, seeing your
Repentance will be so pleasing, and so reviving to your even brokenhearted
Ministers? Your Repentance will more please God, than all your sins have
displeased him. Though your sins have very much displeased him, yet he was loath
to depart from you, he has departed only gradually; But if you will repent he
will readily return: in his departure he has gone as it were a Snayles pace,
but if you will return, he will return with speed, he will turn toward you,
and fall upon your Necks, and kiss you, and not upbraid you with any of your
former miscarriages. And O! what a refreshing will it be to your fainting
Ministers to see you returning Prodigals? Believe it, our Chains would be worn
as Bracelets and Jewels, and our Exiles would be a Paradise to us, did we see
you putting your mouths in the dust, and crying out because of all your
Provocations. It is your security, your seeking great things for your selves,
your pride, your foolish expectations of our returns, whilst you, and we are so
unfit for such a mercy, that is our greatest burden, and lies heavier on us
than the wrath of any, save of God Almighty. God knows, who knows the
secrets of our Souls, that we could be contented to be banished from the face
of men, so that you were delivered from the power of your lusts: If you live
and stand fast in the faith, we live, and though we have nothing, yet we
possess all things, joying and rejoicing to see your Zeal, your Repentance,
your Indignations and Revenges against your sins. But we is unto us, we fear we
have spent our Lungs, our Time, our Studies, our Life in vain upon you, whilst
we behold your benummedness, your insensibleness of all the tokens of Gods
displeasure, by reason of your transgressions. And will you add affliction to
the afflicted? Is it not enough that we are turned out of the Vineyard, where
we loved our work better than our lives; Is it not enough that we are cast
forth from among our People and Friends to seek bread for our selves and little
ones from door to door? But will you have a greater hand in our misery than any
others? Will you lay the greatest load of trouble upon us, whilst others
oppress our outward man, will you go on to vex our Spirits? Have pity upon us,
O Children! whom we have begotten in the Gospel: you call us your Spiritual
Fathers, you did receive us as Angels, yea as Jesus Christ, you would have
plucked out your eyes to do us good; O! now what do we beg? not to have your
eyes out, but filled, filled with tears, Gal. 4.15.
and your hearts filled with sorrow for, hatred and indignation against, your
sins? Weep not for us; but weep for your selves: And is there not a cause? Your
tears will be our meat and drink: a great part of our joy will arise from
seeing your godly sorrow: Hagar was not more refeshed with her fountain, than
we shall be to find your heads as waters, and your eyes as fountains of tears,
and you weeping day and night for your own and others provocations. Let it
suffice you that you have so long grieved us and Christ by your Security,
Self-love. Worldliness, Pride, and Passions. O that now the Egyptians, that we
have seen among you, may be seen alive no more! Let us not be hastened to our
graves by your impenitencies and stubborn departures from God. We are troubled
to find still among you and upon you, those very sins, which have laid Kingdoms
and Churches wast, and yet you secure: as if the Lord had powered out a Spirit
of slumber upon you: those very sins, which overthrow the Churches of Judea and
Asia are found among you, and will you not repent, and do your first works? It
grieves us to the heart to see sins run through you, as water through a Mill,
and you regard it not. We beseech you out of love to God, to your own Souls,
and to us and our comforts, that you would cease to do evil, and learn to do
well: Be moved with fear, and prepare an Ark. The old world would not believe
Noah; But the Lord made them to know he was a Prophet of Righteousness. We
pity your Souls, we are troubled to see what confidence you put in uncertain
Signs and Prognostications, which beget carelessness and security in you, and
how little you fear the threatenings of most dreadful Judgments against those
very sins you have lived in: many a sad thought we have about you, whilst we
see your fickleness, inconstancy, stupidity, and ungrounded, (because
unscriptural) hopes. O! return, return, repent, repent; that we may be able to
say, ye are our joy, our Crown, our rejoicing in the day of Christ.

7. (...), or ^^ver, for ought they know.
And Lastly, Should not your hearts be broken for and from your sins, even by
what may be seen in this Glass, seeing now God gives you not only time to
Repent, but an opportunity of Repentance, and such an one, as if you neglect it
you may never have the like again? When time and the means are married and
lodged together (says one) they beget opportunity. Now time, and means meet
together to effect your Repentance. If this opportunity be lost, you may never
have another: and if you should never have any other, your case is desperate.
Opportunities cannot be prayed, or wept back again. Heb. 12.17.
Esau's instance puts it out of all doubt. In Gods opportunity it is an easy
thing to repent; but if this opportunity should be lost by you, (which God
forbid) it may be impossible for you to repent, See Mr. Fenners danger of
deferring repentance folio 35, 36.
God may justly give you up to Judicial impenitency. It may be God does now by
this Treatise speak home unto thy Soul, now it may be God warms thy heart, now
it may be God works in thee good thoughts and desires; Now is thy day of grace;
But (to use the words of one of the chiefest of Englands late Alarming
Preachers, with some little variation) If thou let this day pass, thou may
desire to have one of the drops of that blood, that has been offered to thee,
and yet never have it: thou may desire to feel one drap of his spirit, that
has knocked at thine heart; and yet go without it: thou may entreat for one
dram of that mercy, that has been offered, and thou have rejected; but it
shall never be granted to thee: God may clap that fearful sentence upon thee,
Now henceforth never grow fruit more on thee, never repentance come into thine
heart more. If now thou will not repent and be converted, the Lord may set it
down in his decree, that from this day forward thou may fumble about thy
sins; but shall never get victory over them: thou may ever be mourning for
thy corruptions; but never mourn aright for them: thou may blunder about
repentance, but never do the work. You shall not mourn, Ezekiel. 24.23.
nor weep; but you shall pine away in your iniquities. There is many a Soul for
contemning of God, and not taking up repentance, while he may have it, upon
whom this plague of God is come, that they are ever repenting, but never able
to repent; ever poring upon their sins, but never able to come out of them;
they pray and pray against them, but their prayers moulder away under them; for
they shall pine away for their transgressions. What is the reason? Ezekiel. 24.13.
Why? because I would have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall
not be purged any more. May not God say to thee thus? Because I have given thee
line upon line, precept upon precept, call upon call; not only outward, but
inward calls, ordinance upon ordinance, providence upon providence, book upon
book, motion upon motion: Because I have used all means, fair means, and foul
means; I have plainly showed thee thy sins by my Word and Rod, and by this
glass, I have awakened thine own Conscience, yea and stirred up, as by other
Sermons and Treatises, so by this, good thoughts and desires in thee; because I
would have cleansed thee, and thou wast not cleansed, thou shall never be
cleansed. Is not this a fearful sentence? Alas! Thy heart is very hard, and
thy Conscience very much seared, if the reading hereof does not make thee quake
and tremble. What shall I say? Now is the Axe laid to the root of the Tree.
Mat. 3.10.
Thine opportunity is now: If thou pass by this Now, thou art gone for ought I
can tell; thou may be chopped off presently. O! Neglect not the present Now,
lest thou be cut off for ever. Thou art in danger of being presently cut down,
if thou do not presently repent. Every Tree which brings not forth, (in the
present tense) good fruit, is (even for the present) hewn down, and cast into
the Fire. I shall conclude with the words of the Apostle, The Earth which
drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for
them, by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God: Heb. 6.7, 8, 9.
But that which bears thorns and briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned: But, Beloved, we are persuaded better
things of you, and things that accompany Salvation (such a repentance as cannot
be separated from Salvation) though we thus speak: yea therefore we thus write.

Soli Deo sit Gloria.
ERRATA.
Such Sense-spoyling Mistakes, as (notwithstanding the great care of the
Printer and Corrector) occurr in the first 19. Sheets of this Glass, the Candid
Reader is desired to correct thus,
PAge 2. Line 18. for said, read saw. p. 37. l. 20. for buy, read by. p. 39. l.
20. for self seizings, read self-seekings. ibid. l. 17. after joined, add, and
must be taken. p. 52. l. 20. for they, read he. p. 56. l. 15. for sure, read
save. p. 84. l. 23. for poised, read posed. p. 106. l. 10. for begin, read
began. p. 123. l. 21. for salocy, read saucy. p. 124. l. 25. after want, add,
are such. p. 134. l. 32. for meetings, read meltings. p. 158. l. 1. dele an. p.
161. l. 28. for of, read as are. p. 168. Marg. for illi, read illis. p. 182. l.
26. for to, read too. p. 194. l. 13. for (...), read (...). ibid. l. 16. for
(...), read (...). p. 202. l. 5. for sanesti, read sanasti. p. 225. Marg. for
affectionibus, read afflictionibus. p. 250. l. 11. for for, read or. p. 269. l.
23. after to, add do. p. 299. l. 20, 21. dele rather.


