Mr. STUBS'S SERMON OF Public Baptism, BEFORE THE LORD MAYOR, etc.

Fleet, Major: Martis, vj. Die Decembris, 1692. Annoque Regis and Reginae,
Willielmi and Mariae, Angl' etc. Quarto.

THis Court does desire Mr. Stubs to Print his Sermon, Preached at
Guild-Hall-Chapel, on Sunday the 20th Day of November last, before the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

GOODFELLOW.

Imprimatur.

Decembr. 9. 1692.

Guil. Lancaster, R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Land. a sacris Domesticis.

OF Public Baptism. A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable THE LORD
MAYOR, AND THE Court of Aldermen, AT Guild-Hall-Chapel, Sunday, Nov. 20. 1692.

By PHILIP STVBS, A. M. Fellow of Wadham-College, Oxon. And Chaplain to the
Right Reverend Father in God, ROBERT Lord Bishop of CHICHESTER.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCXCIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir JOHN FLEET, Knight. LORD MAYOR Of the CITY of LONDON,
And to the Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
THE unexpected Success this plain Discourse (by the Blessing of God) met with
from a kind Auditory in this City, (for whose private Benefit 'twas, not long
since, I must confess, but too hastily drawn up;) as it prompted me at first to
offer it before the most public Assembly therein at Guild-Hall-Chapel; so the
Hopes of its farther Usefulness makes me now readily comply with Your Honor's
Commands for its Publication, in order thereunto. That it may have its designed
Effect, in contributing (though never so little) to the Retrieving so Ancient,
so Universal, so Religious, I may say, so necessary a Practice, as is the
subject Matter of it; and, by Consequence, to the farther Promoting of God's
Glory, in the greater Good of his Church in general, and the Welfare of
particular Christians, is the Hearty Desire of,

Right Honorable, Your most Humble, Most Obedient Servant, PHIL. STVBS.

A SERMON Before the LORD MAYOR, etc.
St. MATTHEW. xxviij. 19. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations; baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.


THE Text is a full Commission, delivered out by our Savior to his Apostles,
when he had just finished the glorious work of our Redemption, and was now
Ascending up again unto his Father: whereby he impowers them to extend the
benefits of his Passion by Baptism, as far as he designed they should reach,
even to the utmost parts of the Earth: For as he himself had spent his whole
time in Judea, and the Regions thereabout, amongst the Jews, God's peculiar
People; so he commands them, whom he had fully instructed in every Particular
of his Doctrine, to communicate it to the Gentiles.

Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations; baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

From which Words, I may take Occasion to speak of these Five Heads.

I. Of the Nature of Baptism in general.

II. Of the Persons here authorized to Baptize.

III. Of the Persons to be Baptized.

IV. Of the Form of Baptism. And,

Lastly, Of the Time and Place, when and where this Sacrament ought to be
administered.

Of the Four first (there being no difference about them, either as to
Principle or Practice, amongst those of our Communion) I shall say little more
at present, than what may serve by way of Introduction, as it were, to the last
Particular, which I have designed for the main Subject of my ensuing Discourse:
Wherein I shall, with all the Brevity and Plainness I can, endeavor to
demonstrate the Unreasonableness of continuing that corrupt Custom crept in
among us, (and which of late Years has prevailed more especially in this City,)
of Baptizing Children in Private Houses, contrary to the earnest, pious Desires
and Endeavors of our Clergy, the declared Sense and Usage of the Catholic
Church all along, the express Orders and Constitutions of that sound Part of
it, whereof we boast our selves Members, and the very Reason and Design of the
Institution it self; to the no small Dishonor of God Almighty, in hindering the
greater Promotion of his Glory, and the Edification of many Religious,
well-dispos'd Christians.

But before I enter professedly upon this Argument, I am to speak a Word or two
briefly, on the four just mentioned Heads. And,

I. Of the Nature of Baptism in general.

Now Baptism signifies properly an Immersion, Dipping, or Washing the whole
Body in Water; and was a Ceremony used among the Heathens, as well as the Jews,
upon the Admission of any new Converts to their Religion: By which Washing was
signified, the Cleansing of the Persons, so baptized, from their former
Pollutions; and their Resolution of continuing Pure and Unspotted for the
future. This Ceremony, being very innocent, and very significant, the Holy
Jesus was willing to continue it in his Church; leaving out the other of
Circumcision, which signified but the same thing, and was more injurious to
Men's Health, and to their Modesty.

I say, Baptism signifies properly an Immersion, Dipping, or Washing the whole
Body in Water: And so it was practiced in the Primitive Times, after the manner
of John's Baptism, who chose the River Jordan, and such Places, where there was
much Water, for the Convenience of such an Immersion: For so it is expressly
said of him, That John was baptizing in Enon, S. Joh. 3.23.
near to Salim, because there was much Water there. After this manner the
Eunuch, in Acts 8. was baptized by S. Philip; Acts 8.38.
for it is said, They went down both into the Water, both Philip and the Eunuch,
and he baptized him. And indeed, this Dipping all over in Water is thought by
some, more significant than any other sort of Baptism; for hereby is denoted
the Cleansing the whole Man from Sin, the being buried with Christ in Baptism,
which is signified by the Immersion, or Dipping in Water; and the Rising to a
Newness of Life, which is signified by the Emersion, or Rising out of it again.
But yet it is not so necessary, but it may be omitted in favor of the Weakness
of the Person to be baptized, and the Pouring or Sprinkling of Water used
instead of it; as has been the Practice of these Northern Countries, in the
Baptism of Children, whose tender Bodies cannot endure a total Immersion; and
of the first Ages of the Church, in favor of Sick and Bedridden Persons, who
desired to become Christians. For, as God Almighty is tender of our Souls, so
he takes care of our Bodies too; and his Laws are so far from injuring our
Healths, that they highly improve them: Upon which Account, it is not to be
imagined, that the Ceremony of Admission into the Christian Religion should be
more difficult, than that into the Jewish Covenant; or that Children should be
obliged to become Martyrs, as soon as they are made Proselytes.

But here it may be started, That, admitting this Washing, Dipping, or
Sprinkling to be the Ceremony of my Admission into Covenant with Christ, How
does it hence appear, that Christ thereby enters into Covenant with me? I may
be washed indeed with Water; But how shall I be satisfied that Christ washes me
with his Holy Spirit? For the satisfying of which Objection, I must proceed to
the Second Thing I designed to speak of, viz.

II. The Persons here authorized to Baptize.

Whom, if we look back to Ver. 16. of this Chapter, we shall find to be the
Apostles: St. Matt. 28.16.
Then the Eleven Disciples (for so the Apostles are there called) went away
into Galilee, into a Mountain where Jesus had appointed them: Who, when he came
amongst them, spoke unto them, saying, All Power is given unto me, in Heaven,
-- V. 18.
and in Earth: Go ye therefore and teach all Nations, -- V. 19.
baptizing them, etc. As if he had said, My Father has left the Government of
this World, which I have redeemed with my Blood, to me: I have power to make
what Covenants I please with Mankind: I have told you, upon what Conditions I
will confer Heaven and Happiness upon Men: Go ye therefore, and let them all
know it: And I give you power, and none but you, to admit them into this my new
Covenant by Baptism. But then, the Mercy of God, as it was willing to extend
the Benefits of his Passion beyond that Age of the World, and that Generation
of Men, continued Means for the effectual Continuance of this Power of making
such Covenants to the End of the World, by authorizing the Apostles to delegate
and depute their Power to others, in this large and plenary Commission, As my
Father has sent me, S. Joh. 20 21.
even so send I you: I give you the same Authority, which I have received: And
as I had Power of my Father to send you forth to preach the Gospel, and baptize
every Creature; so I give you Power to send others forth with the same
Commission; to Ordain Bishops, Priests and Deacons, as you shall judge
expedient for the Edifying and Welfare of my Church. Which Power was
accordingly delegated, immediately afterward, to seven Persons at once, Acts.
6.3. Chap. 13.3.
as you will find in Acts 6. to Saul and Barnabas, to their Successors, until
this very Period of Time; wherein we of this Communion, have Persons under the
several Characters abovementioned, who derive their Authority from them, by an
uninterrupted Succession. For no Man can take this Authority upon himself; and
unless there were Sacred Persons so continued in the Church, there could, at
this Day, be no Legal or Valid Administration of this Sacrament; and by
Consequence, our Savior's Command would have long since fell to the Ground,
(which I tremble to think of,) when he bid them, and, in them, their
Successors, Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. The Meaning of which
Words, All Nations, or an Enquiry,

III. Into the Persons to be Baptized, is the Subject of my Third General,
which now offers it self to be spoke to; Go ye therefore and teach All Nations,
baptizing them, etc.

The Lord God had, for a long time, dwelt only in Judea: Though the vast Circle
of the Earth, 2 Chronicles. 2.6.
nor the larger Circumference of the Heavens cannot contain him; yet, as the
Psalmist expresses it, at Salem was his Tabernacle, Psalm. 76.2.
and his Dwelling at Sion: There was his House, there his peculiar Residence.
To the People of Israel only had he given his Laws, and ordered the manner of
his Worship: The rest of the World seemed overlooked, and neglected, like
Children dis-inherited, and banished from their Father's Presence. But when the
Blessed Jesus, the Word of God, by whom all Men were created, descended, for
the Redemption of them all, he threw down the Partition Wall which shut out the
Gentiles from the Sight and Favor of God, and contrived Means for the Bringing
them into his Family. He caused the Waters of Baptism to extend themselves, as
far as those of the Universal Deluge; that as all Men had once perished by
Water, so they should all be saved by it.

Nor do we, when we say All Men only (upon slight Grounds) exclude the Children
of Believers from this extraordinary Privilege, as do the Adversaries to
Infant Baptism: Who should not have been mentioned in this place, (since their
wild Opinion runs counter to the Belief and Practice of the Universal Church in
all Ages,) did not some of them boast of an Irrefragable Argument on their
Side, taken from the very Words we are now about; arguing from hence, that
because our Savior first said Teach, before he said Baptize; therefore every
Body must be taught, before he is baptized. To which there need be given no
other Answer, but what the true Meaning of the Original Word will readily
furnish us with: For, (...), in the Greek, signifies not here Teach, as in our
Translation; but rather, make Disciples of: Inter Judaeos Discipuli facti sunt
ii, non qui jam docti sunt, sed ideo Discipuli facti sunt, ut doceantur.
Lightfoot: Hor. Heb. ad locum.
As if our Savior (alluding to a known Custom among the Jews) had said, Go and
admit into my Church, and make Disciples of all Nations, and that by the
Ceremony of Baptism; for (which is very remarkable) in the very next Verse,
where the Word Teaching comes again, (...).
there is another Word made use of in the Original, which has that for its
proper signification. An Exposition, which, if it were duly attended to, might
be of no small Use to many unprejudiced Anabaptists. As,

IV. The Form of Baptism here prescribed, in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, might be so to another sort of seemingly more
Rational Persons, who yet (some of them) make a Difficulty in Founding the
Doctrine of the Individual and Ever Blessed Trinity upon express Words of
Scripture.

For, if the being baptized into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, as the Original imports, (...), and not in the Name, according
to our Translation, which is less significant. If, I say, V. Grot. sup. loc.
the being baptized into those Names does not signify, the being baptized into
the Belief of Three Persons in one Incomprehensible Godhead, which
distinguishes the Christian Baptism from all others; and the submitting all the
Faculties of our Souls and Bodies to the Sovereign Dominion and Guidance of
each of them, as such; then the whole Church almost has been in an Error for
nigh these 1700 Years, and a Handful of Men, whose Business it is nowadays to
receive old, condemned Heresies, are alone in the Right.

Thus have I briefly gone through the Four first Particulars, which relate to
the Essentials of Baptism: To all and singular of which, every one in our
Communion is so ready to subscribe, against all Anabaptists, Socinians, and
other Vnorthodox Persons whatever, that few would forgive themselves, should
their Children by any means happen to be otherwise baptized than by Sprinkling
them with Water, according to the Usage of our Country, and not by Dipping them
all over in it; should they not be baptized by a Lawfully Ordained Minister of
the Church of England; and that too, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost.

V. But now, as to the Circumstances of Time and Place, when and where this
Sacrament ought to be Administered, which is my Fifth Particular, and comes now
to be considered more at large. Rubr. 1. before the Office for Public Baptism.
Rubr. 2. before the Office for Private Baptism.


Most are so prejudiced against them, by a prevailing Custom to the contrary,
that, notwithstanding our Rule tells us, It ought not to be done, but upon
Sundays, or Holy Days; nor Out of the Church, unless in Cases of great
Necessity: They think these Matters of no such Importance, but that they may
safely pass them by, and Christen their Children at Home, when there is no
Cause for it, without the least Contravention to my Text, or any other place of
Scripture.

To Persons of which Complexion, I answer,

First, That although this Text is not strictly producible for Public Baptism,
as it means Baptism at the Font, according to the particular Constitution of
our Church, which provides, Can. and Constable. Eccles. Can. 81.
That there shall be a Font of Stone in every Church or Chapel, where Baptism
is to be Administered; and there, in that Font only, the Minister shall Baptize
publicly: Yet (with their Leaves) it may be urged for it, as far as the Design
of the Institution it self will warrant us, and the early and constant Custom
of the Church of Christ, which is the best Expositor of such a Design.

Now that Baptism, even from the Church's Infancy, has been all along as
publicly celebrated, as the present State of that did permit, may be fairly
gathered from the following Words of a great Searcher into the Records of the
Primitive Times; which shall serve instead of many Quotations that might be
brought for the Proof of the Assertion. Dr. Cave in his Prim. Christ. part 1.
c. 10.
The Place where this solemn Action was performed, was at first unlimited; any
Place where there was Water, Ap. 2. p. 93.
as Justin Martyr tells us: In Ponds or Lakes, in Springs or Rivers, De Bap.
adv. Quintill. cap 4.
as Tertullian speaks: But always, as near as might be, to the place of the
Public Assemblies; for it was seldom done without the Presence of the
Congregation. And then,

Secondly, I answer farther, That though the Text before us should not be
sufficient of it self to satisfy all the beweldring Doubts of the Scrupulous,
or Perverse, but, notwithstanding its Evidence, they will think themselves
still at liberty to baptize either in public or private; yet, in Consort with
some others that may be alleged, it ought certainly to be thought of such
Force, as to conclude them without more a-do, and immediately determine their
Choice. Such are these, 3 Cor. 14.40.
and the like Apostolical Canons: Let all things be done decently, -- 26.
and in order. Let all things be done to edifying. From which, and several
other Places of Scripture of the same Nature, Hor. Confess. varias Aug. Sc.
Helv. Basil. Bohem. Belg. Sax. etc.
it is on all Hands acknowledged among Protestants, That hereby is given to the
Church Power to make Decrees about such Matters as this, and others designed
there, where St. Paul tells the Corinthians, That the rest he will set in order
when he comes. 1 Cor. 11.34.
And we of this Church expressly assert, Art. 20.
That she has Power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, not repugnant to the Word
of God: And that the Bringing of Persons to be solemnly baptized in God's
House, for the general Good of Christians there present, has no such
Contrariety, must still be presumed, till better Topics for Conviction be
found out, than what have hitherto been offered.

Now, this Power being granted, as lodged in the Church, it will hence follow,
That what our Mother does lawfully enjoin, we are, with Readiness and
Submission to assent to; lest by standing out against her obstinately, we sin
as much against Heaven, who gave her this Commission, as we do against the
Authority of the Church it self.

However therefore some may style themselves her Children, and seem mightily
pleased with the specious Appellation of True Sons of the Church of England,
whilst they are guilty of such an Irregularity as Private Baptism has been
always reckoned in it, (especially when required to the contrary,) they must
pardon others who cannot but think them highly unworthy to be called so; since
by such stubborn, undutiful Carriage, (were all Men as positive in their
Refusals as they,) her Being must (inevitably) be destroyed as a Church, whence
every one of us derive our own, as Christians.

But, to be more methodical, and to press this Matter with greater Application,
let me crave your Patience, whilst I tender to you the Four following
Particulars.

1. The express Orders of our Church, with Relation to Public Baptism, and the
Care she has taken in the Contrivance of her Form for it, so, that there can be
no Intrenchment upon it, without a great deal of Absurdity, as well as
Disobedience on their side, 1 Cor. 11.22.
who become Despisers of the Church of God, by acting contrary to her
Injunctions.

2. That the Obedience of her Genuine Sons in this Affair, may not be
Nick-nam'd, or termed Implicit, I shall show, that she has done nothing
herein, but upon very extraordinary Motives; in that her Constitutions about it
do not only bear a sweet Harmony to the Practice of the Eastern, and all the
Western Churches: But,

3. That the Practice of all these Churches is grounded upon the earliest
Antiquity: And,

4. That that Antiquity has no less solid a Basis, than the firmest Reasons to
support it.

But of each of these as briefly as possible. And,

1. Then, As to the Orders of our Church: besides the Canon just now mentioned,
Can. 81.
where there is a Font enjoined to be set up in every Church or Chapel, where
Baptism is to be Administered; and that in the Font only, the Minister shall
Baptize publicly; Rubric 1st. of that Office.
the Office for Public Baptism says in one place, That the People are to be
admonished, that it is most convenient that Baptism should not be Administered,
but upon Sundays, and Holy Days, when the most number of People come together.
Rubric 2d.
In another place it enjoins, That when there are Children to be baptized, the
Parents shall give notice thereof over Night, or in the Morning, before the
Beginning of Morning-Prayer, to the Curate: And then, the Godfathers and
Godmothers, and the People, with the Children, must be ready at the Font,
either immediately after the Last Lesson at Morning-Prayer, or else immediately
after the Last Lesson at Evening-Prayer; as the Curate, by his Discretion,
shall appoint. Again, In the Office for Private Baptism, Rubric 3d.
The Curates of every Parish shall often admonish their Parishioners, that,
without great Cause and Necessity, they procure not their Children to be
baptized at home, in their Houses. Our Church is so indulgent a Mother, that
she permits any to be baptized in Private when there is a Necessity for it,
agreeably to the Practice of the Universal Church all along; and accordingly
has provided a particular Form for such Exigencies: Rubric 5th. in the Office
for Private Bapt.
But this still with an Injunction, That afterward they be brought to Church,
that those Prayers and Rites, which before were omitted in the Office, may be
there publicly supplied.

This is the Sense of our Church in this Matter, and her Determination, and
therefore sufficient, as has been proved, to oblige every True Son of hers to
acquiesce therein, and be conformable.

But I have yet farther to urge, That whosoever will be stubborn, and run
counter to these Establishments of hers, by Christ'ning his Children at home,
and that by the Public Form, (which is still insisted upon,) must not only be
reckoned guilty of manifest Disobedience to his Mother, but is chargeable
likewise with several gross Absurdities in one of the solemnest of God's holy
Ordinances; the Public Form being so contrived, to prevent Evasion, or
Collusion herein, that it cannot properly be used any where but in the Church;
Mr. Arwaker 's Ministration of Public Baptism of Infants to be used in the Chapter
as has been well observed in a late Treatise on this Argument, to which hardly
any thing can be added on this Head. For, 1. For instance, as the Author
observes, Page 29, etc.
When the Minister says thus to the Godfathers and Godmothers, You have brought
this Child here to be baptized, Ivo Carnotens. Sermon. de Sacrament. Dedicat.
(according to that of one of the Ancients, You were brought to Church in the
Arms of your Sureties;) he ought, in a Private House, to invert the Words thus,
Ye have brought me here to baptize this Child. 2. How can any Minister use that
Petition in the last Collect, before the Prayer of Consecration, in such a
place, with any color of Reason, when he is thus to address himself to God
Almighty, Grant that whosoever is here dedicated unto thee, by our Office and
Ministry, may be endued, etc. whilst by Here is undoubtedly meant the Font in
the Church, or the Church it self, the proper place of Dedication; at least, 1 Samuel 1.24.
Hannah was of that Opinion, when she offered her Samuel, the Son of her
Prayers, in the House of the Lord, with a Design of Dedicating him there to his
Service. 3. In the Prayer of Consecration it self, it is no small Argument to
prevail for God's Assent to the Petitions offered in the behalf of the Child,
to be Regenerated; That he would regard the Prayers of his Congregation, and
comply therewith, in Sanctifying the Water, to the Mystical Washing away of
Sin, etc. Now this Congregation, whose Prayers are thought thus efficacious,
ought to be such an one, Page 31,
(as the above cited Author observes,) of which the Minister may safely and
truly say, Thy Congregation; for there is certainly the greatest Validity in
the Prayers of God's Congregation: But there is great Reason to think, that
those are not such, which are gathered in a private House, on such an Account;
since the Church has not appointed it a fit place for Baptism, unless, as was
abovesaid, in Cases of extreme Necessity. So that Private Houses being not
ordinarily allowed, much less commanded to be made use of as such; nay,
oftentimes perversely appropriated by some, to that Use, against the express
Authority of the Church, and earnest Solicitation of those that are set over
them; whoever assemble there, in such an illegal manner, Vid. Bals. and Zon.
(apud Beveregium, Tom. 1. p. 191.) ad Can. 31. Council. 6. in Trullo. St. Matthew.
18.20.
must be thought as really guilty of a Disorder in the Church, as those who
meet in prohibited Numbers and Places are of a Riot in the State. Nor will that
pitiful Plea from our Savior's (ignorantly misapplied) Promise, Where Two or
Three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them, stand
them in any stead; Since we must not be allowed to argue from extraordinary, to
ordinary and common Cases; for though not a Tittle of our Savior's Words shall
fall to the Ground, but he will be with his all the World over, till the
Consummation of all things; yet this Text must be understood of them, as duly
circumstantiated, with respect to Time, Place, etc. Hence the Reason of no
Considering Person will give him leave to say, Because our Savior supported
his Disciples with these Words, whom he foresaw Drooping, ere-long, under a
Persecuted Condition; therefore they may make use of it upon every Caprichio,
(as too many among our Laity actually do,) in the more flourishing State of the
Church, against the known Orders of the Establishment in it, to which, in many
the like Cases, they readily submit upon those very Motives which are usually
urged for their Obedience to this Injunction. But, 4. The last Absurdity
committed in using our Public Form at Home, is, the Receiving the Child: When
the Minister, having first Named it, and Baptized it, holding it still in his
Hand, uses these Words of Admission, We receive this Child into the
Congregation of Christ's Flock, etc. Which Reception does not only mean, into
the whole Body of the Universal Church, but as well that Representative Part
then present, and Consenting to it for the Whole. And the Minister's Embracing
the Child, is for the same End, as the Imposition of Hands in Baptism was of
Old; which, Durantus tells us, De Rit. Eccl. Cath. Lib. 19. cap. 1.
signified the Reconciliation, by which he that was without the Church a Child
of Wrath, according to our Catechism, was in the Church received into the
Church's Favor, and made a Child of Grace.

Thus have I laid before you the Commands of our Church, with relation to
Public Baptism, together with the Danger and Absurdity of our Breach of them;
which was the First Particular: I hasten through the following Ones with all
imaginable Brevity, and proceed to show,

2. That She has done nothing herein, but upon very extraordinary Motives, in
that her Thoughts, with respect to the Business in hand, accord with the
Eastern, and all the Western Churches now in the World.

As for the Eastern, Chap. 7.
Sir Paul Ricaut, in his Present State of the Greek Church, tells us, That That
has, from long Antiquity, practiced, on the Eighth Day to present their
Children at the Church Porch, to receive the Blessing of the Priest, etc. And
it is notoriously known, that the Practice of the Church of Rome, here in the
West, is agreeable to her Constitutions: Vid. Rituale jussu Pauli 5. Colon.
Edit.
Cum proprius locus hujus Sacramenti sit Ecclesia Parochialis, nullus extra
eam, nisi forte in casu necessitatis baptizet. Nor does She permit any, but in
Cases of Extreme Necessity, to be baptized at Home; and they, upon Recovery,
are still brought to Church afterward. The French (as well as the other
Reformed Churches abroad, Il est a noter qu'un doit apporter les Enfans, pour
baptizer; ou le Dimanche, ou les autres jours au Sermon: a fin que comme le
Baptesme est une reception solennelle en Eglise il se fasse en la presence de
l' Assemble; v. La Form d' Administrer le Baptesme.
conformable to which is their Practice (as many of them as have Churches) in
this City) not only order this Usage in their Service-Books, but, as we do,
give their Reasons for it there likewise: Because * Baptism, say they, is a
solemn Admission into the Church of Christ, and therefore ought to be done in
the Face of the Assembly, who are to be Witnesses of the Matter. Nay, The
English Congregation which was gathered at Geneva, in the Year 1558. upon an
unjust Dislike of some Things in our Liturgy and Church Government here, in
their Form of Prayer, See The Order of Baptism, Rubr. 1.
and Administration of the Sacraments, approved by J. Calvin himself, tells us
positively, That it is evident from God's Word, that the Sacraments are not
Ordained of him, to be used in Private Corners, as Charms or Sorceries; but
left to the Congregation, and necessarily annexed to God's Word, as Seals of
the same: Therefore the Infant, which is to be baptized, shall be brought to
Church on the Day appointed, to Common Prayer, and Preaching, etc. And (which I
hope will be for the Conviction of those among us, who are very ready to charge
every Person or Thing with Popery, or Superstition at least, that does but look
toward the Establishing or Retrieving any of the Solemnities in God's Worship)
Even the Presbyterian Directory, in the late Times of Confusion, expressly
Ordains, In the Chap. Entitled, Of Baptism, p. 19.
That Baptism be not Administered in Private Places, or Privately, but in the
Place of Public Worship, and in the Face of the Congregation, where the People
may most conveniently see and hear: Which the Framers of it likewise tell us,
was resolved upon, See the Preface to the Directory for the Public Worship of
God throughout England, Scotland and Ireland. Minist. of Pub. Bap. p. 43.
After earnest and frequent Calling upon the Name of God; and after much
Consultation, not with Flesh and Blood, but with his Holy Word. Pursuant to
which Resolutions, as it should seem, we are told, that as for their Brethren
in Scotland, no Length of Way, nor scarce any Indisposition, can prevail with
them to keep their Children from the Church; but they carry them several Miles
to be baptized, that it may be done in Public: And that they thought it an
inexpressible Favor, when a Toleration was granted them for Private Baptism in
case of Great Necessity. But,

3. There is not only a Consent between ours and these Churches in this
Particular, but the Practice of all of them is grounded upon the earliest
Antiquity: For the Proof of which, I shall not now trouble you with a pompous
Ostentation of Authorities; though I might quote to you Justin Martyr, St.
Athanasius, Gregory Nazianzen, Ambrose, Chrysostom Vid. Cocceii These. Cathol.
Tom. 2. lib. 5. Art. 11. de Baptisteriis.
, etc. with Councils Pro caeteris notetur praecipue Can. 59. antiq. illius
Conc. Constant. 3. sic Stat.(...).
, General and Provincial; but desire the Page 11. from Cave 's Primitive
Christianity, Part 1. Chap. 10. Page 311.
abovementioned Citation may serve, instead of many: Where 'twas said, That the
Place where this solemn Action was performed, was at first unlimited; any place
where there was Water; as, a Pond, Lake, River, or Spring, serving turn: But
that always they chose a Place for Baptism as near as might be to that of the
Public Assembly; for 'twas seldom done (even in the very Infancy of the
Church) without the Presence of the Congregation. For which Reason it was, that
in Ancient Times, as we are there likewise told, Id. Ibid. p 312.
their Baptisteria, or Fonts, as we call them, were built at first near the
Church, then in the Church Porch, to represent Baptism's being the Entrance
into the Mystical Church; and afterward in the Church it self. At which
Places, Baptism was of Old Administered only on Easter and Whit-Sunday, as many
Councils formerly ordered; because (as one of them is express) at those Solemn
Times there were the most numerous Assemblies; De Catechumenis Baptizandis id
statutum est, ut in Paschae vel Pentecostes solennitate, quanto majoris
celebritatis major est celebritas, tanto magis ad Baptizandum veniant. Conc.
Gerund. Can. 3.
and by Consequence, the Administration of this holy Rite would be then more
for the Edification of the Church.

Where, by the way, we may observe the Rise of Private Baptism in the Primitive
Church, together with the Reasonableness of its Allowance then: For, they
reserving the Baptization of all their Catechumens till those two great
Festivals, if any of them in the mean while happened to be in great danger of
Persecution, Qui enim in difcrimen naufragii, hostilitatis incursum, obsidionis
ambguum, and cujuslibet corporalis aegritudinis desperationem inciderint, and
sibi unico credulitatis auxilio poposcerint subveniri, eodem, quo poscunt,
momento temporis, expetitae regenerationis praemia consequuntur. Siricius Papa
ad Himerium Tarraconensem.
as was probable in the first Ages of the Church; Incursions of Barbarous
Enemies, no less frequent in the succeeding Times, present Death, by Sickness,
or any other Means; they granted them the Liberty of being baptized
immediately, fearful lest at any time they should go out of the World, deprived
of the Benefit of this Holy Laver.

But, God be thanked, we are under no such Apprehensions at present; though we
were then, when this Custom of Christning at Home first got Footing amongst us;
no such Practice being heard of in the Church of England, till the late Times
of our horrible Distractions. Which bare Consideration, viz. of the Means
whereby this Usage was here introduced, might, one would think, have long since
rendered it odious and abominable, to those especially, who have the Conscience
still left them to abhor the lewd Proceedings of those Days, when Wild
Enthusiasm, and Blind Zeal justled all sober Religion almost, with God's Solemn
Worship, out of these three Kingdoms. But,

4ly. and Lastly, The Constitutions of our Church, which order Baptism to be
Publicly Celebrated, do not only bear a just Correspondence with the Practice
of the Eastern, and all the Western Churches now in the World, as grounded upon
the earliest Antiquity: But that Antiquity has no less solid a Basis, than the
firmest Reason, to support it; Three of which I shall, for the present, only
hint at, leaving the farther Consideration of them, and others as obvious, to
your own more serious Reflections. The

1. Council. Gerund. bab. Conc. Anno. 517.
Of which, is, That Public Baptism is more for Edisication. This the Primitive
Church was sensible of, as you find from the Canon of the Council just now
mentioned, which (with a great number besides) orders Baptism to be performed
on Easter and Whit-Sundays only; because then the Congregations were fuller.
This our Church is very sensible of, in like manner, when She orders it to be
administered ordinarily upon Sundays, or Holy days, when the greatest Number of
People are met together; that all there present may be put in mind of their own
Profession made to God in their Baptism. Rubr. 1. in the Office for Public
Baptism.
This the French Reformed Church is highly sensible of, when, in her last
Rubric, in the Office for Public Baptism, She orders, That the Minister,
Baptizing in the Church, Le tout se dit a haute voix en langue vulgaire,
d'autant que le Peuple qui assiste la doit estre temoin de ce qui s'y fait a
quoi est requise intelligence; and aussi asin que tous soient edifiez, en
reconnoissant, etc La Form d' Administrer le Baptesme. Rubr. 1. in the Office
for Public Baptism.
speak as loud as he can, in the Vulgar Tongue, that all may be edified: En
reconnoissant and reduisant en memoire, quel'est le fruit, and l'usage de leur
Baptesme. This, in a Word, all the Churches in the World are sensible of, their
Custom being principally founded upon this Motive. But, then,

2. The very Nature and Design of Baptism bespeaks the Reasonableness of its
being done in Public: It is, as has been said, our solemn Admission into the
Christian Church, and therefore ought to be done openly; that as our own
instructs us, the Congregation then present may testify the Receiving of them
that are newly baptized into the Number of Christ's Church. And,

3. We may consider, that Baptism contains a Public Profession of our Faith in
Christ, by our Godfathers and Godmothers. Now, the Profession of our Faith, the
more public it is, the more agreeable is it to the Nature of Baptism, and the
Constitution of the Christian Church; which is a Visible Society, professing
the Faith of Christ. And when can it possibly be more public, Psalm. 116.13.
than in the Courts of the Lord's House? The Public Congregation for God's
Worship, held by Public Authority, in Places publicly set apart for that
purpose; when the End of Assembling there, is, the more solemn Celebration of
God's Honor; that Devout Persons may, with one Mind, and one Mouth, glorify
his Name together.

Thus have I gone through all the Particulars I designed to speak to: And have
shown,

I. Very briefly, The Nature of Baptism in general.

II. Who were the Persons Commisson'd by our Savior to baptize.

III. Who ought to be baptized.

IV. After what Form. And,

V. More at large, at what Time, and in what Place.

I should now put an End to this Discourse, but that it may be expected, since
I have been so copious in the Defense of Public Baptism, that I should say
somewhat by way of Obviating those Pretenses, which have been so powerful, as
to uphold the contrary Practice amongst too many of us, for some Years last
past.

And, indeed, were it not for this Reason, notwithstanding their Prevalency, I
should have thought the best of them too weak and trifling, such as deserved
rather to be passed over in Silence, or, at most, answered by a Minister in
Whispers, as they are commonly urged to him, rather than mentioned by way of
Confutation before such an Auditory as this. But, such as they are, they may be
reduced to Three chiefly; either of the Richer Sort, the Poorer, or Both
indifferently.

The Richer Sort usually preface their Resolutions about a Private Christning,
with an Intimation of their sincere Intentions toward the Church of England,
in which they were born and bred, and resolve, by the Grace of God, to die in
too: But, as for the Business in hand, the Child is at present indisposed, and
the Gossips are now in the Way, who cannot so well attend another Time; and
therefore it is convenient it should be done immediately, without making any
farther Trouble on it.

To such it may easily be answered, If they are so well affected, as they
pretend, to the Church of England, or rather the Church of Christ, let them
show their Affection, by a ready Compliance to the wholesome Injunctions of this
in general, with relation to Public Baptism; and that in particular, which has
provided a Private Form, purposely to be used in such Exigencies; and satisfies
them there, Rubr. 5th. in that Office.
That the Child so baptized, is lawfully and sufficiently baptized, and ought
not to be baptized again: But only desires, upon Recovery, it be brought to
Church afterward, for the Reasons just mentioned; and there receive the high
Honor of being orderly and solemnly admitted into Christ's Flock. But, to be
plain, It Is not the Child's real Indisposition, but the unhappy Bent of the
Parents too perverse Inclinations oftentimes, that make them take these
Measures; since it is notorious, that, of those who dared not venture their
Infant two or three Doors to Church, in the cold Air of this City, many have
speedily after sent it out some Miles in a much colder, to be taken Care of in
the Country. And then, as for the Excuse of wanting those that will stand
Godfathers and Godmothers, it is well known, that Persons of any Fashion, are
not without Numbers, ambitious of paying that Complemental Piece of Respect to
them; (for, to our Shame be it spoken, it is too frequently looked upon as no
more.)

On the other side, Whilst we have gloss'd, varnished Falsehood from the Rich,
suitable to their Circumstances, we meet with simple, naked Truth from the
Poor: What was pretended Indisposition in the former, is downright Shame in the
latter,

Truly, though (they thank God) they want nothing, yet they are not so well to
pass in the World, as to make a Figure in it, and upon that Account, being
unable to provide things handsome enough for their Company, and a Public
Appearance, they don't care to be ridiculed and laughed at by their Neighbors,
till they can.

To which 't may be replied, in a Word, That the Vanity of some in a higher
Rank, ought not to be a Rule for those in a meaner Condition; much less should
the Avoiding of it be objected to them; then which, nothing can more advance
their Reputation among Persons of Prudence and Sobriety; whose Censures, in
such Cases, are alone to be regarded.

And, indeed, were those Extravagant Expenses retrenched, which are every where
too common on such Occasions, and have been condemned in three late Councils,
Conc. Colon. Decr. 15. Conc. Mogunt. Can. XVI. Conc. Mediol. 5tum. cap. Quae ad
Baptismum pertinent.
even by the Corrupt Church of Rome; we should quickly find the Thoughts of
most People, which are now wholly bent upon Dress, Show, and the Pomp of the
Business, turned a contrary way; and the chief Solemnity of Christnings would
then lie, in having the Religious Part of them performed more decently, with
respect to Time, Place, etc. than generally now it is.

But, 3. The Main, Topping Argument from both Sorts, is, That such or such
Great Men have not scrupled to Christen in Private: Why therefore should others
refuse it, who are not nigh so much Dignified, nor Distinguished?

To this I answer, Lastly, When those Eminent Persons declined their Rule, they
did it with Reason, or without.

If without, Then their Example ought no more to be a Guide to others, than the
unwarrantable Actions of a Superior Magistrate in any Corporation, should be
proposed to the Imitation of an Inferior one; for, however they may both, by
the Connivance of the Higher Powers, or any other way, escape the Punishment
due to them for the Breach of the Laws of their Country; yet there is a Court
of Conscience in each of their Breasts, that will not acquit them here, and a
Sentence to be awarded them by the highest Tribunal hereafter.

If they did it with Reason, Then it must be presumed 'twas for the same that
made Moses counive at some Irregularities in the Jews; viz. the Hardness of
their Hearts, in hopes to bring them, by this Means, at length, to an entire
Conformity. For, to that deplorable Condition are we arrived, through a
complicated Degeneracy of Principles and Manners, peculiar to this Age, that
unless a Clergyman will now and then submit to undue Compliances of this
nature, some proud, peevish Persons there are, who shall make it their whole
Study and Endeavor (by spreading about malicious Innuendo's, and palpable
Untruths, with other indirect Methods) to render his Preaching, Prayers,
Administration of the other Sacrament, his whole Ministry ineffectual. But, God
be thanked, this is but the Case of a few; the rest of the Laity generally
standing out upon no other Ground, than the Strength of that bad Custom to the
contrary, which many wish heartily were broke, but only are shy, each of them,
of first attempting it.

Far be it therefore from me, to apply to the Present State of our Church, with
relation to this Affair, what was said, by one of the Conc. Colon. Anno 1549.
V. Inter Censuras and decreta tata pro abusuum and vitiorum ad Synodi judicium
perlatorum emendatione, Decr. 15.
Councils last mentioned, of the Clergy and Laity in the Diocese of Cologne,
where Private Baptism began to make Head: Detestanda est non minus Laicorum
superbia, quam Pastorum eis obsequentium adulatio, qui contempta Ecclesia
proles suas volunt in domibus suis baptizari, and eo Baptismi aquam deferri.
No, it is not owing to the base Easiness of our Clergy, in making Concessions
of this nature; nor to the Pride of most of our Laity, Private Baptism etc. is
since become a Mark of Vanity, and a piece of Affected State. Burnet's Hist.
Reform Abridged, Lib. 2. page 63.
(though some must be thought to make it a Piece of State) that they have had a
long while, and still have in too many places, their Children generally
Christn'd at Home, but to the great difficulty of breaking a Custom; which, as
it began in a very ill Time, and has more unhappily prevailed ever since; so it
will be most dismal in its Consequences, if the Observation of a great Doctor
in our Church holds good, Dr. Sherlock's Relig. Assemb. Part 2. chapter 4. page 293.
That there is not a more ready way to root out Christianity it self among us,
than (thus) to destroy the Solemnities of God's Worship.

However therefore some Men, when pressed with Arguments of this kind from the
Pulpit, or otherwise, are apt to stifle or shuffle them off, with crying out in
general of a Ho-Life, a Holy Life, as the only Stable Support of Christianity.
Sure I am (though what they say is true) yet they are never like to be any
great Pillars of it, who are deaf to all Informations about, and consequently
neglect all the Means of Practice, amongst which, a due Administration of God's
Holy Sacraments has still been reckoned none of the least.

The Application from all, what has been said, is this, in short; That since
there is no Shadow of Reason for Private Baptism, and no Bar against bringing
this Ancient, this Catholic, this Religious, this almost necessary Practice of
Baptizing in Public, into a greater Esteem amongst us, than the pitiful Plea
of a prevailing Custom to the contrary, which might be easily overthrown by the
Encouragement, and especially the Example of Rich Men; whom their Meaner
Neighbors would as readily follow in ^ous Vsages, as in Civil Fashions. I say,
since there is no other Bar against Public Baptism, but this pitiful Plea, it
may be worth while for all Persons of Character and Station to consider,
whether, as God has bestowed on them more distinguishing Marks of his Favor,
than on others round about them, they ought not (were it only by way of
Gratitude) to signalize themselves more especially, and become forwarder
Instances in promoting his Glory all the ways imaginable: A fair Opportunity of
doing which, in no small measure, they have in the Matter before us, which
tends so much, as we have seen, to the Good of his Church, in the Edification
of particular Christians, and (which is little thought on) the Welfare of their
own Souls too.

For, See the Prayer for Christ's Church Militant, in the Communion-Service.
Whereas they beseech God every Lord's Day, and Holy Day, that he would give
his Grace to all Bishops and Curates, that they Rightly and Duly Administer his
Holy Sacraments; if in this, as well as other Petitions, their Hearts go along
with their Lips, and their Endeavors with both; if they do not frustrate this
his Grace here, by discouraging his Ministers in a faithful Discharge of their
Office, they may then expect to be at length Partakers with him in Everlasting
Glory hereafter.

Now, Consider we, what has been said, and God Almighty give every one of us a
right Judgment in this Particular, as wellas in all other Matters; That, as he
has left in his Church but two Sacraments, Church-Catechism.
as Outward and Visible Signs of his Inward and Spiritual Grace, we may none of
us, in the great Day of Visitation, be found among those, who have either
scandalously neglected the one, or huddl'd up the other in a Corner.

Now, to the Individual and Ever-blessed Trinity, Three Persons, but One
Glorious, Almighty Lord God, be ascribed, as is most due, by us, and his People
every where, all possible Adoration, Honor and Glory, As it was in the
Beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without End. Amen.

FINIS.

