A Survey of the River AVON, from BATH, to BRISTOL, by Experienced Artists;
with their Opinion of the Difficulty, and Charges to make the same Navigable.
1. THAT from Bristol, to Hannam, which is 5 Miles by Land, the River is
already Navigable; But that 12 Tides in 15 days, do not flow to Hannam, in
which Tides no Boat can be brought thither, and the highest Tide does not serve
above 3 hours.

2. That upon the River, from Hannam to Bath, being but 6 Miles by Land, there
are seven Wears, and twenty nine Mills, besides several Fords and Bridges for
Passage, between Gloucester-shirt and Somersetshire, and many Rocks, and
Shallows cross the River.

3. The first Wear from Bath, is upper Tierton-Wear, at which is six foot and a
half fall of Water; that the necessary charge of fixing Locks in the said Wear,
will be 9001.

4. The second Wear is lower Tierton, at which is 6 Foot and 8 Inches fall, and
the fresh rises there 16 foot, and is frequently Choked with Sand; and the
fixing Locks in this Wear, will cost 1000l; in which Wear it appears, a Lock
has been endeavored, formerly, to be set, but left unfinished.

5. The third Wear is that of Salford, where there is seven Foot fall, and the
Water is sixteeh Foot deep on each side the Wear, the River not to be diverted,
but with extreme difficulty, for though Draughts be made, according to the custom
of the River, there will still remain twelve Foot water, and the fixing Locks
in this Wear (if practicable) will cost at least 1500l.

6. The fourth Wear is Kelson, at which is seven Foot fall, which (though (...)
he easiest) will cost at least 800l. to place Locks there.

7. The fifth Wear is that of Swinford, which has 5 Foot, and a half head of
water, and will likewise cost 800l. to place Locks there.

8. The sixth Wear is Keinsham, which has 8 Foot and a half head of Water,
besides a considerable fall from the Wear to a hundred Foot below the Bridge,
which cannot be made Navigable, but by making a new Wear and Lock below the
Bridge, or by cutting a new Water-way, from the Mill Pond, to one hundred Yards
below the Bridge, which will be 400 Yards, and a Lock to Pen fourteen Foot high
will cost 1800l.

9. The seventh Wear is Hannam, at which there is eight Foot and a half fall,
the water not to be diverted; the Banks being there 15 Foot high, and the water
rising by freshes more then 20 Foot Perpendicular height; placing Locks there,
will cost at least 1500l. If it can be performed at all.

10. So that, the ordinary, and necessary Charges, in placing the said several
Locks, Amount to 8300l. And those Locks cannot be made, without the hazard of
usual and Customary floods, and other Accidents, which, should they happen
during the Work (as is more then probable) the Extraordinary Charges and
Damages cannot be computed or guessed at.

11. That the Charges above, are computed, without Consideration had, of the
Damages the Proprietors of the Lands upon the said River will sustein, or of
the great Damages the Proprietors of each Mill must unavoidably susler, by loss
of water, all the while the Locks are setting down, and afterward by the
frequent opening them; And especially Hannam Mills, which are the Lowest upon
the River, and where the Engines are placed for serving the City of Bristol with
fresh water: The working of which requires the greatest strength of water the
River now Affords.


