A COPY OF A LETTER FOUND IN THE PRIVY LODGEINGS AT WHITEHALL.

Printed in the year, 1641.

A COPY OF A LETTER FOUND IN THE PRIVY LODGINGS AT WHITEHALL.
THat it is fit for the King to do something extraordinary at this present, is
not only the opinion of the wisest, but their expectation also; men observe
him more now, then at other times: for Majesty in an eclipse, like the Sun,
draws eyes, that would not so much as have looked toward it, if it had shined
out and appeared like it self. To lie still now, at least, shows but a
calmness of mind, not a magnanimity: since in matters of government to
think well at any time (much more in a very active) is little better then to
dream well; nor must he stay to act till his people desire, because it is
thought nothing relisheth with them less: for therefore has nothing relished
with them, because the King for the most part has stayed till they desired,
and done nothing but what either they have, or were petioning for. But that the
King should do, will not be so much the question, as what he should do. And
surely for the King to have right council given him at all times is strange,
and at this time almost impossible; his party for the most part (I would it
were modestly spoken and it were not all of them) have so much to do for their
own preservation, that they cannot without breaking a law in nature, intend
another. Those that have courage, have not perchance innocence, and so dare
not show themselves in the Kings business; and if they have innocence, they
want parts to make themselves considerable, and so consequently the things they
undertake. Then in the Court, they give such council as they believe the King
is inclined to, and determine of his good by his desire, which is a kind of
setting the Sun by the dial. Interest which cannot err by passion, which
may in going about to show the King a cure, but a man should first show him the
disease. But to Kings, as to some kind of patients, it is not always proper to
show them how ill they are; And is too much like a country clown, not to show
the way unless he know of you first, from whence you come, and discourse of
things: Kings may be mistaken, and Councillors corrupted, but true interest
alone (said the Duke of Rohan) cannot err. It were not amiss therefore to
find out this interest, for setting down right principles before conclusions,
is weighing the scales before we deal for the commodities.

Certainly the interest of the King is the union of the people, and whosoever
has told him otherwise, (as the Scripture says of the Devil) was a Seducer
from the first. If there had been one Prince in the whole World that made
felicity in this life, and left a fair fame after death, without the love of
his Subjects, there were some color to despise it. There was not among all our
princes a greater Courter of the people, then Richard the third; not so much
out of fear as out of wisdom, and shall the worst of Kings have striven for
that, and shall not the best? it being an Angelical thing to gain love.

There be two things in which the people expect to be satisfied, Religion,
and justice, nor can it be done by any little Acts, but by Real and Kingly
resolutions. If any think that by dividing the factions (a good rule at other
times) he shall master the rest, he will be strangely deceived, for in
beginning of things it would do much; but when whole Kingdoms are resolved of
those now that lead those parties, if you would take off the major number the
lesser would govern, and do the same things still. Nay if you could take off
all, they would set up one and follow him; for as Cato said of the Romans they
were like sheep, and that the way to drive them was in a flock, for if one
would be extravagant, all the rest would follow; so it will be here, it will
dearly appear, that neither the person of the Scottish or English Actours
upon the stage are considerable to the great Body of England. But the things
they undertake, which done by another hand and so done that there remains no
jealousy, and leaves them where they were and not much risen in value. And of
how great consequence it is for the King to resume the right and be Author
himself let any body judge, since (as Comines says) those that have the art
to please the people, have the power to raise them.

To do things so that there remain no jealousy is very necessary, and is no
more then really reforming, that is pleasing them, for to do things that shall
grieve hereafter, and yet pretend love amongst Lovers themselves, where there
is the easiest faith will not be accepted. It will not be enough for the King
to do what they desire, but he must do something more; for that will show
the heartinesse; I mean by doing more, doing something of his own, as
throwing away things they call not for, or giving that they expected not; and
when they see the King doing the same things with them, that will take away all
thought or apprehension, that he thinks the things they have done already ill.

Now if the King ends the difference, and takes away the suspect for the
future, the cause will fall out to be no worse, then when two dualists enter
the field, the worsted party (the other having no ill opinion of him) has his
sword given him again without any farther hurt, after he has been in the
others power. But otherwise it is not safe to imagine what will follow, for the
people are naturally not valiant, nor not much Cavalliers, now it is the nature
of Cowards to hurt when they receive none, and wound even the dead; they will
not be content while they fear and have the upper hand, to fetter only
royalty, but perchance as timorous spirits use, will not think themselves
safe while it is at all. And possibly this is now the state of things.

In this great work at least to make it appear perfect and lasting to the
Kingdom, it is necessary that the Queen really join: for if she stand
aloof, there will be still suspicion, it being a received opinion in the
World, that she has a great interest in the Kings favor and power. And to
invite her, she is to consider with her self, whether such great virtues and
eminent excellencies (though she be highly admired and valued by those that
know her and are about her, ought to rest satisfied with so narrow a payment,
as the estimation of a few, and whether it be not more proper for a Queen so
great to aim at universal honor and love then private esteem and value.
Besides how becoming a work of the sweetness and softness of her love is
compounding of differences, and uniting hearts: and how proper for a Queen
reconciling King and people.

There is but one thing more remains, which whisperd abroad busieth the Kings
mind, if not disturbes it. In the midst of those great resolutions. And that is
the preservation of some servants, which he thinks somewhat hardly torn from
him of late, which is a thing of so tender a nature, I shall rather propound
something about it then resolve it.

The first Quere will be whether (as things now stand) Kingdoms in the
balance, the King is not to follow nature, where the conservation of the
general weal commands and governes the less. As Iron in particular sympathy
sticks to the Lodestone, but if it be joined with a greater body of Iron, it
quits those particular affections to the Lodestone, and moves with the other
the greater body, the common Country.

The second will be, whether if he could preserve these Ministers they can
be of any use to him hereafter, since no man is served with a greater
prejudice, then he that imployes suspected Ministers, or not beloved, though
able and deserving in themselves.

The third is, whether to preserve them there be any other way then for the
King first to be right with his people since the rule in Philosophy must ever
hold good nemo dat, quod non habet; before the King have power to preserve, he
must have power.

And lastly, whether the way to preserve this power, be not to give it away;
for the people of England have ever bin like wantons which pull and tugge as
long as the Prince has pulled with them, as you may see in King Henry the
third, King John, and King Edward the second, and ended all their troublesome
and unfortunate reigns. But when the Princes have let it go, the people come
and put in their hands again, that they may play on, as in Queen Elizabeth.

I will conclude all with a prayer, not that I think it needs for the present,
(prayers are to keep us from what may be, as well as preserve us from what
is) that the King may not be too unsensible of what is without him, nor too
resolved of what is within him; to be sick of a dangerous disease and feel
no pain cannot be but with loss of understanding: it is an Aphorism of
Hippocrates. And on the other side Opinionist is a sullen Porter, and (as is
witnessed of Constans) shuts out oftentimes better things then it lets in.

FINIS.

