A Plea for Tolleration OF OPINIONS and PERSUASIONS IN Matters of Religion,
Differing from the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

Grounded upon good Authority of Scripture, and the Practice of the Primitive
Times.

Showing the unreasonablenesse of Prescribing to other men's Faith, and the evil
of persecuting differing Opinions.

Humbly Presented to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by John Sturgion, a
Member of the Baptized People.

Acts 5. 38,39. And now I say unto you, Refrain from these men, and let them
alone; for if this Counsel (or this work) be of men, it will come to naught;
but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found, even to
fight against God.

LONDON, Printed by S. Dover, for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle
near Temple Bar, 1661.

A Plea for Tolleration of Opinions and Persuasions in Matters of Religion,
differing from the Church of England.
May it please your Majesty,
I Have had strong impulses upon my mind for some days, to present this Paper
to your Majesty, and I humbly hope it will not be made to suffer much under an
evil Resentment, upon its presentation to your hand, because it bears a
Testimony about it, of the Authors good affections to your Royal Self; for my
witness is on High, that I did not write this Paper because I love you not,
because I honor you not, because I own you not, in your Royal capacity of
Magistracy and Civil Power; God knows that you have not any Subject more
Christianly real or cordial unto you; and I humbly beg that your Majesty would
be pleased so far to deny your self, as to read it with patience, and to judge
of it as you shall see cause.

I beseech your Majesty to Consider, That it is one of the Sovereign and high
Concernments of your Soul, to understand, and to be acquainted with the
Counsels and mind of God, and to find time to search thoroughly into those
worthy Mysteries, which the blessed Angels (those great Princes of Heaven)
judge it no ways beneath them to pry into; and when they, who are Gods by
institution shall narrowly and with delight contemplate the Real Excellency of
his Glory, 1 Pet. 1. 12.
who is a God by nature, they must needs be transformed into his likeness,
according to that most observable Passage of the great Apostle; But we all with
open face beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same Image, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
and when the gods on Earth, shall be changed into the same Image with the God
of Heaven; not doubt but blessedness is coming on a pace upon the world.

Now if your Majesty be pleased to look into the excellent proceedings of the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, toward men; he does not take away his
favor, or withdraw his grace from all men, because some abuse it, and render
themselves so fearfully wicked, as not only to sin against the Law of
Commandments, but against that glorious Gospel of grace sealed and confirmed,
by the blood of ever blessed Jesus; Eze. 18. 20.
nor will he punish the Innocent for the guilty: but the soul that sins shall
die; the Father shall not answer for the Son, nor the Son for the Father, but
every soul shall bear the burden of his own sin. O that your Princely Mind
might be Eluminated or enlightened by this heavenly instance, that your
Majesty's Actions to all your Subjects, (from the Peer to the poorest) may be
guided by that Rule which God himself has been pleased to lay before you.

I shall humbly take leave to mind your Majesty of the Liberty of tender
Consciences, which your Majesty declared to indulge in your Declaration from
Breda, for which many thousands did in all humility bless the most High God,
who put it into your Majesty's heart to declare your Resolution to provide in
that particular, That such as did uot disturb the Peace of the Kingdom, might
Worship God according to their Light; and that no man should be molested or
disquieted for differing Opinions in matters of Religion, who could not join in
the Public service of worship; Yet in regard of some Rebellious persons in the
City of London, who pretended to the like Liberty of worshipping God apart from
the Parochial Assembly; who made Insurrections and committed Murder, under
groundless pretenses, of fighting for the Kingdom of Christ; whereupon your
Majesty by Proclamation has forbid all Meetings whatsoever, in private houses,
or houses built, or purchased for the use of Prayer, and other Ordinances of
Gods Worship; whereby the Innocent suffer for the Guilty; and many of your
Majesty's Loyal and obedient Subjects are questioned, and publicly suspected
to their great prejudice in their reputations, the consequence whereof is very
mischievous to them and their Families.

I cannot imagine how your Majesty can be unsatisfied, as to the Innocence of
the Baptized People and others, The Apology of the Baptized People of London.

The Linconshire two addresses.

The Kentish Petition; and many more to that Purpose.


who have not only disclaimed the wicked Rebellion of the said persons, but
they have pressed their Innocence from the very thought or Imagination of any
such wickedness; If your Majesty please to consider that in case three or four
of your Domestic servants should have committed, or done foam unworthy Act,
whereby they had incurred your just displeasure, upon which your Majesty should
have discharged all your servants from any further attendance in your Royal
Court, although they never had any thing to do with the Offenders, or their
ways; It may be supposed, that the Innocent would have thought this a very
severe Act? I shall Humbly leave Your Majesty to make the Application.

But if it be said, the Law is against that Indulgence formerly granted unto
us, by your Majesty (as was hinted in the Answer to the Petition of the
Congregations in London, given at your Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
to the said Petitioners) and therefore no longer to be continued unto us,
unless the next Parliament (to whom we are referred) provide for the same.

Upon which Answer, some make this Observation; That seeing the discontinuance
of Your Majesty's Gracious Indulgence, proceeds from the Aspect of some Old
Law, then we should have felt the influence thereof, although Venner and his
disciples had never been born: Moreover, if there be any such Law, it was in
being before Your Majesty sent that Dove, with the Olive Branch of Liberty of
Conscience, (viz.) Your Declaration that granted us Toleration; for no Law was
made against our Meetings by that Parliament, which Your Majesty termed, the
Healing and Blessed Parliament.

Now if Your Majesty saw Reason to suspend the Execution of those Laws, they
being hurtful and pernicious to men of Tender Consciences; then there is the
same Reason for Your Majesty to suspend them still, out of Tenderness to all
such as have in no wise abused Your Clemency and Grace, to them vouchsafed in
that Particular.

And whoever have, or shall move Your Majesty, to continue Your Proclamation
against Meetings, to worship God, or to take occasion by those Laws, to Grieve
and Afflict poor Men and Women, who have Opinions different from those of the
Church of England (for such endeavors are not wanting, by them that know not
what spirit they are of) and this is matter of Astonishment and Wonder, if Your
Majesty consider it, how far such men are from improving Your Excellent
Proclamation against Swearing, Debauchery and Drunkenness, or being in Taverns
after nine of the clock at night. Oh! how little notice is taken of these
Proclamations, or of the Laws to which they direct, either by the Swearing
Debauched Persons themselves, or by Your Majesty's Subordinate Ministers? and
how few (if any) have been prosecuted upon those two Proclamations, and what
Multitudes upon the other? And this is much to be lamented, that men may with
less danger, meet at Taverns, AleHouses, and other places of Debauchery, to
Drink above measure, or Swear, Game, Rant and Tear, as if there were neither
Heaven nor Hell, God nor Magistrates; but if a few poor Men and Women, meet
together in the Fear of the Lord, having mutual Faith, and Oneness of Heart, to
pray unto Almighty God; a part of whose Petition is, that God would Bless and
Guide Your Majesty, and all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2. at such Meetings
many are offended.

And may it further please Your Majesty, to consider Your afflicted and
innocent Subjects, how they have been haled from their Peaceable Habitations,
and thrust into Prisons, almost in all Counties in England, and many are still
detained, to the utter undoing of themselves and Families; and most of them are
poor men, whose Livelihood (under God) depends upon the labor of their own
hands; so that they lie under more then an ordinary Calamity, there being so
many thrust into little rooms together, that they are an anoyance each to
other; especially in the City of London, where the Lord Mayor crowds them very
close together; that it has been observed, the Keepers have complained, they
have had too many guests; and whilst they suffer there, some of their Wives
and tender Babes want bread at home.

And how long this will be the portion of some, I know not, unless Your Majesty
extend the like Grace to other Prisoners, as Your Majesty did most Princely to
them at Westminster, in giving Order to Discharge them, they acknowledging by
Subscription, Your Majesty to be the Supreme Magistrate of this Kingdom, and of
all others of Your Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions, without pressing the Oath
of Allegiance, which some are not free to take, by Reason Christ says, Mat. 5.
34. Swear not at all, and in St. James 5.12. Above all things my Brethren,
Swear not; they mistaking these two places, understand that Christians should
not Swear in any Case; and therefore out of mere fear, lest they should offend
against a Divine Law, have fallen under the Penalty of that Humane Law, which
requires us to Swear, our Allegiance to Your Majesty. O, that Your Majesty's
Clemency might enterpose, that their weakness on the one hand, and the
Severity of the Law on the other, might not ruin many hundred Families.

But to return to that for which I am in Travel (viz.) that we may worship God,
according to our light and measure of understanding, unto which we have
attained, without being restrained from the exercise thereof, by the
Magistrate, or by having any thing imposed upon us, as Articles of Faith, or
Rules of Worship; in the behalf of which, I humbly tender these six Reasons
following;

Reason 1. First, Be pleased, Royal Sir, to consider, that such imposing of the
Magistrates, is contrary to the Nature of the Gospel; because it is one of the
Glories of Christian Religion, that it was so Pious, Excellent, Powerful, and
Persuasive, that it came in upon its own Piety and Wisdom; with no other force,
but a Torrent of Arguments, and Demonstration of the Spirit, beating down all
strong holds, and every high Thought and Imagination, 2 Cor. 10. v. 5.
that exalted it self against the same; but toward the persons of men, it was
always full of Meekness, and Charity, Compliance, and Toleration, and bearing
one with another, restoring persons overtaken with an Error, Gal. 6. ^.
with the Spirit of Meekness; the Consideration is as Prudent, and the
Proposition as Just, as the Precept is Charitable, and the President most Pious
and Holy; that Precept which it chiefly Preaches in order to all Blessedness,
is, Meekness, Mercy and Charity, whereby it should preserve it self, and
promote its own Interest: for indeed nothing will do it so well, nothing does
so excellently insinuate it self into the understanding and affections of men,
as when the Principles, Actions, and Persuasions of a people, are in every part
suitable; and it would be a mighty disparagement to so Glorious an Institution,
that in its Principle it should be so Merciful and Humane, and in the Promotion
and Propagation, of it, so inhumane and dishonorable to Christ; it may serve
the Turk to support his Alkoron, but it will much dishonor Christianity, to
offer to support it by that which good men believe to be a distinctive
cognizance of the Mahometon Religion, from the Excellency and Piety of
Christianity, whose sense and Spirit, is excellently described by S. Paul, 2 Timothy 2.24. The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men,
in meekness Instructing those that oppose themselves; If then any man will
smite those that are his Opposites in Opinion, he must quit the Title of being
Gods Servant for his pains; nor can a Distinction of Persons Ecclesiastical and
Secular, give advantage for an escape; for even the Secular Power, if it be
Christian, must not be strikers of others for the Matters of their Faith, for
God alone is judge of erring Persons, as that Learned Doctor Jeremiah Tailor,
now Bishop of Down, says in his thirteenth page of his Epistle Dedicatory, to
that famous Book, entitled, The Liberty of Prophecy.

Reason 2. The second Reason against restraining or using force in Matters of
Religion; is, Because Christ, who is the Only Lawgiver to his Church, gives
this Precept for the Regulation of the Conversation of his Disciples; Mat. 7.12
Whatsoever you would have men do unto you, do ye even so unto them; than which
there is no Law more reasonable, nor more just: It cannot be supposed that
Kings sitting in the Throne of Government, or place of Trust and Rule, are
exempted from the observation of this Commandment; which if so, then if the
Magistrates be of this Persuasion, that Christ dyed for all men, and the people
believe as Calvin did, that he dyed for the Elect only; What can the
Magistrates do in this case? for if they make a Law in favor of the Peoples
Judgment, then they wrong themselves, which I suppose they will not do, if a
Law be made in favor of their own Opinion against the Peoples, then besides
the injury which is done to the people, they break that Royal Law before
mentioned, and thereby become guilty before God.

Reason 3. The third Reason against restraining, or using force in matters of
Religion, is taken from the unreasonablenesse of such proceedings; for what is
more unreasonable, then to deny men the use of their Reason, in choice of their
Religion? for if Scripture Tradition, Councils and Fathers, be the evidence in
a question; yet Reason is the judge; that is, we being the Persons that are to
be persuaded, we must see that we be persuaded reasonably, and it is against
Reason to assent to a lesser evidence, when a greater is propounded, but every
man for himself is to take cognizance, if he be able to judge, but if he be
not, then he is not bound under the tie of necessity to know it, nor will God
punish him for not knowing it; and not only the unreasonablenesse, but the
impiety of using force in this case, may be further seen, if it be considered,
that there is nothing under God has power over the understanding of a man, God
commanding us to believe his Revelations, persuades and satisfies the
understanding, by his commanding and revealing it; for there is no greater
probation in the World, that a Proposition is true, then because God has
commanded it to be believed; but then it must certainly be made appear to us,
that God has so commanded it; but no man has any Efficacy or Authority on the
understanding of another, but by Proposal and Persuasion, and then a man is
bound to assent according to the operation of the Argument, and strength of the
Persuasion; neither indeed can he assent sooner, or other ways though he would
never so fain; he therefore that in this case uses force or punishment,
punishes a man for keeping a good Conscience, or forces him into a bad; he
both punishes sincerity, and persuades hypocrisy, he presecutes a truth, and
drives into an error; he teaches a man to dissemble, to be safe, but never to
be honest nor acceptable to God. Learned Doctor Tailors Argument for
Tolleration is very Excellent, in his Epistle to his Liberty of Prophecy, in
page 14. This very thing (says he) being one of the Arguments I use to
persuade permissions, left compulsion introduce hypocrisy, and make sincerity
troublesome and unsafe.

Reason 4. The fourth Reason which I humbly offer to consideration, That
persecution for Conscience, or the Civil Magistrate using force in the matters
of Religion; is, because it came in through corruptions of the times, so that
it is so far from being of Divine Sanction, that it is earthly and sensual; for
the proof of this I shall only transcribe a passage out of that worthy Author,
Doctor Tailor, in his aforesaid Epistle to his Liberty of Prophecy, Page the
18, 19. Which is as follows; That against this I have laid prejudice enough
from the Dictates of holy Scripture, it is observable that this with its
Appendent degrees, I mean restraint of Prophesying, imposing upon other men's
understandings, being masters of their Consciences, and Lording it over their
Faith, came in with the retinue and train of Antichrist; that is, they came as
other abuses and corruption of the Church did, by reason of the Iniquity of
times, and the cooling of the first heats of Christianity, and the increase of
Interest, and the abatement of Christian simplicity, when the Churches fortune
grew better, and her sons grew worse, and some of her Fathers worst of all; For
in the first three hundred years there was no sign of persecuting any man for
his opinion, though at that time there were very horrid opinions commenced, and
such which were Exemplary and parallel enough to determine this question; for
they then were assaulted by new Sects which destroyed the common Principles of
Nature, of Christianity, of Innocence and public Society, and they who used
all the means Christian and spiritual, for their disimprovement and conviction,
thought not of using corporal force, other ways than by blaming such
proceedings; and therefore I do not urge their not doing it, as an Argument of
the unlawfulness of such proceedings, but their defying it, and speaking
against such Practices, as unreasonable and distructive to Christianty; for
which the Learned Doctor cites all these Fathers, Tertullian, St. Cyprian,
Lactantius, St. Hilary, Minuitius, Felix Sulpitius, Severus, Saint Chrysostom,
St. Hierom, St. Austin, Damascon, Theophylact, Socrates, Scholasticus, and St.
Bernard; and he further says, that all wise Princes till they were overborn
with Faction or solicited by Peevish Persons, gave Tolleration to differing
Sects, whose Opinions did not disturb the public Interest; and in page 20.
till 400. years after Christ, no Catholic Person, or very few did provoke the
secular arm, or implore its aid. So far he. From which it is evident, that the
Magistrates imposing in matters of Religion, is an Evil, from which I pray God
deliver your Majesty.

Reason. 5. The fifth Reason is taken from the Principles and Practices of some
great Princes, who did both give and persuade Tolleration; King James your
Majesty's Royal Grandfather, in his Letter to the States of the united
Provinces dated the sixth of March, 1613. amongst other things thus wrote,
Etdistricte imperetis ut Pacem Colant seinvicem tolerando in ista opinionum ac
sententiaram, discere pacitia Eoque Iustius videmur vobis hoc ipsum suadere,
debere quod Neutrum Comperimus adeo deviam, ut non possint cum Fidei Christiana
veritate, and cum Animarum Salute consistore: (Englished for common Benefit)
That you charge them to maintain peace by bearing one with another in such
difference of Opinions and Judgments; There were very sharp contentions about
Religion amongst the Holland Ministers; at that time King James advises the
Magistrate to moderate them, not to kill or punish them, for they may both be
saved.
Therefore it seems more Right, that you should be thus persuaded, seeing
neither of the Judgments is found so dangerous, but that it may stand with the
true Faith of a Christian, and the Salvation of Souls.

The like Counsel in the divisions of Germany at the first Reformation, was
thought reasonable by the Emperor Fardinand, and his Excellent son Maximilion,
they had observed that violence did Exasperate, was unblessed, unsuccessful,
and unreasonable; and therefore they made Decrees of Tolleration, and appointed
Tempors and Expediences to be drawn up by discreet Persons; and George
Cassander was designed to this great work, and did some thing toward it; and
Immanuel Phillibert Duke of Savoy, repenting of his War undertaken for Religion
against the Pedimontans, promised then Tolleration, and was as good as his
word; as much is done by the Nobility of Polonia; and Theodoricus the Sage,
King of the Goths, asswaging the vemency of the Arians against the Orthodox,
No belief (says he) is carried on by blows; nor is that Excellent saying of
King Edward the sixth to be forgotten, he being solicited to put a Heretic to
death, made this wise answer, Will you have me to send her to Hell in her sins?
But to conclud^ this, the French King (although he be the second son of the
Church of Room) gives Tolleration to different persuasions in matters of
Religion; for the Hugonets have their Churches and Places of meeting for to
worship God in according as they are persuaded by order from their King; and
the world is witness how prosperous they have been, since they have left
fighting for Religion among themselves.

Reas. 6. The sixth and last Reason, I have taken from the ill success, that
always attends such proceedings; for whoever used force upon the body to
change the mind, or to make men believe something they are not persuaded of, or
to disbelieve something they have received for truth, or to leave off
worshipping God, in that way which they think is most agreeable to his will;
they will have no better success than that man had, that clapped his shoulder to
the ground to stop the earthquake: and the experiences which Christendom has
had in this last Age, are sufficient instances; when France fought amongst
themselves, the Catholics against the Hugonets, the spilling of their own
blood was Argument enough, of the imprudence of that way of promoting Religion,
and that all the blood shed in open Arms, and private Massacres could not
prevent their further growth, nor extinguish that light that sprung up amongst
that People; and the name of the Hugonets is not only still in France, but
they and their Religion Tolerated.

But the great instance is in the differing temper, Government, and success,
which Margaret of Parma, and the Duke of Alva had; the clemency of the first,
had almost extinguished the Flame, but when she was removed and Duke Alva
succeeded, and Managed the matter of Religion with fire and sword (...) made
the flame so great, that his Religion and his Prince too, have been quite
turned out of a great part of the Country.

And we are not without example nearer home, in Queen Mary's days, what Force
and Violence was there used, to make the People believe, as the Queen and her
Bishops believed, some was burnt to death, some destroyed in Persons, and many
that escaped with life, were undone in their estates and livelihood; and all
this was so unsuccesful, as to the suppressing their further growth, that it
did the quite contrary, for the more they were oppressed, the more they grew.

I shall only add a passage out of Learned Bishop Tailor, in his Epistle to
his Liberty of Prophecy, page 25. But it is (says he) observed by Socrates,
that when the first Persecution was made against them (that is) such as
differed in Opinion from the Bishop at Rome, by Pope Innocent the first; at the
same instant, the Goths invaded Italy, and become Lords of all; it being just
in God, to bring a persecution upon them, for true belief, who with an
incompetent Authority, and insufficient Grounds, do persecute an error less
material, in persons agreeing with them, in the profession of the same common
Faith.

The next thing I humbly offer to Your Princely consideration, is the Divine
Bond upon our Hearts, to worship God according to our Light; and the crying
sin, we must commit, if we shall resist our own understanding, and refuse to
obey the Command of God upon our Conscience, to assemble our selves together
for his Worship, Heb. 10. 25.
and that we ought to esteem our duty to God, much dearer than our Estates,
Liberty or Lives.

And our Souls are fully persuaded, that it is our duty to meet together, and
speak often one to another, to exhort each other daily, to take heed of sin,
and to follow after virtue, and to press after the Mark of our High Calling of
God, in Christ Jesus our Lord; and to provoke to love and good works, and if
any be overtaken in a fault, to restore them in the Spirit of meekness; and to
relieve the poor, and to support the weak, that by bearing one another
burdens we may fulfill the Law of Christ; and to walk so inoffensively in our
conversation, as to give no Just occasion neither to your Majesty as Supreme
Magistrate, nor to any of your Ministers under you; nor to any of the People or
Neighbors about us; but to observe that excellent Law of Christ, Mat. 7. 12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; and if
any shall persecute us for our Profession-sake, to bear it with patience and
not to return evil for evil, nor reviling for reviling; but contrary-wise to do
them good for evil, and to pray for them, Mat. 5. 44.
that their eyes may be opened, and that God may not lay their sin (in this
case) to their charge.

Now if Your Majesty will but consider what it is which the Baptized People and
diverse others, have made such earnest suite to your Majesty for, it is not for
Titles of Honors, nor for places of great profit, either in a Civil or
Ecclesiastical Capacity, but only this is their request, and humble desire,
that we may serve the Lord without molestation in that Faith and order which we
have Learned in the Holy Scripture; giving Honor to our King to whom Honor
belongs, fear to whom fear, Tribute to whom Tribute belong, 1 Pet. 2^ 17.
in every thing as far as we have abilities, to render to God the things that
are Gods, and to the Magistrate the things that are His. Romans 13.7.

We likewise judge it our duty, to be always willing and ready to give an
Answer, to every man that shall ask us a Reason of our Hope that is in us, with
meekness and fear, Now if any who judge themselves to be spiritual Guides, will
but take the pains to endeavor our conviction (if they think we err) or at
least to hear what we have to say, why we dissent from the Public worship, we
doubt not but through the Grace of God, we shall be able to give such an
account of our Faith and Practice, that we do not deserve those Epithets some
are please do give us.

I shall only transcribe one passage out of that Ingenious Doctor, Dr.
Jeremiah Tailor which I find in Sect. 18. number 34. of his Liberty of
Prophecy, he speaking of the Anabaptists, says, That since there is no direct
impiety in the Opinion, nor any that is apparently consequent to it, and they
with so much probability do or may pretend to true persuasion, they are with
all means Christian fair and humane to be Redargued or instructed; but if they
cannot be persuaded, they must be left to God, who knows every degree of
every man's understanding, all his weaknesses and strengths, what impresse each
Argument makes upon his spirit, and how unresistable every Reason is; and he
alone judges his Innocence and sincerity: And for the question, I think there
is so much to be pretented, against that which I believe to be the truth, that
there is much more truth than evidence on our side; and therefore we may be
confident, as for our own particulars, but not too forward peremptorily to
prescribe to others, much less, to damn, or to kill, or to persecute them,
that only in this Particular disagree. So far he.

I shall conclude with this Humble Petition, that seeing Your Majesty has been
most earnestly supplicated (by many Petitions, Addresses, and Papers) to
continue Your former Indulgence: Oh, that Your Majesty would be Graciously
Pleased to do something in it, that may recommend Your Name to be embalmed by
them for perpetuity, through the remembrance of Your Just, Righteous, and
Merciful Actions, in breaking every Yoke of Oppression, and to the easing of
the Conscience of every man, professing Jesus Christ, from all Unrighteous
Impositions; And as this will administer Peace, Joy, and Comfort to many of
Your Suffering Subjects; so it will bring most excellent Consolation unto Your
Majesty's Soul, when the Heavens shall be no more: And as Your Majesty desires
to be found on the right hand of the great Judge, in that his day; so in this
Your day, to remember and consider, that Magistracy and Power of Government,
are no Institutions of God, either to fill the Purses, or to furnish the
Tables, or to lift up the Minds, or in any kind, to gratify the flesh of those
in whom they are invested; but rather, to serve to accomodate and bless the
Societies and Communities of men on earth (unto which they relate respectively)
according to that worthy Item, which the Queen of Sheba gave unto Solomon,
Because the Lord loved Israel for ever; therefore made he thee King to do
Judgment and Justice. 1 Kin. 10.9.

The same Lord and Mighty God, so over-shadow Your Majesty with his Power and
Good Spirit, that the conceptions of Your Heart, may be Holiness to him,
Wealth and Peace, and gladness of Heart to the People of these Great and Famous
Kingdoms (the Government whereof God has been pleased to entrust with You) to
Your Royal Self, Honor and Safety, and length of Days, with the Peace and Joy
of a good Conscience on earth, and a far more exceeding Eternal weight of Glory
in the Heavens;

So Prays, Your Humble and Dutiful Subject, JOHN STURGION.

THE END.

