The Surey Demoniack: OR, AN ACCOUNT OF SATAN'S Strange and Dreadful Actings, In
and about the Body of Richard Dugdale Of Surey, near Whalley in Lancashire; And
how he was Dispossessed by Gods Blessing on the Fastings and Prayers of diverse
Ministers and People. The Matter of Fact attested by the Oaths of several
Credible Persons, before some of His MAJESTY'S Justices of the Peace in the
said County.

LONDON: Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's-
Churchyard. 1697.

THE PREFACE.
AMong Satan's various methods for the ruining of the Gospel, he has kept up
among us, abundance of his Institutions, Customs and Exercises, which he
brought in among our Barbarian unchristened Ancestors, 2 King. 17. from ver.
17. to the end. Neh. 13.24. and has manifested himself in such practices, or
appearances, as he did, or does act, in and among Pagans or Jews, such as in
Apparitions, Possessions, Witch-crafts, etc. A particular Instance whereof is
hereafter related; as also, how Satan was herein defeated through the Lords
setting in with our Endeavors against him; and oh! that by this Alarm this
Evil Generation may be rouzed out of their Security, Prejudices, Formality and
Sensuality, if God peradventure will give even to those that oppose themselves,
Repentance, that they may acknowledge the Truth, and recover themselves out of
the snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26. which would more rejoice them and us,
had we thus our Name written in Heaven, than if we had the Devils subject to
us, Luke 10.20. Mat. 7.22, 23. And oh! that none may either with the Pharisees,
Luke 11.15, 16. contract the dreadful Guilt and Danger of imputing the Lord's
extraordinary Workings to wrong Causes, or may be disregarders of the Works of
the Lord, and of the Operations of his Hands, whom he will destroy, and not
build up, Psalm. 28.5. or may be despisers, which behold wonders and perish,
through the Lords working a Work in their days; a work, that they will in no wise
believe, though a Man declare it unto them, Act. 13.41.

On the following Occasion, the Reverend Mr. Baxter, desirous to add this
Narrative to his late Book; called, The World of Spirits evinced by
Apparitions, Witchcraft, etc. ordered about half a dozen Letters for our
sending it up to him: hence arose our intentions of Printing it, which seemed
to die, upon his dying before this was sent to him. But afterward another
Reverend London Divine desired that it should be Printed, as an Appendix to Mr.
Increase Mathers Book; called, A further Account of the Trials of New England
Witches, A. D. 1693. Upon which much of it was then at London, for the same
purpose, as is declared in an Advertisement on the back of the said Book's
Title Page: But it not being then thoroughly completed and certified, it was
again as dead, or at least delayed, which delay proceeded partly from our
backwardness to show our selves to the World, being far from seeking to be
known openly, John 7.4. insomuch that were it consistent with this Work, we
would be unnamed herein, being especially desirous, that none might be eyed,
but only the fearful in praises working Wonders, nor any in the least share in
the first Title, that cannot reach the last, Exo^. 15.11. Psalm. 136.4 although it
might have come abroad long ere now, had not Satan likewise sensibly hindered
once and again, 1 These. 2.18. as to give one instance. On Sept. the 16th -- 95,
about Seven in the Evening, one of us walking by the Bell and Dragon an
Apothecaries Shop, at Kings-street end in Cheapside, with the fair Copy of this
Narrative, and the only Copy of a Postscript designed for it, wrapped together in
his Pocket, to be offered for the Press; about half a dozen Men sudenly claspt
about him, and notwithstanding his struggling and calling for help, got the said
Copies from him; so as all his endeavors could not yet regain them. However
this delay is not so long, but that were there any falsehoods, as we are
satisfied there are none herein, they might be as well detected now as at
first. Nay this delay seems rather to advantage than disparage this Narrative,
since had it been Printed soon after it happened; Satan's removal from, or
return to Richard's Body, had been more questionable than now, Deuteronomy. 18.22. and
then the proofs of it might have been reputed the effects of mistaken surprise,
and of the ferment and wonder which the Country was then in about it; whereas
the within mentioned proofs of it, preserved these Five Years, and given in on
a far less plausible Juncture, and that after the hearing of what can be said
against it, must needs be more weighty, deliberate, digested and satisfactory,
though far less numerous then might have been at first from the Crowds of
Spectators that are now scattered we know not where. But he in whom are all our
Springs, to whom belong the Issues from Death seems at last to rescue it from
the death it thus long lay under, and to overruled the Obstructions of it, Rev.
12.4. for the furthering of its production, Act. 5.38, 39. and to say, let it
live by the Mouths of two sorts which indeed are the all sorts of Christians.

First, Of the Believers of Satan's actuating Men's Bodies by Possessions,
Witch-crafts, etc. Many such eminent Divines, Physicians, and others urged the
publication hereof as a very likely expedient for rooting out Atheism,
Debauchery, Sadducism and Devilishness, and for planting the practice and power
of Christ's precious Truths and Ways in the room thereof. Yea several have at
different times pressed this by inculcating Captain Bell's Case, as in the
Preface of Luther's Table talk, viz. Luther's Mensalia, which did so promote
the Protestant Religion in Germany, that each Church had one of them chained in
it; on which the Pope and the Emperor caused them all to be burnt, only one of
them was long afterward found wrapped up in an old Wall by a German Gentleman
that pulled down his old House, who not daring to keep it for fear of the Law
against it, sent it to his Friend Captain Henry Bell in London, desiring him to
turn it out of the German into the English Tongue. The said Captain through
business or otherwise deferring to translate it, one Night between Twelve and
One a Clock appeared to him, then awake, an Ancient Man standing at his Bed
side all in white, with a broad White Beard down to his Girdle, taking him by
the right Ear, saying, Sirrah! Will thou not take time to translate that Book
which is sent thee out of Germany, I will shortly provide for thee both time
and place to do it in, then vanished; his fright and sweating, astonished his
Wife, yet not heeding Visions; the Book again slipped out of his mind, till
Warrants from Charles the First's Council Board laid him in the Gate House in
Westminster for Ten Years, without showing him any cause, Five of which he
spent in composing the said Translation, which was published by the Assembly of
Divines. Thus the silencing of this Narrative was reckoned dangerous, even as
the said Captains neglect proved. Besides something like his said Night-Warning
befell one of the Ministers undernamed, who as the said Captain, through business
not finding, or taking time to prepare for Printing the said Narrative, was
after the Midnight of November the 18th 1693, as fully awakened in his Bed as
ever in his Life, where he heard a most melodious sound, that did most
distinctly pronounce unto him these three pieces of Sentences, the other pieces
of which three Sentences were concealed from him, viz. -- This cannot be
endured. Therefore prepare for -- or death. Thou shall ere long die, -- or;
which melody or words struck the said Minister into a sweating horror, until
in the Morning of November the 19th 1693, he declared this unto a faithful
Witness, who was likewise amazed thereat.

Secondly, By the Mouths of the Questioners or Scoffers of such workings of
Satan, who are of two sorts, either first Questioning or denying such in the
general, which denial or disbelief seems occasioned Two ways; either first,
through the difficulty of distinguishing true Reports of such workings from the
false ones which are broached, either first, by Popish Fablers, whose Legends
however, among Protestants at least, should not affect the credit, or impair
the Authority of Protestant Writings. Secondly, By Protestant Impostors, who,
as the Cyclopses at the forges in devilish Volcanoes, do perhaps write such
Narratives as this, affixing the feigned Names of Justices and Witnesses
thereunto, yea dressing them up so like the true ones, as creates a suspicion,
yea often a rejection of the true Ones, as if they likewise were but
Counterfeits, in this case what is to be done, should all true Narratives be
forborne, through fear of their being reputed false, or rather should not such
Falsifiers be suppressed as common Nusances offering to bring the Cretian name,
Tit. 1.12. on Britain, and embezilling the precious stock of the Nations
Credibility and Veracity, Prove. 22.1. since others are punished by Ministers of
Justice for Forgery of Bills, Coin, Deeds, etc. Why should not the Cheats
abovesaid fall under Legal Prosecutions unto which the Attestants
beforementioned offer themselves, if any known falsehood be found herein. Or,
Secondly, For that the true Reports of such workings are not duly minded by
them, through their extinguishing their intellectual sight, so as they cannot,
or turning it aside, so as they will not view or believe them. Whereas, if they
have a mind to any thing, though never so absurd, what shallow giddy Reasons will
serve their turn, to patronize their belief thereof, and when any thing, though
never so excellent and evident seemed not to their interest, and is not to
their mind or liking, how will they arm and harden themselves against all
methods for convincing them thereof, just like the Jews when driven to the
necessitous dilemma of seeing Christ to be the Messiah or putting out their own
Eyes, John 9.16, 39, 40. rather resolved upon this, then that, and so could not
see the two gross absurdities in their opinion of Christ's being not only a
Demoniack, because of his matchless preaching, John 10.19, 20. and 7.46. but
also a Wizard, because of his ejecting Devils, Mat. 9.33, 34. As 1. They could
not see it, to be irrational, for that no unblinded Man could argue from such
premises, that Christ was either the one or the other, for can it possibly
follow, that he was possessed with a Devil, because he preached so, as never any
Man did, or that he had a familiar Spirit, because he cast out such Spirits.
Nor 2. Could they see it to be self contradictory, for that if it did from
thence follow that Christ was either the one or the other, yet how could one
Man possibly be both at once, since surely the Man, that Acts a Wizard could
cast out Devils, would never suffer himself to be a Demoniack, for how could he
cast Devils out of others, if he could not out of himself, Luke 4.23. at the
same rate did they persuade themselves to think an incarnate Devil to be more
eligible than an incarnate God, Mat. 27.16, 26. John 6.70. just as if a Man
should fix it in his conceit, that the Sun is nothing but Soot and Ink kneaded
into a Ball, and that so unalterably as that no Sense or Reason could persuade
him of the contrary; a more modern Instance whereof is the Papists denying
Consecrated Bread and Wine to be Bread and Wine, and were it not for such
Instances, one would scarce think it practicable, that any against Sense,
Reason, Scripture, (1 John 1.1, 3.) and all Topics of Arguments should in
earnest deny such workings of Satan in the general.

The Second sort of those whose questioning of such workings occasions this
Publication, are the Questioners of the within mentioned instances in
particular, on which perhaps several pass various Censures, now it is past, and
though some of them knew not the most material things thereof, and others of them
whilst it was in hand, seemed under deep Convictions and Apprehensions of
Satan's working therein, yet now such Impressions being decayed or vanished in
them [as in those that in one juncture admired and cried up Sejanus] they on
another turn of affairs can jointly say, Sojanum nunjanum nunquam si quid mihi
credis amavi, For my part I never believed there was any such Possession or
Witchcraft in this matter, which I still thought proceeded merely; either,
First, From a Disease, which might have been cured by mere Physic: Or,
Secondly, From Imposture which might have been cured merely by the House of
Correction: Or, Thirdly, From I know not what. One while I think it came from
this Cause; another while from another Cause; and though I cannot possibly
ascribe, or resolve what past at the Surey into one or other of the said
Causes, or into them all together, and so I know not where to fix it, or unto
what Natural Cause or Causes exclusive of Satan, it can rationally or properly
be referred, yet for all this, I am resolved, it shall not pass with me, or
with any that I can influence for Possession, or any such thing, though all the
signs and marks of Possession that ever I read, or heard of in Scripture, or
other Authors be to be met with herein, and though I have no enforcing Arguments
to the contrary, yet I am loath to yield this to be such, and like not that
such use of Scripture means should gain the reputation of removing Satan thus
through the Lord's concurrence, rather then this I Would have it reputed Disease,
Imposture, or any thing to this purpose, as we hear, some scraps or parcels of
what past at the Surey are talked of amongst some, as the all that happened
there; and hereupon it is run down, and represented as very inconsiderable, and
they that engaged therein, are impeached for charging God foolishly. In this
case is it our duty on the one hand, by our silence, to let Gods Ways and
Servants be vilified, and such a tremendous astonishing Providence to be buried
in Misreports or Oblivion, in the Burning and Shining Light whereof such
multitudes were awakened (John 5.35.) at least for a season, for it was not
done in a Corner? Act. 26.26. or on the other hand, what other preventive or
remedy can we have, besides publishing this Narrative, wherein the Actings and
Discourses from and to the Demoniack are often word for word, and every where in
sense and substance, the very same that past at the Surey, though vastly short of
being all, and particularly not all the Discourses to Satan, much of which was
premeditated, and so not strange, though sometimes long, yet many other things
more apposite and advantageous did flow in the ^eat of Conference, but we
little then thinking of Printing what past there, did not put down near all in
any Notes or Minutes, or in our Diaries which some of us there kept, as we do
still for other daily occurrences; however to the Truth of what is herein
reported, some thousands hinted at in the Narrative, can in part testify: And
we the Ministers principally concerned therein, do positively affirm, that it
was all really and certainly matter of Fact, so far as we could learn from our
being personally present, all of us at most, or many passages, and some of us,
at all the material Passages contained herein: As, Witness our Hands.

Thomas Jolly Charles Sagar Nicholas Kershaw Robert Waddington Thomas Whally
John Carrington
Ministers occasionally assisting at the Meetings within mentioned were Mr.
Frankland Mr. Pendlebury Mr. Oliver Heywood.


Some Account of Satan's acting in and about the Body of Richard Dugdale of
Surey, near Whally in Lancashire, and of Satan's removal thence through the
Lord's Blessing on the Fasting and Prayer of the within mentioned Ministers and
People.
THE said Richard Dugdale, was not very big nor small, but of a middle size and
stature, about 19 years old, and had been Gardener or Servant at West-Byhal,
till he was seized with the Affliction hereafter mentioned; before, and after
which he was not apparently troubled with any Melancholy or Disease, or
Distemperature of Body, and upon his said Affliction, he lived at the said
Surey, with his Parents and his Sisters, who got a competent Livelihood through
his Father Thomas Dugdales Gardoning, and their other Labors, and were all
professed Protestants, though they had been Popishly brought up, and lead
profane lives in a place, where Iniquity did so abound, as some Judgment might
justly be expected upon, or among them.

Upon April the 29th 1689, in the Morning, the said Richard came to the House
of Mr. Jolly at the New Chapel or Waymond Houses near Pendle Hill; for though
Richard had signified his desires of coming thither a Quarter of a Year before,
yet the Messenger failed to give notice thereof until a day or two before he
came; whilst he was in the said House, there were great grounds of suspecting
that he was possessed by the Devil, partly from the account he gave of his Case,
and principally from the strange Fits which violently seized him, whilst Mr.
Jolly was at Family Duty, reading and opening the Word, and Praying, wherein he
had many Praeternatural Motions, far above the reach of his personal Ability
and Agility, and had shown great despite against the said Ordinances of God,
yea especially when Christ was more solemnly named, and his Condition more
earnestly recommended to the Lord; then he raged as if he had been nothing but
a Devil in Richard's bodily shape, though when he was not in his fit, he
manifested great inclination to the Word and Prayer, for the Exercise of which
on his behalf, he desired we would set apart a Day of Fasting as the only means
from which he could expect help, being he had in vain tried other means both
lawful and unlawful.

Accordingly some of us Ministers with several of the People met at the Sparth,
May the 8th 1689. Before the Exercise was begun, we examined Richard and his
Parents about the occasion of this sad Affliction; On this day and at some
following Meetings, they confessed to us as follows; That at Whally Rushburying
on the Jamestide before, or on July the 25th 1688, there was great Dancing and
Drinking; what happened to the said Richard at that great Dancing-bout, or how
therein Richard had offered himself to the Devil, on condition the Devil would
make him a good Dancer, is more fully declared in Sept. the 26th's Discourse.
Upon which inordinate wish, and other extravagant Courses, very probably Satan
did thorough the just Judgment of God get advantage over Richard; but at the
said Drinking-bout, they acknowledged both the said Thomas and Richard, Father
and Son were much in drink, and then had a scoffle with a Young Man; and him,
or his Partakers they suspected as instrumental in this harming Richard one way
or other, though not in the said scuffle, for Richard apparently went well and
sound home without any hurt, where after he had been for some time sitting with
some Company, his Side was suddenly seized as with a burning pain, as if it had
been whipped and stung with Nettles, or stabbed with Needles; afterward he being
in the Evening in a Room by himself, several Apparitions presented themselves,
and after Vanished before him; for he saw the Table spread over with Dainties
or Delicate Fare, and heard a Voice as from under the Table, saying, Eat, and
take thy fill of Pleasures; then he saw the Table covered with Ribbons and fine
Ornaments, and heard a Voice, saying, Take and enjoy what Honors thou
desire; then he saw Gold and Precious things lying on the Table, and heard a
Voice, saying, Take, and thou shall have all the Riches thou will; but he said,
he took none of the said Offers, but that ever after the said Rushburying Riot,
he had a great fancy and vehement inclination for Dancing, so that he could not
refrain from it, and that in the Week afte^, the said James-tides Dancing and
Drunken Fit, or after the said Dancing Humor did thereupon possess him, he had
the Apparition of a Man's Head all along in the way as he went to Westby-Hall,
where as he was working hard at the Hay, he was taken with an unusual
Merriness, and in the Evening of the same day he made himself Drunken, and then
he was transported into such an height of Profaneness as did astonish the
Bystanders, so that they concluded that the Devil had some extraordinary power
over him; yea, he himself said, that in the said Evening, he had an Apparition
of the Devil pointing at something which the said Richard had lately done,
which we concluded was Richards offering himself to Satan as a Bond, or some
other Compact, or Consent to Satan, for the satisfying his desires, either of
Dancing or of some other matter; after this Night his Fits grew very frequent
and violent, whence they made use of a Doctor, who finding that Physic would
nothing avail, gave him over, not undertaking him any further; then they sought
unto a reputed Wise Man for help, viz. Dr. Crabtres, who said, he was amazed at
several things which befell him whilst under his charge, as particularly at his
precise foretelling various sorts of Weather, he at last confessing, as some
told us, that there was no help for him, except from the Ministers; after which
Richard and his Father applied to us, which things Richard's Parents and he
could not confess all at once, for when he had thought to confess some things
to this purpose, his Mouth, as he said, was stopped, that he could not speak
them, and when he had told us of some of them, then he was shrewdly checked for
confessing too much, and when sometimes he refused to do what Satan would have
him do, he was tossed miserably as after appeared, nay he was often visibly
shaken, and as not at his own disposal, and sadly disordered, even whilst out
of his Fits; sometimes as stupefied and restrained from saying or doing what he
offered at, and at other times as pushed to such words and deeds, as he neither
meant beforehand, nor knew of when past; after the said Examination, the said
Ministers showed to Richard and his Parents, the Evil of some unlawful means
before made use of, and that the means now applied to, were appointed by Christ
to be used in their case, wherein a Blessing might be hoped for, upon their
repenting and expecting Mercy in God's way; hence they proceeded to the Word
and Prayer; Mr. Jolly insisting on Acts 26. v. 18. During which Exercises
Richard had two terrible Fits, after which Richard commonly attended the
Ordinances at Mr. Jolly's Meeting Place, under which he was one Sabbath very
quiet, another Sabbath extremely rude all the while.

On May the 28th 89. At Richard's earnest request, another Fast Day was kept on
his behalf; and hitherto Richard after his Application to the Ministers for
help, had been all along as possessed with a dumb Devil, and had not spoken at
all in his Fits until this said Fast Day, then he had two astonishing Fits, and
when either of them began, he was as blown or snach'd, or born up suddenly from
his Chair, as if he would have flown away, but that the holders of him hung at
his Arms or Legs, and clung about him, one of whom came on purpose so as he
might pass unobserved among the other holders of him, and more distinctly
observed all transactions about him.

In his said Fits, Richard's Body was hurled about very desperately, and
besides his abundance of confused hurry and din, he often stretched out his Neck
to a prodigious length toward the Ministers that prayed, especially Mr.
Waddington, as if he would have rushed upon them, or thrown his Head at them,
and at least Six times he with much difficulty, fury, and gaping, skreamed out
against them, have done! have done! whilst the holders of him observed his Lips
unmoved, his Tongue rolled inwardly all on a Lump, and his Sight or Eye Balls
turned backwards, so as made him stark blind, nothing but the White of them
being to be seen, as was indeed in most, if not in all his Fits afterward;
whilst the other words and things, hereafter related of him, did come out of
him or from him, excepting that throughout many Fits, his Eyelids would be
close shut. Then seeing he could not get at the then Praying Ministers, he
flung all about him down, and lay as dead upon the Floer, till in a Moment, his
whole Body was raised as from Death, and as all at once, without the natural
help of Arms or Legs, bearing up with it those that leaned on him to hold him,
and then broke out into such wild curvets or bounces as cannot here be
described. Which sort of Trances and Rages, or Fallings and Risings again, were
frequent this day as they did usually and interchangeably seize him in most or
all his other Fits that he had afterward; at last the Daemoniack threw his
head so among the People that were betwixt him and one of the Ministers, as
that a Ball of Phlegm strangely glanted among them without weting any, till it
slap'd on his Shoulder, and thence flashed over his Face, and all down his
Clothes, Richard's Tongue and Eyes being inactive herein, as abovesaid; whilst
this flowed from his Breast, What amazing hideous sounds were heard in or from
him all along! Sometimes as of Swine, or Water-mills, or as if a Bear and other
Wild Beasts had joined their several Notes to mix up a dreadful peal of Noises.

Toward the beginning of June was a Meeting at the Surey on his behalf, which
place being so near Whalley, the Public Minister there Mr. Jea, was acquainted
with the Occasion of the said Meeting that he might take no offense, all the
time wherein Ephesians. 6. v. 12. was spoke to, and Prayers put up for him, the Evil
Spirit worked in Richard, yet it break not out into a Fit, till afterward it
hurried him in a most violent manner, and manifested more than ordinary Venom
against Mr. Jolly and Mr. Waddington, as it did at other times against Mr.
Sagar, Mr. Whalley, and Mr. Kershaw; and on the following Sabbath was a very
great concourse of People, many of them coming to see Richard, from whom
however there were no Distractions or Disturbances all the while, though through
all the Exercises of another Sabbath, his Fits were excessively ill, he
spurning, and spitting, and grining at Mr. Jolly with great fury, but hurt him
not.

On July the Fifth was the next Fast day for him at the Surey, but being
nothing is put down here but plain and certain matter of Fact, such as some or
all of the aforementioned Attestants are sure of, therefore very many of the
Demoniack's Expressions, Predictions, and Transactions singularly remarkable,
that the said Attestants made no due and full Observation about, nor took any
certain Cognizance of, are not here recorded as absolutely certain, or of
unquestionable Verity, being none of them would speak wickedly or deceitfully
for God, Job 13. v. 7. Although even these Passages are reported and affirmed
by some other Spectators of what past at the Surey; as to instance, whilst the
Demoniack in a Fit lay on his back with his Arms and Legs spread open, he was
twirled about like a pair of Yarwangles. Sometimes the Demoniack in a Fit
seemed to hang in the Barn with his Head downwards, and his Heels toward the
top thereof: A Spectator at the Surey being thought to be the occasioner of
some strict enquiries there, was sadly blamed and threatened, on which going
homewards with company in a Moonshiny Night, they saw in the Fields as a Boy
coming with his Face toward them which suddenly vanished, and then a Boy going
with his Back toward them which suddenly vanished, and then a Foal going with
Langotts all which likewise suddenly vanished.

On July the 16th, at a Fast day for him at the Surey was a great confluence of
People, as there was often before, and almost always at such Meetings afterward
until prevented by the Ministers, though when conferences with Satan were looked
for, far vaster Multitudes met than at other times. And on the Lord's day next
after, viz. July 20th no Molestations happened from Richard, till the close of
that days Public Work. But on the Lord's day next before, viz July 13th 1689.
The Demoniack at Mr. Jolly's Meeting Place in a Fit cries out, Ye talk of
having Six Ministers against me next Wednesday at the Surey, but there will
only five be there then, and I Will make Fools of you, for I Will be quiet at that
time. Which Words seemed strange to Mr. Jolly, who on Friday before, with one
or two more, many Miles from the Surey, had very privately named Six Ministers
as fit and desirable for attending the Surey Meeting, which they concluded to
keep on the aforementioned Wednesday, July the 16th 1689, but they only knew of
Three Ministers, whose presence they then expected on the said Wednesday. Which
Meeting, besides, they had kept private, and had not spoken of, so as it could
be known to any of the Surey by any Humane means, before the said Lord's day
Cry of the Demoniack; in whose Wednesday Morning Fit he cried out, One
^arrington will this day terribly shake me; which amazed the bystanders, who
had never before heard of a Minister so called, for it was but about half a
Year since he first began to Preach, and that only in a Private Family far from
the Surey, where he had never been before, and coming from another County was a
Stranger thereabout; that however heard of the said Meeting, whither he on the
said Wednesday Morning had leave to go, and whither some Ministers unlooked for
came, which made up just the number foretold of in the Sabbath Cry; according
to which the Demoniack was quiet throughout all the Exercise, until at the end
thereof, Mr. Jolly, and Mr. Sagar called the said Mr. Carrington to Prayer as
he stood in the throng unacquainted with any others there that he knew of. Upon
which the Demoniack most furiously raged, threatened to tear him in pieces,
struggled most vehemently to get at him, being Six or Seven Yards distant from
him, hurled Rolls of Foam still on his Face; and though Hats and Aprons were held
up betwixt them, to hinder his annoying of him, yet he was hurled so high, or
so low, or sideways, that the Balls of Foam which came from him still hit him
on or about the Face; notwithstanding the uselesness of Richard's seeing or
speaking Organs herein, which was so far from daunting him that was before all
covered with Foam, that it did rather embolden him to pray more vehemently
against the Devils troubling Richard, who hereupon for about an Hour poured
forth the bitterest Execrations and Blasphemies, amongst which he often cried
out, Oh! Carrington, I hate thee mortally. Oh! I Will be revenged on thee.

July the 25th, was the next Fast day on this occasion at Altham, for a great
part whereof Richard was detained thence through several dead Fits or Trances
that seized him, where the Multitude was so very great, as caused much
distraction and danger, a Post in the Barn being broken down through the weight
of the People, yet was there through Gods good Providence no farther harm done.

On August the First, was a Fast day for him at the Surey, he was quiet. Though
he never Learned above the English Tongue and his natural and acquired
Abilities were very ordinary, yet when his Fits seized him he often spoke Latin,
Greek, and other Languages very well; as also Satan like an Angel of Light, did
tell unto or pronounce from him, several Practical Speeches, as to instance,
several times he declaimed much against the Sins of the place and time, as also
against worldly People, saying, That as Maids do sweep away Spiders webs, so
would their Wealth be swept away: More such sayings being elsewhere herein
mentioned.

On August the 13th, was a Fast day for him at the Surey, John 16.8, 9, 10, 11.
was insisted on, and the said Mr. Carrington had been about a Fortnight or
Three Weeks Journey in several Counties out of Lancashire, whilst in Yorkshire
some discourse past about hastening his Ordination. Returning home, he on the
Road casually heard, that the Ministers met about the Surey Demoniack upon that
very day, being the aforementioned August the 13th, 89. although Surey was then
out of his Road, and far off, yet finding that he might reach it before the
usual time of the Ministers ending there. He got to a Smiths House, about or
within a Mile of it, about Two a Clock, and fearing that he should come too
late if he staid till the Shoe which his Horse had lost was set on, he went
fast over the Fields on Foot, upon which the Demoniack often cried; Yonder comes
Carrington running, and footing it apace, who when he was about Two Fields off
the Barn, wherein Richard and crowds of Spectators were; did look at his Watch
behind an Hedge, to see if he were not too late, when he heard an hideous noise
from the Barn, wherein the Demoniack cried, Carrington, What a Clock is it?
Which with the aforesaid Cry, made them in the Barn wonder, none there knowing
what County he was in. The Ministers there being near ending, knowing nothing
of his coming; who, when he was near the Barn, before he saw any body, or any
body that was known of saw him, did hear the Demoniack cry, Make way for
Carrington. Carrington, What brings thee here at this time of day? Thou come
too late, etc. I defy thee, thou art but of a weak Faith, thou can not
prevail against me, thy Faith is but Hypocritical, etc. Which set him a
trembling, who notwithstanding being called to Prayer was so encouraged, and
the Demoniack so strangely acted and handled, that when the Meeting was broke
up, and he out of his Fit, he and his Relations, and Neighbors earnestly
begged of him to stay all night, since then Richard was to have other Fits, and
they had strong hopes that Satan would leave him, if he were closely dealt with
for a few Fits together. The Ministers being consulted herein were then pleased
to accept him as one of their Number in this enterprise, and thought his
staying then there might not be amiss; upon which he staying, deliberated to
divide the Evening and Nights Exercise into Three parts. 1. He Preached,
Expounded, read in the Bible, or Sung Psalms, whilst Richard was out of his
Fits, that the many Hundreds or Thousands that on such Nights were there, might
thereby be kept in a suitable frame for attending his Fits when they came on
him. 2. He discourst or questioned the Demoniack in his raging Fit. 3. He
prayed in Richard's still or dead Fits. In which Night he had three Fits
besides that in the Afternoon, each of which was about Three Hours long. At the
ending of one Fit, the Demoniack still told what Hour of the Night or Day his
next would begin very precisely and punctually, as was constantly observed,
though there was no equal or set distance of time between his Fits, betwixt which
sometimes would be but few hours, sometimes many, sometimes one day, sometimes
many days, all the various Transactions of that Night are unaccountable, a few
of which however were these in his First Fit. As in the general, he, whilst
raging did still labor to mischieve the Minister, till being often frustrated,
he fell into Ludicrous or Outrageous Actions, so in the general the Minister
discourst to him on what he thought most dreadful to, or expulsive of fallen
Angels. Three Young Men on one side three on the other, usually crossed the way
betwixt them with their joined hands, various attempts he made to wheel about
to the Minister, but still the said Youths interposed, only once he got past
them, when the Minister retired and opposed the Chair which he still held in
his hand betwixt him and Richard, till at last the Youths got betwixt them
again, then the Demoniack leapt for Six or Ten times together so very high,
that one might see his Legs above their Heads, but then they likewise lifted
up their joined hands to hinder his leaping over them, and letting them fall
again when Richard defended, lest he should rush under them, till once though he
was about a Rod distant from the Minister, he instead of leaping high as they
expected, shot himself under their hands, and dashed the Chair out of the
Ministers hands with his feet, the Waft whereof made his hand very sensible
that it had escaped a great danger, who recovering his Chair, and they
interposing, the Demoniack pelted him at the old rate with Foam Bullets,
fiercely blustering against him, and railing hoarsly as from his Breast, till
the Minister said to him, If thou be a Devil that troublest this Youth's
Body, as I suppose thou art, then I tell thee thou art in Chains; in Chains to
restrain thee, so that if thou do thy worst against me, through God's Blessing
thou can do me no hurt, and in Chains to torment thee, so that thou art now
full of hellish pain and anguish; And does it not vex, and fret, and mad thee,
to see me through God's unsearchable Goodness out of thy reach, whilst thou
feel thy burning Chains scorching and tormenting, and devouring thee? How
did the Demoniack gnash, and shake, and rage at this, sometimes in an
inarticulate clatter, sometimes in unintelligible accents, sometimes in words
clustered thick together, very often in a distinct Lingua, that was either
Foreign or unknown to us all then there, or else forged Gibberish; upon which
the Minister continued, art thou freer from Torments whilst in his Body then
thou were before, and if thy being there cannot now respite or abate thy Woes,
then thy annoying him seems to be merely through thy Malice to make him
miserable as thou thy self art, and shall thou go unpunisht for this thy
Malice, nay rather will not the just Judgments of God load thee with fresh
vengeance for this thy troubling him, besides the other Torments due to thee,
thou that have been glutted these many Thousand Years with God's avenging Fury;
Do thou like it so well as to seek larger and fuller Vials thereof by this
reaking thy spite upon his Creature? Oh the Infinite Wrath of God, does this
delight thee? And is it sport to thee to wallow in eternal Burnings? 'Twas
strange, 'twas pitious to behold what Horrors, what Convulsions the Demoniack
was under during this Discourse, until with great Struglings, Shrieks, and
Leaps, he fell into his dead Fit, and after came out of that Fit, till in his
second Fit his rages returning, he spoke much to the Minister in the abovesaid
Foreign or Forged Lingua, at the end of which he cried, Carlisle, Carlisle,
Do thou understand me, construe me this, and tell me in English what it was I
now spoke? Now Carlisle where is thy Learning? Upon which by a chucking grunting
noise inwardly, and the horrid fleering grin of his Countenance, he seemed to
Laugh Vehemently at the Minister, adding Carlisle, Now I have puzzled all thy
Scholarship, who answered, I am never the worse Scholar for being ignorant of
the Devils Rhetoric, and unlearned in the Language of Hell. But oh! how sad is
thine heart in the midst of that ugly Laughter which thou counterfeitest but
poorly, having been long unpractised in true Mirth, Joy and Laughter; and am I
in a condition to be laughed at by thee, who art irrecoverably fallen into a
worse case than the most poisonous stinging Serpent is in? Ah! poor Fiend, for
all thy Grimness and Rhodomantadoes, I*de not be in thy plight for a Thousand
Worlds: But what ridiculous Pranks, and antic Gambols art thou now acting, as
if thou designed to set us all a Laughing at thy Fooleries? For whilst the
Minister was thus a speaking, he as in great derision of him hectored and
braved it, and played with unimitable dexterity several wild tricks and
sportive frolicks, such as are too commonly too too wickedly used at merry
Nights, and at Saturnalian, Bacchanalian, or Floralian Carnavals, as to
instance, there were Rushes strewed on the Barn floor to keep the Demoniack's
Bones from being broken, for his Body was constantly sore dashed and battered
against the Ground, especially when falling into a dead Fit, or coming out of
his Fits, he being usually born up before he was hurled to the Earth, he taking
up Rushes, handled them so as if they had been a pack of Cards, every way
acting the Carding Gamester to the life, then ordering the Rushes otherwise as
if they had been Dice, who so expert in throwing the Die as he, then he managed
the Rushes as if he had been playing at Bowls, with the various postures and
eagerness of a Bowler, performing these and the like feats, either with Words
and Oaths, or by dumb Shows and Signs, so artificially, intelligibly, and
nimbly, as amazed the Spectators, especially because Richard was wholly
ignorant of these Games, both before and since this trouble, he at present
declaring, that he never used or knew how to play at Cards, Dice, Bowls,
Tables, etc. All this while the Minister thus talked to him, now Angel, where is
all thy dazzling grandeur; And what is become of thy Pompous Magnificence? how
did thou brandish in ample state among the Potentates and Powers, among the
Crowned Grandees of Mighty Lucifer, how did thou ruffle in Illustrious Robes,
and strut loftily in thy glittering Pride, and scatter abroad thy appaling
glories? What is thy towering Crest now fallen, and that so low as to such
froth, noise, flash and pedantry; And is thy Peacocks gaudy Train deplumed, so
that thou art as the featherless Peacok, the very fowlest Fowl of the Air, Luke
8. v. 5, 12. And can thy stout Stomach stoop to personate a Merry Andrew? Were
thou the inventor, or only an old Practitioner of these silly trifles, that
makes thee so surpassing skilful at them? What little pedling knacks will thou
next entertain us with? Art thou not a notable dealer in May Pole rounds, 2
Kings 18. v. 26. Masquerades, Deuteronomy. 22, v. 5. Rush-buryings, Morrice-dances,
Whiston-ales, Fortune telling, Legerdemain, Lotteries, Midnight-revels, and in
lewd Ballads, Pictures, Comedies and Romances? Oh how well it becomes thy
haughty stateliness, thus wilely to sneak to such mimical apishness and basest
mummeries. Never was the touchiest pretender to the nicest punctilio's of
imaginary humors, so sensible of the grossest affronts as the Demoniack seemed
at this Discourse, one while boiling as with Indignation and disdain; another
time hanging down the head as if covered with shame, often abruptly startling and
breaking off from one Trick, then again shuffling to another, till he fell into
his dead Fit, and at last recovered. But in this Nights last or third Fit, he
was handled more extraordinarily than ever before, both as to the variety of
his Colloquies, and the multitude of his dead, and the fierceness of his raging
Fits; at the beginning of which the Minister said, The Lord rebuke thee Satan,
that thou may be gone out of him, and cease from troubling him; What! Can no
meaner a shrine than an Human body serve thy turn? And is it not good enough
for thee, to abscond with thy Fellow Locusts in their Abys, Rev. 9.3. or to
flutter in the Air, Ephesians. 2. v. 2. to wallow in the Waves or flames, Mark 9. v.
22. Mat. 8. v. 31, 32. to skip or skulk in Woods or Thickets, or old Mountains,
or Ruins, or Rocky Caverns, or Subterraneous Vaults of Darkness, Rev. 18. v. 2.
Isa. 13. v. 19, 21, 22. and 65. v. 4. Wisd. 19. v. 4, 6, 9, 14. or to haunt or
ramble over Deserts, Fields, over Bogs or Mountains, Mat. 4. v. 1. and 12. v.
43. 2 Chronicles. 11. v. 15. Wisd. 11. v. 15. among the loathsome crew of Seirim,
Ziimim and Ochim, Isa. 34. v. 11. add 16. Jer. 50. v. 39. Deuteronomy. 32. v. 17. And
was it not enough that ye dwelt in Stocks, and Stones, and Gilded Statues,
when ye gave false Oracles to our Pagan Ancestors? And does it not grieve thee
that ye are driven out of your Stately Temples by the coming of Christ? Or, why
do thou not fly to Asia, Africa, or America, where as yet thou may have
too too many Pagan Idolaters? Would thou not rather be adored there, than
abhorred here? And have thou so many Sons of Belial even in Europe, whose
wicked Souls are at thy Devotion? And cannot this suffice thee, unless thou
have Men's Bodies also enslaved to thy Tyranny? And have not thou liberty enough
over Men's Bodies in places of Blasphemy, Cruelty, Sorcery, Beastiality,
Superstition and Death, but must thou also inflict this Land where thy grand
Enemies Gospel Truths and Worship flourishes? Oh how is it that such
Night-Owls fly abroad in the brightest Sunshine of Christianity, and must we at
this time of the day be troubled with driving you, not only out of Men's Hearts,
but out of their Bodies also! During this Discourse, the Demoniack often cried
out, Carlisle, Carlisle, hold, hold, stay, stay, Carlisle, hear me Carlisle,
let me speak to thee Carlisle, and seemed extraordinary enraged, for that upon
his commands, the Minister did not immediately stop, who at last forbearing,
said he, Carlisle, Thou have been talking about Ordination designing to be set
a part to the Ministry, and thinking that thereby thou will be more enabled to
oppose and dispossess me. Here he swear such Oaths as are not to be repeated,
upon which, said he, I Will work and manage thee to purpose, whilst by thine own
acknowledgment thou art no Minister; and besides, I value not thine Ordination
but defy it, and all thy other Stratagems against me. This Discourse surprised
the Minister, who was then but a Minister probationary or expectant, who
confessed, that it had for some Weeks before been over and over in his mind to
offer himself to trial for Ordination, being strongly persuaded, that if he
could but come against the Devil invested with a Ministerial Commission,
Dignity, and Office, that then through the Divine Assistance he should prevail
against him; which persuasion however he had never spoken of except in private
Prayer, before this very Conference with the Demoniack. And besides, the day
before his coming to the Surey, he had some Discourse with Mr. O. H. near
Halifax in Yorkshire about his Ordination, which neither was nor could be
related at the Surey, by any Mortal, before the Demoniack thus rehearst it.
Which discoveries of such secret transactions, made some more circumspect
against ill Words, Thoughts, Actions, lest Satan should publish them at these
Conferences in vast Assemblies or at Doomsday, especially for that he often
told openly the faults of others Persons that were Strangers coming from far.
Whence the Ministers often blessed the Lord, partly for that he kept Satan from
reporting their past Frailties, but mainly for that they were kept from such
gross Sins, as might have made them fear the Devils tell-tale blabbing, so as
they durst never have encountered him with such unfailing boldness, unshaken
constancy, and sweet repose of Mind. However the Minister thus answered Satan's
last Discourse; How now Satan, have thou been at thine old Trade of going to
and fro in the Earth, and of walking up and down in it, and that upon so mean
an errand as huxtering for Stories, and flying with Tales from own Country to
another: What art thou the grand Intelligencer, News-monger, or Observator of
the Nation, that invisibly and incognito crowdest among all Companies,
shrowdest thy self in Closets, and all to take Cognizance, and make reports of
Men's Minds and Manners, or are some Devils, as Posts, or Lackeys, from whom
thou had the Tidings of the abovesaid Persuasion, and talk about Ordination,
or how otherwise could thou know them, or how know thou that mine
Ordination, if I be found fit for it, will be of no force against thee. Was the
Ordination of the Apostles, and the Seventy Disciples, and Paul, of no force
against thee, through which ye fell as Lightening from Heaven, and all the
Powers of your worst Scorpions were subject to, and trampled on them, Luke 9.
v. 1, 6, 10. v. 1, 17, 18, 19. Acts 16. v. 18. And is the Lord's Arm shortened,
that he cannot as powerfully set in with his Ordinances to dispel thee now as
he did formerly? Isa. 5.9. v. 1. And what is it which thou threatnest to do at
me whilst I am no Minister? Why may not I rather whilst unordain'd prevail
against thee? for whilst Philip and Stephen were no Ministers, were they not
too hard for the proudest Devil among you, Acts. 6. v. 8, 10. and 8. v. 6, 7.
Blessed be my rock, I fear thee not, and exalted be the God of the rock of my
Salvation; thy triumphing before the Victory methinks, is a sure sign, that I
shall Triumph after it. Upon which the Demoniack launched forth into a great
deal of jargo, nintermixt with Greek and Latin, and particularly, a page
Carlisle, I may not abide thee. Abi in malam rem quid mihi tecum rerum tuarum
satagas (...), the Minister answered, Why call'st thou me a Busy body, and
say, that I am employed in business that nothing concerns me? What have I no
business here where I am called by the Ministers and People of these parts? Nay
as a Man ought not, I to do my best to help a Beast out of a Ditch, much more
to help this youth out of his Misery, and especially as a Christian; Does it
not belong to me to oppose the Devil seeing this I was bound to by a Vow at
Baptism, and often since, engaging that through the Lords help, I would to mine
utmost through all my time practice every known duty, though never so much
against my will, or name, my livelihood, or life, which I bless the Lord that I
was so bound to, which through Gods grace I will ever keep; and mine heart
exalts whilst I do now solemnly renew it, and do denounce an irreconcilable
War against thee, and will do all that I can to drive thee out of the Country,
and so cordially do I abominate, and so effectually would I ruinate thine
interest in the World, that I cannot acquiess merely in this general Vow
against thee, but do further profess my self an offerer at a special Vow for
prosecuting thy Kingdoms overthrow, as the only Vocation, Calling and Business,
which I have to mind and follow in this World, and even as every orderly
Person, besides his Christian trade does fix on some particular Act or Science,
Mystery or Craft, to spend his Life in 2 These. 3. v. 11. Just so would I enter
on the most tremendous Ministerial Vow against thee, that I may do the greater
mischief to thy cause and ways. The Demoniack replied, Carlisle, Carlisle,
Colloquamur Latin vel Graece vel qualibet alia lingua auditoribus ignota:
adeon' indoctus es ut alio Idiomate usi non possis quam quod cum materno lacte
imbisti: Respondeas ergo nec anglice in (...) illiteratus palam dici malles. To
which the Minister said, What Satan were thou intimate with all the
Babel-builders, so as to learn of them all their Languages, or being some of
those Languages died with our Ancestors, and some new Dialects were since
invented, and sprung up in their stead; did thou learn all these Tongues and
Idioms by thy long Travels through the Earth in all those times wherein they
flourished, or by conversing with all in Hell, that great Emporium, whether Men
resort of all Ages, Speeches, Countries? But is it not better to speak that one
Language of thine old Heavenly Country, which I hope to learn, and thou have
irrecoverably forgot, than to be so universal a Linguist as thou pretendest to
be; however I am not careful to answer thee in this matter, for should I talk
to thee in a Language unknown to the hearers as thou desire, then I should
follow the Devils Counsel, and do his pleasure, and still stand at thy
Courtesy, whether upon my gratifying thee in speaking such a Language thou
would not still challenge me to some other Lingua, which if I understood no^,
thou would still style me as thou threatnest me even now illiterate, for not
knowing so many Languages as thou; and besides such Languages would be no
satisfaction or advantage, but much prejudice to the Hearers, who might then
think that I used Charms and Spells, and Enchanting Words, and Magical
Expressions to Conjure thee out of this Youth. And I de rather the Hearers
should repute me unlearned for refusing, than an Exorcist for abusing strange
Languages in our Dialogues. But though I Will not yield to thy last request, yet
thy Discourse last before it, I continue to Answer; thou little think how
thou pleasedst me, by threatening me with thy hatred, which I value infinitely
more than thy Friendship. But I fear thou flatteredst me, and would make me
overjoyed and cajole me to think too well of my self, by telling me thou can
not abide me, and I fear thou do not really hate me, but only say so, to
tempt me into presumption; but if thou do really hate me, as thou say,
then I comfortably conclude, that I am none of thy Children or Party, whom thou
could not hate, For the God of this World still loves his own, Mark 3. v.
24, 26. John 7. v. 7, 15, 19. And thence may I infer, that I belong to Christ,
and am of the same side with the Saints and Angels, whom thou hate also as
ill as me, Rev. 12. v. 7, 10, 17. John 8. v. 42, 44. and so thy hatred is an
Evidence that I shall dwell for ever in that all Glorious Heaven, whence thou
irretrievably fell into an all cursed Hell, which I shall escape for ever. But
as Paul after his Soul ravishing sense of unutterable Glories, was sorely
buffeted by Satan, 2 Cor. 12. v. 7. so the Minister after his said joyous hopes
was as swallowed up in the hour and power of Darkness, Luke 22. v. 53. Whilst
the Demoniack shaken as with an Hurricane, after most Execrable Curses, cried
out, Carlisle, Thou art mine own, and shall never get to Heaven; mine thou were
at first, and were since given finally up to me, and whilst thou live Ill
employ thee in my Work, and then Ill carry thee to Hell, where I and other
Tormentors will rack thee into Lamentations, and Mournings, and Woes, into
Weeping and Wailing, and gnashing of Teeth, Wines of Wrath having long been on
the Lees for thee a ripening, and a gathering rageous strength and quick Spirit
of Fury, and when drawn off thrice refined from all Tinctures of Mercy for thee
to drink up, the very first sight of them will shoot thee through, as with
ravenous flakes of fiery stinging Poison, and when the Sword bathed in Heaven
has for ten thousand Millions of Ages been fatted with thy Kidneys, and drunk
with thy Souls Life Blood, thou shall then be as far from the end of thy
Torments as thou art now, and even then thou will think thy infinite Woes
already past were nothing in comparison of those horrible Tempests of vengeful
Plagues which thou will then see a rushing successively on thee, without
mitigation or intermission for evermore. And here Satan described much of the
nature and sorts of Hell Torments, at a more lively and terrible rate than ever
the Bystanders knew done by Men's Books or Sermons, insomuch that many things
then spoken by the Devil about Hell, being afterward collected, and so far as
clear Scripture proof for them was found, formed into a Discourse at T. one
that heard it broke his way through the Company, and ran out crying as in a
Fright, Away, away, else the House will be set on fire about our Ears: Yea, so
uncommonly did Satan penetrate as into the experienced Mysteries of Damnation,
as if he were gushing out all Einae's roaring Floods of blazing Sulfur Rocks,
or stirring up the very dregs and bottoms of the fired Brimstone Lake, so as
surely might have flasht Lightning into the most closed Eyes of diverse
Consciences that could possibly be lift up before tormented in this Flame, Luke
16. v. 23, 24. And thus he long went on, reckoning up various most barbarous
Tortures, that he said, he would make the Minister suffer when he got him to Hell,
and particularly said he, When I get thee in Hell, I Will make thee my Porter to
carry damned Wretches from one bed of Flames to another, and there thou shall
meet with thy old Friend such an one thy Countryman, such an one thy Neighbor,
such an one, etc. All whom I have already got into Hell, and how will it please
me then to see you then flying into mutual Revenges for your past helping one
another Helwards. Whilst Satan talked thus endways, breathing dreadful threats
against the Minister, he was for a time quite driven off his way of arguing and
presence of mind, as Job's Friends amazed, he answered no more, and stood still
and left off speaking, and the People waited for his words, and gave ear for
his Reasons, but there was no Answer found in his Mouth, Job 32. v. 5, 11, 15,
16. especially when the names of his old dear dead acquaintance were reckoned
up, he was extremely surprised thereat, for that not any Mortal then there
except himself, did then so much as know what Countryman he was, much less
could they know the said Names; whom when the Devil said, he had in Hell the
Minister remembered how some of them had lived, and seemingly died in lamentable
Omissions and Commissions; upon which his very soul was brim full of
Tribulation, and Horror, and Anguish, his trembling Legs were a failing him,
and he near fainting, and the People were greatly troubled and afraid for him,
seeing his Carriage and Countenance so altered, and the roaring Lion as about
to prey upon him; till at last, he leaning on the Chair to keep him from
falling, and considering how vilely he was giving ground and yielding up all to
Satan, he forcibly gathered in his thoughts from attending Satan's Discourse,
and firmly resolved not then to mind one word he said, but six his thoughts
unmoveably on Christ, in Heart, Prayer and Meditation, which through amazing
rich Mercy proved as Sampson's Enhakkore -- to him who tasting thereof, his
Soul came again and he revived, Judge. 15. v. 18, 19. though not so suddenly, but
that Satan again staggered his resolutions, by calling him (not Carlisle, as
before, but) by his own Name, saying, Carrington, I see thou droopest sadly,
and art miserably dejected: Alas poor Carrington, will thou have a Posset and
some Barley Pye-crust to cherish and to hearten thee, and to keep thee from
swooning? All the Ministers efforts hindered not his relapsing into astonishment
at this pitiful flout, for that no Mortal then there except he himself did then
know of his being a Cheshire Man, where Barley especially shull'd is much used
for Bread, etc. much less did they know of his old Custom and Inclinations,
ordinarily using the said Food and preferring it before any other sort
whatsoever, against whom thus amused, Satan followed his Blow with Invectives,
Insultings, and Comminations, and particularly cried out, Carlisle, Ill now
chastise thee for thy rashness in meddling with me; yea Ill deal with thee as
the Sons of Sceva were treated, Ill leap on thee, overcome thee, and make thee
flee hence wounded, Acts 19. v. 14, 16. how durst thy saucy Impudence provoke
my puissance who can hurl Fire from Heaven, and scatter abroad Whirlwinds and
Destructions, and much more frustrate thy best endeavors, Job 1. v. 12, 16,
19. 1 These. 2. v. 18. And now Carlisle, thou have none of thy Black Regiment
here to back thee, no Minister here to bring thee off, or to rescue thee out of
my hands, and now a have thee under; I will never let thee alone till I have
mischiev'd thee, and unless thou run away quickly from my presence, I will pour
forth my continued rages against thee, and lash thee with insatiable Furies for
Three Hours longer, far worse than I have done hitherto; nor will I intermit
them, or give thee the least breathing fit, until I have utterly confounded
thee, or driven thee away with such a vengeance, as will fright thee from ever
facing me again, or contesting with me about Dicky.

Though the Minister had been continually exercised from about Two a Clock in the
Afternoon, till about Seven a Clock next Morning, and so was unlikely to
sustain so formidable a Tempest, as by the Devils reckoning was a coming upon
him, yet with an humble confidence that he should be helped, through the utmost
date and danger thereof bore him up against Satan, and they who thought he
would faint, or retire upon these stormy vollies that battered against him as
Cracks of Thunder, wondered to hear him, after so long silence and discomposure,
thus to renew the conflict, saying, Satan I Will not believe merely on thy
report, that they are in Hell whom thou namedst, but surely thou can not say
such an One is in Hell too, nor will I take it on thy word, that the Lord has
finally given me up to thee; How provest thou that I am thus given up? Nay,
surely Christ on whom I dwell, who is my very precious Life, has not yet left
me, and surely he will never, never leave, he will never, never, never leave
me, Heb. 13. v. 5. said he, Carlisle, I will never, never leave thee, I will
never, never, never part with thee; and though Hell has not whom thou
mentionest, yet it shall have thee, and that thou art mine, I Will e're long
prove to purpose by sensible demonstrations, by stabs and stings, and an
infinite sort of Torture, Stratagems. The Minister answered, I question not
Instruments of cruelty are in thy Habitation, Oh my soul, come not thou into
its Secrets, Genesis 49. v. 5, 6. And fierce, cruel Lord is thy name, Es. 19. v.
3, 4. I see so much of thy Monstrous Savageness toward this poor Youth, and
some other of thy Vassals upon Earth, as I hope will warn me and others from
trying Experiments how thou would treat us in Hell; But how provest thou that
ever thou shall have a power of giving me such proofs as you tell of? This
point thou can never prove, and though thou be loath to part with me, yet
thou must for ever, unless thou can pluck me out of Christ's and his Fathers
hands, John 10. v. 27, 28, 29. or unless thou can persecute and turn me off
from following Christ, which through Gods grace thou shall never do; and as to
thy driving me away as thou do threaten, why may not I instead thereof drive
thee away through the Lord's Blessing, by whose strengthing me, I can do all
things? Phil. 4. v. 13. Nay it seems my company is a trouble to thee, and that
thou art weary of me, since thou so often biddest me to be gone, and art so
eager to have me run away from thee, but I am not yet fled hence Satan as the
Sons of Scevan; and though thou threatenest that thou would never intermit
this angry fit till I were routed, yet through Gods good Providence and
Spiritual Assistance, I am resolved, not only to confront thee now, till this
brush be over, but also to come hither again and again to trouble thee, and
never let thee alone till thou be gone from him.

'Twas strange to see how the case was altered upon the Minister's thus
re-encountering him, for whilst he thus discoursed, the Demoniack very
furiously flung to and fro, mantling his face sometime on one side, then on
another, and as if he were speaking to something unseen by the Bystanders, he
said in a lower, yet audable Voice, What shall I do, I will mischieve him, I
can bear him no longer? Upon which rushing up toward the Minister, he gave the
Young Man a most surly thump, who mainly hindered his reaching the Minister;
upon which the other Youths joined Forces hindering his further mischievousness
he sprung up into a dead Fit. Then the Minister fell to Public Prayer and
Praising God for his singular Goodness on this occasion, upon which he soon
starts up again, though not so formidable as before, till upon Conference he fell
again into his dead fit, and upon Prayer soon rose again, and did thus often;
insomuch that they then there, had very great hopes of his being cast out that
very Night, for that he still yielded more and more before the Minister, and it
seemed as at the Ministers pleasure, to make him answer to him, or to make him
fall into or rise from his dead Fits.

As to instance, the Minister much encouraged, bid the Young Men to let the
Demoniack come near him, and do or say his pleasure without their interposal,
who accordingly came up and stood about a yard off him, never in the least
during the remainder of this fit motioning to harm him, but drooping most
despicably as a Malefactor at the Bar, having gradually shrunk into a seemingly
abject and slavish Fashion: Said the Minister, Is it not a maxim among you
Devils, that none should be tormented before his time, Mat. 8. v. 29. Now if
thou be sure of this possessed Youth as thou say thou art, and that thou shall
torment him in Hell, then why should thou torment him now, which is before
the time, being the ordinary time of thy thus tormenting thy Slaves, is not
till thou gettest them into Hell. Said he, My time is short, and I must take
all advantages of carrying on my work, for which purpose this is a fit
occasion. Said the Minister, I hope Satan this occasion shall not carry on thy
work, but the Lord shall out-shoot thee in thine own Bow, so that thou shall
hereby drive and fright him and others from thee, rather than win them to Hell
as thou purposest.

Just as the Father of the possessed Man and Spectators were driven from you to
Christ, who would not have sought Christ had thou not troubled them. And do
thou confess that thy time of possessing this Youth is but short, and will be
soon over? Said he, If this work hold, I shall not stay long here. On these
words he seemed enraged against himself, as if they had over-slipt him, that he
fell into a dead fit, whence he soon rose up in time of Prayer much abashed, as
if he would recall his last words, saying, Carlisle, Carlisle, I Will not go out
of him, but my meaning was, that my time of liberty and stay among Mortals is
short.

Prayer ended, the Minister said, Satan, What is the reason why thou still
call me Carlisle? Said he, Because thou art a going Carlisle- wards, and art
erelong to remove from where thou now dwell, and to reside at a place in the
Rode to Carlisle; at which the Minister much wondered, for though some places
then had moved for his fixing among them, of which one was toward Carlisle,
yet he had not determined, much less answered about his removing either to the
one or other of them; till Two Weeks after this Nights Surey Conflict, some
Ministers were got to a day of Prayer and Conference about his said Answer; the
result whereof was, that he was to go Carlisle-wards which neither he nor any
Mortal knew of before this Prayer day; so that it was strange that his going
toward Carlisle should be told of by the Demoniack on that Night so long
before it was resolved on. Notwithstanding the Minister said, What Satan! Do
thou say thy time of staying in this World is but short? Hark, hark, Do not
thou hear the last Trump sounding a dreadful Call, Summoning all Devils to the
last day of Judgment, at which he as in a shivering fright fell into his dead
Fit, but afterward rose up whilst the Minister prayed, who then solemnly
closing his Prayer did say; Satan thou tellest how thou will not leave that
possessed Youth, but that shall be tried through the Lords help. I come in the
Name of my great Master the Lord Jesus Christ, to demand this Young Man from
thee, to take Livery, and Seizing of him for my Masters use and service, and do
expressly charge and command thee to depart from him, as thou shall answer me at
the great day of Judgment, where thou shall have Judgment without Mercy, if
thou will not be gone from him, Jam. 2. v. 13. It is written, That the Devil
shall flee from those that resist him, Jam. 4. v. 7. on which Divine Promise I
depend steadfast in the Faith that thou shall flee upon our resisting thee, 1
Pet. 5. v. 8, 9. and do entirely rely upon that precious promise, that Faith
may drive thee hence, since there is nothing impossible to it, Mat. 17. v. 20.
and do believe that Prayers which are still wrestling against thee may open
Heaven, Jam. 5. v. 18. and thence command thy removal from Gods Sons and
Daughters, Isa. 45. v. 11. yea from this Youth, John 5. v. 14. add 19. and do
humbly wait for, and expect that Blessing promised and annexed to the great
Ordinance of Prayer and Fasting, by which thou may be cast out, Mat. 6. v.
16, 18. and 17. v. 21. And I am sure if the Holy Spirit and our Hearts, do once
tell their mind to the Father for thy going hence, and pour out unutterable
Groans and Intercessions for this Youth, that then thou can stay no longer
there, no though thou be one of the Principalities, or Powers, or Wickednesses in
high places, Romans 8. v. 26, 27. and I am firmly persuaded, that the Weapons of
our Warfare are Mighty through God to pull down Devils, or any thing that
exalts it self against him, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. and that there is so much of the
Armor, Word and Power of God abiding in us confederate against thee, as the
Wicked One will never be able to withstand, 1 John 2. v. 14. Ephesians. 2. v. 10, 14.
and though no single one here be as Jacob, the Prince of Praying Men, a Prevailer
with God, Genesis 32. v. 28. or as the Syrophenician Princess of Praying Women, a
Prevailer against the Devil, Mark 7. v. 25, unto the 31st. Yet surely as Gad
this troop of suppliant Wrestlers shall overcome thee at last, Genesis 49. v. 19.
and surely the minds of them that believe, shall defeat the God of this World,
2 Cor. 4. v. 4. and greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the World,
therefore I trust that we shall overcome Evil Spirits, 1 John 4. v. 4. yea we
shall cast thee out by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of his Testimony,
Rev. 12. v. 9, 11. As the Minister was thus going on, the Demoniack cried out,
At Ten a Clock my next Fit returns, and so unexpectedly came out of his Fit
about Eight of the Clock, or about an hour after his threatening that his
raging Fit should continue Three Hours longer.

On August the 14th 1689. As soon as the last mentioned Nights Conflict ended,
Richard, and the rest then at the Surey, desired the said Minister to stay till
his next Fit was over, which the Demoniack foretold, would be at Ten a Clock
that Morning, as is above said; they strongly consided that Satan would
certainly be dispossessed if he were but again pursued thus, as in the last Fit;
the Devil did partly confess, and did besides so manifestly submit more and
more, as if sometimes he was a going, or could not stay long, and could not
very probably resist another close Application of the Word and Prayer, Fasting
and Conference against him; upon which the Minister denied not to stay, till he
walking hot out of the Barn, the Air suddenly made him so very hoarse that he
could only whisper, and not speak out all that day; then going home, other
Ministers were sent for, and desired to carry on the Work of the approaching
Fit, taking the matter up where it was left, each successively taking his day
work in his turn, and that incessantly, assaulting the Devil in each of his
Fits without intermission, by which course it was not doubted, but that the
Devil would certainly be soon dispossessed, but the Ministers opposed not Satan
in every Fit uninterruptedly, nor spoke to him in any Fit for a long time
after, which some thought one Reason why, they were so long before they
dispossessed him, through which delay, other wicked Spirits either Humane, or
Diabolical, or both, very probably took occasion to cast more work on the
Ministers hands, and rubbs in their way then they had at first; the Romanists
seeming at least desirous, that Richard should reject the abovesaid Ministers
further labors on his behalf, and should resign himself to the charge of their
Priests for relief, which indeed they of the Surey seemed sometimes willing to
yield to, one while one, another while others of them hinting, let the
Protestant Ministers go to their purpose, and we will go to ours; their way of
helping Demoniacks, seems not so sure and speedy as that which the Romanists
use, which occasioned a Discourse from Luke 11.14, to 27. on this Proposition,
that Satan's possession of, and dispossession from a Man's Body or Soul, does
very much concern us, which was so spoken to at the Surey, as did then prevent
those Applications to the Romanists for help, that were then talked of, insomuch
that it was designed as a Postscript to this Narrative, had it not been
hindered, as is declared in the Preface; so that this with other such means at
other times seemed to fix them in a firm dependence only upon the abovesaid
Ministers Assistances in the Lord; however Seven Romanists, whereof Two at
least seemed Priests, did one Midnight undertake Richard in his Fit, wherein
Satan, and some of the Seven did long talk to one another in a Language unknown
to the other Bystanders, besides a Paper was once sent to Richard with full
assurance, that if the said Ministers would once read it over him whilst in his
Fit, it would thoroughly cure him, which the said Ministers declined, knowing it
was a Prayer prescribed in some Conjuring Book, or in Popish Exorcisms, besides
other methods which they were thought to use to the foresaid purpose. Three
others did likewise offer at relieving Richard at three several times, and in
three different ways; Two of which very hastily going away, when his rageing
Fit began, at which indeed the Third did stay, being strong and old, but was
thrown down, and in great danger of being killed by the Demoniack, whom the
Bystanders pulled off him with great difficulty, Luke 10. v. 31, 32, 33.
However the Demoniak's Fit returning at the abovesaid Ten a Clock, he mightily
exulted at the silencing and going away of Carlisle, whose absence after this
from the Surey was necessitated for a considerable time, wherein he had both
frequent intimations of Satan's being grown fiercer than ever, and particularly
in his domineering against Carlisle, as also several instigations to hasten his
coming again to the Surey, and particularly this following Letter from one of
the Ministers engaged in the said Affair.

Windemarly, Sept. the 16th 1689. SIR,
THis is to Certify you, That the Ministers have concluded to observe Sept.
the 26th at the Surey, for the Young Man, who has been seized on by a Dumb and
Deaf Devil, since I saw you, that is, whilst the Ministers were employed in
Praying and Preaching. When we were a going out of the House [on Sept. the 3d]
toward the Oratory, he delivered a written Paper to Mr. Jolly; wherein was
signified, that the Spirit, had told him, that he should continue Deaf and Dumb
a Month together, if the Ministers Prayed so long, and that time it was
verified, for Deafness and Dumbness seized upon him, when we went forth to the
place of Prayer, and continued till the conclusion of the Exercise, upon the
backside of the Paper was signified what his Distemper was, viz. Obsession in
and with Combination, these words were suggested unto him in a Fit, and these
with much difficulty he wrote the Morning after the Fit. Upon another day of
Prayer, he signified in the Morning, that he should be Deaf, Dumb, and Blind,
whilst Two did Exercise, which I suppose was fulfilled but the last day of
Prayer, which was the last Tuesday appointed with special respect to you, he
was capable to Hear, See, Speak all the time of Exercise, he conceits there are
two Spirits which converse with him, a good one, and a bad one, he expressed,
that he is as Lot's Wife, a Monument for the Admonition of all others. One day
of Prayer when he came out of his Fit, he fell upon his knees and prayed with
Tears in his Eyes, Mr. Heywood is sent to for his Assistance the next
opportunity, and your pains would be very acceptable, and you should study a
Compensation for your last Absence. The Country is very desirous of your
Assistance, and vox Populi, vox Dei. Mr. H. and his Consort, who have a very
Commodious House, are very free to be serviceable to you with any accomodations
for Lodging there. I pray you good Sir forecast, if possible, for the next
Opportunity, and pay long interest for your last disappointing so many
expectations by a longer continuance when you come. The Devil threatens, That
He will grease your Boots and your Spurrs too, when you come, Praemonitus,
premunitus; I have heard him speak Latin, and he declares he knows nothing of
Latin. He uttered, Promissum non factum principiis obstasero Immedicable vulnus
quum mala per Longas invaluere moras ense Recidendum, ne pars sincera
trathatur. Multum tempestatis sub noctem. Gutta cavat Lapidem non vi sed saepe
cadendo. I have heard him Prognosticate the alteration of the Weather into
immoderate Showers and brisk Winds; he has vomited some Stones, one near two
Fingers broad, and foretold of the prodigious Foal in Gloucestershire; he spoke
of a murdered Child in Bolland, which I hear is since discovered; his Fits do
now come usually in the night about Eight a Clock, and continue about Six
Hours; his Dancing is very admirable, he surpasses, I suppose, any Artist; he
takes better rest; he thinks he must be delivered, but not yet. My respects,
etc.

Robert Waddington.


The next Fast Day on this account was kept at Read, and some Professors
questioned the lawfulness of talking to Satan, but sound Reasons, and
especially the Bible, that Epitome of all past, present, and future Libraries,
that sure Rule for all Actions, 2 Pet. 1.19. that oraculous Resolver of all
Cases, Romans 3.2. gave sufficient satisfaction about it; and on the one hand, it
was found unlawful, if it were by way of Eve's curiosity, Genesis 3.1, to 6. or
Baal-Priest's Worship, 1 King 18.26, to 30. or Ahaziah's consultation, 2 Kings
1.2. or Manasse's familiarity, 2 Chronicles. 33.6. or Sceva's Son's exorcisms, Acts
19.13, 14. or the Dreamer's railing accusations, Judge. 8, 9. or the Mutterer's
aiding and mischieving purposes, Isa. 8.19.19.3.29.4. or Readiness despair, 1 Samuel
28.15. But yet on the other hand, it seemed lawful and useful when managed in a
right manner for removing Satan, or imparing his Interest; for that, it was
practiced by the Lord, Job 1.7, to 13.2.2, to 7. and Christ, Luke 8.28, to 33.
and Angels, Judge. 9. and Apostles, Mark. 16.17. Acts 16.18. and in the Ages
since, as Authentic History declares; and may Men talk to Satan at the day of
Judgment, 1 Cor. 6.3. then why not now? And may they now talk to good Angels by
way of Communion? Genesis 19.2. Why not then with bad ones in a way of War? And
since Satan can understand Men's talk, it must needs make some impressions on
him; and if any impressions, Then why not such as may disadvantage or remove
him? And being on Men's bad talk to Satan, he may get advantage and prevail
against them. Why may not good talk to him prevail against him, since things
that are contrary produce contrary effects or consequences? And can it be
Satan's interest, to use such talk against us, as is praeternatural to him? Why
then is it not ours to talk against him, as is our natural Talent and Province,
or to oppose him with our own Weapons, when he Challenges us at them? Or should
Satan meet a Man in a Humane Apparition, would it not be natural? Or in some
other resemblances, would it not be lawful for a Man to speak to him? If so,
Why not in a Demoniack, as well as in such other appearances? And some talk to
Satan may be a resisting him; and if so, then such talk is not only lawful, but
a Duty; all sorts of resisting Satan being commanded, and having no
Prohibition, have further a promise of removing Satan annexed to the use of
every such sort, Jam. 4.7. and Man's word being one of Christ's great
Ordinances, and Weapons of our Warfare, mighty through God against Satan, Why
may it not as our Savior's -- It is written -- remove Satan from man's body,
Mat. 4.5, add 12. and the Ministers consulted hereon gave no judgment against
it, but experience was for it.

On Sept. the 3d, Was a Fast Day for him at the Surey, Satan had said that he
would spare Dicky Fifty days longer, but then he would carry him to Hell. Of
which see October, the 22ds Discourse; as in other Fits he spoke very horrible
and Blasphemous words, saying, That he was God, and requiring that such Worship
should be paid to him, as was due unto God.

Sept. the 5th, Was another Fast day for him at the Surey, the Meeting even in
very bad Weather, being very full, and without much trouble from him, though in's
Fits, the words that came from him, always sounded far different from the
ordinary voice of Richard, or of any Man that ever spoke in the hearing of the
Bystanders; yea, sometimes made such a dismal noise, as might be heard at a
Miles distance, yea often there were two different Voices spoke in him, one
most hollow and very hideous, the other more shrill and skreaming, yea
sometimes both of them were in him at once, as if talking one to the other,
which seemed to be pronounced ordinarily as from his Breast, and often as from a
great hard round lump within his Fit swelled upon his Belly or Breast.

Sept. the 10th Was another Fast Day for him at the Surey. Being many who in
Scripture had Satan cast from their Bodies, had him at the same time cast out
of their Souls: Some may hence think, that if Richard had not this Last, he
could not have the First; But

1. What is within mentioned shows the hopes there was of Richard's Conversion;
Though

2. Some things, as to his visible Christianity, seem not so well as could be
desired, he therein much falling short of Magdalen, and others, whose Bodies
were freed from Satan, as his in some sort was; but though Richard upon Satan's
leaving his Body, was, and is, and ever should be in an unconverted State, this
nevertheless is very consistent with Satan's removal from his Body; for that
Satan was removed from Readiness and the Pythones's Bodies, yet not from their
Souls, 1 Samuel 16.23. Acts 16.18. and the Bodies of many mentioned in Scripture
were dispossessed, whose Conversion was unlikely, at least uncertain, Mar. 9.38,
to 41. Mat. 12.27. and since many cast out Devils who were never Converted; Why
maight not some dispossessed by them continue still Unconverted as well as they,
Mat. 7.22, 23. and 10.4, 8. and since many had various Miracles wrought on or
about them, yet were never Converted; Why might not some have dispossession
wrought on them without Conversion, such Miracles having as great a tendency
toward Conversion, as dispossession has, Luke 17.17, 18. Exodus c. 8. c 9. c.
10. 1 King. 13.4, 6.18.24, to 41. and God's Word and Appointments only are
converting, and Miracles but as proofs of them; Conversion therefore cannot be
expected mainly from dispossession or any of God's Works, which have no
institution or promise annexed to them as to Converting Ordinances, yet were
they such Ordinances; God's Spirit sets not in with any Ordinance whatsoever
for the Conversion of all under it; How then cannot be imagined, that it should
be tied to the Conversion of all under possession? Luke 16.31. Acts 13.11, 12.
John 3.8. and 5.36, to 39. and 10.25, 26, 27, 37, 38. And what necessary
connection is there 'twixt Souls and Bodily Cures? Are bodily Distempers always
removed, upon the removal of an error or a graceless state, from the Soul? Or,
Why may not Satan sometimes be, even as Distempers often are, removed from the
Body, without the removal of Soul Maladies thereupon, Psalm. 106.15, 43. 2 King.
6.20. and some have been Converted before their Bodies were troubled with
Satan, where surely Conversion could be no attendant of, or consequent to
Satan's leaving their Bodies, Luke 13.16. Job 2.3, 7. Although if a Conversion
work have not yet been wrought on Richard, it is hoped he may yet attain
thereunto, being some who continued Unconverted, whilst under Miracles, were
notwithstanding Converted afterward, John 5.9, to 16. Acts 2.36, 37. and being
it is his greatest concernment to make sure that his Conversion be sound, which
if it prove not, it may be more tolerable for Tire or Sidon at the day of
Judgment, than for him, For if the mighty works which was done on him, had been
done on them, they might have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes, Mat.
11.21.

On Sept. the 19th, Whilst the Ministers were at the Surey, Richard was in a
Fit, and Satan had in his Fit told of a Parchment Contract which Dicky entered
into with him: Of which see October. the 18ths Discourse. And Richard had dealt
unworthily with the Ministers, in signifying behind their back, either by
Letter, or otherwise, that he got no good by them, but grew weary of their
pains, as he had all along manifested his forwardness, and desires for their
proceeding thus far, so he then confessed his fault, and with his Father besought
them to go on as they had begun.

On Sept. the 26th, Was a Fast Day for him at the Surey, Mr. Jolly's Discourse,
was so clear their Call and Conduct in this Work, and the Reverend Mr. O.
Heywood's on 1 John 3. v. 8. as upon other days, the Reverend Mr. Frankland,
Mr. Pendlebury, and others assisted upon the desires of Richard and of the
rest, the said Carrington staid all night as formerly; but meddled not with so
weighty a province as speaking to Satan, while the other Ministers were
present, without their order or example, they then and at most other times
forbearing any Speeches to, or Conferences with Satan; but being what happened
on such Conference Nights, may be perceived by the more large description of
the past Nights Conflicts; therefore what passed in this or other such Nights
shall be more briefly declared, so as very many considerable things yet
unmention'd shall be past by, and if already mentioned shall be no more so,
though they were done frequently by Richard. This Nights raging Fits of the
Demoniack seemed different from the former, a voice in, or from him, and
something about him, and a pertinacious insolency and defiance of all methods
for removing Satan, seeming otherwise then formerly, when the said Ministers
last left him, who in his first raging Fit did say, Tell me Satan, how thou
troublest Richard; And do thou do this merely by thine own immediate acting,
in or about him, or by ill humors disordered in him, or infused into him, or by
outward Agents or Assistances about him? Satan as with an insulting
scornfulness and haughty fierceness answered, Thou may as well spare thy
pains about him, and remove a Mountain from its roots as me from him; said the
Minister, I am sure that Faith can drive thee hence, though thou be more
unremoveable than a Mountain, Mat. 17. v. 20. The Son of Peace shall I trust
bruise thee under our Feet shortly, Romans 16.20. I trust that God will stand
with us and strengthen us, so that he shall be delivered out of the mouth of
the roaring Lion, 2 Timothy 4, 17. And I wait, till the Lord Jesus shall say unto
thee, the Lord rebuke thee O Satan! The Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke
thee; Is not this a Brand plucked out of the Fire, Zach. 3. v. 2. Satan
answered, It were better for thee to forbear, for I am sure, that he is
certainly mine own, and in spite of thee, and all thy partakers; I will do what
I will with him, and carry him to Hell at my pleasure. The Minister answered,
Poor Satan! Nothing is thine own but Sin and Hell, and thy Slaves already
doomed thereunto. How does it appear that he is so doomed? What! Because thou
art permitted to trouble him? Art thou hence sure, that thou shall get him to
Hell? No! no! for so the Devil would have been sure of Job and of the
Syrophenicians Daughter, whom they were allowed to trouble; but thou thy self
know how perfectly Despotical, Arbitrary and Imperial Christ's Government
is, and how by the least beck of his Will, he works the greatest Changes and
Revolutions throughout the Worlds, in a Moment, turning all Creature-wheels
hither and thither, with as much freedom and ease, as if they were but one
single Wheel in his hand, Ezekiel. 10.13. thy title to and tenure of him is but
disputable usurped and precarious, and may e're long be lost to the Absolute
Power and Sovereign Pleasure of the Head over all Principalities and Powers,
Mightinesses and Dominions, Ephesians 1.21, 22. and thou or the stoutest, so
that Legions among ye, cannot stay in Humane Bodies or Souls one Moment longer
than his effectual Call, by which have not thou been cast out of many a Soul,
that thou have been as sure of, as thou art of him; Why then may thou not
soon be turned out hence, yea perhaps the very Sword is just now issuing out
from him to pack thee hence suddenly; mark, is it not now a hurling thee out,
so that instead of thy being sure of him, he ere long may sit on the Bench at
Christ's right hand to demand the Judgments against thee, for now troubling
him, where we likewise may join our Testimonies as Eve did, Genesis 3.13, to 16.
against thy Oaths, Lies, Blasphemies, and Curses, and attempts to beguile us,
which may further bruise thy head, and aggravate thy destruction. Satan
answered; Let me alone, Carlisle, art thou come again to torment me? have done,
or I will tear thee in pieces and be thy death: Said the Minister, let him
come; I will not through the Lord's help give place to the Devil, Ephesians. 4.27.
Let the Lord do with me what seems him good, though he slay me, yet I will
trust in him; but if the Gates of Hell were all opened, and all therein might
be saved through their killing of me, so that they with all their fellows on
Earth should conspire to destroy me, they could do nothing against me, if the
Lord be for me, as I trust he is, Romans 8.31. during which words he fell into a
dead Fit, but soon raging again. He gradually was reduced to yield much to what
was required and to answer what was demanded of him, though seemingly very much
against his will, as to instance; the Minister said, What right is it that thou
tells of, Satan, or what Commission have thou to trouble Richard thus? Satan
answred, My right to and troubling of him shall last for ever, and I will e're
long produce to thee my Commission against him. The Minister answered, Though for
a small moment the Lord has forsaken him in a little wrath, yet with
Everlasting kindness may he have great mercy on him, Isa. 54.7, 8. So that
instead of thy troubling him for ever, e're long he may he the Temple of the
Holy Ghost, the Habitation of God, and filled with all the fullness of God; And
when the Lord grant any such Commissions as thou tellest of, that are without
any Limitation to last for ever? Job 1.12. and 2.6. and yet if thou do not
stand to thy word, and produce to me such a Commission, art not thou a Liar.
Satan answered, His sins have given me such sure hold of him, that say, what
thou will, and do what thou can against me, I will trouble him for ever. Said
the Minister, What sins can thou charge him with that are unpardonable? What
know thou, but the Lord will save, and not make a full end of him; and though
his wounds be incurable, and his bruise grievous, yet is there none to plead
his cause, that they may be bound up? And are there no healing Medicines? What
though the Lord has wounded him with the wound of an Enemy, with the
Chastisement of a cruel one? What though his sorrow is incurable, and the Lord
has done these things unto him for the multitude of his iniquities, and
because his, and the Country sins were increased, yet the Lord may restore him
health, whom thou call cast away, and may heal him of his Wounds, and
forgive his Sins, and spoil thee, for thy spoiling him, Jer. 30.10. to 18.
therefore tell me no more of thy holding him for ever, but tell me for how long
were thou empowred to trouble him by the Commission which thou tellest of:
Satan answered, For Eighteen Months. Said the Minister, Thou then recedest from
thy Boasts of being sure of him for ever, and being thou have given ground thus
far, why may thou not be forced to give up all thy ground in him e're long,
and being thou acknowledgest thou must part with him, tell me likewise how thou
gottest first hold of him. Satan answered, Will thou still be my Tormentor,
ever pressing me to tell more. The Minister answered, Thou art like to be pressed
further unless thou get hence; had Richard some bodily Distemper that
occasioned thy seizing him, or did thou come into him through some plot among
the Devils; or had some malicious Witch a spite against him, so as to send thee
for executing her revenge on him; or did some pretendedly Religious Wizards
send thee on him, that by casting thee from him again, they might gain honor
to themselves, and him and others to their side; or did Richard give himself to
thee, or enter into any Promise or Covenant with thee through which thou thus
punishest him. Satan often answered, I will not tell thee. The Minister still
pursued that said Question, Was it through Disease or Combination, that thou
did get this power over him? I mean not to leave thee, till thou tell me
this, therefore without further delay or evasion, declare what it was that
occasioned thy first troubling of him thus. Satan with a seeming Reluctance and
great Consternation cried out; A wish, and a Vow. Said the Minister, What Wish
and Vow was that? Satan answered, Dicky wished he might be a good Dancer,
saying, He'de give himself to the Devil, might he but excel others in Dancing;
upon which many of the Bystanders struck with wonder, declared how they heard
Richard speak those words, when he having a mind to dance with a Young Woman,
because he could not dance well, another that could dance better, was preferred
before him; Dancing then being much labored after, and prided in their way as
a rare Accomplishment. Upon which the Demoniack seemed as in a dejected and
forlorn condition: And the Minister said, If this be all Satan which gives thee
Claim to Richard, there seems a door of hope in his achor vale of trouble, for
if he could, and did give himself away to thee by Vow or otherwise, such gift
however may be redeemed or rescued from thee, as the Woman's Vow disallowed by
her Husband was void; Her Husband bore its iniquity, and the Lord forgave it,
Numb. 30.5, 8, 15. So he may be betrothed to Christ, Hos. 2.16, 19. Who nulling
such a Vow, and bearing its Iniquity it shall be pardoned, such Vows being
better broken than kept, and when broken, pardonable among other horrid Sins, 1 Samuel 25.22, 34, 39. And why may not thou trouble others, who revoke other
Vows as well as him for breaking this, for I doubt not he is for reversing this
Vow if ever he made it, now willinger to want such Dancing skill than to pay so
dear for it. And being thou still breakest thy Bargains with all thy Slaves,
promising them ease in thy ways, Luke 12.18. which they never met with; How
can thou tie him to his Vow on his rejecting it? Satan answered, I will call
up my Sister Ishcol against thee; upon which the Bystanders cried out, see
where the Mouse that is used to haunt him, runs circling about his feet, and
now it dropped as into the Ground, so as it can be no more seen. Upon which the
Demoniack was as thrown down with his Mouth to that very spot of Ground where
the said Mouse, or Imp seemed to disappear, he was whispering there
unintelligibly to something that was neither seen nor heard. Then the Minister
said, What art thou mumbling or muttering about Satan? Or what does thy Sister
Ishcol say to thee? The Demoniack at last raised up again, said, She tells me,
that at one time or other, when she gets thee by her self, she will destroy
thee: Said the Minister, Why tell thou me of he and she; now of thy Sister,
and at other times of thy Brother, since there are no different Sexes among
Devils? Luke 20.35, 36. And why call'st thou her Ishcol, and him Lampas, and
another Nicholas, as if every Devil had a peculiar Name decyphering his Nature,
if so, then what is thy Name? Satan answered, Apollyon. Said the Minister, your
Names seem rightly to suit your Natures, you being all for Conquering,
Destroying and Burning all Men; But why tells Ishcol of her getting or leading
me by my self, and then destroying me? I trust the Lord shall guide me on every
side, 2 Chronicles. 32.22. and he will guide me even until death, Psalm. 48.14. so as
I shall not be left to her conduct. And has not every good Christian as strong an
hedge of protection about him, when he is got alone, as when he is in company?
Job 1.5, 10. Had she power to destroy me? Why cannot she do it now? What could
this Company do to hinder her? Were she the weakest Devil among you? And were
all Men on Earth here to defend me from her, though all their Bones were as
pieces of Brass, or bars of Iron, yet had I no stronger guard than these? Oh!
How should I tremble for fear of her, but in this day shall this Song be sung;
Salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks, I Will trust in the Lord for
ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, Isa. 26.14. and whether
I be alone or in company, Oh! how secure, am I, and out of the reach of the
fiercest Devils, whilst the Lord has a matchless Power, and Faithfulness, and
a mighty Arm, and strong is his Hand, and high is his right hand about me,
Psalm. 89.8.13. The Minister thus proceeding, the Demoniack fell down, and
coming out of his Fit, did cry out, Haste, give me some drink, quickly any
thing to drink, there is as a fiery furnace in me, that almost smothers me.

On October. the 10th 89, Mr. Carrington came to the Surey, being the day before
the other Ministers had appointed to be there; for that on Conference Night
last before Satan seemed to yield before him, whence he strongly hoped that
Satan could not withstand such Conflicts two Nights and Days together, when in
the Demoniack's raging Fits, Satan burst out into affrighting Blasphemies, and
the Minister answered, One may know, Satan! what Country thou art of by thy
Hell-language. One would wonder, that thou should be so obsequious to Christ
on Earth, and then so believe in, and tremble at, a Just Omnipresent dreadful
God, and yet now should talk such things against him as make us tremble far
more at them, then at thy menaces against us; And do thou think such Sins to
be still desirable and worth thy committing, who have so infinitely lost and
suffered by them? Satan answered, Sin is my trade and diversion, and shall be
thine, and I will make thy life most wretched, if thou refuse it. The Minister
answered, wretched indeed should I be, were I Master of that Trade; and woeful
is thy case, if Sin can be any, or is the only diversion therein, that thy
Diversion being infinitely more wretched than thou can make me on my leaving
Sin, and cleaving to Christ, the prevailing of whose Interest and so the ruin
of thine is at least as dear to me as my future, and dearer than my temporal
interest; so that the wretchednesses thou threatens me with on this score, are
a grace, I am infinitely unworthy of, Acts 5.41. Phil. 1.7, 29. Oh! how
infinitely more light and easy are the heaviest loads in Christ's Burden, and
sharpest Thorns in his Yoke, than the gentlest weights and stings in the least
sin, Mat. 11.28, 30. the least taste of the sweetest Sin, being more intolerable
to Christ then all Hell besides; and as he rejected all the Sins thou did, or
could offer him, so would I more gladly then I would eat, when hungry, Luke
4.2, 6. being more afraid of sin than I am of thee, dreading lest it should be
too hard for me, as it was for thee and fellow Angels, who excelled in strength,
yet could not hinder its rapacious talons from fastening on ye, and dragging ye
out of Heaven; yea so hateful have I found iniquity to be, Psalm. 36.2. that
were it in Heaven, I would not be there, but rather in Hell, if Sin were not
there, Job 36.23. Nay if there were no way nor state, wherein I might be
without sin, I would not be any where, saying with Job chap. 7.15, 16. My soul
choseth death rather than life, I hate it, I would not live always; Let me
alone, for my days are vanity. Said Satan, My Tormentor, I told thee, I would
show thee my Commission as thou often requiredst, see, here it is; upon which the
Demoniack vomited to the Minister a piece of Paper, all very much wet, close
wrapped up in a round lump; said the Minister, Where had thou this, which thou
call thy Commission? Or what is in short the Contents of it? Satan answered,
Read it, if thou would know, for thou art like to know no more of me but what
thou find there; What can thou not understand it? I think I have given
thee something to study on; upon which he very scornfully vapor'd by insulting
Words, Gestures, and wild Pranks, especially by Dancing, wherein he excelled
all that the Spectatours had seen, or heard of, and probably all that mere
Mortals could perform, and though the Demoniack before and after, and out of
such Fits, could scarce Dance at all, or but very sorrily, yet in them he often
for six or seven times together leapt up so, as that part of his Legs might be
seen shaking and quavering above the heads of the People, from which heights he
often fell down on his knees, which he long shivered and traverst on the ground,
at least as nimbly as other Men can twinckle or sparkle their Fingers, thence
springing up in to's high leaps again, and then falling on his Feet, which
seemed to reach the Earth, but with the gentlest and scarce perceivable
touches, when he made his highest leaps. How wondrous then were the movements
of his Feet and deportment of his Body, whilst he did not leap, and every sort
and part of his Dances seemed chained to some Tunes or Measures, and regulated
in conformity to some Music which none there heard, and all seemed to be done
with so much freedom and ease, that though continued one or more hours, his Body
seemed no more spent, or tired, or out of breath, then at the beginning of
them; and so obstinate was he in persuing his Dances, that many offering to
hinder them were not able, till the Ministers discourse seemed at last to break
them off more than all their forces; the Minister saying, What Satan, is this
the Dancing that Richard gave himself to thee for? And did his Wish thou
tellest of, bind thee to do no more than this for so great a purchase as thy
seizing him. No, no, this answers not his Vow for his being a good Dancer; for
surely his Wish was that he might Dance well merely of himself, without thy
painting or actuating his Limbs, or Dancing in and for him. Surely he wished to
Dance when he pleased alone, or with others, and not when thou please, so
that no others dare Dance with him. Surely he wished to Dance for his diversion,
and not that Dancing should be his Punishment, and why could not he Dance out
of his sits as well as in them, were he a good Dancer as he wished, and is not
therefore thy seizing him without giving him his said wish, a wronging of him
just like thy cheats in other cases, as when thou offerest the World and its
Kingdoms, Powers, and Glories to such as will Worship thee, Luke 4.5, 6, 7. How
do thou delude such Worshippers, some of them, whom thou give most to,
finding all empty, fading, cloying, vexing, and so far short of what thou
promisedst, and they looked for; and others of them, are put off with scanty
parcels of what thou flatter'dst them with, scarce getting Hutts for their
Heads, Scraps for their Bellies, Rags for their Backs, and Graves for their
Corpses, but think not thus to impose on him, since thy part in the Vow or
Bargain thou tellest of is not kept by thee, as abovesaid; it must needs be
void, and he now free from it: so as you having thence no part nor lot in him,
cease Dancing Satan and be gone from him; upon which the Demoniack forbore
Dancing for a while, walking very hastily and angerly too and fro, till at last
he fell to Dancing again, the Minister said, Can thou Dance no better?
Ransack the old Records of all past times and places in thy memory; Can thou
not there find out some other way of finer trampling, pump thine invention dry?
Cannot that universal Seed-plot of subtle Wiles and Stratagems spring up one
new method of cutting Capers? Is this the top of skill and pride to shuffle
feet, and brandish knees thus, and to trip like a Do, and skip like a
Squirrel, and wherein differs thy leapings from the hoppings of a Frogg, or
bounces of a Goat, or friskings of a Dog, or gesticulations of a Monkey? And
cannot a Palsy shake such a loose Leg as that? Do not thou twirle like a
Calf that has the turn, and twitch up thy Houghs just like a spring hault fit,
or does the thoughts of thy treading of the Wine Press of the fierceness of the
Almighties Wrath, Rev. 19.15. strike thee into such Convulsions as toss and
distort, and jert thee thus? Or does thy walking on the burning Coals of his
Fury make thee startle, and fling, and sprent so wretchedly? During this
Discourse, the Demoniack seemed sometimes as put out of his Dances, till he
fell into his dead Fit, whence arising, he fell to Dancing again; the Minister
saying, Is this a time for thee to Dance in, when the other Devils are a
trembling, have not thou heard the News, so sad and fatal to them and thee,
that the great day of the Lord is near? It is near, and hastes greatly, even
the Voice of the day of the Lord, the day of Wrath, and fiery jealousy, of
trouble and distress, of wastness and desolation, of thick clouds and
gloominess, Zeph. 1.14, 15. Mark! mark! Satan, do not thou see the Angel
coming down from Heaven, Having the key of the bottomless pit, and a great
chain in his hand, laying hold on the Dragon the old Serpent the Devil and
Satan, and binding and casting them into the bottomless pit, where he will
shut, and seal, and keep you up from deceiving or troubling men on Earth, Rev.
20.1, 2, 3. So that thou shall no longer tell, that the World and its Kingdom,
Power and Glory is delivered to thee, and to whomsoever thou will thou give
it, Luke 9.6, 7. and that thou will give it Christ upon his Worshipping thee?
No, no, it shall be his, whether thou will or no, for behold he comes with
Fire, and with his Chariots like a Whirle wind to render his anger with fury,
and his rebukes with flames of Fire, to take unto him his great power, and to
reign for ever and ever, and to extend his Churches peace as a River, and her
glory, as a stream flowing over the Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea,
satisfying his People with joy and gladness, delights and satisfying
consolations for the abundance of her glory, Rev. 11.15, 17. and 10.7. Isa.
66.10, to 16. and notwithstanding your Plots against the First and Second Adam,
and all your devices to hinder his coming: Behold he comes quickly, and his
reward is with him, Rev. 22.12. And should ye pray to him, as when he was on
Earth, Mat. 8.29. Luke 8.28. to stay the Wheels of his Chariots? And should ye
beg more earnestly, than ever any dying Man did for a few moments longer out of
Hell? yet surely he will not tarry, Hab. 2.3. And art thou like the Malefactor
on the Gallows ready to be turned off the Ladder, and yet desperately dancest
and frolickest about the Mouth of the Fiery Lake, that thou art a sinking into?
Upon this the Demoniack was hurled into a long dead Fit, whence as he
recovered, he cried out, My Fit returns next Morning at Seven a Clock. And
just before the Minister entered on this Nights Work, he was told of several
Gentlemen's coming on purpose to ridicule and discompose him, instead of which
they at the end thereof, openly thank him for the satisfaction and assurance
they had thence received of Richard's being actuated by Satan, which before
they questioned. After which the Paper vomited by the Demoniack was unfolded
and dried by the Fire, whereon was written much Greek, and other Letters or
Charracters which none then there understood; one sentence whereof was this.
(...) 600 (...); which was put in a Diary for that 600, the Figures therein,
seemed to refer to the whole number of days that were to pass betwixt Richard's
first trouble, and the time when the Lord would plunge him in the Lake of
burning as the said paper threatened. On the remainder of which Night the
Minister lay near a Mile off the Surey with an ingenious Gentleman, to whom
several Arguments were long urged, for proving that Richard's Affliction was
through Satan's possessing him; he frequently answering, I cannot believe that it
is through possession. Early next Morning, whilst the said Gentlemen seemed to be
asleep, the Minister little thinking of such Devil Spectators, as he afterward
heard of, put his Mouth to the Water in a Basin that was on a seat behind a
Curtain close by the Beds-head, and washed it, so as the said Gentleman could
scarce have seen through the Curtain had he then been awake; after which he went
privately thence to the Surey to wrestle against Satan in the said Fit, before
the other said Ministers were to come thither. In which Fit, Satan burst out
into his usual bravadoes; saying, Do thou again trouble me, after thou have
seen my Commission, which thou do either understand, and so thou know it
is in vain to oppose me, or else thou art ignorant, and so unfit to deal with
me? Said the Minister, The Commission thou tellest of, threatens that the Lord
will put him in the burning Lake, How could thou know this Satan? Have thou
looked into the Book of Life, and found Richard's Name, even as thine own
awanting there? Or does the Lord reveal such Secrets to thee. Nay surely the
Lord never gave thee this Commission which I shall reckon among thy usual vain
gloryings, unless thou show how it empowers thee to trouble him here, or to get
him to Hell; And what good would it do thee to get him, or others to Hell, so
as should make thee thus insatiably desire them thither? Would not they rather
be to thee, as Dives's Brethren to him, enraging rather then asswaging thy Hell
Flames? What would thou do with them, if thou had them there? Satan
answered, I would treat them with Puddings and Brows, and as for B. OF the B.
there is a Chair of State prepared in Hell for him, and thy unbelieving
Bedfellow B. shall follow him; on which the Minister was doubly surpised,
partly through Satan's thus naming his Bedfellow, though they at the Surey then
knew not that he had any Bedfellow; much less, that he lay with Mr. B. that
piece of a Night, especially for that Satan styled him unbelieving, though no
Mortal except the two said Bed fellows did know of their said arguing about
Richard's possession; nor did then know of the said Mr. B's answering of it; I
cannot believe it, which was the more considerable for that the main Argument
pressed that Night for proving the said possession, was the Demoniack's
discovering things utterly unknowable to mere Mortals, of which the Minister
gave Mr. B. several Instances, and as if Satan would leave no room for
disbelief, and enforce the said Arguments into a Demonstration. He adds fresh
Instances, discovering even above Humane capacity what happened so very
secretly but a few hours before at such a distance, and that about Mr. B's own
Arguings against such Discoveries. The Minister however answered Satan, Do
thou still entertain me with such unproved Narrations about thy having this
Person, and the other in Hell, as thou did about having Richard and me
thither; but praised be the Lord for ever, for some Golden Moments, which we
have yet out of Hell, wherein we may wait and strive, That the Lord may deliver
us from all our Transgressions, Psalm. 39.7, 8 and from the Wrath to come, and
pardon and take away our sin, and preserve us from all evil, from this time
forth, and for ever, Job 7.2. 2 These. 1.10. Psalm. 12.1, 7, 8. And surely thy
threatening us as Jonah did Nineveh, will set us a repenting, So iniquity shall
not be our ruin, Ezekiel. 18.30. But the Lord shall deliver us from every evil
work, and preserve us unto his heavenly kingdom, to whom be glory for ever and
ever, 2 Timothy 4.18. Satan answered, Have not I often told thee, that all thy
endeavors cannot prevail against me, especially not to day, for that thou
come not hither fasting. The Minister affirmed, he was then fasting, Satan
denied it; and thus they interchangeably affirmed and denied, and contradicted
each other about six times, till the Minister said, Thou art the father of
lies, and a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because
there is no truth in thee: When thou speak a lie, thou speak of thine
own, for thou art a lier, and the father of lies, John 8.44. and therefore what
I say, is truth, and what thou say, is falsehood, and must needs appear so,
unless thou provest the contrary: On which the Demoniack stood a while
trembling as in a muse, till he was suddenly turned with his face toward the
wall, so intensely and greedily poring thereon, and beckning thereunto, as if
he converst with something therein. The Minister said, Why do thou apply thy
self as to something unseen to us when thou art at a loss? And what do thou
then mean by thy mumbling, sometimes with thy face to the Earth; and sometimes
whispering in a Corner; and sometimes muttering, or making signs toward the
Wall; Do thou then see some other Devil that thou then talkst too? And what
parley have thou now with the Devil in the Wall there? And what news does he
bring thee? Satan answered, He tells me that my words are true, and thine
false, for that thou art not fasting; for he says, thou did sup some water
behind the Curtain of the Bed before thou came out of thy Chamber this
Morning. The Minister was again surprised to find something in the Wall, tell
of that which Satan in Richard seemed before not to know of, and which no
Mortal did then know of, except the Minister himself as is abovesaid; who
answered, I perceive, thou tellest nothing of what passed in my Chamber to
Night, from thy own knowledge; else what need was there of thy telling, what he
in the Wall says, and besides the Intelligence he gave thee, at first about my
not fasting was but by halves, else what need had thou to ask him now, what
it was that broke my Fast; and besides he in the Wall there either observed me
negligently in the Chamber, not minding how I put the Water out of my Mouth
there as well as into it, or else he slanders me maliciously now in reporting
that I broke my Fast with the said Water, which I did not, and so he is not
only an Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.10. but a false Accuser, Job 1.11.2.5.
for I tell thee, one drop of that Water did not go down my throat, and so I did
not thereby break my Fast, let him in the Wall, or any Devil among ye all deny
this if he can. Besides, Why do ye Devils publish what passes secretly in my
Chamber, being ye report not what passages ye see in other Men's Chambers? And
what Devil is that there that was so busy to Night, in remarking what was said
and done in my Chamber? Satan answered, He is my Cousin Melampus. The Minister
answered, I will labor, that good Angels may be incharged with and encamped
about me, Psalm. 91.11. and that I may be hid in the secret of Gods presence,
having the Lord for my Habitation, ver. 9. and dwelling in the secret place of
the most High, ver. 1. who surely shall deliver me from the snare of the
Fowler, ver. 3. So that neither Melampus nor any of you shall haunt my Chamber,
or come nigh my dwelling, ver. 10. But why do thou tell me sometimes of thy
Brother Lampas and Sister Ishcol, and now of thy Cousin Melampus, as if there
were some Kindred among ye? Surely it is but some base rank of Devils that thou
art related to, and who is it that thou boastest to be the very top of thy
kindred; Satan answered, The chief I belong to, is Beelzebub; the Minister
said, thou ownest then thou art but an underling Slave, and a poor diminutive
one indeed, if thou be under no greater a Devil than Beelzebub, the Lord of
Flies, which rebellious Flies contemned his Lordship, so as he could not keep
them from sucking the reekings of his Pagan Sacrifices; or because he is
likewise styled Beelzebub; is he also the Lord of dung, which indeed is too
good for him to reign over, yea the very ruins of Old Baals Temple turned into
a Draught-house, 2 King. 10.27. is far too noble a Palace for his Lordship, yea
the very Swine or Flies are too precious for him to lodge in. How then
presumest thou on an Humane Body? The Minister thus arguing about Flies, some
of the Spectators as in a commotion said, See, see, some things like Flies, are
flying up into the Demoniack 's Nose; but the Minister proceeded. How meanly
employed is thy Prince Beelzebub and your sort of Devils in dealing thus about
Bodies? Mat. 12.24. Are ye so dull and blockish and sunk into Earthlings, that
ye are unfit to trade with cunninger Devils about Men's Souls? And how vilely
sneaking and servile are ye grown, one of you taking up with the resemblance of
a Mouse; another of you sniveling into the appearance of a Weazil, whence
horridly ugly must ye needs be in preferring such soul looks before your own,
and filthily unclean Spirits are ye indeed, Luke 4.33. that can thus wallow in
the most loathsome Creepers, and in the most defiling forms that were commanded
to be had in abomination above all other, Lev. 11.29, 41, 42, 43. What can ye
put on no better shapes than those? Upon which he fell into a dead Fit, whence
he soon arose. Then the Minister said, Satan, as to thy attempting this Youth's
Body, against which I trust thou shall never prevail; What account will thou
give thereof to thy Superior Devils? look, look, Satan, Do not thou see how
they glow with fiery rage against thee, and shake their threatening looks, and
Sparkle out flames of Vengeance, and bend their murdering frowns like Bows to
shoot Wrathful Arrows through thee, for thy being so long a dispatching this
their business; then, ah! how will they vex all thy powers of sensation, and
blast all the Spirits, and crush all the strengths, and rack every Article of
thine Essence, upon thy not succeeding herein at last; and if on the one hand
thou will be thus afflicted by them, for not ruining Richard thoroughly; How
will thou on the other hand be tortured by the Lord for thy troubling him at
all? Ah! then how will thou bear his showers of snares of Fire and Brimstone,
and horrible Tempests, Psalm. 11.6. when his terrors shall take hold of thee as
Waters, and as stormy East winds shall hurl thee away, and God shall cast on
thee and not spare, so as thou would fain flee out of his hand, Job. 27.20, to
23. yet if to escape his Wrath thou should flee to the utmost parts of the
Sea, or should hide thy self in Rocks from the Face of him that sits on the
Throne; or should thou soar among the Stars, or make thy Bed in Hell, and
shroud thy self in the Abyss of Impenetrable obscurity, yet his Spirit and
presence would find thee out for Destructions in the great Day of his Wrath,
then who among ye, will be able to stand, Rev. 6.16, 17. Psalm 139.7, to the 12.
Who among ye, can dwell with the everlasting burnings of devouring fire, Isa.
33.14. When the whirlwind of the Lord shall go out with fury, and that
continuing whirlwind shall fall with pain on thy wicked head, Jer. 30.23. So as
may make thee cry out bitterly. Let not the Lord regard this eternal day, but
let the blackness of the thickness of darkness dwell upon it, and the shadows
of death stain it, so as may terrify it out of the number of days, Job 3.4,
5, 6. On which he was hurled down as dead, and afterward recovered.

October. the 11th 89, Was prefixed to be a Fast Day for him at the Surey, as is
beforementioned; whither the other Ministers did also come on that very
Morning, when the last mentioned Conference with and Fit of the Demoniack was
newly over; on which day multitudes stockt thither as formerly, many of them
coming from far, and many all along seemed wrought on by that Providence and
the Ordinances together, as appeared from the several Lectures that through this
occasion, were desired to be set up by the said Ministers, where there had been
none before: Moreover on this day, as also at some other times, Richard whilst
out of his Fits, seemed very serious and attentive at the Preaching of the Word
by Mr. Jolly, still looking in his Bible for the proofs referred to, and also
seemed very devout at the Ministers Prayers; yea, he often borrowed Godly Books
of them, reading them in private, and praying by himself, yea sometimes in
company with bitter tears, confessing and renouncing his Sins, and Mourning,
for that the Lord had made him such a public Spectacle of his just Judgments,
and importunately craving mercy vehemently; crying out, Ye Ministers if ye can
do any thing, help me, I trust to be delivered by your Labors under God, or no
way at all. Insomuch that sometimes the Ministers had great hopes that he was
becoming a new Creature, and that the Lord was a giving him Faith to be healed,
Act. 14.9. But whilst he was in such hopeful Expressions of his Piety, he was
seized with his said Fits, in the closure of which he cried out, My next Fit
returns at Eight a Clock; upon which Mr. Jolly and Mr. Carrington, at the
continued desires of those at the Surey, did stay till the said Fit was over,
much of the time before the said Eight a Clock was employed by Mr. Jolly in
Discoursing, Expounding, Singing and Praying; during which work, Mr. Carrington
was meditating in a retired Walk by the River Shelder near the Surey, and
preparing himself for the said Eight a Clock Conflict, having before given
express charge to young Mr. G. to call him from thence when his said Fit began,
but there being that Night about or above a Thousand People, laboring to
throng into the Barn, the said Mr. G. was so hurried down the stream, and
wedged in the crowds of them, that he could not thence disingage himself to
tell Mr. Carrington when Richard's Fit seized him, whence Mr. Jolly alone
carried on all that Nights Work both before and through the said Fit, which
lasted near an Hour, being far shorter than usual, and was all the while a
raging Fit, without any dead Fits interrupting it, wherein Mr. Jolly spoke to
Satan; he declined any direct discourse with Mr. Jolly, and did either talk of
other matters, then those that were proposed to him, or else his talk was not
understood, for sometimes he insulted at Mr. Carrington's not appearing, and
triumphed over him, for that he encountered him not that Night as he did the
Night before; and sometimes he affirmed that Dicky was his own, and sometimes
he seemed to speak a sort of Gibberish, or to speak his words so thick, that
nothing could be made of them, whilst Mr. Carrington wondered that he was not
called, and finding by his Watch, that it was past Eight a Clock, and hearing a
horrible noise from the Barn, he went thitherwards, being met by some that came
to seek and fetch him thither, where he came too late; for that Satan cried out
as he was a coming, Now Carrington, I think I have cozened thee, I will put a
fine trick on thee, for I will have done before thou get hither. Then he became
exceeding furious, and hurled them that were near him on the Ground, whence
some of the People were likewise rude, so that some small harm was then done to
the Barn, and to some Persons therein, until he came out of his Fit.

On October. the 18th, Was a Fast Day for him at the Surey, notwithstanding the
Weather was extremely bad, the usual crowds did disturb the Ministers; one of
them did pray earnestly, that the Lord would remove Satan by his All-powerful
word, saying, Satan come out of him thou Evil Spirit, get thee hence and
trouble him no more; and that the Lord would effectually bid Satan be gone, and
say, Satan, I command thee to leave this Youth, and cease from afflicting him;
by which words some Persons there did think the Minister turned his Speech unto
Satan in the midst of Prayer. Upon which they did hint some dissatisfaction
very privately among themselves, yet the Devil did publicly take notice of
those hints and did reflect upon some for them; at the close of which days
work, Mr. Carrington was desired to search a Box in Richard's Chamber, for in
one of Richard's Fits, Satan cried out, that there was a Contract made between
him and Dicky, for a certain time, written in Parchment, to which Dicky
subscribed a jade [as Satan styled her] taking his hand out of Bed, and putting
one or two of his Fingers to the Writing, though Richard, when out of his Fits
confessed not any thing of such a Contract that he knew of, yet many suspected
there was such a Paper or Parchment, and particularly John Hancock a running
Horse-keeper lying in Standing-hay Stable remote from the Surey, who once
observed some there, loath to have a Box set before the Preaching Minister,
which however they brought, after having hastily emptied it of Papers in a
corner, all which when come home, he told to Mary Sharply, who thinking the
Paper Contract should be sought for in the Box at the Surey, did privately
desire Mr. John Grimshaw, to put Mr. Carrington upon the said search, which the
said Mr. G. did very secretly; upon which the said Minister did that very
Evening search the said Box, finding in it nothing like the said Contract, but
very many Papers, having very odd shapes and Figures pricked into them, as with
Pins, and drawn upon them with Pens very ill favouredly, and uncommonly as
would have appeared by one of the Papers, which the said Minister took with
him, if it had not been taken from his custody as is above said. But though this
search was undertaken by the said Families leave, yet whilst it was made, there
was a strange Commotion, one boxing Richard, said, Thou Rogue, will thou suffer
this? Yonder Jade has put him upon it. Upon which going out, did chide the
abovesaid M. S. telling her, how the Knave at her House had first occasioned
this search, sadly threatening him and her as she was going to get a Horseback
behind her Neighbor homewards. During which brawl, Richard, though not in his
usual sit was pusht, as is abovesaid, or hurried on to say, it should go ill
with some that Night, and he would send his Sister Ishcol among them, which so
frightened the People then at the Surey, that they durst not go home that
Night, but the said M. S. being to go over a Field, after her quitting her said
Neighbor's company, did in the said Field hear a great rattling or clashing
noise, as of armed Soldiers; then she saw great Multitudes as of Cattle run
past her two by two, as if yoakt each other, till she recovering her Spirit,
prayed and said, Go vanish; upon which she heard or saw no more of them. But
next Morning the said running Horse-keeper came as in a great fright to her,
saying, Did she meet with no mischief, as she came home last Night? He was sure
she brought something that was haught with her from the Surey, as he had felt
to purpose; for that soon after his coming home, he being in bed in the Stable,
a great weight as of Lead rolled to and fro on him, till after much struggling
he got his Arms out of Bed, after which something else as an heavy Man tumbled
on him, till with much ado he got his hands toward it; upon which thinking to
get out of Bed to avoid such further trouble, he was kept from rising by
something that seemed like a Sack full of Wheat to be poured on him out of the
Sack, as from the Stable range near his Bed, till at last getting at liberty he
could feel nothing at all that had been poured on his Bed.

On October. the 22th, The Fast day for him was kept at Altham that by changing,
and not divulging the place, that Meeting might have escaped the great
confluence of People, which however did then slow in thither, and many other
Conferences and Conflicts with Satan, such as are abovesaid, shall be past over
for brevity sake, though therein likewise did happen several remarkable things,
as to instance; Satan had long before this October. the 22d, threatened, that
upon this very day he would carry Richard away to Hell, as is before mentioned;
and Mr. Carrington was so desirous, that Satan's said threatening might be
prevented, that on the Wednesday before, viz. October. the 20th, he secretly by
himself Fasted and prayed for that very purpose, wherein he as Joshua, Jos.
7.6. fell to the Earth on his Face, with his Soul, as David's bowed down to the
dust, and his Belly cleaving unto the ground, Psalm. 44.25. and Richard as he
came from the Surey to the said Meeting, was hoisted up in the Air, and when
the time came, for Mr. Carrington's praying at this Altham Meeting, he was
desired to stand at prayer so very remote from the Demoniack, that neither of
them could hear any thing that each of them said, yet though the Demoniack had
long lain in a dead fit, Satan then cried out very much against his Tormentor,
saying, Dicky, Thou have this day narrowly escaped me, and thou may thank my
Tormentor as long as thou live, and do for him all that lies in thy power, by
way of acknowledgment, since but for him thou had this day been carried to
Hell, but my Tormentor was last Wednesday upon all four, and therefore I could
not now carry thee to Hell. Besides other things mentioned in the last part of
W. Sellar's Oath hereafter mentioned. When the said days work was over, some of
the Spectators asked Mr. Carrington, whether on the said Wednesday he had not
fallen off his Horse, or how he then came to be on all four, as the Devil had
told, to whom he was loath to speak of such a Secret, Mat. 6.6, 18. But
considering the wonderfulness of Satan's discovering such a Design, and Time
and Posture of a Prayer, put up at so many Miles distance, and then utterly
unknown to any Mortal besides the said Minister himself, he hoped it might be
useful to acknowledge it as is abovesaid. Besides his dead Fits continuing
sometimes about an hour or more after the Ministers Fast Day work was over,
many hundreds who could not come near him, during the said Exercises; did after
them still flock about him to feel or observe how his Body was sometimes as
light or lighter than a Feather, and in the same hour as heavy or heavier than
Lead, and how he seemed so very lifeless that on diligent trial* no beating of
his Pulse, nor breathing at his Mouth or Nostrils could be perceived, nor any
Sense or Motion in him upon their lugging, thumping, or pinching of him, whilst
he still retained his natural warmth and freshness, and how his Joints were
stiff, and his Arms and other parts of him inflexible, and how a round hard
lump of flesh, as some thought near the bigness of a Man's Head, and as others
say about the bigness of a Man's Fist, suddenly did roll or was puffed up on his
Belly or Breast, out of which Satan spoke several Noises and Voices; as to
instance, A Stranger wholly unknown at the Surey, laying his hand on the said
lump, these words came out of it, Though thou be a Doctor of Physic, thou can
not help Dicky, for none but Doctors of Divinity, can do him any good; Upon
which the said Stranger being asked, who he was, confessed, that he was a
Physician new come from Holland, the said lump being instantly flat again, as
soon as the said Fit was over. Besides the Ministers hoping that Satan could
not long withstand them more closely opposed, resolved to observe three days in
one Week to the said purpose, viz. Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, allotting
two of them to observe it of the said days, and particularly Mr. Carrington to
be one of the two that was to carry on the said Friday work, but Mr. Carrington
afterward finding that he could not observe the said Friday, came within four
Miles of the Surey, late on the Tuesday Evening before it, that he might assist
at the said Wednesday work, and get some other in his stead for the said Friday
work; and though the said Minister did thus take up his said Lodgings, then
utterly unknown to any Mortal at the Surey, and quite contrary to all their
expectations, who never looked for him, till the said Friday, yet the Demoniack
being in a Fit on the said Tuesday Evening, seemed to have two Devils, or at
least two contrary Voices talking to, and opposing of each other in him; one
Voice in him, crying out to the other, Hold, hold, do not vomit up that scroule
of paper yet, for my Tormentor is coming, and is got within four Miles of this
place. The other answered, I value him not, I will cast it out now. The other
replied, Thou shall not, for Carrington will be here early next Morning, and it
shall be kept to be cast at him. Thus they long wrangled, and the said Minister
coming to the Surey on the said Wednesday Morning, was asked by very many there,
where he lay that Night, which falling out as Satan had before told them, they
were amazed, and he confronting Satan in that Morning Fit, Satan vomited up the
said Paper at him, as was threatened; and in a Pit which the Demoniak had in the
Night, Mr. Waddinton joined with the said Minister in the encountering of Satan,
who did rage and storm more furiously than ordinarily, whilst Mr. Waddington
was very awfully mentioning the Tremendous and Dreadful Titles of the Lord; To
whom be the Kingdom, Power and Glory, now and evermore. Amen.

On October. the 31th, Was a Fast Day for him at the Surey, The Ministers found
that Satan had so tormented him the Night before, that the use of his Limbs was
taken from him, and whilst out of his Fit, he continued in great pain and
anguish; so that before they began the usual work of the day, he burst out into
impatience, saying, He resolved that this should be the last prayer day on his
behalf, and that he would take another course for his help: But the Father
entreated us with tears to proceed, and Richard having been all the time of the
Exercise very quiet, and somewhat eased, and much alarmed, especially by one of
the said Ministers, who was then more than ordinarily assisted in Prayer, he in
the close changed his former Language into thanking of the Ministers, and
wishing them to go on in their usual course for him.

On November. the 7th, Was a Fast Day for him at the Surey, he was in much better
frame than formerly and carried it extreme kindly to the said Ministers, and in
his Fit, Satan said, I think I have given all the Ministers enough, and I have
quite tired them all out except Carrington, and as for him he shall torment me
no more, nor shall any of you ever see him again. And at the end of his Fit,
Mr. Carrington offered to return home that Night as he usually did, when no Fit
was foretold to be in the Night after such Surey Meetings; and when he returned
so, sometimes not eating at the Surey, he used to break his Fast with an Apple
on the Road to his home, which was about 24 Miles from the Surey; and as he was
getting on Horseback homewards, Richard being out of his Fit, full of respect
and kindness, said, He knew not how to express his thankfulness answerable to
the said Ministers pains for him, desiring him however to accept as a token of
his Love an Apple from him, which was about the bigness of two ordinary Fists,
so that he could scarcely get it out of his Pocket. Then several very earnestly
entreated the said Minister not to go home that Night, because Satan had so
often threatened to mischieve him, and particularly in the last Fit, that they
should never see him more; but he not fearing any of the Devils threatenings,
was still for going home then, till being got about half a Mile from the Surey,
he was for eating the said Apple, but he found on one side of it a hole, as if
something a little thicker than a Goose-quill, had been stuck near an Inch deep
into it, and at the bottom of it something bubbled and flasht upwards, and
round about it was a Circle of about a Straws breadth and brown color, and
harder to the touch of his Nail than other parts of the Apple, and on the other
side of the Apple was just such another hole, all the other seeming fair and
sound, excepting the said holes, which were almost opposite one to the other,
and he not conceiving how or why the said holes were made, and so not knowing
but the Apple might be mischievous if eaten, did neither eat it nor throw it
away, least some other should eat it; whence not knowing but that Satan might
aim at some harm to him, as before was cautioned, he staid at a Friends house
that N^ght, and got about Ten a Clock next Morning into that part of a Common
or Forest, which was within Ten Miles of his home, into which he was
misdirected by an Old Woman that he met with on the Road, in which Level or
Plain place, his Mare that was of high mettle and excellent for a Journey, did
stop and curcled about such a compass of the said place, as was about Twelve
Roods long and Four broad, whence she could not be got either forwards, or
backwards, or side-ways, by his utmost endeavors, from the said Ten a Clock
till Four a Clock, when he observing Night to be near, left her, and not
knowing that any House was near, resolved on the directest way homewards that
he could, walking over Hills and shallow Rivers, about Six or Seven Miles
before he found a House, where his coming occasioned frequent Meetings in those
parts afterward, as they earnestly desired, but his said violent and continued
endeavors to get his Mare away, made him so sweat and weary, that he had
scarce got over one River, or one Mile from her, before he lay down, when all
his Limbs were so benumbed with the said Water and cold frosty Night, or some
other way, that for a considerable time, he could not stir one of them, when he
did not doubt in the least, but he was to die, before any could find him there,
at the thought whereof, he was at first seized with unutterable searchings of
heart about the Eternal State, that then lay near in his full view, wide open
to swallow him up in infinitely blissful or wretched agonies, till dying there
did not trouble him on any account, but only through his fears of Religion being
disparaged thereby, which fears likewise wore away, though his considering how
easily his adored Son of Righteousness could shine away any such Cloud, as that
sort of death might raise; upon which all the enlargments and capacities of his
mind, at the sight of his being a entering on immense Felicities, were
entertained with such foretasts thereof, as he cannot yet hope for on a real
Deathbed; yea such, as he would for ever forego all Creature delights for a
repetition of them; yea for ever forego delights far vaster, even those of
God's Ordinance for a continuance of them, through which Joys he could not
forbear moving some Limbs that before he could not move; which he observing,
did with ease leap up, unexpectedly walking the rest of the way without trouble
or weariness, with great satisfaction, at having looked grim Death in the face
before its last arrests, with any faint glimmerings or possibilities of its
being a welcome or a tolerable Visitant to him from the said House. He hired
some who well knew the said Heath or Forest to fetch the said Mare; they not
finding her, he hired some again who still failing, and all their way
discouraged, he supplyant as Jacob, Genesis 28.18. and 20.21. was satisfied he
should find her; and though there was no Hedge, Tree, or Way-mark thither, yet
he with Company went directly to her, she then coming readily away with him,
who coming home buried the said Apple, taking a faithful Witness thereof, and
afterward lest it should be rooted up, he laid a great stone upon it.

On November. the 14th, Was another Fast Day for Richard at the Surey, they
wondered at Mr. Carrington's above said narrow escape, of what Satan had last
threatened, but he much more wondered within himself, to find there what strange
Fits had seized Richard, since he had last left him, such as Richard never had
before, nor since the Apple business; for Richard in his Fits was extremely
hurried and ridden about, and chafed, and besmeared on his head, as with the
foam of an Horse hard riden, and of a very rank smell, besides his dead Fits
were very long and almost constantly continuing, and when they were
intermitted, he was always so full, that he fasted and could not eat nor drink
any thing for Three or Four days together: Besides, in one such Fit, a great
Stone of about 14 Pounds weight was laid on him so gently, as not to harm him,
and yet so secretly, as that none of the Spectators did know whence, or how it
came thither, which things seemed the more considerable, for that on enquiry it
was found, that Richard's said foaming, chafe, and hurry was at the very same
time when the said Minister was still running after, or laboring about his
Mare, and his said Fits began near the time, when the said Apple was buried,
and the said Stone was laid on him near the time when the said Stone was laid
on the said Apple about 24 Miles off Richard, and such Stones as that on
Richard were not to be found or got near the Surey, though they were near the
Apple; and Richard affirmed, that when he received the said Apple it was
perfectly sound, and he knew not how the two holes abovesaid came to be in it;
And Satan said in the said Fits, that there was good news for Dicky, who was to
have some respite from his Fits for some considerable time, and that there was
bad news for himself, who was ere long to forbear his troubling of Dicky, which
accordingly happened, for the said Minister not knowing whether or no the said
Apples burial had any influence on Richard's illness, though not superstitiously
credulous thereof; yet leaving Richard in the said dead Fits as he found him,
he hastened home that Night, and took up the said Apple, and afterward
Richard's Fits were long suspended, and when they returned on him, they were
never again so frequent or violent as formerly, till they were removed, as is
abovesaid.

On November. the 21th, Was another Fast Day for him at the Surey, the concourse
of People thither was less than usual, as the Ministers had endeavored to have
it. It was great matter of wonder, that the Ministers Spirits, Strength and
Bodies were not in the least impaired or weakened by their continual labors
about him on each Week, or Fortnight, or Three Weeks throughout the whole Year,
and by Fasting often about 24 hours for him, and sometimes much longer when
awaking with him, and by journying many Miles unto him in all sorts of Weather,
and all this without any abatement of their other Ministerial work at home or
abroad; as also that Richard being tossed so by Satan, and dashed against the
ground, had not his Head split in pieces, his Bones broken, his Spirits spent,
or Body more disordered, but seemed rather bigger and more plump, and in far
better liking, when out of his Fits, then ever he was before, as also that
Richard when out of his Fits, neither did or could practice, or remember such
things as past in them.

On November. the 28th, Was a Fast Day for him at the Weiming-Houses; he was and
had been attentive and quiet, as Satan had foretold, but on Sabbath Day next
after he had Fits again, the return of which after such a discontinuance, as
was hoped to be a decaying or cessation of them, did make the said Ministers
troubled indeed, but not distressed, perplexed, but not in despair, 2 Cor. 4.8.
being supported by Psalm. 37.3. unto the 8th.

On December. the 5th, A Fast Day was kept for him at the Surey. In his Fit,
Satan told one there the very private discourse, and other passages that had
newly happened between Sir E. A. and him, as in other Fits he told what was
secretly said and done elsewhere, as to instance; Rebecca Wilkinson, Widow
Chew's Maid, when come from home to the Surey, was told by Satan the very words
she spoke as she came out of her Dames door, viz. My Dame is gone to the Holy
House of God, and I will creep to the Surey. Satan said to a Manchester Man,
Come to the Surey, thou Manchester Whelp; thou lookedst at a Dial in Morton,
and it was past Nine a Clock; which the said Man confessed was true, though Morton
was remote from, and he unknown at the Surey. At one Meeting, Satan cried, Thou
Woman at the further end of the Barn, give me that Bread and Cheese which thou
have in thy pocket; soon after a Dog came with Bread and Cheese in his Mouth to
eat it in a place of the Barn, that was freest from the Crowds feet, which some
observing said, Here Is the Bread and Cheese which Satan lately called for,
which the said Woman hearing, in great fear confessed, that she coming from far,
had brought Bread and Cheese to feed on in her walk too and fro; which when she
heard the Devil call for, she durst not keep it, but labored to thrust it out
of the Barn; which however was not thrust so far, but that the Dog got it back
again thither.

On December. the 12th, Was a Fast Day for him at the Sparth; he was hindered from
coming thither by a Fit, that then seized him at the Surey, wherein Satan told
him, that he would find him something else to do, than to go eat Bread and
Cheese with Cottom Less at Sparth, as he had done 25 Weeks before: He also
then told what distress Ireland was then in, and that England must pay the
Piper (as he phrased it) notwithstanding its present security.

On December. the 13th, The Demoniack in a Fit foretold, that some Money was a
coming to him before any Mortal could bring him the News thereof, for the said
Family being taken off their Callings, and impoverisht on this occasion, and
the Ministers eating thereat sometimes after their Fast Day work was over; some
Money was therefore given unto it in or about the last Quarter of that Year,
wherein the Ministers had to do with Richard, and because in or about the said
Quarter some did apprehend, that Richard's Affliction from Satan was furthered
or attended by Witch craft or bodily distemper; therefore offers were made to
procure or bestow more Moneys, either for the legal prosecution of such as
might justly be suspected, as Wizards, or Witches concerned in this Affair, or
else for engaging Doctors of Physic to join their assistances herein, as
knowing that though Spiritual means only were to be used against possession, Mar.
9.29. Luke 9.39, 40, 41. Mat. 17.21. Yet if Richard's Malady were complicated,
and that either partly Disease, and partly Possession, then Physical and more
especially Spiritual means might be useful together, Isa. 38.2.5.21. Job 33.22,
to the 31st. Jam. 5.14, 15. or if it were partly Witchcraft, partly
Possession, yet secular and especially Spiritual means might be useful
together, Mal. 17.20, 21. Exodus 22.18. 1 Samuel 28.3. 2 King. 23 29. none of
these being exclusive of each other. Upon which some methods were used on Jan.
the 9th, toward the said legal Prosecution; as also some Doctors of Physic
were desired to undertake his Cure so far as he was diseased, which undertaking
they declined upon their beholding that his Affliction was not mainly any
bodily Distemper, but Richard being soon after cleared of his Fits, the said
offers of getting more Moneys for the said purposes ceased.

December. the 20th, Was another Fast day for him at the Surey, and on other such
days Mr. Jolly insisted on Mat. 17.21. and 11.28, 29, 30. 1 Timothy 4 19. and
1.13, 14, 15, 16. But he not being willing that such a Book should be balkey or
tedious, declines so much as hinting at the heads of his Discourses thereon,
which else might profit the Readers as well as the Hearers; and the Demoniack
in his Fits vomited up several Papers on which Greek and other strange
Languages were written: Some of which Papers were lent, but Three of them were
laid up among one of the Ministers choicest things together with the Box paper
before mentioned, which were several times desired out of his hands again by
them about the Surey, which he refusing to part with, they though 24 Miles off
the Surey, were unaccountably taken away together, with one of the Diaries that
contained some Surey passages, which last however were tolerably made up by
other Diaries and Memoires among the said Ministers.

On Jan. the First 1689/90, Mr. Jolly insisted on Heb. 5.7. and whenever the
said Demoniack in his Fits seemed to whisper as unto something that seemed to
be sometimes as in the Ground, sometimes as in a Corner, and sometimes as on
the Wall, so invisibly as the Bystanders could not discern it, then he
constantly made discoveries of many such things, as could not have been known,
but by Satan's help.

On Jan. the 9th, Was a Fast Day for him at the Surey, the Ministers dealt
plainly, and particularly with Richard, and them, where he lived, suspecting
that the success of their endeavors was hindered by their little sense or
improvemt of this sad Judgment, and by their slowness in confessing all they
knew of a more full Contract with Satan, than what had been discovered, or of
any thing else, that might occasion the said Judgments beginning, and
continuance, or by some hand that Romanists or Witches might have herein, for
there were reports of their Corresponding with P. and H. Popish Priests, which
however they denied; yea, and some reports of Witches concerned herein, which
they however declared their ignorance of; but the Ministers having in vain
labored to bring them unto a more ingenious temper, some of them very much
feared Richard's being finally and totally given up to Satan. But some of them
thought it requisite to deal yet more roughly with some there-a-way, which
others of them very much questioned the expediency of; yet at last the
Ministers all agreed to put them upon some Duties, and particularly upon
Prayer; and one of them attempting several times to say over the Lord's Prayer
still mist all the last Petition, excepting and from Evil, the excuse for which
omission still was, that the Bible out of which the said Petition was learnt,
being of Queen Elizabeth's Edition, had not the said Petition in it worded, as
it is in other Bibles; after which the said Ministers threatened further Trials,
yea Law severities against all in those parts, who on good grounds were
suspected of Witchcraft.

On Jan. the 23d, Was another Fast Day for him at the Surey, Richard's Fits
were very impetuous and extravagant again, and in his Fits, he did things which
were undoubtedly above Richard's own natural skill and power, as to instance.
As he returned from a Lord's day Meeting in a Fit, he repeated the heads of
that days Sermon, and also such proofs, as were quoted therein. One going by
the Surey toward the said Meeting, was told by the Demoniack in a Fit, What
need'st thou go to the said Meeting, thou may as well stay here, for I can
tell thee the Sermon that will be preached there; upon which he told the Text,
and much of the Sermon that was that day Preached at the said Meeting, and
sometimes he said off Book, some Chapters of the Bible, which he had never
learnt to say off Book.

On Feb. the 6th, Was a Fast Day for him at the Surey, No considerable Fit fell
on him, nor had done, for many days before, though in his last and other Fits, he
often told of things done at a distance, at the very same time, whilst those
things were a doing, as for instance: A Woman being afraid to go to the Barn,
though she was come within a Bows shoot of it, was immediately sent for by the
Demoniack, that said, Unless that weak fa^thed Jade come, my Fit will last
longer; some said, Let us send for Mr. J. G. to the Surey, the Demoniack
answered, He is now upon the Hay-cart, as after was found true, though he was not
used to the Hay, and remote from the Sury.

On Feb. the 20th, Was a Fast Day for him at the Surey, the Ministers met with
many great Discouragements, Richard's Father bewraying much disingenuity, and
his Landlord S. E. A. disapproving the continuance of such Meetings at the
Surey, because of the harm done to his Headges by such a confluence of People,
but Richard's Deportment was more encouraging, his Acknowledgment and
Confessions being very plain open and free as formerly, when 2 Cor. 11.3. was
insisted on.

On March the 24th 1689/90, Was another Fast Day for him, which was turned unto
them from sorrow unto joy, and from mourning into a good day: Esth. 9.22. into
the long looked for, much sought for day which some had deridedly said, was not
to be hoped for; whereon was appointed and given unto them, comfort for dark
Trials, Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning, and Garments of Praise,
for the Spirit of heaviness, Isa. 6.2, 3. whereon Richard had a most terrible
Fit, wherein Satan cried out, Now Dicky, I must leave thee, and must afflict
thee no more as I have done, I have troubled thee thus long by Obscessions, and
also by a Combination, that never shall be discovered as long as the World
indures: Upon which Richard's Body was tossed and tortured, as if something was a
tearing it a pieces, and it was strained and stretched as if it were a vomiting,
wherein nothing visibly appeared to come out of him, and yet Satan or
whatsoever had troubled him before, did therein evidently come from or out of
him. Richard after that time having no more such troubles and workings as
heretofore, as he some days after did tell Mr. Jolly, declaring, that he hoped
he was then delivered, and owning that he got this deliverance by Spiritual
Means, the use whereof however he desired might be continued for him, which
accordingly was for some time after, being the Ministers did not know, but that
Richard might relapse into his old condition, especially for that Richard some
Weeks after was again in Drink, wherein he had some threatenings of his old Fits
returning upon him, for which Richard was extremely grieved, especially upon
Mr. Jolly's putting him in remembrance of the advantage Satan got over him by a
Drunken-bout at first, and of his last states being worse than the first,
should his Sins give admission to Satan's entering him again, Mat. 12.45.
Besides he was advised to purge away the evil humors, which his Body might have
contracted, which have often proved, and so are styled Vehiculum Diaboli, the
Receptacle of Satan; accordingly he took Physic from the said Doctor, whom he
had in vain made use of at the first, and ever since his abovesaid deliverance,
he has been Perfectly free from all the abovesaid Fits; and being healthful and
sound as ever, he soon after Married, and followed his Calling of Gardening,
Mowing, etc. as well as formerly, and has on several occasions since his said
deliverance expressed the tendrest respects and thanfulness to the said
Ministers, as the Instruments which the Lord made use of for his abovesaid
help. As to instance, Mr. Carrington about half a Year after, riding on the
Road, had his Leg suddenly laid hold on by one leaping over a Thorn-hedg, whom
he found to be Richard overjoyed, and as surpised with an unspeakable
gladness, at the sight of him, who hereupon could not forbear crying out. To
the Son, we'll give praise, whilst we live; To the Spirit, when we die; To the
Father, when we rise again; To God eternally.

The Testimony and Information upon Oath of several Persons who voluntarily
offered themselves concerning Richard Dugdale of Whalley, in the County of
Lancaster, Gardener; taken before Hugh Lord Willoughby, and Ralph Egarton, Esquire
Two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Lancaster, at
Holcomb in the said County, the Nine and Twentieth day of July, 1695.
THomas Dugdale, Father of the said Richard Dugdale makes Oath, that he
consulted one Crabtree, in behalf of his said Son, then under a strange
Distemper, and had this Answer; that if there was Money enough he could effect
the Cure: whereupon this Deponant seeing his Sons Body much weakened with the
said Crabtree's Physic, and his Fits more violent, did apply himself to Mr.
Jolly a Neighboring Minister, and others of his Brethren in the Ministry. And
this Deponant says, he has seen his Son vomit up Stones several times and
other things. Once he declared he must either vomit Gold, Silver, or Brass
Rings, and an Hair Button, and accordingly he did so. At other times he vomited
great Stones, also blew Stones like Flints. One time he vomited a Stone as was
an Inch and an half long, and an Inch and an half broad, having Blood upon the
edges, which this Deponant and others standing by him, apprehended it very was
painful to him. And further this Deponant makes Oath, that one day a little
before Night, walking by his said Son then in a Fit, it growing dark, a Candle
being brought in, the Deponant looking upon him, there was a great Stone laid
upon his Belly weighing about Twelve or Thirteen Pounds, this Deponant not
knowing how it came there, nor was there any such like Stones about the House.
Besides Stones have been thrown at the Barn side, falling very thick upon the
Door, yet this Deponant could never discover the hand which threw them, nor any
Person employed therein, although this Deponents Wife was hit with one of them,
but without any hurt. At other times the said Richard Dugdale would cast
Goose-dung at this Deponant and others standing by, which he seemed to fetch
out of the Barn side; although neither this Deponant nor those that were with him
could find any there, nor discover any one that brought it, nor were there any
Geese kept at the House, nor other Geese came near it. And Lastly, This
Deponant says, that his said Son would run upon his hands and his feet
together as fast as most Men could run upon their feet alone, and his Body
would sometimes be so heavy, that two or three strong Men could hardly lift it
up, at other times as light as a bag of Feathers.

John Walinsley of Herwood in the said County of Lancaster, Sadler; Deposes,
That he has seen the said Richard Dugdale in a Fit held in a Chair by Six Men.
And whilst his Feet were off the ground he has leaped up in the Chair for two
or three Hours together, as fast as a Man can ordinarily count any thing; and
has so sweated through his Clothes, that it has stood like a Dew upon them.
Moreover this Deponant has taken the said Richard Dugdale by his Shoe betwixt
this Deponant foremost Finger and his Thumb, another taking him at his Head, and
so lifting him up, this Deponant could not think he weighed Six Pounds. And
farther, this Deponant says, that Mr. Jolly the Minister sending word by him
to the said Richard's Father, that the Ministers would be at his House called
Surey on such a day; this Deponant going the same day he was spoken to with his
Errand, the said Richard declared it before this Deponant mentioned it, as
likewise what Ministers would be there. And furthermore, this Deponant upon his
Oath says, that the said Richard Dugdale in some of his Fits, opening his Hand
has received written Papers into it, none of the Bystanders knowing how they
came thither, which the said Richard Dugdale had given People that were about
him, also the said Deponant has seen him shufle Rushes like Cards, and play
Games on them, as though he had been playing with some other Person, with whom he
has chid about the Casts, Cursing and Swearing in his Play, and then said, Do
not Gamesters thus. He likewise played with Rushes as though they had been Dice,
using exactly several expressions belonging to that Play; saying, People think
this is laid on me for my Sins, but I never was a Gamester in my life, neither
know I how to play at such Games when out of my Fits. And the said Richard
Dugdale did likewise play at Bowls making Bowls of Rushes, and when he had
thrown the Jack, he said, I must now throw my Gill; then running a good way, as
though he had been running after a Bowl swearing, Run, run, Flee, flee, hold a
Bias; and sometimes he caught up Rushes as though they had been Bowls, swearing,
Sirrah, stand out of the way or I Will knock out your brains; adding, I never was
a Bowler, but don't Gentlemen do thus. And this Deponant says, that the said
Richard Dugdale had several Fits after his being threatened with being brought
before a Justice of Peace. And once being in his last fit, when this Deponant
was present, he declared his Affliction was through Obsession, and in a
Combination which should never be discovered whilst the World endured. And this
Deponant has seen him in a Fit, as in a great Agony with something he could
not see, and then has been taken up, and thrown backwards, set upon his Head,
and so stood till he was pulled down by one John Fletcher. Also this Deponant
has heard him Curse and Swear, his Gesture being so Terrible it would have
frighted a Man to come near him, and yet in a Moments time after in such a fear
that he has sought to creep into any hole or behind any Body to have hid
himself, and so lamented himself as moved the Standers by with great
compassion. He would at other times have told when his Fits would begin, when
they were two or three in one day, or three or four Days a sunder, wherein he
was never disproved that he knows off; which Fits commonly began with the Calf
of his Leg, and wrought upward into the Chest of his Body, and then he was
thrown down, where he would lie for a good while as dead, or breathless, and
then would have a strange noise in his Mouth and Nose, and there would be in
his Bosom like Whelps before he had risen, after which sometime he would be
very furious, sometimes more quiet.

William Loond of Harwood Carrier in the County of Lancaster, makes Oath, that
he has heard the said Richard Dugdale Curse and Swear, his Gesture being so
terrible, it would have frighted a Man to come near him, and yet in a Moment of
time after in such a fear, that he has sought to creep into any hole, or
behind any Body, to have hid himself, and so lamented himself, as moved the
Standers-by with great compassion. He would at other time have told when his
Fits would begin, when they were two or three in one Day, or three or four Days
asunder, wherein he never was disappointed that he knows off; which Fits
commonly begun in the Calf of his Leg, and wrought upwards into the Chest of
his Body, and then he was thrown down, where he would lie for a good while as
dead or Breathless, and then would have a strange noise in his Mouth and Nose,
and there would be in his Bosom like Whelps before he had risen; after which,
sometimes he would be very furious, sometimes more quiet.

Willoughby. Ralph Eagerton.


John Livesay of Clayton, in the County of Lancaster Skinner, makes Oath, That
the Deponant being at home with him, the said Richard Dugdale, he Cursed and
Swore, making Answer to something at the Window, that he could not see whom he
called, Nicholas saying he would go with him. And this Deponant being with him
at the Chapel door, he then being in a Trance, this Deponant observed there
would be such a noise in his Breast, as went in course with the Peoples Voices,
singing Psalms within singing, or tuning as they did, and ceasing when they
ceased; and whilst his Eyes were close shut, he told a Woman she had a Pipe in
her Pocket, which proved very true. Also this Deponant has seen him run over
three or four Styles with his Eyes closed, and has heard his Voice as in his
ordinary Discourse, when the Deponant has been above a Mile distant from him.

Nathaniel Waddington of Altham in the County of Lancaster, Husbandman; upon
his Oath says, That he has carried the said Richard Dugdale in one of his
Fits, for the space of eight Roods, that in the beginning of some of his Fits
he would be as light as a Feather boulster, but before he came out heavier than
a Load of Corn. That sometimes this Deponant has taken him off the Ground by
the Buttons with one hand, and to this Deponants thinking, he has weighed but
Twenty Pounds. And further, this Deponant says, That in some of his Fits, a
swelling as big as a Man's Hand in one of his Legs moved toward his Knee. That
in some of his Fits he had more force than six strong Men.

John Darwitt of Wiswall in the County of Lancaster, Husbandman; makes Oath,
that he has seen the said Richard Dugdale dance upon his Knees without
touching the Ground with his Toes, with his Body bowed forward, and that for
the space of a quarter of an Hour with as much Activity, as though he had been
upon his Feet. And has also seen him Dance upon his Toes, quickly changing to
Dance upon his Knees, and so has leaped up again upon his Feet; and has seen
him in a Fit have motions of Dancing Antickly being kept down in a Chair.

William Seller of Pendleton in the County of Lancaster, Husbandman; makes
Oath, That he heard the said Richard Dugdale, in his Fit, utter Words which
this Deponant understood not, in one of which Fits Twelve Men could not hold
him, but with case he would throw them a good distance from him. And another
time the Deponent being told by Mr. Jolly, he expected the said Richard Dugdale
would have a Fit about Seven a Clock next Morning, wished this Deponant to see
the said Richard Dugdale, giving this Deponant Five Shillings for him; but
before this Deponent could come up to the said Richard Dugdale, he cried,
Here Is a Man will bring Money to day, and fell a leaping and Dancing in the
Barn, as a Token of Joy, But after while seeming to be displeased at something,
he said, Dick, Dick, thou shall have meat enough, and not long after fell down
dead, and then in a little time turned on his Back, and seemed to fall a
eating; at which time this Deponant, with Richard Dugdale his Uncle lifted at
him twice, and found him to be as light as a Hat, or a Walking Cane. And when
he was sensible, this Deponant demanded of him the occasion of his Distemper,
and whether he had not made some Contract with the Divil, who answered, saying,
Would you have me to lie? This Deponant also makes Oath, that at a Meeting in
one William Waddington's House in Altham, the said Richard Dugdale made such a
noise as terrified several People, insomuch that they left the House, and at
the same time this Deponant heard two distinct Voices at once come from him the
said Richard Dugdale, the one being a very hideous noise, which running through
the Crowd, put some People into horrible Trembling, that some of them said,
they thought the Devil then went out of him.

Willoughby. Ralph Egerton.


Lawrence Robertshaw of Harwood in the County of Lancaster, Woollen-weaver,
deposes, and says upon his Oath, that he heard one of the Ministers thou
present, and the Devil (as he supposes) in the said Richard Dugdale talk one
to another. One passage this Deponant well Remembers, viz. The Minister said,
Satan, Thou have made a trial both of Heaven and Hell, whether of ^em likest
thou better. To which an answer was given by Satan (as this Deponant supposes)
saying, Hell is my Palace and Paradise where I Will have thee shortly. Upon
which the said Richard Dugdale shivered, as if one joint would have fallen from
another, and many other sayings could this Deponent report, was he thereunto
required.

Willoughby. Ralph Egerton.


Thomas Booth of Hay-houses in the County of Lancaster, Carpenter, makes Oath,
that he heard several Voices come from the said Richard Dugdale, his lips not
moving, and his Tongue appeared to be strangely rolled on a lump, and his
Eye Balls turned inwards, at the time when the several Voices came from him.
And further this Deponant says, that in the time of his Fits, the said Richard
Dagdale was something of an exceeding lightness, and again of an exceeding
heaviness, sometimes as light as a Chip, and again as heavy as a Horse, and all
in one and the same Fit. In the light part of his Fit, this Deponant has taken
him up about his Hipps betwixt this Deponants hands, and he was so light this
Deponant thought he could lift twenty such.

The Depositions aforesaid were taken at the time and place aforementioned,
upon the Holy Evangelists before us.

Willoughby Ralph Egerton.


The Information of diverse Persons taken before the said Justices of Peace, at
the time and place aforesaid declaring themselves ready to do it upon Oath when
required.
JAmes Abbot of Whitbeck in the County of Lancaster, Dyar, declares, that he
went on purpose to see the said Richard Dugdale at Surey, the place of his
abode, having no acquaintance with him; nor had he any knowledge of this
Informant, as this Informant verily believes. When this Informant came, the
said Richard Dugdale being in one of his Fits said, Abbot, thou think no
body knows thee, but I know thee well enough thou must go into Cheshire and
Staffordshire; when as this Informant says, he had not so much as such a
design of such a Journey to his rememberance; but accordingly it happened, that
this Informant went that Journey soon afterward.

John Fielding of Harwood in the County of Lancaster, Joyner; declares, that
being with the said Richard Dugdale in one of his Fits, this Informant to his
thinking heard something within him like Piggs sucking of a Sow, also like the
barking of a Dog.

John Whalley of Harwood, in the County of Lancaster, Hair-cloth-Weaver;
Informs the same which John Fielding does; and further informs the same with
John Walmsbey, as to the said Richard Dugdale's Carding, Dicing, and Bowling.
And moreover informs, that he this said Informant being with Richard Dugdale in
one of his Fits, he said, There were Lapideers (as he called them) a coming,
and presently after came a Stone which this Informant took up, and felt it to
be very warm. And further informs, that the said Richard Dugdale in his Fits
did ordinarily tell when the next Fit should come.

William Livesay of Whalley in the County of Lancaster, Shoemaker; Informs,
that he being in Whalley, desired several young Men to go along with him to
Surey (above half a Mile distant) but they refused, when the Informant came to
the Barn, where the said Richard Dugdale was, the said Richard Dugdale told
this Informant he had desired several Persons to come along with him, but they
had denied him, naming Ned Dean in particular. And further informs that the
said Richard Dugdale Dancing on his Feet three Yards from the Wall of the Barn,
was as soon as one could turn himself, set straight upon his head, and was as
stiff as a Tree.

John Grimshaw of Clayton in the County of Lancaster Woolen-Weaver; Informs
that the said Richard Dugdale being in a Fit, he said, Nicholas, Art thou
there! What peepest thou for? Come up. Then said, See thou where thy Mother
sits? Then something came to his Shoulder, and several parts of his Body; the
said Richard Dugdale seemed to be much affrighted with it. And further informs,
that he coming to the Surey one Night, he the said Richard Dugdale told Mr.
John Grimshaw, that he the said Informant Grimshaw was coming before he came.
And this Informant leaving his Horse at a considerable distance from the place
where the said Richard Dugdale was, and going into the place, where the said
Richard Dugdale meets him with a great noise, and says, How now? Calling him
Grimshaw, adding, Art thou there with all thy Knives? (this Informant having at
that time Three or Four Knives about him) telling this Informant that he could
not go on Foot. And this Informant further says, that when the said Richard
Dugdale was in his Trances (as they called them) and lying upon the Ground, he
was sometimes as light to this Informants thinking as his Shoes and Stockings,
and sometines as heavy as a Man could lift.

The Information aforesaid were taken at the the time and place aforementioned
before us,

Willoughby.

And Lastly, We the said Justices of the Peace do Certify, that the said
Thomas Dugdale Father of the said Richard Dugdale, did make Oath before us,
that he knew not of any Design or Combination betwixt his said Son and any
other Person, which might occasion the aforesaid strange Fits and Disturbances.
Nor that he the Deponant was any way privy thereunto; nor knows he of any
Cheating or Deceiving Practices for gain, or any such End, Purpose, or Design
whatsoever.

Willoughby. Ralph Egerton.


The Informations of several Persons, who voluntarily offered themselves
concerning Richard Dugdale of Whalley, in the County of Lancaster, Gardener;
before Thomas Braddill Esquire and Ralph Egerton Esquire Two of His Majesty's Justices
of Peace for the said County, at Darwen in the said County, on the Twentieth
day of July, 1695.
JOhn Fletcher of Harwood in the County of Lancaster, Husbandman; declares,
that he has seen the said Richard Dugdale in many of his Fits, wherein he has
barked-like a Mastiff-Dog, being then as strong as Ten Men. For this Informant
has been one of the Ten, that has undertaken to hold him. Also that this
Informant one time found him in the River of Calder, up to the Neck in Water,
crying out, and saying, Wil'st thou drown me, Wil'st thou drown me; striking at
the same time upon the Water with two sticks. Whereupon this Informant, with
the help of others by a Rope drew him out of the Water. The said Dugdale being
then in a dumb Fit, which began in the Water, and continued near four Hours
afterward. And farther this Informant says, he found in the Barn where the
said Dugdale lay, a round hole in the Hay like a Hens Nest, wherein were Seven
Stones laid together. And this Informant has taken up several Stones cast by
the said Dugdale, which were warm, and has seen the said Dugdale running upon
his Hands and Feet barking and howling. And the said Dugdale being sat down,
he has seen him several times thrown Five or Six Yards from the place. And
being to help this Informant to cleave a piece of Wood, the said Dugdale upon
his first stroke, had his Ax flew one way, and himself cast about Twelve Yards
from the place.

John Whitehead of Bank-hey in the County of Lancaster, Labourer; Declares,
that being with the said Dugdale at the Surey, in one of his Fits, he found him
lying upon the Barn floor like a dead Man, at which time Mr. Ainsworth the
Apothecary, and another Apothecary from Manchester, coming in both of them,
felt the said Dugdale's Pulses, which did not beat, and then they laid their
Faces to his Mouth, to try if he breathed, but could not perceive it. And
further this Informant says, that at Mr. Jolly's House the Informant
endeavoring to hold the said Dugdale in his Fit by the Wrist of his Arm, could
by no means do it, for this Informants Fingers were no sooner closed but they
opened again.

John Smalley of Harwood, in the County of Lancaster, Cooper; Declares, that
he has seen the said Richard Dugdale, in Twenty or Thirty of his Fits,
sometimes lying on the Floor, for the space of Four Hours very stiff and heavy;
insomuch that this Informant with Three more have carried him out of the Barn,
but on his coming out of his Fit, his Head and part of his Body has been
lifted up by this Informants Daughter, a Child then of Seven Years old.

The Informations aforesaid were taken at the the time and place
aforementioned, before the said Mr. Braddill, and me the said

Ralph Egerton.

The Informations of diverse credible Persons which were, and are ready to give
in upon Oath, before the said Justices of the Peace, or others at the places
aforesaid, or elsewhere if desired thereunto, as they voluntarily offered and
delar'd unto Tho. Jolly, and others of sufficient Credit and Cautiousness.
JOhn Fletcher further says, I was one Night in Bed with Richard Dugdale, and
I felt something come up toward my Knees, then I felt it creep up till it came
toward my Heart, then I got hold of it, and it was about the bigness of a
little Dog or Cat, and it slipped through my hands as if it had been a Snig, and
when we were in Bed, very often there have been something in Bed knattering, as
though there had been Mice or Rats, and we searched the Bed, it was not harmed,
and things to our thinking have fallen in the House, as if all had been broken,
yet in the Morning nothing stirred; and one Sabbath Day in his Fit, there was a
Knife length-way in his Mouth, none knowing how it came there, where it was
held so very fast, that I with much ado pulled it out, and asked the Company,
whether any one of them wanted a Knife, they all said no, till one Jeremy
Webster, that was newly come in, said, I had one, when I came in, and I think
he cannot have got it out of my Pocket; but he finding nothing but a Sheath in
his Pocket, claimed the Knife, and it was certainly his. John Fletcher further
says, that when the said Richard Dugdale was in a Fit, about Five a Clock in
the Night, John Hindle pricked a large Pin in his Feet, and he neither stirred
nor complained at all: Besides, in one of his Fits, I heard him tell, that he
must Vomit an Hair Button, and a certain Ring, which I saw him do within an
Hour. I have seen (as John Darwin before testified) Richard Dugdale for a
quarter of an Hour together Dance upon his Knees, with as much Activity, as any
one on their Feet.

John Fletcher.

John Hindle says, These strange things, I have heard Richard Dugdale do and
say; I was by when he told, that he should Vomit an Hair Button and Curtain
Ring, which I saw him do within an Hour: Likewise I have lifted at him, when I
could not lift as much as his Head for my life; at other times I have lifted at
him, and could have lifted him, as if he had been but a Child. I was present
when Richard Dugdale was in a Fit, about Eight a Clock in the Night, and I
pricked a Pin into his Foot, and he neither stirred nor complained at all. I was
present at all which William Loond swears to, in the first part of his Oath.

John Hindle.

Thomas Core says, I have seen several times the Lump on his Breast or Belly,
as big as a Man's Fist, and have heard strange Voices coming out of it.

Thomas Core.

James Fielding says, That the said Swelling of the said Richard Dugdale,
which rose from the thick of his Leg, was about the bigness of a Mole (or a
Mole-warp, as we call it) and did work up like such a Creature toward the
Chest of his Body, that it got up into his Shoulder, and then he was at the
worst of his Fit. He also says, that the said Richard Dugdale did in several
of his Fits, take several things out of the Hands of several Persons, and would
by no means part with the said things, but to the Party to whom they did
belong, having his Eyes close shut all the while; also he says, that they
which attempted to force the things out of his Hands, could not force them out
of his Hands, how strong soever the Persons were, that they might sooner pull
the things in pieces, than get them from him. The said Fielding also says,
that the said Creature did arise under the said Richard Dugdale's Skin, as he
does verily think. Also, he says, that the said Richard Dugdale did in his Fit
lift up several lusty Men, and the Chair wherein they held him, though the said
Richard Dugdale is but of an ordinary strength of Body, when out of his Fit.

James Fielding Jun.

John Smalley further says (so does John Fletcher witness with him herein, as
he does with several other Witnesses in several other things) that he saw
Richard Dugdale lay Four Hours in one Fit, as if he were stark dead, and as
stiff as a Board; also when his Shoes were fast buckled to his Feet, they did
fly Six Yards, and hit the Skel-boos in the Barn with great force; also he
says, that Richard Dugdale was in the same Fit, as light as his Clothes, and
as heavy as a Sack of Corn.

John Smalley, also further says, that upon occasion, he went to the Abbey in
VVhalley, and whilst he was there, the said Richard Dugdale said, that Smalley
was taking Liquor at the Abbey, and he takes it freely, it costs him nothing.
This he said to Thomas Dugdale, as he also testifies.

John Smalley.

Edmund Haworth at Rushton, Carrier; Testifies to the passage about Jeremy
VVebster's Knife as abovesaid; also to those passages about Richard Dugdale his
Vomiting several Stones, Hair-Buttons, Curtain-Rings. He moreover Testifies,
that the said Richard Dugdale, in one of his Fits told him, with his Company
that came along, what they had been eating at home; what Discourse they had by
the way; what Styles they went over; how they stumbled; and that the said
Richard Dugdale did threaten Robert Turder, to send his Sister (as he called
his Spirit) to give him a fall at such a Fields end, which fell out
accordingly; so that it set all the Company a trembling, and that he and Three
or Four more were coming toward Surey, and that Richard Dugdale in a Fit said,
that such were coming, but he would send them back again, which happened
accordingly, for they did turn back near Harwood Church. He also Testifies,
that a Voice spoke in the said Richard Dugdale, besides his own Voice, he not
moving his Lips; and that another Voice, as they apprehended, spoke out of the
Earth in answer to him, and that he has been one of the Seven or Nine, to
carry him, and they have all been hard set to carry him; yet at another time,
he has himself alone easily carried him, and that he, and some others were
coming, and such a fear came on him, that he durst only go betwixt his Company,
and that when he came to the Surey, he found Richard Dugdale in a Fit, who asked
him of his fear in such a place, and told him, that his Sister (as he called
his Spirit) did cross them in the way, but had no further power then to put him
into that fright.

Henry Page of Harwood Magna, Feltmaker; Certifieth, that he saw Richard
Dugdale Dance on his knees a good while together, not touching the Earth with
any thing but his knees. Further, that he saw the same Person bowl with a
Bowl he had made with Rushes, that he heard him bark like a Mastiff-Dog.

Henry Page.

Grace VVhalley of the same place Testifies, that she heard Richard Dugdale
snarle and bark like a Dog; that she also heard (as she and others thought) a
noise out of his Belly, like as if a litter of young Dogs had been sucking
there: And she further Testifies, that she helped to hold his Head, the time
he Vomited a Stone, weighing near Three Ounces, as she thinks. Further, that
she has seen Richard Dugdale gallop round the Barn on his Hands and Feet for
half an Hour together, as cleverly as any Horse; she has heard him whining like
an Horse, and as eating Provender. She further declares, she has seen the said
Richard Dugdale dance on his Knees, not touching the Earth with his Toes; also
that she heard Richard Dugdale tell, that in one of his Fits, there would come
Three Lapideers at a certain time; accordingly at the time he foretold, there
was thrown Three Stones, some distance of time betwixt each, which were as warm
as new Milk. These foresaid passages, she saw, heard, and observed, when
Richard Dugdale was in his Fits; also she asked Richard Dugdale, when out of his
Fits, whether he knew of any thing spoken or done by him, whilst in the Fit,
which he utterly denied. Also she testifies, that coming with her Brother and
others to the Surey, to see Richard Dugdale, she being the hindermost and
coming over the Hippings, she unaccountably slipped off one of the Stones into
the Water, and could not get out until her Brother came to her help, at that
time many Persons came running out of the Barn upon some words Richard Dugdale
spoke at the same time in a Fit, viz. Sister Ekel, put the hindermost into the
water.

Grace Whalley.

Surey July the 31st. 1695.
Thomas and Ann Dugdale, Parents to Richard Dugdale, with Mary and Alice
Dugdale, Sisters to Richard Dugdale, testify, that Richard Dugdale's Fits
began soon after St. James's day, when they went first unto a Neighboring
Doctor for help, who prescribed several things, which were observed without
effect; whereupon the Doctor was desired to take Richard Dugdale to his own
House, but refused, acknowledging he had done what he could, yet promised to
ride his Horse a Hundred Miles, if he thereby could help him. After this
Richard Dugdale's Fits were more violent, soon after we consulted Doctor
Crabtree, who undertook to Cure Richard Dugdale, Thomas Dugdale went along with
his Son Richard Dugdale to Doctor Crabtree, where they staid about a Fortnight,
and upon Richard Dugdale's Fits abating, they came home within a few days after
his return, his Fits were more violent than ever, after a Fortnight stay at
home. Thomas Dugdale and Richard Dugdale went to Doctor Crabtree the second
time, where they staid not so long as before. The Reasons were Two; First*
Richard Dugdale was tired with the methods Doctor Crabtree took, the Doctor
confessed that he gave the Patient Physic at once enough for Six Men, which
weakened Richard Dugdale so much, that he had strength little enough left to
carry him cross the House, yet in his Fits Seven strong Men could not hold him.
The Second Reason was, the great Charges we were at, for it cost us more than
Three Pound Ten Shillings, in little time more than Three Weeks, which was
insupportable, considering our indigency, and no encouraging signs of help;
but the Doctors words to his Neighbors, were at first, that if the Father
would bring Money enough he would Cure Richard Dugdale, yet said another time,
if the Spirit in Richard Dugdale was a Water Spirit, there was no Cure for it.
Some time after we consulted Mr. Jolly, who with others in the Ministry upon
our request were much concerned for Richard Dugdale, praying for him near
Twelve Months; In which time he had many strange Fits, sometimes Vomited
Stones, a Curtain Ring, a large Hair-Button; in Fits would be lighter than so
many Feathers. In the beginning of several Fits, would gape and catch with his
Mouth (as a Dog at Flies) Ten or Eleven times together, in the end opened his
Mouth so often, when we thought Spirits might come into him, and in the end leave
him. In many of his last Fits he told People, he might be killed or cured
before the 25th of March, which proved true; for on the 24th coming from his
work on Hinfield side, his last Fit seized him, when he came home he was in the
Fit, his Face black as a Coal; upon this he sell down, lay a while, then
recovered out of his last Fit; after this Richard Dugdale had no Fit, though
once, when he had got too much Drink, he was after another manner than drunken
Persons usually are.

Thomas Dugdale Anne Dugdale Mary Dugdale Alice Dugdale.


Altham, August the 4th 1695.
Nathaniel VVaddington further testifies; First, That he had seen Richard
Dugdale gallop round the Barn several times together, and heard him whining
very like a Horse, and make a noise, as if an Horse had been eating Provender.
Secondly, That he told things in his Fit, that neither he, nor any could by
lawful art: As one time he, the said Nathaniel VVaddington and his Neighbor
Joseph Hargreaves going to Surey to see Richard Dugdale, they called at the
House of a Neighbor of theirs, to desire the Master to go with them, but a
Relations averseness prevented him, Richard Dugdale, was in a Fit at the same
time, and spoke it before a great number of People, that Nathaniel VVaddington,
and Joseph Hargreaves were coming, that they called on such a one whom he
named, and told further how that good Man's Wise hindered him the latter part,
viz. the discovery they met with from several which were with Richard Dugdale
in the Barn, being sure that things were so circumstanced, that Richard Dugdale
could have no intelligence. And further, Richard Dugdale's Relation was so
particular, that it could not be an uncertain guess.

Further, That a certain Person going to see Richard Dugdale, took some Biscuit,
and a piece or pieces of Gold, on purpose, as the Person said, to try whether
Richard Dugdale could discover it. Soon after the Party came to the Surey, the
Relator saw the Person standing upon a Seat to take a fuller view of Richard
Dugdale in his fit. Richard Dugdale immediately treated her so very rudely,
discovered the Biscuit, and said, I will play at Cards with thee for those
Guineaus in thy Pocket, etc. These words the Relator heard Richard Dugdale
speak in his fit; further, that John Fielding Joyner, related in the hearing of
the said Nicholas VVaddington and others, that he the said John Fielding was
working at his Calling above Thirty Miles distant from the Surey, and that
Richard Dugdale, in one of his fits said, John Feilding is this day at such a
place working, and further named the piece of work which he had in hand at that
time. The said John Fielding* coming over to see his Relations, several Persons
who had heard Richard Dugdale speak those words, and relate such strange
Circumstances, came to the said John Fielding, to know whether it were true;
this he acknowledged, being much surpised at their Relation. Thirdly, That he
asked this Richard Dugdale, when he came out of his fits, whether he could give
account of any thing that past in the fit; this Richard Dugdale denied, only
once related a strange passage, that in his Fit he thought he had distinct
sight of a Person, and told the posture he thought he saw him in, and the place
where, many Miles from the place where Richard Dugdale had his Fit, which
things concerning that Person were found true upon enquiry.

Nathaniel Waddington further Testifies; That Richard Dugdale in his Fits would
sometimes pretend that a good Spirit was in him, and that Richard Dugdale then
would in a long Discourse speak against several Sins, viz. Drinking, Gaming,
etc. Bringing several pat Scriptures, naming Book, Chapter, Verse, either whole
or part, so much as was pertinent. Mr. John Grimshaw examined the places and
found them true, and that Richard Dugdale in his Discourse would use many
pretty Similitudes.

Joseph Hargreaves Neighbor to Nathanial Waddington, Testifies; That coming to
the Surey, and finding the Boy laid on the Barn floor, he the said John
Hargreaves lifted Richard Dugdale from the Ground more than once, and thinks
(speaking to the full) that Richard Dugdale did not weigh above a Stone and a
half, further that six strong Men could not hold him in a Fit, but that he has
drawn them all a great way and been forced from amongst them, hanging upon him
at a Table a Yard high; that he saw the Lump upon his Leg about the bigness of
a Turkey Egg rise toward his Body, and that he, and others have endeavored to
stop it, by girding a Boot garter above it under the Knee, and by grasping that
part with their Hands, yet could not prevent its rising into the Chest of his
Body, that this to his thinking, crept up his Leg like a Rat, sometimes in
motion, at times would be at a stand. Joseph Hargreaves Testifies the First,
and Third of Nathaniel Waddington, Richard Crichly under his hand Testifies,
concerning Richard Dugdale's strength.

Several Testimonials about the said Richard Dugdale's Case do follow.
WE whose Names are Subscribed, being Ministers of the Gospel, having read or
heard the Affidavits, and Declarations taken before the Right Honorable Hugh
Lord Willoughby, and Ralph Eagerton Esquire Two of His Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, for the County Palatine of Lancaster, concerning one Richard Dugdale of
Surey, in the Parish of Whalley, do verily believe the Truth of the same; and
that the strange Fits of the said Dugdale were by a Diabolical Power.

Given when we met at Blackburn in Lancashire, on August the 6th 1695. Thomas
Crompton Peter Aspinwall John Crompton John Parr Samuel Angler Nicholas Haywood
Samuel Eaton Nathanial Schools.


I Do hereby Testify (as many more will, if there be occasion) from my own
observation, as an Eye and Ear Witness at the Meetings, concerning Richard
Dugdale; That I do verily believe, he was then under a Diablolical Possession
or Obscession. I do also Testify, that he is now fully delivered from that
Supernatural Malady, and that no other probable means of his said Deliverance
may be assigned, but the Word of God and Prayer with Fasting, which Spiritual
means were made use of by several Ministers with great Faithfulness and
Diligence, for a considerable time together: Witness my Hand this 10th of June
1695.

At Holy in Yorkshire. Robert Whitaker Medicus.

July the 10th 1695.
I Richard Dugdale, Son of Thomas Dugdale, of Surey near Whalley in Lancashire
Gardener, do Certify all to whom this may come; That my former strange Fits
were not any Cheat, or Art of Man, that I do know of, but as I do verily
believe, were caused by the Devil, from whom and from my terrible Fits, my Body
was cleared through the Ministers Fasting and Prayer, at or about Lady Day
1690. After which I never had any more such Fits; for the which I never can
return sufficient thanks to the Lord or them: Witness my Hand, the Day and Year
abovesaid.

In presence of us, James Gregson Thomas Jolly. Richard Dugdale.


WE whose Names are Subscribed, were present at many of the within mentioned
Meetings concerning Richard Dugdale, so were Eye and Ear-Witnesses to many of
the things within mentioned, and do verily believe the rest; not doubting, but
that the said Dugdale's Affliction, was through Possession or Obscession, by
Combination, or by some secret Judgment of God, for which he was delivered, as
we are fully persuaded by the Gospel means within mentioned.

William Cross John Duerden Lau. Walmisley John Baxon John Bayley Christopher
Duckworth Leonard Bayley John Marsh James Whitaker William Waddington George
Cockshout Samuel Hey Charles Riley James Hindle Nehemiah Hindle Richard Jackson
William Barton Christ. Tattersill Richard Sudon Nich. Grimshaw.


FINIS.

