Sr Nathaniel Barnardiston of Ketton in Suff. Knight Obiit A. D. 1653 ^t 66. F. H.
van. Houe Sculp.



SVFFOLKS Tears: OR ELEGIES On that Renowned Knight Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston.
A Gentleman eminent for Piety to God, love to the Church, and fidelity to his
Country; and therefore Highly honored by them all. He was Five times chosen
Knight of the Shire, for the County of Suffolk, and once Burgess for Sudbury.
In the discharge of which Trust, he always approved Himself Faithful; as by his
great sufferings for the Freedoms and Liberties of his Country, abundantly
appear. A Zealous Promoter of the Preaching of the Gospel, manifested by his
great care, in presenting Men, Able, Learned, and Pious, to the places whereof
he had the Patronage; and also by his large and extraordinary bounty toward
the advancing of Religion and Learning, both at home, and in Foreign
Plantations among the Heathen.

Dignum laud virum Musa vetat Mori. London, Printed by R. I. for Tho. Newberry
at the Three Lions in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1653.

To the Worshipful and highly honored Lady, the Lady Jane Barnardiston. An
Offertory.
THrice Noble Lady, spare that melting Bead,
Our sorrows want no jewel from your head;
Still let those silver drops, that lightly lie
Like little deluged worlds within your eye;
Fixed abide in their own brightest sphere,
His fame wants not those pendents for her ear;
Those falling stars rob heaven, we need not thence
Borrow our griefs, or tax you with expense:
Behold how every Mourner brings his sheet
To wipe your eyes, and weep himself; it is meet
That this so public loss by the Countries charge
Should mourned be: Spare, Madam, then: this large
And thicker Volume that is here annexed,
Is but our Comment on that public text:
Come Argus, Hieraclicus, lend your eyes
To pay on's tomb a liquid sacrifice;
Lo all the grass that round about him lie,
Hangs full of tears shed from Dame Natures eye,
See how sad Philomele (that yonder sits,
And to the dancing twig her music fits)
Now mourns for him, the silver brook runs on,
Grumbling to leave those loved banks, whereon
A Mansion once he had; that is now set round
With Cypress trees, and with their branches crowned;
So dark, it seems Nights mantle for to borrow,
And may be called, the gloomy den of sorrow.
E're since he di'd; the Heavens their griefs to tell,
Daily in tears to earth's wet bosom fell;
Not in an April storm, or those in June,
Whose trembling Cadents makes it rain in tune;
But like a grave Decembers day, or those
Who mourn in Cicero's style, and weep in prose.
Madam, you see all Natures watery store
Attends this sable day, weep you no more;
Angels, that on your eyes with bottles wait
To catch your falling tears, do now retreat
With vessels full; anon again they will stoop,
And lightly hover round the mourning troop,
Whilst I in silence do his Shrine adore;
If worship does offend, I then implore,
And crave a favor, Madam, it is this one,
Add to his memory no pictured stone;
Lest whilst within the Church my vows I pay,
I to the Image of this Saint should pray.
Madam, your most humble and faithful servitor: Samuel Faireclough. Jun.

ELEGIES ON That renowned Knight SIR Nathaniel Barnardiston.
AN Acrosticke Elegy on my ever Honored Friend Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston,
who faithfully in all employments served his Country, was renowned for Piety,
and exemplary in Religion, dyed the 25. of July, 1653.
Shall such Friends dye, and my Muse idle be?
Is It possible? can such stupidity
Remain in me, and I not dead with thee?
Nature don't give, but lend its life to men,
And at its pleasure calls it back again.
The image engraved on man, Gods right does show,
His image it is; let Caesar have his due.
And in this Microcosme we plainly see
No less then part of Gods Divinity,
In smaller letters; for the Soul's a spark
Even of his kindling, and (though in the dark
Lodged in the grave, the body seems to be)
Let Us hope, and we shall find re-unity.
Body and Soul shall join by heaven's great power
As once they were, before the parting hour:
Rally the Atoms shall, and then each part
Not loosing ought, by Gods Almighty Art
Attain shall to its just and proper due,
Returning to each corpse its former hue;
Descend then shall the Soul, and with a kiss
Its ancient friend awake to perfect bliss:
So these new married couple joyfully
To heaven ascend, and match eternity.
Oheavenly Music! endless harmony!
None can desire to live, that is fit to dye.
So slept our former Patriots (when they
Had served their country) in a bed of clay;
Flesh may incinerate, when Man does dye,
The body in the grave may sleeping lie;
But there is a spark remains, which shall return,
And re-inform those ashes in their urn,
Which when the last days morning shall draw nigh,
Shall raise its flame by heavenly Chemistry:
So springs the Phoenix, from which Rise
She Is ever called the Bird of Paradise.
Si quis; qui bonus, and pius est? inquirit; Jesus
Respondet, verus Nomine Nathaniel.
Inquire whose good? Christ will thee tell,
It is a true Nathaniel.
WILLIAM SPRING Barronet.

An Elegy containing a Dialogue between the Author and his Muse, and between
Death and an Angel.
MAke have my Muse, The Author to his Muse.
lay off thy brighter plume,
The sable wings of darkest Night assume,
Cover thy head with blackness, do not fail
Thy brow with mournful shadow now to veil;
Thine eyes now cloud, which may pour down apace,
A shower of brinish tears upon thy face.
Fill up thy breast with sighs, and saddest grief,
With Rachels sorrows, that refu'd relief;
Now let a living Spring thy sorrow feed,
That may supply, with running streams, thy need:
The depth in silence pass, noise not the same
Lest Nature hear, and do dissolve her frame;
Attire thy self in saddest mourning weed,
Put on thy tragic Buskins, haste with speed
Unto the place where griesly Death does dwell, The house of death.

Within the ground in lowest darkest cel;
Pale kercher'd sickness lies at the door,
To him the Porter opens every hour.
About, above, the Monuments remain,
Of old and young whom direful death has slain:
There the worlds Victor vanquished does lie,
There Caesar, Croesus, and grave Cato by;
There David, Jedidiah, Daniel,
And there with these our true Nathaniel.
Of doleful Ebony the Portal's made,
The roof of fatal dismal Ewe is laid,
The pillars of black pollisht Marble be,
That may endure til time you ended see;
The walls entire of Adamantine rock,
The two-leav'd gates of Steel, so key and lock.
The chambers there with Coffins plancherd sure,
Corruptions sap will not let long endure;
These worn and torn, in time renewed again,
The cost of future Funerals maintain:
The lower floor's of earth, most rooms be full,
Lo here the dead men's bones, and there the skul.
The trophies of triumphant Death are there,
The rooms all hung with whited linen are;
The corpse entombed with juice of Poppy smeared,
There rest and sleep in dust, no danger feared,
Till that these bodies, putrifactions prey,
Be raised up to life at the last Day.
The way is beaten to this house of Death, A description of Death.

The fatal enemy of Mortals breath.
A raw-bon'd carcass, of his Head the hair
And flesh is fallen, and left the skul all bare;
His eyes no eyes, cannot be seen not see,
Worm-eaten nose, one jaw, no teeth has he:
Yet heaps of men he daily does devour,
And hundreds fall before him in an hour.
Within his cruel breast he has no heart,
Yet full of courage, and with deadly dart
He kills, yet neither arm he has, nor hand,
He has no feet, yet walks over sea and land.
Nor arteries, flesh, nor sinews (wonder)
Has he, all his joints they are asunder;
His bones, there one, and here another lies,
He smites, there one, and here another dies;
Haste thither, knock, call, know the cause, why thus
This lean starved Heluo snatched our joy from us.
Could sacred Piety, The Muses message and complaint to Death, lamenting the
death of this worthy
that adorned his mind,
The grace of heart and life, no pity find?
Will thou thus wrong (oh death) the Public weal?
And justice slay, extinguish fervent zeal!
Pull down the Temples pillar, quench the fire
That Heaven's sent, and did to Heaven aspire?
Could neither faith nor faithfulness find grace?
Nor friendly love keep off thy Sergeants Mace?
Could not integrity and truth him save
(With Hezekiah) from the greedy grave?
O Sun return, yet shine on Sions hill,
On Ahaz Dial keep the shadow still.
Why fell he not upon Elisha's hearse,
That could the dead again to life reverse?
Where is He now that Lazarus did raise?
Where is the widow of Sarepta's praise,
That might in flaming Chariot let him ride
With him to heaven? then he had not died.
Shall I not once within this vale of tears?
(Or shall I hold my peace, not speak my fears?)
Shall I not once again on earth behold
That countenance so grave, so brave, so bold,
Which with a look could daunt the face of sin,
And make offense to hide it self with in?
Shall I not see his presence? bless the walls,
Wherein did sound his frequent sacred calls,
Of wife and children, and of all the rest,
To wait on God; who is for ever blessed,
And beams of blessing from this Sunt' expect
That blessed these blessings, might on him reflect.
And as the Rivers to the Ocean pay
Their tribute streams, that in their channel play;
So daily Prayer answerers re-ascend
In praises might to God, and never end:
O never end your prayers and praises due,
To him that gave such sweet returns to you.
That you should pray, and yet still praise his name,
And walk in right before him without blame;
So did he walk, and so attended went
With all his train: and in the Temple spent
Both hours and days, and of all days the best,
Wherein both Christ did rise, and God did rest.
The time though diverse, yet the precept's one,
Writ and ingrav'd by Gods own hand in stone,
In midst of that his everlasting Law,
Which might at all time keep in dreadful awe
All hearts, and all induce, his voice with fear,
And faithful care, and conscience to hear.
Oh! shall I never more observe that eye,
Intently lifted up unto the sky?
And hands stretched out unto the throne of grace,
And bended knees to fall before the place,
Where shadowing Cherub covered with his wing,
The Mercy-seat of heavens mighty King?
From Golden Altar did the incense fly
In clouds of smoke, and mounted up on high:
God smelt the savor, in his heart he said,
Behold, it is done according as thou prayed.
And now O death, can thee no prayer melt,
Wherein the highest God such sweetness smelt?
Release thy Prisoner, and set o'pe thy gate,
Break off those fetters, free thy self from hate,
And let him rise from off that fatal bed
VVhereon thou forced him to lay down his head:
Unto the votes of high and low restore
Their joy, to be enjoyed as before.
What aylest thou, Deaths answer^ to the Muse.
O Muse, bereft of mind?
What mean these words, these empty puffes of wind?
VVil't change the Fates, and burn the sacred roll
Of Gods Decree, and make thy self a scroul;
There to design each one to death or life,
And heaven and earth to set at dismal strife?
Shall brazen mountains with a blast remove?
Or shall the Sun run retrograde above?
Shall morning o'pe her purple door in the West?
And Moon and Stars to rule the day be pressed?
And night shine forth with Phoebus orient beams?
And at thy will all rivers change their streams?
Then my Commission I to thee Will give,
The living shall not dye, the dead shall live;
And mortals all, immortal shall become,
And withered branch, with winter blast shall bloome;
And Adam shall with Eve to Eden go,
No fruit shall kill, no friend shall be a foe.
But if that Adam must no more return,
Why should I break up Barnardistons urn?
His faith? so Abraham died, yet did believe;
But Truth did Hezekiah once reprive,
And Lazarus did life again inspire,
And to his body did the soul retire:
But know thou not how these of death did taste?
And back again unto my Palace haste?
Nor Abrams faith, nor Isaacks, Jacobs fear
Could shield them from deaths deadly piercing spear;
So Joseph, Joshua, and Josiah all,
By sooner, later strokes of death did fall.
And Job was patient under death's sad blow,
And mighty Sampson unto death did bow;
And David with his Worthies all did yield
To death, against his stroke they found no shield;
And John, Christ's bosom friend, did hither hye,
And Christ himself, the Son of God, did dye;
Eliah left his Mantle him behind,
They sought him, but in no place could him find,
His change like death; and Enoch he is not,
Nor Rachels children, Death became their Lot.
And thou (O Muse) shall be as one of these,
When Atropos thy thread to cut shall please.
O cruel Death! The Muses reply to death.
can nothing then assuage
Thy savage fury, and thy direful rage?
Must all (O Charon) thee thy ferriage pay?
And all take Boat, and all have over-lay?
Then come, and to our Lazarus let us go,
And as he died, with him, let us do so.
As Joseph went unto old Jacobs grave,
So shall this Saint, of us attendance have.
What mean ( O Muse) and whither do thou wend? The Angels message to the
Muse.

When of thy passion will thou make an end?
Will thou presume on Sion Mount to stand,
And Heavens scepter sway in thy right hand?
The Lord by power and providence divine,
Did all unto their place and end assign:
The Earth to Plants, in Seas the Fishes swim,
The Birds in the air do wave their feathers trim;
Shall not the fixed Stars in heaven shine?
What God does own, will thou detain as thine?
And why among the dead do thou enquire
For these that live? A description of Heaven.
lift up thy eye, look higher,
There is a place beyond that mount most bright,
Whence Phoebus chariot shines with flaming light;
The stately City new Jerusalem,
Wherein does dwell Jehovah, God of Shem.
Her glory does as Jasper stone appear,
Her light like to transparent Crystal clear;
Her battlements are high, her streets are gold,
Her gates twelve glittering Pearls, their price untold,
Twelve holy Angels at the gate attend,
Whereon twelve names of Isreal's tribes are pend.
The gates, all nightless day, stand open wide,
That Saints in golden charriots in may ride.
Three where the Sun does shed his orient beam,
Three open where he does loose his fiery team,
Three from the North receive Christ's holy train,
Three from the South that Saints do entertain.
The twelve foundations, each a precious stone,
The Jasper, Saphir, and the Chalcedon,
The Sardonix of color red and white,
The Sardius next, and golden Chrysolite,
The seagreen Beril, and the Topaz rare,
Chrysoprasus as gold with green most fair;
The Jacynth then, and next to that is set
The Amethyst like purple violet,
In those the names of Christ's, Apostles are,
That through the world the Gospel spread so far.
On those an hundred forty cubits height*
And four, the wall so broad, of Jasper bright.
Four square the City, and the measured ground
With golden read a thousand furlongs found;
The Angel so the length and breadth did take,
The height the same no Cannon great can shake
The wall, that does this City compass in,
Where none can enter, nor abide with sin.
No need of Temple, Sun, The Saints glory and happiness, and this Saint among
them.
or Moon there is,
Where dwells that Trine in one, in endless bliss,
The Lamb his everlasting light does give
Unto it, there the Saints in glory lives
Upon their heads, they Crowns of glory wear,
Their faces like the radiant Sun appear.
They clothed are in Linen sins and pure,
No Fuller ever made the like, it is sure:
And Palms of victory in their hands they have,
Triumphant Trophies, on the wall most brave
Do hang the Monuments of conquered Hell,
With all the Fiends and Furies, there that dwell;
Their Crowns and Palms before the Lamb they cast,
By whom the danger of the war they past;
They all bedight with glory, round about
The Lamb do follow, going in and out,
Unto the tree of lasting life they haste,
In midst of Eden, and the fruit they taste.
Thence to the Well of Life they take their way,
Whence living streams do never cease to play;
With Mannah eke, and sweetest Nectar fed,
They, by the Lamb, into the Palace led;
The Song of Moses and the Lamb do sing,
With sweetest harmony to heavens King.
In close hereof came Barnardiston in,
Who late the field from virtues foe did win:
A troop of Angels blessed had been his guard,
Into the Palace, to a place prepared:
Wherein the Emerauld of virld hue,
For beauties honor strives with Saphir blew:
And Topaz seeks to have away the fame
From Carbuncle, that shines with fiery flame.
There he arrayed in the robes of glory,
Had to the presence Chamber, tells the story,
How he in fight with Sin and Death had stood,
And overcame them by the Lamb, Christ's blood:
The Lamb my Captain was, I won the field,
Lo there his Word my Sword, his faith my shield.
The Angels then did all their Trumpets blow,
The Victor's blessed welcome there to show;
The Lord commands a crown of golden Bays,
Upon his head are set the Victors praise.
The Saints afresh renew their happy joy,
Them neither sin nor sorrow does annoy.
Moses and Aaron, sang the same that was
By Israel sung, when they the Sea did pass;
And Miriam did on sounding Timbrel play,
And David tuned to his Harp a Lay:
The rest took hands, and danced a sacred round,
The vaults of glory echoing did sound,
There did I leave him, there in bliss he lives,
With him, to Saints that grace and glory gives.
Go haste, and tell all those that did him love,
How he sits on a golden Throne above;
On earth he in his hand a sword did bear,
His hand in heaven does a scepter rear:
There shall he always live, and never dye,
And there shall wait on highest Majesty;
And wait to see his Wife and Children dear
Increase his joy, in this his glories sphere.
The Lord we pray, there grant to them a place,
With their allies, and to their budding race.
In eundem carmen funebre, comprehensum
In Dialogo inter Musam and Vitam.
Tene quid abripiet nobis? M.
(mors improba!) mortem
Tuque premes, victam tu perimesque necem.
Vita fugis mortem? meditaris morte fugamne?
Vivas, ut mortem morte fugare queas.
Dum vixi, V.
vitam viveham, ut perdere possem:
Dum morior mihimet, reddita vita mihi.
Christopher. Burrell. Rec. Wratten Mag.

An Elegy upon the death of that truly noble Gentleman, famous for Piety and
Religion, the right Worshipful Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston, Aug. 25. 1653.
THou stately Top-bough of a noble Stem,
One of Gods Jewels, and thy Country's Gem,
That helped to bless the Land wherein thou wast
Lately a Saint: but now those joys are past;
And we in sorrows left, with hearts most sad,
To think we'ave lost that bliss we lately had
In thee (Great Sir:) alas, we are now without
A thousand comforts, that from thee dealt out
But lately were, to us, and to all men,
With whom thou had to do; how shall my Pen
Be able to set out to the world that worth,
That was in thee? or who can warble forth
Thy praises due? or to the life, let us see,
What by thy death we 'ave lost, in loosing thee?
What rarest Orator, or Poet can
Set forth the use, or loss of such a man?
Thou blessed Soul; the Model of perfection,
Guilelesse Nathaniel, winner of affection:
Beloved of God and Man; why did thou dye,
And leave thy friends naught but an Elegy*
Could thou but hear our plaints, but hear our groans,
But see our mournful tears, and know what moans
Are uttered here, sighed, shed, and made for thee,
The ould'st pity's all, if thy felicity
Could give thee leave, but in that place thou art,
Where sorrow's shadow cannot reach thy heart;
Where thou have good of all sorts, plenteous store,
And joy at Gods right hand for evermore.
There rest ( blessed Saint) thy soul in heavens high story,
Until the dust thou have left shall rise to glory.
But shall I thus have done? how can it be?
To leave already such a Saint as he;
To say no more of such a Son of Grace
Then has been said of him, were to dispraise
Him; so shall I, when I have spent my store,
What I can say, will be too ^^at, too poor:
Could I but chant out now, such notes as he
Does in Heavens Quite, before the blessed three;
I Would tell his praises, i would declare his fame
To after Ages, i would make known his name;
An uncorrupted Patron that did hate
Out of the Churches means, to augment his state
He looked upon it as abhorred thrift,
To gain to himself a farthing by the gift
Of any Benefice, though he had those,
Which if that others had such to dispose,
They would have worm'd and scru'd out two or three
Hundreds of pounds, and yet have faeid how free
Have I been to my Clerk? I did present
Him to some hundred pounds: but yet in Cent'
Gat fifty to himself; God never mean
It should be so, which thing this Saint knew well,
And loathed such baseness as he loathed hell.
He was a Benefactor to our Tribe,
We freely had his boones, he scorned our bribe.
If he were now, whence once he was ejected,
(To hear Petitions from the ill-affected,
Begging of men in power to haste, and ply
The begg'ring of the godly Ministry,
By stripping them of means, and maintenance,
And 'th other honor due; good countenance,
That God allows them, and has given command,
That no man openly, or underhand
Should rob them of it, or withold their due)
He would have hated to have proved untrue
To truth, or them; loathing ill-gotten pelf,
And would have kept them up; or fallen himself.
And not by seeking theirs have ruined those,
Gods faithful servants, which himself has chose,
Gifted, and sent dispencers of his mind
To them that sat in the dark with eyes-ful blind;
And God has blessed their pains; maugre here is spite,
And brought them out of darkness into light;
Yea to their calling God has set his seal,
Their people their Epistle are, and weal
Of many Souls, through grace, effected by
Their faithful Labors in their Ministry.
I trust our Worthies now in power will stand
Strong for the Truth, and Gospel in the Land,
Preached and professed, and maugre all our scorners,
Preserve us, that we fly not into corners,
Where pining souls their Teachers cann^^ see,
So starve and dye through Romish policy.
Those that have gotten any Gospel good
From Preachers lips, must love them; though none stood
For them, and their encouragement, but they
Will choose to dye before they will e're give way
To throw them down, and Heachenize the Nation,
Knowing 'twil prove Religions extirpation.
They Will lend no ear in this corrupted time,
To them wh'ould make the Word a cover-crime.
But whither runs my pen? my Muse return,
And fall again to mourning over the urn
Of this desceased Saint, whose loss is such,
Thousands we might have lost, yet not so much
As we have lost in thee, blessed soul, on ground
Say, where is such another to be found?
Where Is such an Husband? Father? Friend? or Brother?
A word of comfort; say, where is such another
Patron? a Saint so good? just? meek? so kind?
So self-denying? such an heavenly mind?
His husbanding his time, so godly spent,
Told me h' was bound for heaven before he went.
Since he is commenced above, and got his grace,
We cannot leave him in a better place.
Yet one word more give leave for, e're I 'ave done,
Much honored Lady, you his eldest Son;
Ye children all, who put to it, would much rather,
Have chose the loss of all, then of your Father.
Let sorrows surges sink, let comfort come,
And joy your sad and heavy hearts; make room
For gladness, know ye 'ave mourned your shares,
Your dear is gone to glory, stay your tears.
Ye see what God has done, and who may have
Like liberty to take, as he that gave?
Submit to God, bear Christianly this Cross,
He can restore you manifold your loss.
Madam, take comfort, and trust God to be
A better Husband to you far, then He,
And to your virtuous Daughters, widows left,
Both, like your self, of Husbands late bereft;
Not only Husband, but of Father too,
To you and yours, thus does the Promise go.
Worthy Sir Thomas, now, great God expects
In you such graces, from you such effects,
As in, and from your blessed Father were,
Take care, herein you truly prove his heir;
My prayers for ye all shall be this rather,
God make ye better, then your Gracious Father.
Loquitur post funera virtus.
To. Cook.

An Elegy on that eminently religious Knight, Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston.
STay (Reader) stay, stand, but a while, and see
The dismal face of this sad obsequie
Where all are Mourners, where you would think you spy
A Son or Daughters tear in every eye.
Hark, Reader, have thou ever seen what Grace,
What Majesty was seated in his face?
Then bow before his shrouded head, and know
What honor's due, where age white hairs did snow;
Where virtue, where a noble mind did dwell,
Which nothing can ( beside its self) excel.
Democritus himself, should he but know
What caused these tides of tears to over^flow,
The watrish humor in his eye (I fear)
Would melt the Chrystaline into a tear.
Reader, first pay a tear, and then pass on,
It Is no dry subject we are now upon:
But hold, God too will have his harvest free
From rainy showers of tears, as well as we:
This full-ear'd Wheat of his, first bowed its head,
So gathered was to's Garner with the dead.
Apostrophe ad defunctum:
Blessed Shade, your pardon, that thus late my verse,
In black and white attends your sacred hearse;
My Muse was fondly loath, I must confess,
To mix with sables in an English dress;
Thought that too homely, wanton; did desire
A persick, Syriak, Arabic attire,
Or any more exotic; Parrots seek
A Caesar's favor in no less then Greek:
Pardon her soft-pac'd measures, her delays,
She in sad broken Accents sighing says:
Should sundry Tongues, each with a diverse tone
Lament our loss, all must consent in one.
Write on the weeping Marble, here does lie,
Mecaenas, and the Muses Deity.
Sic flevit, Gulielm. Stephenson.

Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston, his Hallelujah,
Saint. THrice holy Lord, at thy right hand I see
The Incense pillars up ascending be
From thy most precious blood, on which does lie
The Roose, and hang the Pavement of this high
And glorious Court, by them brought up I stand
Before thy face, expecting thy command.

Almighty. Drop of my self, eternally my Dear,
(Distance away) draw to this bosom near;
Lo here, thy elder Brother, did not long
To see thy Jesus? see thou not the throng
Of crowned Saints about thee, that rejoice
To join thee to their Chore, who with their voice,
My everlasting praise do sing? this sphere
Of Ravishment, that does thee circle here*
The native heat is of thy Fathers breast,
From whence when first thou sparkled'st I thee blessed,
With my unknown delight, and love; to me,
Thou art not strange, but from eternity
Thou always present were* behold thy name
Deeply in-laid upon the Covenant frame
Of my Free Grace, that Archive Archy-type*
And Index of this Court, the first grand Pipe,
Conveighing down my love unto my Son,
Through him, and all his Gospel veins, to run
Into the elect, those Gulphs of love; find'st not
My half believed Gospel true? thy Lot*
Does it not fill thy heart, fulfill my Oath?
Do I delude the sons of men, when loath
To mind or love me, I them woo, and pray
To daine acceptance of me, that they may
Be well, and pleased here? do I deserve
That slight and scorn, that dust and ashes serve
Me daily with? the Leprous scales of sin,
Have they more weight of joy then what is within
The spangles of thy Crown? which of the two,
The lower wilderness of thorns and woe,
Or this eternal gallery of love
Would choose thy walk? these prospects here above,
And not Lusts snakie Groves true pleasure yields:
Earths sence-inspiring glances in May-fields
Cause but an ulcerous Ich; those leaps of sprite
Men think they feel in earthly loves delight,
Are here indeed the souls eternal dance,
Raised by the dartings of my countenance;
Look and be ravished, spring, and sing my Dove,
Tuning thy measures to my eye of love.

Saint. How low's this Chore? how Faint's this echo here?
Is this the Almighties praise that now I hear?
Can the thousand thousands raise no higher?
Jehovah, thy acceptance I admire:
Is all the powers of Saints and Angels joined
Beneath thy love, and glory thus confined?
(O love thy self, my God) were this a place,
Tears should reflect thy beams upon my face:
Can thou not make a Temple higher roof'd,
wherein on louder Organs may be proved
The Art of treble-voiced Seraphims,
Joined with deep Accent of winged Cherubims?
But neither I, nor these, alas can raise
Ought else but love; Lord reckon that thy praise.
And I am glad thou art great beyond our songs,
Because we feel thee good, beyond our Tongues,
And since thou smil'st to hear thy Nurc'ry sing,
In broken Notes, their Fathers name, I Will bring
My Jews-Trump to thy set: Chore let us join:

Saint and Chore. All might and power, transcendant Lord, is thine,
Above thy Creatures thoughts, thy glory is:
Their utmost stretch, can give to thee no bliss,
Yet it is their joy, and everlasting gain,
That they to sing thy praise, their spirits strain.
Thou can have but their all, their all they spend
Upon thy Throne, yet neither waste or end.
O blessed be thou, thou self-arisen Sun
Of Light and Love; from whence has ever run
Beams both of Life and good, thickning to Globes
And Worlds: This Heaven of Saints is but the Robes
Of Rays about thee; thou Eternal Spring
(In which th'rising streams, most sweetly sing)
Of Life and Love, and Joy, of Good and Right;
From whence we flow, and whither thou invite
Thy Channels to return; there are we well,
And not to be in thee, is lowest Hell.
All might of love be to thy Spirit given,
Who least we should by Hellish winds be driven
Into the gulf of woe, did with us mix,
And ran along our wavering course, to fix
On thee Life's Ocean. Fruits of that love
Now in our Center we do taste and prove.
Our life is thine, O lovely God and Man,
The wonder of thy death, who of us can
Half comprehend, much less repay. But see
The goodly Offspring of thy Blood, and be
Self-satisfi'd, while we behold thy Face
Filled with delight, rejoice thou in the Grace
Thy Blood has sprinkled round about thy Throne,
Hallelujah, Hallelujah, Three in One.

His Character.
Most perfect Image of the God above,
Without was Majesty, within was love:
One drawn with sweetness by an Infants hand,
Never driven by violence, or Base command:
Religion's Patron, Crown of Piety
Upon his Houses Ancient Chevalry.
To Lawful Senates, was his Countries choice,
The last dissolved, above he gives his voice.
To a wise and beauteous Lady joined,
Into a generous Offspring Both are twined.
He went not hence, till he might clearly see
Himself in's Heir, should much exalted be.
His Votaries Prayer.
O let no Curse, no Sin, no Fate, no War,
His long-lin'd house, ever blot, defame, or scar.
But let its numerous seed, still run along,
Till it receive Christ's coming, with a Song.
The Gentries Virtues, Glories let it wear;
But all its Vices, let it scorn to bear.
His House a School of worth, let ages see;
And Lord, a Church of Graces, let it be.
Richard Fairclough Rector of Mells in Sommersetshire.

To the Memory of that Highly Noble, and Religious Knight Sir NATH.
BARNARDISTON.
PArdon great Sir, though others to your Tomb,
Bring Volumes of your praise, and I be dumb.
A Verse or two is all I can; not want
Of sorrow, but the greatness makes me scant.
I cannot write, Tears make my Paper sink;
My Pen weeps too, its proper tears of Ink.
These, whilst I strive to Checker my white sheet,
Correct my Error, and tell me it is meet
That all be black, that every part should mourn,
And so my sheet into a pall they turn.
How can I make a Verse, who want my Feet?
Rooted I stand, amazed at the great,
And strangness of our loss, sad Niobs fate
Transformed to stone, is mine, incorporate
I to a quarry am; Then take from me
His Monument, his Gravestone I will be;
And so for ever, I upon my Breast
Shall wear this Epitaph, and weep the rest.
Epitaph.
Here lies those Sacred Ashes, once the seat
Of Heav'n-born-fires, and Loves diviner heat.
No Basket-Justice, or Bribed Committee,
No purged Senator, but all Purity.
In's Consort happy, both in Offspring Crowned:
Birth made him noble, Piety renowned.
Anagram. Nathaniell Barnardiston. Born in an All-sainted Heart.
How well All Saints, give honor to his Urn,
Whose Faith was in An Heart All-sainted Born.
The World's unworthy of him, whose best part,
Lived, and was Born in an All-Sainted Heart.
Nathaniell Fairclough Rector of Stalbridge in Dorcetshire.

PARENTALE, or an ELEGY on the Highly Honorable and Right Worshipful Sir Nath.
Barnardiston, Knight.
BY Euphrat's Flood, when Captive Israel sat,
Increasing it; their Harps inanimate
Hung speechless by: All sorrows want their Tongues,
These Organs speak not, filled from sighing Lungs.
Great anger makes a Poet; but the sense
Of greatest grief, stops flowing eloquence:
Who groans in tune, has learned the Hebrew art
To weep with the eye; but bleed not at the heart.
My Theam's too great, that Pegasus should wear
Such straitning Fetters; he cannot mount the air,
Or soar aloft, whilst pinioned is his Wing.
England lies here; your boundless tears then bring,
And Mote it round; let every weeping eye
Now pay its River, till the Springs be dry;
Then offer them: Galatian tribute here
Is due, he pays an eye, that has no tear.
The Academy, Country, Church, at once,
Have lost their chiefest Patron, and thus groans.
Erst while I saw a Spring ('it was Hippocrene)
Brim'd round about with Sable Jet, within
The waters swelled; and past their common bounds:
Strait I drew near, t'observe, and search the grounds
Of this late Flood; and silently I spied
The Orphan Muses by; all sadly cried:
And as they wept, the dewy tears that fell,
Slid to that watery lodge, which made it swell;
Their Patrons death (Apollo) caused this woe,
Which falling beads now tell; a wrinkled O
From every fall, their griefs in water wrote,
And spoke the sadness of their sighing note.
The common people next, dismayed with fears,
Dewing their Bosoms; thus fills all our ears.
Swift Time (Heavens Pursevant) straightly summons
To the Lords House, this Member of the Commons;
Thrice chosen Senator, let Ipswich fame
How often her streets have echoed with his Name;
But cruel dint of death's severer Dart
Suffolks great Soul, from Suffolk now does part.
Nor mourns the State alone; the Churches chime;
Religion sighs; her trickling tears keeps time
Whilst sobbing thus, she sings, Here lies the Knight,
Lifeless, that did maintain the Gospels Light.
Let Ketton boast; how from her sacred Hill,
Her Sun with brightest Rays, the World does fill;
Here fixed by him: O joyful, Heavenly meet
Of thousands, Sainted by his means; that greet
His crowned head, whose Crown they are, then haste
We too, to add more gems, and be so placed.
SA. FAIRECLOVGH. Fell. of Gone. and Caius Coll.

An Elegy on that ever honored Knight, Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston.
NOt for to scrape acquaintance with the great,
Much less, like some, to get a good meals meat;
Not that my stranger Muse strives to be known,
As if she thought sh' were else as good be none:
A mourning Ribband, or a parie of Gloves,
Can nothing tempt her from that rest she loves?
My Muse is no such hackney, none of these
Can draw her from her now accustomed ease;
Nor does she now (as erst) catch after wit,
And hap'ly sometimes had the praise of it.
In part, She minds her self, now called away,
From lighter studies, to a graver way;
In part, she thinks amongst Country Clowns to rise
In strains of wit, were but to solaecise.
Partly her wil's in fault, and may be too,
Though she were never so willing, 'twould not do.
Chiefly, my Muse puts on so grave a dress,
Because the occasion calls for seriousness.
And now she speaks, she does not mean to raise
A Trophie to his name from's father's praise:
Though here (if Ancestry must have a place)
She knows no ancienter, no nobler race.
Those who have naught to brag of, but the glory
Of their forefathers, blot their fathers story.
I Would put the Ape, and such men both together,
That could be proud of borrowed Peacocks feather.
But here no sluggishnesse did make a seat
Of Grandsires glory, there to sit complete;
But he made what he found left by his Sire
But as his footstool, that should raise him higher.
And as the circled glass contracts the flames,
That noontide Sun did scatter with his beams,
And makes them like meridian lines, at last
To meet in one point, as from one they past:
So here those nobler flames that were comprest,
Some here in one, some in another breast,
Of all those famous Barm'stons, once alive
Met here, in this conjunction cop' lative.
So that to raise a Trophie to his fame,
From those same virtues that have run in the name,
And hence to fetch one stone, and thence another,
To catch at this in that man, that in the other;
This were to go about, as he should stray
From hence to London, should take York in's way.
We Will make a shorter cut of it by far,
While he alone both compass is, and star;
And though our Logick-mongers teach for truth,
That accidents must never dare ( forsooth)
To change their soil (but like some fettered Ass,
Enclosed in walls, must always feed on grass;
Or as we read it was with Shimei)
But stir from subjects once, they needs must dye.
Yet here we find those virtues all do dwell,
In which each Sire of his did most excel;
And having lest their former soil, yet more
Did thrive in him, then e're they did before.
So well, (though Logic scoff) without correction,
Divinity maintains her resurrection,
In short, his Father gave him life and breath,
But he ( O Miracle) even after Death.
Revives his Fathers Fathers, makes them be
(Being long since dead) fresh in our memory.
Yea, he survives himself, and cannot die,
Until the ending of eternity.
But mind thy self, my Muse, remember how
Thy calling makes all other things to bow
To one, (Religion) leave all other then,
And make this one, the subject of thy Pen.
Nor need'st thou here put on Creative power,
As Poets sometimes do; who in one hour
Create him Saint, being dead, who all men know
A walking devil was, when here below:
None need to stretch his conscience, here to tell
Officious lies for one, that burns in hell;
To draw belief to it, by his forged story,
That, that damned caitiff, is a Saint in glory;
And thereby make even Boys and Girls to point,
And say, The Preachers conscience's out of joint.
No, speak he most* then can; there is no fear*
It should offend the tend'redst conscienc'd ear.
No new truths can be preached, but what are known,
No better by the Preacher, then the Town.
All men that knew him, by his life might know,
He was not only great, but godly too:
Nor was his saintship of that new Edition,
Which Sequestrations make, or a Commission:
Gain brought him not to Piety. To rise
From sin to grace, he never learned by the Excise.
Nor did he ( Proteus like) to all men's view,
Change his religions face, still for a new,
As the old grew out of credit; he never made*
Religions change to be his gainful trade.
'Twas Conscience made him Pious, no design
To rob thee (gasping Church) of what was thine.
He deemed that which the new Saints of our Age,
Count a main piece of Piety, Sacrilege.
But peace my Muse; thou would fame to th'later times,
And cloth this Heroes actions in thy rhimes;
Thou long'st to bring partic'lars on the stage,
And would; but that the growing Peers of the age
Being set of the counter part, would surely raise
Thine Elegiake strains, to Satyr lays,
And make them speak so loud, that without doubt,
They Would doom thee to it, to have thy tongue cut out.
I think it therefore, far the safer way,
Thou prate no more, but that thou rather pray,
Many such Barnardistons God would send,
Th'unhappiness of Church and State to 'mend.
Samuel Reyner, Thirloe Mag.

An Elegy at the Funeral of that truly Honorrable, and most Religious Knight,
the Right Worshipful Sir NATH. BARNARDISTON.
WHat Marble now is dry? then shall not we
Our tears pour forth, at this solemnity?
In ancient time the men of Carthage Town,
Upon Masistius death, their Towers brake down;
Their Walls they hung with blacks, and Towers torn,
That so not only men, but stones might mourn.
The Rock it self, when Moses smote did spring;
Streams Crystalline the fiery Flint did bring.
Much more should we, now God himself does smite,
Send forth our streaming tears; for these of right
Are due; if we deny this tribute, then
The stones that now shed tears, will shame us men.
When Pompey by Septimius was slain,
The valiant Julius Caesar did disdain
To view his head; when to him it was sent,
His Kingly heart, with pity did relent;
His Cheeks bedewed with tears, his clemency
Did manifest even to his enemy.
If Julius Caesar wept thus for a fo,
Then for a friend, much more should we do so.
For such a friend, whom all men may of right,
Most truly term, The High Gods favorite.
His dearest darling, and all men's delight.
Who whilst he lived with us, out-shin'd in grace
The rest of men, now sees God face to face:
When that the Emp'ror Titus did depart:
What cloudy looks, moist cheeks, and heavy heart,
Might be beheld all o'r the Roman State,
Each single man bemoaning his sad fate:
And thus concerning him, they did complain,
Titus is gone, to our loss, though to his gain.
The same may we take up; Gods darling's gone.
It Is for his good, though our affliction.
Well mourn we may, as in some silent grove,
Whilst he in heavenly joys, triumphs above.
Nathaniel he was, Gods gift to us;
A Gem, a precious Pearl esteemed, and thus
The greater was our joy; but now deceased,
The more our grief, and sorrows are increased.
It seems God gives and takes, who can gainsay?
God says, Give me my gem, who shall say nay?
Who shall resist his will? Lord take thine own,
But give us leave, our loss for to bemoan.
A custom 'twas of old, that men renowned,
Not only living, but when dead, were crowned.
Marcellus once this honor did receive,
The same the Emperor Augustus gave
To Alexander's Tomb: Demetrius
His Urn (when he was dead) was crowned thus.
Not any man more worthy of this Bay,
Then he for whom we celebrate this day.
A King he lived, most worthy to be crowned,
In whom so many graces did abound.
A King he di'd, Deaths Victor now sits down
In Heaven resplendent, with a glorious crown,
When Death uncas'd his Soul, it to Heaven tended,
And by his declination he ascended.
How now grim Death, whence comes thus thy rage?
What, could find none but the Phoenix of our age,
To exercise thy cruelty upon?
No twinkling Star, none serve thee but the Sun,
Thus to eclipse? How do thou think shall we
Deport our selves, when we no Sun can see?
Whence this thy hate to break our Rule and Line,
To take our Pattern from's that was Divine?
Had thou no white, but innocencies heart,
Whereat to level this thy forked dart?
O it is not he, but we that feel the smart.
Lo here a Spectacle we see,
To teach us all, what we must be.
Would know thy metal? then look on
The Mould and Earth, thou tread'st upon.
Look here proud man, behold thy Mother,
For at the first, thou had no other:
She brought thee forth, thou art her son,
Flesh of her flesh, bone of her bone.
Thou must repay again, what she has lent thee,
Thy flesh thy bone, and what ever else she sent thee.
Tho. Marriot. M. A.

On the Death of that Noble Patriot of his Country Sir Nath. Barnardiston.
I Heard that many Poets went of late
In a full throng to knock at Heavens gate,
Humbly beseeching Jove of his quick brain,
(From whence Minerva, without Mothers pain,
Or Midwifes help, a witty Dame did flow)
Some few small Particles on them bestow;
And highly their immortal souls inspire,
With a divine and active nimble fire;
That they might fancies, quick, and high conceive,
And might even Virgil of his Bays bereave.
'Twas granted; then in haste to Helicon,
With fury rapt beyond themselves they run,
And for their guide, among the nine they choose,
A fullen, melancholy, pensive Muse,
To show that bitter stream of Pegasus,
That prompted Naso with De Tristibus:
Of this they largely drinking to their fill,
Did into far more bitter tears distill,
Sounding aloud, in hideous lamentation,
As when Plague, Sword, and Famine fright a Nation.
I wondering, curiously the cause desired,
Which so much wit, and so much grief required;
'Twas answered in a sad, and doleful voice,
By one whose sorrows did surmount his noise.
Alas! of all good men (of such though blessed,
The Catalogue's but short) we' ave lost the best;
Prince in his Tribe, his Countries Patriot,
By election made, not undiscerning Lot;
A just, wise, honest, noble Senator,
Lover of Peace, contentions Arbiter,
Patron of Learning, Poverties releife,
The Angels joy, and ease unto friends grief.
Farewell, brave Soul, whom now the Saints do greet,
In all things high, but in thine own conceit.
These great Elog'ums did me little move,
(A stranger to his person, and his love:)
Beside, I knew that Poets, some for gain,
Many for fear, and more for hunger, strain
The music of their pliant, giddy passion,
To any humor of Mecaenas fashion;
Yet some impression I must needs admit,
Seeing whole Families, and Hamblets sit
Like Israel by Euphrate discontent,
As if his absence were their banishment.
I therefore did unto the Funeral show,
If not a Party, yet Spectator go;
There was the much lamented hearse let down,
In hope of resurrection to a crown;
In silent vault confined with worms, and dust,
Where marble must consume, and iron rust;
Whence we expect a glorious release,
For the seeds corruption tends to increase.
But when I saw the mournful Dowager,
Like Mary Magdalen by the Sepulcher,
Fixing her eyes upon the greedy grave,
Which humane flesh unsatisfi'd does crave;
As if in that cold bed she would rather lie,
Then part with her old loving company.
When Children, Nephews, Kinsmen there stood dumb,
Like Images, to deck the dead Knights Tomb;
I could not then refrain, but these tears lent,
As drops to the Sea, their sorrow to augment.
Sure he was very good, who when life fayl'd,
Left so much wealth behind, and's yet bewayl'd;
Whose heir can slightly look upon his gold,
And wished in the live Testators hand untold?
But grieve not Sirs, nor envy him, his mind,
He Is far above what he has left behind;
Nathaniel is not dead, but was enticed,
To leave his Fig Tree, for to follow Christ.
Edmund Underwood.

A Funeral Elegy on the Right Worshipful Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston.
WHen Abner died, King David then could say,
A great man fell in Israel that day.
But how may we lament, to see Gods hand,
Thus snatch this great and good man from our Land?
This our right Worthy, Sir Nathaniel*
Who did not suffer guile in him to dwell;
But when our giddy-headed Nation run
After strange Meteors, he most like the Sun,
Kept on his course in Justice, Truth, and Right,
And shined more clearly in this sable night.
Rend now your hearts, and be confounded all,
That love the truth, at Barnardistons fall;
When such strong pillars from the Church are taken
What can we judge in reason to remain,
But desolation? yet great Jove can still
Extract much good from greatest sense of ill.
Near forty years has he most glorious been,
In strengthening virtue, and suppressing sin;
Of all that knew him was he most renowned;
And now by God that made him is he crowned,
And in immortal glory shall remain,
Until that day that all shall rise again:
And then with Christ his Savior shall appear,
To judge all those that were Apostates here.
John Soame, Gent.

An Elegy on the much lamented death of Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston.
Were I endued with that learned skill,
To mourn thy doleful death, with such a quil
As might it grave in lines, as fair, as those
Thou wrot'st thy noble life in; and compose
Each syllable by so exact a square,
As that whereby thy actions formed were;
Then might I such an Elegy invent,
As should thy death unto the life lament;
Then such sad accents, such a doleful verse
I might breath forth, as might become the hearse
Of a Nathaniel, and might fully tell,
How sad's the death of one that lived so well:
How as the Inamorato of Sol's ray,
The Heliotrope, which in the lightsome day
Displayes its widest beauty to his light,
Does closed mourn his absence in the night:
So does the Country, which with great desire
Wont to receive the influence of that fire
Of prudent Piety, which from thy breast
Sent forth most glittering rays, but now (the art blessed
Elsewhere with light more glorious, and dear)
Lament thy setting in our Haemisphear.
But it is an Art my ruder Pen cannot reach,
To mourn thee as becomes; and so to teach
Strangers to know thy pious worth, and see
How great a joy all good men lost in thee.
Besides, to speak so highly in thy praise,
As thy true worth requires, may chance to raise*
In some men's minds mistrust of flattery,
And thy due praise be thought Hyperboly.
But since perhaps: it might be thought a crime,
Now to be wholly dumb, at such a time,
When so renowned a Hero calls to speak;
Somewhat i will say, though but in accents weak,
And yet but little will I speak, and that
Not in thy praise; (Reader, do start hereat?)
The reason's this; Not that I envy thee,
That, which is known of all, thy due to be;
But that thy worth far does my Pen transcend.
And he that poorly praise does discommend.
Not to disparage then thy worth in Lays,
Too mean by far for thy deserved praise:
All that i will say is only this, to tell,
Thy worth needs not my praise, it is known so well.
Ralph Garnons. M. A.

On the Right Worshipful and ever honored Knight, Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston.
A Grave! a Funeral! my Muse, no toys
Become this Scene, no fancies like decoyes,
To tangle Readers in a pleasing maze
Of lofty words, wrapped in Luxuriant phrase:
These are not seasonable, now our verse
Can naught else speak, or think of, but a hearse.
That Macedonian Trumpet, that did bring
Memento mori to a mighty King,
Instead of Ave Phillip, late has brought
Us doleful news, a sad disastrous thought.
Stand off, come not too near, give air, give breath,
I faint to speak of late unweildy death,
Snatched not a Philip, but Nathaniel hence,
An Israelite, that of no guile had sense,
One whose rare piety that is much admired,
Speak him an earthly Angel, though attired
In Robes of Flesh; one of a higher mind,
Then could to lower regions be confined,
Whose heaven-born soul did still in contemplation,
Pass over those heavenly joys, whose adumbration
He fully now enjoyes; those pleasing shades,
In sweet Elysi'um, where joy never fades:
Those Hills of Solyma, where purest streams
Make glad the region of that Sun, whose beams
Those healing wings, continually refresh
The Sacred Pilgrim, when dis-rob'd of flesh:
There rests this holy Saint; what heretofore
He could but see in part, and wish for more;
H'ath now attained: O rare state of perfection,
The end of hope, joys center, Saints election.
Nor did his strict religion only speak
His Peerless worth, which we (alas) poor, weak,
And crazy mortals, knew not how to prize:
But he had gifts more obvious to our eyes,
Love to his Country, whose affairs he minded
With so great care, that none but envy-blinded
Can cease condoling him, whose name who hears
In future times shall steep himself in tears:
And like sad Niob', standing over his Tomb,
Shall kiss the Earth, in whose most happy Womb
He lies enclosed; and to his sacred Urn,
As to a Delphick Oracle shall turn.
But stop my Muse, his V^rtues so transcend
Thy weak expression, that perhaps in the end
Thy mind may be mis-deem'd, and some may raise
An argument against thee from thy praise:
Better forbear to speak, then speaking wrong
The harmless dead, to whom all praise belong:
Condole we then his loss, his Virtues pass,
Praised by themselves, engraved in firmest Brass,
Which time shall never wear out, nor malice blot,
But Fame shall render blameless without spot.
Yet this admit, the more his Virtues shone,
Our loss the greater, and the more our moan.
O for a Mount of Tears to sleep upon,
Acis or Biblis, for a Helicon:
But wishes boot not, clear we then our eyes,
He Is singing now triumphant Elegies.
Whilst we poor mortals grovelling here below,
Fall short of that his praise, we fain would show.
This only dare we own, that for his Hearse,
If fancy fail, yet grief has made a Verse.
Abrah. Garnons, M. A.

The Offering of an Infant-Muse to the Memory of Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston.
YOu Sager Heads, that do attend this Hearse,
Accept the Homage of a Yonglings Verse.
Tears are griefs rhetoric, and a Child though weak,
Knows how to weep, before it learns to speak.
I have my end, although my style be rude;
Who do not study wit, but gratitude.
This Noble Gentleman, when first I came
Into the world, bestowed on me my Name.
Now he has lately left the world, shall I
Foolishly modest, suffer his to die?
What though far abler Pens applaud him, yet
They meant to pay their own, and not my debt.
His prayers for, and favors to me shown,
No other Muse proclaims besides my own,
Which though a Newborn spark, yet such a Name,
May quickly mount it up into a flame:
A Name wherein you nothing mean, can spy
His Birth, Place, Person, Graces; all were high
Whilst here: But now he in those heights does dwell,
That nothing, but an Angels tongue can tell.
My Infant-Muse oppressed with such bright glory,
Leaves flaming Seraphims to write his story.
Nath. Owen. Anno Aetat. 12o.

Obsequies to the Memory of Sir Nath. Barnardiston, Knight.
GIve leave (my Friends) unto this sable Hearse,
To offer up a Tributary Verse:
Even such, as love and sorrow shall suggest:
Sorrow never made good Poet, Love the best.
O! how much rather, if the all ordering hand
Of Providence Divine (which none withstand)
Had so disposed, I would have brought this day
My salutary vows; but now the way
To joy's shut up: The scene which whylome we
Thought Comic, now ends in a Tragedy.
Where were ye Galen and Hippocrates?
Thou Paracelsus, who did vainly please
Thy self, to boast with thine Elixar's art
To make a man immortal? could that part
Have acted here, or some years lusters more,
Have added to his lives lease? on this score,
Like loyal Romans for Augustus, we
A during statue to thy memory
Would have erected; engraved thy name in Brass,
Lasting to ages glory: But (alas!)
Nor Themison, nor Aesculapius,
Machaon thou, nor Podalirius,
Amongst the Galenick Nation, though you be
Chief Doctors, conld you bring a remedy
To supersede this fate: That hand that gave
This wound ( Achilles like) could only save:
Then which no other weapon-salve, I know,
Nor universal medicine here below.
He Is therefore gone, and we alive to see,
The Monument of our mortality,
His sacred relics; and remember what
He was in's life, and study to be that.
But is there any that will undertake,
To write his copy; I fear his hand will shake,
Or's Pensil's dull, or some fault in his eyes,
That he will indent deformed obliquities.
Yet his clear eye, and steady hand never drew,
But strait lines from the center, for he knew
And learned from such a master, who alone
Could guide the hand and hearts position.
And so he guided was, that few are seen
On this worlds Theater, or er'st have been
Equal proficients with him in this art,
This heavenly art of living well; which part
He much adorned, and 'twas his greatest grace,
And worth's embellishment in such a place,
As God had set him, to be good as great;
Goodness and greatness, both well here did meet
In him. How soon began! for in his prime
He chose (not like luxurious youth) his time
To spend in th'ages wanton revellings;
But sought that merchandise, which only brings
That great advantage (after all his care
And travel) now possessed, without all fear
Of loosing: he by firm indenture bound
Himself to God, not for years; for he found
They might expire, and's Fathers legacy
Was more then this poor worlds annuity.
Therefore in graces tenure, humbly he
Cast anchor unto all eternity.
And now his torn, and weather-beaten bark
With the worlds storms and tempests, like the ark
Puts int' a quiet harbor, even as that
Rested upon the Mountain Ararat.
He left this world in the storm by Land and Sea,
Yet he a calm and sweet tranquillity
Found in himself; as one that swom to Land,
Having escaped shipwreck, does in the Harbor stand
Safe and secure; yet viewing with sad eyes
The Monuments of Neptunes cruelties:
Or he whose ship from some far Country bound,
Laden with Gold and Spice, at length has found
The wished Port, prays that his Friends may see,
The like returns advantage; so did he,
Having received his lading home secure,
Prays God, the States and Churches to ensure.
But whilst we mind his gain, we value not
Our loss, nor can: The Saints indeed have got
One that will bear a part with them, whilst we
Are left to sing a doleful Elegy.
To mourn, becomes us well; here needs no art
To paint a tear, that comes not from the heart:
Or that we hire some ancient praefica'es
To howl their well-dissembled nania's.
For such sad Sables ( Sorrows Livery)
Well may they hold a semblance to the eye,
Of some thing which we see; but for the rest
Behind the Curtain, Cannot be expressed.
So did that Artist when he came to draw
The Parents grief, for Iphigenia,
Cast over a veil, (the rest within made good
By an Aposiopesis understood)
Then draw the Curtain here (my Muse) and tell,
The World thou can with no lines parallel,
Their grief, whose honor 'twas once to have had,
A Wife, or childs relation here: So sad
Appears the Scene, There Is none that bears apart
A mourning robe, without a mourning heart.
Yet once again (thou Cypress tree)
Let me now pluck a branch from thee;
Bitter constraint, and saddest woe,
( Alas) compels me so to do.
Thou wont'st not to receive a call
To every vulgar funeral.
We'll therefore not impropriate
Thy custom, since it is our sad fate
To loose a Hero of that worth,
As nature rarely brings forth.
Mourn then, for on this woeful Beer
Lies one, that has not left his Peer.
For whom the Heavens (as if too long,
They had expected him among
His Fellow Saints) at last have sent
Now to complete their Parl'ament.
Saxa ruunt Mausoli invisa, ruuntque Colossi
Mole sua; and si quae porro Monumenta vetustas
Condidit, illa abolevit edax; vel quicquid Apelles
Pinxerit, ant si quid Lysippus duxerit olim,
Apparent nusquam (ne subsistente ruina.)
At meliora tibi pietas Monumenta locavit,
Quippe fides tua clara (aevo rarissima nostro)
Te petrae inseruit. Titulo te posse carere
Ergone Marmoreo? licet aut componere parvis
Maxima? Namque Choro coelesti ascriptus iniquum
Ut remeare velis divisis mente Britannis.
Qui tamen, (et si nos tot blandimenta nepotes
Chara reliquisti) superes ubi nulla cupido
Invadet redeundi, non si populusve senatus
Antiquum ad meritumque locum revocare potesset.
Consociare tuis, te suaviloquentior usquam
Nec fuerat dum tu fueras, nec amantior ullus
Qui potuit. Quoties dextram (Venerande) benignam
Tu mihi, quam gratos amplexus saepe dedisti,
Nulli ementitos? verus monitorque fidelis
Idque frequens mihi; cultor eras quia tu neque parens
Numinis atque alios mecum suadere solebas.
Oh quoties and quae nobis memoranda locutus
Digna velut clavo maneant infixa trabali?
Nam neque tu quenquam vano sermon morari,
Pejorem solitus coram aut demittere tristem.
Quos vultus, quales vidi candore micantes!
Atque oculos? mihi quos spectare (heu non licet ultra.)
At nunquam? Oh nunquam nostras resonabit ad aures
Vox antiqua sonos modulans mihi quam been notos:
Nam mihi nunc superas heu dissociabilis; oras
Lenta nimis vela impellent suspiria nostra
Hasce iterum infidas, ut frustra refer conemur.
Ast ego quando quidem nobis te fata tulerunt,
O quam te memorem, and memorans suspiria ^undam,
Dum maestus reddam solennia vota Sepulchro.
Joh. Clopton. Gent*

An Epicedium upon the death of that thrice worthy Knight, Sir Nathaniel
Barnardiston, eminent for Piety to God, love to the Church, and fidelity to his
Country.
It Is easy for to write an Elegy
On common fates, great sorrows stupifie;
A toe or finger lost, we can complain,
But wounds received in liver, heart, or brain,
(The parts that be architectonical)
Oppress the sense, we should complain withal.
A cask that naught, but the light air does hold,
Sounds far more shrilly, then one filled with gold;
Fleet streams are clamorous, the deepest joys
And sorrows, their own depth do keep from noise.
Our loss so vast, as would a country break,
We want both help to bear, and strength to speak.
What is it to hear a wife, or children cry,
Should such a father, such a husband dye?
Or a few mournful Scholars make this moan,
Our-dear Mecaenas, our best friend is gone;
The expenses of a sorrow that is thus large,
Should be borne out at a whole Nations charge;
A public tax of grief, whole subsidies
Of tears, and freely given, will scarce suffice.
Where are you all, who while he was alive
Owned none but him, your representative?
Resound a Barm'stons name, cannot that breath
Which silenced other Rivals, silence Death?
Shall the graves prison your free choice prevent,
And break a privilege of Parliament?
Tell him, he has your suffrages, least we
Judge you have lost your voice, as well as he;
But since your tongues avail not, let your eyes
Discharge their last debt to his obsequies.
Tears have a strong ( though silent) eloquence;
You cannot speak, yet sigh thus out your sense,
Our Patriot is dead, who often was known,
Saving our freedoms, to have lost his own.
From right who would not swerve, or conscious wrest,
To please a side, or serve an interest;
Who lived by rule Divine, and human Laws,
And did not dread the power, nor court the applause
Of the wild multitude, but firmly stood
To his first principles, and those were good;
And as his Tenants, so we may be bold
To say, his honors and estate were old.
H'was born to both, had no need to desire
To warm his hands, by's neighbors house on fire.
His plentiful revenues did not rise
To higher rates, since taxes and excise;
Fames trump sound's forth his ancestors renown,
When the Henry's, and the Edwards wore the crown;
Mushrooms of Gentry can straight from a blew
Be dipped in scarlet, which is honors hue,
Yet in his birth and blood he found a stain,
Till 'twas innobled, and he born again.
You reverend Divines go on to tell
His following story, whom he loved so well.
You are Gods Heralds, and by place designed,
TO emblazon his most noble heaven-born mind;
His faith most vigorous, though crossed by sense,
Could grasp a promise, eye omnipotence;
Through the black clouds, that before the Church were drawn,
He could foresee her day was near to dawn.
The rage of enemies now grown so stout,
He judged a blaze, before their light went out;
His zeal towering aloft to heavenly things,
Yet was discreet, had eyes, as well as wings;
Humble in height of place, troubles he knew,
Though great, yet just; by bearing, to subdue.
His love to Christ, the Church, shone bright as day,
Ireland can witness, yea America:
In all these he enjoyed the name, and style
Of a true Israelite, and free from guile,
Though not from sin, yet in a Gospel sense,
Sincerity is counted innocence.
This, at his death, caused him such peace within,
For death scares none, but where it meets with sin.
His Noble Lady now disconsolate,
Like a true Turtle, which has lost her Mate,
And sad posterity known by their eyes,
We do not here invite to simpathize;
'Twere cruelty to strain a bleeding sore,
Instead of stanching to provoke it more.
Oh, dry your tears up, whilst you still complain;
You only mind your loss, but not his gain;
Were It not more love for to rejoice, as he
Does there, then to wish him our misery?
Repine not at his change, would you again
Hear him complaining under sin, and pain?
We in retired corners melt our eyes
In tears, and breath our spirits out in sighs,
Whilst he in glory is triumphant; where
He never hears a groan, nor sees a tear.
Our Muse sings naught but Elegies, his tongue
Is now a chanting forth a marriage song.
Grieve not at his new honor lately sent,
To sit in the upper house of Parliament,
where all three States agree, and none does strive
For Privileges, or Prerogative;
Before whose bar other great Courts shall come,
To give up their accounts, and hear their doom:
In this the worlds supreme just Council, none
Can cause; or fear a dissolution.
Ergo triumphatis inferni finibus, ipsa
Morte exarmata, regna superna petis.
Quid non fata regunt? senio monumenta fatiscunt;
Ipsaque cernuntur posse sepulchra mori:
Sed pietas and rara sides patriaeque cupido
Fervida vicerunt jura superba necis.
Dignum hunc laud virum, lex, plebs, ecclesia, cleru^,
Catera si taceas, vivere musa jubet.
Cistula diffringi potuit, sed gemma superstes
Usque nitens, nullo est interitura die.
Non is vana fuit ingentis nominis umbra,
Praemia sed meritis fama minora dedit.
Quem non prava jubens irati principis ardor,
Non populi rabies mente quatit solida.
Perstitit ut rupes variis vexata procellis,
Fixa basi firma, quae tamen usque stetit.
Heu! vereor ne haec magna domus suffulta columnis,
Tam validis, ruptis hisce, misella cadat.
Joh. Owen. Rect. Wrat. par.

To the Memory of that renowned Knight, Sir Nath. Barnardiston,
LOok as the Heliotrope the Sun's loved flower,
That spreads the yellow curtain of her bower
At his fair rising, closes it again
When he declineth westward to the main:
Even so should we, (our Phoebus gone to bed,)
Shut in our joys, and hang a drooping head:
Our lips in sables dress, close mourners all,
Our tongues are to pronounce a funeral;
A Barmston's funeral; recall that name,
A name so old, 'twil fit the trump of fame;
A name too heavy for a slender quil,
Whose very echo would a Nation fill;
A name so good, posterity may run
Division on that name, till time were done.
Pardon ( great Sir) we cannot speak thy worth,
Apollo's tongue-ty'd, and must lisp it forth;
To score each virtue on thy noble tomb
Would strike invention, and the Muses dumb.
What Quire of wel-breath'd Lungs screwed never so high,
Can reach the Ela of that harmony,
That did concenter in thy pious breast,
Warb'ling forth Airs, such as the Spears might feast;
Sweet consort! where the Graces tune their throats,
And virtues chant their Polyphonian notes,
Striving to excel in those diviner Lays,
And crown their Master with celestial bays.
But oh! we lack an Orpheus in our ears
That might distinguish (they are stopped with tears)
Each lofty strain; each Rapsody resound,
And take each quaver at the first rebound;
Our sense is dull, and cannot comprehend
The words they breathed, unless his Ghost do send
A key to unlock the closet of his heart,
(Which may their language to our eyes impart)
We must despair to read those Heav'n-borne tones,
And be content to spel their mind in groans.
Sure 'twas his Music act, he is gone from hence
To Heav'ns-Kings Chapel there for to commence
Doctor in glory, and has left us here
To celebrate his feast, our funeral cheer.
Oh! how his consort, and his mourful train,
Their Cristal cisterns broach, draw, tun again,
Brim full with tears, each tender eye of reflows,
And proves a running banquet in the close.
That friend, who brings a palate in his eyes,
May fill his stomach at these obsequies.
But now our dear Mecaenas leads the way,
Come, come; enough, our sorrows cannot stay:
The slow-paced Mourners wait upon the hearse,
And teach their feet to tread elegiac verse:
The virtues which were inmates in his breast,
Hover about, now they have lost their nest;
And fear lest they who had a cage of gold
Be forced to wander (charity's so cold)
Nay beg for harbor, woo each heart they meet,
Yet find no lodging but a winding sheet.
Unhappy hand of fate, that went about
To make the holes whereat these Birds flew out^
These pretty Phil' meles hop from flag to flag,
Filling the air with sweetness, as they wag
Their lovely wings, each ear with elogies,
And thus extol their patron to the skies.
What soaring pinion's able to express
That well ground constancy, the sole impresse
That ruled thy actions, and as firmly stood
As does the Oak the Monarch of the wood;
Whose stately towering top scorns to strike sail,
(Like to the Poplar) to each whiffling gale,
And dance a quaver with a trembling bough,
When Boreas plays a crochet on his brow?
Men now adays in such a posture stand,
That Is ready to receive each base command:
Blow what wind will, like the wind-serving Vane,
They will comply, then as you were again.
Mechanic spirits with their supple joints
Can ring the changes to a thousand points,
And please their ears too with that Stygian sound,
That Is harsh enough even Babel to confound.
But Barm'ston moved in an higher sphere,
Disdained to crouch unto degenerous fear,
And on the Hinges turn his Patron knee,
To dance the humors of disloyalty.
Blush, blush you servile natures, that can mould
Your very souls into what frame you would;
New cast your moulds, and work your brittle clay
To such a temper, as with honor may
Heav'ns-broad-backt Porter Atlas strength excel,
And under-prop the Churches citadel,
And tottering state. A pillar we have lost
By deaths unhappy stroke (our glory's crossed)
An ancient Pillar, whose firm basis stood
Supporters of the truth, and what was good,
Even when surrounded with the dangerous seas
Of Errors, ^^hisms, and Metamorphoses;
Call it Seths pillar, wonder, and vouchsafe
To read the inscription in this Epitaph;
Behold Nathaniel, says sacred style,
An Isra'lite indeed, in whom's no guile;
An holy vessel tunn'd with noble breath,
By Surgeons broacht, to be drawn out by death.
Mirror of goodness, and of constancy,
Gods gift, our loss, within this vault does lie.
Quote, maesta pedes? an quo via ducit, in aedem?
Musa* perantiquum quid petis aegra locum?
Forte sepulchrales men's est invisere seeds,
Et veterum exuvias; ossaque spectra times?
Flebilis illa refert, vix ora in verba resolvens,
Heu! cineres magni nominis urna tenet!
Et dictura fuit Barmston, dolor occupat ora,
Sic vox ipsa haeret faucibus: exit Io.
Tesequar; at lentis pedibus modo currite versus;
Funeris, heu, maestos cogor inire modos!
Stella serena poli cecidit jam gloria nostri;
O decus! O nostri stella serena poli!
Hac signante viam, non qualem erraticus ignis
Nil metuit populus, stagna profunda, dolos.
Infaustos nusquam radios diffudit in orbem,
Evomuitve iras, bella nefanda, neces.
Indidit huic nullas vires natura malignas,
Quales cancer habet, scorpius, a^que canis.
Quin dedit aspectus aequos frontemque benignam:
Luce sub innocua non latet ulla lues.
Scilicet innumeri fulgent hinc inde planetae,
Et nova dispergunt lumina: quale decus!
Fert quasi stelliferam per dorsum stellio sphaeram:
Sed cave, tabificam pixida pectus habet.
Lucifer Angelico zeli larvatus amictu,
Decipit incautum credulitate gregem.
Augustam Phoebi faciem mortalibus aegris.
Invida opaco aufert corpore Luna suo.
Non tulit haec nostrum, magno dum luxit in orb
Aequali peragens tramite Sydus iter.
Meeoenas, Trabeatus, Eques, Pascit, Colit, Ornat,
Clerum, Jus, Patriam, Munere, Voce, Fide.
Singula quid memorem? Nil non laudabile Barmston,
Stemmata nobilitans, stemmate prisca suo.
Nubibus immunis translato est mortis Horizon,
Occasu claro, pulchrior ortus erit.
Ra. Astel.

An Elegy on the Death of the Right Worshipful Sir NATH. BARNARDISTON.
IF David's Worthies, God himself recount
In Writ Divine, which does humane surmount.
If Christ, the anointing of his holy Head
Deigned, as an honor done to his Funeral Bed;
And to requite this precious Mary's favor,
Embalmed her name with Everlasting savor.
Then do we not amiss, this faithful Knight
To praise and recommend; if so me might
Hereafter move to pious emulation,
Posterity by holy imitation.
And not his Son alone, to bear the Name
And Heir his Grace, but others gain the fame
Of being like this er'st renowned Knight,
To equal and surpass him, if they might.
(Whilst others envy) Ministers are bound,
His praise by Word, and writing forth to sound.
To him who did Prophets on Earth receive,
Prophets reward, both God and Man shall give.
Nathaniel don coruscus Barnardiston
Vixit in hac terra nobilitatu^ Eques.
Vixisset semper, regeret si stamina vita
Vox populi, cujus claruit auspic^it*
Clarus ad invidiam, quem sic neque dira simultas
Flexit ab officio carcere, sive mini^.
Mista priora novis, nec summa pericla movebant
Obstrictum Patriae cumpiet ate Deo.
Eripit hunc nobisque suit mors scaeva, videmur
Orbatam patriam flere, perinde domum.
Quem Deus indid sit, rapuit mors sava, queremur,
Non rapuit reddens officiosa Deo.
Ossa quidem nobis anima ascendente reliquit;
E^apsam ut vestem quam tenet arca pia,
Qua, Deus expurgans simul and fulgore deaurans,
Regis in adventu vestiet ad thalamos.
Haec vates sperans, ovat gestitque videre
Nunc Monumenta spei, tunc documenta rel.
Observantiae causa posuit. Clemens Ray.

On the Death of that most Illustrious and worthy Knight Sir Nathaniel
Barnardiston.
Often have I seen (in veiwing Monuments)
Of Roral Drops from Marble strange descents:
Wonder not why this Rocky Marble weeps;
For lo! here Noble Barnardiston sleeps
The sleep of death; it is strange to cloudy sense,
That in the Tomb there seems no difference
'Twixt just and unjust, Pebble and the Gem.
Here virtue seems to wear no Diadem.
It Is strange here seems to fall such equal lots
Upon the Traitors, and true Patriots.
But cease fond heart to wonder, it is not hard,
God is to such th'exceeding great reward;
And sure to him, who yet could never be wone
To act a Proteus in Religion.
Reward in life, he met with great renown,
God did his faithful acts with glory crown.
Reward in death, for (when the world shall see
Those Pha^tons in dust interred be,
Both names and bodies too; and them shall laugh
To scorn, to see no better Epitaph
Then this: Lo here their skeletons are laid,
Who once their Country, and their Church betrayed:)
His name shall live as one, that witnessed well
Himself to be a true Nathaniel.
ACROSTIC.
Nomen in aeternum, Barnurdistone, perenne
Augusta humanum pectus dum capsula condit,
Tulampas terris ast inter sydera coeli,
Haud minimus meliore tui jam part manebis:
Accingens radiis nitidis tua tempora Phoebus,
Noster amator eras, artis sophiaeque patronus:
Imminuere decus gentis, virtutis honorem
Electi Heroes; fidei tu semper amicus;
Lex tibi grandis erat virtus quae nescia vinci.
Bruma perennis adest nobis te sole cadente,
Astra calore carent nitidi sine lumine Phoebi,
Rara fides genti virtus procerumque propago,
Nostrorumque decus capitis tua gloria magni,
Ast nihili pendens, tu talia (...) Christi
Respectuque Dei: sacrato sanguine venas,
Diluvians, causa est magni Theodore triumphi
In coelo solio frueris semperque frueris.
Siste viator iter: vultum cortina recondit
Talem quem memores lacrimarum flumine deflent
Omnes, dona Dei nobis cum numina poscunt,
Nos decet hanc deflere vicem, gemituque dolere.
Josephus Skinner, M. A.

An Elegy on the Right Worshipful Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston.
Here Is one that was an Isra'lite sincere,
In whom all noble virtues did appear;
A faithful Patriot, one that ever stood
Firm to Gods Cause, and to his Countries good;
And yet by cruel death's impartial hand
Laid level with the dust: Who can withstand
Death's all commanding power? this tyrants Law
Is that which keeps the universe in awe;
He nips the Infant blossom when it springs,
And aged Snow to dissolution brings:
And though the faded Rose year after year*
With a fresh color in her leaves appear,
Age knows no spring, and death will not restore
His stolen goods, till time shall be no more.
O happy those that do betimes begin
To love Christ Jesus, and to leave off sin;
To walk in holy ways with Simeon old,
That in the arms of faith their Savior hold.
The life of such is blessed, their death much more,
For then they rest from labor, not before.
Thus (worthy Barnardiston) thou art blessed,
Who from thy labors and all pains do rest.
Death which for thee a crown of gold prepares,
Gives unto us a thorny crown of tears,
And puts us in a mourning frame, for we
Cannot but have sad hearts, when as we see
The Chariots and the Horsemen yield to fate,
And few such left to guide the affairs of State:
But yet our grief for thee shall not proceed,
It Is charity to give to those that need,
That Is to our selves; our miseries and fears
Require not only floods, but seas of tears.
Therefore for thee we will cease our lamentation,
And take it up for our selves, and for the Nation;
Though for our loss we cannot choose but grieve,
This comfort shall our passions yet relieve;
That heaven is joyful, and thy blessed state
Shall be a means our griefs to mitigate.
O what a happy state it were, if we
Had no more cause of sorrow but for thee.
ACROSTIC.
Non audis nostras, Barnardistone, querelas,
Aut lacrymis opus esse putas; sed funera fletu
Tu tua nos ornare vetas; at nos tamen ipsi
Haud ita sentimus, vanum licet esse fatemur
Atque supervacuum pro te (vir sum) dolorem;
Non ita pro nobis, nam mors tibi maxima merces,
Ipsa tamen summi nobis est causa doloris,
Et poscit lacrymarum imbres, luctumque perennem,
Luminaque ut lacrymis turgescant semper amaris.
Busta viri tanti studeant ornare Camaenae,
Adsit Melpomene, moestisque boatibus auras
Repleat, and totus resonet plangoribus ether,
Nam pietas and prisca fides, and mascula virtus
Angligenumque decus, jam nunc periisse videntur.
Religionis honos venerabilis, artis amicus
Defunctus jacet hic* titulis and honor priori
Impositis parvo turba comitante Sepulchro,
Sed lacrymis jam parce, sat est, non prorsus ineptus
Te Theodore mori, quisquis vel posse putabit.
Onimium Felix frueris meliore senatu,
Nil ubi juris habet mors, mars, aut Barbarus hostis.
J. C.

On the much lamented death of the right Worshipful Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston.
I VVonder not that Barnardiston's dead,
But rather that he spun so long a thread;
Sure it is a sound has echoed through the earth,
Christ's verdict on Nathaniels second birth.
Behold an Isra'lite: 'Twas then a wonder,
But now the Gloworm times that we live under,
Write such men Miracles, and they we know
Are ceased, dead, and buried long ago.
We would enjoyed him longer, but we knew
Who was the gift of God, was Heavens due.
(So Job, he gives and takes) cease then to tell
His worth, whose Epitaph's a Miracle.
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).

Memoriae Sacrum equitis Nobilissimi, Pientissimique Viri, Nathan.
Barnardiston. Equ. Aur.
QUote corripis, viator, properans?
In hunc tumulum converte oculos,
Si modo permiserint
Lacrymae and singultus tui.
Jacet hic
Eques auratus, and vir vere aureus,
Sine fuco Israelita, and absque dolo:
Ipsemet enim Nathaniel:
Decus Patria, and familiae antiquissimae,
Quae inter trophaea sua hoc jactitat,
Quod talem peperit.
Amor cleri and Patrocinium:
Orthodoxa Religionis ingens exemplar and columen,
Veris Evangeliti Ministris tutela and praesidium,
Apud eos dum vixerit,
Hi omnes ornarunt calculo
Mortuum,
Lugubri Epitaphio.
Quippe quod his indulsit, ut parentem decuit,
Ut filium, auscult avit obsequentissime;
Sic quos humi calcavit aetas impia,
Hic fovebat in sin^.
Ipsimet enim in deliciis, quos mundus reputat
(...).
Lumina ecclesiae radiantia,
Quae seculi rabies
Extincta vult, and effossa penitus.
Heu! quoties (...) est, and (Constantini more)
Deosculatus suaviter.
Defe male suisque metuit
Reformata religio.
Dum talem (...)
Fidei columnam and (...) naculum.
Quem non gementem audies? Abiit, hem obiit
Noster Nathaniel;
Tam coeli quam terra (...)
Utrobique affulsit (...),
Hic equestri cinctus (...),
Illic corona redimitus gloriae
Improba and aetate degeneri.
Cum ultra vivere penitus displicet
Eja! tunc juvat mori.
Ultimi in occasu seculi
Occasum is passus est,
Ut celo fulgeat fortiori jubare
Hinc disce Lector;
Tunc tunc nos coelo maturi sumus
Cum huic sumus mundo decidui.
Posuit honoris
Et debitae observantiae ergo.
Johan. Allot.

Chronogramma.
SI patrlae fIDVs perIIt and VerVs aMICVs, VIr Pius atque bonVs, VIta perennIs
erIt.
MOrte manet justis sua spes, post fata, futura
Soecula cum venient, ultima cumque dies.
Optima sanctorum remanebunt lucra virorum
Illorum effari gaudia nemo potest.
Pessima pravorum remanebunt damna virorum
Illorum effari tristia nemo potest.
Epitaphium.
AN justus periit? dici hunc periisse licebit?
Non licet; in Christo non periturus abit.
Ast periit justus, dici hunc periisse licebit?
Heu! periit nobis, non rediturus abit.
Rara avis in terris est justus, puraque corda
Sunt inter spinas lilia nata Deo.
Est constantis opus durum quin ampla corona,
Spes perit illius qui recidivus erit.
Temporibus duris frigent pietatis amici
Vani: sinceri se renovare solent*
Talis erat vivus Barnardistonus, and inter
Omnes emicuit vir bonitatis amans,
Nathaniel vivus fuit, expers fraud doloque
Sincerus, constans in pietate fuit.
Funus justa petit, justum hunc plorare decebit
Ne plorate nimis, non decet iste dolor.
Dum vixit Christi valde est gavisus amore,
Cum Domino moriens percupit esse suo.
Non sibi sed Christo vixit, nunc mortuus ipse,
Cum Christo coelis gaudia summa sapit.
Ad Lectorem.
En perit justus, perit imbrobusque
Sort communi perit omnis, ecce
Vanitas mundi, cito transit ejus
Gloria fallax.
Dum viges fac ut sapas superna,
Possidens mundum quasi non haberes,
Est pio terris peregrina coelis
Vita perennis.
Pet. St. Hill.

Justa Nathanieli Barnardistono Equiti Aurato.
SIccin' abis? O serve Dei ter maxim, splendour
Et columen patriae, and religionis honor.
Heu! nos cur dubio rerum sub turbine linquis,
Turbatur mediis, publica puppis aquis.
Forsitan ingratum quod sese praebuit orbis,
Praemia nec meritis aequiparanda dedit,
Vel te subducis dum transit iniqua tyrannis
Caelitus ereptus, quod super astra regas?
Irrita vota forent terris obstante caterva,
Sed fient coelis omnia quaeque velis.
Te te prisca fides, teque ipsa Ecclesia poscit
Patronum, fer opem, jam celerato pedem.
Quid stas? at cadis heu! Deus optime fersque refersque
Gloria quod dederis sit tribuenda tibi.
Subtrahis heu nobis, Deus optime quodque dediste,
Quod tibi cum placeat, gloria summa tibi.
Abstinet a lacrymis quis jam? turgentia guttis
Lumina quis non fert? nocte dieque fluunt.
Ac veluti fierent modo lumina flumina; cordum
Hinc gemitus, dolor hinc, quod pius ille jacet.
Qui steteras a part Dei, dum vivus adesses,
Mortuus aethereas ingrediare domos.
Miles ut emeritus Christi splendescis honor,
Coeptis susceptis glorificando Deum.
Perditur extremus tuus hand orabilis hostis,
Mors Christi Domini quod teneare fide.
Ergo praestiteris cum quod Deus imperat, euge!
In cameram Domini possis inire Dei.
Offert se nobis Israelitica nubes,
Part priore nigrens, posteriore nitens.
Quod sis sublatus sequitur nigredo superstes,
Quod tua progenies emicat, inde nitor.
Ecce triumphantem jam spiritualibus armis,
Non secus ac Christum tu, sequar ipse ducem.
Jo. French. Art. Mag.

Carmen funebre in obitum clarissimi viri D. Nathaniel Barnardiston. equitis
Aur.
OCcubuit clarus claro de stemmate natus
Barnardistonus, gloria certa suis;
Gloria certa suis, magis an genere an pietate
Emicuit quaeras: clarus utroque fuit.
Sanguinis en quanto fuerat dignatus honor,
Mentis candores pingere nemo potest.
Effigiem verae virtutis nobilitatis
Candoris nivei religionis babes.
Flete viri, lugete senes, plorate puellae,
Pulpita maesta, sacri funera flete viri.
Nos res lugemus nostras, Ecclesia luget,
Interitum deflet patria maesta tuum.
Te nobis vitia and mores rapuere maligni,
In coelis virtus te tua sancta locat:
Terra tegit corpus, men's aureo regnat Olympo,
Fama Anglos inter celsa perennis erit.
Nath. Eyres.

In obitum Illustrissimi Domini, D. Nath. Barnardiston, Equitis Aurati.
PRo dolor! insignis succumbit gloria nostri,
Nobilium splendour, justitiaeque decus.
Spes dulcis Patriae decrescit te moriente,
Te vivente, tuo lumine tuta fuit.
Aegrite, ^udique carent, and carcere clausi;
His data non tarda sunt tua dona manu.
Musarum Pater es, qui sit, post funera Patris
Praeterea vereor nullus adesse velit.
Fulgida stella cadit non ultra credita terrae
Immeritae, at coelis jam quoque fix a manet.
Verus amor, spes firma, fidesque insignia Christi,
Omnia florebant pectore clausa tuo.
Inque oculis charites habitant and grata venustas,
Nec minor es proavis tu pietate tuis.
Coelitus haec bona te sanctum fecere beatum,
Et nunc in coelis praemia digna capis.
Te lugeant omnes, lacrymis sint undique sparsi,
Vestitus nigros induat omnis amans.
Qui color albus erat, nunc est contrarius albo:
Jam, jam, conveniet luctibus ille color.
Haec ego; dum laudant alii tua facta, tuasque
Ingenio lauds uberiore canunt.
Rob. Hobart.

An EPITAPH. NATHANIEL BARNARDISTON. Anagram. And Art Is In An Noble Heart.
A Generous Knight and Noble Heart lies here*
In The Art of living well, he had no Peer.
A true Nathaniel, and void of guile.
Stay and admire ( Reader) but a while,
Here Barnardiston lies, our loss bemoan
With brinish Tears, as does this weeping Stone:
Here lies his worst, in Heaven's his better part.
True worth, And Art Is In An Noble Heart.
Sylvanus Morgan.

FINIS.

