Fragmenta Aurea.

A Collection of all THE Incomparable Pieces,

WRITTEN By Sir JOHN SVCKLING.

And published by a Friend to perpetuate his memory.

Printed by his own Copies.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Sign of the Princes Arms in St Paul's Churchyard MDCXLVI.

Obijt anno

Aetatis suae 28.

SUCKLIN whose numbers could invite
Alike to wonder and delight
And with new spirit did inspire
The Thespian Scene and Delphick Lyre;
Is thus expressed in either part
Above the humble reach of art;
Drawn by the Pencill here you find
His Form* by his own Pen his mind.
W. Marshall fecit.



To the READER.
WHile Sucklins name is in the forehead of this Book, these Poems can want no
preparation: It had been a prejudice to Posterity they should have slept
longer, and an injury to his own ashes. They that conversed with him alive, and
truly, (under which notion I comprehend only knowing Gentlemen, his soul being
transcendent, and incommunicable to others, but by reflection) will honor
these posthume Idaea's of their friend: And if any have lived in so much
darkness, as not to have known so great an Ornament of our Age, by looking
upon these Remains with Civility and Understanding, they may timely yet
repent, and be forgiven.

In this Age of Paper-prostitutions, a man may buy the reputation of some
Authors into the price of their Volume; but know, the Name that leads into
this Elysium, is sacred to Art and Honor, and no man that is not excellent in
both, is qualified a Competent Judge: For when Knowledge is allowed, yet
Education in the Censure of a Gentleman, requires as many descents, as goes to
make one; And he that is bold upon his unequal Stock, to traduce this Name, or
Learning, will deserve to be condemned again into Ignorance his Original
sin, and dye in it.

But I keep back the Ingenuous Reader, by my unworthy Preface: The gate is
open, and thy soul invited to a Garden of ravishing variety, admire his wit,
that created these for thy delight, while I withdraw into a shade, and
contemplate who must follow.

POEMS, etc.

Written by Sir JOHN SUCKLING.

Printed by his own Copy.

The Lyrick Poems were set in Music by Mr. Henry Laws, Gent. of the Kings
Chapel, and one of His Majesty's Private Music.

LONDON, Printed by Ruth Raworth for Humphrey Mosely, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

On New Years day 1640. To the KING.
1.
AWake (great Sir) the Sun shines here,
Gives all Your Subjects a New-yeer,
Only we stay till you appear,
For thus by us Your Power is understood,
He may make fair days, You must make them good.
Awake, awake,
and take
Such Presents as poor men can make,
They can add little unto bliss
who cannot wish.
2.
May no ill vapor cloud the sky,
Bold storms invade the Soveraigntie,
But gales of joy, so fresh, so high;
That You may think Heaven sent to try this year
What sail, or burden, a Kings mind could bear.
Awake, awake, etc.
3.
May all the discords in Your State
(Like those in Music we create)
Be governed at so wise a rate,
That what would of it self sound harsh, or fright,
May be so tempered that it may delight.
Awake, awake, etc.
4.
What Conquerors from battles find,
Or Lovers when their Doves are kind,
Take up henceforth our Masters mind,
Make such strange Rapes upon the place, 't may be
No longer joy there, but an ecstasy.
Awake, awake, etc.
5.
May every pleasure and delight
That has or does your sense invite
Double this year, save those o'th night:
For such a Marriage Bed must know no more
Then repetition of what was before.
Awake, awake,
and take
Such Presents as poor men can make,
They can add little unto bliss
who cannot wish.
Loving and Beloved.
1.
THere never yet was honest man
That ever drove the trade of love;
It is impossible, nor can
Integrity our ends promove:
^or Kings and Lovers are alike in this
That their chief art in reign dissembling is.
2.
Here we are loved, and there we love,
Good nature now and passion strive
Which of the two should be above,
And laws unto the other give.
o we false fire with art sometimes discover,
and the true fire with the same art do cover.
3.
What Rack can Fancy find so high?
Here we must Court, and here engage,
Though in the other place we die.
Oh! it is torture all, and cozenage;
And which the harder is I cannot tell,
To hide true love, or make false love look well.
4.
Since it is thus, God of desire,
Give me my honesty again,
And take thy brands back, and thy fire;
I Am weary of the State I Am in:
Since (if the very best should now befall)
Loves Triumph, must be Honors Funeral.
1.
IF when Don Cupids dart
Does wound a heart,
we hide our grief
and shun relief;
The smart increases on that score;
For wounds unsearcht but ranckle more.
2.
Then if we whine, look pale,
And tell our tale,
men are in pain
for us again;
So, neither speaking does become
The Lovers state, nor being dumb.
3.
When this I do descry,
Then thus think I,
love is the fart
of every heart.
It pains a man when 't is kept close,
And others does offend, when 't is let loose.
A Sessions of the Poets.
A Session was held the other day*
And Apollo himself was at it (they say)
The Laurel that had been so long reserved,
Was now to be given to him best deserved.
And
Therefore the wits of the Town came thither,
T was strange to see how they flocked together,
Each strongly confident of his own way,
Thought to gain the Laurel away that day.
There Seldom, and he sat hard by the chair;
Weniman not far off, which was very fair;
Sands with Townsend, for they kept no order;
Digby and Shillingsworth a little further:
And
There was Lucans Translator too, and he
That makes God speak so big in's Poetry;
Selwin and Walter, and Bartlets both the brothers;
Jack Vaughan and Porter, and diverse others.
The first that broke silence was good old Ben,
Prepared before with Canary wine,
And he told them plainly he deserved the Bays,
For his were called Works, where others were but Plays.
And
Bid them remember how he had purged the Stage
Of errors, that had lasted many an Age,
And he hopes they did not think the silent Woman,
The Fox, and the Alchymist out done by no man.
Apollo stopped him there, and bade him not go on,
'Twas merit, he said, and not presumption
Must carry't; at which Ben turned about,
And in great choler offered to go out:
But
Those that were there thought it not fit
To discontent so ancient a wit;
And therefore Apollo called him back again,
And made him mine host of his own new Inn.
Tom Carew was next, but he had a fault
That would not well stand with a Laureat;
His Muse was hard bound, and the issue of's brain
Was seldom brought forth but with trouble and pain.
And
All that were present there did agree,
A Laureat Muse should be easy and free,
Yet sure 'twas not that, but 'twas thought that his Grace
Considered he was well he had a Cup-bearers place.
Will. Davenant ashamed of a foolish mischance
That he had got lately traveling in France,
Modestly hoped the handsomnesse of's Muse
Might any deformity about him excuse.
And
Surely the Company would have been content,
If they could have found any President;
But in all their Records either in Verse or Prose,
There was not one Laureat without a nose.
To Will Bartlet sure all the wits meant well,
But first they would see how his snow would sell:
Will smiled and swore in their judgments they went less,
That concluded of merit upon success.
Suddenly taking his place again,
He gave way to Selwin, who straight stepped in;
But alas! he had been so lately a wit,
That Apollo hardly knew him yet.
Toby Mathews (pox on him) how came he there?
Was whispering nothing in some-bodies ear:
When he had the honor to be named in Court,
But Sir, you may thank my Lady Carleil for it:
For had not her care furnished you out
With something of handsome, without all doubt
You and your sorry Lady Muse had been
In the number of those that were not let in.
In haste from the Court two or three came in,
And they brought letters (forsooth) from the Queen,
'Twas discreetly done too, for if they had come
Without them, they had scarce been let into the room.
Suckling next was called, but did not appear,
But strait one whisperd Apollo in the 'ear,
That of all men living he cared not for it,
He loved not the Muses so well as his sport;
And prized black eyes, or a lucky hit
At bowls, above all the Trophies of wit;
But Apollo was angry, and publicly said
'Twere fit that a fine were set upon's head.
Wat Montague now stood forth to his trial,
And did not so much as suspect a denial;
But witty Apollo asked him first of all
If he understood his own Pastoral.
For if he could do it, 't would plainly appear
He understood more than any man there,
And did merit the Bays above all the rest,
But the Mounsier was modest, and silence confessed.
During these troubles in the Court was hid
One that Apollo soon mist, little Cid;
And having spied him, called him out of the throng,
And advised him in his ear not to write so strong.
Murrey was summoned, but 't was urged that he
Was Chief already of another Company.
Hales set by himself most gravely did smile
To see them about nothing keep such a coil;
Apollo had spied him, but knowing his mind
Past by, and called Faulkland that sat just behind:
But
He was of late so gone with Divinity,
That he had almost forgot his Poetry,
Though to say the truth (and Apollo did know it)
He might have been both his Priest and his Poet.
At length who but an Alderman did appear,
At which Will. Davenant began to swear;
But wiser Apollo bade him draw nigher,
And when he was mounted a little higher
Openly declared that the best sign
Of good store of wit 's to have good store of coin,
And without a Syllable more or less said,
He put the Laurel on the Aldermans head.
At this all the wits were in such a maze
That for a good while they did nothing but gaze
One upon another, not a man in the place
But had discontent writ in great in his face.
Only the small Poets cleared up again,
Out of hope as 't was thought of borrowing,
But sure they were out* for he forfeits his Crown
When he lends any Poets about the Town.
Loves World.
IN each man's heart that does begin
To love, there is ever framed within
A little world, for so I found,
When first my passion reason drowned.
Earth,
Instead of Earth unto this frame,
I had a faith was still the same,
For to be right it does behoove
It be as that, fixed and not move;
Yet as the Earth may sometime shake
(For winds shut up will cause a quake)
So, often jealousy, and fear,
Sun,
Stolen into mine, cause tremblings there.
My Flora was my Sun, for as
One Sun, so but one Flora was:
All other faces borrowed hence
Their light and grace, as stars do thence.
Moon
My hopes I call my Moon; for they
Inconstant still, were at no stay;
But as my Sun inclined to me,
Or more or less were sure to be:
Sometimes it would be full, and then
Oh! too too soon decrease again;
Eclip'st sometimes, that 't would so fall
There would appear no hope at all.
Stars,
My thoughts 'cause infinite they be
Must be those many Stars we see;
Fixed Planets.
Of which some wandered at their will,
But most on her were fixed still.
Element of fire.
My burning flame and hot desire
Must be the Element of fire,
Which has as yet so secret been
That it as that was never seen:
No Kitching fire, nor eating flame,
But innocent, hot but in name;
A fire that is starved when fed, and gone
When too much fuel is laid on.
But as it plainly does appear,
That fire subsists by being near
The Moons bright Orb, so I believe
Ours does, for hope keeps love alive.
Air.
My fancy was the Air, most free
And full of mutability,
Big with Chimera's, vapors here
Innumerable hatched as there.
Sea.
The Sea's my mind, which calm would be
Were it from winds (my passions) free;
But out alas! no Sea I find
Is troubled like a Lovers mind.
Within it Rocks and Shallows be,
Despair and fond credulity.
But in this World it were good reason
We did distinguish Time and Season;
Her presence then did make the Day,
And Night shall come when she is away.
Winter.
Long absence in far distant place
Creates the Winter, and the space
She tarryed with me; well I might
Summer.
Call it my Summer of delight.
Diversity of weather came
From what she did, and thence had name;
Sometimes sh'would smile, that made it fair;
And when she laughed, the Sun shined clear.
Sometimes sh'would frown, and sometimes weep,
So Clouds and Rain their turns do keep;
Sometimes again sh'would be all ice,
Extremely cold, extremely nice.
But soft my Muse, the world is wide,
And all at once was not descride:
It may fall out some honest Lover
The rest hereafter will discover.
Song.
WHy so pale and wan fond Lover?
prithee why so pale?
Will, when looking well cannot move her
looking ill prevail?
prithee why so pale?
Why so dull and mute young sinner?
prithee why so mute?
Will* when speaking well cannot win her,
saying nothing do it?
prithee why so mute?
Quit, quit for shame, this will not move,
this cannot take her;
If of her self she will not love,
nothing can make her:
the devil take her.
Sonnet. I.
1.
Do see how unregarded now
that piece of beauty passes?
There was a time when I did vow
to that alone;
but mark the fate of faces;
That red and white works now no more on me
Then if it could not charm or I not see.
2.
And yet the face continues good,
and I have still desires,
Am still the self same flesh and blood,
as apt to melt
and suffer from those fires;
Oh! some kind power unriddle where it lies,
Whether my heart be faulty, or her eyes?
3.
She every day her Man does kill,
and I as often die;
Neither her power then, nor my will
can questioned be,
what is the mystery?
Sure Beauties Empires, like to greater States
Have certain periods set, and hidden fates.
Sonnet. II.
1.
OF thee (kind boy) I ask no red and white
to make up my delight,
no odd becoming graces,
Black eyes, or little know-not-whats, in faces;
Make me but mad enough, give me good store
Of Love, for her I Court,
I ask no more,
*It Is love in love that makes the sport.
2.
There Is no such thing as that we beauty call,
it is mere cousenage all;
for though some long ago
Like't certain colors mingled so and so,
That does not tie me now from choosing new,
If I a fancy take
To black and blue,
That fancy does it beauty make.
3.
It Is not the meat, but it is the appetite
makes eating a delight,
and if I like one dish
More then another, that a Pheasant is;
What in our watches, that in us is found,
So to the height and nick
We up be wound,
No matter by what hand or trick.
Sonnet III.
1.
OH! for some honest Lovers ghost,
Some kind unbodied post
Sent from the shades below.
I strangely long to know
Whether the nobler Chaplets wear,
Those that their mistress scorn did bear,
Or those that were used kindly.
2.
For what-so-e're they tell us here
To make those sufferings dear,
'Twill there I fear be found,
That to the being crowned,
To Have loved alone will not suffice,
Unless we also have been wise,
And have our Loves enjoyed.
3.
What posture can we think him in,
That here unlov'd again
Departs, and's thither gone
Where each sits by his own?
Or how can that Elysium be
Where I my Mistress still must see
Circled in others Arms?
4.
For there the Judges all are just,
And Sophonisba must
Be his whom she held dear;
Not his who loved her here:
The sweet Philoclea since she died
Lies by her Pirocles his side,
Not by Amphialus.
5.
Some Bays (perchance) or Myrtle bough
For difference crowns the brow
Of those kind souls that were
The noble Martyrs here;
And if that be the only odds
(As who can tell) ye kinder Gods,
Give me the Woman here.
To his much honored, the Lord Lepinton, upon his Translation of Malvezzi his
Romulus and Tarquin.
IT is so rare and new a thing to see
Ought that belongs to young Nobility
In print (but their own clothes) that we must praise
You as we would do those first show the ways
To Arts or to new Worlds: You have begun;
Taught traveled youth what'tis it should have done:
For It has indeed too strong a custom bin
To carry out more wit then we bring in.
You have done otherwise, brought home (my Lord)
The choicest things famed Countries do afford*
Malvezzi by your means is English grown,
And speaks our tongue as well now as his own.
Malvezzi, he: whom it is as hard to praise
To merit, as to imitate his ways.
He does not show us Rome great suddenly,
As if the Empire were a Tympany,
But gives it natural growth, tells how, and why
The little body grew so large and high.
Describes each thing so lively, that we are
Concerned our selves before we are aware:
And at the wars they and their neighbors waged,
Each man is present still, and still engaged.
Like a good Prospective he strangely brings
Things distant to us: and in these two Kings
We see what made greatness. And what 't has been
Made that greatness contemptible again.
And all this not tediously derived,
But like to Worlds in little Maps contrived.
It Is he that does the Roman Dame restore,
Makes Lucrece chaster for her being whore;
Gives her a kind Revenge for Tarquins sin;
For ravished first, she ravisheth again.
She says such fine things after't, that we must
In spite of virtue thank foul Rape and Lust,
Since't was the cause no woman would have had,
Though she is of Lucrece side, Tarquin less bad.
But stay; like one that thinks to bring his friend
A mile or two, and sees the journeys end,
I straggle on too far: long graces do
But keep good stomachs off that would fall too.
Against Fruition.
STay here fond youth and ask no more, be wise,
Knowing too much long since lost Paradise;
The virtuous joys thou have, thou would should still
Last in their pride; and would not take it ill
If rudely from sweet dreams (and for a toy)
Tho'wert wak't? he wakes himself that does enjoy.
Fruition adds no new wealth, but destroys,
And while it pleases much the palate, cloyes;
Who thinks he shall be happyer for that,
As reasonably might hope he might grow fat
By eating to a Surfeit, this once past,
What relishes? even kisses loose their taste.
Urge not it is necessary, alas! we know
The homeliest thing which mankind does is so;
The World is of a vast extent we see,
And must be peopled; Children there must be;
So must bread too; but since there are enough
Born to the drudgery, what need we plough?
Women enjoyed (what e're before to have been)
Are like Romances read, or sights once seen:
Fruition's dull, and spoils the Play much more
Than if one read or knew the plot before;
It Is expectation makes a blessing dear,
Heaven were not heaven, if we knew what it were.
And as in Prospects we are there pleased most
Where something keeps the eye from being lost,
And leaves us room to guess, so here restraint
Holds up delight, that with excess would faint.
They who know all the wealth they have, are poor,
He Is only rich that cannot tell his store.
1.
THere never yet was woman made,
nor shall, but to be cursed;
And oh* that I (fond I) should first
of any Lover
This truth at my own charge to other fools discover.
2.
You that have promised to your selves
propriety in love,
Know women's hearts like straws do move,
and what we call
Their sympathy, is but love to jett in general,
3.
All mankind are alike to them;
and though we iron find
That never with a Loadstone joined,
it is not the irons fault,
It is because the loadstone yet was never brought.
4.
If where a gentle Be has fallen
and labored to his power,
A new succeeds not to that Flower,
but passes by;
It Is to be thought, the gallant elsewhere loads his thigh.
5.
For still the flowers ready stand,
one buzzes round about,
One lights, one tastes, gets in, gets out
all, all ways use them,
Till all their sweets are gone, and all again refuse them.
Song.
1.
NO, no, fair Heretic, it needs must be
But an ill love in me,
And worse for thee;
For were it in my power,
To love thee now this hour
More then I did the last;
I would then so fall
I might not love at all;
Love that can flow, and can admit increase,
Admits as well an ebb, and may grow less.
2.
True Love is still the same; the Torrid Zones,
And those more frigid ones
It must not know:
For love grown cold or hot,
Is lust, or friendship, not
The thing we have.
For that is a flame would dye
Held down, or up too high:
Then think I love more then I can express,
And would love more could I but love thee less.
To my Friend Will. Davenant; upon his Poem of Madagascar.
WHat mighty Princes Poets are? those things
The great ones stick at, and our very Kings
Lay down, they venture on; and with great ease,
Discover, conquer, what, and where they please.
Some Phlegmatic Sea-Captain, would have staid
For money now, or victuals; not have waid
Anchor without 'em; Thou (Will) do not stay
So much as for a wind, but go away,
Land'st, view'st the Country; fight'st, put'st all to rout,
Before another could be putting out!
And now the news in Town is; Dav'nant's come
From Madagascar, Fraught with Laurel home;
And welcome (Will) for the first time, but prithee
In thy next Voyage, bring the gold too with thee.
To my Friend Will. Davenant on his other Poems.
THou have redeemed us, Will. and future Times
Shall not account unto the Age's crimes
Dearth of pure wit: since the great Lord of it
(Done) parted hence, no Man has ever writ
So near him, in's own way: I would commend
Particulars, but then, how should I end
Without a Volume? Every line of thine
Would ask (to praise it right) twenty of mine.
1.
LOve, Reason, Hate, did once bespeak
Three mates to play at barley-break;
Love, Folly took; and Reason, Fancy;
And Hate consorts with Pride; so dance they:
Love coupled last, and so it fell
That Love and Folly were in hell.
2.
They break, and Love would Reason meet,
But Hate was nimbler on her feet;
Fancy looks for Pride, and thither
Hyes, and they two hug together:
Yet this new coupling still does tell
That Love and Folly were in hell.
3.
The rest do break again, and Pride
Has now got Reason on her side;
Hate and Fancy meet, and stand
Untoucht by Love in Folly's hand;
Folly was dull, but Love ran well,
So Love and Folly were in hell.
Song.
1.
I Prithee spare me, gentle Boy,
Press me no more for that slight toy,
That foolish trifle of an heart,
I swear it will not do its part,
Though thou do thine, employ'st thy power and art.
2.
For through long custom it has known
The little secrets, and is grown
Sullen and wise, will have its will,
And like old Hawks pursues that still
That makes least sport, flies only where 't can kill.
3.
Some youth that has not made his story,
Will think perchance the pain's the glory;
And mannerly sit out Loves Feast;
I shall be carving of the best,
Rudely call for the last course before the rest.
4.
And oh! when once that course is past,
How short a time the Feast does last;
Men rise away, and scarce say grace,
Or civilly once thank the face
That did invite; but seek another place.
Upon my Lady Carliles walking in Hampton Court garden.
Dialogue. T. C. I. S. Thom. Did thou not find the place inspired,
And flowers as if they had desired
No other Sun, start from their beds,
And for a sight steal out their heads?
Heardst thou not music when she talked?
And did not find that as she walked
She threw rare perfumes all about
Such as bean*blossoms newly out,
Or chafed spices give? --

J. S. I must confess those perfumes (Tom)
I did not smell; nor found that from
Her passing by, ought sprung up new,
The flowers had all their birth from you;
For I passed over the self same walk,
And did not find one single stalk
Of any thing that was to bring
This unknown after after spring.

Thom. Dull and insensible, could see
A thing so near a Deity
Move up and down, and feel no change?

J. S. None, and so great, were alike strange,
I had my Thoughts, but not your way,
All are not born (Sir) to the Bay;
Alas! Tom, I am flesh and blood,
And was consulting how I could
In spite of masks and hoods descry
The parts denied unto the eye;
I was undoing all she wore,
And had she walked but one turn more,
Eve in her first state had not been
More naked, or more plainly seen.

Thom. 'T was well for thee she left the place,
There is great danger in that face;
But had thou viewed her leg and thigh,
And upon that discovery
Searched after parts that are more dear
(As Fancy seldom stops so near)
No time or age had ever seen
So lost a thing as thou had been.

To Mr. Davenant for Absence.
WOnder not if I stay not here,
Hurt Lovers (like to wounded Deer)
Must shift the place* for standing still
Leaves too much time to know our ill:
Where there is a Traitor eye
That lets in from the enemy
All that may supplant an heart,
It Is time the Chief should use some Art;
Who parts the object from the sense,
Wisely cuts off intelligence.
O how quickly men must die,
Should they stand all Loves Battery;
Persindaes eyes great mischief do,
So do we know the Canon too;
But men are safe at distance still,
Where they reach not, they cannot kill.
Love is a fit, and soon is past,
Ill diet only makes it last;
Who is still looking, gazing ever,
Drinks wine in the very height of the Fever.
Against Absence.
MY whining Lover, what needs all
These vows of life Monastical?
Despairs, retirements, jealousies,
And subtle sealing up of eyes?
Come, come, be wise; return again,
A finger burnt's as great a pain;
And the same Physic, self same art
Cures that, would cure a flaming heart:
Would thou whilst yet the fire is in
But hold it to the fire again.
If you (Dear Sir) the plague have got,
What matter is it whether or not
They let you in the same house lie,
Or carry you abroad to die?
He whom the plague, or Love once takes,
Every Room a Pesthouse makes.
Absence were good if it were but sense
That only holds th'Intelligence:
Pure love alone no hurt would do,
But love is love, and magic too;
Brings a mistress a thousand miles,
And the sleight of looks beguiles,
Makes her entertain thee there,
And the same time your Rival here;
And (oh! the devil) that she should
Say finer things now then she would;
So nobly Fancy does supply
What the dull sense lets fall and die.
Beauty like man's old enemy's known
To tempt him most when he is alone:
The air of some wild o'regrown wood,
Or pathlesse Grove is the Boys food.
Return then back, and feed thine eye,
Feed all thy senses, and feast high.
Spare diet is the cause Love lasts,
For Surfets sooner kill than Fasts.
A Supplement of an imperfect Copy of Verses of Mr. Will. Shakespears, By the
Author.
1.
ONe of her hands, one of her cheeks lay under,
Cozening the pillow of a lawful kiss,
Which therefore swelled, and seemed to part asunder,
As angry to be robbed of such a bliss:
The one looked pale, and for revenge did long,
While the other blushed, cause it had done the wrong.
2.
Out of the bed the other fair hand was
On a green satin quilt, whose perfect white
Looked like a Dazie in a field of grass,
Thus far Shakespeare.
*And showed like unmelt snow unto the sight,
There lay this pretty perdue, safe to keep
The rest oth' body that lay fast asleep.
3.
Her eyes (and therefore it was night) close laid,
Strove to imprison beauty till the morn,
But yet the doors were of such fine stuff made,
That it broke through, and showed it self in scorn.
Throwing a kind of light about the place,
which turned to smiles still as't came near her face.
4.
Her beams (which some dull men called hair) divided
Part with her cheeks, part with her lips did sport,
But these, as rude, her breath put by still; some
Wiselyer downwards sought, but falling short,
Curled back in rings, and seemed to turn again
To bite the part so unkindly held them in.
THat none beguiled be by times quick flowing,
Lovers have in their hearts a clock still going;
For though Time be nimble, his motions are quicker
and thicker
where Love has his notions:
Hope is the main spring on which moves desire,
And these do the less wheels, fear, joy, inspire;
the balance is thought, evermore clicking
and striking,
and never giving ore
Occasions the hand which still's moving round,
Till by it the Critical hour may be found,
And when that falls out, it will strike kisses,
strange blisses,
and what you best like.
1.
It Is now since I sat down before
That foolish Fort, a heart;
(Time strangely spent) a Year, and more,
And still I did my part:
2.
Made my approaches, from her hand
Unto her lip did rise,
And did already understand
The language of her eyes.
3.
Proceeded on with no less Art,
My Tongue was Engineer;
I thought to undermine the heart
By whispering in the ear.
4.
When this did nothing, I brought down
Great Canon-oaths, and shot
A thousand thousand to the Town,
And still it yielded not.
5.
I then resolved to starve the place
By cutting off all kisses,
Praising and gazing on her face,
And all such little blisses.
6.
To draw her out, and from her strength,
I drew all batteries in:
And brought my self to lie at length
As if no siege had been.
7.
When I had done what man could do,
And thought the place mine own,
The Enemy lay quiet too,
And smiled at all was done.
8.
I sent to know from whence, and where,
These hopes, and this relief?
A Spy informed, Honor was there,
And did command in chief.
9.
March, march (quoth I) the word straight give,
Lets lose no time, but leave her:
That Giant upon air will live,
And hold it out for ever.
10.
To such a place our Camp remove
As will no siege abide;
I hate a fool that starves her Love
Only to feed her pride.
Upon my Lord Brohalls Wedding.
Dialogue. S. B. S. IN bed dull man?
When Love and Hymen's Revels are begun,
And the Chnrch Ceremonis past and done.

B. Why who is gone mad to day?

S. Dull Heretic, thou would say,
He that is gone to Heaven's gone astray;
Brohall our gallant friend
Is gone to Church as Martyrs to the fire:
Who marry differ but i'th'end,
Since both do take
The hardest way to what they most desire:
Nor staid he till the formal Priest had done,
But ere that part was finished, his begun:
Which did reveal
The have and eagerness men have to seal
That long to tell the money.
A sprigg of Willow in his hat he wore,
(The loosers badge and liv'ry heretofore)
But now so ordered that it might be taken
By lookers on, forsaking as forsaken.
And now and then
A careless smile broke forth, which spoke his mind,
And seemed to say she might have been more kind.
When this (dear Jack) I saw
Thought I
How weak is Lovers Law?
The bonds made there (like gypsies knots) with ease
Are fast and loose, as they that hold them please.
But was the fair Nymphs praise or power less
That led him captive now to happiness?
'Cause she did not a foreign aid despise,
But enterr'd breaches made by others eyes:
The Gods forbid,
There must be some to shoot and batter down,
Others to force and to take in the Town.
To Hawks (good Jack) and hearts
There may
Be several ways and Arts;
One watches them perchance, and makes them tame:
Another, when they are ready, shows them game.

Sir,
WHether these lines do find you out,
Putting or clearing of a doubt;
(Whether Predestination,
Or reconciling three in one,
Or the unriddling how men die,
And live at once eternally,
Now take you up) know it is decreed
You straight bestride the College Steed:
Leave Socinus and the Schoolmen,
(Which Jack Bond swears do but fool men)
And come to Town; it is fit you show
Your self abroad, that men may know
(What e're some learned men have guest)
That Oracles are not yet ceas't:
There you shall find the wit, and wine
Flowing alike, and both divine:
Dishes, with names not known in books,
And less amongst the Colledge-Cooks,
With sauce so pregnant that you need
Not stay till hunger bids you feed.
The sweat of learned Johnsons brain,
And gentle Shakespeare's eas'er strain,
A hackney-coach conveys you to,
In spite of all that rain can do:
And for your eighteen pence you sit
The Lord and Judge of all fresh wit.
News in one day as much we have here
As serves all Windsor for a year,
And which the Carrier brings to you,
After 't has here been found not true.
Then think what Company's designed
To meet you here, men so refined,
Their very common talk at board,
Makes wise, or mad a young Court-Lord,
And makes him capable to be
Umpire in's Fathers Company.
Where no disputes nor forced defense
Of a man's person for his sense
Take up the time; all strive to be
Masters of truth, as victory:
And where you come, I Would boldly swear
A Synod might as easily err.
Against Fruition.
Fie upon hearts that burn with mutual fire;
I hate two minds that breath but one desire:
Were I to curse th'unhallow'd sort of men,
I Would wish them to love, and be loved again.
Love's a Camelion, that lives on mere air;
And surfets when it comes to grosser fare:
It Is petty Jealousies, and little fears,
Hopes joined with doubts, and joys with April tears,
That crowns our Love with pleasures: these are gone
When once we come to full Fruition.
Like waking in a morning, when all night
Our fancy has been fed with true delight.
Oh! what a stroke't would be! Sure I should die,
Should I but hear my mistress once say, I.
That monster expectation feeds too high
For any Woman e're to satisfy:
And no brave Spirit ever cared for that
Which in Down-beds with ease he could come at.
She Is but an honest whore that yields, although
She be as cold as ice, as pure as snow:
He that enjoys her has no more to say
But keep us Fasting if you will have us pray.
Then fairest Mistress, hold the power you have,
By still denying what we still do crave:
In keeping us in hopes strange things to see
That never were, nor are, nor e're shall be.
A Ballade.
Upon a Wedding.
I Tell thee Dick where I have been,
Where I the rarest things have seen;
Oh things without compare!
Such sights again cannot be found
In any place on English ground,
Be it at Wake, or Fair.
At Charing-Crosse, hard by the way
Where we (thou know) do sell our Hay,
There is a house with stairs;
And there did I see coming down
Such folk as are not in our Town,
Vorty at least, in Pairs.
Amongst the rest, one Pest'lent fine,
(His beard no bigger though then thine)
Walked on before the rest:
Our Landlord looks like nothing to him:
The King (God bless him) 'twould undo him,
Should he go still so dressed.
At Course-a-Park, without all doubt,
He should have first been taken out
By all the Maids in the Town:
Though lusty Roger there had been,
Or little George upon the Green,
Or Vincent of the Crown.
But wot you what? the youth was going
To make an end of all his woing;
The Parson for him staid:
Yet by his leave (for all his haste)
He did not so much wish all past,
(Perchance) as did the maid.
The maid (and thereby hangs a tale)
For such a maid no Whitson-ale
Could ever yet produce:
No Grape that is kindly ripe, could be
So round, so plump, so soft as she,
Nor half so full of Juice.
Her finger was so small, the Ring
Would not stay on which they did bring,
It was too wide a Peck:
And to say truth (for out it must)
It looked like the great Collar (just)
About our young Colts neck.
Her feet beneath her Petticoat,
Like little mice stole in and out,
As if they feared the light:
But oh! she dances such a way!
No Sun upon an Easter day
Is half so fine a sight.
He would have kissed her once or twice,
But she would not, she was nice,
She would not do it in sight,
And then she looked as who should say
I will do what I list to day;
And you shall do it at night.
Her Cheeks so rare a white was on,
No Dazy makes comparison,
(Who sees them is undone)
For streaks of red were mingled there,
Such as are on a Katherne Pear,
(The side that is next the Sun.)
Her lips were red, and one was thin,
Compared to that was next her chin;
(Some Be had stung it newly.)
But (Dick) her eyes so guard her face;
I durst no more upon them gaze,
Then on the Sun in July.
Her mouth so small when she does speak,
Thou Would swear her teeth her words did break,
That they might passage get,
But she so handled still the matter,
They came as good as ours, or better,
And are not spent a whit.
If wishing should be any sin,
The Parson himself had guilty bin;
(She looked that day so purely,)
And did the youth so often the feat
At night, as some did in conceit,
It would have spoiled him, surely.
Just in the nick the Cook knocked thrice,
And all the waiters in a trice
His summons did obey,
Each serving man with dish in hand,
Marched boldly up, like our Trained Band,
Presented, and away.
When all the meat was on the Table*
What man of knife, or teeth, was able
To stay to be entreated?
And this the very reason was,
Before the Parson could say Grace,
The Company was seated.
The business of the Kitchin's great,
For it is fit that men should eat;
Nor was it there denied:
Passion oh me! how I run on!
There Is that that would be thought upon,
(I trow) besides the Bride.
Now hatts fly off, and youths carrouse;
Healths first go round, and then the house,
The Brides came thick and thick:
And when 'twas named another health,
Perhaps he made it hers by stealth.
(And who could help it? Dick)
Of The sudden up they rise and dance;
Then sit again and sigh, and glance:
Then dance again and kiss:
Thus several ways the time did pass,
Till every Woman wished her place,
And every Man wished his.
By this time all were stolen aside
To counsel and undresse the Bride;
But that he must not know:
But yet 'twas thought he ghest her mind,
And did not mean to stay behind
Above an hour or so.
When in he came (Dick) there she lay
Like new-faln snow melting away,
('It Was time I trow to part)
Kisses were now the only stay,
Which soon she gave, as who would say,
Good Boy! with all my heart.
But just as heavens would have to cross it,
In came the Bridemaids with the Posset:
The Bridegroom eat in spite;
For had he left the Women to it
It would have cost two hours to do it,
Which were too much that night.
At length the candles out and out,
All that they had not done, they do it:
What that is, who can tell?
But I believe it was no more
Then thou and I have done before
With Bridget, and with Nell.
MY dearest Rival, least our Love
Should with excentrique motion move,
Before it learn to go astray,
We Will teach and set it in a way,
And such directions give unto't,
That it shall never wander foot.
Know first then, we will serve as true
For one poor smile, as we would do
If we had what our higher flame,
Or our vainer wish could frame.
Impossible shall be our hope;
And Love shall only have his scope
To join with Fancy now and then,
And think what reason would condemn:
And on these grounds we will love as true,
As if they were most sure t'ensue:
And chastely for these things we will stay,
As if to morrow were the day.
Mean time we two will teach our hearts
In Loves burdens bear their parts:
Thou first shall sigh, and say she is fair;
And I Will still answer, past compare.
Thou shall set out each part o'th face,
While I extol each little grace;
Thou shall be ravished at her wit;
And I, that she so governs it:
Thou shall like well that hand, that eye,
That lip, that look, that majesty;
And in good language them adore:
While I want words, and do it more.
Yea we will sit and sigh a while,
And with soft thoughts some time beguil;
But straight again break out and praise
All we had done before new-waies.
Thus will we do till paler death
Come with a warrant for our breath,
And then whose fate shall be to die
First of us two, by Legacy
Shall all his store bequeath, and give
His love to him that shall survive;
For no one stock can ever serve
To love so much as she will deserve.
Song.
1.
HOnest Lover whosoever,
If in all thy love there ever
Was one wavering thought, if thy flame
Were not still even, still the same:
Know this,
Thou love amiss,
And to love true,
Thou must begin again, and love anew.
2.
If when she appears in the room,
Thou do not quake, and art struck dumb,
And in striving this to cover
Do not speak thy words twice over,
Know this,
Thou love amiss,
And to love true,
Thou must begin again, and love anew.
3.
If fondly thou do not mistake,
And all defects for graces take*
Perswad'st thy self that jeasts are broken,
When she has little or nothing spoken,
Know this,
Thou love amiss,
And to love true,
Thou must begin again, and love anew.
4.
If when thou appear'st to be within,
Thou lett'st not men ask and ask again,
And when thou answer'st, if it be
To what was asked thee properly,
Know this,
Thou love amiss,
And to love true
Thou must begin again, and love anew.
5.
If when thy stomach calls to eat,
Thou cutt'st not fingers 'steed of meat,
And with much gazing on her face
Do not rise hungry from the place,
Know this,
Thou love amiss,
And to love true,
Thou must begin again, and love anew.
6.
If by this thou do discover
That thou art no perfect Lover,
And desiring to love true*
Thou do begin to love anew:
Know this,
Thou love amiss,
And to love true,
Thou must begin again, and love anew.
Upon two Sisters.
BEleev't young Man, I can as easily tell
How many yards and inches it is to hell;
Unriddle all predestination,
Or the nice points we now dispute upon,
Had the three Goddesses been just as fair,
It had not been so easily decided
And sure the apple must have been divided:
It must, it must; he is impudent, dares say
Which is the handsomer till one's away.
And it was necessary it should be so;
Wise Nature did foresee it, and did know
When she had framed the Eldest, that each heart
Must at the first sight feel the blind-god's dart:
And sure as can be, had she made but one,
No plague had been more sure destruction;
For we had liked, loved, burnt to ashes too,
In half the time that we are choosing now:
Variety, and equal objects make
The busy eye still doubtful which to take;
This lip, this hand, this foot, this eye, this face,
The others body, gesture, or her grace:
And whilst we thus dispute which of the two,
We unresolved go out, and nothing do.
He sure is happy'st that has hopes of either,
Next him is he that sees them both together.
To his Rival.
NOw we have taught our Love to know
That it must creep where't cannot go*
And be for once content to live,
Since here it cannot have to thrive;
It will not be amiss t'enquire
What fuel should maintain this fire:
For fires do either flame too high,
Or where they cannot flame, they die.
First then (my half but better heart)
Know this must wholly be her part;
(For thou and I, like Clocks, are wound
Up to the height, and must move round)
She then by still denying what
We fondly crave, shall such a rate
Set on each trifle, that a kiss
Shall come to be the utmost bliss.
Where sparks and fire do meet with tinder,
Those sparks mere fire will still engender:
To make this good, no debt shall be
From service or fidelity;
For she shall ever pay that score,
By only bidding us do more:
So (though she still a niggard be)
In graceing, where none's due, she is free:
The favors she shall cast on us,
(Least we should grow presumptuous)
Shall not with too much love be shown,
Nor yet the common way still done;
But every smile and little glance
Shall look half lent, and half by chance:
The Ribbon, Fan, or Muffe that she
Would should be kept by thee or me,
Should not be given before to many,
But neither thrown to's when there is any;
So that her self should doubtful be
Whether 'twere fortune flung't, or she.
She shall not like the thing we do
Sometimes, and yet shall like it too;
Nor any notice take at all
Of what, we gone, she would extol:
Love she shall feed, but fear to nourish,
For where fear is, love cannot flourish;
Yet live it must, nay must and shall,
While Desdemona is at all:
But when she is gone, then Love shall die,
And in her grave buried lie.
Farewell to Love.
1.
WEll shadowed Landscape, fare-ye-well:
How I have loved you, none can tell,
At least so well
As he that now hates more
Then e're he loved before.
2.
But my dear nothings, take your leave,
No longer must you me deceive,
Since I perceive
All the deceit, and know
Whence the mistake did grow.
3.
As he whose quicker eye does trace
A false star shot to a marked place,
Does run apace,
And thinking it to catch,
A gelly up does snatch.
4.
So our dull souls tasting delight
Far off, by sense, and appetite,
Think that is right
And real good; when yet
It Is but the Counterfeit.
5.
Oh! how I glory now* that I
Have made this new discovery!
Each wanton eye
Enflamed before: no more
Will I increase that score.
6.
If I gaze, now, it is but to see
What manner of deaths-head 'twill be,
When it is free
From that fresh upper skin;
The gazers Joy, and sin.
7.
The Gun and glist'ning which with art
And studi'd method, in each part
Hangs down the heart,
Looks (just) as if, that day
Snails there had crawled the Hay.
8.
The Locks, that curled over each ear be,
Hang like two Master-worms to me,
That (as we see)
Have tasted to the rest
Two holes, where they liked best.
9.
A quick coarse methinks I spy
In every woman; and mine eye,
At passing by,
Check, and is troubled, just
As if it rose from Dust.
10.
They mortify, not heighten me:
These of my sins the Glasses be:
And here I see
How I have loved before.
And so I love no more.
FINIS.
LETTERS To diverse Eminent PERSONAGES: Written on several Occasions,

By Sir JOHN SUCKLING.

Printed by his own Copy.

LONDON, Printed by Ruth Raworth for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

FOrtune and Love have ever been so incompatible, that it is no wonder (Madam)
if having had so much of the one for you, I have ever found so little of the
other for my self; Coming to Town (and having rid as if I had brought
intelligence of a new-landed Enemy to the State) I find you gone the day
before, and with you (Madam) all that is considerable upon the place; for
though you have left behind you, faces whose beauties might well excuse perjury
in others, yet in me they cannot, since to the making that no sin, Loves
Casuists have most rationally resolved, that she for whom we forsake, ought to
be handsomer then the forsaken, which would be here impossible: So that now a
gallerie hung with Titians or Vandikes hand, and a chamber filled with living
Excellence, are the same things to me; and the use that I shall make of that
Sex now, will be no other then that which the wiser sort of Catholics do of
Pictures; at the highest, they but serve to raise my devotion to you: Should a
great Beauty now resolve to take me in (as that is all they think belongs to
it) with the Artillery of her eyes, it would be as vain, as for a Thief to set
upon a new robbed passenger; You Madam) have my heart already, nor can you use it
unkindly but with some injustice, since (besides that it left a good service to
wait on you) it was never known to stay so long, or so willingly before with
any; After all, the wages will not be high; for it has been brought up under
Platonicks, and knows no other way of being paid for service, then by being
commanded more; which truth when you doubt, you have but to send to its master
and

Your humble Servant, J. S.

A disswasion from Love.
Jack,
THough your disease be in the number of those that are better cured with time
then precept, yet since it is lawful for every man to practice upon them that
are forsaken and given over (which I take to be your state) I will adventure to
prescribe to you; and of the innocence of the Physic you shall not need to
doubt, since I can assure you I take it daily my self.

To begin Methodically, I should enjoin you Travel; for Absence does in a kind
remove the cause (removing the object) and answers the Physicians first
Recipez, vomiting and purging; but this would be too harsh, and indeed not
agreeing to my way. I therefore advise you to see her as often as you can, for
(besides that the rarity of visits endears them) this may bring you to surprise
her, and to discover little defects, which though they cure not absolutely, yet
they qualify the fury of the Fever: As near as you can let it be
unseasonably, when she is in sickness, and disorder; for that will let you know
she is mortal, and a Woman, and the last would be enough to a wise man: If you
could draw her to discourse of things she understands not, it would not be
amiss.

Contrive your self often into the Company of the cryed*up Beauties; for if you
read but one book, it will be no wonder if you speak or write that style;
variety will breed distraction, and that will be a kind of diverting the humor.

I would not have you deny your self the little things (for these Agues are
easier cured with Surfets than abstinence) rather (if you can) taste all: for
that (as an old Author says) will let you see That the thing for which we woo,
Is not worth so much ado.
But since that here would be impossible, you must be content to take it where
you can get it. And this for your comfort I must tell you (Jack) that Mistress
and Woman differ no otherwise then Frontiniack and ordinary Grapes: which
though a man loves never so well, yet if he surfeit of the last, he will care
but little for the first.

I would have you leave that foolish humor (Jack) of saying you are not in
love with her, and pretending you care not for her; for smothered fires are
dangerous, and malicious humors are best and safest vented and breathed out.
Continue your affection to your Rival still, that will secure you from one way
of loving, which is in spite; and preserve your friendship with her woman; for
who knows but she may help you to the remedy.

A jolly glass and right Company would much conduce to the cure; for though in
the Scripture (by the way it is but Apocrypha) Woman is resolved stronger than
Wine, yet whether it will be so or not, when wit is joined to it, may prove a
fresh question.

Marrying (as our friend the late Ambassador has wittily observed) would
certainly cure it; but that is a kind of live Pigeons laid to the soals of the
feet, a last remedy, and (to say truth) worse than the disease.

But (Jack) I remember I promised you a letter, not a Treaty; I now expect you
should be just, and as I have showed you how to get out of love, so you
(according to our bargain) should teach me how to get into it. I know you have
but one way, and will prescribe me now to look upon Mistress Howard; but for
that I must tell you aforehand, that it is love as in Antipathy; The Capers
which will make my Lord of Dorset go from the Table, another man will eat up.
And (Jack) if you would make a visit to Bedlam, you shall find, that there are
rarely two there mad for the same thing.

Your humble Servant.

THough (Madam) I have ever hitherto believed play to be a thing in it self as
merely indifferent as Religion to a Statesman, or love made in a
privie-chamber; yet hearing you have resolved it otherwise for me, my faith
shall alter without becoming more learned upon it, or once knowing why it
should do so; so great and just a Sovereignty is that your reason has above
all others, that mine must be a Rebel to it self, should it not obey thus
easily; and indeed all the infallibility of judgment we poor Protestants have,
is at this time wholly in your hands.

The loss of a Mistress (which kills men only in Romances, and is still
digested with the first meat we eat after it) had yet in me raised up so much
passion, and so just a quarrel (as I thought) to Fortune for it, that I could
not but tempt her to do me right upon the first occasion: yet (Maddame) has it
not made me so desperate but that I can sit down a loser both of that time and
money too, when there shall be the least fear of losing you*

And now, since I know your Ladyship is too wise to suppose to your self
impossibilities, and therefore cannot think of such a thing, as of making me
absolutely good; it will not be without some impatience that I shall attend to
know what sin you will be pleased to assign me in the room of this: something
that has less danger about it (I conceive it would be) and therefore if you
please (Madam) let it not be Women: for to say truth, it is a diet I cannot yet
relish, otherwise then men do that on which they surfetted last.

Your humblest Servant, J. S.

Madam,
BEfore this instant I did not believe Warwickshire the other world, or that
Milcot walks had been the blessed shades. At my arrival here I am saluted by
all as risen from the dead, and have had joy given me as preposterously and as
impertinently as they give it to men who marry where they do not love. If I
should now die in earnest, my friends have nothing to pay me, for they have
discharged the Rites of Funeral sorrow before hand. Nor do I take it ill, that
report which made Richard the second alive so often after he was dead, should
kill me as often when I am alive; The advantage is on my side: The only
quarrel I have, is that they have made use of the whole Book of Martyrs upon
me; and without all question the first Christians under the great persecutions
suffered not in 500. years, so many several ways as I have done in six days
in this lewd Town. This (Madam) may seem strange unto you now, who know the
Company I was in; and certainly if at that time I had departed this transitory
World, it had been a way they had never thought on; and this Epitaph of the
Spaniards (changing the names) would better have become my Gravestone, then
any other my friends the Poets would have found out for me:

Epitaph.
Here lies Don Alonzo,
Slain by a wound received under
His left Pappe,
The Orifice of which was so
Small, no Surgeon could
Discover it.
Reader,
If thou would avoid so strange
A Death,
Look not upon Lucinda'es eyes.
Now all this discourse of dying (Madam) is but to let you know how dangerous a
thing it is to be long from London, especially in a place which is concluded
out of the World. If you are not to be frighted hither, I hope you are to be
persuaded; and if good Sermons, or good Plays, new Braveries, or fresh Wit,
Revells (Madam) Masks that are to be, have any Rhetorique about them, here they
are I assure you in perfection; without asking leave of the Provinces beyond
Seas, or the assent of -- I write not this that you should think I value these
pleasures above those of Milcot: for I must here protest, I prefer the single
Tabor and Pipe in the great Hall, far above them: and were there no more
belonging to a journey then riding so many miles (would my affairs conspire
with my desires) your Ladyship should find there not at the bottom of a Letter

Madam, Your humble Servant,

Madam,
I Thank Heaven we live in an Age in which the Widows wear Colors, and in a
Country where the Women that lose their Husbands may be trusted with poison,
knives, and all the burning coals in Europe, notwithstanding the president of
Sophonisba and Portia: Considering the estate you are in now, I should
reasonably imagine meaner Physicians then Seneca or Cicero might administer
comfort. It is so far from me to imagine this accident should surprise you,
that in my opinion it should not make you wonder; it being not strange at all
that a man who has lived ill all his time in a house, should break a Window,
or steal away in the night through an unusual Postern: you are now free, and
what matter is it to a Prisoner whether the fetters be taken off the ordinary
way or not? If instead of putting off handsomely the chain of Matrimony, he has
rudely broke it, it is at his own charge, nor should it cost you a tear;
Nothing (Madam) has worse Mine than counterfeit sorrow, and you must have the
height of Woman's Art to make yours appear other, especially when the spectators
shall consider all the story.

The sword that is placed betwixt a contracted Princess and an Ambassador, was
as much a Husband, and the only difference was, that that sword laid in the
bed, allowed one to supply its place; this Husband denied all, like a false
Crow set up in a Garden, which keeps others from the fruit it cannot taste it
self: I would not have you so much as enquire whether it were with his garters
or his Cloak-bag strings, nor engage your self to fresh sighs by hearing new
relations.

The Spanish Princess Leonina (whom Balzac delivers the Ornament of the last
Age) was wise; who hearing a Post was sent to tell her her Husband was dead,
and knowing the Secretary was in the way for that purpose, sent to stay the
Post till the arrival of the Secretary, that she might not be obliged to shed
tears twice. Of ill things the less we know, the better. Curiosity would here
be as vain, as if a Cuckold should enquire whether it were upon the Couch or a
Bed, and whether the Cavalier pulld off his Spurrs first or not.

I must confess it is a just subject for our sorrow to hear of any that does
quit his station without his leave that placed him there; and yet as ill a Mine
as this Act has: 't was a-la-Romansci, as you may see by a line of Mr.
Shakespears, who bringing in Titinius after a lost battle, speaking to his
sword, and bidding it find out his heart, adds By your leave Gods, this a
Romans part.


It Is true, I think Cloak-bag strings were not then so much in fashion; but to
those that are not Swordmen, the way is not so despicable; and for my own
part, I assure you Christianity highly governs me in the minute in which I do
not wish with all my heart that all the discontents in his Majesty's three
Kingdoms would find out this very way of satisfying themselves and the world.

I. S.

Sir,
SInce the settling of your Family would certainly much conduce to the settling
of your mind (the care of the one being the trouble of the other) I cannot but
reckon it in the number of my misfortunes, that my affairs deny me the content
I should take to serve you in it.

It would be too late now for me (I suppose) to advance or confirm you in those
good resolutions I left you in, being confident your own reason has been so
just to you, as long before this to have represented a necessity of redeeming
time and fame, and of taking an handsome revenge upon your self for the
injuries you would have done your self.

Change I confess (to them that think all at once) must needs be strange, and
to you hateful, whom first your own nature, and then custom another nature,
have brought to delight in those narrow and uncouth ways we found you in. You
must therefore consider that you have entered into one of those near
conjunctions of which death is the only honorable divorce; and that you have
now to please another as well as your self; who though she be a Woman, and by
the patent she has from nature, has liberty to do simply; yet can she never
be so strongly bribed against her self, as to betray at once all her hopes and
ends, and for your sake resolve to live miserably. Examples of such loving
folly our times afford but few; and in those there are, you shall find the
stock of Love to have been greater, and their strengths richer to maintain it,
than is to be feared yours can be.

Woman (besides the trouble) has ever been thought a Rentcharge, and though
through the vain curiosity of man it has often been enclosed, yet has it seldom
been brought to improve or become profitable; It faring with married men for
the most part, as with those that at great charges wall in grounds and plant,
who cheaper might have eaten Mellons elsewhere then in their own Gardens
Cucumbers. The ruins that either time, sickness, or the melancholy you shall
give her, shall bring; must all be made up at your cost: for that thing a
husband is but Tenant for life in what he holds, and is bound to leave the
place Tenantable to the next that shall take it. To conclude, a young Woman is
a Hawk upon her wings; and if she be handsome, she is the more subject to go
out at check; Faulkners that can but seldom spring right game, should still
have something about them to take them down with. The Lure to which all stoop
in this world, is either garnisht with profit or pleasure, and when you cannot
throw her the one, you must be content to show out the other. This I speak not
out of a desire to increase your fears which are already but too many, but out
of a hope that when you know the worst, you will at once leap into the River,
and swim through handsomely, and not (weather-beaten with the diverse blasts of
irresolution) stand shivering upon the brink.

Doubts and fears are of all the sharpest passions, and are still turning
distempers to diseases; through these false Optics it is, all that you see is
like evening shaddows, disproportionable to the truth, and strangely longer
then the true substance: These (when a handsome way of living and expense
suitable to your Fortune is represented to you) makes you in their stead see
want and beggary: thrusting upon your judgment impossibilities for
likelyhoods, which they with ease may do (since as Solomon says) they betray
the succors that reason offers.

It Is true, that all here below is but diversified folly, and that the little
things we laugh at Children for, we do but act our selves in great; yet is
there difference of Lunacy, and of the two, I had much rather be mad with him,
that (when he had nothing) thought all the Ships that came into the Haven his;
Than with you, who (when you have so much coming in) think you have nothing;
This fear of losing all in you, is the ill issue of a worse Parent, desire of
getting in you; So that if you would not be passion-rent, you must cease to be
covetous: Money in your hand is like the Conjurers Devil, which, while you
think you have, that has you.

The rich Talent that God has given, or rather lent you, you have hid up in a
napkin, and Man knows no difference betwixt that and Treasures kept by ill
Spirits, but that yours is the harder to come by. To the guarding of these
golden Apples, of necessity must be kept those never sleeping Dragons, Fear,
Jealousy, Distrust, and the like; so that you are come to moralize AEsop, and
his fables of beasts are become prophecies of you; for while you have caught at
the shadow, uncertain riches; you have loft the substance, true content.

The desire I have ye should be yet your self, and that your friends should
have occasion to bless the providence of misfortune, has made me take the
boldness to give you your own Character; and to show you your self out of your
own glass: And though all this tells you but where you are, yet it is some
part of a cure to have searched the wound. And for this time we must be content
to do like Travelers, who first find out the place, and then the nearest way.

My Noble Lord,
YOur humble Servant had the honor to receive from your hand a Letter, and had
the grace upon the sight of it to blush. I but then found my own negligence,
and but now could have the opportunity to ask pardon for it. We have ever since
been upon a March, and the places we are come to, have afforded rather blood
than Ink: and of all things, Sheets have been the hardest to come by,
specially those of Paper. If these few lines shall have the happiness to kiss
your hand, they can assure, that he that sent them knows none to whom he owes
more obligation then to your Lordship, and to whom he would more willingly pay
it: and that it must be no less than necessity it self that can hinder him
from often presenting it. Germany has no whit altered me, I am still the
humble servant of my Lord [] that I was, and when I cease to be so, I must
cease to be

John Suckling.

SInce you can breath no one desire that was not mine before it was yours, --
or full as soon, (for hearts united never knew divided wishes) I must chide you
(dear Princess) not thank you, for your Present: and (if at least I knew how)
be angry with you for sending him a blush, who needs must blush because you
sent him one. If you are conscious of much, what am I then? who guilty am of
all you can pretend to, and something more -- unworthiness. But why should you
at all (Heart of my heart) disturb the happiness you have so newly given me? or
make love feed on doubts, that never yet could thrive on such a diet? If I have
granted your request -- Oh! -- Why will you ever say that you have studied me,
and give so great an instance to the contrary? that wretched If -- speaks as if
I would refuse what you desire, or could: both which are equally impossible. My
dear Princess, There needs no new Approaches where the Breach is made already;
nor must you ever ask any where, but of your fair self, for any thing that
shall concern

Your humble Servant.

My Dearest Princess,
BUt that I know I love you more then ever any did any, and that yet I hate my
self because I can love you no more, I should now most unsatisfied dispatch
away this messenger.

The little that I can write to what I would, makes me think writing a dull
commerce, and then -- how can I choose but wish my self with you -- to say the
rest. My Dear Dear, think what merit, virtue, beauty, what and how far Aglaura
with all her charms can oblige, and so far and something more I am

Your humble Servant.

A Letter to a Friend to diswade him from marrying a Widow which he formerly
had been in Love with, and quitted.
AT this time when no hot Planet fires the blood, and when the Lunaticks of
Bedlam themselves are trusted abroad; that you should run mad, is (Sir) not so
much a subject for your friends pity, as their wonder. It Is true, Love is a
natural distemper, a kind of Small Pocks: Every one either has had it, or is
to expect it, and the sooner the better.

Thus far you are excused: But having been well cured of a Fever, to court a
Relapse, to make Love the second time in the same Place, is (not to flatter
you) neither better nor worse then to fall into a Quagmire by chance, and ride
into it afterward on purpose. It Is not love (Tom) that that does the mischief,
but constancy, for Love is of the nature of a burning-glasse, which kept still
in one place, fireth: changed often, it does nothing: a kind of glowing-Coal,
which with shifting from hand to hand a man easily endures. But then to marry!
(Tom) Why thou had better to live honest. Love thou know is blind, what
will he do when he has Fetters on think thou?

Do thou know what marriage is? It Is curing of Love the dearest way, or
waking a loosing Gamester out of a winning dream: and after a long expectation
of a strange banquet, a presentation of a homely meal. Alas! (Tom) Love-seeds
when it runs up to Matrimony, and is good for nothing. Like some Fruit Trees,
it must be transplanted if thou would have it active, and bring forth any
thing.

Thou now perchance have vowed all that can be vowed to any one face, and
think thou have left nothing unsaid to it: do but make love to another, and
if thou art not suddenly furnished with new-language, and fresh oaths, I will
conclude Cupid has used thee worse then ever he did any of his train.

After all this, to marry Widow, a kind of chew'dmeat! What a fantastical
stomach have thou, that can not eat of a dish til another man has cut of it?
who would wash after another, when he might have fresh water enough for asking?

Life is sometimes a long-journey: to be tied to ride upon one beast still, and
that halftyr'd to thy hand too! Think upon that (Tom.)

Well; If thou must needs marry (as who can tell to what height thou have
sinned? Let it be a Maid, and no Widow: (for as a modern Author has wittily
resolved in this case) it is better (if a man must be in Prison) to lie in a
private room then in the hole.

An Answer to the Letter.
CEase to wonder (honest Jack) and give me leave to pity thee, who labourest
to condemn that which thou confessest natural, and the sooner had, the better.

Thus far there needs no excuse, unless it be on thy behalf, who stilest
second thoughts (which are by all allowed the Best) a relapse, and talkest of a
quagmire where no man ever stuck fast, and accusest constancy of mischief in
what is natural, and advisedly undertaken.

It Is confessed that Love changed often does nothing; nay it is nothing: for Love
and change are incompatible: but where it is kept fixed to its first object,
though it burn not, yet it warms and cherishes, so as it needs no
transplantation, or change of soil to make it fruitful: and certainly if Love
be natural, to marry is the best Recipe for living honest.

Yes, I know what marriage is, and know you know it not, by terming it the
dearest way of curing Love: for certainly there goes more charge to the keeping
of a Stable full of horses, then one only Steed: and much of vanity is therein
besides: when, be the errand what it will, this one Steed shall serve your turn
as well as twenty more. Oh! if you could serve your Steed so!

Marriage turns pleasing Dreams to ravishing Realities which out do what Fancy
or expectation can frame unto themselves.

That Love does seed when it runs into Matrimony, is undoubted truth; how else
should it increase and multiply, which is its greatest blessing.

It Is not the want of Love, nor Cupids fault, if every day afford not
new-language, and new-waies of expressing affection: it rather may be caused
through an excess of joy, which oftentimes strikes dumb.

These things considered I will marry, nay, and to prove the second Paradox
false, I Will marry a Widow, who is rather the chewer, then thing chewed. How
strangely fantastical is he who will be an hour in plucking on a strait-boot,
when he may be forthwith furnished with enough that will come on easily, and do
him as much credit, and better service? Wine when first-broacht, drinks not
half so well as after a while drawing. Would you not think him a mad man who
whilst he might fair and easily ride on the beaten-road-way, should trouble
himself with breaking up of gaps? a well wayed horse will safely convay thee to
thy journeys end, when an unbackt Filly may by chance give thee a fall: It Is
Prince-like to marry a Widow, for it is to have a Taster.

It Is true, life may prove a long*journey; and so believe me it must do, A very
long one too, before the Beast you talk of prove tired. Think you upon that
(Jack.)

Thus, Jack, thou see my wel-tane resolution of marrying, and that a Widow,
not a maid; to which I am much induced out of what Pythagoras says (in his 2
da Sect. cu^iculorum) that it is better lying in the hole, then sitting in the
Stocks.

When I receive your lines (my Dear Princess) and find there expressions of a
Passion; though reason and my own immerit tell me, it must not be for me; yet
is the Cozenage so pleasing to me, that I (bribed by my own desires) believe
them still before the other. Then do I glory that my Virgin-Love has staid for
such an object to fix upon, and think how good the Stars were to me that kept
me from quenching those flames (Youth or wild Love furnished me withal) in
common and ordinary Waters, and reserved me a Sacrifice for your eyes; -- While
thought thus smiles and solaces himself within me, cruel Remembrance breaks in
upon our retirements, and tells so sad a Story, that (trust me) I forget all
that pleased Fancy said before, and turns my thoughts to where I left you.
Then I consider that storms neither know Courtship, nor Pity, and that those
rude blasts will often make you a Prisoner this Winter, if they do no worse.

While I here enjoy fresh diversion, you make the sufferings more, by having
leisure to consider them; nor have I now any way left me to make mine equal
with them, but by often considering that they are not so: for the thought that
I cannot be with you to bear my share, is more intolerable* to me, then if I
had borne more -- but I was only born to number hours, and not enjoy them --
yet can I never think my self unfortunate, while I can write my self

Aglaura, Her humble Servant.

When I consider (my Dear Princess that I have no other pretense to your
favors, then that which all men have to the Original of Beauty, Light: which
we enjoy not that it is the inheritance of our eyes, but because things most
excellent cannot restrain themselves, but are ours, as they are diffusively
good; Then do I find the justness of your quarrel, and cannot but blush to
think what I do owe, but much more to think what I do pay, Since I have made
the Principal so great, by sending in so little Interest -- When you have
received this humble confession, you will not I hope, conceive me one that
would (though upon your bidding) enjoy my self, while there is such a thing in
the world, as --

Aglaura -- Her humble Servant. J. S.

SO much (Dear --) was I ever yours since I had first the honor to know you,
and consequently so little my self since I had the unhappines to part with you,
that you your self (Dear) without what I would say, cannot but have been so
just as to have imagined the welcome of your own letters; though indeed they
have but removed me from one Rack, to set me on another; from fears and doubts
I had about me of your welfare, to an unquietness within my self, till I have
deserved this Intelligence.

How pleasingly troublesome thought and remembrance have been to me since I
left you, I am no more able now to express, then another to have them so. You
only could make every place you came in worth the thinking of, and I do think
those places worthy my thought only, because you made them so. But I am to
leave them, and I shall do it the willinger, because the Gamester still is so
much in me, as that I love not to be told too often of my losses: Yet every
place will be alike, since every good object will do the same. Variety of
Beauty and of Faces (quick underminers of Constancy to others) to me will be
but pillars to support it; Since when they please me most, I most shall think
of you.

In spite of all Philosophy, it will be hottest in my Climate, when my Sun is
farthest off; and in spite of all reason, I proclaim, that I am not my self but
when I am

Yours wholly.

THough desire in those that love be still like too much sail in a storm, and
man cannot so easily strike, or take all in when he pleases: Yet (Dearest
Princess) be it never so hard, when you shall think it dangerous, I shall not
make it difficult, though -- Well; Love is love, and Air is Air; and (though
you are a Miracle your self) yet do not I believe that you can work any;
without it I am confident you can never make these two thus different in
themselves, one and the self same thing; when you shall, it will be some small
furtherance toward it, that you have

Your humble servant. J. S.
Who so truly loves the fair Aglaura, that he will never know desire, at least
not entertain it, that brings not letters of recommendation from her, or first
a fair Pasport.



My Dear Dear,
THink I have kissed your Letter to nothing, and now know not what to answer. Or
that now I am answering, I am kissing you to nothing, and know not how to go
on! For you must pardon, I must hate all I send you here, because it expresses
nothing in respect of what it leaves behind with me. And oh! Why should I write
then? Why should I not come my self? Those Tyrants, business, honor, and
necessity, what have they to do with you and I? Why should we not do Loves
commands before theirs whose Sovereignty is but usurped upon us? Shall we not
smell to Roses 'cause others do look on? or gather them, 'cause there are
prickles, and something that would hinder us? Dear -- I fain would -- and know
no hindrance -- but what must come from you -- and -- why should any come?
since it is not I, but you must be sensible how much time we lose, It being long
since I was not my self, but

Yours.

Dear Princess,
FInding the date of your Letter so young, and having an assurance from [ ] who
at the same time heard from Mr. [ ] that all our Letters have been delivered at
[B] I cannot but imagine some ill mistake, and that you have not received any
at all. Faith I have none in Welsh, man; and though Fear and Suspicion look
often so far that they oversee the right, yet when Love holds the Candle, they
seldom do mistake so much. My Dearest Princess, I shall long, next hearing you
are well, to hear that they are safe: for though I can never be ashamed to be
found an Idolater to such a shrine as yours, yet since the world is full of
profane eyes, the best way, sure, is to keep all mysteries from them, and to
let privacy be (what indeed it is) the best part of devotion. So thinks

My D. D. P. Your humble Servant.

SInce the inferior Orbs move but by the first, without all question desires
and hopes in me are to be governed still by you, as they by it. What mean these
fears then? Dear Princess.

Though Planets wander, yet is the Sphere that carries them the same still; and
though wishes in me may be extravagant, yet he in whom they make their motion
is, you know, my dear Princess,

Yours, and wholly to be disposed of by you.
And till we hear from you, though (according to the form of concluding a
Letter) we should now rest, we cannot.



Fair Princess,
IF parting be a sin (as sure it is) what then to part from you? if to
extenuate an ill be to increase it, what then now to excuse it by a letter?
That which we would allege to lessen it, with you perchance has added to the
guilt already, which is our sudden leaving you. Abruptness is an eloquence in
parting, when Spinning out of time, is but the weaving of new sorrow. And thus
we thought yet not being able to distinguish of our own Acts, the fear we may
have sinned farther then we think of, has made us send to you, to know whether
it be Mortal or not.

For the Two Excellent Sisters.
THough I conceive you (Ladies) so much at leisure that you may read any thing,
yet since the stories of the Town are merely amorous, and sound nothing but
Love, I cannot without betraying my own judgment make them news for Wales.
Nor can it be less improper to transport them to you, then for the King to
send my Lord of C. over Ambassador this winter into Green-land.

It would want faith in so cold a Country as Anglesey, to say that your Cozen
Duchess, for the quenching of some foolish flames about her, has endured
quietly the loss of much of the Kings favor, of many of her houses, and of
most of her friends.

Whether the disfigurement that Travel or sickness has bestowed upon B W. be
thought so great by the Lady of the Isle, as it is by others, and whether the
alteration of his face has bred a change in her mind -- it never troubles you
-- Ladies. What old Loves are decayed, or what new*ones are sprung up in their
room; Whether this Lady be too discreet, or that Cavalier not secret enough;
are things that concern the inhabitants of Anglesey not at all. A fair day is
better welcome and more news, then all that can be said in this kind. And for
all that I know now, the Devils Chimney is on fire, or his pot seething over,
and all North Wales not able to stay the fury of it. Perchance while I write
this, a great black cloud is sailing from Mistress Thomasses bleak Mountains
over to Baron-hill, there to disgorge it self with what the Sea or worse places
fed it with before.

It may be the honest banks about you turn bankrupt too, and break; and the Sea
like an angry Creditor seizes upon all, and has no pity, because he has been
put off so long from time to time. For variety (and it is not impossible) some
boisterous wind flings up the hangings; and thinking to do as much to your
cloths, finds a resistance, and so departs, but first breaks all the windows
about the house for it in revenge.

These things now we that live in London cannot help, and they are as great
news to men that sit in Boxes at Black-Fryars, as the affairs of Love to
Flannel-Weavers.

For my own part, I think I have made a great complement, when I have wished my
self with you, and more then I dare make good in Winter: and yet there is none
would venture farther for such a happiness then

Your humble servant.

The Wine-drinkers to the Water-drinkers, greeting.
WHereas by your Ambassador two days since sent unto us, we understand that
you have lately had a plot to surprise (or to speak more properly) to take the
waters; and in it have not only a little miscarryed, but also met with such
difficulties, that unless you be speedily relieved, you are like to suffer in
the adventure; We as well out of pity to you, as out of care to our State and
Commonwealth (knowing that Women have ever been held necessary, and that
nothing relisheth so well after Wine) have so far taken it into our
consideration, that we have neglected no means since we heard of it first, that
might be for your contents, or the good of the cause; and therefore to that
purpose we have had diverse meetings at the Bear at the Bridge-foot* and now at
length have resolved to dispatch to you one of our Cabinet-Councel, Colonel
Young, with some slight Forces of Canary, and some few of Sherry, which no
doubt will stand you in good steed, if they do not mutiny and grow too
headstrong for their Commander; him Captain Puff of Barton shall follow with
all expedition, with two or three Regiments of Claret; Monsieur de Granville,
commonly called Lieutenant Strutt, shall lead up the Rear of Rhenish and White.
These succors thus timely sent, we are confident will be sufficient to hold the
Enemy in Play; and till we hear from you again, we shall not think of a fresh
supply: For the Waters (though perchance they have driven you into some
extremities, and diverse times forced their passages through some of your best
guarded places) yet have they, if our intelligence fail us not, hitherto had
the worst of it still, and evermore at length plainly run away from you.

Given under our hands at the Bear, this fourth of July.
SInce Joy (the thing we all so Court) is but our hopes stripped of our fears,
pardon me if I be still pressing at it, and like those that are curious to know
their fortunes aforehand desire to be satisfied, though it displeases me
afterward. To this Gentleman (who has as much in-sight as the the other wanted
Ey-sight) I have committed the particulars, which would too much swell a
Letter: if they shall not please you, it is but fresh subject still for
Repentance; nor ever did that make me quarrel with any thing but my own
stars. To swear new oaths from this place, were but to weaken the credit of
those I have sworn in another: if heaven be to forgive you now for not
believing of them then, (as sure as it was a sin) heaven forgive me now for
swearing of them then (for that was double sin.) More then I am I cannot be,
nor list,

Yours, I. S.
I am not so ill a Protestant as to believe in merit, yet if you please to give
answer under your own hand, such as I shall for ever rely upon: if I have not
deserved it already, it is not impossible but I may.



To a Cousin (who still loved young Girls, and when they came to be
mariageable, quitted them, and fell in love with fresh) at his fathers request,
who desired he might be persuaded out of the humor, and marry.
Honest Charles,
Were there not fools enough before in the Commonwealth of Lovers, but that
thou must bring up a new Sect? Why delighted with the first knots of roses, and
when they come to blow (can satisfy the sense, and do the end of their
Creation) do not care for them? Is there nothing in this foolish transitory
world that thou can find out to set thy heart upon, but that which has newly
left off making of dirt-pyes, and is but preparing it self for loam, and a
green*sicknes? Seriously (Charles) and without ceremony, it is very foolish, and
to love widows is as tolerable an humor, and as justifiable as thine -- for
beasts that have been ridd of their legs are as much for a man's use, as Colts
that are un-way'd, and will not go at all: -- Why the devil such young things?
before these understand what thou would have, others would have granted. Thou
do not marry them neither, nor any thing else. 'Sfoot it is the story of the
Jack-an-apes and the Partridges; thou starest after a beauty till it is lost to
thee, and then let'st out another, and starest after that till it is gone too.
Never considering that it is here as in the Thames, and that while it runs up
in the middle, it runs down on the sides; while thou contemplat'st the
comming-in-tide and flow of Beauty, that it ebbes with thee, and that thy youth
goes out at the same time: After all this too, She thou now art cast upon will
have much ado to avoid being ugly. Pox on it, Men will say thou were benighted,
and were glad of any Inn. Well! (Charles) there is another way if you could
find it out. Women are like Melons: too green, or too ripe, are worth nothing;
you must try till you find a right one. Taste all, but hark you -- (Charles) you
shall not need to eat of all, for one is sufficient for a surfeit: Your most
humble servant.

I should have persuaded you to marriage, but to deal ingeniously, I am a
little out of arguments that way at this present: It Is honorable, there is no
question on it; but what more, in good faith I cannot readily tell.

Madam,
TO tell you that neither my misfortunes nor my sins did draw from me ever so
many sighs as my departure from you has done, and that there are yet tears in
mine eyes left undryed for it; or that melancholy has so deeply seized me, that
colds and diseases hereafter shall not need above half their force to destroy
me, would be I know superfluous and vain, since so great a goodness as yours,
cannot but have out-beleeved already what I can write.

He never knew you that will not think the loss of your Company, greater then
the Imperialists can all this time the loss of all their Companies; and he
shall never know you that can think it greater then I, who though I never had
neither wisdom nor wit enough to admire you to your worth, yet had my Judgment
ever so much right in it, as to admire you above all. And thus he says that
dares swear he is

Your most devoted servant.

Madam,
THe distrust I have had of not being able to write to you any thing which
might pay the charge of reading, has persuaded me to forbear kissing your hands
at this distance: So, like Women that grow proud, because they are chaste; I
thought I might be negligent, because I was not troublesome. And, were I not
safe in your goodness, I should be (Madam) in your judgment; which is too just
to value little observances, or think them necessary to the right honoring my
Lady.

Your Ladyship I make no doubt, will take into consideration, that superstition
has ever been fuller of Ceremony then the true worship. When it shall concern
any part of your real service, and I not throw by all respects whatsoever to
manifest my devotion, take what revenge you please. Undo me Madam: Resume my
best Place and Title; and let me be no longer.

Your humble servant.

Madam,
BY the same reason the Ancients made no sacrifice to death, should your
Ladyship send me no Letters; since there has been no return on my side. But the
truth is, the place affords nothing: all our days are (as the Women here)
alike: and the difference of Fair, does rarely show it self; Such great State
do Beauty and the Sun keep in these parts. I keep company with my own Horses
(Madam) to avoid that of the men; and by this you may guess how great an enemy
to my living contentedly my Lady is, whose conversation has brought me to so
fine a diet, that, wheresoever I go, I must starve: all days are tedious,
companies troublesome, and Books themselves (Feasts heretofore) no relish in
them. Finding you to be the cause of all this, Excuse me (Madam) if I resent:
and continue peremptory in the resolution I have taken to be

Madam, during life, Your humblest Servant,

Madam,
BUt that I know your goodness is not mercinary, and that you receive thanks,
either with as much trouble as men ill news, or with as much wonder as Virgins
unexpected Love, this letter should be full of them. A strange proud return you
may think I make you (Madam) when I tell you, it is not from every body I would
be thus obliged; and that if I thought you did me not these favors because you
love me; I should not love you because you do me these favors. This is not
language for one in Affliction, I confess, and upon whom it may be at this
present, a cloud is breaking; but finding not within my self I have deserved
that storm; I will not make it greater by apprehending it.

After all, least (Madam) you should think I take your favors as Tribute; to
my great grief, I here declare, that the services I shall be able to render
you, will be no longer Presents, but payments of Debts; since I can do nothing
for you hereafter, which I was not obliged to do before.

Madam, Your most humble and faithful servant.

My Noble Friend.
THat you have overcome the danger of the Land and of the Sea, is news most
welcome to us, and with no less joy received amongst us than if the King of
Sweden had the second time overcome Tilley, and again past the Meine and the
Rhine. Nor do we in this look more upon our selves and private interests, then
on the public, since in your safety both were comprised. And though you had
not had about you the affairs and secrets of State, yet to have left your own
person upon the way, had been half to undo our poor Island, and the loss must
have been lamented with the tears of a whole Kingdom.

But you are now beyoud all our fears, and have nothing to take heed on your
self, but fair Ladies. A pretty point of security; and such a one as all
Germany cannot afford. We here converse with Northern Beauties, that had never
heat enough to kindle a spark in any man's breast, where heaven had been first
so merciful, as to put in a reasonable soul.

There is nothing either fair or good in this part of the world; and I cannot
name the thing can give me any content, but the thought that you enjoy enough
otherwhere: I having ever been since I had the first honor to know you,

Yours, more then his own.

My Lord,
TO persuade one that has newly ship-wrackt upon a Coast to imbarque suddenly
for the same place again, or your Lordship to seek that content you now enjoy
in the innocence of a solitude, among the disorders and troubles of a Court,
were I think a thing the King himself (and Majesty is no ill Orator) would find
some difficulty to do. And yet when I consider that great soul of yours, like a
Spider, working all inwards, and sending forth nothing, but like the Cloistered
Schoolmens Divinity, threads fine and unprofitable: if I thought you would not
suspect my being serious all this while, for what I should now say, I would
tell you that I cannot but be as bold with you as your Ague is, and for a
little time, whether you will or not entertain you scurvily.

When I consider you look (to me) like -- I cannot but think it as odd a thing,
as if I should see Van Dike with all his fine colors and Pensills about him,
his Frame, and right Light, and every thing in order, and yet his hands tied
behind him: and your Lordship must excuse me if upon it I be as bold.

The wisest men, and greatest States have made no scruple to make use of brave
men whom they had laid by with some disgrace* nor have those brave men so laid
by, made scruple, or thought it a disgrace to serve again, when they were
called to it afterward.

These general motives of the State and Common good, I will not so much as once
offer up to your Lordships consideration, though (as it is fit) they have still
the upper end: yet, like great Oleoes, they rather make a show then provoke
Appetite. There are two things which I shall not be ashamed to propound to you,
as ends; since the greater part of the wise men of the world have not been
ashamed to make them theirs: and if any has been found to contemn them, it has
been strongly to be suspected that either they could not easily attain to them,
or else that the readiest way to attain to them was to contemn them. These two
are Honor and Wealth: and though you stand possessed of both of them, yet is the
first in your hands like a sword, which, if not through negligence, by
mischance has taken rust, and needs a little clearing; and it would be much
handsomer a present to posterity, if you your self in your life time wipe it
off.

For your Estate (which it may be had been more had it not been too much)
though it is true that it is so far from being contemptible, that it is Nobly
competent, yet must it be content to undergo the same fate greater states
(Commonwealths themselves) have been and are subject to: which is, when it
comes to be divided in it self, not to be considerable. Both Honor and Estate
are too fair and sweet Flowers, to be without Prickles, or to be gathered
without some scratches.

And now (my Lord) I know you have nothing to urge but a kind of incapability
in your self to the service of this State; when indeed you have made the only
bar you have, by imagining you have one*

I confess (though) had vice so large an Empire in the Court, as heretofore it
has had, or were the times so dangerous that to the living well there, wise
conduct were more necessary then virtue it self; Your Lordship would have
reason (with AEsops countrey-mouse) to undervalue all change of condition;
since a quiet-mediocrity is still to be preferred before a troubled
superfluity: but these things are now no more: and if at any time they have
threatened that Horizon, like great clouds, either they are fallen of themselves
to the ground, or else, upon the appearing of the Sun (such a Prince as ours
is) they have vanished, and left behind them clear and fair days. To descend
to parts, envy is so lessened, that it is almost lost into virtuous emulation,
every man trusting the Kings judgment so far, that he knows no better measure
of his own merit, then his reward. The little word behind the back, and undoing
whisper, which, like pulling of a sheat-rope at Sea, slackens the sail, and
makes the gallantest ship stand still; that that heretofore made the faulty and
the innocent alike guilty, is a thing, I believe, now so forgot; or at least so
unpractiz'd, that those that are the worst, have leisure to grow good, before
any will take notice they have been otherwise, or at least divulge it.

It Is true, Faction there is, but it is as true, that it is as winds are, to
clear, and keep places free from corruption; the oppositions being as
harmless, as that of the meeting-tides under the bridge, whose encounter makes
it but more easy for him that is to pass. To be a little pleasant in my
instances; The very women have suffered reformation, and wear through the whole
Court their faces as little disguised now, as an honest man's actions should be,
and if there be any have suffered themselves to be gained by their servants,
their ignorance of what they granted may well excuse them from the shame of
what they did. So that it is more then possible to be great and good: and we
may safely conclude, if there be some that are not so exact, as much as they
fall short of it, just so much they have gone from the great Original, God; and
from the best Copies of him on earth, the King and the Queen.

To conclude, If those accidents or disasters which make men grow less in the
world (as some such, my Lord, have happened to you) were inevitable as death,
or, when they were once entered upon us, there were no cure for them; examples
of others would satisfy me for yours; but since there have been that have
delivered themselves from their ills, either by their good Fortune, or Virtue,
'twould trouble me that my friends should not be found in that number, as much
as if one should bring me a Catalogue of those that truly honored my Lord of
-- and I should not find among the first,

Your humble Servant,

To Mr. Henry German, in the beginning of PARLIAMENT, 1640.
Sir,
THat it is fit for the King to do something extraordinary at this present, is
not only the opinion of the wise, but the expectation. Men observe him more
now then at other times: for Majesty in an Eclipse, like the Sun, draws eyes
that would not so much as have looked toward it, if it had shined out, and
appeared like it self. To lie still now, would, at the best, show but a
calmnesse of mind, not a magnanimity; since in matter of government, to think
well (at any time, much less in a very active) is little better then to dream
well. Nor must he stay to act till his people desire, because it is thought
nothing relishes else: for therefore has nothing relisht with them, because
the King has for the most part stayed till they have desired; done nothing but
what they have or were petitioning for. But, that the King should do, will not
be so much the question, as what he should do. And certainly, for a King to
have right counsel given him, is at all times strange, and at this present
impossible. His party for the most part (I would that were modestly said, and
it were not all) have so much to do for their own preservation, that they
cannot (without breaking a law in nature) intend another. Those that have
courage have not perchance innocence, and so dare not show themselves in the
Kings business; and if they have innocence, they want parts to make themselves
considerable; so consequently the things they undertake. Then, in Court, they
give much counsel, as they believe the King inclined, determine his good by his
desires: which is a kind of setting the Sun by the Dial, Interest which cannot
er^e, by passions which may.

In going about to show the King a Cure, now a man should first plainly show
him the disease. But to Kings, as to some kind of Patients, it is not always
proper to tell how ill they be: and it is too like a Country clown not to show
the way, unles he know from whence, and discourse of things before.

Kings may be mistaken, and Counselors corrupted; but true interest alone
(says Monsieur de Rohan) cannot err. It were not amiss then to find out the
Interest: for setting down right principles before conclusions, is weighing the
scales before we deal out the commodity.

Certainly the great interest of the King is, A union with his People, and
whosoever has told him otherwise (as the Scripture says of the devil) was a
seducer from the first. If there ever had been any one Prince in the whole
world that made a felicity in this life, and left fair Fame after death,
without the love of his Subjects, there were some color to despise it.

There was not among all our Princes a greater Courtier of the People then
Richard the third, not so much out of fear, as out of wisdom. And, shall the
worst of our Kings have striven for that? and shall not the best? (it being an
Angelical thing to gain love.)

There are 2. things in which the people expect to be satisfied; Religion, and
Justice: nor can this be done by any little acts, but by Royal and Kingly
resolutions.

If any shall think that by dividing the factions (a good rule at other times)
he shall master the rest now, he will be strangely deceived: for in the
beginning of things That would do much, but not when whole Kingdoms are
resolved. Of those now that lead these parties, if you could take off the major
number, the lesser would govern, and do the same things still: nay, if you
could take off all, they would set up one, and follow him.

And of how great consequence it is for the King to resume this right, and be
the author himself, let any body judge: since as Cumneus said, those that have
the art to please the People, have commonly the power to raise them.

To do things so that there shall remain no jealousy, is very necessary, and
is no more then really reforming, that is, pleasing them. For to do things that
shall grieve hereafter, and yet pretend love (amongst lovers themselves, where
there is easiest faith) will not be accepted. It will not be enough for the
King to do what they desire, but he must do something more: I mean (by doing
more) doing something of his own, as throwing away things they call not for, or
giving things they expected not. And when they see the King doing the same
things with them, it will take away all thought and apprehension that he thinks
the things they have done already ill.

Now if the King ends the differences, and takes away suspect for the future,
the case will fall out to be no worse then when two duellists enter the Field,
where the worsted party (the other having no ill opinion of him) has his sword
given him again (without further hurt after he is in the others power.) But
otherwise it is not safe to imagine what may follow: for the people are
naturally not valiant, and not much Cavalier. Now it is the nature of Cowards
to hurt where they can receive none. They will not be content (while they fear
and have the upper hand) to fetter only Royalty, but perchance (as timorous
spirits use) will not think themselves safe while that is at all. And possibly,
this is the present state of things.

In this great work (at least to make it appear perfect and lasting to the
Kingdom) it is necessary the Queen really join; for if she stand aloof, there
will still be suspicions: it being a received opinion in the world, that she
has a great interest in the Kings favor and power. And to invite her, she is
to consider with her self, whether such great virtues and eminent excellencies
(though they be highly admired and valued by those that know her) ought to rest
satisfied with so narrow a payment as the estimation of a few? And whether it
be not more proper for a great Queen to arrive at universal honor, and love,
then private esteem and value.

Then, how becoming a work, for the sweetness and softnes of her Sex, is
composing of differences, and uniting hearts? and how proper for a Queen,
reconciling King and People?

There is but one thing remains, which whispered abroad, busies the Kings mind
much (if not disturbs it) in the midst of these great Resolutions, and that is,
The preservation of some servants, whom he thinks somewhat hardly torn from him
of late: which is of so tender a nature; I shall rather propound something about
it, then resolve it.

The first Quaere will be, Whether as things now stand (Kingdoms in the
balance) the King is not to follow nature, where the conservation of the more
general still commands and governs the less. As Iron by particular sympathy
sticks to the loadstone, but yet if it be joined with a great body of Iron, it
quits those particular affections to the loadstone, and moves with the other,
to the greater, the common Country.

The second will be, Whether, if he could preserve those ministers, they can be
of any use to him hereafter? since no man is served with a greater prejudice,
then he that employs suspected instruments, or not beloved, though able and
deserving in themselves.

The third is, Whether, to preserve them, there be any other way then for the
King to be first right with his people? since the rule in Philosophy must ever
hold good, nihil dat quod non habet. Before the King have power to save, he
must have power.

Lastly, Whether the way to preserve this power be not to give it away? For the
people of England have ever been like wantons, which pull and tugg as long as
the princes have pulled with them, as you may see in Hen. 3. King John, Edw. 2.
and indeed, all the troublesome and unfortunate reigns; but when they have let
it go, they come and put it into their hands again, that they may play on: as
you may see in Queen Elizabeth.

I will conclude with a prayer (not that I think it needs at this present:
Prayers are to keep us from what may be, as well as to preserve us from what
is) That the King be neither too insensible of what is without him, nor too
resolved from what is within him. To be sick of a dangerous sickness, and find
no pain, cannot but be with loss of understanding (It Is an Aphorism of
Hippocrates) and on the other side, Opiniastrie is a sullen Porter, and (as it
was wittily said of Constancy) shutts out oftentimes, Better things then it
lets in.

FINIS.
AN ACCOUNT OF RELIGION BY REASON. A Discourse upon Occasion presented to the
Earl of Dorset.

By Sir JOHN SUCKLING.

Printed by his own Copy.

Lucret. page 227. Tentat enim dubiam mentem rationis egestas.
LONDON, Printed by Ruth Raworth for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

The Epistle.
I Send you here (my Lord) that Discourse enlarged, which frighted the Lady
into a cold sweat, and which had like to have made me an Atheist at Court, and
your Lordship no very good Christian. I am not ignorant that the fear of
Socinianisme at this time, renders every man that offers to give an account of
Religion by Reason, suspected to have none at all: yet I have made no scruple
to run that hazard, not knowing why a man should not use the best Weapon his
Creator has given him for his defense. That Faith was by the Apostles both
highly exalted, and severely enjoined, is known to every man, and this upon
excellent grounds; for it was both the easiest and best way of converting: the
other being tedious, and almost useless: for but few among thousands are
capable of it, and those few not capable at all times of their life, Judgment
being required. Yet the best servant our Savior ever had upon Earth, was so
far from neglecting or contemning Reason, that his Epistles were admired, even
by those that embraced not the Truths he delivered. And indeed, had the
Fathers of the Church only bid men believe, and not told them why, they had
slept now un-Sainted in their Graves, and as much benighted with Oblivion, as
the ordinary Parish Priests of their own Age.

That man is deceivable, is true; but what part within him is not likelyer then
his Reason? For as Manilius said, Nam neque decipitur ratio nec decipit unquam.


And how unlikely is it that that which gives us the Prerogative above other
Creatures, and wholly entitles us to future happiness, should be laid aside,
and not used to the acquiring of it.

But by this time (my Lord) you find how apt those which have nothing to do
themselves, are to give others trouble. I shall only therefore let you know
that your Commands to my Lord of Middlesex are performed; and that when you
have fresh ones, you cannot place them where they will be more willingly
received, then by

Bath, Sept. 2. Your humble Servant, John Suckling.

A Discourse by Sir John Suckling, Knight.
AMong the truths (my Lord) which we receive, none more reasonably commands our
belief, then those which by all men, at all times have been assented to. In
this number and highest I place this great one, that there is a Deity; which
the whole world has been so eager to embrace, that rather then it would have
none at all, it has too often been contented with a very mean one.

That there should be a great Disposer and Orderer of things, a wise Rewarder
and Punisher of good and evil, has appeared so equitable to men* that by
instinct they have concluded it necessary; Nature (which does nothing in vain)
having so far imprinted it in us all, that should the envy of Predecessors
deny the secret to Succeders, they yet would find it out. Of all those little
ladders with which we seal heaven, and climb up to our Maker, that seems to me
not the worst, of which man is the first step. For but by examining how I, that
could contribute nothing to mine own being, should be here, I come to ask the
same question for my Father, and so am led in a direct line to a last Producer,
that must be more then man. For if man made man, Why died not I when my Father
died? since according to that Maxim of the Philosophers, the cause taken away,
the effect does not remain. Or if the first man gave himself being, why has he
it not still? Since it were unreasonable to imagine any thing could have power
to give it self life, that had no power to continue it. That there is then a
God, will not be so much the dispute, as what this God is, or how to be
worshipped, is that which has troubled poor mortals from the first, nor are
they yet in quiet. So great has been the diversity, that some have almost
thought God was no less delighted with variety in his service, then he was
pleased with it in his works. It would not be amiss to take a survey of the
world from its cradle; and with Varro, divide it into three Ages: the Unknown,
the Fabulous, and the Historical.

The first was a black night, and discovered nothing: the second was a weak and
glimmering light, representing things imperfectly and falsely: the last (more
clear) left handsome monuments to posterity. The unknown I place in the age
before the Flood, for that Deluge swept away things as well as men, and left
not so much as footsteps to trace them by. The fabulous began after the Flood;
in this time Godheads were cheap, and men not knowing where to choose better,
made Deities one of another. Where this ended, the historical took beginning:
for men began to ingrave in pillars, and to commit to Letters, as it were by
joint consent: for the three great Epoches or Terms of Account were all
established within the space of 30. years: The Grecians reckoning from their
Olympiades: The Romans from the building of their City: and the Babilonians
from their King Salmonassar. To bring into the scale with Christian Religion
any thing out of the first Age, we cannot; because we know nothing of it.

And the second was so fabulous, that those which took it up afterward, smiled
at it as ridiculous and false (which though was easier for them to do then to
show a true.) In the historical, it improved, and grew more refined: but here
the Fathers entered the field, and so clearly gained the victory, that I should
say nothing in it, did I not know it still to be the opinion of good wits, that
the particular Religion of Christians has added little to the general Religion
of the World. Let us take it then in its perfecter estate, and look upon it in
that age which was made glorious by the bringing forth of so many admirable
spirits, and this was about the 80. Olympiad, in the year of the world 3480.
for in the space of an 100. years, flourished almost all that Greece could
boast of, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Architas, Isocrates, Pythagoras,
Epicurus, Heraclitus, Xenophon, Zeno, Anaxagoras, Democritus, Demosthenes,
Parmenides, Zenocrates, Theophrastes, Empedocles, Tymaeus, with diverse others,
Orators and Poets. Or rather (for they had their Religion one from another, and
not much different) let us take a view of it in that Century in which Nature
(as it were to oppose the Grecian insolence) brought forth that happy birth of
Roman wits: Varro, Cicero, Caesar, Livie, Salust, Virgil, Horace, Vitruvius,
Ovid, Pliny, Cato, Marcus Brutus, and this was from Quintus Servilius his
Consulship to that of Augustus, 270. years after the other. And to say truth, a
great part of our Religion, either directly or indirectly has been professed
by Heathens; which I conceive not so much an exprobation to it, as a
confirmation; it being no derogating from truth, to be warranted by common
consent.

First then, the Creation of the world is delivered almost the same in the
Phoenician stories with that in Moses; from this the Grecians had their Chaos,
and Ovid the beginning of his Metamorphosis. That All things were made by God,
was held by Plato, and others; that darkness was before light, by Thales; that
the Stars were made by God, by Aratus; that life was infused into things by the
breath of God, Virgil; that Man was made of dust, Hesied, and Homer; that the
first life of man was in simplicity and nakedness, the Egyptians taught: and
from thence the Poets had their Golden Age. That in the first times men's lives
lasted a thousand years, Berosus, and others: that something divine was seen
amongst men, till that the greatness of our sins gave them cause to remove,
Ca^u^^us: and this he that writes the story of Columbus, reports from the
Indians of a great Deluge, almost all. But to the main, they hold one God, and
though multiplicity has been laid to their charge, yet certainly the clearer
spirits understood these petty Gods as things, not as Deities; second causes,
and several virtues of the great power: by Neptune, water; Juno, air; by
Dispater, earth; by Vulcan, fire; and sometimes one God signified many things,
as Jupiter the whole world, the whole heaven; and sometimes many gods, one
thing, as Ceres, Juno mag^a, the earth. They concluded those to be vices which
we do; nor was there much difference in their virtues; only Christians have
made ready belief the highest, which they would hardly allow to be any. They
held rewards for the good, and punishments for the ill; had their Elysium, and
their hell; and that they thought the pains eternal there, is evident, in that
they believed from thence was no return. They proportioned sufferings
hereafter, to offenses here; as in Tantalus, Sisyphus, and others, among which
that of Conscience) the worm that never dies) was one, as in the Vultures
gnawing of Promotheus heart, and Virgils ugliest of Furies thundering in
Pirithous ear, was not obscurely shown; and yet nearer us, they held the number
of the Elect to be but small, and that there should be a last day in which the
World should perish by fire. Lastly they had their Priests, Temples, Altars.

We have seen now the Parallel, let us enquire whether those things they seem
to have in common with us, we have not in a more excellent manner, and whether
the rest in which we differ from all the world, we take not up with reason. To
begin then with their Jupiter (for all before were but little stealthes from
Moses works) how much more like a Deity are the actions our stories declare
our God to have done, then what the Ethnic Authors deliver of theirs? How
excellently elevated are our descriptions of him? Theirs looking as if they
knew that power only by their fears, as their Statues erected to him declare:
for when he was Capitolinus, he appeard with thunder; when Latiaris, besmeared
with blood; when Feretrius, yet more terrible: We may guess what their
conceptions were, by the worship they gave him: How full of cruelty were their
sacrifices? it being received almost through the whole world, that gods were
pleased with the blood of men: and this custom neither the Grecian Wisdom, nor
Roman Civility abolished, as appears by sacrifices to Bacchus.

Then the ceremonies of Liber Pater, and Ceres, how obscene? and those days
which were set a part for the honor of the gods, celebrated with such shows as
Cato himself was ashamed to be present at. On the contrary, our services are
such as not only Cato, but God himself may be there: we worship him that is the
purest Spirit, in purity of spirit; and did we not believe what the Scriptures
deliver from himfelf, yet would our reason persuade us that such an Essence
could not be pleased with the blood of beasts, or delighted with the steam of
fat: and in this particular, Christians have gone beyond all others except the
Mahometans; besides whom there has been no Nation that had not sacrifice, and
was not guilty of this pious cruelty.

That we have the same virtues with them is very true; but who can deny that
those virtues have received additions from Christianity, conducing to men's
better living together? revenge of injuries Moses both took himself, and
allowed by the Law to others; Cicero and Aristotle placed it in virtues
quarter: We extol patient bearing of injuries; and what quiet the one, what
trouble the other would give the world, let the indifferent judge. Their
justice only took care that men should not do wrong: ours that they should not
think it, the very coveting severely forbidden: and this holds too in chastity,
desire of a woman unlawfully being as much a breach of the commandment, as
their enjoying, which showed not only the Christians care, but wisdom to
prevent ill, who provided to destroy it where it was weakest in the Cradle, and
declared, He was no less then a God which gave them these Laws; for had he
been but man, he never would have provided or taken care for what he could not
look into, the hearts of Men, and what he could not punish, their thoughts.
What Charity can be produced answerable to that of Christians? Look upon the
Primitive times, and you shall find that (as if the whole World had been but a
private Family) they sent from Province to Province, and from Places far
distant, to Releeve them they never saw nor knew.

Now for the happiness which they proposed: if they take it as the Heathens
understood it, it was an Elysium, a place of blessed shades, at best but a
handsome retirement from the troubles of this World: if according to the duller
Jews, Feastings and Banquettings; (for it is evident that the Sadduces, who
were great observer^ of the Mosaical Law, had but faint thoughts of any thing
to come) there being in Moses books no promises but of Temporal blessings, and
(if any) an obscure mention of eternity. The Mahometans are no less sensual,
making the renewing of youth, high Feasts, a woman with great eyes, and dressed
up with a little more fancy, the last and best good.

Then the hell; How gentle with the Heathens? but the rolling of a stone,
filling of a sieve with water, sitting before Banquets, and not daring to touch
them, exercising the trade and businesses they had on earth; with the
Mahometans, but a Purgatory acted in the grave, some pains inflicted by a bad
Angel, and those qualified and mitigated too, by an assisting good one. Now for
the Jews, as they had no hopes, so they had no fears; so that if we consider
it rightly, neither their punishments were great enough to deter them from
doing ill, nor their rewards high enough to invite men to strictnes of life;
for since every man is able to make as good a heaven of his own, it were
unreasonable to persuade him to quit that certain happiness for an uncertainty:
whereas Christians with as much more noble consideration both in their heaven
and hell took care not only for the body but the soul, and for both above man's
apprehension.

The strangest, though most Epidemical disease of all Religions, has been an
imagination men have had, that the imposing painful and difficult things upon
themselves, was the best way to appease the Deity, grossly thinking the chief
service and delight of the Creator to consist in the tortures and sufferings of
the Creature. How laden with chargeable and unnecessary Ceremonies the Jews
were, their feasts, circumcisions, sacrifices, great Sabbaths, and little
Sabbaths, fasts, burials, indeed almost all their worship, sufficiently
declare: and that the Mahometans are much more infected, appears by the
cutting of the Praepuces, wearing iron rings in the skin of their Fore parts,
launcing themselves with knives, putting out their eyes upon the sight of their
Prophets Tomb, and the like. Of these last we can show no patterns amongst us:
for though there be such a thing as whipping of the body, yet it is but in some
parts of Christendom, and there perchance too, more smiled at then practiced.
Our Religion teaches us to bear afflictions patiently when they fall upon us,
but not to force them upon our selves: for we believe the God we serve, wise
enough to choose his own service, and therefore presume not to add to his
commands. With the Jews it is true we have something in common, but rather the
names then things: Our Fasts being more the medicines of the body, then the
punishments of it, spiritual, as our Sabbaths; both good men's delight, not
their trouble.

But least this discourse should swell into a greatness, such as would make it
look rather like a defense which I had labored to get, then an account which I
always carry about me; I will now briefly examine, whether we believe not with
reason those things we have different from the rest of the world. First then,
for the persuasion of the truth of them in general: let us consider what they
were that conveyed them to us: men (of all the world) the most unlikely to
plot the cozenage of others, being themselves but simple people, without ends,
without designs, seeking neither honor, riches, nor pleasure, but suffering
(under the contrary) ignominy, poverty, and misery; enduring death it self, nay
courting it: all which are things distasteful to nature, and such as none, but
men strangely assured, would have undergone. Had they feigned a story,
certainly they would not in it have registered their own faults, nor delivered
him whom they propounded as a God, ignominiously crucified: add to this the
progress their doctrine made abroad, miraculous above all other either before
or since: other Religions were brought in with the sword, power, forcing a
custom, which by degrees usurped the place of truth: this even power it self
opposing. For the Romans (contrary to their custom which entertained all
Religions kindly) persecuted this: which by its own strength so possessed the
hearts of men, that no age, sex, or condition, refused to lay down life for it.
A thing so rare in other Religions, that among the Heathens, Socrates was the
sole martyr: and the Jews (unless of foam few under Manasses and Antiochus)
have not to boast of any. If we cast our eyes upon the healing of the blind,
curing the lame, redeeming from the grave, and but with a touch or word, we
must conclude them done by more then humane power, and if by any other, by no
ill; These busy not themselves so much about the good of man: and this
Religion not only forbids by precept the worship of wicked spirits, but in fact
destroys it wheresoever it comes. Now as it is clear by Authors impartial (as
being no Christians) that strange things were done, so it is plain they were
done without imposture. Delusions shun the light; These were all acted openly,
the very enemies both of the master and disciples daily looking on. But let us
descend to those more principal particulars, which so much trouble the curious
wits: these I take to be the Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, and Trinity.

For the first, That man should be made without man, why should we wonder more
at it in that time of the world, then in the beginning? much easier, certainly,
it was here, because nearer the natural way; Woman being a more prepared matter
then earth. Those great truths, and mysteries of salvation would never have
been received without miracles; and where could they more opportunely be shown,
then at his entrance into the world, where they might give credit to his
following actions and doctrine? So far it is from being against my reason to
think him thus borne, that it would be against it to believe him otherwise; it
being not fit that the Son of God should be produced like the race of men. That
humane nature may be assumed by a Deity, the enemy of Christians, Julian,
confirms; and instances (himself) in AEsculapius, whom he will have descend
from heaven in mortal shape, to teach us here below the Art of Physic. Lastly,
That God has lived with men, has been the general fancy of all Nations: every
particular having this tradition; that the Deity at some time or other
conversed amongst men. Nor is it contrary to reason to believe him residing in
glory above, and yet incarnate here: So in man himself, the soul is in heaven
when it remains in the flesh, for it reaches with its eye the Sun; why may not
God then being in heaven, be at the same time with us in the flesh? since the
soul without the body would be able to do much more then with it, and God much
more then the soul, being the soul of the soul. But it may be urged as more
abstruse, how all in heaven, and all in earth? Observe man speaking (as you
have done seeing) Is not the same speech, at the instant it is uttered, all in
every place? Receives not each particular ear* alike, the whole? and shall not
God be much more Ubiquitary then the voice of man? For the Passion (to let
alone the necessity of satisfying divine Justice this way, which, whosoever
reads more particularly our Divines, shall find rationally enforced) we find:
the Heathen had something near to this (though, as in the rest, imperfect) for
they sacrificed single men for the sins of the whole City or Country.
Porphyrius having laid this foundation: That the supreme happiness of the soul
is to see God, and that it cannot see him unpurified, concludes, That there
must be a way for the cleansing of Mankind; and proceeding to find it out, he
tells that Arts and Sciences serve but to set our wits right in the knowledge
of things, and cleanse us not enough to come to God: the like judgment he gives
of purging by Theurgie, and by the mysteries of the Sun; because those things
extend but to some few, whereas this cleansing ought to be universal for the
benefit of all mankind: in the end resolves that this cannot be done, but by
one of the three In-beings, which is the word they use to express the Trinity
by. Let us see what the divinest of the Heathens (and his Master Plato)
delivers, to admiration, and as it were Prophetically, to this purpose. That a
truly just man be shown (says he) it is necessary that he be spoiled of his
Ornaments, so that he must be accounted by others a wicked man, be scoffed at,
put in prison, beaten, nay be crucified: and certainly for him that was to
appear the highest example of patience, it was necessary to undergo the highest
trial of it, which was an undeserved death.

Concerning the Resurrection, I conceive the difficulty to lie not so much upon
our Lord, as us; it being with easy Reason imagined, that he which can make a
body, can lay it down, and take it up again. There is something more that urges
and presses us: for in our estate we promise our selves hereafter, there will
be no need of Food, Copulation, or Excrement, to what purpose should we have a
mouth, belly, or less comely parts? it being strange to imagine God to have
created man, for a moment of time, a body consisting of particulars, which
should be useless to all eternity. Besides, Why should we desire to carry that
along with us which we are ashamed of here, and which we find so great a
trouble, that very wise men (were it not forbidden) would throw it off before
it were worn out? To this I should answer, that as the body is partner in well
or ill doing, so it is but just it should share in the rewards or punishments
hereafter: and though by reason of sin we blush at it here, yet when that shall
cease to be, why we should be more ashamed then our first Parents were, or some
in the last discovered parts of the World are now, I cannot understand. Who
knows but these unsightly parts shall remain for good use, and that putting us
in mind of our imperfect estate here, they shall serve to increase our content
and happiness there? What kind of thing a glorified body shall be, how changed,
how refined, who knows? Nor is it the meanest invitement to me now, to think
that my estate there, is above my capacity here. There remains that which does
not only quarrel with the likelihood of a Resurrection, but with the
possibility; alleging, that man corrupted into dust, is scattered almost into
infinite, or devoured by an irrational creature, goes into aliment, and grows
part of it; then that creature perchance is made like food to another: And
truly did we doubt of Gods power, or not think him omnipotent, this were a
Labyrinth we should be lost in: but it were hard, when we see every petty
Chymick in his little shop bring into one body things of the same kind, though
scattered and disordered; that we should not allow the great Maker of all
things to do the same in his own Universe.

There remains only the mystery of the Trinity; to the difficulty of which,
the poverty and narrowness of words have made no small addition.

St. Austin plainly says the word Person was taken up by the Church for want
of a better; Nature, Substance, Essence, Hypostasis, Suppositum, and Persona,
have caused sharp disputes amongst the Doctors: at length they are contented to
let the three first and three last signify the same thing. By all of them is
understood something Complete, Perfect, and Singular: in this only they differ,
that Nature, Substance, Essence are communicable ad quid, and ut quo (as they
call it) The other are not at all: but enough of this; Those that were the
immediate Conveighers of it to us, wrapped it not up in any of these terms. We
then hold God to be one, and but one, it being gross to imagine two
omnipotents, for then neither would be so; yet since this good is perfectly
good, and perfect goodness cannot be without perfect love, nor perfect love
without communication, nor to an unequal or created, for then it must be
inordinate; We conclude a Second Coeternal though Begotten: nor are these
contrary (though they seem to be so) even in created substances, that one thing
may come from another, and yet that from whence it comes, not be before that
which comes from it; as in the Sun and Light. But in these high mysteries,
similitudes may be the best Arguments. In Metaphysics they tell us, that to
the constituting of every being, there is a Posse sui esse, from whence there
is a Sapientia sui esse, and from these two proceeds an Amor sui esse: and
though these three be distinct, yet they make up one perfect being. Again, and
more familiarly; There is a hidden Original of waters in the earth, from this a
spring flows up, and of these proceeds a stream: this is but one essence, which
knows neither a before, nor an after, but in order, and (that too) according to
our considering of it: the Head of a Spring is not a Head, but in respect of
the Spring; for if something flowed not from it, it were no Original, Nor the
Spring a Spring if it did not flow from something, nor the Stream a Stream but
in respect of both: Now all these three are but one Water, and though one is
not the other, yet they can hardly be considered one without the other. Now,
though I know this is so far from a demonstration, that it is but an imperfect
instance (perfect being impossible of infinite by finite things) yet there is a
resemblance great enough to let us see the possibility. And here the eye of
Reason needed no more the spectacles of Faith, then for these things of which
we make sympathy the cause, as in the Lodestone, or antipathy, of which every
man almost gives instance from his own nature: nor is it here so great a
wonder that we should be ignorant; for this is distant and removed from sense;
these near and subject to it; and it were stranger for me to conclude that God
did not work ad extra, thus one and distinct within himself, because I cannot
conceive how begotten, how proceeding; then if a Clown should say the hand of a
Watch did not move, because he could not give an account of the wheels within.
So far is it from being unreasonable, because I do not understand it, that it
would be unreasonable I should: For why should a created substance comprehend
an uncreated, A circumscribed and limited, an uncircumscrib'd and unlimited?
And this I observe in those great Lovers and Lords of Reason, quoted by the
Fathers, Zoroastres, Trismegistus, Plato, Numenius, Plotinus, Proclus, Amelius,
and Avicen, that when they spoke of this mystery of the Trinity, of which all
writ something, and some almost as plainly as Christians themselves, that they
discussed it not as they did other things, but delivered them as Oracles which
they had received themselves, without dispute.

Thus much of Christian Profession compared with others: I should now show
which (compared within it self) ought to be preferred: but this is the work of
every pen, perhaps to the prejudice of Religion it self. This excuse (though)
it has, that (like the chief Empire) having nothing to conquer, no other
Religion to oppose or dispute against, it has been forced to admit of Civil
wars, and suffer under its own excellency.

FINIS.
AGLAURA. PRESENTED At the Private House in Blackfriars, by his Majesty's
Servants.

Written by Sir JOHN SVCKLING.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Walkley, and are to be sold by Humphrey Moseley, at
his shop, at the sign of the Princes arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1646.

PROLOGVE.
I Have thought upon it; and cannot tell which way
Ought I can say now, should advance the Play.
For Plays are either good, or bad; the good,
(If they do beg) beg to be understood.
And in good faith, that has as bold a sound,
As if a Beggar should ask twenty pound.
-- Men have it not about them:
Then (Gentlemen) if rightly understood,
The bad do need less Prologue than the good:
For if it chance the Plot be lame, or blind,
Ill clothed, deformed throughout, it needs must find
Compassion, -- It is a beggar without Art: --
But it falls out in penny-worths of Wit,
As in all bargains else. Men ever get
All they can in; will have London measure,
A handful over in their very pleasure.
And now ye have't; he could not well deny'ee,
And I dare swear he is scarce a saver by ye.
Prologue to the Court.
THose common passions, hopes, and fears, that still,
The Poets first, and then the Prologues fill
In this our age, he that writ this, by me,
Protests against as modest foolerie.
He thinks it an odd thing to be in pain,
For nothing else, but to be well again.
Who writes to fear is so; had he not writ,
You never had been the Judges of his wit;
And when he had, did he but then intend
To please himself, he sure might have his end
Without the expense of hope, and that he had
That made this Play, although the Play be bad.
Then Gentlemen be thriftie, save your doomes
For the next man, or the next Play that comes;
For smiles are nothing, where men do not care,
And frowns as little, where they need not fear.
To the King.
THis (Sir) to them, but unto Majesty.
All he has said before, he does deny.
Yet not to Majesty: that were to bring
His fears to be, but for the Queen and King,
Not for your selves; and that he dares not say:
You Are his Sovereigns another way:
Your souls are Princes, and you have as good
A title that way, as ye have by blood
To govern, and here your power's more great
And absolute, than in the royal Seat.
There men dispute, and but by Law obey,
Here is no Law at all, but what ye say.
Scena Persia.

King, In love with Aglaura. Thersames, Prince, in love with Aglaura. Orbella,
Queen, at first Mistress to Ziriff: in love with Ariaspes. Ariaspes, Brother
to the King. Ziriff, Otherwise Sorannez disguised, Captain of the Guard, in
love with Orbella, brother to Aglaura. Iolas, A Lord of the Council, seeming
friend to the Prince, but a Traitor, in love with Semanthe. Aglaura, In love
with the Prince, but named Mistress to the King. Orsames, A young Lord
antiplatonique; friend to the Prince. Philan, The same. Semanthe, In love with
Ziriff; platonique. Orithie, In love with Thersames. Pasithas, A faithful
servant. Jolinas, Aglaura's waiting woman. Courtiers. Huntsmen. Priest. Guard.
AGLAURA.
ACTUS I. SCENA I.
Enter IOLAS, IOLINA. Jolas, MArried? and in Diana's Grove!

Jolin. So was th'appointment, or my Sense deceived me.

Jolas, Married!
Now by those Powers that tie those pretty knots,
It Is very fine, good faith it is wondrous fine:

Jolin. What is, Brother?

Jolas, Why? to marry Sister --
T'injoy 'twixt lawful and unlawful thus
A happiness, steal as 'twere ones own;
Diana's Grove* say thou? -- Scratcheth his head.

Jolin. That Is the place; the hunt once up, and all
Engaged in the sport, they mean to leave
The company, and steal unto those thickets,
Where, there is a Priest attends them;

Jolas, And will they lie together think thou?

Jolin. Is there distinction of sex think you?
Or flesh and blood?

Jolas, True; but the King, Sister!

Jolin. But love, Brother!

Jolas, Thou say well;
It Is fine it is wondrous fine:
Diana's Grove --

Jolin. Yes, Diana's grove,
But Brother if you should speak of this now, -- (so fast:

Jol. Why thou know a drowning man holds not a thing Semanthe! she shuns me
too: (Enter Semanthe she sees

Jolin. The wound festred sure!
(Iolas and goes in again. The hurt the boy gave her, when first
She looked abroad into the world, is not yet cured.

Iolas, What hurt?

Iolin. Why, know you not
She was in love long since with young Zorannes,
(Aglaura's brother,) and the now Queens betrothed?

Iolas, Some such slight Tale I'ave heard.

Iolin. Slight? she yet does weep, when she but hears him named,
And tells the prettiest, and the saddest stories
Of all those civil wars, and those Amors,
That, trust me both my Lady and my self
Turn weeping Statues still.

Iolas, Pish, it is not that.
It Is Ziriff and his fresh glories her^
Have robbed me of her.
Since he thus appeared in Court,
My love has languish'd worse than Plants in drought.
But time's a good Physician: come, lets in:
The King and Queen by this time are come forth. Exeunt.

Enter Serving-men to Ziriff. 1 Serve. Yonder Is a crowd without, as if some
strange
Sight were to be seen to day here.

2 Serve. Two or three with Carbonadoes before in stead of faces mistook the
door for a breach, and at the opening of it, are striving still which should
enter first.


3 Serve. Is my Lord busy? (Knocks.)

Enter Ziriff as in his Study. 1 Serve. My Lord there are some Soldiers
without --

Zir. Well* I will dispatch them presently.

2 Serve. Th'Embassadours from the Cadusians too --

Zir. Show them the Gallerie.

3 Serve. One from the King --

Zir. Again? I come, I come. Exeunt Serving-men.
Ziriff solus. Greatness, thou vainer shadow of the Princes beams,
Begot by mere reflection, nourished in extremes;
First taught to creep, and live upon the glance,
Poorly to fare, till thine own proper strength
Bring thee to surfeit of thy self at last.
How dull a Pageant, would this States-play seem
To me now; were not my love and my revenge
Mixed with it? --
Three tedious Winters have I waited here,
Like patient Chemists blowing still the coals,
And still expecting, when the blessed hour
Would com, should make me master of
The Court Elixar, Power, for that turns all:
It Is in projection now; down, sorrow, down,
And swell my heart no more, and thou wronged ghost
Of my dead father, to thy bed again,
And sleep securely;
It cannot now be long, for sure Fate must,
As't has been cruel, so* a while be just. Exit.

Enter King and Lords, the Lords entreating for Prisoners. King. I say they
shall not live; our mercy
Would turn sin, should we but use it er'e:
Pity, and Love, the bosses only be
Of government merely for show and ornament.
Fear is the bit that man's proud will restraines,
And makes its vice its virtue -- See it done.
Enter to them Queen, Aglaura, Ladies, the King addresses himself to Aglaura.
So early, and so curious in your dress, (fair Mistress?)
These pretty ambushes and traps for hearts
Set with such care to day, look like design:
Speak, Lady, is it a massacre resolved?
Is conquering one by one grown tedious sport?
Or is the number of the taken such,
That for your safety you must kill outright?

Agl. Did none do greater mischief (Sir) than I,
Heaven would not much be troubled with sad story,
Nor would the quarrel man has to the Stars
Be kept alive so strongly.

King. When he does leave't
Woman must take it up, and justly too;
For robbing of the sex and giving all to you.

Agl. Their weaknesses you mean and I confess Sir.

King. The greatest subjects of their power or glory.
Such gentle rape thou act'st upon my soul,
And with such pleasing violence do force it still;
That when it should resist, it tamely yields,
Making a kind of haste to be undone,
As if the way to victory were loss,
And conquest came by overthrow.

Enter an Express delivering a Packet upon his knee. The King reads. Qu.
Pretty! The Queen looking upon a flower in one of the Ladies heads.
Is it the child of nature, or of some fair hand?

La. It Is as the beauty Madam of some faces,
Arts issue only.

King. Thersames,
This concerns you most, brought you her picture?

Exp. Something made up for her in have I have. (Presents

King. If she does owe no part of this fair dower (the Picture.
Unto the Painter, she is rich enough.

Agl. A kind of merry sadness in this face
Becomes it much.

King. There is indeed, Aglaura,
A pretty sullenesse dressed up in smiles,
That says this beauty can both kill, and save.
How like you her Thersames?

There. As well as any man can do a house
By seeing of the portall, here is but a face,
And faces (Sir) are things I have not studied;
I have my duty, and may boldly swear.
What you like best will ever please me most.

King. Spoke like Thersames, and my son,
Come! the day holds fair,
Let all the Hunts-men meet us in the vale,
We will uncouple there. Exeunt.

Ariaspes: solus stays behind. Ariasp. How odd a thing a crowd is unto me!
Sure nature intended I should be alone,
Had not that old doting man-mid-wife Time
Slept, when he should have brought me forth* I had
Been so too -- Studies and Scratches his head.
To be borne nere, and only nere a crown --
Enter Jolas.
Iol. How now my Lord?
What? walking o'th 'tops of Pyramids?
Whispering your self away
Like a denied lover? come! to horse, to horse,
And I will show you straight a sight shall please you
More than kind looks from her you dote upon
After a falling out.

Ariasp. Prithee what is it?

Iol. I Will tell you as I go. -- Exeunt.

Enter Hunts-men hollowing and whooping. Hunt. Which way? which way?

Enter Thersames, Aglaura muffled. There. This is the grove it is somwhere here
within. -- Ex.

Enter dogging of them, Ariaspes, Jolas. Iol. Gently! Gently!

Enter Orsames, Philan, a Huntsman, two Courtiers. Hunts. No hurt, my Lord, I
hope.

Ors. None, none,
Thou would have warranted it to another,
If I had broke my neck:
What? do think my horse and I show tricks?
That which way soever he throws me
Like a tumblers boy I must fall safe?
Was there a bed of roses there? would I were Eunuch if I had not as leif h'a
fallen in the state, as where I did; the ground was as hard, as if it had been
paved with Platonicke Ladies hearts, and this unconscionable fellow asks
whether I have no hurt; where is my horse.


1 Court. Making love to the next mare I think.

2 Court. Not the next I assure you,
He Is gallop't away, as if all the spurs i*th' field
Were in his sides.

Ors. Why there is it* the jades in the fashion too.
Now has done me an injury, he will not come nere me.
Well when I hunt next, may it be upon a starved cow,
Without a saddle too.
And may I fall into a saw-pit, and not be taken up, but with suspicion of
having been private, with mine own beast there. Now I better consider on it
too, Gentlemen, it is but the same thing we do at Court; here is every man
striving who shall be foremost, and hotly pursuing of what he seldom overtakes,
or if he does, it is no great matter.


Phi. He that is best horsed (that is best friended) gets in soonest, and then
all he has to do is to laugh at those that are behind. Shall we help you my
Lord? --


Or^. Prithee do -- stay!
To be in view, is to be in favor,
Is it not?

Phi. Right,

And he that has a strong faction against him, hunts, upon a cold sent, and may
in time come to a loss.


Ors. Here Is one rides two miles about, while another leapes a ditch and is in
before him.


Phi. Where note the indirect way's the nearest.

Ors. Good again --

Phi. And here is another puts on, and falls into a Quagmire, (that is) follows
the Court till he has spent all (for your Court quagmire is want of money)
there a man is sure to stick and then not one helps him out, if they do not
laugh at him.


1 Court. What think you of him, that hunts after my rate
And never sees the Dear?

2 Court. Why he is like some young fellow, that follows
The Court, and never sees the King.

Ors. To spur a horse till he is tired, is

Phi. To importune a friend till he be weary of you.

Ors. For then upon the first occasion you are thrown off,
As I was now.

Phi. This is nothing to the catching of your horse Orsames.

Ors. Thou say true, I think he is no transmigrated
Philosopher, and therefore not likely to be taken with morals.
Gentlemen -- your help, the next I hope will be yours,
And then 'twill be my turn. -- Exeunt.

Enter again married, Thersames, Aglaura, Priest. There Is. Fear not my Dear,
if when Loves diet
Was bare looks and those stolen too,
He yet did thrive! what then
Will he do now? when every night will be
A feast, and every day fresh revelrie.

Agl. Will he not surfeit, when he once shall come
To grosser fare (my Lord) and so grow sick,
And Love once sick, how quickly will it dye?

There. Ours cannot; it is as immortal as the things
That elemented it, which were our souls:
Nor can they ere impair in health, for what
These holy rites do warrant us to do,
More than our bodies would for quenching thirst*
Come let us to horse, we shall be mist,
For we are envies mark, and Court eyes carry far.
Your prayers and silence Sir: -- to the Priest. Exeunt.

Enter Ariaspes, Jolas. Ari. If it succeed? I wear thee here my Jolas --

Iol. If it succeed? will night succeed the day?
Or hours one to another? is not his lust
The Idol of his soul? and was not she
The Idol of his lust? as safely he might
Have stolen the Diadem from off his head*
And he would less have mist it.
You now, my Lord, must raise his jealousy,
Teach it to look through the false opticke fear,
And make it see all double: Tell him the Prince
Would not have thus presumed* but that he does
Intend worse yet; and that his crown and life
Will be the next attempt.

Ari. Right* and I will urge
How dangerous it is unto the present state,
To have the creatures, and the followers
Of the next Prince (whom all now strive to please)
Too near about him:

Iol. What if the malcontents that use
To come unto him were discovered?

Ari. By no means; for 'twere in vain to give
Him discontent (which too must needs be done)
If they within him gav't not nourishment.

Iol. Well* I Will away first, for the print's too big
If we be seen together. -- Exit.

Ari. I have so fraught this Bark with hope, that it
Dares venture now in any storm, or weather;
And if he sink or splits, all is one to me.
"Ambition seems all things, and yet is none,
"But in disguise stalks to opinion
"And fools it into faith, for every thing:
It Is not with th'ascending to a Throne*
As it is with stairs, and steps, that are the same;
For to a Crown, each humour's a degree;
And as men change, and differ, so must we.
The name of virtue does the people please,
Not for their love to virtue, but their ease,
And Parrat Rumor I that tale have taught.
By making love I hold the woman's grace,
It Is the Court double key, and entrance gets
To all the little plots; the fiery spirits
My love to Arms has drawn into my faction*
All, but the minion of the Time, is mine,
And he shall be, or shall not be at all.
He that beholds a wing in pieces torn,
And knows not that to heaven it once did bear
The high-flowne and selfe-less'ning bird will think
And call them idle Subjects of the wind:
When he that has the skill to imp and bind
These in right places, will thus truth discover;
That borrowed Instruments do often convey
The Soul to her proposed Intents, and where
Our Stars deny* Art may supply -- Exit.

Enter Semanthe, Orithie, Orsames, Philan. Sem. Think you it is not then
The little jealousies (my Lord) and fears,
Joy mixed with doubt, and doubt revived with hope
That crowns all love with pleasure? these are lost
When once we come to full fruition;
Like waking in the morning, when all night
Our fancy has been fed with some new strange delight.

Ors. I grant you, Madam, that the fears, and joys,
Hopes, and desires, mixed with despaires, and doubts,
Do make the sport in love; that they are
The very dogs by which we hunt the Hare;
But as the dogs would stop* and straight give over
Were it not for the little thing before;
So would our passions; both alike must be
Flesh*t in the chase.

Ori. Will you then place the happiness, but there,
Where the dull plowman, and the plow-mans horse
Can find it out? Shall Souls refined, not know
How to preserve alive a noble flame,
But let it die, burn out to appetite?

Sem. Love's a Chamelion* and would live on air,
Physic for Agues, starving is his food.

Ors. Why? there is it now! a greater Epicure
Lives not on earth? my Lord and I have been
In's Privy kitchen, seen his bills of Fare.

Sem. And how, and how my Lord?

Ors. A mighty Prince,
And full of curiosity -- Hearts newly slain
Served up entire, and stuck with little Arrows
In stead of Cloaves --

Phi. Sometimes a cheek plumpt up
With broth, with cream and claret mingled
For sauce, and round about the dish
Pomegranate kernells, strewn on leaves of Lillies.

Ors. Then will he have black eyes, for those of late
He feeds on much, and for variety
The gray --

Phi. You forget his covered dishes
Of Jene-strayes, and Marmalade of Lips,
Perfumed by breath sweet as the beans first blossoms.

Sem. Rare!
And what is the drink to all this meat, my Lord?

Ors. Nothing but pearl dissolved, tears still fresh fetched
From Lovers eyes, which if they come to be
Warm in the carriage, are straight cooled with sighs.

Sem. And all this rich proportion, perchance
We Would allow him:

Ors. True! but therefore this is but his common diet;
Only serves
When his chief Cooks, Liking and Opportunity,
Are out of the way; for when he feasts indeed,
It Is there, where the wise people of the world
Did place the virtues, in the middle -- Madam.

Ori. My Lord there is so little hope we should co^vert you;
And if we should, so little got by it,
That weell not loose so much upon it as sleep.
Your Lordships servants --

Ors. Nay Ladies wee*ll wait upon you to your chambers.

Ph. Prithee lets spare the complement, we shall do no good

Ors. By this hand I Will try,
They keep me fasting* and I must be praying. Exeunt.

Aglaura undressing of her self, Jolina. Agl. Undresse me: --
Is it not late, Iolina?
It was the longest day, this --

Enter Thersames. There. Softly, as Death it self comes on,
When it does steal away the sick man's breath,
And standers by perceive it not*
Have I trod, the way unto these lodgings.
How wisely do those Powers
That give us happiness, order it?
Sending us still fears to bound our joys,
Which else would overflow and lose themselves:
See where she sits,
Like day retired into another world.
Dear mine! where all the beauty man admires
In scattered pieces* does united lie.
Where sense does feast* and yet where sweet desire
Lives in its longing* like a Misers eye,
That never knew, nor ^aw sacietie:
Tell me* by what approaches must I come
To take in what remains of my felicity?

Agl. Needs there any new ones, where the breach
Is made already? you are entered here --
Long since (Sir) here and I have given up all.

There. All but the Fort* and in such wars, as these,
Till that be yielded up there is no peace,
Nor triumph to be made; come* undo, undo,
And from these envious clouds slide quick
Into Loves proper Sphere, thy bed:
The weary traveller* whom the busy Sun
Has vex't all day, and scortch*d almost to tinder.
Nere longed for night as I have long*d for this.
What rude hand is that? One knockes hastily.
Go Iolina, see but let none enter -- Iolina goes to the door*

Iol. It Is Zeriff, Sir.

There. -- Oh --
Something of weight has fallen out it seems,
Which in his zeal he could not keep till morning.
But one short minute, Dear, into that chamber. --
Enter Ziriff. How now?
Thou start'st, as if thy sins had met thee,
Or thy Fathers ghost; what news man?

Zir. Such as will send the blood of hasty messages
Unto the heart, and make it call
All that is man about you into council?
Where Is the Princess, Sir?

There. Why? what of her?

Zir. The King must have her --

There. How?

Zir. The King must have her (Sir)

There. Though fear of worse makes ill, still relish better
And this look handsome in our friendship, Ziriff,
Yet so severe a preparation --
There needed not: come, come! what is it?
Ziriff leads him to the door, and shows him a Guard. A Guard! Thersames,
Thou art lost; betrayed
By faithless and ungrateful man,
Out of a happiness: -- He steps between the door and him and draws.
The very thought of that,
Will lend my anger so much noble justice,
That were thou master of as much fresh life,
As thou have been of villainy, it should not serve,
Nor stock thee out, to glory, or repent
The least of it.

Zir. Put up: put up! such unbecomming anger
I have not seen you wear before.
What? draw upon your friend, Discovers himself.
Do you believe me right now? --

There. I scarce believe mine eyes: -- Zorannes.

Zir. The same, but how preserved, or why
Thus long disguised to you a freer hour must speak:
That you are betrayed is certain, but by whom,
Unless the Priest himself, I cannot guess
More than the marriage, though he knows not of:
If you now send her on these early summons
Before the sparks are grown into a flame,
You to redeem the offense, or make it less;
And (on my life) yet his intents are fair,
And he will but besiege, not force affection.
So you gain time; if you refuse, there is but
One way; you know his power and passion.

There. Into how strange a labyrinth am I
Now fallen! what shall I do Zorannes?

Zir. Do (Sir) as Seamen, that have lost their light
And way: strike sail, and lie quiet a while.
Your forces in the Province are not yet
In readiness, nor is our friend Zephines
Arrived at Delphos; nothing is ripe, besides --

There. Good heavens, did I but dream that she was mine?
Upon imagination did I climb up to
This height? let me then wake and dye,
Some courteous hand snatch me from what is to come,
And ere my wrongs have being give them end:

Zir. How poor, and how unlike the Prince is this?
This trifle woman does unman us all;
Robs us so much, it makes us things of pity.
Is this a time to loose our anger in?
And vainly breathe it out? when all we have
Will hardly fill the sail of Resolution,
And make us bear up high enough for action.

There. I have done (Sir) pray chide no more;
The slave whom tedious custom has enured
And taught to think of misery as of food,
Counting it but a necessary of life,
And so digesting it, shall not so much as once
Be named to patience* when I am spoken of:
Mark me; for I will now undo my self
As willingly, as virgins give up all first nights
To them they love: -- Offers to go out.

Zir. Stay, Sir, 'twere fit Auglara yet were kept
In ignorance: I will dismiss the Guard,
And be my self again. Exit.

There. In how much worse estate am I in now,
Than if I near had known her; privation,
Is a misery as much above bare wretchedness,
As that is short of happiness:
So when the Sun does not appear,
It Is darker, cause it once was here.

Enter Ziriff speaks to Orsames and others half entered. Zir. Nay, Gentlemen:
There needs no force, where there is no resistance:
I Will satisfy the King my self.

There. -- Oh it is well you are come,
There was within me fresh Rebellion,
And reason was almost unking'd again.
But you shall have her Sir -- Goes out to fetch Aglaura.

Zir. What doubtful combats in this noble youth
Passion and reason have! --

Enter Thersames leading Aglaura. There. Here Sir -- Gives her, goes out.

Agl. What means the Prince, my Lord?

Zir. Madam, his wiser fear has taught him to disguise
His love, and make it look a little rude at parting.
Affairs that do concern* all that you hope from
Happiness, this night force him away:
And lest you should have tempted him to stay,
(Which he did doubt you would and would prevail)
He left you thus: he does desire by me
You would this night lodge in the little tower,
Which is in my command* the reasons why
Himself will shortly tell you.

Agl. It Is strange, but I am all obedience -- Exeunt.

ACTUS II. SCENA I.
Enter Thersames, Jolas a Lord of the Counsel Iol. I Told him so, Sir, urged
'twas no common kn^
That to the tying of it two powerful Princes,
Virtue and Love were joined and that
A greater than these two was now
Engaged in it* Religion; but 'twould, not do,
The cork of passion boy'd up all reason so
That what was said* swam but o'th*top of the ear
Nere reached the heart:

There. Is there no way for Kings to show their power,
But in their Subjects wrongs? no subject neither
But his own son?

Iol. Right Sir:
No quarrie for his lust to gorge on, but on what
You fairly had flowne at and taken:
Well -- were not the King, or were indeed
Not you* that have such hopes, and such a crown
To venture, and yet --
It Is but a woman.

There. How? that but again* and thou art more enjurious
Than he, and woul't provoke me sooner.

Iol. Why Sir?
There are no Altars yet addressed unto her,
Nor sacrifice; if I have made her less
Than what she is, it was my love to you:
For in my thoughts, and here within, I hold her
The Noblest piece Nature ere lent our eyes,
And of the which* all women else, are but
Weak counterfeits, made up by her journey-men*
But was this fit to tell you?
I know you value but too high all that,
And in a loss we should not make things more,
It Is miseries happiness, that we can make it less
By art, through a forgetfulness upon our ils,
Yet who can do it here?
When every voice, must needs, and every face,
By showing what she was not, show what she was.

There. I Will instantly unto him -- draws.

Iol. Stay Sir:
Though It be the utmost of my Fortunes hope
To have an equal share of ill with you:
Yet I could wish we sold this trifle life,
At a far dearer rate, then we are like to do,
Since it is a King's the Merchant.

There. Ha!
King, I! it is indeed.
And there is no Art can canncell that high bond:

Iol. -- He cooles again. -- (to himself.)
True Sir, and yet me thinks to know a reason --
For passive nature nere had glorious end,
And he that States preventions ever learned,
Knows, it is one motion to strike and to defend.

Enter Serving-man. Serve. Some of the Lords without, and from the King,
They say, wait you.

There. What subtle State trick now?
But one turn here, and I am back my Lord. -- Exit.

Iol. This will not do; his resolution's like.
A kilfull horseman and reason is the stirrup,
Which though a sudden shock may make
It loose* yet does it meet it handsomely again.
Stay, 'tmust be some sudden fear of wrong
To her, that may draw on a sudden act
From him* and ruin from the King; for suth
A spirit will not like common ones, be
Raised by every spell, it is in loves circle
Only 'twill appear.

Enter Thersames. Their. I cannot bear the burden of my wrongs
One minute longer.

Iol. Why! what is the matter Sir?

Their. They do pretend the safety of the State
Now, nothing but my marriage with Cadusia
Can secure th'adjoyning country to it;
Confinement during life for me if I refuse
Diana's Nunnerie for her -- And at that Nunn'rie, Iolas*
Allegiance in me like the string of a Watch
Wound up too high and forced above the nicke,
Ran back, and in a moment was unravelled all.

Iol. Now by the love I bear to Justice,
That Nunn'rie was too severe; when virtuous love's a crime
What man can hope to escape a punishment,
Or who is indeed so wretched to desire it?

There. Right!

Iol. What answer made you, Sir!

There. None, they gave me till to morrow,
And e're that be, or they or I
Must know our destiny:
Come friend let us in* there is no sleeping now;
For time is short, and we have much to do. -- Exeunt*

Enter Orsames, Philan Courtiers. Ors. Judge you, Gentlemen, if I be not as
unfortunate
As a gamester thinks himself upon the loss
Of the last stake; this is the first she
I ever swore too heartily* and (by those eyes)
I think I had continued unperjur'd a whole month,
(And that is fair you will say.)

1 Court. Very fair --

Ors. Had she not run mad betwixt. --

2 Court. How? mad?
Who? Semanthe?

Ors. Yea, yea, mad, ask Philan else.
People that want clear intervalls talk not
So wildly: I Will tell you Gallants* it is now, since first I
Found my self a little hot and quivering 'bout the heart,
Some ten days since, (a tedious Ague) Sirs;
(But what of that?)
The gracious glance, and little whisper past,
Approches made from the hand unto the lip.
I came to visit her, and (as you know we use)
Breathing a sigh or two by way of prologue,
Told her, that in Loves Physic 'twas a rule,
Where the disease had birth to seek a cure;
It had no sooner named love to her, but she
Began to talk of Flames, and Flames,
Neither devouring, nor devoured, of Air,
And of Camelions --

1 Court. Oh the Platoniques.

2 Court. Those of the new religion in love! your Lordship's merry,
Troth how do you like the humor on it?

Ors. As thou would like red hair, or leanness
In thy Mistress; scurvily, 't does worse with handsomnesse,
Than strong desire would do with impotence;
A mere trick to inhance the price of kisses --

Phi. Sure these silly women, when they feed
Our expectation so high, do but like
Ignorant Conjurers, that raise a Spirit
Which handsomely they cannot lay again:

Ors. True, it is like some that nourish up
Young Lions till they grow so great they are afraid of
Themselves, they dare not grant at last,
For fear they shou d not satisfy.

Phi. Who Is for the Town? I must take up again,

Ors. This villainous Love's as changeable as the Philosophers Stone and thy
Mistress as hard to compass too!


Phi. The Platonique is ever so; they are as tedious
Before they come to the point, as an old man
Fallen into the Stories of his youth;

2 Cour. Or a widow into the praises of her first husband,

Ors. Well if she hold out but one month longer,
If I do not quite forget, I ere beleaguered there,
And remove the siege to another place, may all
The curses beguiled virgins lose upon their perjured lovers
Fall upon me.

Phi. And thou woult deserve'em all.

Ors. For what?

Phi. For being in the company of those
That took away the Prince's Mistress from him.

Ors. Peace, that will be redeemed --
I put but on this wildness to disguise my self;
There are brave things in hand, hark i'thy ear^: -- (Whisper)

1. Court. Some severe plot upon a maidenhead.
These two young Lords make love,
As Embroyderers work against a Mask, night and day;
They think importunity a nearer way then merit,
And take women as Schoole-boyes catch Squirrells.
Hunt 'em up and down till they are weary,
And fall down before'm.

Ors. Who loves the Prince fails not --

Phi. And I am one: my injuries are great as thine,
And do persuade as strongly.

Ors. I had command to bring thee,
Fail not and in thine own disguise,

Phi. Why in disguise?

Ors. It is the Princes policy and love;
For if we should miscarrie,
Some one taken might betray the rest
Unknown to one another,
Each man is safe, in his own valor;

2 Court. And what Mercers wife are you to cheapen now
In stead of his silks?

Ors. Troth; it is not so well; it is but a Cozen of thine --
Come Philan let us along: -- Exeunt.

Enter Queen alone. Orb. What is it thus within whispering remorse,
And calls Love Tyrant? all powers, but his,
Their rigor, and our fear, have made divine!
But every Creature holds of him by sense,
The sweetest Tenure; yea! but my husbands brother:
And what of that? do harmless birds or beasts
Ask leave of curious Heraldrie at all?
Does not the womb of one fair spring,
Bring unto the earth many sweet rivers,
That wantonly do one another chase*
And in one bed, kiss, mingle, and embrace?
Man (Natures heir) is not by her will ti'de,
To shun all creatures are allied unto him*
For then he should shun all; since death and life
Doubly allies all them that live by breath:
The Air that does impart to all life's brood,
Refreshing, is so near to it self, and to us all,
That all in all is individual:
But, how am I sure one and the same desire
Warmes Ariaspes: for Art can keep alive
A beddred love.

Enter Ariaspes. Ari. Alone, (Madam) and overcast with thought,
Uncloud -- uncloud -- for if we may believe
The smiles of Fortune, love shall no longer pine
In prison thus, nor undelivered travel^
With throes of fear, and of desire about it.
The Prince, (like to a valiant beast in nets)
Striving to force a freedom suddenly,
Has made himself at length, the surer prey:
The King stands only now betwixt, and is,
Just like a single tree, that hinders all the prospect:
It Is but the cutting down of him, and we --

Orb. Why would't thou thus imbarque into strange seas,
And trouble Fate, for what we have already?
Thou art to me what thou now seek'st a Kingdom;
And were thy love as great, as thy ambition;
I should be so to thee.

Ari. Think you, you are not Madam?
As well and justly may you doubt the truths,
Tortured, or dying men do leave behind them:
But then my fortune turns my miseri^,
When my addition shall but make you less;
Shall I endure that head that wore a crown,
For my sake should wear none? First let me lose
The Exchequer of my wealth, your love; nay, may
All that rich Treasury you have about you.
Be rifled by the man I hated, and I look on;
Though youth be full of sin, and heaven be just,
So sad a doom I hope they keep not from me;
Remember what a quick Apostacy he made,
When all his vows were up to heaven and you.
How, e're the Bridal torches were burnt out,
His flames grew weak, and sicklier; think on that,
Think how unsafe you are, if she should now,
Not sell her honor at a lower rate,
Than your place in his bed.

Orb. And would not you prove false too then?

Ari. By this -- and this -- loves breakfast: (Kisses her.)
By his feasts too yet to come, by all the
Beauty in this face, divinity too great
To be profaned --

Orb. O do not swear by that;
Cankers may eat that flower upon the stalk,
(For sickness and mischance, are great devourers)
And when there is not in these cheeks and lips,
Left red enough to blush at perjurie,
When you shall make it, what shall I do then?

Ari. Our souls by that time (Madam)
Will by long ^ustome so acquainted be,
They will not need that duller truch-man Flesh,
But freely, and without those poorer helps,
Converse and mingle; mean time we will teach
Our loves to speak, not thus to live by signs,
And action is his native language, Madam,
Enter Ziriff unseene. This box but opened to the Sense will do it.

Orb. I undertake I know not what,

Ari. Thine own safety (Dearest)
Let it be this night, if thou do; Whisper and kiss.
Love thy self or me.

Orb. That Is very sudden*

Ari. Not if we be so, and we must now be wise,
For when their Sun sets, ours begins to rise. -- Exeunt.

Ziriff solus. Zir. Then all my fears are true, and she is false;
False as a falling Star, or Glow-wormes fire:
This Devil Beauty is compounded strangely,
It is a subtle point, and hard to know,
Whether 't has in it more active tempting,
Or more passive tempted; so soon it forces,
And so soon it yields --
Good Gods! she seized my heart, as if from you
Sh'ad had Commission to have used me so;
And all mankind besides -- and see, if the just Ocean
Makes more haste to pay
To needy rivers, what it borrowed first,
Then she to give, where she never took;
Me thinks I feel anger, Revenges Harbenger
Chalking up all within, and thrusting out
Of doors, the tame and softer passions; --
It must be so:
To love is noble frailty, but poor sin
When we fall once to Love, unlov'd again. Exit.

Enter King, Ariaspes, Jolas. Ari. 'Twere fit your Justice did consider, (Sir)
What way it took; if you should apprehend
The Prince for Treason (which he never did)
And which, unacted, is unborn; (at least will be believed so)
Lookers on, and the loud talking crowd,
Will think it all but water colors
Laid on for a time,
And which wiped off, each common eye would see,
Strange ends through stranger ways:

King. Think thou I will compound with Treason then?
And make one fear another Advocate?

Iol. Virtue forbid Sir, but if you would permit,
Them to approach the room (yet who would advise
Treason should come so near?) there would be then
No place left for excuse.

King. How strong are they?

Iol. Weak, considering
The enterprise; they are but few in number,
And those few too having nothing but
Their resolutions considerable about them.
A Troop indeed designed to suffer what
They come to execute.

King. Who are they are thus weary of their lives?

Jol. Their names I cannot give you.
For those he sent for, he did still receive
At a back door, and so dismissed them too.
But I do think Ziriff is one. --

King. Take heed! I shall suspect thy hate to others,
Not thy love to me, begot this service;
This Treason thou thy self do say
Has but an hours age, and I can give account
Of him, beyond that time. -- Brother, in the little Tower
Where now Agla^ra's prisoner,
You shall find him; bring him along,
He yet does stand untainted in my thoughts,
And to preserve him so,
He shall not stir out of my eyes command
Till this great cloud be over.

Jol. Sir, 'twas the Prince who first --

King. I know all that! urge it no more!
I love the man;
And it is with pain, we do suspect,
Where we do not dislike:
Thou Art sure he will have some,
And that they will come to night?

Jol. As sure as night will come it self.

King. Get all your Guards in readiness, we will our self
Disperse them afterward; and both be sure
To wear your thoughts within: I Will act the rest: Exeunt.

Enter Philan, Orsames, Courtiers. 2. Court. Well. -- If there be not some
great storm toward,
Never trust me; Whisper (Court thunder) is in
Every corner, and there has been to day
About the Town a murmuring
And buzzing, such as men use to make,
When they do fear to vent their fears;

1. Court. True, and all the Statesmen hang down their heads,
Like full eared corn; two of them
Where I sup't, asked what time of night it was,
And when 'twas told them, started, as if
They had been to run a race.

2. Court. The King too (if you mark him,) does faigne mirth
And jollitie, but through them both,
Flashes of discontent, and anger make escapes:

Ors. Gentlemen! it is pity heaven
Designed you not to make the Almanacks.
You guess so shrewdly by the ill aspects,
Or near conjunctions of the great ones,
At what is to come still; that without all doubt
The Country had been governed wholly by you,
And plowed and reaped accordingly; for me,
I understand this mystery as little
As the new Love, and as I take it too,
It Is much about the Time that every thing
But Owls, and Lovers take their rest;
Good night, Philan -- away -- Exit.

1. Court. It Is early yet; let us go on the Queens side
And fool a little; I love to warm my self
Before I go to bed, it does beget
Handsome and sprightly thoughts, and makes
Our dreams half solid pleasures.

2. Court. Agreed: agreed: Exeunt.

ACTUS III. SCENA I.
Enter Prince: Conspiratours. There. Could thou not find cut Ziriff?

1. Court. Not speak with him my Lord;
Yet I sent in by several men.

Ors. I wonder Jolas meets us not here too.

There. It Is strange, but let us on now how ere,
When Fortunes, honor, life, and all is in doubt
Bravely to dare, is bravely to get out.

Excursions: The Guard upon them. There. Betrayed! betrayed!

Ors. Shift for your self Sir, and let us alone,
We will secure your way, and make our own. Exeunt.

Enter the King, and Lords. King. Follow Lords, and see quick execution done,
Leave not a man alive.
Who treads on fire, and does not put it out,
Disperses fear in many sparks of doubt. Exeunt.

Enter Conspirators, and the Guard upon them. Ors. Stand friends, an equal
party -- (Fight.) Three of the Conspirators fall, and three of the Kings side:
Orsames and Philan kill the rest. They throw of their disguises.

Ph. Brave Orsames, it is pleasure to die near thee.

Ors. Talk not of dying Philan, we will live,
And serve the noble Prince again; we are alone,
Off then with thy disguise, and throw it in the bushes;
Quick, quick; before the torrent comes upon us:
We shall be straight good subjects, and I despair not
Of reward for this nights service: so. --
We two now killed our friends! it is hard,
But 'tmust be so.

Enter Ariaspes, Jolas, two Courtiers, part of the Guard. Ari. Follow! Follow!

Ors. Yes; so you may now, you are not likely to overtake.

Jol. Orsames, and Philan, how came you hither?

Ors. The nearest way it seems, you followed (thank you)
As i^ 'thad been through quicksets:

Jol. 'Sdeath have they all escaped?

Ors. Not all, two of them we made sure;
But they cost dear, look here else.

Ari. Is the Prince there?

Phi. They are both Princes I think,
They fought like Princes I am sure. Jolas pulls off the vizors.

Jol. Stephines, and Odiris -- we trifle.
Which way took the rest?

Ors. Two of them are certainly here abouts.

Ari. Upon my life they swam the river;
Some straight to horse, and follow over the bridge;
You and I my Lord will search this place a little better.

Ors. Your Highness will I hope remember, who were
The men were in --

Ari. Oh! fear not, your Mistress shall know you are valiant.

Ors. Philan! if thou love me, let us kill them upon the place.

Phi. Fie: thou now art wild indeed;
Thou taught'st me to be wise first,
And I will now keep thee so. -- Follow, follow. Exeunt.

Enter Aglaura with a Lute. The Prince comes and knocks within. There. Madam!

Agl. What wretch is this that thus usurps
Upon the privilege of Ghosts, and walks
At midnight?

There. Aglaura.

Agl. Betray me not
My willing sense too soon, yet if that voice
Be false. --

There. Open fair Saint, and let me in.

Agl. It is the Prince --
As willingly as those
That cannot sleep do light; welcome (Sir,) (Opens.)
Welcome above. -- Spies his sword drawn.
Bless me, what means this unsheathed minister of death?
If, Sir, on me quick Justice be to pass,
Why this? absence alas, or such strange looks
As you now bring with you would kill as soon:

There. Softly! for I, like a hard hunted Dear,
Have only hearded here; and though the cry
Reach not our ears, yet am I followed close:
O my heart! since I saw thee,
Time has been strangely Active, and begot
A Monstrous issue of unheard of Story:
Sit; thou shall have it all! nay, sigh not.
Such blasts will hinder all the passage;
Do thou remember, how we parted last?

Agl. Can I forget it Sir?

There. That word of parting was ill placed, I swear,
It may be ominous; but do thou know
Into whose hands I gave thee?

Agl. Yes into Ziriffs Sir.

There. That Ziriff was thy brother, brave Zorannes
Preserved by miracle in that sad day
Thy father fell, and since thus in disguise,
Waiting his just revenge.

Agl. You do amaze me, Sir.

There. And must do more, when I tell all the story.
The King, the jealous King, knew of the marriage,
And when thou thought thy self by my direction,
Thou were his Prisoner;
Unless I would renounce all right,
And cease to love thee, (o strange, and fond request!)
Immured thou must have been in some sad place,
And locked for ever, from Thersames sight.
For ever -- and that unable to endure
This night, I did attempt his life.

Agl. Was it well done Sir?

There. O no! extremely ill!
For to attempt and not to act was poor:
Here the dead-doing Law, (like ill-paid Soldiers)
Leaves the side 'twas on, to join with power,
Royal villainy now will look so like to Justice,
That the times to come, and curious posterity,
Will find no difference: weep'st thou Aglaura?
Come, to bed my Love!
And we will there mock Tyranny, and Fate,
Those softer hours of pleasure, and delight,
That like so many single Pearls, should have
Adorned our thread of life, we will at once,
By Loves mysterious power, and this nights help
Contract to one, and make but one rich draught
Of all.

Agl. What mean you Sir?

There. To make my self incapable of misery,
By taking strong preservative of happiness:
I would this night enjoy thee:

Agl. Do: Sir, do what you will with me,
For I am too much yours, to deny the right
How ever claimed -- but --

There. But what Aglaura?

Agl. Gather not reses in a wet and frowning hour,
They Will lose their sweets then, trust me they will Sir.
What pleasure can Love take to play his game out,
When death must keep the Stakes -- A noise without.
Hark Sir -- grave-bringers, and last minutes are at hand,
Hide hide your self, for Loves sake hide your self.

There. As soon the Sun may hide himself, as I.
The Prince of Persia hide himself?

Agl. O talk not Sir; the Sun does hide himself then;
When night and blackness comes --

There. Never sweet Ignorance, he shines in the other world
And so shall I, if I set here in glory:
Enter Opens the door. enter Ziriff.
Ye hasty seekers of life.
Sorannez. --

Agl. My brother!
If all the joy within me come not cut,
To give a welcome to so dear an object,
Excuse it Sir; sorrow locks up all doors.

Zir. If there be such a Toy about you, Sister,
Keep't for your self, or lend it to the Prince;
There is a dearth of that Commodity,
And you have made it Sir. Now?
What is the next mad thing you mean to do?
Will you stay here? when all the Court's beset
Like to a wood at a great hunt and busy mischief hastes
To be in view, and have you in her power --

There. To me all this --
For great griefe's deaf as well as it is dumb,
And drives no trade at all with Counsel: (Sir)
Why do you not Tutor one that has the Plague,
And see if he will fear an after ague sit;
Such is all mischief now to me; there is none left
Is worth a thought. death is the worst, I know,
And that compared to shame, does look more lovely now
Than a chaste Mistress, set by common woman --
And I must court it Sir?

Zir. No wonder if that heaven forsake us, when we leave our selves:
What is there done should feed such high despair?
Were you but safe --

Agl. Dear (Sir) be ruled,
If love, be love, and magic too,
(As sure it is where it is true;)
We then shall meet in absence, and in spite
Of all divorce, freely enjoy together,
What niggard Fate thus peevishly denies.

There. Yea: but if pleasures be themselves but dreams,
What then are the dreams of these to men?
That monster, Expectation, will devour
All that is within our hope or power,
And e're we once can come to show, how rich
We are, we shall be poor,
Shall we not Sorannez?

Zir. I understand not this,
In times of envious penury (such as these are)
To keep but love alive is fair, we should not think
Of feasting him: come (Sir)
Here in these lodgings is a little door,
That leads unto another; that again,
Unto a vault that has his passage under
The little river* opening into the wood;
From thence it is but some few minutes easy business
Unto a Servants house of mine (who for his faith
And honesty, hereafter must
Look big in Story) there you are safe however;
And when this Storm has met a little calm,
What wild desire dares whisper to it self,
You may enjoy, and at the worst may steal:

There. What shall become of thee Aglaura then?
Shall I leave thee their rages sacrifice?
And like dull Seamen threatened with a storm,
Throw all away, I have* to save my self?

Agl. Can I be safe when you are not? my Lord?
Knows love in us divided happiness?
Am I the safer for your being here?
Can you give that you have not for your self?
My innocence is my best guard and that your stay
Betraying it unto suspicion* takes away.
If you did love me? --

There. Grows that in question? then it is time to part: -- Kisses her.
When we shall meet again Heaven only knows,
And when we shall, I know we shall be old:
Love does not calculate the common way,
Minutes are hours there, and the hours are days,
Each day's a year and every year an age;
What will this come to think you?

Zir. Would this were all the ill,
For these are pretty little harmless nothings;
Times horse runs full* as fast, hard borne and curbed,
As in his full carreere, loose-rain'd and spurred:
Come, come, let us away.

There. Happiness, such as men lost in misery
Would wrong in naming, it is so much above them.
A^l that I want of it, all you deserve,
Heaven send you in my absence.

Agl. And misery such as witty malice would
Lay out in curses, on the thing it hates,
Heaven send me in the stead if when you are gone
I welcome it, but for your sake alone. -- Exeunt. Leads him out, and enters up
out of the vault.

Zir. Stir not from hence, Sir, til you hear from me
So goodnight dear Prince.

There. Goodnight dear friend.

Zir. When we meet next all this will but advance --
Joy never feasts so high,
As when the first course is of misery. Exeunt.

ACTUS IV. SCENA I.
Enter three or four Courtiers. 1 Court. BY this light -- a brave Prince,
He made no more of the Guard, than they
Would of a Tailor on a Mask night, that has refused
Trusting before.

2 Court. He Is as Active as he is valiant too;
Did mark him how he stood like all the points
Of The Compass, and as good Pictures,
Had his eyes, toward every man.

3 Court. And his sword too,
All the other side walk up and down the Court now,
As if they had lost their way, and stare,
Like Greyhounds, when the Hare has taken the furze.

1 Court. Right.
And have more troubles about'em
Than a Serving-man that has forgot his message
When he is come upon the place. --

2 Court. Yonder Is the King within chafing, and swearing
Like an old Falconer upon the first flight
Of a young Hawke, when some Clown
Has taken away the quarrie from her;
And all the Lords stand round about him,
As if he were to be baited, with much more fear,
And at much more distance,
Than a Country Gentlewoman sees the Lions the first time:
Look: he is broke loose.

Enter King and Lords. King. Find him; or by Osiris self, you all are
Traitors;
And equally shall pay to Justice; a single man,
And guilty too, break through you all!

Enter Ziriff. Zir. Confidence!
(Thou paint of women, and the States-mans wisdom,
Valor for Cowards, and of the guilties Innocence,)
Assist me now.
Sir, send these Starers off:
I have some business will deserve your privacie.

King. Leave us.

Jol. How the villain swells upon us? -- Exeunt.

Zir. Not to punish thought,
Or keep it long upon the wrack of doubt,
Know Sir,
That by corruption of the waiting woman,
The common key of secrets, I have found
The truth at last, and have discovered all:
The Prince your Son was by Aglaura's means,
Conveyed last night unto the Cypress Grove,
Through a close vault that opens in the lodgings:
He does intend to join with Carimania,
But e're he goes, resolves to finish all
The rites of Love, and this night means
To steal what is behind.

King. How good is Heaven unto me!
That when it gave me Traitors for my Subjects,
Would lend me such a Servant!

Zir. How just (Sir) rather,
That would bestow this Fortune on the poor.
And where your bounty had made debt so infinite
That it grew des^erate, their hope to pay it --

King. Enoug^ of that, thou do but gently chide
Me for a fault, hat I will mend; for I
Have been toopoore, and low in my rewards
Unto thy* vert^e: but to our business;
The question is, whether we shall rely
Upon our Guards again?

Zir. ^y no means Sir:
Hope (...) his future fortunes, or their Love
Unto his person, has so sicklied over
Their resolutions, that we must not trust them,
Besides, it were but needless here*
He passes through the vault alone, and I
My self durst undertake that business,
If that were all, but there is something else,
This accident does prompt my zeal to serve you in.
I know you love Aglaura (Sir) with passion,
And would enjoy her; I know besides
She loves him so* that whosoever shall bring
The tidings of his death, must carry back
The news of hers, so that your Justice (Sir)
Must rob your hope: but there is yet a way --

King. Here! take my heart; for I have hitherto
Too vainly spent the treasure of my love,
I Will have it coined straight into friendship all,
And make a present to thee.

Zir. If any part of this rich happiness.
(Fortune prepares now for you) shall owe it self
Unto my weak endeavors, I have enough,
Aglaura without doubt this night expects
The Prince, and why
You should not then supply his place by stealth,
And in disguise --

King. I apprehend thee Ziriff,
But there is difficulty --

Zir. Who trades in love must be an adventurer, (Sir)
But here is scarce enough to make the pleasure dearer:
I know the Cave; your Brother and my self
With Iolas, (for those we are sure do hae him,)
With some few chosen more betimes wll wait
The Princes passing through the vault; i^ he
Comes first, he is dead; and if it be yourselfe,
We will conduct you to the chamber door^*
And stand 'twixt you and danger afterward.

King. I have conceived of joy, and am grown ^reat:
Till I have safe deliverance, time's a cripple
And goes on crutches. -- as for thee my Ziriff,
I do here entertain a friendship with thee,
Shall drown the memory of all patterns past;
We will oblige by turns; and that so thick,
And fast, that curious studiers of it,
Shall not once dare to cast it up, or say
By way of guess, whether thou or I
Remain the debtors, when we come to die. Exeunt.

Enter Semanthe, Orithie, Philan, Orsames, Lords and Ladies. Ori. Is the Queen
ready to come out?

Phi. Not yet sure the Kings brother is but newly entered;

Sem. Come my Lord, the Song then.

Ori. The Song.

Ors. A vengeance take this love, it spoils a voice
Worse than the losing of a maidenhead.
I have got such a cold with rising
And walking in my shirt a nights, that
A Bittorne whooping in a reed is better music.

Ori. This modesty becomes you as ill, my Lord,
As wooing would us women; pray, put's not to it.

Ors. Nay Ladies, you shall find me,
As free, as the Musicians of the woods
Themselves; what I have, you shall not need to call for*
Nor shall it cost you any thing.

SONG.
WHy so pale and wan fond Lover?
Prithee why so pale?
Will, when looking well cannot move her,
Looking ill prevail?
Prithee why so pale?
Why so dull and mute young Sinner?
Prithee why so mute?
Will, when speaking well cannot win her,
Saying nothing do it?
Prithee why so mute?
Quit, quit, for shame, this will not move
This cannot take her;
If of her self she will not Love,
Nothing can make her,
The Devil take her.
Ori. I should have ghest, it had been the issue of
Your brain, if I had not been told so;

Ors. A little foolish counsel (Madam) I gave a friend
Of mine four or five years ago, when he was
Falling into a Consumption. --

Enter Queen. Orb. Which of all you have seen the fair prisoner
Since she was confinde?

Sem. I have Madam.

Orb. And how behaves she now her self?

Sem. As one that had entrenched so deep in Innocence*
She feared no enemies, bears all quietly,
And smiles at Fortune, whilst she frowns on her

Orb. So gallant! I wonder where the beauty lies
That thus inflames the royal blood?

Ori. Faces, Madam, are like books, those that do study them
Know best, and to say truth, it is still
Much as it pleases the Courteous Reader.

Orb. These Lovers sure are like Astronomers,
That when the vulgar eye discovers, but
A Sky above, studded with some few stars,
Find out besides strange fishes, birds, and beasts.

Sem. As men in sickness scorched into a raving
Do see the Devil, in all shapes and forms,
When standers by wondering, ask where, and when;
So they in Love, for all is but fever there,
And madness too.

Orb. That Is too severe Semanthe;
But we will have your reasons in the park;
Are the doors open through the Gardens?

Lo. The King has newly led the way. Exeunt.

Enter Ariaspes: Ziriff, with a warrant sealed. Ari. Thou art a Tyrant, Ziriff:
I shall die with joy.

Zir. I must confess my Lord; had but the Princes ills
Proved slight, and not thus dangerous,
He should have owed to me, at least I would
Have laid a claim unto his safety; and
Like Physicians, that do challenge right
In Natures cures, looked for reward and thanks;
But since 'twas otherwise, I thought it best
To save my self, and then to save the State.

Ari. 'Twas wisely done.

Zir. Safely I Am sure, my Lord! you know it is not
Our custom, where the Kings dislike, once swells to hate,
There to engage our selves; Court friendship
Is a Cable, that in storms is ever cut,
And I made bold with it; here is the warrant sealed
And for the execution of it, if you think
We are not strong enough, we may have
Iolas, for him the King did name.

Ari. And him I would have named.

Zir. But is he not too much the Prince's (Sir?)

Ari. He is as lights in Scenes at Masks,
What glorious show so e're he makes without*
I that set him there, know why, and how; Enter Jolas.
But here he is. --
Come Jolas; and since the Heavens decreed,
The man whom thou should envy, should be such,
That all men else must do it; be not ashamed
Thou once were guilty of it;
But bless them, that they give thee now a means,
To make a friendship with him* and vouchsafe
To find thee out a way to love, where well
Thou could not hate.

Jol. What means my Lord?

Ari. Here, here he stands that has preserved us all!
That sacrificed unto a public good,
(The dearest private good we mortals have)
Friendship: gave into our arms the Prince,
When nothing but the sword (perchance a ruin)
Was left to do it.

Iol. How could I chide my love, and my ambition now,
That thrust me upon such a quarrel? here I do vow --

Zir. Hold do not vow my Lord, let it deserve it first;
And yet (if Heaven bless honest men's intents)
It Is not Impossible.
My Lord, you will be pleased to inform him in particulars,
I must be gone. --
The King I fear already has been left
Too long alone.

Ari. Stay -- the hour and place.

Zir. Eleven, under the Tarras walk;
I will not fail you there. Goes out, returns back again.
I had forgot: --
'Tmay be, the small remainder of those lost men
That were of the conspiracy, will come along with him:
'Twere best to have some chosen of the Guard
Within our call -- Exit Ziriff.

Ari. Honest, and careful Ziriff: Jolas stands musing.
How now Planet struck?

Iol. This Ziriff will grow great with all the world,

Ari. Shallow man short ^^ghteder than Travelers in mists,
Or women that outlive themselves; do thou not see,
That whilst he does prepare a Tomb with one hand
For his friend, he digs a Grave with the other for himself?

Iol. How so?

Ari. Do think he shall not feel the weight of this,
As well as poor Thersames?

Iol. Shall we then kill him too at the same instant?

Ari. And say, the Prince made an unluckie thrust.

Iol. Right.

Ari. Dull, dull, he must not dye so uselesly.
As when we wipe off filth from any place,
We throw away the thing that made it clean,
So this once done, he is gone.
Thou know the People love the Prince, to their rage
Something the State must offer up; who fitter
Than thy rival and my enemy?

Iol. Rare! our witness will be taken.

Ari. Pish! let me alone.
The Giants that made mountains ladders,
And thought to take great Jove by force, were fools:
Not hill on hill, but plot on plot, does make
Us sit above, and laugh at all below us. -- Exeunt*

Enter Aglaura, and a Singing Boy. Boy. Madam* 'twill make you melancholy,
I Will sing the Prince's Song, that is sad enough.

Agl. What you will Sir.

SONG.
NO, no, fair Heretic, it needs must be
But an ill Love in me,
And worse for thee.
For were it in my Power,
To love thee now this hour,
More than I did the last;
I would then so fall,
I might not Love at all;
Love that can flow, and can admit increase,
Admitts as well an Ebb and may grow less.
2
True Love is still the same; the torrid Zones,
And those more frigid ones,
It must not know:
For Love grown cold or hot,
Is Lust, or Friendship, not
The thing we have;
For that is a flame would die,
Held down, or up to high*
Then think I love more than I can express,
And would love more, could I but love thee less.
Agl. Leave me! for to a Soul, so out of Tune,
As mine is now; nothing is harmony:
When once the maine-spring, Hope, is fallen into
Disorder; no wonder, if the lesser wheels,
Desire, and Joy, stand still; my thoughts like Bees
When they have lost their King, wander
Confusedly up and down, and settle no where.

Enter Orithie. Orithie. fly! fly the room,
As thou would shun the habitations
Which Spirits haunt, or where thy nearer friends
Walk after death; here is not only Love,
But Loves plague too -- misfortune; and so high,
That it is sure infectious!

Ori. Madam, so much more miserable am I this way than you,
That should I pity you, I should forget my self:
My sufferings are such, that with less patience
You may endure your own, than give mine Audience.
There is that difference, that you may make
Yours none at all, but by considering mine!

Agl. O speak them quickly then! the marriage day
To Passionate Lovers never was more welcome,
Than any kind of ease would be to me now.

Ori. Could they be spoke, they wre not then so great.
I love, and dare not say I love; dare not hope,
What I desire; yet still too must desire --
And like a starving man brought to a feast,
And made say grace, to what he nere shall taste,
Be thankful after all, and kiss the hand,
That made the wound thus deep.

Agl. It Is hard indeed, but with what unjust scales,
Thou took'st the weight of our misfortunes,
Be thine own Judge now.
Thou mourn'st for loss of that thou never had,
Or if thou had a loss, it never was
Of a Thersames.
Would thou not think a Merchant mad, Orithie?
If thou should see him weep, and tear his hair,
Because he brought not both the Indies home?
And would not think his sorrows very just.
If having fraught his ship with some rich Treasure,
He sunk in the very Port? This is our case.

Ori. And do you think there is such odds in it?
Would Heaven we women could as easily change
Our fortunes as ('it is said) we can our minds.
I cannot (Madam) think them miserable,
That have the Princes Love.

Agl. He is the man then --
Blush not Orithie, it is a sin to blush
For loving him, though none at all to love him.
I can admit of rivalship without
A jealousy -- nay shall be glad of it:
We two will sit, and think* and think and sigh,
And sigh, and talk of love -- and of Thersames.
Thou shall be praising of his wit, while I
Admire he governes it so well:
Like this thing, said thus, the other thing thus done,
And in good language him for these adore,
While I want words to do it, yet do i^ more.
Thus will we do* till death it self shall us
Divide, and then whose fate 'tshall be to die
First of the two by legacy shall all
Her love bequeath, and give her stock to her
That shall survive; for no one stock can serve.
To love Thersames so as he will deserve.

Enter King, Ziriff. King. What have we here impossibility?
A constant night, and yet within the room
That, that can make the day before the Sun?
Silent Aglaura too?

Agl. I know not what you say:
Is It to your pity, or your scorn, I owe
The favor of this visit (Sir?) for such
My fortune is, it does deserve them both:

King. And such thy beauty is, that it makes good
All Fortunes, sorrow looks lovely here;
And there is no man, that would not entertain
His griefs as friends, were he but sure they would show
No worse upon him -- but I forget my self,
I came to chide.

Agl. If I have sinned so high, that yet my punishment
Equals not my crime,
Do Sir; I should be loath to die in debt
To Justice, how ill soe*re I paid
The scores of Love. --

King. And those indeed thou have but paid indifferently
To me, I did deserve at least fair death,
Not to be murdered thus in private:
That was too cruel, Mistress.
And I do know thou do repent, and wilt
Yet make me satisfaction:

Agl. What satisfaction Sir?
I am no monstet, never had two hearts;
One is by holy vows another now,
And could I give it you, you would not take it,
For it is alike impossible for me,
To love again, as you love Perjurie.
O Sir! consider, what a flame love is.
If by rude means you think to force a light,
That of it self it would not freely give,
You blow it out, and leave your self in the dark.
The Prince once gone, you may as well persuade
The light to stay behind, when the Sun posts
To the other world, as me; alas! we two,
Have mingled souls more than two meeting brooks;
And whosoever is designed to be
The murderer of my Lord, (as sure there is,
Has angered heaven so far that 'tas decreed
Him to increase his punishment that way)
Would he but search the heart, when he has done,
He there would find Aglaura murdered too.

King. Thou hust overcome me, moved so handsomely
For pity, that I will dis-inherit
The elder brother, and from this hour be
Thy Convert, not thy Lover. --
Ziriff, dispatch away --
And he that brings news of the Prince's welfare,
Look that he have the same reward, we had decreed
To him, brought tidings of his death.
'Tmust be a busy and bold hand, that would
Unlinke a chain the Gods themselves have made:
Peace to thy thoughts: Aglaura -- Exit.

Ziriff steps back and speaks. Zir. What e're he says believe him not Aglaura*
For lust and rage ride high within him now:
He knows Thersames made th'escape from hence,
And does conceal it only for his ends:
For by the favor of mistake and night,
He hopes to enjoy thee in the Prince's room;
I shall be mist -- else I would tell thee more;
But thou may guess, for our condition
Admits no middle ways, either we must
Send them to Graves, or lie our selves in dust -- Exit.

Aglaura stands still and studies. Agl. Ha! it is a strange Act thought puts me
now upon;
Yet sure my brother meant the selfsame thing,
And my Thersames would have done 't for me:
To take his life that seeks to take away
The life of Life, (honor from me;) and from
The world* the life of honor, Thersames;
Must needs be something sure, of kin to Justice.
If I do fail, the attempt however was brave,
And I shall have at worst a handsome grave -- Exit.

Enter Jolas, Semanthe. Semanthe steps back, Jolas stays her. Jol. What? are
we grown, Semanthe, night, and day?
Must one still vanish when the other comes?
Of all that ever Love did yet bring forth
(And 'thas been fruitful too) this is
The strangest issue. --

Sem. What my Lord?

Jol. Hate Semanthe.

Sem. You do mistake, if I do shun you, it is,
As bashful Debtors shun their Creditors,
I cannot pay you in the selfsame coin,
And am ashamed to offer any other.

Jol. It is ill done Semanthe, to plead bankrupt,
When with such ease you may be out of debt;
In loves dominions, native commodity
Is current payment, change is all the Trade,
And heart for heart the richest merchandise,

Sem. 'Twould here be mean my Lord, since mine would prove
In your hands but a Counterfeit, and yours in mine
Worth nothing; Sympathy, not greatness,
Makes those Jewels rise in value.

Iol. Sympathy! o teach but yours to love then,
And two so rich no mortal ever knew.

Sem. That heart would Love but ill that must be taught,
Such fires as these still kindle of themselves.

Iol. In such a cold, and frozen place as is
Thy breast? how should they kindle of themselves
Semanthe?

Sem. Ask how the Flint can carry fire within?
It Is the least miracle that Love can do:

Jol. Thou art thy self the greatest miracle,
For thou art fair to all perfection,
And yet do want the greatest part of beauty,
Kindness* thy cruelty (next to thy self,)
Above all things on earth takes up my wonder.

Sem. Call not that cruelty, which is our fate,
Believe me Iolas the honest Swain
That from the brow os some steep cliffe far off,
Beholds a ship laboring in vain against
The boisterous and unruly Elements, never had
Less power, or more desire to help than I;
At every sigh, I die, and every look,
Does move; and any passion you will have
But Love, I have in store: I will be angry,
Quarrel with destiny, and with my self
That itis no better; be melancholy;
And (though mine own disa^^ers well might plead
To be in chief,) yours only shall have place,
I Will pity, and (if that is too low) I Will grieve,
As for my sins, I cannot give you ease;
All this I do, and this I hope will prove
It Is greater Torment not to love, than Love. -- Exit.

Iol. So perishing Sailours pray to storms,
And so they hear again. So men
With death about them, look on Physicians that
Have given them over, and so they turn away:
Two fixed Stars that keep a constant distance,
And by laws made with themselves must know
No motion excentrick, may meet as soon as we:
The anger that the foolish Sea does show,
When it does brave it out, and rore against
A stubborn rock that still denies it passage,
Is not so vain and fruitless, as my prayers.
Ye mighty Powers of Love and Fate, where is
Your Justice here? It is thy part (fond Boy)
When thou do find one wounded heart, to make
The other so, but if thy Tyranny
Be such, that thou willt leave one breast to hate,
If we must live, and this survive,
How much more cruell's Fate? -- Exit.

ACTUS V. SCENA I.
Enter Ziriff, Ariaspes, Iolas. Iol. A Glorious night!

Ari. Pray Heaven it prove so.
Are we not there yet?

Zir. It Is about this hollow. Enter the Cave.

Ari. How now! what region are we got into?
Th'enheritance of night;
Are we not mista^en a tur^ing Ziriff,
And stepped into some m^lancholy Devils Territory?
Sure it is a part of the first Chaos,
That would endure no change.

Zir. No matter Sir, it is as proper for our purpose,
As the Lobbie for the waiting woman's.
Stay you here, I Will move a little backward,
And so we shall be sure to put him past
Retreat: you know the word if it be the prince. (Goes to the mouth of the Cave.

Enter King. Here Sir, follow me, all is quiet yet. --
King. He is not come then?

Zir. No.

King. Where Is Ariaspes?

Zir. Waiting within. He leads him on, steps behind him, gives the false word
they kill the king.

Iol. I do not like this waiting,
Nor this fellows leaving us.

Ari. This place does put odd thoughts into thee,
Then thou art in thine own nature too, as jealous
As either Love or Honor: Come wear thy sword in readiness,
And think how near we are a Crown.

Zir. Revenge!
So let us drag him to the light and search
His pockets, there may be papers there that will
Discover the rest of the Conspiratours.
Iolas, your hand -- Draw him out.

Jol. Whom have we here? the King!

Zir. Yes, and Zorannes too. Illo! hoe! -- Enter Pasithas and others.
Unarme them.
Do You stare?
This for my Fathers injuries and mine: Points to the Kings dead body.
Half Love, half Duties Sacrifice,
This -- for the noble Prince, an offering to friendship: (runs at Jolas.

Iol. Basely! and tamely -- Dies.

Ari. What have thou done?

Zir. Nothing -- killed a Traitor,
So -- away with them, and leave us,
Pasithas be only you in call.

Ari. What do thou pawse?
Have thou remorse already murderer?

Zir. No fool: it is but a difference I put
Betwixt the crimes: Orbella is our quarrel;
And I do hold it fit, that love should have
A nobler way of Justice, than Revenge
Or Treason; follow me out of the wood,
And thou shall be Master of this again:
And then, best arm and title take it. They go out and enter again.
There -- Gives him his Sword.

Ari. Extremely good! Nature took pains I swear,
The villain and the brave are mingled handsomely.

Zir. 'Twas Fate that took it when it decreed
We two should meet, nor shall they mingle now
We are brought together strait to part. -- Fight.

Ari. Some Devil sure has borrowed this shape. Pawse.
My Sword never stayed thus long to find an entrance.

Zir. To guilty men, all that appears is Devil,
Come Trifler, come. -- Fight again, Ariaspes falls.

Ari. Whither whither, thou fleeting Coward life?
Bubble of Time* Natures shame, stay; a little, stay!
Till I have looked my self into revenge,
And star'd this Traitor to a carcass first.
-- It will not be: -- Falls.
The Crown, the Crown, too
Now is lost, for ever lost -- oh! --
Ambition's, but an Ignis fatuns, I see
Misleading fond mortality,
That hurries us about, and sets us down
Just -- where -- we -- first -- begun -- Dies.

Zir. What a great spreading mighty thing this was,
And what a nothing now? how soon poor man
Vanishes into his noone-tide shadow?
But hopes over fed have seldom better done: -- (Hollows.)
Take up this lump of vanity, and honor, Enter Pasithas.
And carry it the back way to my lodging,
There may be use of Statesmen, when they are dead:
So. -- for the Cittadell now, for in such times
As these, when the unruly multitude
Is up in swarms, and no man knows which way
They Will take, it is good to have retreat. Exeunt.

Enter Thersames. There. The Dog-star's got up high, it should be late:
And sure by this time every waking ear,
And watchful eye is charmed; and yet me thought
A noise of weapons struck my ear just now.
'Twas but my fancy sure, and were it more,
I would not tread on step, that did not lead
To my Aglaura, stood all his Guard betwixt,
With lightning in their hands;
Danger! thou Dwarf dressed up in Giants clothes,
That show far off, still greater than thou art:
Go, terrify the simple, and the guilty, such
As with false Optics, still do look upon thee.
But fright not Lovers, we dare look on thee
In thy worst shape, and meet thee in them too.
Stay -- These trees I made my mark, it is hereabouts*
-- Love guide me but right this night,
And Lovers shall restore thee back again
Those eyes the P^^ts took so boldly from thee. Exit

Aglaura with a torch in one hand and a dagger in the other. Agl. How ill this
does become this hand how much the worse
This suits with this, one of the two should go.
The she within me says, it must be this --
Honor says this -- and honor is Thersames friend.
What is that she then? it is not a thing
That sets a Price, not upon me, but on
Life in my name, leading me into doubt,
Which when 'tas done, it cannot light me out.
For fear does drive to Fate, or Fate if we
Do fly, oretakes, and holds us, till or death,
Or infamy, or both does seize us. -- Puts out the light.
Ha! -- would 'twere in again.
Antiques and strange mishapes,
Such as the Porter to my Soul, mine Eye,
Was never acquainted with, Fancy lets in,
Like a distracted multitude, by some strange accident
Piec'd together, fear now afresh comes on,
And charges Love to home.
-- He comes -- he comes --
Woman, if thou would be the Subject of man's wonder,
Not his scorn hereafter* now show thy self.
Enter Prince rising from the vault she stabs him two or thre^ times, he falls
she goes back to her chamber. Sudden and fortunate.
My better Angel sure did both infuse
A strength, and did direct it. Enter Ziriff.

Zir. Aglaura!

Agl. Brother --

Zir. The same.
So slow to let in such a longed for Guest?
Must Joy stand knocking Sister? come, prepare,
Prepare. --
The King of Persia's coming to you strait!
The King! -- mark that.

Agl. I thought how poor the Joys you brought with you,
Were in respect of those that were with me:
Joys, are our hopes stripped of their fears,
And such are mine; for know, dear Brother,
The King is ^ome already, and is gone -- mark that.

Zir. Is this instinct, or riddle? what King? how gone?

Agl. The Cave will tell you more --

Zir. Some sad mistake -- thou have undone us all. Goes out, enters hastily
again.
The Prince! the Prince! cold as the bed of earth
He lies upon, as senseless too; death hangs
Upon his lips.
Like an untimely frost, upon an early Cherrie;
The noble Guest, his Soul, took it so ill
That you should use his old Acquaintance so,
That neither prayers, nor tears, can e're persuade
Him back again. -- Aglaura swounes: rubs her.
Hold hold! we cannot sure part thus!
Sister! Aglaura! Thersames is not dead,
It is the Prince that calls --

Agl. The Prince, where? --
Tell me, or I will strait go back again,
Into those groves of Gessemine, thou took'st me from,
And find him out, or lose my self for ever.

Zir. For ever. -- I: there is it!
For in those Groves thou talk of,
There are so many by-ways, and odd rurnings.
Leading unto such wild and dismal places,
That should we go without a guide, or stir
Before Heaven calls, it is strongly to be feared
We there should wander up and down for ever,
And be benighted to eternity! --

Agl. Benighted to eternity? -- What Is that?

Zir. Why it is to be benighted to eternity;
To sit in the dark, and do I know not what;
Unriddle at our own sad cost and charge,
The doubts the learned here do only move --

Agl. What place have murderers brother there? for sure
The murderer of the Prince must have
A punishment that Heaven is yet to make. --

Zir. How is religion fooled betwixt our loves,
And fears? poor Girl, for ought that thou have done,
Thy Chaplets may be fair and flourishing,
As his in the Elysium:

Agl. Do you think so?

Zir. Yes, I do think so.
The juster Judges of our Actions,
Would they have been severe upon
Our weaknesses,
Would (sure) have made us stronger. --
Fie! those tears
A Bride upon the marriage day as properly
Might shed as thou, here widows do it
And marry next day after:
To such a funeral as this, there should be
nothing common --
We Will mourn him so, that those that are alive
Shall think themselves more buried far than he;
And wish to have his grave, to find his Obsequies:
But stay -- the Body. Brings up the body, she swoun^ and dies.
Again! Sister -- Aglaura --
O speak once more, once more look out fair Soul. --
She Is gone. --
Irrevocably gone. -- And winging now the Air,
Like a glad bird broken from some cage:
Poor Bankrupt heart, when 'thad not wherewithal
To pay to sad disaster all that was its due,
It broke -- would mine would do so too.
My soul is now within me
Like a well metled Hawk, on a blind Faulk'ners fist,
Me thinks I feel it baiting to be gone:
And yet I have a little foolish business here
On earth; I will dispatch: -- Exit.

Enter Pasithas, with the body of Ariaspes. Pas. Let me be like my burden
here, if I had not as lieve kill two of the Bloud-royall for him, as carry one
of them; These Gentlemen of high actions are three times as heavy after death,
as your private retired ones; look if he be not reduced to the state of a
Courtier of the second form now? and cannot stand upon his own legs, nor do
any thing without help, Hum. -- And what is become of the great Prince, in
prison as they call it now, the toy within us, that makes us talk, and laugh,
and fight, I! why there is it, well, let him be what he will, and where he will,
I Will make bold with the old Tenement here. Come Sir -- come along: -- Exit.


Enter Ziriff. Zir. All Is fast too, here --
They sleep to night
I'their winding sheets I think, there is such
A general quiet.
Oh! here is light I warrant:
For lust does take as little rest, as care, or age. --
Courting her glass, I swear, fie! that is a flatterer Madam,
In me you shall see trulier what you are. (Knocks. Ent. the Queen

Orb. What make you up at this strange hour my Lord?

Zir. My business is my boldness warrant,
(Madam)
And I could well afford to have been without it now,
Had Heaven so pleased.

Orb. It Is a sad Prologue,
What follows in the name of virtue?

Zir. The King.

Orb. I: what of him? is well is he not?

Zir. Yes. --
If to be free from the great load
We sweat and labor under, here on earth
Be to be well, he is.

Orb. Why he is not dead, is he?

Zir. Yes Madam, slain -- and the Prince too*

Orb. How? where?

Zir. I know not, but dead they are.

Orb. Dead?

Zir. Yes Madam.

Orb. Did see them dead?

Zir. As I see you alive.

Orb. Dead!

Zir. Yes, dead.

Orb. Well, we must all die;
The Sisters spin no cables for us mortals*
They Are thread; and Time, and chance --
Trust me I could weep now,
But watrie distillations do but ill on graves,
They make the lodging colder. She knocks.

Zir. What would you Madam?

Orb. Why my friends, my Lord!
I would consult and know, what is to be done.

Zir. Madam it is not so safe to raise the Court;
Things thus unsettled, if you please to have --

Orb. Where Is Ariaspes?

Zir. In's dead sleep by this time I Am sure,

Orb. I know he is not! find him instantly.

Zir. I Am gone, -- Turns back again.
But Madam, why make you choice of him, from whom
If the succession meet disturbance,
All must come of danger?

Orb. My Lord, I am not yet so wise, as to be jealous;
Pray dispute no further.

Zir. Pardon me Madam, if before I go
I must unlock a secret unto you; such a one
As while the King did breathe durst know no air,
Zorannes lives.

Orb. Ha!

Zir. And in the hope of such a day as this
Has lingered out a life, snatching, to feed
His almost famished eyes,
Sights now and then of you, in a disguise.

Orb. Strange! this night is big with miracle!

Zir. If you did love him, as they say you did,
And do so still; it is now within your power!

Orb. I would it were my Lord, but I am now
No private woman, If I did love him once
(And it is so long ago, I have forgot)
My youth and ignorance may well excus't.

Zir. Excuse it?

Orb. Yes, excuse it Sir.

Zir. Though I confess I loved his father much.
And pity him, yet having offered it
Unto your thoughts: I have discharged a trust;
And zeal shall stray no further.
Your pardon Madam: Exit. Queen studies.

Orb. May be it is a plot to keep off Ariaspes
Greatness, which he must fear, because he knows
He hates him: for these great Statesmen,
That when time has made bold with the King and Subject,
Throwing down all fence that stood betwixt their power
And others right, are on a change,
Like wanton Salmons coming in with floods,
That leap over wyres and nets, and make their way
To be at the return to every one a prey.

Enter Ziriff, and Pasithas throwing down the dead body of Ariaspes. Orb. Ha!
murdered too!
Treason -- treason --

Zir. But such another word, and half so loud,
And thou art, --

Orb. Why? thou will not murder me too?
Will thou villain?

Zir. I do not know my temper -- Discovers himself*
Look here vain thing, and see thy sins full blown:
There Is scarce a part in all this face, thou have
Not been forsworn by, and Heaven forgive thee for it!
For thee I lost a Father, Country, friends,
My self almost, for I lay buried Long;
And when there was no use thy love could pay
Too great, thou made the principle away:
Had I but staid, and not began revenge
Till thou had made an end of changing,
I had had the Kingdom to have killed:
As wantons entering a Garden, take
The first fair flower, they meet, and
Treasure't in their laps.
Then seeing more, do make fresh choice again,
Throwing in one and one, till at the length
The first poor flower o're-charg'd, with too much weight
Withers, and dies:
So have thou dealt with me,
And having killed me first, I will kill --

Orb. Hold -- hold --
Not for my sake, but Orbella's (Sir) a bare
And single death is such a wrong to Justice,
I must needs except against it.
Find out a way to make me long a dying;
For death's no punishment, it is the sense,
The pains and fears before that makes a death:
To think what I had had, had I had you,
What I have lost in losing of my self;
Are deaths far worse than any you can give:
Yet kill me quickly, for if I have time,
I shall so wash this soul of mine with tears,
Make it so fine, that you would be afresh
In love with it, and so perchance I should
Again come to deceive you. Sherises up weeping, and hanging down her head*

Zir. So rises day, blushing at nights deformity:
And so the pretty flowers blubbered with dew,
And ever washed with rain, hang down their heads,
I must not look upon her: (Goes toward him.)

Orb. Were but the Lillies in this face as fresh
As are the Roses; had I but innocence
Joined to their blushes, I should then be bold,
For when they went on begging they were never deni'de,
It Is but a parting kiss Sir --

Zir. I dare not grant it. --

Orb. Your hand Sir then, for that is a part I shall
Love after death (if after death we love)
'Cause it did right the wronged Zorannes, here --
Steps to him, and opens the box of poison, Zorannes falls. Sleep, sleep for
ever, and forgotten too,
All but thy ills, which may succeeding time
Remember, as the Seaman does his marks,
To know what to avoid, may at thy name
All good men start, and bad too, may it prove
Infection to the Air, that people dying of it
May help to curse thee for me. (Turns to the body of Ariaspes.
Could I but call thee back as easily now;
But that is a Subject for our tears, not hopes!
There is no piecing Tulips to their stalks,
When they are once divorced by a rude hand;
All we can do is to preserve in water
A little life, and give by couretous Art
What scanted Nature wants Commission for,
That thou shall have: for to thy memory
Such Tribute of moist sorrow I will pay,
And that so purified by love, that on thy grave
Nothing shall grow but Violets and Primroses,
Of which too, some shall be
Of the mysterious number, so that Lovers shall
Come thither not as to a tomb, but to an Oracle. She knocks, and raises the
Court.

Enter Ladies and Courtiers, as out of their beds. Orb. Come! come! help me to
weep my self away,
And melt into a grave, for life is but
Repentance nurse, and will conspire with memory,
To make my hours my tortures.

Ori. What Scene of sorrow's this? both dead?

Orb. Dead? I! and it is but half death's triumphs this,
The King and Prince lie somewhere, just
Such empty truncks as these.

Ori. The Prince?
Then in griefs burden I must bear a part.

Sem. The noble Ariaspes -- valiant Ziriff too. -- Weeps.

Orb. Weep'st thou for him, fond Prodigal? do know
On whom thou spend'st thy tears? this is the man
To whom we owe our ills; the false Zorannes
Disguised, not lost; but kept alive, by some Enter Pasithas, surveys the
bodies, finds his Master*
Incensed Power, to punish Persia thus:
He would have killed me too, but Heaven was just,
And furnished me with means, to make him pay
This score of villainy, e're he could do more.

Pas. Were you his murderer then? -- Pasithas runs at her, kills her, and
flies.

Ori. Ah me! the Queen. -- Rub her till she come to her self.

Sem. How do you Madam?

Orb. Well, -- but I was better, and shall -- Dies.

Sem. Oh! she is gone for ever.

Enter Lords in their night-gownes, Orsames, Philan. Ors. What have we here?
A Churchyard? nothing but silence, and grave?

Ori. Oh! here has been (my Lords)
The blackest night the Persian world e're knew,
The King and Prince are not themselves exempt
From this arrest; but pale and cold, as these,
Have measured out their lengths.

Lo. Impossible! which way?

Sem. Of that we are as ignorant as you:
For while the Queen was telling of the Story,
An unknown villain here has hurt her so,
That like a sickly Taper, she but made
One flash, and so expired:

Enter tearing in Pasithas. Phi. Here he is, but no confession.

Or. Torture must force him then:
Though 'Twill indeed, but weakly satisfy
To know now they are dead, how they did die.

Phi. Come take the bodies up, and let us all
Go drown our selves in tears, this massacre
Has left so torn a State, that 'twill be policy
As Well as debt, to weep till we are blind,
For who would see the miseries behind?

Epilogue.
Our Play is done, and yours does now begin:
What different Fancies, people now are in?
How strange, and odd a mingle it would make,
If e're they rise; 'twere possible to take
All votes. --
But as when an authentic Watch is shown,
Each man wi^des up, and rectifies his own,
So in our very Judgments; first there sits
A grave Grand Jurie on it of Towne-wits;
And they give up their verdict; then agin
The other Jurie of the Court comes in
(And that is of life and death) for each man sees
That often condemns, what the other Jurie frees:
Some three days hence, the Ladies o^ the Town
Will come to have a Judgment of their own:
And after them, their servants; then the City,
For that is modest, and is still last witty.
'Twill be a week at least yet e're they have
Resolved to let it live, or give't a grave:
Such difficulty, there is to unite
Opinion; or bring it to be right.
Epilogue for the Court.
SIR:
THat the abusing of your eare's a crime,
Above the excuse any six lines in (...)
Can make, the Poet knows: I am but sen^
TO entreat he may not be a President,
For he does think that in this place the^e he
Many have done't as much and more than he
But here is, he says, the difference of the Fates,
He begs a Pardon after't, they Estates.
FINIS.
AGLAURA. REPRESENTED At the Court, by his Majesty's Servants.

Written by Sir JOHN SVCKLING.

LONDON, Printed for Tho Walkley, and are to be sold by Humphrey Moseley, at
his shop, at the sign of the Princes arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1646.

Prologue.
FOre love, a mighty Sessions: and I fear,
Though kind last Sizes, 'twill be now severe;
For it is thought, and by judicious men,
Aglaura 'scap't only by dying then:
But 'twould be vain for me now to indeare,
Or speak unto my Lords, the Judges here,
They hold their places by condemning still,
And cannot show at once mercy and skill;
For wit's so cruel unto wit, that they
Are thought to want, that find not want in the play,
But Ladies you, who never liked a plot.
But where the Servant had his Mistress got,
And whom to see a Lover dye it grieves,
Although it is in worse language that he lives,
Will like't w are confident, since here will be,
That your Sex ever liked variety.
Prologue to the Court.
It Is strange perchance (you will think) that she that di' d^
At Christmas, should at Easter be a Bride:
But it is a privilege the Poets have,
To take the long-since dead out of the grave:
Nor is this all, old Heroes a sleep
'Twixt marble coverlets, and six foot deep^
In earth, they boldly wake, and make them do
All they did living here -- sometimes more too,
They give fresh life, reverse and alter Fate,
And yet more bold, Almightie-like create:
And out of nothing only to deifie
Reason, and Reasons friend, Philosophy,
Fame, honor, valor, all that is great, or good,
Or is at least amongst us, so understood,
They give, heavens theirs, no handsome woman dies,
But if they please, is strait some star in the skies --
But oh --
How those poor men of Meetre do
Flatter themselves with that, that is not true,
And 'cause they can trim up a little prose,
And spoil it handsomely, vainly suppose
The are Omnipotent, can do all those things
That can be done only by Gods and Kings.
Of this wild guilt, he feign would be thought free,
That writ this Play, and therefore (Sir) by me,
He humbly begs, you would be pleased to know,
Aglaura's but reprieved this night, and though
She now appears upon a Poets call,
She Is not to live, unless you say she shall.
ACTUS V. SCENA I.
Enter Ziriff, Pasithas, and Guard: he places 'em: and Exit. A State set out.
Enter Ziriff, Jolas, Ariaspes. Iol. A Glorious night!

Ari. Pray Heaven it prove so.
Are we not there yet?

Zir. It Is about this hollow. They Enter the Cave.

Ari. How now! what region are we got into?
Th'enheritance of night;
Have we not mistaken a turning Ziriff,
And stepped into the confines of some melancholy
Devils Territory?

Iol. Sure it is a part of the first Chaos,
That would not suffer any change.

Zir. No matter Sir, it is as proper for our
Purpose, as the Lobbie for the waiting woman's.
Stay you here, I Will move a little backward,
And so we shall be sure to put him past
Retreat: you know the word if it be the prince. Ziriff goes to the door

Enter King. Ziriff. Here Sir, follow me, al^'s quiet yet.

King. Is he not come then?

Zir. No.

King. Where Is Ariaspes?

Zir. Waiting within.

Iol. I do not like this waiting,
Nor this fellows leaving of us.

Ari. This place does put odd thoughts into thee.
Then thou art in thine own nature too,
As jealous, as Love, or Honor; wear thy sword
In readiness, and think how near we are a Crown.

Zir. Revenge! -- Guard seiseth on'em.

King. Ha! what is this?

Zir. Bring them forth. -- Brings them forth.

Ari. The King.

Zir. Yes, and the Princes friend -- Discovers himself.
Do You know this face?

King. Zorannes.

Zor. The very same,
The wronged Zorannes, -- King --
D you stare. --
Away with them where I appointed.

King. T^aytours, let me go;
Villain, thou dare not do this --

Zor. Poor Counterfeit,
How feign thou now would act a King and art not:
Stay you, -- to Ariaspes.
Unhand him, -- Whispers.
Leave us now. -- Exeunt. Manet Ariasp. Zoran.

Ari. What does this mean?
Sure he does intend the Crown to me.

Zor. We are alone*
Follow me out of the wood, and thou shall be
Master of this again,
And then best a^me and title take it.

Ari. Thy offer is so noble, in gratitude Icannot
But propound gentler conditions,
We will divide the Empire.

Zor. Now by my fathers soul,
I do almost repent my first intents,
And now could kill thee scurvily, for thinking
If I had a mind to rule
I would not rule alone,
Let not thy easy faith (lost man)
Fool thee into so dull an heresy;
Orbella is our quarrel, and I have thought it fit,
That love should have a nobler way of Justice,
Than Revenge, or Treason.
If thou dare die handsomely, follow me. Ex. And enter both again

Zor. There, -- Gives him his sword.

Ari. Extremely good; Nature took pains I swear,
The villain and the brave are mingled handsomely: --

Zir. 'Twas Fate that took it, when it decreed
We two should meet, nor shall they mingle now,
We are but brought together strait to part. -- Fight.

Ari. Some Devil sure has borrowed this shape,
My sword never staid thus long to find an entrance.

Zir. To guilty men, all that appear is Devil;
Come trifler come. -- Fight.

Ari. Dog, thou have it,

Zir. Why then it seems my star's as great as his, Ariaspes pants, and runs at
him to catch his sword
I smile at thee,
Thou now would have me kill thee,
And it is a courtesy I cannot afford thee,
I have bethought my self, there will be use
Of thee, -- Pasithas -- to the rest with him. Exit.

Enter Pasithas, and two of the Guard. -- Exeunt. Enter Thersames. There. The
Dog-star's got up high, it should be late:
And sure by this time every waking ear
And watchful eye is charmed; and yet me thought
A noise of weapons struck my ear just now.
'Twas but my Fancy sure, and were it more,
I would not tread one step, that did not lead
To my Aglaura, stood all his Guard betwixt,
With lightning in their hands.
Danger, thou Dwarf dressed up in Giants clothes,
That show far off still greater than thou art,
Go, terrify the simple, and the guilty, such
As with false Optics still do look upon thee:
But fright not Lovers* we dare look on thee
In thy worst shapes and meet thee in them too. --
Stay these trees I made my mark, it is hereabouts,
-- Love guide me but right this night,
And Lovers shall restore thee back again
Those eyes the Poets took so boldly from thee. Exit.

A Taper Table out. Enter Aglaura, with a Torch in one hand, a Dagger in the
other. Agl. How ill this does become this hand? much worse
This suits with this, one of the two should go.
The she within me says, it must be this --
Honor says this -- and honor is Thersames friend.
What is that she then? is it not a thing
That sets a Price, not upon me, but on
Life in my name, leading me into doubt,
Which when 'tas done it cannot light me out.
For fear does drive to Fate, or Fate if we
Do fly, oretakes, and holds us, till or death,
Or infamy, or both do seize us. -- Puts out the light.
Ha! -- would 'twere in again. Antiques and strange mishapes,
Such as the Porter to my Soul, mine Eye,
Was never acquainted with, Fancy lets in,
Like a disrouted multitude, by some strange accident
Piec'd together, fear now afresh comes on,
And charges Love too home.
-- He comes, he comes. -- A little noise below.
Woman, if thou would be the Subject
Of man's wonder, Not his scorn hereafter, --
-- Now show thy self.

Enter Thersames from the vault, she stabs him as he rises. There. Unkindly
done --

Agl. The Princes voice, defend it Goodness?

There. What art thou that thus poorly
Have destroyed a life?

Agl. Oh sad mistake, it is he?

There. Have thou no voice?

Agl. I would I had not, nor a being neither.

There. Aglaura, it cannot be?

Agl. Oh still believe so, Sir,
For 'twas not I Indeed, but fatal Love.

There. Loves wounds used to be gentler than these were,
The pains they give us have some pleasure
In them, and that these have not. Enter Ziriff with a taper.
Oh do not say 'twas you, for that does wound again:
Guard me my better Angel,
Do I wake? my eyes (since I was man)
Never met with any object gave them so much trouble,
I dare not ask neither to be satisfied,
She looks so guiltily --

Agl. Why do you stare and wonder at a thing
That you your self have made thus mizerable?

Zir. Good gods, and I of the party too.

Agl. Did you not tell me that the King this night
Meant to attempt my honor; that our condition
Would not admit of middle ways, and that we must
Send them to graves, or lie our selves in dust?

Zir. Unfortunate mistake? Ziriff knocks.
I never did intend our safety by thy hands: Enter Pasithas.
Pasithas, go instantly and fetch Andrages
From his bed; how is it with you Sir?

There. As with the besieged:
My soul is so beset it does not know,
Whether't had best to make a desperate
Sally out by this port or not?

Agl. Sure I shall turn statue here.

There. If thou do love me, weep not Aglaura:
All those are drops of blood and flow from me.

Zir. Now all the gods defend this way of expiation,
Think thou thy crime, Aglaura would be less,
By adding to it? or can thou hope
To satisfy those powers, whom great sins
Do displease, by doing greater.

Agl. Discourteous courtesy!
I had no other means left me than this,
To let Thersames know I would do nothing
To him, I would not do unto my self,
And that thou take away.

There. Friend, bring me a little nearer,
I find a kind of willingness to stay
And find that willingness something obeyed.
My blood now it persuades it self
You did not call in earnest,
Makes not such have. --

Agl. Oh my dearest Lord,
This kindness is so full of cruelty,
Puts such an ugliness on what I have done,
That when I look upon it needs must fright
Me from my self, and which is more insufferable.
I fear from you.

There. Why should that fright thee, which most comforts me?
I glory in it, and shall smile in the grave
To think our love was such, that nothing
But it self could e're destroy it.

Agl. Destroy it? can it have ever end?
Will you not be thus courteous then in the other world?
Shall we not be together there as here?

There. I cannot tell whether I may or not.

Agl. Not tell?

There. No:
The Gods thought me unworthy of thee here,
And when thou art more pure
Why should I not more doubt it?

Agl. Because if I shall be more pure,
I shall be then more fit for you.
Our Priests assure us an Elysium,
And can that be Elysium where true Lovers
Must not meet? Those Powers that made our loves,
Did they intend them mortal,
Would sure have made them of a courser stuff,
Would they not my Lord? --

There. Prithee speak still,
This music gives my soul such pleasing business,
Takes it so wholly up, it finds not leisure to
Attend unto the summons death does make;
Yet they are loud and peremptory now,
And I can only -- Faints.

Agl. Some pitying Power inspire me with
A wa^ to follow him: heart will thou not
Break it of thy self.

Zir. My grie^es besot me:
His sou^e will sai^e out with this purple tide,
And I shall here be found staring
After't like a man that is come too short of the ship,
And's left behind upon the land. She swounes.
Enter Andrages. Oh welcome, we come here lies Andrages
Alas too great a tr^all for thy art.

And. There Is life in him: from whence these wounds?

Zir. Oh it is no time for story.

And. It Is not mortal my Lord, bow him gently,
And help me to infuse this into him;
The sou e is but asleep and not gone forth.

There. Oh -- ho: --

Zir. Hark* the Prince does live.

There. What e're thou art have given me now a life,
And with it all my cares and miseries,
Expect not a reward no not a thanks.
If thou would merit from me,
(Yet wh would be guilty of so lost an action)
Restore me to my quietness again,
For life and that are most incompatible.

Zir. Still in despaires:
I did not think till now 'twas in the power
Of Fortune to have robbed Thersames of himself,
For pity, Sir* and reason live;
If you will die die not Aglaura's murdered,
That Is not so handsome: at least die not
Her murdered and her murderer too;
For that will surely follow. Look up, Sir,
This violence of Fortune cannot last ever:
Who knows but all these clouds are shadows,
To set off your fairer days, if it grows blacker,
And the storms do rise, this harbour's always open.

There. What say thou* Aglaura?

Agl. What says Andrages?

And. Madam, would Heaven his mind would admit
As eafie cure, as his body will,
'Twas only want of blood,
And two hours rest restores him to himself.

Zir. And by that time it may be Heaven
Will give our miseries some ease:
Come Sir, repose upon a bed,
There Is time enough to day.

There. Well, I will still obey,
Though I must fear it will be with me,
But as it is with tortured men,
Whom States preserve only to wrack again. Exeunt.

Take off table. Enter Ziriff with a taper. Zir. All fast too, here
They sleep to night
I'their winding sheets, I think, there is such
A general quiet.
Oh! here is light I warrant you:
For lust does take as little rest, as care, or age.
Courting her glass, I swear, fie! that is a flatterer Madam,
In me you shall see trulier what you are* He knocks, Enter Queen.

Orb. What make you up at this strange hour, my Lord?

Zir. My business is my boldness warrant,
(Madam)
And I could well afford to have been without it now,
Had Heaven so pleased.

Orb. It Is a sad Prologue,
What follows in the name of virtue?

Zir. The King --

Orb. I: what of him? is well, is he not?

Zir. Yes, --
If to be on's journey to the other world
Be to be well, he is.

Orb. Why he is not dead, is he?

Zir. Yes, Madam, dead.

Orb. How? where?

Zir. I do not know particulars.

Orb. Dead!

Zir. Yes (Madam.)

Orb. Art sure he is dead?

Zir. Madam, I know him as certainly dead,
As I know you too must die hereafter.

Orb. Dead!

Zir. Yes, dead.

Orb. We must all die.
The Sisters spin no cables for us mortals;
They Are threads; and Time, and chance --
Trust me I could weep now,
But watrie distillations do but ill on graves,
They make the lodging colder. She knocks.

Zir. What would you Madam?

Orb. Why my friends, my Lord;
I would consult and know what is to be done.

Zir. (Madam) it is not so safe to raise the Court;
Things thus unsettled, if you please to have --

Orb. Where Is Ariaspes?

Zir. In's dead sleep by this time sure,

Orb. I know he is not! find him instantly.

Zir. I Am gone, -- Turns back again.
But Madam, why make you choice of him, from whom
If the succession meet disturbance,
All must come of danger?

Orb. My Lord, I am not yet so wise, as to be
Jealous; Pray dispute no further.

Zir. Pardon me (Madam) if before I go
I must unlock a secret to you; such a one
As while the King did breathe durst know no air,
Zorannes lives.

Orb. Ha!

Zir. And in the hope of such a day as this
Has lingered out a life, snatching, to feed
His almost famished eyes,
Sights now and then of you, in a disguise.

Orb. Strange! this night is big with miracle!

Zir. If you did love him, as they say you did,
And do so still; it is now within your power!

Orb. I would it were, my Lord, but I am now
No private woman, if I did love him once,
(as it is so long ago, I have forgot)
My youth and ignorance may well excus't.

Zir. Excuse it?

Orb. Yes, excuse it Sir.

Zir. Though I confess I loved his father much*
And pity him, yet having offered it
Unto your thoughts: I have discharged a trust;
And zeal shall stray no further.
(Your pardon Madam:) Exit.

Orb. May be it is but a plot to keep off Ariaspes
Greatness which he must fear, because he knows
He hates him: for these great Statesmen,
That when time has made bold with the King
And Subject, throwing down all fence
That stood betwixt their power
And others right, are on a change,
Like wanton Salmons coming in with floods,
That leap over wyres and nets and make their way
To be at the return to every one a prey.

Enter Ziriff. Zir. Look here vain thing and see thy sins full blown:
There Is scarce a part in all this face, thou have
Not been forsworn by, and Heaven forgive thee for it!
For thee I lost a Father, Country, friends,
My self almost, for I lay buried long;
And when there was no use thy love could pay
Too great, thou made the principle away: -- Prompt.
As wantons entering a Garden, take
The first fair flower they meet, and
Treasur't in their laps.
Then seeing more, do make fresh choice again,
Throwing in one and one, till at the length
The first poor flower o're-charg'd, with too much weight
Withers and dies:
So have thou dealt with me,
And having killed me first, I will kill --

Orb. Hold -- hold --
Not for my sake, but Orbella's (Sir) a bare
And single death is such a wrong to Justice,
I must needs except against it.
Find out a way to make me long a dying;
For death's no punishment, it is the sense,
The pains and fears before that makes a death:
To think what I had had, had I had you,
What I have lost in losing of my self;
Are deaths far worse than any you can give:
Yet kill me quickly, for if I have time,
I shall so wash this soul of mine with tears,
Make it so fine, that you would be afresh
In love with it, and so perchance I should
Again come to deceive you. She rises up weeping, and hanging down her head.

Zir. So rises day, blushing at nights deformity:
And so the pretty flowers blubbered with dew,
And over washed with rain, hang down their heads*
I must not look upon her: (Queen Goe^ toward him.)

Orb. Were but the Lillies in this face as fresh
As are the Roses; had I but innocence
Joined to these blushes, I should then be bold,
For when they went a begging they were never deni'de,
It Is but a parting kiss Sir --

Enter Pasithas, and two Guard. Zir. I dare not grant it. -- Pasithas -- away
with her.
A bed put ^^t. Thersames and Aglaura on it, Andrages by.

There. She wake't me with a sigh,
And yet she sleeps her self, Sweet Innocence,
Can it be sin to love this shape,
And if it be not, why am I persecuted thus? --
She sighs again, sleep that drownes all cares,
Cannot I see charm loves? blessed pillowes,
Through whose finenesse does appear
The Violets, Lillies and the Roses
You are stuffed withal, to whose softness
I owe the sweet of this repose,
Permit me to leave with you this, -- Kisses them, she wakes.
See if I have not wake't her,
Sure I was borne, Aglaura, to destroy
Thy quiet.

Agl. Mine, my Lord,
Call you this drowsinesse a quiet then?
Believe me, Sir, 'twas an intruder I much
Struggled with, and have to thank a dream,
Not you, that it thus left me.

There. A dream! what dream, my Love?

Agl. I dreamp't (Sir) it was day,
And the fear you should be found here.

Enter Ziriff. Zir. Awake; how is it with you, Sir?

There. Well, extremely well, so well, that had I now
No better a remembrancer than pain,
I should forget I e're was hurt,
Thanks to Heaven, and good Andrages.

Zir. And more than thanks I hope we yet shall
Live to pay him. How old's the night?

And. Far-spent I fear, my Lord.

Zir. I have a cause that should be heard
Yet ere day break and I must needs entreat
You Sir to be the Judge in it.

There. What cause Zorannes?

Zir. When you have promised -- (Zorannes.

There. 'Twere hard I should deny thee any thing. -- Exit
Know thou, Andrages, what he means?

And. Nor cannot guess, Sir, -- Draw in the bed.
I read a trouble in his face, when first
He left you, but understood it not.

Enter Zorannes, King Ariaspes, Jolas, Queen and two or three Guard. Zor. Have
I not pitched my nets like a good Huntsman?
Look, Sir, the noblest of the Herd are here.

There. I am astonished.

Zor. This place is yours. -- Helps him up.

There. What would thou have me do.

Zor. Remember, Sir, your promise,
I could do all I have to do, alone;
But Justice is not Justice unlesse't be justly done:
Here then I will begin, for here began my wrongs.
This woman (Sir) was wondrous fair, and wondrous
Kind, -- I, fair and kind, for so the story runs,
She gave me look for look, and glance for glance,
And every sigh like eccho's was returned,
We sent up vow by vow, promise on promise,
So thick and strangely multiplied,
That sure we gave the heavenly Registers
Their business, and other mortals oaths
Then went for nothing, we felt each others pains,
Each others joys, thought the same thought,
And spoke the very same;
We were the same and I have much a do
To think she could be ill, and I not
Be so too, and after this, all this (Sir)
She was false, loved him, and him,
And had I not begun revenge,
Till she had made an end of changing,
I had had the Kingdom to have killd,
What does this deserve?

There. A punishment he best can make
That suffered the wrong.

Zor. I thank you, Sir,
For him I will not trouble you,
His life is mine, I won it fairly,
And his is yours, he lost it foully to you --
To him (Sir) now:
A man so wicked that he knew no good,
But so as't made his sins the greater for it.
Those ills, which singly acted bred despair
In others, he acted daily, and never thought
Upon them.
The grievance each particular has against him
I will not meddle with, it were to give him
A long life, to give them hearing,
I Will only speak my own.
First then the hopes of all my youth,
And a reward which Heaven had settled on me,
(If holy contracts can do any thing)
He ravished from me, killed my father,
Aglaura's father, Sir, would have whor'd my sister,
And murdered my friend, this is all:
And now your sentence, Sir.

There. We have no punishment can reach these crimes:
Therefore it is justest sure to send him where
They Are wittier to punish than we are here:
And cause repentance often stops that proceeding,
A sudden death is sure the greatest punishment.

Zor. I humbly thank you Sir.

King. What a strange glass th*have showed me now my self
In; our sins like to our shadows,
When our day is in its glory scarce appeared,
Toward our evening how great and monstrous
They are.

Zor. Is this all you have to say? -- Draws.

There. Hold: -- now go you up.

Zor. What mean you, Sir?

There. Nay, I denied not you, --
That all thy accusations are just,
I must acknowledge,
And to these crimes, I have but this to oppose,
He is my Father, and thy Sovereign. --
It Is wickedness (dear Friend) we go about
to punish, and when we have murdered him,
What difference is there 'twixt him and
Our selves, but that he first was wicked? --
Thou now would kill him 'cause he killed thy Father,
And when thou have killed, have not I the self same
Quarrel?

Zor. Why Sir, you know you would your self
Have done it.

There. True: and therefore it is I beg his life,
There was no way for me to have
Redeemed the intent, but by a real
Saving of it. ^e ready Courtiers, and Guard, with their swords drawn, at the
breasts of the Prisoners.
If he did ravish from thee thy Orbella,
Remember that that wicked issue had
A noble parent Love, -- Remember
How he loved Zorannes when he was Ziriff, --
There Is something due to that.
If you must needs have blood for your revenge,
Take it here -- despise it not Zorannes: Zorannes turns away.
The gods themselves, whose greatness
Makes the greatness of our sins,
And heightens'em above what we can do
Unto each other, accept of sacrifice
For what we do against them,
Why should not you, and it is much thriftier too:
You cannot let out life there, but my honor
Goes, and all the life you can take here,
Posterity will give me back again;
See, Aglaura weeps:
That would have been ill Rhetorique in me,
But where it is, it cannot but persuade.

Zor. They Have thawed the ice about my heart;
I know not what to do.

King. Come down come down, I will be King again,
There Is none so fit to be the Judge of this
As I; the life you showed such zeal to save,
I here could willingly return you back;
But that is the common price of all revenge.

Enter Guard, Orsames, Philan, Courtiers, Orithie, Semanthe. Jol. Ari. Ha, ha,
ha: how they look now?

Zor. Death: what is this?

There. Betrayed again;
All th'ease our Fortune gives our miseries is hope,
And that still proving false, grows part of it.

King. From whence this Guard?

Ari. Why Sir, I did corrupt, while we were his prisoners,
One of his own to raise the Court; shallow souls,
That thought we could not countermine,
Come Sir, you are in good posture to dispatch them.

King. Lay hold upon his instrument:
Fond man, do think I am in love with villainy?
All the service they can do me here
Is but to let these see the right I do
Them now is unconstrained, then thus I do proceed.
Upon the place Zorannes lost his life,
I vow to build a tomb, and on that tomb
I vow to pay three whole years penitence,
If in that time I find that heaven and you
Can pardon; I shall find again the way
To live amongst you.

There. Sir be not so cruel to your self this is an age, --

King. It Is now irrevocable, thy Fathers lands
I give thee back again, and his commands;
And with them, leave to wear the Tyara,
That man there has abused. --
To you Orbella,
Who it seems are foul as well as I,
I do prescribe the self same physic
I do take my self:
But in another place, and for a longer time,
Diana's Nunnerie.

Orb. Above my hopes.

King. For you, who still have been
The ready instrument of all my cruelties,
And there have cancelled all the bonds of brother,
Perpetual banishment: nor, should
This line expire, shall thy right have a place.

Ari. Hell and Furies. -- Exit.

King. Thy crimes deserve no less; yet 'cause thou were
Heavens instrument to save my life,
Thou only have that time of banishment,
I have of penitence. -- Comes down. Ziriff offers to kiss the Kings hand

Jol. May it be plague and famine here till I return.
No: thou shall not yet forgive me:

King. Aglaura thus I freely part with thee,
And part with all fond flames and warm desires,
I cannot fear new agues in my blood
Since I have overcome the charms
Thy beauty had, no other ever can
Have so much power, Thersames, thou look pale,
Is It want of rest?

There. No Sir; but that is a story for your ear -- They whisper.

Ors. A strange and happy change.

Ori. All joys wait on you ever.

Agl. Orithie
How for thy sake now could I wish
Love were no Mathematick point,
But would admit division, that Thersames might.
Though at my charge, pay thee the debt he owes thee*

Ori. Madam, I loved the Prince, not my self;
Since his virtues have their full rewards,
I have my full desires.

King. What miracles of preservation have we had?
How wisely have the stars prepared you for felicity?
Nothing endeares a good more than the contemplation
Of the difficulty we had to attain to it:
But see, Nights Empire's out,
And a more glorious auspitiously does begin;
Let us go serve the gods, and then prepare
For jollitie, this day I Will borrow from my vows.
Nor shall it have a common celebration;
Since't must be,
A high record to all posterity. -- Exeunt omnes.

Epilogue.
PLays are like Feasts, and every Act should be
Another Course, and still variety:
But in good faith provision of wit
Is grown of late so difficult to get,
That do we what we can, we are not able,
Without cold meats to furnish out the Table.
Who knows but it was needless too? may be
'Twas here, as in the Coach-mans trade; and he
That turns in the least compass, shows most Art:
How e're, the Poet hopes (Sir) for his part,
You Will like not those so much, who show their skill
In entertainment, as who show their will.
FINIS.
THE GOBLINS A Comedy. Presented at the Private House in Blackfriars, by His
Majesty's servants.

WRITTEN By Sir JOHN SUCKLING.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Sign of the Princes Arms in St Paul's Churchyard. MDCXLVI.

PROLOGUE.
WIt in a Prologue, Poets justly may
Style a new imposition on a Play.
When Shakespeare, Beamont, Fletcher ruled the Stage,
There scarce were ten good pallats in the age,
More curious Cooks then guests; for men would eat
Most heartily of any kind of meat,
And then what strange variety each Play,
A Feast for Epicures, and that each day.
But mark how odly it is come about,
And how unluckily it now falls out:
The pallats are grown, higher number increas't,
And there wants that which should make up the Feast;
And yet you are so unconscionable. You Would have
Forsooth of late, that which they never gave,
Banquets before; and after. --
Now pox on him that first good Prologue writ,
He left a kind of rent charge upon wit;
Which if succeding Poets fail to pay,
They forfeit all their worth, and that's their play:
Y' have Ladies humors, and you are grown to that,
You will not like the man less that his boots and hat
Be right; no play, unless the Prologue be,
And Epilogue writ to curiosity.
Well (Gentiles)'^is the grievance of the place,
And pray consider't, for here is just the case;
The richness of the ground is gone and spent,
Men's brains grow barren, and you raise the Rent.
Francelia.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter as to a Duel: Samorat, Philatell, Torcular. Samorat, BUt my Lords,
May not this harsh business
Yet be left undone!
Must you hate me because I love your sister;
And can you hate at no less rate then death?

Phil. No, at no less:
Thou art the blaster of our fortunes,
The envious cloud that darknest all our day,
While she thus prodigally, and fondly
Throws away her love on thee;
She has not wherewithal to pay a debt
Unto the Prince. --

Sam. Is this all?

Tor. Faith, what if in short we do not think
You worthy of her? --

Sam. I swear that shall not make a quarrel.
I think so too;
'Have urged it often to my self;
Against my self have sworn't as often to her,
Pray let this satisfy. --

Phil. Sure (Torcular) he thinks we come to talk
Look you Sir; -- draws.
And brother since his friend has failed him,
Do you retire.

Tor. Excuse me (Philatell)
I have an equal interest in this,
And fortune shall decide it. --

Phil. It will not need, he is come. --

Enter Orsabrin. Ors. Mercury protect me! what are these?
The brothers of the high way!

Phil. A stranger by his habit. --

Tor. And by his looks a Gentleman.
Sir, -- will you make one!
We want a fourth. --

Ors I shall be robbed with a trick now!

Sam. My Lords excuse me!

This is not civil.
In what concerns my self,
None but my self must suffer. --

Ors. A duel by this light, --
Now has his modesty,
And to others forwardnes warmed me* -- goes toward them.
Gentlemen, I wear a sword,
And commonly in readiness,
If you want one, speak Sir. -- to Samorat.
I do not fear much suffering.

Sam. You Are noble Sir,
I know not how t'invite you to it;
Yet, there is Justice on my side,
And since you please to be a witness
To our actions, it is fit you know our Story. --

Ors. No Story Sir I beseech you, --
The cause is good enough as it is,
It may be spoiled in the telling.

Phil. Come we trifle then. --

Sam. It is impossible to preserve I see
My honor and respect to her.
And since you know this too my Lord,
It is not handsome in you thus to press me,
But come. --
Torcular beckens to Orsabrin. --
Oh! I understand you Sir. -- Exeunt.

Philatell and Samoratt fight. Phil. In posture still. --
Oh, you are mortal then it seems. -- A slight wound.

Sam. Thou have undone thy self rash man,
For with this blood thou have let out a spirit
Will vex thee to thy grave. --

Fight again, Samorat takes away Philatells sword, and takes breath, then gives
it him. Sam. I Am cool again,
Here my Lord. --
And let this Present bind your friendship. --

Phil. Yes thus. -- Runs at him.

Sam. Treacherous, and low. --

Enter Orsabrin. Ors. I have dril'd my gentleman,
I have made as many holes in him
As would sink a Ship Royal
In sight of the Haven: --
How now? -- Samorat upon his knee.
S'foot yonder is another going that way too. --
Now have I forgot of which side I Am on,
No matter.
I Will help the weakest;
There Is some Justice in that.

Phil. The Villain sure has slain my brother.
If I have any friends above,
Guide now my hand unto his heart. -- Orsabrin puts it by, runs at him, Samo
steps in.

Sam. Hold noble youth!
Destroy me not with kindness:
Men will say he could have killed me,
And that injustice should not be*
For honors sake, leave us together. --

Ors. It Is not my business fighting -- puts up.
Th'employment's yours Sir:
If you need me,
I am within your call.

Sam. The gods reward thee: --
Now Philatell thy worst. -- They fight again, and close, Samo: forces his sword.

Enter Orsabrin. Ors. Hell and the Furies are broke loose upon us,
Shift for your self Sir. -- Flies unto the woods s^verall ways pursued by
Thieves in Devils habits.

Enter Torcular, weak with bleeding. Tor. It will not be, --
My body is a Jade:
I feel it tire, and languish under me.
Those thoughts came to my soul
Like Screech-owles to a sick man's window. --

Enter Thieves back again. Thee. Here -- here --

Tor. Oh! I am fetched away alive.- Exeunt. They bend him, and carry him away.

Enter Orsabrin. Ors. Now the good gods preserve my senses right,
For they were never in more danger:
'Ith name of doubt, what could this be?
Sure 'twas a Conjurer I dealt withal:
And while I thought him busy at his prayers,
'Twas at his circle, levying this Regiment.
Here they are again. --

Enter Samoratt. Sam. Friend -- Stranger -- Noble youth --

Ors. Here -- here --

Sam. Shift, shift the place,
The wood is dangerous,
As you love safety,
Follow me. -- Exeunt.

Enter Philatell. Phi. The have left the place,
And yet I cannot find the body any where --
May be he did not kill him then,
But he recovered strength,
And reached the Town --
-- It may be not too. --
Oh that this hour could be called back again.
-- But it is too late,
And time must cure the wound that is given by fate. -- Exit.

Enter Samoratt, Orsabrin. Ors. In The shape of Lions too sometimes,
And Bears? --

Sam. Often Sir. --

Ors. Pray unriddle. --

Sam. The wiser sort do think them Thieves,
Which but assume these forms to rob
More powerfully. --

Or. Why does not then the State
Set out some forces and suppress them?

Sam. It often has (Sir) but without success. --

Or. How so? --

Sam. During the time those leavies are abroad,
Not one of them appears,
There have been
That have attempted under ground;
But of those as of the dead
There has been no return. --

Or. Strange.

Sam. The common people think them a race
Of honest and familiar Devils,
For they do hurt to none,
Unless resisted;
They seldom take away but with exchange;
And to the poor they often give,
Return the hurt, and sick recovered
Reward, or punish, as they do find cause. --

Or. How cause? --

Sar. Why Sir, they blind still those they take,
And make them tell the stories of their lives,
Which known, they do accordingly. --

Or. You make me wonder! Sir, --
How long is it since they thus have troubled you?

Sam. It was immediately upon
The great deciding day, fought
'Twixt the two pretending families,
The Samorats, and the Orsabrins.

Or. Ha! Orsabrin?

Sam. But Sir, that storie's sad, and tedious,
We Are entering now the Town,
A place less safe then were the Woods,
Since Torcular is slain. --

Or. How S r? --

Sam. Yes. --
He was the Brother to the Princes Mistress,
The loved one too.
If we do prize our selves at any rate,
We must embarque, and change the clime,
There is no safety here. --

Or. Hum. --

Sam. The little stay we make, must be
In some dark corner of the Town:
From whence, the day hurried to the other world,
We Will sally out to order for our journey.
That I am forced to this, it grieves me not;
But (gentle youth) that you should for my sake. --

Or. Sir, loose not a thought on that
A storm at Sea threw me on Land,
And now a Storm on Land drives me
To Sea again. --

Sam. Still noble, -- Exeunt.

Enter Nassurat, Pellagrin. Na. Why; suppose it is to a Wench,
You would not go with me, would you? --

Pella. To choose, -- to choose, --

Na. Then there is no remedy. -- Flings down his hat, unbuttons himself draws.

Pella. What do mean? --

Na. Why? since I cannot leave you alive,
I will try to leave you dead.

Pella. I thank you kindly Sir, very kindly.
Now the Sedgly curse upon thee,
And the great Fiend, ^ide through thee
Booted and Spurred, with a Since on his neck;
Pox on thee, I Will see thee hanged first;
S'foot, you shall make none of your fine
Points of honor, up at my charge:
Take your course if you be so hot.
Be doing, -- be doing, -- Ex.

Na. I am got free of him at last:
There was no other way;
H'as been as troublesome as a woman that
Would be loved whether a man would or not:
And h'as watched me as if he had been
My Creditors Sergeant. If they should have dispatched
In the mean time, there would be fine
Opinions of me. -- I must cut his throat
In earnest, if it should be so. -- Ex.

Enter Thieves, A horn sounds. Th. A prize -- A prize -- A prize --

Perid. Some duel (Sir) was faught this morning, this
Weakened with loss of blood, we took, the rest
Escaped. --

Tamoren. He Is fitter for our Surgeon, then for us,
Hereafter we will examine him --

Again a shout. Thee. A prize -- A prize -- A prize -- (They set them down)
Ardelan, Piramant.

Tam. Bring them, bring them, bring them in,
See if they have mortal Sin,
Pinch them, as you dance about,
Pinch them till the truth come out. --

Peri. What art?

Ar. Extremely poor, and miserable.

Per. It Is well, it is well, proceed,
No body will take that away from thee,
Fear not, -- what Country? --

Ar. -- Francelia --

Per. Thy name? --

Ar. Ardelan. --

Per. And thine, --

Pira. Piramant. --

Per. Thy story, -- come --

Ar. What story! --

Per. Thy life, thy life. -- (Pinch him)

Ar. Hold* hold, --
You shall have it; -- (he sighs)
It was upon the great defeat
Given by the Samorats unto the Orsabrins,
That the old Prince for safety of the young,
Commit^ed him unto the trust of Garradan,
And some few servants more,
Amongst whom I filled a place. --

Tam. Ha! Garradan!

Ar. Yes.

Tam. Speak out, and set me nearer;
So; void the place, proceed. --

Ar. We put to Sea, but had scarce lost the sight
Of Land, ere we were made a prey
To Pirates, there Garradan
Resisting the first Board, changed life with death;
With him the servants too, --
All but my self and Piramant.
Under these Pirates ever since
Was Orsabrin brought up,
And into several Countries did they carry him.

Tam. Knew Orsabrin himself? --

Ar. Oh! no, his spirit was too great;
We durst not tell him any thing,
But waited for some accident
Might throw us on Francelia,
*Bout which we hovered often,
And we were near it now,
But Heaven decreed it otherwise: -- (he sighs)

Tam. Why do thou sigh? --

Ar. Why do I sigh? (indeed,)
For tears cannot recall him;
Last night about the second watch, the
Winds broke loose,
And vexed our Ships so long,
That it began to reele and totter,
And like a drunken man,
Took in so fast his liquor,
That it sunk down in the place. --

Tam. How did you escape? --

Ar. I bound my self unto a maste,
And did advise my Master to do so,
For which he struck me only,
And said I did consult too much with fear. --

Tam. It Is a sad story. -- (within there)
Let them have Wine and
Fire, -- but hark you, -- (Whispers)

Enter Thieves. With a Poet. The. A Prize. -- A prize, -- A prize. --

Per. Set him down, --

Poet. -- Sings. --
-- And for the blew, --
Give him a Cup of Sack 'twill mend his hew. --

Per. Drunk as I live. -- (Pinch him, pinch him.
What art? --

Poet. I am a Poet,
A poor dabler in Rhyme. --

Per. Come confess, confess;

Poet. I do confess, I do want money.

Per. By the description he is a Poet indeed.
Well proceed. -- (Pinch him)

Poet. What do you mean? --
Pox on you.
Prithee let me alone,
Some Candles here, --
And fill us the other Quart, and fill us
Rogue, Drawer, the the other Quart,
Some small Beer. --
And for the blew,
Give him a Cup of Sack 'twill mend his hew. --

Tam. Set him by till he is sober,
Come lett's go see our Duellist
Dressed. -- Exeunt.

Enter Tailor, two Sergeants. Tay. He Is something tall, and for his Chin,
It has no bush below:
Marry a little wool, as much as an unripe
Peach does wear;
Just enough to speak him drawing toward a man. --

Ser. Is he of fury?
Will he foine,
And give the mortal touch?

Tay. Oh no!
He seldom wears his Sword.

Ser, Topo is the word if he do,
Thy debt, my little Mirmidon.

Tay. A yard and a half I assure you without abatement.

Ser. It Is well, it is wondrous well:
Is he retired into this house of pleasure?

Tay. One of these he is entered;
It Is but a little waiting,
You shall find me at the next Tavern. -- Exit.

Ser. Stand close, I here one coming.

Enter Orsabrin. Or. This house is sure no S^minary for Lucreces,
Then the Matron was so over diligent,
And when I ask't for meat or drink,
She looked as if I had mistook my self,
And called for a wrong thing,
Well ^ it is but a night, and part of it I Will spend
In seeing of this Town,
So famous in our Tales at Sea. --

Ser. Look* look, mufled, and as melancholy after't
As a Gamester upon loss; upon him, upon him,

Or. How now my friends,
Why do you use me thus?

Ser. Quietly; 'twill be your best way

Or. Best way? for what?

Ser. Why, it is your best way,
Because there will be no other,
Topo is the word,
And you must along. --

Or. Is that the word?
Why then, this is my Sword -- (Run away)

Ser. Murder, murder, murder;
H'as killed the Princes Officer,
Murder -- Murder -- Murder. --

Or. I must not stay,
I hear them swarm. -- Exit.

Enter Constable, People. Con. Where is he, where is he?

Ser. Here, -- here -- oh a Manmender,
A Manmender,
Has broacht me in so many places,
All the Liquor in my body will run out.

Con. In good sooth (neighbor) has tapt you at the
Wrong end too;
He has been busy with you here behind;
As one would say, lend a hand, some of you,
And the rest follow me. -- Exeunt

Enter Orsabrin. Or. Still pursued!
Which way now?
I see no passage;
I must attempt this wall, --
Oh -- a luckie door.
And open. -- Exit.

Enters again. Where am I now?
A garden, and a handsome house,
If It be thy will a Porch to it,
And I Am made;
'Twill be the better lodging of the two. -- (goes to the Porch)
Enter Maid. Phemilia. Oh! welcome, welcome Sir,
My Lady has been in such frights for you.

Or. Hum! for me? --

Phe. And thought you would not come to night:

Or. Troth, I might very well have failed her:

Phe. She Is in the Gallery alone in the dark.

Or. Good, very good.

Phe. And is so melancholy, --

Or. Hum. --

Phe. Have you shut the Garden doors?
Come I Will bring you to her, enter, enter. --

Or. Yes, I will enter:
He who has lost himself makes no great venture. -- Exit.

ACT II.
Enter Sabrina, Orsabrin. Sab. OH welcome, welcome, as open air to prisoners,
I have had such fears for you.

Or. She Is warm, and soft as lovers language:
She spoke too, prettily;
Now have I forgot all the danger I was in. --

Sab. What have you done to day (my better part)

Or. Kind little Rogue!
I could say the finest things to her me thinks,
But then she would discover me,
The best way will be to fall too quietly. -- (kisses her)

Sab. How now my Samorat,
What saucy heat has stolen into thy blood,
And heightened thee to this?
I fear you are not well. --

Or. S'foot! it is a Platonique:
Now cannot I so much as talk that way neither.

Sab. Why are you silent, Sir?
Come I know you have been in the field to day.

Or. How does she know that? --

Sab. If you have killed my brother, speak:
It is no new thing that true Love
Should be unfortunate:

Or. 'Twas her brother I killed then,
Would I were with my Devils again:
I got well of them,
That will be here impossible. --

Enter Phemillia. Phe. Oh! Madam, Madam,
You Are undone;
The garden walls are scaled,
A flood of people are entering the house.

Or. Good -- why here is variety of ruin yet. --

Sab. It Is so,
The Feet of Justice
Like to those of time,
Move quick,
And will destroy I fear as sure:
Oh Sir, what will you do,
There is no ventring forrh,
My Closet is the safest,
Enter there,
While I go down and meet their fu^ie
Hinder the search if possible. -- Exit.

Or. Her Closet,
Yea where is that?
And, if I could find it,
What should I do there?
She will return, --
I will venture out. -- Exit.

Enter the Prince, Philatell Phontrell, Company, Music. Phi. The lightest
aires; 'twill make them
More secure, --
Upon my life he will visit her to night. -- Music plays and sings.

Prince. Nor she, nor any lesser light
Appears, --
The calm and silence 'bout the place,
Perswardes me she does sleep.

Phi. It may be not, but hold,
It is enough, -- let us retire
Behind this Pillar, Phontrell, is thy place,
As thou did love thy Master show thy care,
You to the other Gate,
There Is thy Ladder. -- Exeunt.

Enter Sabrina. Sab. Come forth my Samorat, come forth,
Our fears were false,
It was the Prince with Music,
Samorat, Samorat.,
He sleeps, -- Samorat,
Or else he is gone to find me out
In The Gallery, Samorat, Samorat, it must be so. -- Exit.

Enter Orsabrin. Ors. This house is full of Thresholds,
And Trap-doores,
I have been in the Cellar,
Where the Maids lie too,
I laid my hand groping for my way
Upon one of them,
And she began to squeake,
Would I were at Sea again in the storm,
Oh! a door:
Though the Devil were the Porter,
And kept the Gate, I Would out. --

Enter Samorat Or. Ha! guarded? taken in a trap?
Nay, I will out,
And there is no other
But this. -- (Retires and d^a^es, runs at him Another p^sse they close.

Sam. Philatell in ambush on my life-

Enter Sabrina, and Phemillia with a light Sab. Where should he be?
Ha! --
Good Heavens what spectacle is this? my Samorat!
Some apparition sure, -- (They discover one another ^y the light, throw away
their weapons, and e^b^ace.

Sam. My noble friend,
What angry, and malicious Planet.
Governed at this point of time! --

Sab. (My wonder does grow higher)

Or. That which governes ever:
I seldom knew it better.

Sam. It does amaze me Sir, to find you here.
How entered you this place?

Or. Forced by unruly men in the street.

Sab. Now the mistake is plain.

Or. Are you not hurt?

Sab. No, -- but you bleed?

Or. I do indeed,
But it is not here,
This is a scratch,
It is within to see this beauty;
For by all circumstance, it was her brother,
Whom my unlucky Sword found out to day.

Sab. Oh! my too cruel fancy. -- (Weeps)

Sam. It was indeed thy Sword,
But not thy fault,
I am the cause of all these ills.
Why do you weep Sabrina! --

Sab. Unkind unto thy self, and me,
The tempest, this sad news has raised within me
I would have laid with Sheares,
But thou disturb'st me,
Oh! Samorat.
Had thou consulted but with love as much
As honor, this had never been.

Sam. I have no love for thee that has not had
So strict an union with honor still,
That in all things they were concerned alike,
And if there could be a division made,
It would be found
Honor had here the leaner share:
'Twas love that told me 'twas unfit
That you should love a Coward.

Sab. These handsome words are now
As if one bound up wounds with silk,
Or with fine knots,
Which do not help the cure,
Or make it heal the sooner:
Oh! Samorat this accident
Lies on our love,
Like to some foul disease,
Which though it kill it not,
Yet will it destroy the beauty;
Disfigur't so,
That't will look ugly to the world hereafter. --

Sam. Must then the Acts of Fate be crimes of men?
And shall a death he pulled upon himself,
Be laid on others?
Remember Sweet, how often
You have said it in the face of Heaven,
That 'twas no love,
Which length of time, or cruelty of chance,
Could lessen, or remove,
Oh kill me not that way Sabrina,
This is the nobler;
Take it, and give it entrance any where -- Kneeles and presents his Sword.
But here,
For you so fill that plaee,
That you must wound your self. --

Or. Am I so slight a thing?
So bankerupt?
So unanswerable in this world?
That being principally in the debt,
Another must be called upon,
And I not once looked after?
Madam why do you throw away your Teares]
On one that is irrecoverable?

Sab. Why? therefore Sir,
Because he is irrecoverable.

Ors. But why on him?
He did not make him so.

Sab I do confess my anger is unjust,
But not my sorrow Sir,
Forgive these tear^^ my Samorat,
The debts of nature must be paid,
Though from the stock of love:
Should they not Sir?

Sam. Yes. --
But thus the precious minutes pass,
And time, e're I have breathed the sighs,
Due to our parting,
Will be calling for me.

Sab. Parting? --

Sam. Oh yes Sabrina, I must part,
As day does from the world,
Not to return till night be gone,
Till this dark Cloud be over,
Here to be found,
Were foolishly to make a present
Of my life unto mine enemy,
Retire into thy Chamber fair,
There thou shall know all. --

Sab. I know too much already. -- Exeunt.

Enter Phontrell. Hold rope for me, and then hold rope for him.
Why, this is the wisdom of the Law now,
A Prince looses a subject, and does not
Think himself paid for the loss^,
Till he looses another:
Well I will do my endeavor
To make him a saver;
^or this was Samorat.. -- Exit.
Enter Samorat, Orsabrin bleeding. Or. Let it bleed on, -- you shall not stir
I swear. --

Sam. Now by the friendship that I owe thee,
And the Gods beside, I will
Noble youth, were there no danger in thy wound,
Yet would the loss of blood make thee
Unfit for travel,
My servants wait me for direction,
With them my Surgeon, I Will bring him instantly,
Pray go back. -- Exit.

Enter Philatell, Guard. Phil. There. -- (places them at the door^.
You to the other Gate,
The rest follow me. -- Ex.

Enter Orsabrin, Sabrina. Sab. Hark a noise Sir.
This tread's too loud to be my Samorats.

Searchers. (Which way? -- which way) -- (to them.
Some villainy in hand,
Step in here Sir, quick, quick. -- Locks him into her Closet.

Enter Philatell, Guard, and pass ore the Stage. Phi Look every where. --
(Philatell dragging out his Sister.
Protect thy brothers murderer?
Tell me where thou have hid him,
Or by my fathers ashes I will search
In every vein thou have about thee, for him. -- (O^sab^in ^ounces thri^e ^t
the door, it ^l^^s op^^.

Enter Orsabrin. Or. Ere such a villainy should be
The Gods would lend unto a single arm
Such strength, it should have power to punish
An Army, such as thou art. --

Phi. Oh! are you here Sir? --

Or. Yes I am here Sir. -- (sight)

Phil. Kill her. -- (She interposed

Or. Oh! save thy self fair excellence,
And leave me to my Fate. --
Base* -- Comes behind him, ^^t^hes bold of his Arms.

Phi. So bring him one,
The other is not far, -- Exeunt.

Enter Sabrina, Phemilia. Sab Run, run, Phemillia To the Garden walls,
And meet my Samorat,
Tell him, oh tell him any thing,
Charge him by all our loves
He instantly take Horse,
And put to Sea,
There is more safety in a storm,
Then where my brother is. -- Exeunt.
ACT III.
Enter Thieves. Thee. A Prize -- A prize, A prize,

Per. Bring him forth, bring him forth; (They dance about him and sing.
Welcome w^^come, mortal wight,
To the ^ansion of the night:
Good or bad, thy life discover
Truly all thy deeds declare;
For about thee Spirits hover
That can tell, tell what they are.
-- Pinch him, if he speak not true,
-- Pinch him, pinch him black and blew,

Per. What art thou?

Stra I was a man.

Per. Of whence? --

Str. ^he Court. --

Per. Whether now bound?

Str, To my own house.

Per. Thy name?

Stra. Stramador.

Per. Oh you fill a place about his Grace,
And keep out men of parts, do you not?

Str. Yes. --

Per. A foolish Utensill of State,
Which like old Plate upon a Gaudy day,
'Sbrought forth to make a show, and that is all;
For of no use you are, you had best deny this:

Str. Oh no! --

Per. Or that you do want wit,
And then talk loud to make that pass for it?
You think there is no wisdom but in form;
Nor any knowledge like to that of whispers: --

Str. Right, right.

Per. Then you can hate, and fawn upon a man
At the same time,
And dare not urge the vices of another,
You are so foul your self;
So the Prince seldom hears truth.

Str. Oh! very seldom.

Per. And did you never give his Grace odd Councels.
And when you saw they did not prosper,
Persuade him take them on himself. --

Str. Yes, yes, often. --

Per. Get baths of Sulphur quick,
And flaming oils,
This crime is new, and will deserve it.
He has inverted all the rule of State;
Confoun^ed policy,
There is some reason why a Subject
should suffer for the e^rours of his Prince;
But why a Prince should ^ear^
The faults of's Ministers, none, none at
All. -- Cauldrons of Brimstone there.

Thee. Great Judge of this infe^nall p^ace
Allow him yet the mercy of the Count.

Str. Kind Devil. --

Per. Let him be boiled in scalding lead a while
T'enure, and to prepare him for the other.

Str. Oh! hear me, hear me,

Per. Stay!
Now I have better thought upon it,
He shall to earth again:
For villainy is catching, and will spread:
He will enlarge our Empire much,
Then we are sure of him at any time,
So it is enough -- where is our Governor? -- Exeunt.

Enter Goalor, Samorat, Nassurat, Pellegrin, three others in disguise Iai. His
hair curles naturally,
A handsome youth. --

Sam. The same, -- (Drinks to him.
Is there no speaking with him?
He owes me a trifling sum. --

Iay. Sure Sir the debt is something desperate,
There is no hopes he will be brought
To clear with the world,
He struck me but for persuading him
To make even with Heaven,
He is as surly as an old Lion,
And as sullen as a Bullfinch,
He never eat since he was taken. -- Gentlemen

Sam. I must needs speak with him,
Hark in the ear. --

Iai. Not for all the world.

Sam. Nay I do but motion such a thing,

Iai. Is this the business Gentlemen?
Fare you well. --

Sam. There is no choice of ways then. -- (Run after him, draw their dag^ers,
set ^t t^ his B^est.
Stir not, if thou but think a noise,
Or breathe aloud, thou breath'^t thy last.
So bind him now. --
Undo,
Quickly, quickly,
His Jerkin, his Hat.

Na. What will you do?
None of these Beards will serve,
There Is not an eye of white in them.

Pell. Pull out the Silvered ones in his
And stick them in the other.

Na. Cut them, cut them out,
The bush will suit well enough
With a grace still.

Sam. Desperate wounds must have desperate
Cures, extremes must thus be served, --
You know your parts,
Fear not, let us alone. --
Sings a Catch.
Some drink, -- what Boy, -- some drink --
Fill it up, fill it up to the brinke,
When the Pots cry clinke,
And the Pockets chinke,
Then it is a merry world.
To the best, to the best, have at her,
And a Pox take the Woman-hater. --
The Prince of darkness is a Gentleman,
Mahu, Mohu is his name,
How do you Sir?
You gape as you were sleepy,
Good faith he looks like an -- O yes.

Pell Or as if he had overstrain'd himself
At a deep note in a Ballad. --

Na. What think you of an Oyster at a low ebb?
Some liquor for him;
You will not be a Pimpe for life you Rogue,
Nor hold a door to save a Gentleman,
You are -- Pox on him, what is he Pellagrin?
If you love me, let us stifle him,
And say 'twas a sudden judgment upon him
For swearing; the posture will confirm it.

Pell. We Are in excellent humor,
Let Us have another bottle,
And give out that Anne my wife is dead,
Shall I Gentlemen? --

Na. Rare Rogue in Buckram,
Let me bite thee,
Before me thou shall go out wit,
And upon as good terms,
As some of those in the Ballad too. --

Pell. Shall I so? -- Why then foutree for the Guise,
Saines shall accrue, and ours shall be,
The black eyed beauties of the time,
I Will ticke you for old ends of Plays: --
They sing, --
A Round, -- A Round, -- A Round, --
A Round, -- A Round, -- A Round -- (Knock)
Some body's at door.
Preethee, preethee, Sir, Sir,
Try thy skill.

Na. Who Is there.

Messen. One Sturgelot a Jailer here? --

Na. Such a on there was my friend,
But he is gone above an hour ago:
Now did this Rogue whisper in his heart
That Is a lie, -- and for that very reason,
I Will cut his throat. --

Pell. No prithee now, -- for thinking?
Thou shall not take the pains,
The Law shall do it --

Na. How, -- how? --

Pell. Marry we will write it over when wee're gone,
He joined in the plot, and put himself
Into this posture, merely to disguise it to
The world. --

Na. Excellent,
Here Is to thee for that conceit,
We should have made rare Statesmen,
We are so witty in our mischief.
Another song, and so let us go,
It will be time.
-- Sing. --
A health to the Nut brown Less,
With the hazell eyes let it pass.
She that has good eyes
Has good thighs,
Let it pass, -- let it pass. --
A much to the lively Gray,
It Is as good in the night as the day,
She that has good eyes,
Has good thighs,
Drink away, -- drink away. --
I pledge, I pledge, what ho some Wine,
Here Is to thine, and to thine,
The colors are Divine. --
But oh the black, the black
Give me as much again, and let't be Sack:
She that has good Eyes,
Has good Thighs,
And it may be a better knack. --

Na. A reckoning Boy. -- (They knock)
There. -- (paies him)
Do hear
Here Is a friend of ours 'has forgotten himself
A little (as they call it)
The Wine has got into his head,
As the frost into a hand, he is benumbed,
And has no use of himself for the present.

Boy. Hum Sir. -- (s^^l^s.)

Na. Prithee lock the door, and when he
Comes to himself,
Tell him he shall find us at the old place,
He knows where.

Boy. I will Sir. -- Exeunt.

Enter Orsabrin. Or. To di^! yea what is that?
For yet I never thought on it seriously;
It may be it is. -- hum. --
It may be it is not too. --
Enter Samorat, as Jailer undoes his Fetters. Ha. -- (as amazed.)
What happy intercession wrought this change?
To whose kind prayers owe I this my friend?

Sam. Unto thy virtue -- Noble youth
The Gods delight in that as well as prayers.
I am --

Or. Nay, nay, --
Be what thou will,
I will not question't:
Undo, undo.

Sam. Thy friend Samorat.

Or. Ha?

Sam. Lay by thy wonder,
And put on these clothes,
In this disguise thou wilt pass unto the
Prison-gates, there you shall find
One that is taught to know you;
He will conduct you to the corner
Of the wood, and there my horses wait
Us. --
I Will throw this Jailer off in some odd place,

Or. My better Angel. -- Exennt.

Enter Thieves. Per. It is 'een as hard a world for Thieves
As honest men, -- nothing to be got --
No prize stirring. --

1. Thee. None, but one with horses,
Who seemed to stay for some
That were to come,
And that has made us wait thus long.

Per. A lean days work, but what remedy?
Lawyers, that rob men with their own consent,
Have had the same:
Come, call in our Perdues,
We will away. -- (they whistle.)

Enter Orsabrin, as seeking the horses. Or. I hear them now,
Yonder they are. --

Per. Hallow, who are these?
Any of ours?

Thee. No, stand close,
They shall be presently,
Yield -- yield. --

Or. Again betrayed? there is no end of my misfortune,
Mischief vexes me
Like a quotidian,
It intermits a little, and returns
E're I have lost the memory of
My former fit. --

Per. Sentences, sentences,
A way with him -- A way with him. -- Exeunt.

Enter Jailer, Drawers, over the Stage. Jailer. I am the Jailer, undone, undone,
Conspiracy, a cheat, my prisoner, my prisoner. -- Exeunt.

Enter Samorat. Sam. No men? -- nor horses? --
Some strange mistake, --
May it be, the are sheltred in the wood. --

Enter Peridor and other Thieves, examining the young Lord Torcular that was
hurt. Perid. And if a Lady did but step aside,
To fetch a Masque or so,
You followed after still,
As if she had gone proud?
Ha; is it not so? --

Tor. Yes. --

Per. And if you were used but civillie in a place,
You gave out doubtful words upon it,
To make men think you did enjoy.

Tor. Oh! yes, yes.

Per. Made love to every piece of cried-up beauty*
And swore the same things over to them.

Tor. The very same. --

Per. Abominable.
Had he but sworn new things, yet't had been
Tolerable. --
Reads the sum of the Confession*

Th. Let me see* -- let me see.
Hum.
Court Ladies Eight,
Of which two great ones. --
Country Ladies twelve.
Tearmers all. --

Per. Is this right?

Tor. Very right.

Per. Citizens wives of several trades,
He cannot count them. --
Chamber maids, and Country wenches,
About thirty: --
Of which the greater part,
The night before they were married,
Or else upon the day:

Per. A modest reckoning, is this all? --

Tor. No. --
I will be just t'a scruple.

Per. Well said, -- well said, --
Out with it. --

Tor. Put down two old Ladies more.

Per. In The name of wonder,
How could he think of old,
In such variety of young?

Tor. Alas I could never be quiet for them.

Per. Poor Gentleman.
Well what is to be done with him now?
Shall he be thrown into the Cauldron
With the Cuckolds,
Or with the Jealous?
That Is the hotter place.

Per. Thou mistake^'t,
It Is the same, they go together still:
Jealous and Cuckolds differ no otherwise
Then Sheriff and Alderman;
A little time makes the one the other.
What think you of Gelding him,
And sending him to earth again,
Amongst his women?
'Twood be like throwing a dead fly
Into an Ants nest.
There would be such tearing, pulling,
And getting up upon him,
They would worry the poor thing
To death, --

Th. 1. Excellent,
Or leave a string as they do sometimes
In young Colts:
Desire and impotence,
Would be a rare punishment.
Fie, fie, the common disease of age,
A very old man has it.
Enter The. A prize, -- A prize, -- A prize, (Horns blow, Brass Plots, etc.

Ors. This must be Hell by the noise

Ta. Set him down, set him down;
Bring forth the newest wrack,
And flaming pinching Irons,
This is a stubborn piece of flesh,
'Twould have broke loose.

Or. So, this comes of wishing my self
With Devils again. --

Per. What art? --

Or. The slave of Chance,
One of Fortunes fools;
A thing she kept alive on earth
To make her sport,

Per. Thy name?

Or. Orsabrin.

Per. Ha! he that lived with Pirates?
Was lately in a storm?

Or. The very same. --

Ta. Such respect as you have paid to me, -- (whispers)
Prepare to Revels, all that can be thought on:
But let each man still keep his shape. -- (Exit.)
They unbind him, all bow to him,

(Music) Or. Ha!
Another false smile of Fortune? -- (They bring out several suite of clothes,
and a banquets
Is this the place the gowned Clearkes
Do fright men so on earth with?
Would I had been here before.
Master Devil;
To whose use are these set out?

Ta. To yours Sir.

Or. I Will make bold to change a little -- (takes a hat.
Could you not afford a good plain Sword (dresses himself.
To all this gallantry? --

Per. We Will see Sir.

Or. A thousand times civiller then men,
And better natured.

Enter Tamoren, Reginella. Tam. All leave the room.
I like not this. -- Ex.

Tam. Cupid do thou the rest,
A blunter arrow, and but slackly drawn,
Would perfect what is begun,
When young and handsome meet,
-- The work's half done. --

Or. She cannot be less then a goddess;
And 't must be Proserpine:
I Will speak to her, though Pluto's self stood by,
Thou beauteous Queen of this dark world,
That make a place so like a hell,
So like a Heaven, instruct me
In what form I must approach thee,
And how adore thee? --

Re. Tell me what thou art first:
For such a creature
Mine eyes did never yet behold. --

Or. I am that which they name above a man:
In The watery Elements I much have lived,
And there they term me Orsabrin.
Have you a name too? --

Re. Why do you ask?

Or. Because I Would call upon it in a storm,
And save a Ship from perishing sometimes.

Re. It Is Reginella.

Or. Are you a woman too?
I never was in earnest until now.

Re. I know not what I am,
For like my self I never yet saw any.

Or. Nor ever shall.
Oh! how came you hither?
Sure you were betrayed.
Will you leave this place,
And live with such as I am?

Re. Why may not you live here with me?

Or. Yes. --
But I Would carry thee where there is a glorious light,
Where all above is spread a Canopie,
Studded with twinkling Gems,
Beauteous as Lovers eyes;
And underneath Carpets of ^lowry Meads
To tread on. --
A thousand thousand pleasures
Which this place can never afford thee. --

Re. Indeed!

Or. Yes indeed --
I Will bring thee unto shady walks,
And Groves fringed with Silver purling streams,
Where thou shall hear soft feathered Queristers
Sing sweetly to thee of their own accord.
I Will fill thy lap with early flowers;
And whilst thou bind'st them up mysterious ways,
I Will tell thee pretty tales, and sigh by thee:
Thus press thy hand and warm it thus with kisses*

Re. Will you indeed? --

Enter King Per. above with others. Ta. Fond Girl:
Her rashness sullies the glory of her beauty,
'Twil make the conquest cheap,
And weaken my designs,
Go part them instantly.
And bind him as before;
Be you his keeper Peridore.

Per. Yes, I will keep him.

Or. Her eyes like lightning shoot into my heart
They Will melt it into nothing,
Eere I can present it to her,
Sweet Excellence. --

Enter Thieves. Ha! why is this hateful curtain drawn before my eyes?
If I have sinned, give me some other punishment;
Let me but look on her still,
And double it, oh* whether, whether do you hurry me?
Per. Madam* you must in. -- (carry him away.

R. Ay me, what is this? --
Must! -- ^x.

Enter other Devils. Th. 1. We have had such sport;
Yonder Is the rarest Poet without,
Has made all his confession in blanke verse:
Not left a God, nor a Goddess in Heaven,
But fetched t^em all down for witnesses;
Has made such a description of Stix,
And the Ferry,
And verily thinks has past them.
Enquires for the blessed shades,
And asks much after certain British blades,
One Shakespeare and Fletcher:
And grew so peremptory at last,
He would be carried where they were.

Th. 2. And what did you with him?

Th. 1. Mounting him upon a Cowle-staffe,
Which (tossing him something high)
He apprehended to be P^gasus.
So we have left him to tell strange lies,
Which he will turn into verse;
And some wise people hereafter into Religion.

ACT IV.
Enter Samorat, Nashorat, Pellegri^. Na. GGod faith it is wondrous well,
We have even done like eager disputers;
And with much ado
Are got to be just where we were.
This is the corner of the wood.

Sa. Ha! it is indeed. --

P^ll. Had we no walking ^ire,
Nor sawcer*ey'd Devil of these woods that led us?
No^ am I as weary
As a married man after the first week.
And have no more desire to move forwards,
Then a Post-horse that has past his Stage.

Na. 'Sfoot yonder is the night too, stealing away
With her black gown about her:
Like a kind wench, that had staid out the
Last minute with a man.

Pel. What shall we do, Gentlemen?
I apprehend falling into this Jaylors
Hands strangely; he would use us worse
Then we did him.

Na. And that was ill enough of Conscience:
What think you of turning Beggars?
Many good Gentlemen have don't: or Thieves?

Pel. That Is the same thing at Court:
Begging is but a kind of robbing the Exchequer.

Na. Look four fathom and a half OOS --
In contemplation of his Mistres:
There Is a Feast, you and I are out now Pellegrin;
It Is a pretty trick, this enjoining in absence.
What a rare invention 'twood be,
If a man could find out a way to make it real.

Pel. Do think there is nothing in it as it is?

Na. Nothing, nothing.
Did never hear of a dead Alexander,
Raised to talk with a man?
Love's a learned Conjurer,
And with the glass of Fancy will do as strange things?
You thrust out a hand,
Your Mistress thrusts out another:
You shake that hand that shakes you again:
You put out a lip; she puts out hers:
Talk to her, she shall answer you;
Marry, when you come to graspe all this,
It is but air. (As out of his Study.

Sam. It was unluckie, --
Gentlemen, the day appears,
This is no place to stay in;
Let Us to some neighboring Cottage,
May be the Searchers will neglect
The nearer places,
And this will but advance unto our safety.

Enter Fiddlers. Na. Who are there?

Fid. 1. Now if the spirit of melancholy should possess them*

F. 2. Why if it should,
An honorable retreat.

N. I have the rarest fancy in my head, --
Whether are you bound my friends so early?

Fid. To a Wedding Sir.

N. A Wedding?
I told you so.
Whose?

Fid. A Country wenches here hard by,
One Erblins daughter.

N. Good: Erbl^n: the very place.
To see how things fall out.
Hold, here is money for you.
Hark you, you must assist me in a small design.

Fid. Any thing.

Sam. What do mean?

N. Let me alone,
I have a plot upon a wench. --

Fid. Your Worship is merry.

Na. Yes faith, to see her only.
Look you, some of you shall go back to 'th' Town,
And leave us your Coats,
My friend and I am excellent at a little Instrument,
And then we will sing catches.

P. I understand thee not;
Thou have no more forecast then a Squirrell*
And have less wise consideration about thee.
Is there a way safer then this!
Do think what we have done
Will not be spread beyond this place with every light.
Should we now enter any house
Thus near the Town, and stay all day,
Twould be suspicious: What pretense have we?

P. He speaks reason Samorat.

Sa. I do not like it.
Should any thing fall out 'twould not look well,
I Would not be found so much out of my self,
So far from home as this disguise would make me,
Almost for certainty of safety.

N. Certainty? Why, this will give it us,
Pray let me govern once.

Sa. Well, you suffered first with me,
Now it is my turn.

P. Prithee name not suffering,

N. Come, come, your Coats,
Our Beards will suite rarely to them:
There Is more money,
Not a word of any thing as you tender --

Fid. O Sir.

N. And see you carry't gravely too. --
Now before me Pellagrins rarely translated.
'Sfoot they will apprehend the head of the Base Violl
As soon as thee;
Thou art so likely,
Only I must confess, that has a little the better face,

P. Has it so? --
Pox on thee, thou look like I cannot tell what.

N. Why, so I would fool,
The end of my disguise is to have none
Know what I am:
Look, look, a Devil ayring himself. (Enter a Devil.
I Will catch him like a Mole ere he can get under ground.

P. Nashorat, Nashorat. --

N. Pox on that noise, he is earth't.
Prithee let us watch him and see
Whether he will heave again.

P. Ar't mad? --

N. By this light, three or four of their skins
And we would rob^e.
'I would be the better way. --
Come, come, let us go -- Exeunt.

Enter Captain and Soldiers. Cap. Let the Horse s^^^t about this place,
Wee*le make a search within -- Ex.

Enter again. Now disperse
In The hollow of the wood,
We Will meet again.
Enter Na. Pe. Sa. Fid. Sol. Who goes there?
Speak, -- Oh! they are Fiddlers. --
Saw you no Men nor Horse
In The wood to day, -- as you came along.

(Nashorat pulls one of the Fiddlers by the skirt) Na. Speak, speak Rogue.

Fid. None Sir, --

Sol. Pass on. -- Ex.

N. Gentlemen what say you to th'invention now,
I Am a Rogue if I do not think
I was designed for the Helm of State,
I am so full of nimble Stratagems:
That I should have ordered affairs, and
Carried it against the stream of a Faction,
With as much ease as a Skippar,
Would laver against the wind. -- Ex.

Enter Captain and Soldiers meet again. Cap. What, no news of any?

Sol. No, -- not a man stirring.
Enter other Soldiers. Sa how, away, -- away. --

Cap. What, any discovery?

1. Sol. Yes, the Horse has staid three fellows,
Fiddlers they call themselves;
There Is something in it; they look suspitiously;
One of them has offered at confession once or twice,
Like a weak stomach at vomiting,
But 'twould not out. --

Ca. A little cold Iron thrust down his throat
Will fetch it up. --
I am excellent at discovery,
And can draw a secret out of a Knave,
With as much dexterity as a Barber-Surgeon
Wooed a hollow tooth.
Let Us join forces with them. -- Exeunt.

Enter Orsabrin. Or. Sure it is eternal night with me;
Would this were all too --
For I begin to think the rest is true,
Which I have read in books,
And that there is more to follow. --

Enter Reginella. Re. Sure this is he. -- (She unbinds him.

Or. The pure and first created Light
Broke through the Chaos thus. --
Keep off, keep off thou brighter Excellence,
Thou fair Divinity: If thou come near,
(So tempting is the shape thou now assum'st)
I shall grow saucy in desire again,
And entertain bold hopes which will but draw
More, and fresh punishment upon me. --

Re. I see y' are angry Sir:
But if you kill me too, I meant no ill:
That which brought me hither,
Was a desire I have to be with you,
Rather then those I live with: This is all
Beleeve't. --

Or. With me? Oh thou kind Innocence!
Witness all that can punish falsehood,
That I could live with thee,
Even in this dark and narrow prison:
And think all happiness confined within the walls --
Oh, had thou but as much of Love as I.

Re. Of Love? What Is that?

Or. Why it is a thing that is had before it is known:
A gentle flame that steals into a heart,
And makes it like one object ^o, that it scarce cares
For any other delights, when that is present:
And is in pain when 't's gone* thinks of that alone,
And quarrels with all other thoughts that would
Intrude and so divert it. --

Re. If this be Love, sure I have some of it,
It is no ill thing, is it Sir?

Or. Oh most Divine,
The best of all the gods strangely abound in it,
And Mortals could not live without it:
It is the soul of virtue, and the life of life.

Re. Sure I should learn it Sir, if you would teach it.

Or. Alas, thou taught'st it me;
It came with looking thus. -- (They gaze upon one another.

Enter Per. Per. I will no longer be concealed,
But tell her what I am,
Before this smooth faced youth
Has taken all the room
Up in her heart,
Ha! unbound! and sure by her!
Hell and Furies.

P. What ho -- within there -- Enter other Thieves.
Practice escapes?
Get me new yrons to load him unto death.

Or. I am so used to this,
It takes away the sense of it:
I cannot think it strange.

Re. Alas, he never did intend to go.
Use him for my sake kindly:
I was not wont to be denied.
Ah me! they are hard hearted all.
What shall I do? I Will to my Governor,
He Will not be thus cruel. -- Exeunt.

Enter Samorat, Nashorat, Pelegrin. Nas. It Is a rare wench, she 'ith blew
stockings:
What a complexion she had when she was warm --
It Is a hard question of these Country wenches,
Which are simpler, their beauties or themselves.
There Is as much difference betwixt
A Towne-Lady, and one of these,
As there is betwixt a wild Pheasant and a tame.

Pell. Right: --
There goes such essensing, washing, perfuming,
Da^bing, to the other that they are the least part*
Of themselves.
Indeed the^e's so much sauce, a man cannot taste the meat.

N. Let me kiss thee for that;
By this light I hate a woman dressed up to her height,
Worse then I do Sugar with Muskadine:
It leaves no room for me to imagine:
I could improve her if she were mine:
It looks like a Jade with his ^ayle tied up with ribbons,
Going to a ^ayre to be ^old.

Pell. No, no, thou hate it out of another reason, Nashorat.

Nas. Prithee, what is that?

Pell. Why they are so sine, they are of no use that day.

Na. Pellegrin is in good feeling.
Sir, did mark the Less 'ith green upon yellow,
How she bridled in her head,
And danced a stroke in, and a stroke out,
Like a young Fillet training to a pace.

Pel. And how she kissed,
As if she had been sealing and delivering her self up
To the use of him that came last,
Parted with her sweet-hearts lips still
As unwillingly, and unto wardly,
As ^oft Wax from a dry Seal.

N. True; and when she kisses a Gentleman,
She makes a Curtsey, as who should say,
The favor was on his side.
What dull fools are we to besiege a face
Three months for that trifle.
Sometimes it holds out longer, --
And then this is the sweeter flesh too, --

Enter Fiddlers. Fid. You shall have horses ready at the time,
And good ones too (if there be truth in drink)
And for your letters, they are there by this. --

Sa. An excellent Officer. --

Enter Wedding. Clown. Tut, tut, tut,
That Is a good one in faith, not dance?
Come, come, strike up. (Enter soldiers mufled up in their cloaks.

Sa. Who are those that eye us so severely?
Belong they to the wedding?

Fid. I know 'em not.

Clo. Gentlemen, will it please you dance. -- (Offer their women.

Sol. No, keep your women, we will take out others here.
Samorat, if I mistake not.

Sa. Ha! betrayed? -- (A bussle.

Clo. How now! what is the matter? abuse our Fiddlers?

2 Sol. These are no Fiddlers, fools* obey the Princes officers,
Unless you desire to go to prison too.

Sa. The thought of what must follow disquiets not at all:
But tamely thus to be surpised
In so unhandsome a disguise? -- (They carry him away*

Pel. Is It even so? Why then,
Farewell the plumed Troops, and the big Wars,
Which made ambition virtue. --

Nas. I, I, Let them go, let them go.

Pel. Have you ever a stratagem Nasharot?
'Twood be very seasonable. What think you now?
Are you designed for the helm of State?
Can you laver against this Tempest?

Na. Prithee let me alone, I am thinking for life.

Pe. Yes, it is for life indeed, would 'twere not.

Cl. This is very strange; Let Us follow after,
And see if we can understand it. -- Exeunt.

Enter Peridor, Orsabrin. Per. A mere Phantasme
Raised by Art to try thee.

Or. Good kind Devil,
Try me once more.
Help me to the sight of this Phantasme again.

Per. Thou art undone,
Were thou not amorous
In the other world?
Did not love women?

Or. Who did hate them?

Per. Why there is it;
Thou thought there was no danger in the sin,
Because 'twas common.
Above the half of that vast multitude
Which fills this place, Women sent hither:
And they are highliest punished still,
That love the handsomest.

Or. A very lying Devil this
Certainly. --

P. All that had their women with you,
Suffer with us.

Or. By your friendships favor though,
There Is no justice in that:
Some of them suffered enough
In all conscience by 'em there. --

P. Oh, this is now your mirth:
But when you shall be pinch't
Into a gellie,
Or made into a crampe all over,
These will be sad truths.

Or. He talks odly now, I do not like it.
Do hear? --
Prithee exchange some of thy good counsel
For deeds.
If thou be an honest Devil,
(As thou seem to be)
Put a sword into my hand,
And help me to the sight of this
Apparition again. --

P. Well, some thing I Will do for thee,
Or rather for my self. -- Exeunt.

Enter two other Devils. 1. D. Come, let us go relieve our Poet.

2. D. How, relieve him? he is releas't; is he not?

1. D. No, no;
Bersat bethought himself at the mouth of the Cave,
And found he would be necessary to our Masque too night.
We have set him with his feet in a great tub of water,
In which he dabbles and believes it to be Helicon:
There he is contriving in the honor of Mercury,
Who I have told him comes this night of a message
From Jupiter to Pluto, and is feasted here by him.

Th. Oh, they have fetched him off.

Enter Poet and Thieves. Po. Carer per so lo carer,
Or he that made the fairie Queen.

1 Th. No, none of these:
They are by themselves in some other place;
But here is he that writ Tamerlane.

P. I beseech you bring me to him,
There Is something in his Scene
Betwixt the Empresses a little high and clowdie,
I would resolve my self.

1 Th. You shall Sir.
Let me see -- the Author of the bold Beauchams,
And Englands Joy.

Po. The last was a well writ piece, I assure you,
A Brittane I take it; and Shakespeares very way:
I desire to see the man,

1 Th. Excuse me, no seeing here.
The gods in complement to Homer,
Do make all Poets poor above,
And we all blind below.
But you shall con^esse Sir.
Follow. -- Ex.

Enter Peridor, Orsabrin. Or. Hallight and fresh air again? (Peridor unbinds
him and slips away.
The place I know too. --
The very same I fought the Duel in.
The Devil was in the right;
This was a mere Aparition:
But 'twas a handsome one, it left impressions here,
Such as the fairest substance I shall ere behold,
Will scarce deface.
Well I must resolve, but what, or where?
I, that is the question.
The Towne's unsafe, there is no returning thither,
And then the Port. -- (Enter some to pass over.
Ha! What means the busy haste of these. --
Honest friend. -- No -- (Passes hastily.
Do hear, -- (To another.
What Is the matter pray?

Clo. Gentlemen, gentlemen,
That Is good satisfaction indeed.

Ors. Prithee good fellow tell me. (Enter another.
What causes all this hurry? -- (To another.

Clo. One Samorat is led to prison Sir,
And other Gentlemen about Lord Torcular.
Ha! Samorat!
There is no mean nor end of fortunes malice:
Oh ^ it is insufferable;
I Am made a boy whipped on another back:
Cruel, I Will not endure't by heaven,
He shall not dye for me:
I will not hold a wretched life upon such wretched terms.
(Ex.
Enter Tamoren Peridor, and others. Tam. Fly; fly abroad, search every place,
and
Bring him back:
Thou have undone us all with thy neglect,
Destroi'd the hopes we had to be our selves again;
I shall run mad with Anger;
Fly, be gone. -- Exeunt all but Tam.
Enter Reginella. My Reginella, what brings you abroad?

Re. Dear Governor? I have a suit to you.

Ta. To me my pretty sweetness, what?

Re. You will deny me Sir I fear,
Pray let me have the stranger that came last in keeping.

Ta. Stranger? Alas he is gone, made an escape*

Re. I feared he would not stay they used him so unkindly.
Indeed I would have used him better, (weeps.
And then he had been here still.

Tam. Come* do not weep my girl:
Forget him pretty pensiveness, there will
Come others every day as good as he.

Re. Oh! never: I Will close my ey's to all now he is gone.

Tam. How catching are the sparks of love? Still this
Mischance shows more and more unfortunate.
I was too curious. --
Come indeed, you must forget him,
The gallant'st and the godli'st to the eye are not the best,
Such handsome and fine shapes as those
Are ever fal^e and foul within.

Re. Why Governor d*you then put
Your finest things still in your finest Cabinets?

Tam. Pretty Innocence: no, I do not;
You see I place not you there,
Come no more tears:
Lets in and have a Mate at Chesse,
"Diversion cures a loss, or makes it self. -- Extunt.

ACT V.
Enter Tamaren, Peridor, and others. Pe. Crossed all the Highways, searched the
Woods,
Beat up and down with as much pain and diligence,
As ever Huntsman did for a lost Dear.

Ta. A race of Criples, are y' all
Issue of Snayles, he could not else have escaped us.
Now? what news bring you?

Th. Sir, we have found him out,
The party is in prison.

Ta. How? in prison?

Th. For certain Sir.
It seems young Samorat and he
Were those that fought the duel the other day,
And left our Torcular so wounded there.
For his supposed death was Samorat taken,
Which when this youth had found,
He did attempt to free him (scaling the wall
By night) but finding it impossible,
Next Morning did present himself
Into the hands of Justice, imagining
His death that did the fact, an equal sacrifice.

Ta. Brave Orsabrin.

Th. Not knowing that the greedy Law ask's more,
And does prescribe the accessarie
As well as principal.

Ta. Just so 'ith nicke? 'ith very nicke of time?

Per. He Is troubled.

Ta. It will be excellent.
Be all in soldiers straight,
Where Is Torcular?

Th. Forth coming Sir.

Ta. How are his wounds?
Will they endure the Air?
Under your gaberdines wear Pistols all.]

Per. What does he mean?

Ta. Give me my other habit and my sword
'Ith' least suspected way have after me.

Th. All?

Tam. All but Peridor; I will abroad,
My broken hopes and sufferings
Shall have now some cure.
Fortune spite of her self shall be my friend,
And either shall redress, or give them end. -- Ex.

P. I Have found it out,
He does intend to fetch this stranger back,
And give him Reginella,
Or else -- No, no, it must be that
His anger, and the search declare it;
The secret of the prisonhouse shall out I swear.
I Will set all first on fire,
For middle ways to such an end are dull. -- Ex.

Enter Prince, Phi. S. Since she was refused to speak with you Sir,
Nor look of any,
Languishes so fast,
Her servants fear she will not live
To know what does become of him.

Phi. Sir it is high time you visit her.

Pri. I cannot look upon her, and deny her.

Phi. Nor need you Sir,
All shall appear to her most gracious:
Tell her the former part of the Law
Must pass, but when it comes t'execute,
Promise her that you intend to interpose.

Pr. And shall then Samorat live?

Ph. Oh! --
Nothing less! The censure past,
His death shall follow without noise:
*It Is but not owning of the fact,
Disgracing for a time a Secretary,
Or so -- the thing's not new --
Put on forgiving looks Sir,
We are there --
Enter Sabrina's Chamber. A mourning silence
Sister Sabrina --

Sab. Hence, hence,
Thou cruel hunter after life:
Thou art a pain unto my eyes as great,
As my dear Mother had when she did
Bring thee forth -- And sure that was
Extreme, since she produced a monster.

Ph. Speak to her your self,
She Is so incenst against me,
She will not welcome happiness,
Because I bring it.

Pr. Fair ornament of grief,
Why are you troubled --
Can you believe there is any thing within
My power which you shall mourn for?
If you have any fears, impart them;
Any desires, give them a name,
And I will give thee rest:
You wrong the greatness of my love,
To doubt the goodness of it.

Sab. Alas, I do not doubt your love my Lord,
I fear it; it is that which does undo me.
For it is not Samorat that is prisoner now,
It is the Princes Rival;
Oh! for your own sake Sir be merciful:
How poorly will this sound hereafter,
The Prince did fear another's merit so,
Found so much virtue in his rival, that
He was forced to murder it, make it away.
There can be no addition to you Sir by his death,
By his life there will; You get the point
Of honor, fortune does offer here
What time perchance cannot again:
A handsome opportunity to show
The bravery of your mind --

Pri. This pretty Rhetorique cannot persuade me (fair.
To let your Samorat live for my sake:
It is enough he shall for yours.

Sab. Though virtue still rewards it self, yet here
May it not stay for that; but may the gods
Shower on you suddenly such happiness,
That you may say, my mercy brought me this --

P. The gods no doubt will hear when you do pray
Right ways: But here you take their names in vain,
Since you can give your self that happiness
Which you do ask of them.

Sab. Most gracious Sir, do not --

Pr. Hold, I dare not hear thee speak,
For fear thou now should tell me,
What I do tell my self;
That I would poorly bargain for any favors;
Retire and banish all thy fears,
I will be kind and just to thee Sabrina,
What s'ere thou prov'st to me.

Ph. Rarely acted Sir, -- Ex Sabr.

Pr. Ha! --

Ph. Good faith to the very life.

Pr. Acted? -- No, -- 'twas not acted.

Ph. How Sir?

Pr. I was in earnest.
I mean to conquer her this way,
The others low and poor.

Ph. Ha? --

Pr. I told thee 'twould be so before.

Ph. Why Sir, you do not mean to save him? --

Pr. Yes -- I do --
Samorat shall be releas't immediately. --

Ph. Sure you forget I had a brother Sir,
And one that did deserve Justice at least.

Pr. He did --
And he shall have it:
He that killed him shall dye --
And it is high satisfaction, that,
Look not --
It must be so -- Exeunt.

Enter Stramador, and Peridor. P. No Devils Stramador,
Believe your eyes -- To which I
Cannot be so lost* but
You may call to mind
One Peridor.

Str. Ha? Peridor? thou did
Command that day
In which the Tamorens fell.

P. I did --
Yet Tamoren lives.

Str. Ha?

P. Not Tamoren the Prince, he fell indeed;
But Tamoren his brother, who that day
Led our horse:
Young Reginella too,
Which is the subject of the suit, --
You have engaged your self by oath,
The King shall grant.

Str. Oh! it is impossible,
Instruct me how I should believe thee.

Pe. Why thus --
Necessity upon that great defeat
Forced us to keep the Woods, and hide our selves
In holes which since we much enlarged,
And fortified them in the entrance so,
That 'twas a safe retreat upon pursuit:
Then swore we all allegiance to this Tamoren.
These habits better to disguise our selves, we took at first;
But finding with what ease we robbed,
We did continue 'em, and took an Oath,
Till some new troubles in the State should happen,
Or fair occasion to make known our selves
Offer it self, we would appear no other:
But come, let us not loose
What we shall never recover,
This opportunity --

Enter Nashorat, and Pe. Pe. Nashorat, you have not thought of any
Stratagem yet --

N. Yes I have thought --

Pe. What? --

N. That if you have any accounts with heaven,
They may go on --
This villainous dying's, like a strange tune,
Has run so in my head,
No wholesome consideration would enter it.
Nothing angers me neither, but that
I pass by my Mistresses window to it.

Pe. Troth, that is unkind,
I have something troubles me too.

N. What Is that.

Pe. The people will say as we go along,
Thou art the properer fellow.
Then I break an appointment
With a Merchants Wife,
But who can help it? -- (Nashorat.

N. Yea who can help it indeed,
She Is to blame though 'faith, if she
Does not bear with thee,
Considering the occasion --

P. Considering the occasion as you say,
A man would think he might be borne with.
There Is a Scrivener I should have paid
Some money to, upon my word,
But --

Enter Orsabrin, Samorat, Princes servants. Or. By fair Sabrina's name,
I conjure you not to refuse the mercy
Of the Prince --

Sam. It is resolved Sir, you know my answer.

Or. Whether am I fallen?
I think if I should live a little longer,
I should be made the cause of all the mischief
Which should arise to the world --
Hither I came to save a friend,
And by a slight of fortune I destroy him:
My very ways to good prove ills.
Sure I can look a man into misfortune:
The Plague's so great within me it is infectious.
Oh! I am weary of my self:
Sir I beseech you yet accept of it,
For I shall be his way
A sufferer,
And an executioner too --

Sam. ^I beg of thee no more,
Thou do beget in me desire to live:
For when I find how much I am
Behind in noble acts of friendship,
I cannot choose but wish for longer time, that I might
Struggle with thee, for what thou have too clearly now
Got from me: The point of honor --
Oh! it is wisdom and great thrift to dye;
For who with such a debt of friendship and
Of Love, as you and my Sabrina must expect from me
Could ere subsist.

N. They are complementing;
'Sfoot they make no more of it,
Then if 'twere who should go in first at
A door -- I think Pellegrine, as you and I
Have cast it up, it comes to something
More --

Mess. Gentlemen, prepare, the Court is setting.

Sam. Friends, this is no time for ceremony;
But what a rack have I within m^,
To s^e you suffer.
And yet I hope the Prince will let this anger dye
In me, not to take the forfeiture of you.

N. If he should, Pellegrin and I are resolved,
And are ready, all but our speeches to the people,
And those will not trouble us much,
For we intend not to trouble them. (Exeunt.

Enter Prince, Peridor, and others. Pr. Not accept it?
Lose this way too? -- What shall I do?
He makes advantages of mine,
And like a skillful Tennis-player,
Returns my very best with excellent design.
It must not be,
Bring to the Closet here above, the chief of the Jury:
I Will try another way. -- Ex.

Enter Judges, Prisoners, Lawyers. N. Of all ways of destroying mankind,
These Judges have the easiest,
They sleep and do it.

Pe. To my thinking now,
This is but a solemner kind of Puppet-play:
How the Devil came we to be acters in it?
So; it begins.

1 Judge. The Princes Council:
Are they ready?

Lawy. Here --

Judge. Begin then --

Law. My Lords, that this so great and strange.

Sa. Most reverend Judges,
To save the expense of breath and time,
And dull Formalities of Law --
I here pronounce my self guilty.

Pri. from above. Again he has prevented me --

Sa. So guilty that no other can pretend
A share --
This noble youth, a stranger to every thing
But Gallantry, ignorant in our Laws and Customs,
Has made perchance
(In strange severity) a forfeit of himself;
But should you take it,
The gods when he is gone will sure revenge it.
If from the stalk you pull this bud of virtue,
Before 't has spread and shown it self abroad,
You do an injury to all mankind;
And public mischief cannot be private Justice.
This man's as much above a common man,
As man's above a beast; And if the Law
Destroys not man for killing of a beast,
It should not here, for killing of a man.
Oh what mistake 'twould be?
For here you sit to weed the Cankers out
That would do hurt 'ith' State, to punish vice;
And under that y'oud root out virtue too --

Or. If I do blush, it is not (most gracious Judges)
For any thing which I have done, it is for that
This much mistaken youth has here delivered.
It Is true (and I confess) I ever had
A little stock of honor (which I still preserved)
But that (by leaving me behind alive)
He now most cunningly does think to get from me:
And I beseech your Lordships to assist me;
For it is most fraudulent all he desires.
Your Laws I hope are reasonable,
Else why should reasonable men
Be subject to them; and then
Upon what grounds is he made guilty now?
How can he be thought accessarie
To the killing of a man,
That did not know of the fighting with him?
Witness all those powers which search men's hearts,
That I my self, (until he beckned me)
Knew nothing of it, if such a thing
As sacrifice must be -- why? Man for man's enough:
Though elder times to appease diviner Justice,
Did offer up --
(Whither through gallantrie, or ignorance)
Vast multitudes of Beasts in sacrifice,
Yet numbers of men is seldom heard of:
One single Curtius purged a whole States sin:
You will not say the offense is now as great,
Or that you ought to be more highly satisfied
Then Heaven --

P. Brave youths --

N. Pellegrin, you and I will let our sp^eches alone.

1 Judge. If that the Law were of so fine a web,
As wit and fancy spin it out to, here,
Then these defenses would be just, and save:
But that is more substantial,
Of another make --
And Gentlemen, if this be all,
Sentence must pass --

Enter Tamoren. Tam. Orsabrin!

Or. Ha! who names me there?

Ta. A friend: hear me:
I am an Officer in that dark world
From whence thou came, sent
Thus disguised by Reginella our fair Queen,
And to redeem thee.

Or. Reginella!
In The midst of all these ills,
How preciously that name does sound?

Ta. If thou woult swear to follow me,
At the instant the art releast;
I Will save thee and thy friends,
In spite of Law. --

Or. Doubt not of that;
Bring me where Reginella is:
And if I follow not, perpetual misery follow me:
It cannot be a Hell
Where she appears --

Tam. Be confident. -- (Goes out and brings To^cul^^.
Behold (grave Lords) the man
Whose death questioned the life of these,
Found and recovered by the Thieves
*ith Woods;
And rescued since by us, to rescue Innocence.

Or. Rare Devil,
With what dexterity h'as raised this
Shape up; to delude them --

Pr. Ha? Torcular alive?

Ph. Torcular?
I should as soon believe my brother
Near in being too.

Tor You cannot wonder more to find me here,
Then I do to find my self.

Na. Come unbinde, unbinde, this matter's answered.

Judge. 2. Hold: they are not free, the Law exacts
The same for breach of prison that it did before.

Or. There is no scaping out of fortunes hands.
Do hear; have never a trick for this? --

Ta. Doubt me not, I have without, at my command,
Those which never failed me;
And it shall cost many a life yet
Sir, ere yours be lost --

Pr. Stramador you have been a stranger here of late.

Str. Peruse this paper Sir, you will find there was good reason for it.
Enter Prince Philatell from above. Sramador, Peridor, Reginella meet them
below.

Pr. How! old Tamorens brother, Captain
Of the Thieves, that has infested thus
Our Country?
Reginella too, the heir of that feared Family!
A happy and a strange discovery.

Ta. Peridor, and Reginella, the villain
Has betrayed me.

Re. It Is Orsabrin, they have kept their words.

Or. Reginella? she was a woman then.
O let me go.

Jay. You do forget sure what you are.

Or. I do indeed: oh, to unriddle now!

Stra. And to this man you owe it Sir,
You find an engagement to him there;
And I must hope you will make me just to him.

Pr. He does deserve it,
Seize on him --

Tam. Nay then all truths must out.
That I am lost and forfeit to the Law,
I do confess,
Yet since to save this Prince.

P. Prince!

Or. (Our Mephosto-philus is mad.)

Ta. Yet, Prince, this is the Orsabrin.

Or. Ha! --

Tam. So long ago,
Supposed lost,
Your Brother Sir:
Fetch in there Ardelan and Piramont.

Enter Ardelan and Piramont. N. What mad Planet rules this day
Ardelan, and Piramont.

Or. The Divel's wanton,
And abuses all mankind to day.

Ta. These faces are well known to all Francelians,
Now let them tell the rest --

Pi. My noble Master living! found in Francelia?

Ar. The gods have satisfied our tedious hopes.

Ph. Some Imposture.

Or. A new design of fortune --
I dare not trust it.

Ta. Why speak you not?

Piram. I am so full of joy, it will not out.
Know ye Francelians,
When Sanborne fatal field was fought,
So desperate were the hopes of Orsabrin,
That 'twas thought fit to send away this Prince,
And give him safety in another clime;
That spite of an ill day, an Orsabrin might be
Preserved alive.
Thus you all know,
To Garradans chief charge he was committed:
Who when our Bark by Pirates was surprised,
(For so it was) was slain 'ith first encounter;
Since that we have been forced to wait
On Fortunes pleasure.
And Sir, that all this time we kept
You from the knowledge of your self,
Your pardon; It was our zeal that erred,
Which did conclude it would be prejudicial.

Ar. My Lords you look as if you doubted still:
If Piramont and I be lost unto your memory,
Your hands I hope are not --
Here Is our Commission:
There Is the Diamond Elephant,
That which our Princes Sons are ever known by:
Which we to keep him undiscovered,
Tore from his riband in that fatal day
When we were made prisoners:
And here are those that took us,
Which can witness all circumstance,
Both how, and when, time and place;
With whom we ever since have lived by force:
For on no Kingdom, friend unto Francelia,
Did Fortune ever land us, since that hour;
Nor gave us means to let our Country know
He lived --

T. These very truths, when they could have no ends,
(For they believed him lost)
I did receive from them before,
Which gave me now the boldness to appear
Here, where I Am lost by Law.

Shouts without, Long live Prince Osabrin.
Long live Prince Orsabrin,
Na. Pellegrin let us second this:
Right or wrong it is best for us.

Pe. Observe, observe.

Pr. What shouts are those?

Str. Soldiers of Tamorens the first;
The second was the peoples, who
Much press to see their long lost Prince.

Phi. Sir, it is most evident, and all agrees,
This was his colored hair,
His Air, though altered much with time:
You wear too strange a face upon this news;
Sir, you have found a brother
I, Torcular, the Kingdoms happiness;
For here the plague of Robberies will end.
It is a glorious day --

Pr. It is indeed, I am amazed, not sad;
Wonder does keep the passage so,
Nothing will out.
Brother (for so my kinder Stars will have it)
I here receive you as the bounty of the gods;
A blessing I did not expect,
And in return to them, this day,
Francelia ever shall keep holy.

Or. Fortune by much abusing me, has
So -- dul'd my faith, I cannot
Credit any thing.
I know not how to own such happiness.

P. Let not your doubts lessen your joys:
If you have had disasters heretofore,
They were but given to heighten what is to come.

Na. Here Is as strange a turn as if 'twere the
Fifth Act in a Play. --

Peli. I Am sure it is a good turn for us.

Or. Sir, why stands that Lady so neglected there,
That does deserve to be the business of mankind.
Oh ye gods: since you will be kind
And bountiful, let it be here.
As fearfully, as jealous husbands ask
After some secrets which they dare not know;
Or as forbidden Lovers meet in the night,
Come I to thee (and it is no ill sign this,
Since flames when they burn highest tremble most)
Oh, should she now deny me!

Re. I know not perfectly what all this means;
But I do find some happiness is near,
And I am pleased, because I see you are --

Or. She understands me not --

Pr. He seems to have passion for her.

Ta. Sir, in my dark commands these flames broke out
Equally, violent at first sight;
And 'twas the hope I had to reconcile my self.

Or. It is a holy Magic that will make*
Of you and I but one. --

Re. Any thing that you would ask me, sure I might grant.

Or. Hark Gentlemen, she does consent,
What wants there else?

Pe. My hopes grow cold, I have undone my self.

Pr. Nothing, we all will join in this;
The long lived feu'd between the Families
Here dies, this day the Hyminaeall
Torches shall burn bright;
So bright, that they shall dim the light
Of all that went before --
See Sabrina too. -- (Enter Sabrina.

Ta. Sir, I must have much of pardon,
Not for my self alone, but for all mine --

Pr. Rise, had thou not deserved what now thou su'st for,
This day should know no clouds.

Peridor kneeles to Tamoren. Tam. Taught by the Princes mercy; I forgive too.

Sab. Frighted hither Sir.
They told me you wooed not accept the Princes mercy.

Sam. Art thou no further yet in thy intelligence?
See, thy brother lives --

Sab. My brother? --

Tor. And it is the least of wonders has fallen out.

Or. Yes, such a one as you are, fair, (Reginella looks at Sabrina
And you shall be acquainted.

Sam. Oh could your hate my Lords, now,
Or your love dye.

Phy. Thy merit has prevailed
With me.

Tor. And me.

Pr. And has almost with me.
Samorat thou do not doubt thy Mistress Constancia.

Sam. No Sir.

Pr. Then I will beg of her,
That till the Sun returns to visit us,
She will not give away her self for ever.
Although my hopes are faint,
Yet I would have 'em hopes,
And in such jolly hours as now attend us.
I would not be a desperate thing,
One made up wholly of despair.

Sab. You that so freely gave me Samorats life,
Which was in danger,
Most justly, justly, may be suffered to attempt
Upon my love, which is in none.

Pr. What says my noble Rival?

Sab. Sir, y' are kind in this, and wisely do
Provide I should not surfeit:
For here is happiness enough besides to last the Sun's return.

N. You and I are but savers with all this Pellegrin.
But by the Lord it is well we came off
As we did, all was at stake --

Pr. Come, no more whispers here,
Let Us in, and there unriddle to each other --
For I have much to ask.

Or. A Life! a Friend! a Brother! and a Mistres!
Oh! what a day was here:
Gently my Joys distill,
Least you should break the Vessel you should fill.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
ANd how, and how, in faith, -- a pretty plot;
And smartly carried through too, was it not?
And the Devils, how, well? and the fighting,
Well too; -- a fool, and't had bin just old writing.
O what a monster wit must that man have,
That could please all which now their twelve pence gave:
High characters (cries one) and he would see
Things that never were, nor are, nor never will be.
Romances cries easie-soules, and then they swear,
The Playe's well wr^t, though scarce a good line's there.
The Women -- Oh if Stephen should be killed,
Or miss the Lady, how the plot is spil'd?
And into how many pieces a poor Play
Is taken still before the second day?
Like a strange Beauty newly come to Court;
And to say truth, good faith it is all the sport:
One will like all the ill things in a Play,
Another, some of the good, but the wrong way;
So from one poor Play there comes to arise
At several Tables, several Comedies.
The ill is only here, that 't may fall out
In Plays as Faces; and who goes about
To take asunder often destroys (we know)
What altogether made a pretty show.
FINIS.
BRENNORALT. A Tragedy. Presented at the Private House in Blackfriars, by His
Majesty's servants.

WRITTEN By Sir JOHN SUCKLING.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Sign of the Princes Arms in St Paul's Churchyard. MDCXLVI.

The Scaene. Poland.

The Actors.
SIgismond -- King of Poland. Miefla. Brennoralt -- a Discontent. Doran -- His
Friend. Villanor. Stratheman. Fresolin, Brother to Francelia. Iphigene -- young
Pallatine of Florence. Pallatine of Mensecke, Governor, one of the chief
Rebels. Pallatine of Tork a Rebel. Almerin, a gallant Rebel. Morat, his
Lieutenant Coronell. Francelia, the Governors daughter. Orilla, a waiting
woman to Francelia. Reguelin, A servant in the Governors house, but Spy to
Brennoralt. Iaylor. Guard. Soldiers.
Brennoralt.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Brennoralt, Doran. Brennoralt, I Say, the Court is but a narrow circuit;
Though something elevate above the common;
A kind of Ants nest in the great wild field,
Over charged with multitudes of quick Inhabitants,
Who still are miserably busied to get in,
What the loose foot of prodigality,
As fast does throw abroad.

Dor. Good:
A most eternal place of low affronts,
And then as low submissions.

Bren. Right.
High cowards in revenges amongst themselves,
And only valiant when they mischief others.

Dor. Stars, that would have no names,
But for the ills they threaten in conjunction.

Bren. A race of shallow, and unskilful Pilots;
Which do misguide the Ship even in the calm,
And in great storms serve but as weight to sink it.
More, prithee more. -- (Alarm within.
It Is music to my melancholy.

Enter Soldier. Sold. My Lord; a cloud of dust and men
The Sentinels from the East gate discover;
And as they guess, the storm bends this way.

Bren. Let it be.

Sold. My Lord? --

Bren. Let it be,
I will not fight to day:
Bid Stratheman draw to the trenches.
On, prithee on.

Dor. The King imployes a company of formal beards,
Men, who have no other proofs of their
Long life, but that they are old.

Bren. Right, and if the are wise,
It Is for themselves, not others. -- (Alarm.
As old men ever are.

Enter second Soldier. 2 Sold. Coronell, Coronell;
The enemies at hand, kills all the Centries:
Young Almerin leads them on again.

Bren. Let him lead them off again.

2 Sold. Coronell. --

Bren. Be gone.
If the art afraid, go hide thy self.

2 Sold. What a Devil ails he? -- (Exit.

Bren. This Almerin's the ague of the Camp:
He shakes it once a day.

Dor. He Is the ill conscience rather:
He never lets it rest; would I were at home again.
'Sfoot we lie here in the trenches, as if it were
For a wind to carry us into the other
World: every hour we expect --
I Will no more on it.

Bre. Prithee --

Dor. Not I, by heaven.

Bre. What man! the worst is but fair death.

Dor. And what will that amount to? A fair Epitaph*
A fine account. -- I Will home I swear.

Enter Stratheman. Stra. Arm, arm my Lord,
And show your self, all is lost else.

Dor. Why so?

Stra. The Rebels like an unruly flood,
Roll over the trenches, and throw down
All before them.

Bre. Ha?

Stra. We cannot make a stand.

Bre. He would out-rivall me in honor too,
As well as love; but that he must not do.
Help me Strathman. -- (Puts on Armor.
The danger now grows worthy of our swords;
And, oh Doran, I would to heaven there were
No other storms then the worst tempest here. (Exeunt.

Enter Marinell, throwing down one he carries. Mari. There;
The Sun's the nearest Surgeon I know,
And the honestest; if thou recoverest, why so:
If not, the cure's paid, they have mauld us.

Enter Grainevert, with another upon his back. Grain. A curse light on this
powder;
It stays valor, ere i^'s half way on it is journey:
What a disadvantage fight we upon in this age?
He that did well heretofore,
Had the broad fair day to show it in:
Witnesses enough; we must believe one another --
It Is night when we begin:
Eternal smoke and sulpher.
Smalke; by this hand I can bear with thee
No longer; how now? dead as I live;
Stolen away just as he used to wench.
Well, go thy ways, for a quiet drinker, and dier,
I shall never know thy fellow: searches his pockets.
These trifles too about thee?
There was never an honester poor wretch
Borne I think -- look in the the other pocket too -- hum,

Marinell. Mar. Who 's that?

Grani. It Is I; how goes matters?

Mar. Scurvily enough;
Yet since our Colonel came, the ave got no ground
Of us; A weak Sculler against Wind and Tide,
Would have done as much, hark:
This way the torrent bears. Exeunt.

Enter Fresolin, Almerin, Rebels. Fres. The Villains all have left us.

Alm. Would they had left their fears
Behind them. But come, since we must --

Enter Brennoralt, Soldiers. Bren. Hoe! Stratheman;
Skirt on the left hand with the horse,
And get betwixt these and that Body;
They Are new rallied up forrescue. Dor. Th 'are ours.
Brennoralt charges through. I do not see my game yet. -- Exeunt.

A shout within. Enter Brennoralt, Doran, Stratheman, Marinell. Bren. What
shout is that?

Stra. They have taken Almerin, my Lord.

Bren. Almerin? the Devil thank *em for 't:
When I had hunted hard all day,
And now at length unhearded the proud Dear,
The Currs have snatched him up, sound a Retreat:
There Is nothing now behind. Who saw Doran?

Str. Shall we bring Almerin in?

Bre. No; gazing is low Triumph:
Convey him fairly to the King,
He fought it fairly --

Dor. What youth was that, whom you bestrid my Lord,
And saved from all our swords to day?
Was he not of the Enemy?

Bre. It may be so --

Str. The Governors Son, Fresolin, his Mistress brother. (In Dorans e^^e.

Br. No matter who. It Is pity, the rough hand
Of war, should early courages destroy,
Before they bud, and show themselves in the heat
Of Action --

Mar. I threw (my Lord) a youth upon a bank;
Which seeking, after the retreat, I found
Dead, and a woman, the pretty daughter
Of the Forrester; Lucillia.

Bre. See, see Doran; A sad experiment:
Woman's the cowardly'st and coldest thing
The world brings forth: Yet Love, as fire works water,
Makes it boil over, and do things contrary
To'ts proper nature -- I should shed a tear,
Could I tell how -- Ah poor Lucilia!
Thou did for me what did as ill become thee.
Pray see her gently buried --
Boy, send the Surgeon to the Tent; I bleed:
What lousy Cottages the ave given our souls?
Each petty storm shakes them into disorder;
And 't costs more pains to patch them up again,
Then they are worth by much. I Am weary of
The Tenement. -- Exeunt.

Enter Villanor, Grainevert, Marinell, and Stratheman. Gra. Villanor* welcome,
welcome, whence came thou?

Vil. Look, I wear the Kings high way still on my boots.

Gra. A pretty riding phrase, and how? and how?
Ladies cheap?

Vil. Faith, reasonable:
Those toys were never dear thou know;
A little time and industry they will cost;
But in good faith not much: some few there are
That set themselves at mighty rates --

Gra. Which we of the wise pass by,
As things o're-valued in the market.
Is It not so?

Vil. You Have said Sir, Hark you, your friend the Rivals married.
Has obtained the long loved Lady, and is such an ass after 't.

Gra. Hum.
It Is ever so.
The motions of married people, are as of
Other naturals; violent Gentlemen to the place,
And calm in it.

Mar. We know this too; and yet we must be fooling.

Gra. Faith, women are the baggage of life:
They are troublesome, and hinder us
In the great march, and yet we cannot
Be without 'em.

Mar. You speak very well,
And Souldier-like.

Grain. What? thou art a wit too I warrant,
In our absence?

Vil. Hum -- no, no, a poor pretender,
A Candidate or so, against the next Sessions:
Wit enough to laugh at you here.

Gra. Like enough; valor's a crime:
The wise have still repro^^hed unto the valiant,
And the fool^s too.

Vil. R^ lleri^ a part, Gr^invert;
What accommodations shall we find here?

Gra. Clean straw (sweetheart) and meat
When thou can get it.

Vil. Hum? straw?

Gra. Yes.
That Is all will be betwixt Incest:
You, and your mother earth must lie together.

V. Prithee let us be serious; will this last?
How goes affairs?

G. Well.

V. But well?

G. Faith, it is now upon the turning of the balance:
A most equal business, betwixt Rebellion
And Loyalty.

V. What do mean?

G. Why; which shall be the virtue, and which the vice.

V. How the Devil can that be?

G. Oh: success is a rare paint; hides all the uglines.

V. Prithee, what is the quarrel?

G. Nay, for that excuse us;
Ask the children of peace,
They have the leisure to study it,
We know nothing of it; Liberty they say.

V. 'Sfoot, let the King make an Act,
That any man may be unmarried again;
There Is liberty for them. A race
Of half-witted fellows quarrel about freedom?
And all that while allow the bonds of Matrimony?

G. You speak very well Sir.

Enter King, Lords, Brennoralt. M. Soft; the King and Council --

G. Look, they follow after like tired spannels:
Quest sometimes for company; that is, concur:
And that is their business.

M. They are as weary of this sport
As a young unthrift of's land:
Any bargain to be rid on it.

V. Can you blame them? --
Who 's that?

M. Brennoralt, our brave Coronell:
A discontent, but, what of that? who is not?

V. His face speaks him one.

G. Thou art in the right.
He looks still as if he were saying to
Fortune; Huswife, go about your business.
Come, let us retire to Barathens Tent.
Taste a bottle, and speak bold truths;
That Is our way now. Ex. Manet King and Lords.

Mies. -- Think not of pardon Sir,
Rigor and mercy used in States uncertainly,
And in ill times, look not like the effects
Of virtue, but necessity: Nor will
They thank your goodness, but your fears. --

Melid. My Lords;
Revenge in Princes should be still imperfect:
It is then handsom'st, when the King comes to
Reduce, not Ruin --

Bre. Who puts but on the face of punishing,
And only gently cuts, but prunes rebellion:
He makes that flourish which he would destroy.
Who would not be a Rebel when the hopes
Are vaste, the fears but small?

[Mel.] Why, I would not.
Nor you my Lord, nor you, nor any here.
Fear keeps low spirits only in, the brave
Do get above it, when they do resolve.
Such punishments in infancy of war,
Make men more desperate, not the more yielding.
The common people are a kind of flies;
They 're caught with honey, not with wormwood, Sir.
Severity exasp'rates the stirred humor;
And State distempers turns into diseases.

Bre. The gods forbid, great Polands State should be
Such as it dares not take right Physic. Quarter
To Rebels? Sir! when you give that to them,
Give that to me, which they deserve. I would
Not live to see it --

3 Lord. Turn over your own, and other Chronicles,
And you shall find (great Sir)
"That nothing makes a Civil war long lived,
"But ransom and returning back the brands
Which unextinct, kindled still fiercer fires.

Mies. Mercy bestowed on those that do dispute
With swords, does loose the Angels face it has,
And is not mercy Sir, but policy;
With a weak vizard on --

King. -- Y' have met my thoughts
My Lords; nor will it need larger debate.
To morrow, in the sight of the besiedg'd,
The Rebel dies: Miesla, it is your care.
The mercy of Heaven may be offended so,
That it cannot forgive: Mortals much more,
Which is not infinite, my Lords. (Exeunt.

Enter Iphigene, Almerin (as in prison.) Iph. O Almarin; would we had never
known
The ruffle of the world! but were again
By Stolden banks, in happy solitude;
When thou and I, Shepherd and Shepherdess;
So often by turns, as often still have wished,
That we as easily could have changed our sex,
As clothes; but (alas!) all those innocent joys,
Like glorious Mornings, are retired into
Dark sullen clouds, before we knew to value
What we had.

[Alme.] Fame and victory are light (to himself.
Huswifes, that throw themselves into the arms,
Not of the valiant, but the fortunate.
To be taken, thus!

[Iph.] Almerin

[Alm.] nipt 'ith' bud
Of honor!

[Iph.] My Lord

[Alm.] Foiled! and by the man
That does pretend unto Francelia!

Iph. What is it you do, my Almerin? sit still?
And quarrel with the Winds, because there is
A shipwreck tow'^ds, and never think of saving
The bark?

[Almer:] The Bark? What should we do with that
When the rich freight is lost: my name in arms?

Iph. -- Who knows
What prizes are behind, if you attend
And wait a second Voyage?

[Almer:] Never, never:
There are no second Voyages in this,
The wounds of honor do admit no cure.

Iph. Those slight ones which misfortune gives, must needs.
Else, why should Mortals value it at all?
For who would toil to treasure up a wealth;
Which weak inconstancy did keep, or might
Dispose of? -- Enter Melidor.
Oh my Lord, what news?

Mel. As ill as your own fears could give you;
The Council has decreed him sudden death,
And all the ways to mercy are blockt up. (She weeps and sighs.

Almer. My Iphigene --
This was a misbecomming piece of love:
Women would manage a disaster better -- (Iphig: weeps and sighs again.
Again? thou art unkind --
Thy goodness is so great, it makes thee faulty:
For while thou think'^t to take the trouble from me,
Thou give me more, by giving me thine too.

Iph. Alas! I am indeed a useless t^i^ie;
A dull, dull thing: For could I now do any thing
But grieve and pity, I might help: my thoughts
Labor to find a way; but like to birds
In cages, though they never rest they are
But where they did set out at first --

Enter Jailer. Jay. My Lords, your pardon:
The prisoner must retire;
I have received an order from the King,
Denies access to any.

Iph. -- He cannot be
So great a Tyrant.

[Almer.] I thank him; nor can
He use me ill enough: I only grieve
That I must dye in debt; a Bankrupt: Such
Thy love has made me: My dear Iphigene
Farewell: It is no time for Ceremony.
Show me the way I must -- (Exit.

Iph. Grief strove with such disorder to get out,
It stopped the passage, and sent back my words
That were already on the place --

[Melid.] stay, there
Is yet a way.

[Iph.] O speak it

[Mel.] But there is
Danger in it Iphigene, to thee high danger.

Iph. Fright children in the dark with that, and let
Me know it: There is no such thing in nature
If Almerin be lost.

[Melid.] Thus then; You must
Be taken prisoner too, and by exchange
Save Almerin.

Iph. How can that be?

Mel. Why -- (studies.
Step in, and pray him set his hand, about (To the Jailer.
This distance; his seal too --

Jay. My Lord, I know not what this is.

Mel. Settling of money-busines, fool, betwixt us.

Jay. If It be no more -- (Exit.

Mel. Tell him that Iphigene and I desire it:
I Will send by Strathocles his servant,
A Letter to Morat thus signed and sealed,
That shall inform the sudden execution;
Command him as the only means
To save his life, to sallie out this night
Upon the quarters, and endeavor prisoners.
Name you as most secure and slightest guarded,
Best pledge of safety; but charge him,
That he kill not any, if it be avoydable;
Least 't should inrage the King yet more,
And make his death more certain. (Enter Jailer with the writing.

Jay. He understands you not
He says; but he has sent it.

Melid. So --

Iph. But should Morat mistrust now?
Or this miscarry?

Melid. -- Come;
Leave it to me; I Will take the Pilots part;
And reach the Port, or perish in the Art. (Exeunt.

ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Almerin (in prison.) Almer. SLeep is as nice as woman;
The more I court it, the more it flies me;
Thy elder brother will be kinder yet,
Unsent for death will come. -- To morrow --
Well -- What can to morrow do?
'Twill cure the sense of honor lost --
I, and my discontents shall rest together,
What hurt is there in this?
But death against the will,
Is but a slovenly kind of potion;
And though prescribed by Heaven,
It goes against men's stomachs:
So does it at fourscore too; when the soul's
Mewed up in narrow darkness;
Neither sees nor hears, -- pish, it is mere fondnes in our nature;
A certain clownish cowardice, that still
Would stay at home, and dares not venture
Into foreign Countries, though better then
It Is own, -- ha, what Countries? for we receive
Descriptions of the other world from our Divines,
As blind men take relation of this from us:
My thoughts lead me into the dark,
And there they will leave me, I Will no more on it,
Within. (Knocks) -- Enter.
Some paper and a light, I Will write to the King:
Defy him, and provoke a quick dispatch.
I would not hold this lingering doubtful State
So long again, for all that hope can give.
Enter 3 of the Guard (with paper and Incke) That sword does tempt me strangely
-- (writing.
Were in my hands, 'twere worth the other two.
But then the Guard, -- it sleeps or drinks; may be
To contrive it so that if I should not pass, --
Why if I fall in it,
It Is better yet then Pageantry;
A scaffold and spectators; more souldier-like -- One of the Guard peeps over
his shoulder.
Uncivil villain, read my letter? -- (Seizes his sword.

1 Guar. Not I, not I my Lord.

Alm. Deny it too?

Guar. Murder, murder.

Guar. Arm, arm -- (The Guard runs out.

Alm. I Will follow,
Give the alarm with them,
It Is least suspicious -- (Arm, arm, arm.
All -- the enemy, the enemy -- (Enter Soldiers running ^ver the Stage, one
throwing away his arms.

Soul. Let them come.
Let them come.
Let them come -- (Enter Almerin.

Alm. I hear fresh noise,
The camp's in great disorder: where am I now?
It Is strangely dark -- Goddess without eyes
Be thou my guide, for -- blindness and sight
Are equal sense, of equal use, this night.

Enter Grainevert, Stratheman, Villanor, Mari^^ll. Gra. Trouble not thy self,
child of discontent:
'Twill take no hurt I warrant thee;
The State is but a little drunk,
And when 'tas spued up that that made it so,
'Twill be well again, there is my opinion in short.

Mar. The art in the right.
The State's a pretty forehanded State,
And will do reason herea^^er.
Let Us drink and talk no more on it.

All. -- A good motion, a good motion,
Let Us drink.

Villa. I, I let us drink again.

Stra. Come, to a Mistress.

Gra. Agreed.
Name, name.

Villa. Any body. -- Vermilia.

Gra. Away with it.
She Is pretty to walk with:
And witty to talk with:
And pleasant too to think on.
But the best use of all,
Is her health, is a stale
And helps us to make us drink on*

Stra. Excellent.
Gentlemen, if you say the word,
We Will vant credit, and affect high pleasure.
Shall we?

Villa. I, I, let us do that.

Stra. What think ye of the sacrifice now?

Mar. Come we will have it, -- for trickling tears are vain*

Villa. The sacrifice? what is that?

Stra. Child of ignorance, it is a camp health.
An A -- la -- mode one. Grainevert begin it.

Grain. Come give it me.
Let me see -- (Pins up a Rose.
Which of them this Rose will serve.
Hum, hum, hum.
Bright Star of the lower Orb, twinckeling Inviter,
Which draw'st (as well as eyes) but set'st men righter:
For who at thee begins* comes to the place,
Sooner then he that sets out at the face:
Eyes are seducing lights, that the goodwomen know,
And hang out these a nearer way to show.

Mar. Fine, and patheticall:
Come Villanor.

Vill* What Is the matter?

Mar. Come, your liquor, and your stanza's.
Lines, Lines.

Villa. Of what?

Mar. Why, of any thing your Mistress has given you.

Vil. Gentlemen, she never gave me any thing, but a box
Oth'eare, for offering to kiss her once.

Stra. Of that box then

Mar. I, I, that box, of that box.

Villa. Since it must be,
Give me the poison then. -- (Drinks and spits.
That box fair Mistress, which thou gave to me,
In humane guess, is like to cost me three:
Three cups of Wine, and verses six,
The Wine will down, but verse for rhyme still sticks.
By which you all may easily Gentiles know,
I am a better drinker then a Po. -- Enter Doran.

Mar. Doran.
Doran.

Gra. A hall, a hall
To welcome our friend
For some liquor call,
A new or fresh face,
Must not alter our pace,
But make us still drink the quicker:
Wine, Wine, oh'tis divine
Come fill it unto our brother:
What Is at the tongues and,
It forth does send,
And will not a syllable smother Then,
It unlocks the breast
And throws out the rest,
And learnes us to know each other.
Wine, -- Wine. --

Dor. Mad lads* have you been here ever since?

Stra. Yes faith, thou see the worst of us.
We -- debauch -- in discipline:
Four and twenty hours is the time:
Barruthen had the watch to night,
To morrow 'twill be at my Tent.

Dor. Good,
And d' you know what has fallen out to night?

Stra. Yes:
Grainevert, and my Lieutenant Coronell:
But they are friends again.

Dor. Pish, pish -- the young Palatine of Plocence,
And his grave guardian surprised too night,
Carried by the enemy out of his quarters.

G. As a chicken by a Kite out of a back side,
Was It not so?

D. Is that all?

G. Yes.
My Coronell did not love him:
He eats sweet meats upon a march too.

D. Well, hark ye;
Worse yet; Almerin's gone:
Forced the Court of Guard where he was prisoner,
And has made an escape.

G. So pale and spiritlesse a wretch,
Drew Priams curtain in the dead of night,
And told him half his Troy was burnt --
He was of my mind. I would have done so my self.

D. Well.
There Is high suspicions abroad:
Ye shall see strange discoveries
In The Council of War.

G. What Council?

D. One called this morning.
Y' are all sent to.

G. I will put on clean linen, and speak wisely.

V. 'Sfoot we will have a Round first.

G. By all means Sir.
Sings:
Come let the State stay,
And drink away*
There is no business above it:
It warmes the cold brain,
Makes us speak in high strain,
He Is a fool that does not approve it.
The Macedon youth
Left behind him this truth,
That nothing is done with much thinking;
He drunk, and he fought,
Till he had what he sought,
The world was his own by good drinking.
(Exeunt.
Enter General of the Rebels, Palatine of Trocke, Palatine of Mensecke,
Francelia, Almerin, Morat, Iphigene. G. As your friend, my Lord, he has the
privilege of ours,
And may enjoy a liberty we would deny
To enemies.

A. I thank your Excellence; oh Iphigene,
He does not know,
That thou the nobler part of friendship hold'st,
And doe'st oblige, whilst I can but acknowledge.

Men. Opportunity to Statesmen, is as the just degree
Of heat to Chemists -- it perfects all the work,
And in this prisoner it is offered.
We now are there, where men should still begin;
To treat upon advantage.
The Palatine of Trocke, and Mensecke,
With Almerin, shall to the King;
Petitions shall be drawn,
Humble in form, but such for matter*
As the bold Macedonian youth would send
To men he did despise for luxury.
The first begets opinion of the world,
Which looks not far, but on the outside dwells:
The other inforces courage in our own,
For bold demands must boldly be maintained.

Pal. Let all go on still in the public name,
But keep an ear open to particular offers;
Liberty and public good are like great Oleos
Must have the uper end still of our tables,
Though they are but for show.

Fra. Would I had never seen this shape, 't has poison in it,
Yet where dwells good, if ill inhabits there?

Min. -- Press much religion,
For though we dress the scruples for the multitude,
And for our selves reserve the advantages,
(It being much pretext) yet is it necessary;
For things of faith are so abstruse, and nice,
They will admit dispute eternally:
So how so e're other demands appear,
These never can be proved unreasonable;
The subject being of so fine a nature,
It not submits it self to sense, but scapes*
The trials which conclude all common doubts.

Fra. My Lord, you use me as ill Painters paint,
Who while they labor to make faces fair,
Neglect to make them like.

Iphi. Madam, there is no ship wrack of your
Virtues near, that you should throw away
Any of all your excellencies
To save the dearest, modesty.

Gener. If they proceed with us, we can retreat unto
Our expositions, and the peoples votes.
If they refuse us wholly* then we plead,
The King's besiedged, blockt up so straightly
By some few, relief can find no way
To enter to the King, or to get out to us,
Exclaim against it loud,
Till the Polonians think it high injustice,
And wish us better yet.
Then easily do we rise unto our ends.
And will become their envy through their pity.
At worst you may confirm our party there:
Increase it too: there is one Brennoralt,
Men call him Gallant, but a discontent:
My Cosen* the King has used him ill.
Him a handsome whisper will draw.
The afternoon shall perfect
What we have loosely now resolved. --

Iphi. If in discourse of beauty,
(So large an Empire) I do wonder,
It will become your goodness Madam,
To set me right.
And in a country where you your self is Queen,
Not suffer strangers loose themselves.

Gener. What, making revenges Palatine?
And taking prisoners fair Ladies hearts?

Iphi. Yes my Lord.
And have no better fortune in this War,
Then in the other; for while I think to take,
I am surprised my self.

Fra. Dissembler, would thou were.

M. You are a Courtier my Lord;
The Palatine of Plocence, (Almerin)
Will grace the Hymeneals;
And that they may be while his stay is here,
I Will court my Lo^d in absence;
Take off for you the little strangenesses
Virgins wear at first, -- (Iphe sounds.
Look to the Palatine.

Mer. How is it my dearest Ipheg^ne?

Iph. Not well I would retire.

G. A qualme.

Lo. His color stole away; sanke down,
As water in a weather-glasse
Pressed by a warm hand.

Men's. A cordial of kind looks, -- (En^er a Trumpet blinded.
From the King.

M. Let Us withdraw,
And hear him. -- Exit.

Enter Brennoralt, Doran, Raguelin. Dor. Yes to be married;
What are you mute now?

Bren. Thou came too hastily upon me, pu^^^
So close the colors to mine eye, I could
Not see. It is impossible.

[Dor.] impossible?
If It were impossible, it should be otherwise,
What can you imagine there of Constancy?
Where it is so much their nature to love change,
That when they say but what they are,
They excuse themselves for what they do?

Bren. She hardly knows him yet, in such an instant.

Dor. Oh you know not how fire flies,
When it does catch light matter, woman.

B. No more of that; She is
Yet the most precious thing in all my thoughts.
If it be so -- (Studies.)
I am a lost thing in the world Doran.

D. How?

Bren. Thou will in vain persuade me to be other
Life which to others is a Good that they
Enjoy, to me will be an evil, I
Shall suffer in --

Dor. Look on another face, that is present remedy.

Bren. How ill thou do conclude?
'Cause there are pestilent airs, which kill men suddenly
In health, must there be sovereign as suddenly,
To cure in sickness? 't never was in nature*
Exit, and
Enters again hastily. Bren. I was a fool to think, Death only kept
The doors of ill-pay'd love, when or disdain,
Or spite could let me out as well --

Dor. Right; were I as you,
It should no more trouble me
To free my self of love,
Then to spit out that which made me sick.

Bren. I Will tell her so; that she may laugh at me,
(...) at a prisoner threatening his Guard,
He will break loose, and so is made the faster.
She has charms. -- (Studies)
Doran can fetch in a rebellious heart,
(...) while it is conspiring liberty.
-- Oh she has all
The virtues of her sex, and not the vices,
Chaste and unsullied, as first opening Lillies,
Or untouched buds --

Dor. Chaste? why! do you honor me,
Because I throw my self not off a precipice?
It Is her ruin to be otherwise;
Though we blame those that kill themselves (my Lord)
We praise not him that keeps himself alive,
And deserves nothing.

Bren. And it is the least.
She does triumph, when she does but appear:
I have as many Rivals as beholders.

Dor. All that increases but our jealousies;
If you have now such qualmes for that you havenot,
What will you have for that you shall possess?

Bren. -- Dull haeritique;
Know I have these, because I have not her:
When I have her, I shall have these no more.
Her fancy now, her virtue then will govern:
And as I use to watch with doubtful eye,
The wavering needle in the best Sun-dyall,
Till it has settled, then the trouble's over,
Because I know when it is Fixed, it is True:
So here my doubts are all before me. Sure,
Doran, crowned Conquerours are but the types
Of Lovers, which enjoy, and really
Possess, what the other have in dreams. I Will send
A challenge to him. --

Dor. Do, and be thought a madman.
To what purpose?
If she love him, she will but hate you more.
Lovers in favor (Brenkoralt) are Gamesters
In good fortune; the more you set them,
The more they get.

Bren. I Will see her then this night, by Heaven I will*

Dor. Where? in the Cittadell?

Bren. Know what* and why. --

Dor* He raves, Brennoralt?

Bren. Let me alone. --
I conjure thee, by the discretion
Left betwixt us, (that is thine,
For mine is devoured by injuries of fortune,)
Leave me to my self.

Dor. I have done.

Bren. Is there such a passage,
As thou have told me of, into the Castle?

Rag. There is my Lord.

Bren. And dare thou let me in?

Rag. If you my Lord will venture.

Bren. There are no Centry's near it.

Rag. None.

Bren. How to the chamber afterward?

Rag. Her woman.

Bren. What Is she?

Rag. A wicket to my Ladies secrets,
One that stands up to marriage with me.

Bren. There -- upon thy life be secret. -- (flings a purse.

Rag. Else, -- All punishment to ingratitude. --

Bren. Enough,
I am a storm within till I am there,
Oh Doran!
That that, which is so pleasant to behold,
Should be such pain within!

Dor. Poor Brennoralt!
Thou art the Martyr of a thousand tyrants:
Love, Honor, and Ambition reign by turns,
And show their power upon thee.

Bren. Why, let them; I Am still Brennoralt: "Even Kings
"Themselves, are by their servants ruled sometimes;
"Let their own slaves govern them at odd hours:
"Yet not subject their Persons or their Powers.
Exeunt.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Iphigene (as in a Garden) Iphi. WHat have I got by changing place?
But as a wretch which ventures to the Wars,
Seeking the misery with pain abroad,
He found, but wisely thought he had left at home.
Fortune thou have no tyranny beyond
This usage. -- (Weeps
Would I had never hoped
Or had betimes dispair'd, let never in
The gentle theife, or kept him but a guest,
Not made him Lord of all.
Tempests of wind thus (as my storms of grief
Carry my tears, which should relieve my heart)
Have hurried to the thankelesse Ocean clouds
And showers, that needed not at all the courtesy;
When the poor plains have languish't for the want,
And almost burnt asunder. --
I Will have this Statues place, and undertake
At my own charge to keep the water full. -- (Lies down.

Enter Francelia. Fran. These fond impressions grow too strong upon me,
They were at first without design or end;
Like the first Elements, that know not what
And why they act, and yet produce strange things;
Poor innocent desires, journeying they know
Not whether: but now they promise to themselves
Strange things, grow insolent, threaten no rest
Till they be satisfied.
What difference was between these Lords?
The one made love, as if he by assault
Would take my heart, so forced it to defense;
While the other blew it up with secret mines,
And lest no place for it, here he is. --
Tears steal too from his eyes,
As if not daring to be known
To pass that way: make it good, cunning grief
Thou know thou could not dress thy self
In any other looks, to make thee lovely. (spies Francelia)

Iphi. Francelia
If through the ignorance of places,
I have intruded on your privacies,
Found out forbidden paths; it is fit you pardon, Madam:
For it is my melancholy, not I, offends.

Fran. So great a melancholy would well become
Mischances, such as time could not repair:
Those of the war, are but the petty cures
Of every coming hour. --

Iphi. Why should I not tell her all? since it is in her
To save my life; who knows but she may be
Gallant so far, as to undo her self
To make another happy? -- Madam,
The accidents of war contribute least
To my sad thoughts, (if any such I have)
-- Imprisonment can never be --
Where the place holds what we must love, and yet --

Fran. My Lord?

Iphi. In this imprisonment. --

Fran. Proceed my Lord:

Iphi. I dare not Madam.

Fran. I see I do disturb you, and enter upon secrets --
Which when I know, I cannot serve you in them.

Iphi. Oh most of any
You are the cause of all.

Fran. I my Lord?

Iphi. You Madam -- you alone.

Fran. Alas! that it is too soon to understand.

Iphi. Must not you marry Almerin?

Fran. They tell me it is designed.

Iphi. If he have you, I am for ever lost

Fran. -- Lost?
The Heavens forbid they should design so ill!
Or when they shall, that I should be the cause.

Iphi. Ha! her eyes are strangely kind,
She prompts me excellently,
Stars be propitious, and I am safe.
-- A way I not expected.

Fran. His passion labors for vent.

Iphi. Is there a hope you will not give your self
To Almerin?

Fran. My Lord this air is common,
The walks within are pleasanter. -- (Exit.

Iphi. -- Invitation!
God of desires, be kind, and fill me now
With language; such thou lend'st thy Favorites,
When thou would give them easy victories:
And I forgive thee, all thy cruelties. -- (Exit. after.

Enter Pallatine of Trock* Menseck, Almerin, Brennoralt, Lords. Men's. --
Consider too, that those
Who are necessiated to use violence,
Have first been violent by necessity.

Pall. -- But still you judge not right
"Of the Prerogative; "For often it stands
"With Power and Law, as with our Faith and Reason:
"It is not all against, that is above. (my Lord.)

2. Lord. You Lithuanians had of all least reason;
For would the King be unjust to you he cannot:
Where there is so little to be had. --

Almer. Where there is least, there is liberty (my Lord.)
And it is more injury to pull hairs
From the bald, then from the bushy heads. (They go off talking* Trock pulls
Brennoralt.

Pall. of Tro. Brennoralt -- a word
My Lord, the world has cast its eye upon you,
And marked you out one of the foremost men:
You Have busied fame the eareliest of any,
And send her still on errands.
Much of the bravery of your nation,
Has taken up it is lodging in you.
And gallant men but copy from you.

Bren. It Is goodly language this, what would it mean?

Pall. of Tro. The Lithuanians wish you well, and wonder
So much desert should be so ill rewarded.

Bren. Good.

Pall. While all the gifts the Crown is Mistress of,
Are placed upon the empty --

Bren. Still I take yon not.

P. Then to be plain; our Army would be proud of you:
Pay the neglected scores of merit double.
All that you hold here of command, and what
Your fortune in this Sigismund has suff er'd,
Repair, and make it fairer then at first.

Bren. How?
Then nothing, Lord; trifle below ill language:
How came it in thy heart to tempt my honor?

Pall. My Lord?

Bren. Do think 'cause I am angry
With the King and State sometimes
I am fallen out with virtue, and my self?
Draw, draw, or by goodness --

P What means your Lordship?

Bren. Draw I say.
-- He that would think me a villain, is one:
And I do wear this toy, to purge the world Ent. K of Pal. Lords, Melid.
Miesla.
Of such. They Have saved thee, were thou good natured
Thou would love the King the better during life.

K. If they be just, they call for gracious answers:
Speedy, (how e're) we promise. (They all kisle the Kings hand.

All. Long live great Sigismond.

Bren. -- The Lithuanians Sir,
Are of the wilder sort of creatures, must
Be rid with Cavilons, and with harsh curbs.
And since the war can only make them tried,
What can be used but swords? where men have fal'ne
From not respecting Royalty, unto
A liberty of offending it: what though
Their numbers (possibly) equal yours Sir?
And now forced by necessity, like Catts
In narrow rooms, they fly up in your face?
Think you Rebellion and Loyalty
Are empty names? and that in Subjects hearts
They don't both give and take away the courage?
Shall we believe there is no difference
In good and bad? that there is no punishment,
Or no protection? forbid it Heaven!
If when great Polands honor, safety too,
Hangs in dispute, we should not draw our Swords,
Why were we ever taught to wear 'em Sir?

Mi. This late commotion in your Kingdom Sir,
Is like a growing Wen upon the face,
Which as we cannot look one but with trouble,
So take it away we cannot but with danger.
War there has foulest fac^, and I most fear it
Where the pretense is fairest. Religion
And Liberty, most specious names, ^hey urge;
Which like the Bills of subtle Mountebankes,
Filled with great promises of curing all,
-- Though by the wise,
Passed by unread as common cosenage,
Yet, By th'unknowing multitude they are still
Admired, and flock't unto. --

K. Is there no way
To disabuse them?

[Melid] All is now too late.
`The vulgar in Religion are like
"Unknown Lands; those that first possess them, have them*
Then, Sir, consider, justness of Cause is nothing:
When things are risen to the point they are;
It Is either not examined or believed
Among the Warlike. --
The better cause the Grecians had of Yore,
Yet were the Gods themselves divided in it;
And the foul ravisher found as good protection
As the much injured husband. --
Nor are you Sir assured of all behind you:
For though your Person in your Subjects hearts
Stands highly honored, and beloved, yet are
There certain Acts of State, which men call grievances
Abroad; and though they bare them in the times
Of peace, yet will they now perchance, seek to
Be free, and throw them off. "For know Dread Sir,
"The Common People are much like the Sea,
"That suffers things to fall and sink unto
"The bottom in a Calm, which in a Storm
"Stird and enraged, it lifts, and does keep up
Then; Time distempers cures more safely Sir,
Then Physic does, or instant letting-bloud:
Religion now is a young Mistress there,
For which each man will fight, and dye at least;
Let it alone a while, and 'twill become
A kind of married wife: people will be
Content to live with it in quietness.
(If that at least may be) my voice is therefore Sir,
For Peace. --

Mies. Were Sir the question simply War or Peace,
It were no more then shortly to be asked,
Whether we would be well or ill:
Since War the sickness of the Kingdom is,
And Peace the health: But here I do conceive
'Twill rather lie, whether we had not better,
Endure sharp sickness for a time, to enjoy
A perfect strength, then have it languish on us:
For Peace and War in an incestuous line,
Have still begot each other. --
Those men that highly now have broke all Laws,
(The great one only it is 'twixt man and man)
What safety can they promise, though you give it?
Will they not still suspect, (and justly too)
That all those civil bonds (new made) should be
Broken again to them? so being still
In fears and jealousies themselves, they must
Infect the People: "For in such a case
"The private safety is the public trouble.
Nor will they ever want Praetext; "Since he
"That will maintain it with his Sword he is injured,
"May say it at any time --
Then Sir, as terrible as war appears,
My vote is for it; nor shall I ever care
How ugly my Physicians face shall be,
So he can do the cure.

Lord. In entering phisique,
I think, Sir, none so much considers
The Doctors face, as his own body.
To keep on foot the war with all your wants,
Is to let blood, and take strong potions,
In dangerous sickness.

K. I see, and wonder not to find, my Lords,
This difference in opinion; the subject's large:
Nor can we there too much dispute, where when
We err, it is at a Kingdoms charges; Peace
And war are in themselves indifferent,
And time does stamp them either good or bad:
But here the place is much considerable;
"War in our own is like to too much heat
"Within, it makes the body sick; when in
"Another Country, it is but exercise;
"Conveighs that heat abroad, and gives it health.
To that I bend my thoughts; but leave it to
Our greater Council, which we now assemble:
Mean time exchange of prisoners only we
Assent unto --

Lord. Nothing of Truce, Sir?

[K.] No: we will not take up
Quiet at interest: Perfect Peace, or nothing.
"Cessations for short times in war, are like
"Small fits of health, in desperate maladies:
"Which while the instant pain seems to abate,
"Flatters into debauch and worse estate. -- Exeunt.

Enter Iphigene as leading to her chamber Francelia; Servants with lights;
Morat, and another Soldier. Iph. I have not left my self a fair retreat,
And must be now the blessed object
Of your love, or subject of your scorn.

Fran. I fear some treachery;
And that mine eyes have given intelligence.
Unless you knew there would be weak defense,
You durst not think of taking in a heart,
As soon as you set down before it.

Iph. Condemn my Love not of such fond ambition,
It aims not at a conquest,
But exchange, Francelia -- (whisper.

Mor. They 're very great in this short time.

Sol. It Is ever so:
Young and handsome
Have made acquaintances in nature:
So when they meet, they have the less to do.
It is for age or uglines to make approaches,
And keep a distance.

Iph. When I shall see other perfection,
Which at the best will be but other vanity,
Not more, I shall not love it --

Fran. It Is still one step not to despair, my Lord.
Exeunt Iphig. Fran. servants.
Morat. Do think he will fight?

Sold. Troth it may be not:
Nature, in those fine pieces, does as Painters;
Hangs out a pleasant Excellence
That takes the eye, which is indeed,
But a course canvas in the naked truth,
Or some slight stuff.

Morat. I have a great mind to taste him.

Sold. Fie! a Prisoner?

Morat. By this hand if I thought -- Enter Iphig: waitingwoman coming after
him.
He courted my Coronels Mrs in earnest.

Wom. My Lord, my Lord,
My Lady thinks the Gessimine walks
Will be the finer, the freshnes
f the morning takes of the strength
OF the heat she says.

Iph. It Is well.

Mor. Mewe -- do it so? I suspect vildly,
We Will follow him, and see if he be
So far quallified toward a soldier,
As to drink a crash in's chamber -- (Raguelin pulls the waiting woman back.

R. Where are those keys?

Wom. Hark you, I dare not do it.

R. How?

Wom. My Lady will find --

R. Scruples?
Are my hopes become your fears?
There was no other way I should be any thing
In this lewd world, -- and now --
'Sfoot, I know she longs to see him too.

Wom. Does she?

R. Do you think he would desire it else?

Wom. I, but --

R. Why, let me secure it all.
I Will say I found the Keys, or stole them: Come --

Wom. Well, if you ruin all now --
Here, these enter the garden from the works,
That the privy walks and that the back stairs.
Then you know my chamber.

R. Yes I know your chamber. -- Exeunt

Enter Brennoralt. Bren. He comes not.
One wise thought more* and I return:
I cannot in this act separate the foolish
From the bold so far, but still it tastes a' th, rash.
Why let it taste, it tastes of love too;
And to all actions 't gives a pretty relish, that.

Enter Raguelin. Rag. My Lord?

Bren. Oh -- here.

Rag. 'Sfoot y' are upon our Centries.
Move on this hand. -- Exeunt.

Enter (again) Bren. and Rague. Bren. Where are we now?

Ra. Entering part of the Fort,
Your Lordship must be wet a little. -- Exeunt.

Enter (again.) Bren. Why are there here no guards?

Ra. There needs none:
You presently must pass a place,
Where one's an Army in defense,
It is so steep and strait.

Bren. It Is well.

Ra. These are the steps of danger;
Look to your way my Lord.

Bren. I do not find such difficulty.

Francelia (as in a bed.) Bren. Wait me here abouts -- (he draws the
curtains.
So Misers look upon their gold,
Which while they joy to see, they fear to loose:
The pleasure of the sight scarce equalling,
The jealousy of being dispossessed by others;
Her face is like the milky way in the sky,
A meeting of gentle lights without name.
Heavens! shall this fresh ornament
Of the world; this precious lovelines
Pass with other common things
Amongst the wastes of time, what pity 't were. (She wakes.

Franc. Bless me!
Is it a Vision, or Brennoralt?

Bren. Brennoralt, Lady.

Franc. Brennoralt? innocence guard me;
What is 't you have done my Lord?

Bren. Alas I were in too good estate,
If I knew what I did.
But why ask you Madam?

Fran. It much amazes me to think
How you came hither.
And what could bring you to endanger thus
My honor, and your own life?
Nothing but saving of my brother
Could make me now preserve you.

Bren. Reproach me not the follies, you your self*
Make me commit --
I am reduced to such extremity,
That love himself (high tyrant as he is)
If he could see would pity me.

Fran. I understand you not.

Bren. Would heaven you did, for 't is a pain to tell you:
I come t'accuse you of injustice (Madam)
You first begot my passion, and was
Content (at least you seemed so) it should live;
Yet since would never contribute unto it,
Not look upon 't, as if you had desired,
Its being for no other end; but for
The pleasure of its ruin --

Fran. Why do you labor thus to make me guilty of
An injury to you, which when it is one,
All mankind is alike engaged, and must
Have quarrel to me?

Bren. I have done ill; you chide me justly (Madam)
I Will lay 't not on you, but on my wretched self.
For I am taught that heavenly bodies
Are not malicious in their influence,
But by the disposition of the subject.
They tell me you must marry Almerin:
Sure such excellence ought to be
The recompense of virtue;
Not the sacrifice of Parents wisdom,
Should it not Madam?

Fran. 'Twould injure me, were it thought otherwise.

Br. And shall he have you then that knew you yesterday?
Is there in martyrdom no juster way?
But he that holds a finger in the fire
A little time, should have the Crown from them
That have endured the flame with constancy?

Fran. If the discovery will ease your thoughts
My Lord; know Almerin is as the man
I never saw.

[Bren.] You do not marry then?
Condemned men thus hear, and thus receive
Repreeves. One question more, and I am gone.
Is there to latitude of eternity
A hope for Brennoralt?

Fran. My Lord?

Bren. Have I a place at all,
When you do think of men?

Fran. My Lord, a high one,
I must be singular did I not value you:
The world does set great rates upon you,
And you have first deserved them.

Bren. Is this all?

Fran. All.

Bren. Oh be less kind, or kinder:
Give me more pity, or more cruelty, Francelia.
I cannot live with this, nor die --

Fran. I fear my Lord,
You must not hope beyond it.

Bren. Not hope? This, sure, is not the body to (views himself.
This soul; it was mistaken, shufled in
Through haste: Why (else) should that have so much love,
And this want loveliness, to make that love
Received? -- I will raise honor to a point,
It never was -- do things (studies.
Of such a virtuous greatness she shall love me.
She shall -- I will deserve her, though
I have her not: There Is something yet in that.
Madam, wilt please you, pardon my offense?
-- (Oh Fates!
That I must call thus my affection!)

Fran. I will do any thing, so you will think
Of me, and of your self (my Lord) and how
Your stay indangers both --

[Bren.] Alas!
Your pardon is more necessary to
My life, then life to me: but I am gone.
Blessings, such as my wishes for you, in
Their ecstasies, could never reach, fall on you.
May every thing contribute to preserve
That exc'lence (my destruction) till't meet joys
In love, great as the torments I have in it. Exit.

ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Brennoralt. Bren. Why so, it is well, Fortune I thank thee still,
I dare not call thee villain neither.
'Twas plotted from the first,
That Is certain, -- it looks that way?
Hum -- caught in a trap?
Here Is something yet to trust to -- (To his sword.
This was the entry, these the stairs:
But whether afterward?
He that is sure to perish on the land,
May quit the nicetie of Card and Compass:
And safe, to his discretion* put to Sea:
He shall have my hand to it. Exit.

Enter Raguelin, Orilla, (the waiting woman. Ra. Look:
By this light it is day.

Oril. Not by this, by to other it is indeed.

Ra. Thou art such another piece of temptation.
My Lord raves by this time,
A hundred to one the Centinells
Will discover us too,
Then I do pay for night-watch.

Oril. Fie upon thee,
Thou art as fearful as a young colt;
Boglest at every thing, fool.
As if Lovers had considered hours: I Will peep in -- (she peeps

Ra. I am as weary of this wench,
As if I were married to her:
She hangs upon me like an Ape upon a horse --
She Is as common too, as a Barbers glass --
Conscienc't too like a Dy-dapper.

Orilla. -- there is no body within:
My Lady sleeps this hour at least.

Ra. Good, the Divel's even with me --
Not be an honest man neither -- Enter Bren. and a guard.
What course now?

S. Nay Sir, we shall order you now.

Bren. Dogs. -- Enter Fresolin.

Fres. What tumult's this -- ha! Brennoralt! it is he
In spite of his disguise: what makes he here?
He Is lost for ever if he be discovered;
How now companions, why do you use my friend thus?

S. Your friend my Lord? if he be your friend
H'as used us as ill:
H' has played the Devil amongst us.
Six of our men are Surgeons work this month;
We found him climbing the walls.

2 S. He had no word neither,
Nor any language but a blow.

Fres. You will be doing these wild things (my Lord)
Good faith y' are too blame, if y' had desired
To view the walls, or Trenches, 't was but
Speaking; we are not nice:
I would my self have waited on you:
The are the new out-workes you would see perchance.
Boy, bring me black Tempest round about,
And the gray Barbary; a Trumpet come along too;
My Lord, we will take the nearer way,
And privater, here through the Sally-Port.

Bre. What a Devil is this? sure I dream -- Exeunt.

S. Now, you are so officious. (Manet Sold.

2 S. Death! could I guess he was a friend?

S. 'Twas ever to be thought,
How should he come there else?

2 S. Friend or no friend, he might have left us
Something to pay the Surgeon with:
Grant me that, or I Will beat you to it. -- Exeunt.

Enter Fresolin, and Brennoralt. Fres. Brennoralt -- start not:
I pay thee back a life I owe thee;
And bless my Stars, they gave me power to do it;
The debt lay heavy on me.
A horse waits you there -- a Trumpet too,
(Which you may keep, least he should prate)
No Ceremony, it is dangerous.

Bren. Thou have astonished me:
Thy youth has triumphed in one single act,
Over all the age can boast; and I will stay
To tell thee so, were they now firing all
Their Cannons on me; farewell gallant Fresolin:
And may reward, great as thy virtue, crown thee.

Exeunt diverse ways. Enter Iphigene, Francelia. Fran. A peace will come,
And then you must be gone;
And whither when you once are got upon the wing,
You will not stoop to what shall rise,
Before ye fly to some lure
With more temptation garnisht, is a sad question.

Iph. Can you have doubts, and I not my fears?
By this -- the readiest and the sweetest oath, I swear
I cannot so secure my self of you,
But in my absence I shall be in pain.
I have cast up what it will be to stand
The Governors anger; and which is more hard,
The love of Almerin.
I hold thee now but by thy own free grant,
A slight security, alas it may fall out,
Giving thy self, not knowing thine own worth,
Or want of mine, thou may, like Kings deceived,
Resume the gift on better knowledge back.

Fran. If I so easily change, I was not worth your love,
And by the loss you 'l gain.

Iph. But when you are irrecoverably gone*
'Twill be slight comfort to persuade my self
You had a fault, when all that fault must be
But want of love to me; and that again
Find in my much defect, so much excuse,
That it will have no worse name
Then discretion* if inconcern'd do
Cast it up -- I must have more assurance.

Franc. You have too much already:
And sure my Lord you wonder, while I blush,
At such a growth in young affections.

Iphi* Why should I wonder (Madam.)
Love that from two breasts sucks,
Must of a child quickly become a Giant.
Dunces in love stay at the Alphabet,
The inspired know all before; -- Enter waiting woman.
And do begin still higher.

Woman. Madam;
Almerin, returned, has sent to kiss
Your hands. I told him you were busy.

Franc. Must I my Lord be busy?
I may be civil though not kind.
Tell him I wait him in the Gallery.

Iphi. May I not kiss your hand this night? (Whisper)

Franc. The world is full of jealous eyes my Lord:
And were they all locked up; you are a spy
Once entered in my chamber at strange hours.

Iphi. The virtue of Francelia is too safe,
To need those little arts of preservation.
Thus to divide our selves, is to distrust our selves.
A Cherubin dispatches not on earth
The affairs of heaven with greater innocence,
Then I will visit; it is but to take a leave,
I beg.

Franc. When you are going my Lord -- Exeunt.

Enter Almerin, Morat. Almer. Pish. Thou lie, thou lie.
I know he plays with woman kind, not loves it.
Thou art impertinent --

Mor. It Is the camp talk my Lord though.

Al. The camp's an ass, let me hear no more on it

Exeunt (Talking.) Enter Granivert. Villanor. Marinel. Grani. And shall we have
peace?
I am no sooner sober, but the State is so too:
If It be thy will, a truce for a month only.
I long to refresh my eyes; by this hand
They have been so tired with looking upon faces
Of this country.

Villa. And shall the Donazella
To whom we wish so well-a
Look Babies again in our eyes-a?

Grani. Ah -- a sprightly girl above fifteen
That melts when a man but takes her by the hand!
Eyes full, and quick; with breath
Sweet as double violets,
And wholesome as dying leaves of Strawberries.
Thick silken eyebrows, high upon the forehead;
And cheeks mingled with pale streaks of red,
Such as the blushing morning never wore. --

Villa. Oh my chops; my chops;

Grani. With narrow mouth, small teeth,
And lips swelling, as if she pouted --

Villa. Hold, hold, hold;

Grani. Hair curling, and covered, like buds of Marioram,
Part tied in negligence
Part loosely flowing --

Marin. Tyrant! tyrant! tyrant!

Grani. In pinck color taffata petticoate.
Lac't smock-sleeves dangling;
This vision stolen from her own bed
And rustling in ones chamber --

Villa. Oh good Granivert, good Granivert.

Grani. With a wax candle in her hand,
Looking as if she had lost her way;
At twelve at night.

Marm. Oh any hour, any hour.

Grani. Now I think on it, by this hand
I Will marry, and be long lived.

Villa, Long lived? how?

Grain. Oh, he that has a Wife, eats with an appetit^,
'Has a very good stomach to it first:
This living at large is very destructive,
Variety is like rare sawces; provokes too far,
And draws on surfets, more then the other.

Enter Doran. Dor. So; is this a time to fool in?

G. What Is the matter?

Dor. Draw out your choice men, and away to
Your Coronell immediately. There Is work
Toward my boys, there is work.

Grain, Art in earnest?

Dor. By this light.

Grain. There Is something in that yet.
This moiety War
Twilight,
Neither night nor day,
Pox upon it:
A storm is worth a thousand
Of your calm;
There Is more variety in it. Exeunt.

Enter Almerin, Francelia, as talking earnestly. Alm. Madam, that shows the
greatness of my passion.

Fran. The imperfection rather: Jealousie's
No better sign of love (my Lord) then fevers are
Of Life; they show there is a Being, though
Impaired, and perishing: and that, affection
But sick and in disorder. I like 't not.
Your servant. -- Exit.

Al. So short and sour? the change is visible.

Enter Iphigene. Iph. Dear Almerin welcome, y' have been absent long.

Alm. Not very long.

Iph. To me it has appeared so;
What says our Camp? am I not blamed there?

Alm. They wonder --

Iph. While we smile --
How have you found the King inclining?

Alm. Well.
The Treaty is not broken, nor holds it.
Things are where they were;
'T has a kind of face of peace,
You my Lord may when you please return.

Iph. I Almerin?

Alm. Yes my Lord, I Will give you an escape.

Iph. It Is least in my desires.

Alm. Hum!

Iph. Such prisons are beyond all liberty.

Alm. Is It possible?

Iph. Seems it strange to you?

Alm. No, not at all.
What? you find the Ladies kind?

Iph. Civil -- (smiles.

A. You make love well too they say (my Lord.)

Iph. Pass my time.

Alm. Address unto Francelia?

Iph. Visit her.

Al. D' you know she is my Mistres, Pallatine?

Iph. Ha?

Alm. D' you know she is my Mistress?

Iph. I have been told so.

Alm. And do you court her then?

Iph. Why? -- (smiles.
If I saw the enemy first,
Would you not charge?

Alm. He does allow it too* by Heaven:
Laughs at me too; thou filcher of a heart,
False as thy title to Francelia.
Or as thy friendship: which with this I do -- (draws.
Throw by -- draw.

Iph What do you mean?

Alm. I see the cunning now of all thy love,
And why thou came so tamely kind,
Suffering surprise* Draw.

Iph. I will not draw, kill me;
And I shall have no trouble in my death,
Knowing it is your pleasure:
As I shall ha ve no pleasure in my life
Knowing it is your trouble.

Alm. Oh poor -- I looked for this.
I knew the would find 'twas easier to do a wrong
Then justify it -- but --

Iphi. I will not fight -- hear me:
If I love you not more, then I love her;
If I do love her more then for your sake;
Heaven strangely punish me.

Alm. Take heed how thou do play with heaven.

Iphi. By all that is just, and fair, and good,
By all that you hold dear, and men hold great;
I never had lascivious thought, or ere
Did action that might call in doubt my love
To Almerin.

Alm. That tongue can charm me into any thing;
I do beleev't, prithee be wiser then.
Give me no further cause of jealousy,
Hurt not mine honor more, and I am well.

Iphi. But well -- Of all
Our passions, I wonder nature made
The worst, foul jealousy, her favorite.
And if it be not so, why took she care
That every thing should give the monster Nourishment,
And left us nothing to destroy it with?

Alm. Prithee no more, thou plead'st so cunningly
I fear I shall be made the guilty
And need thy pardon.

Iphi. If you could read my heart you would.
I will be gone to morrow if that will satisfy. Indeed
I shall not rest until my innocence
Be made as plain as objects to the sense.

Alm. -- Come;
You shall not go, I Will think upon it no more.
"Distrusts ruin not friendship,
"But build it fairer then it was before --

Exeunt. Enter Brennoralt: Captains, Stratheman: Doran. Bren. No more but ten
from every company;
For many hands are thieves, and rob the glory,
While they take their share* how goes the night?

Stra. Half spent my Lord.
We shall have straight,
The Moons weaker light.

Bren. It Is time then, call in the officers.
Friends, if you were men that must be talked
Into a courage, I had not chosen you;
Danger with its vizard, often before this time
You Have looked upon* and out-fac'd it too;
We are to do the trick again, that is all.
Here -- (draws his sword)
And yet we will not swear:
For he that shrinks in such an action
Is damned without the help of perjury.
Doran; if from the virgin tower thou spiest
A flame, such as the East sends forth about
The time the day should break, go tell the King
I hold the Castle for him; bid him come on
With all his force, and he shall find a victory
So cheap 'twill loose the value. If I fall,
The world has lost a thing it used not well;
And I, a thing I cared not for; that world.

Stra. Lead us on Coronell;
If we do not fight like --

Bren. No like.
We Will be our selves similitude
And time shall say, when it would tell
That men did well, they fought like us.

ACT. V. SCEN. I.
Enter Again. Bren. WHat made the stop?
One in's falling sickness had a fit
Which choked the passage; but all is well:
Softly, we are near the place. Exeunt.

Alarm within, and fight, then enter Almerin (in his night-gowne. Alm. What
noise is here to night?
Something on fire -- what hoe,
Send to the Virgin-tower, there is disorder --
Thereabouts. (Ent. Sold.

Sold. All Is lost, all is lost:
The enemie's upon the place of arms:
And is by this time Master of that,
And of the Tower.

Alm. Thou lie. -- (strikes him.

Enter Mo^^t. Mor. Save your self my Lord, and have unto the camp;
Ruin gets in on every side.

Alm. There Is something in it when this fellow flies.
Villains my arms, I Will see what Devil reigns.

Enter Iphigene, Francelia. Iphi. Look, the day breaks.

Fran. You think I Will be so kind, as swear
It does not now. Indeed I will not --

Iph. Will you not send me neither,
Your picture when y' are gone?
That when my eye is famisht for a look,
It may have where to feed,
And to the painted Feast invite my heart.

Fran. Here, take this virgin-bracelet of my hair,
And if like other men thou shall hereafter
Throw it with negligence,
Amongst the Records of thy weak female conquests,
Laugh at the kind words, and mystical contrivement.
If such a time shall come,
Know I am sighing then thy absence Iphigene,
And weeping over the false but pleasing Image.

Enter Almerin. Alm. Francelia, Francelia,
Rise, rise, and save thy self the enemy
That does not know thy worth, may else destroy it.
(throws open the door. Ha! mine eyes grow sick.
A plague has, through them, stolen into my heart;
And I grow dizzie: feet, lead me off again,
Without the knowledge of my body.
I shall act I know not what else -- Exit.

Franc. How came he in?
Dear Iphigene we are betrayed;
Lets raise the Castle lest he should return.

Iph. That were to make all public.
Fear not* I Will satisfy his anger:
I can do it.

Franc. Yes, with some quarrel;
And bring my honor, and my love in danger -- Enter Almerin
Look he returns, and wrecks of fury,
Like hurried clouds over the face of heaven,
Before a tempest, in his looks appears.

Alm. If they would question what our Rage does act
And make it sin, they would not thus provoke men.
-- I am too tame.
For if they live I shall be pointed at,
Here I denounce a war to all the world,
And thus begin it -- (runs at Iphigene)

Iphi. What have thou done -- (falls)

Franc. Ah me, help, help. -- (wounds Francelia)

Iphi. Hold.

Alm. It Is too late.

Iphi. Rather then she shall suffer,
My fond deceits involve the innocent;
I will discover all.

Alm. Ha! -- what will he discover?

Iphi. That which shall make thee curse
The blindness of thy rage. -- I am a woman.

Alm. Ha, ha, ha, brave and bold!
Because thy perjury deceived me once,
And saved thy life, thou think to escape again.
Impostor, thus thou shall. -- (runs at him.

Iphi. Oh hold -- I have enough.
Had I hope of life, thou should not have this secret.

Franc. What will it be now?

Iphi. -- My father having long desired
A son to heir his great possessions.
And in six births successively deceived,
Made a rash vow; oh how rash vows are punished!
That if the burden then my mother went with
Proved not a male, he never would know her more.
Then was unhappy Iphigene brought forth,
And by the women's kindness named a boy;
And since so bred: (a cruel pity as
It has fallen out.) If now thou findst that, which
Thou thoughtst a friendship in me, Love; forget it.
It was my joy, -- and -- death. -- (faints.

Alm. -- For curiosity
I Will save thee, if I can, and know the end
If It be but loss of Blood, -- Breasts!
By all that is good a woman! -- Iphigene.

Iphi. I thank thee, for I was fallen asleep, before
I had dispatched. Sweetest of all thy sex,
Francelia, forgive me now; my love
Unto this man, and fear to loose him, taught me,
A fatal cunning, made me court you, -- and
My own Destruction.

[Franc.] I am amazed.

Alm. And can it be? Oh mockery of heaven!
To let me see what my soul often wished
And mak't my punishment, a punishment,
That were I old in sins, were yet too great.

Iphi. Would you have loved me then? Pray say you would:
For I like testie sickmen at their death,
Would know no news but health from the Physician.

Alm. Can thou doubt that?
That have so often seen me extas^'d,
When thou were dressed like woman
Unwilling ever to believe thee man?

Iph. I have enough.

Alm. Heavens!
What thing shall I appear unto the world!
Here might my ignorance find some excuse.
-- But, there,
I was distracted. None but one enraged
With anger to a savadgenesse, would ere
Have drawn a sword upon such gentle sweetness.
Be kind, and kill me; kill me one of you:
Kill me if 't be but to preserve my wits.
Dear Iphigene, take thy revenge, it will
Not misbecome thy sex at all; for it is
An act of pity not of cruelty:
Thus to dispatch a miserable man.

Franc. And thou would be more miserable yet,
While like a Bird made prisoner by it self,
Thou bat'st and beat'st thy self against every thing,
And do pass by, that which should let thee out.

Alm. -- Is it my fault?
Or heavens? Fortune, when she would play upon me,
Like ill Musicians, wound me up so high,
That I must crack sooner then move in tune.

Franc. Still you rave,
While we for want of present help may perish.

Alm. Right.
A Surgeon, I Will go find one instantly.
The enemy too -- I had forgot --
Oh what fatality governed this night.

Exit. Franc. How like an unthrifts case will mine be now?
For all the wealth he looses shifts but 's place;
And still the world enjoyes it: so will it you,
Sweet Iphigene, though I possess you not.

Iphi. What excellence of Nature's this! have you
So perfectly forgiven already, as to
Consider me a loss? I doubt which Sex
I shall be happier in. Climates of Friendship
Are not less pleasant, 'cause they are less scortching,
Then those of Love; and under them we will live:
Such precious links of that we will tie our souls
Together with, that the chains of the other.
Shall be gross fetters to it.

[Franc.] But I fear
I cannot stay the making. Oh would you
Had never un-deceiv'd me, for I'had died with
Pleasure, believing I had been your Martyr.
Now --

Iphi. She looks pale. Francelia --

Franc. -- I cannot stay;
A hasty summons hurries me away:
And -- gives -- no -- (dies)

Iphi. -- She Is gone:
She Is gone. Life like a Dials hand has stolen A ^oyse within. Enter
soldiers. She thinke^ them Almer.
From the fair figure e're it was perceived.
What will become of me? -- Too late, too late
Y' are come: you may persuade wild birds, that wing
The air, into a Cage, as soon as call
Her wandering spirits back. -- ha!
Those are strange faces; there is a horror in them:
And if I stay, I shall be taken for
The murderer. O in what streights they move
That wander 'twixt death, fears and hopes of love.

Exit. Enter Brennoralt. Granivert. Soldiers. Bren. Forbear, upon your lives,
the place:
There dwells divinity within it* All else
The Castle holds, is lawful prize;
Your valors wages. This I claim as mine,
Guard you the door --

Grani. Coronell shall you use all the women your self?

Bren. Away -- it is unseasonable -- (draws the curtain)
Awake fair Saint and bless thy poor Idolator
Ha! -- pale? -- and cold? -- dead.
The sweetest guest fled, murdered by heaven;
The purple streams not dry yet.
Some villain has broke in before me,
Robbed all my hopes; but I will find him out,
And kick his soul to hell -- I Will do 't -- dragging out Iphigene.
Speak.

Iphi. What should I say?

Bren. Speak or by all --

Iph. Alas, I do confess my self the unfortunate cause.

Bren. Oh d' you so?
Had thou been cause of all the plagues
That vex mankind, the adst been an Innocent
To what thou art; thou shall not think repentance. (kills her.

Iph. Oh, thou were too sudden.
And -- (dies.

Bren. Was I so?
The lustful youth would sure have spoiled her honor;
Which finding highly guarded, rage, and fear
To be revealed, counseled this villainy.
Is there no more of them? Exit.

Enter Almerin. Alm. Not enter?
Yes dog, through thee -- ha! a course laid out
In stead of Iphigene: Francelia dead too? -- (Enter Bren.
Where shall I begin to curse?

Bren. Here -- If he were thy friend.

Alm. Brennoralt;
A gallant sword could never have come
In better time.

Bren. I have a good one for thee,
If that will serve the turn.

Alm. I long to try it,
That sight does make me desperate;
Sick of my self and the world.

Bren. Did value him?
A greater villain did I never kill.

Alm. Kill?

Bren. Yes.

Alm. Art sure of it?

Bren. May be I do not wake.

Alm. The ast taken then a guilt off from me,
Would have waigh'd down my sword,
Weakened me to low resistance.
I should have made no sports, had thou concealed it.
Know Brennoralt thy sword is stained in excellence,
Great as the world could boast. --

Bren. Ha -- ha -- how thou art abused?
Look there, there lies the excellence
Thou speak of* murdered; by him too;
He did confess he was the cause.

Alm. Oh Innocence, ill understood, and much worse used!
She was alas by accident, but I,
I was the cause indeed

Bre. I will believe thee too, and kill thee --
Destroy all causes till I make a stop
In nature; for to what purpose should she
Work again?

Alm. Bravely then,
The title of a Kingdom is a trifle
To our quarrel Sir; know by sad mistake
I killed thy Mistres Brennoralt,
And thou kild'st mine.

Bren. Thine?

Alm. Yes, that Iphigene
Though shown as man unto the world,
Was woman, excellent woman --

Bren. I understand no riddles guard thee. -- Fight and pause.

Alm. O could they now look down,
And see how we two strive
Which first should give revenge,
They would forgive us something of the crime.
Hold prithee give me leave
To satisfy a curiosity --
I never kissed my Iphigene as woman.

Bren. Thou motion'st well, nor have I taken leave (Rising.
It keeps a sweetness yet --
As stills from Roses, when the flowers are gone.

Alm. Even so have two faint Pilgrims scorch't with heat
Unto some neighbor fountain stepped aside
Kneeled first, then laid their warm lips to the Nymph
And from her coldness took fresh life again
As we do now --

Bren. Lets on our journey if thou art refresht.

Alm. Come and if there be a place reserved
For heightened spirits better then other,
May that which wearies first of ours have it. Fight agood while Alm. falls.

Bren. If I grow weary, laugh at me, that is all*

Alm. -- Brave souls above which will
Be (sure) inquisitive for news from earth
Shall get no other but that thou art Brave.

Enter King: Stratheman: Lords: Minse. Stra. To preserve some Ladies as we
guest.

King. Still gallant, Brennoralt, thy sword not sheathed yet?
Busy still? --

Bren. Revenging Sir
The fowlest murder ever blasted ears
Committed here by Almerin and Iphigene.

Alm. False, false; The first created purity
Was not more innocent then Iphigene.

Bren. Lives he again?

Alm. Stay thou much wearied guest
Till I have thrown a truth amongst them --
We shall look back else to posterity.

King. What says he?

Lord. Some thing concerning this he labors to
Discover.

Alm. Know it was I that killed Francelia?
I alone --

Mins. O barbarous return of my civilities
Was it thy hand?

Alm. Hear and forgive me Minse
Entering this morning hastily
With resolution to preserve
The fair Francelia. I found a thief
Stealing the treasure (as I thought)
Belongd to me. Wild in my mind
As ruined in my honor, in much mistaken rage
I wounded both: then (oh) too late I found
My error. Found Iphigene a woman
Acting stolen love, to make her own love safe
And all my jealousies impossible
Whilst I ran out to bring them cure;
Francelia dies; and Iphigene found here
I can no more -- (dies)

King. Most strange and intricate.
Iphigene a woman?

Mel. With this story I am guiltily acquainted
The first concealments, since her love
And all the ways to it I have bin trusted with:
But Sir my grief joined with the instant business
Begges a deferrement.

King. I am amazed till I do hear it out.
-- But in the mean time,
Least in these mists merit should loose it self,
-- Those forfeitures
Of Trock and Menseck and Brennoralt are thine.

Bren. A Princely guilt! But Sir it comes too late.
Like Sunbeams on the blasted blossoms, do
Your favors fall: you should have given me this
When It might have raised me in men's thoughts, and made
Me equal to Francelia's love: I have
No end, since she is not --
Back, to my private life I will return.
"Cattle, though weary, can trudge homewards, after.

King. This melancholy, time must cure: Come take
The bodies up, and lead the prisoners on,
Triumph and funerals must walk together,
Cipresse and Laurel twined make up one chaplet.
-- For we have got
The day; but bought it at so dear a rate,
That victory it selfe's unfortunate.

Exeunt. FINIS.

