THE SVPPLICATION OF ALL THE PAPISTS OF ENGLAND, TO King JAMES, At his first
coming to the Crown, For a Tolleration of their Religion.

Wherein (with much impudence) they profess and protest themselves, to be the
only obedient one's unto the Sovereign Princes (under whom they live) out of
conscience to avoid sin: When not long after they fell upon that un-exampled
piece of villainy (The Gun-pouder Treason.)

Whereunto is added, A Letter sent from Bishop Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury,
to the King; against Toleration of the Popish Religion.

Published for the observation of all good Protestants.

LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin, 1642.

Most puissant Prince, and Orient Monarch,
SUch are the rare perfections, and admirable gifts of Wisdom, Prudence,
Valor and Justice, wherewith the bountiful hand of Gods Divine Majesty has
endued your Majesty; As in the depth of your most provident judgment, we doubt
not but you foresee what concerns both the spiritual, and temporal
government of all your Kingdoms and Dominions. Notwithstanding your Graces
most afflicted subjects, and devoted servants, the Catholics of England,
partly to prevent sinister informations which happly may possess your Sacred
Ears, before our answer be heard; Partly as men almost overwhelmed with
persecutions for our consciences, we are enforced to have speedy recourse in
hope to have speedy redress from your Highness, and to present these humble
lines unto your royal Person, to plead for us some commiseration and favor.
Alas what allegiance, or duty can any temporal Prince desire, or expect at his
vassals hands, which we are not addressed to perform? How many Noblemen, and
worthy Gentlemen most zealous in the Catholic Religion, have endured some
loss of land and living, some exile, others imprisonment, some the effusion of
blood, and life, for the advancement of your blessed Mothers right unto the
Scepter of Albion? Nay whole finger did ever ache, but Catholics for your
Majesty's present Title and Dominions? How many fled to the Court offering
themselves as hostages for their friends, to live and die in your gracious
quarrel, if ever any adversary had opposed himself against the equity of your
cause? If this they attempted with their Princes disgrace to gain your
Majesty's Grace, what will they do nay what will they not do, to live without
disgrace in your Majesty's favor?

The many of this Realm if we respect Religion (setting petty Sects aside)
consists upon four parts. 1 Protestants who have domineered all the former
Queens days, Puritans, who have crept up apace amongst them, Atheists or
Politicians, who were bred upon their brawles in matters of Faith, and
Catholics who as they are opposite to all, so are they detested of all,
because error was ever an enemy to truth. Hardly all or any two of the first
can be suppressed, therefore we beseech your Majesty to yield us as much favor
as others of contrary Religion (to that which shall be publicly professed in
England) shall obtain at your hands; For if our fault be like, less, or none
at all, then in equity our punishment ought to be like, less, or none at all.

The Gates, Arches, and Pyramides of France proclaimed the present King Pater
patriae and pacis restitutor, that is, The Father of his Country, and the
restorer of peace; because that Kingdom being well near torn in pieces with
civil Wars, and made a prey to foreign foes, was by his provident wisdom,
and valor, acquitted in it self, and hostile strangers expelled: the which he
principally effected by condiscending to tolerate them of an adverse Religion,
to that which was openly professed.

Questionless (dread Sovereign) the Kingdom of England, through the cruel
persecution of Catholics, has been almost odious to all Christian Princes
and Nations, Trade and traffic is exceedingly decayed, Wars and blood have
seldom ceased, subsidies and taxes never so many, discontented minds
innumerable; All which your Princely Majesty's connivance to your humble
suppliants the afflicted Catholics will easily redress, especially at this
your Highness first ingresse. Si loquaris eis verba levia, erunt tibi servi
cunctis diebus, If you speak comfortable words unto them, or if you hearken
unto them in this thing they will be servants unto you, or they will serve you
all their days. For enlargement after affliction resembles a pleasant gale
after a vehement tempest, And a benefit in distress doubleth the value thereof.

How grateful will it be to all Christian Princes abroad, and honorable unto
your Majesty, to understand how Queen Elizabeth's severity is changed into your
royal clemency, and that the lenity of a man has reedified what the
misinformed anger of a woman destroyed? That the Lion rampant is passant,
whereas the passant had been rampant? how acceptable shall your subjects be to
all Catholic Princes, and Countries, who are now almost abhorred of all, when
they shall perceive your Highness prepares not Pikes, or Prisons for the
professors of their Faith, but permits them Temples, and Altars for the use
of their Religion? Then shall we see with our eyes, and touch with our fingers
that benediction of Isaiah, Chapter 14. Ver. 7. in this Land, that swords are
turned into mattocks or ploughes, and lances into sythes; And all Nations
admiring us will say, Hi sunt semem cui benedixit Dominus (that is) these are
the seed whom the Lord has blessed.

We request no more favor at your Graces hands, then that we may securely
believe, and profess that Catholic Religion which all your happy
predecessors professed from Donaldus the first unto your late blessed Mother
martyred. A Religion venerable for antiquity, majesticall for amplitude,
constant for continuance, irreprehensible for doctrine, inducing to all kind of
virtue, and piety, diswading from all sin, and wickedness. A Religion
beloved by all primitive Pastors, established by all Oecumenicall Counsels,
upholden by ancient Doctors, maintained by the first and best Christian
Emperors, recorded (almost alone) in all Ecclesiastical Histories, sealed with
the blood of millions of Martyrs, adorned with virtues of so many Confessors,
beautified with the purity of thousands of virgins, so conformable unto
natural sense and reason, and finally so agreeable unto the Text of Gods
sacred Word and Gospel. The free use of this Religion we request if not in
public Churches at least in private Houses, if not with approbation, at least
with tolleration without molestation: assuring your Grace that howsoever some
Protestants, or Puritans incited by moral honesty of life, or innated instinct
of nature, or for fear of some temporal punishment, pretend obedience unto
your Highness Laws, yet certainly the only Catholics for conscience sake
observe them. For they defending, that Princes precepts, and statutes oblige no
subjects under the penalty of sin, will have less care in conscience to
transgress them, then those who are principally tormented with the guilt of
sin. But Catholics confessing merit in obeying and immerit in transgressing
the Laws of their Sovereigns cannot but in soul be grievously tortured with
the least violation, or prevarication thereof.

Wherefore (most merciful Prince) we your long afflicted Subjects, in all
dutiful subjection protest before the Majesty of God, and all his holy
Angels, as loyal obedience, and immaculate allegiance unto your Grace, as
ever did subjects in England, or Scotland, unto your Highness progenitors; And
intend as sincerely with our goods, and lives to serve you, as ever did the
loyallest Israelites King David, or the trustiest Legions, the Roman Emperors.

And thus expecting your Majesty's accustomed favor, and gracious bounty, we
rest,

Your devoted Suppliants, to him whose hands do manage the hearts of Kings,
and with reciprocal mercy will requite the merciful Your sacred Majesty's
most devoted servants The Catholics of England.

Bishop Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury, his Letter to King JAMES His Majesty,
against tolleration of the Popish Religion.
MAy it please Your Majesty, I have been too long silent, and I am afraid, by
my silence I have neglected the duty of the place it has pleased God to call
me unto, and your Majesty to place me in: And now I humbly crave leave that I
may discharge my conscience toward God, and my duty to Your Majesty: And
therefore I beseech you Sir to give me leave freely to deliver myself, and
then let your Majesty do with me what You please. Your Majesty has propounded
a tolleration of religion. I beseech You Sir, take into Your consideration what
Your act is, what the consequence may be: By Your act You labor to set up that
most damnable and heretical doctrine of the Church of Rome, the whore of
Babylon. How hateful will it be to God, and grievous to Your good Subjects,
(the true Professors of the Gospel) that Your Majesty, who has often disputed
and learnedly written against those wicked heresies, should now show Your Self
a Patron of those doctrines, which Your Pen has told the world, and Your
conscience tells Your Self, are superstitious, idolatrous and detestable?

What dreadful consequences, Sr, these things may draw after them, I beseech
Your Majesty to consider; and above all, lest by this tolleration, and
discountenance of the true profession of the Gospel, wherewith God has
blessed us, and under which this Kingdom has these many years flourished,
Your Majesty do not draw upon the Kingdom in general, and Your Self in
particular, Gods heavy wrath and indignation. Thus in discharge of my duty
toward God, to Your Majesty, and the place of my calling, I have taken humble
boldness to deliver my conscience. And now, Sir, do with me what You please.

George Cant.


