Regestum Practicale: Or, the Practical REGISTER, Consisting of RULES, ORDERS,
AND OBSERVATIONS Concerning the COMMON-LAWS, and the Practice thereof. But more
particularly applicable to the Proceedings in the UPPER-BENCH, As well in
matters Criminal as Civil. Taken for the most part, during the time that the
late Lord Chief Justice ROLL Did sit and give the Rule there.

By WILLIAM STYLE of the Inner Temple Esquire

Alphabetically digested under several Titles. With a TABLE directing to the
ready finding out of these Titles.

Semper ego Auditor tantum? Nunquam ne reponam? Juvenal. 1. Sat. London,
Printed by A. M. for Charles Adams, at the Talbot near Saint Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street. 1657.

To the Honorable JOHN PARKER, One of the Barons of his Highness the Lord
PROTECTORS Court of Exchequer.
William Style wishes the confluence of all Temporal Prosperity here, and
Eternal Felicity hereafter.
SIR,
VErbum Sapienti sat est, is a saying, as equally True, as Ancient; and
therefore I need not (here) use many, neither will I, especially at this time,
wherein your Serious thoughts are (I presume) more then usually busied in
matters of High and Public concernment, and ought not to be interrupted with
Private, and matters of slight moment. In brief therefore I humbly present to
your View and favorable acceptance, this small Collection of some Remarkable
things, chiefly concerning the general Practice of the Common Laws, but more
particularly relating to the manner of proceeding used in the Court of the
Upper-Bench, observed and taken by mine own hand during my constant attendance
at that Bar, for some years last past. I was the willinger to give way to this
publication, that I might make it more visibly appear that I am not ashamed of
my profession, but dare do something in order thereunto, in this very Age
wherein our Laws are so much undervalued and traduced by many, the practicers
thereof so much slighted, and the very practice it self is sunk to so low an
ebb. And I am humbly bold to fix your name in the Front of it, that I may (in
some measure) revive the drooping spirits of many cast down with the sad
consideration of the uncertain event of things by letting them see that there
is not so great cause of doubts and fears, as they timorously fancy, since we
are not yet destitute of grave Sages and Fathers of our Laws, men of Wisdom
and courage, that are not only (themselves) ready to appear in their just
defense and maintenance, but also to cherish and give encouragement to the
honest (though weak) endeavors of the meanest professors thereof.

Sir, in having the happiness to be by birth your Countryman, and almost of the
same neighborhood; I am thereby the better known to you, and I receive no small
content therein, but more especially when I consider how much your Country and
profession is honored in you, and that you possess so high a place of Dignity,
in that very Court where a near Ancestor of mine (with modesty be it spoken)
did for many years sit and dyed a Baron. These things, with my recollected
thoughts, of those many Civilities I have formerly received from you, do induce
me to hope, you will gently pass by the many defects: you may (perchance)
herein meet withal, and which may (justly) render the Work unworthy of your
approbation or protection, and with such favor to entertain it, that I may be
(thereby) hereafter emboldened to present you with some other of my labors,
that may prove more worthy of you, and may more fully answer the expectation
and desires of many.

Inner Temple, Oct. the 20. 1656.
THE PREFACE TO THE READERS, To whom it does or may any ways concern.
MAny and frequent have been the clamors of some infatuated Spirits of this
distempered Age, who (like the Devil, that Arch enemy to all good Government
and Order) labor to bring all things into confusion; yea (if possible, into the
Original Chaos against the Common Laws of this Nation, and the practice
thereof. I must confess their pretenses, though they are as false as malicious,
do yet seem specious and fair in appearance, and are too apt to take with the
vulgar and ignorant; and no wonder, for they ( Athenian-like) pleased with
novelties, and constant to nothing but inconstancy, are ever thirsting after
change and alteration (though to the worse) as children long to vary their
Sports, and shift their Toys and Baubles. It is true, that all Creatures (man
only excepted) do observe the Rules of Nature, prescribed unto them in a
constant and settled way, but he by his fall did loose that perfection, and has
(thereby) not only subjected the Creature, but himself to vanity and vexation
of Spirit: this is not only true of man, in his puris naturalibus, but even of
those whose Souls are hightened above the common pitch, by civil education, and
good literature; yea even of Gods dear children who have those extraordinary
Characters of his strength and goodness fixed upon them, and see things with a
clearer light then mere Nature improved to the utmost can afford: So truly may
that Ancient and common saying, be applied to all, Men's humana novitatis avida.
That therefore many things are (oftentimes) disliked and inveighed against,
even by well-meaning, and (otherwise) discreet men, is no found conclusion,
that they are naught and fit, either to be abolished or reformed, but that men's
minds are unsettled and restless, and not long to be satisfied with any thing,
be it (in it self) never so excellent and desirable. This truth is abundantly
manifested by Solomon the wifest and greatest of men of his Age (if not of any
since) in his book called the Preacher, ^. 1. and 2. These things considered
(though in my Judgment, who have for this six and thirty years last past and
upwards, been a Student of the Common Laws, and for a great part of that time,
carefully observed the general practice thereof; yea, I believe also of many
more, far more ancient in time, and of far deeper judgments, and more eminent
in parts then my self) there is not to be found, either in the Laws themselves,
or in the practice thereof, any such considerable inconveniences, or of such
dangerous consequence as has been, and yet is (by some) pretended, I do not
think it strange to have heard so loud cries, and calumnies, of late falsely
voiced and printed against them. Endeavors and expedients have been prudently
studied, and warily put in practice, by the Grave and Learned Judges and Sages
of this Nation, to give satisfaction unto, and to prevent greater mischiefs (if
possible) which might arise from the unsetledness of this Nulli-legian brood,
by ordering and regulating as much as might be (without impairing the
excellencies of the Laws themselves, and the due and ready administration of
equal Justice) those things against which (they conceived) there was or could
be any color or shadow of exception; but how these men have been satisfied
therewith, or whether the people have received (hereby) that general benefit,
as was supposed, I leave to the Learned to judge, and to those that have made
experience thereof. For my own part, I must confess I cannot yet conceive
(always submitting to better Judgments) that our Common Laws, and the
practice thereof, which are of so great antiquity, and have been from Age to
Age to this present time refining and working into this modle, and so happily
continued, not only to the good and flourishing of this Nation in our own
Country, but to the making of us (thereby) famous and renowned through the
whole Christian World, can admit of a sudden alteration for the better, but do
rather fear that experience will in time manifest (if it does not already too
much appear) that as great, if not greater inconveniences may fall out to the
people by those alterations that have been already made, then there did usually
happen before they were undertaken and put in practice: So difficult, nay so
dangerous a thing it is on the sudden, and by the advice of a few, though
Learned and discreet men to better that which has been the study, and constant
endeavor of many Ages to bring to that excellency, perfection, and beauty, in
which the judicious, with joy and content, do behold it to appear. I speak not
this to reflect upon the Judgments or actions of those that have assayed any
thing in this kind, I know they are placed in many Orbs above me, and may see
much further, and will therefore rather conclude my self to be short sighted in
apprehending, then say there has been any mistakes in the not right stating of
things; Nor do I hope thereby to stop the clamorous mouths of the malicious and
ignorant; for this would be as much folly, as Surdo cancre, or to present
colors to the blind to distinguish of, when their impudence is grown less, and
their knowledge greater, it will be then (and not till then) a fit time to
bespeak them with reason, till when I leave them. But my desire and intentions
herein are in part to settle the wavering minds of such, who though they are
not over-swayed with a prejudicate opinion, or so much raised with
self-inte^est, to run clean beside the fair mark of good Laws, Order and
Government, may yet be unresolved in their judgments, what to determine
concerning those Laws and the practice thereof, which have been (of late)
without any restraint, so much vilified and despised; And this is also one
cause which moved me to give way to the publishing of this ensuing Treatise,
that they may thereby receive information, not from me, but from the Oracles of
the Law, the grave and Learned Judges of the Upper Bench, and more particularly
from the mouth of that upright stout and polished Pillar of the Law, the late
Lord Chief Justice ROLL, what the Law and the practice thereof is and has
been for these latter years, yea even at that very time, wherein they were so
much, and so falsely clamoured against, wherein I doubt not but there may be
found to be by those that will and can understand it, so much reason, and such
universal and impartial Justice in the Laws themselves, and so much care and
circumspection, daily used in the general parctice of them, for the equal and
speedy distribution thereof, that they shall not need a Champion to stand up in
their vindication. As for those miscarriages which do sometimes (and it may be
too often) fall out in the retarding of Justice to the prejudice of the
Clyents, I dare say, that they are usually occasioned, either by their own
negligence or wilfulness, and are not to be charged upon others; and for those
that do befall them other ways, either by the ignorance, or falsity of those
they entrust, which so long as man is but man, may sometimes be; you will find
that they are no sooner discovered and complained of in the right place, but
they are rectified, and (if there be cause) the offenses exemplary punished,
and all possible care that may be (from time to time) taken to prevent and meet
with the like inconveniences for the future; so far are and have bin the Sages
of the Law at all times from countenancing or tolerating any thing, that may
stop or obstruct the stream of Justice from flowing readily and indifferently
to all. For the Book it self, I cannot call it a perfect Work, you see I aver
it to be no more then a few years Collections and Observations thereupon; and
indeed they were only taken for private use, without any thoughts of making
them public, yet such as it is I conceive it may not altogether prove useless;
for it being the first essay of this nature that I find endeavored or put
forth by any, it may, if it may nothing else, at lest encourage others
hereafter, to make a further progress in this kind (now that the way is pointed
at) then the short space of time, allotted me to travail in, has suffered me
to do, and to add heaps to my gleannings, and to nourish up this my Babe to
such a growth and perfection, that it may (happily) when I am gone, forget its
first Parent, and own another name and Author, as I have known some books to
have done. It may also be (probably) some direction to those that begin to
practice at the Bar, but especially in the Court of the Upper Bench; how to
practice fairly, and with ingenuity, and to make motions, befitting the honor
and wisdom of the Court to grant, and may stand with modesty and discretion,
in relation to themselves to move, and not frivolous and useless, yet
chargeable to the Clyent; and though it be not worthy to be an Instructor to
the long experienced, and ready practicer, to whom I presume few things of this
kind can prove new and unheard of; yet way it (perchance) at some time or
other, be their remembrancer of those things (though but ordinary) which
multiplicity of business will not suffer them on the sudden to call to mind, a
thing which I have often observed to befall many able and well-versed
practicers, and no wonder, for the best memories do often prove treacherous. I
have made it my business to observe with diligence, and to render with candor,
not mine own, but the sense of the Court in all things, and as near as I could
in the very words they were delivered, yet (many things being spoken obiter,
and all men subject to mis-apprehensions, and my self (it may be) as much as
others. I will not labor, either to free the book (wholly) from errors, nor my
self from mistakes, but leave both to the Readers candid construction and
censure. Thou may perchance think it strange that so ample a subject as the
Title of the book sets forth, should swell it to no bigger a volume; and also
ask me why upon many of the heads in the book, which in themselves do afford
such copious matter, I am so brief and concise. For the first know, that my
pretentions are not (at thou may see in the very Title of the Book, and
through the whole Book it self, and which I have also already hinted unto thee)
to give thee a complete Collection of all things, belonging to each head, which
I do find and have read, delivered Sparsim in our Books, but only the
substance of such things, which I have heard and taken with my own hand at the
Bar for some years last past, much whereof, I am confident thou can not find
elsewhere in print, and this is also in the second place the true reason why
upon some of the heads I am so short which might have been expected, would have
been far larger, for as things were (occasionally) from time to time delivered
by the Court, so were they taken, and so are they offered unto thee, and not
otherwise, saving my endeavors to explain some things which by reason of the
short delivery of them, seemed more obscure then others, and that not only for
the easier understanding of the younger Student, but also (if it were possible)
to satisfy those great Antagonists of the Law and the practice thereof (who
have need to have things made very plain and easy to them) how much they have
been out of the way in their vilifying and laboring to destroy that which is so
excellent in it self, and by which (next under God) we are not only continued
to be a people, but are also rendered a peaceful and a flourishing Nation, and
which I am confident mauger the malice of those that wish and hope the
contrary, will remain and flourish amongst us, until for our sins God shall
say (which I hope in his mercy he will not) I have no pleasure in you, but
shall suffer a Foreign enemy (as has been heretofore done) to take away not
only our Laws and Liberties, but our Land and Nation. If any shall say that my
own interest has warmed my zeal to this temper, and renders what I have said
suspicious of belief, I must answer them that I am indeed of the profession of
the Law, and I am not ashamed of it, for I believe it to be not only an honest
but an ingenious and honorable calling, and (in it self) not mercenary, as it
is by some said to be, and too corruptly also so made by many others: but for
the advantage I have hitherto made by it, or believe I shall ever do, in the
way of profit, I might and may yet as easily be contented it should be taken
away as most, if not any of them, that cry so loudly against it; only (I
believe) with this difference, I desire to keep that title Quelque chose, that
I have of mine own, pur fair bouillir la marmite, as the French saying has
it, and with which, I am I thank God contented under the protection of the
Laws, and they to get what they have not from others, jure sive injuria, it
matters them not, and that there may be no Law to check or punish their
unbridled desires and unlawful actions; did not then the ensuing Treatise
abundantly prove the truth of that little I have said in defense of our Laws and
the practice thereof, I should not doubt but my single and bare averment of a
truth so well known unto many would sooner be believed, then their many foul
calumnies, speaking their own interests, though in disguised and fair words and
pretenses. I shall say no more, but leave what I have said to thy judicious
consideration, and the Book to thy serious perusal and favorable acceptance.

William Style.
From my Study in the Paper buildings in the Inner Temple, July the 1. 1646.
THE TABLE.
A
Attorney, vid. Warrant Page 1 Actions. Page 5 Amendment. Page 10 Attachment.
Page 15 Amercement. Page 18 Assignment. Page 19 Averment. ibid. Avowry. Page 20
Adjournment. ibid. Arrest vid. Judgment. Page 23 Administration. Page 21
Appearance. Page 23 Affidavit. Page 25 Addition. Page 26 Award. Page 27
Afirmance. Page 28 Agreement. Page 29 Attornment. Page 30 Assumpsit. ibid.
Appeal. Page 33 Age. ibid. Advantage. ibid. Assize. Page 34 Arraignment. ibid.
Attaint. Page 35 Andita Querela. ibid. Authority. Page 36 Appurtenant and
Appendant. Page 37 Account. ibid. Auditor. Page 38 Argument. ibid. Aid and
Aid prayer. ibid.
B
BAron and Fem. Page 39 Bar in Actions. Page 40 Bail. Page 41 Burglary. Page 48
Bankrupt. ibid. Breach. Page 49 Bailiff. ibid. Bargain and Sale. Page 50
Battery. ibid. Bill. Page 51 Book. ibid.
C
COurts and their Jurisdictions, vid. Jurisdictions. Page 52 Corporation. Page
58 Costs and Charges. Page 59 Chancery. Page 62 Capias. ibid. Challenge. Page
63 Certiorari. Page 64 Customs. Page 67 Compulsion. Page 69 Council and
Councellor. ibid. County. Page 70 Constable. ibid. Commission and
Commissioners. ibid. Cessions. Page 71 Commitment. ibid. Contempt. Page 72
Condition. Page 73 Causes. ibid. Confirmation. ibid. Chattel. ibid. Coppy-hold
and Copyholder. Page 74 Contract. ibid. Covenant. Page 75 Consideration. ibid.
Common and Commoner. Page 76 Confession. Page 77 Copy. ibid. Conveyance. Page
78 Certificate. ibid. Clerk. ibid.
D
D Departure. Page 78 Denison. Page 79 Delivery. ibid. Dower. ibid. Difference.
Page 80 Depositions. ibid. Discretion. ibid. Devise. Page 81 Deodands. ibid.
Demurrer. Page 82 Discharge. Page 85 Disseisor. Page 86 Distress and
Distringas. ibid. Discontinuance. Page 87 Demand. Page 89 Declaration. Page 90
Duty. Page 96 Damages. ibid. Deputies. Page 102 Default. ibid. Debt. ibid.
Deeds. Page 107
E
EJectment and Ejector. Page 107 Evidence. Page 112 Emparlance. Page 118
Executor. Page 119 Escape. Page 121 Endictment. ibid. Exposition. Page 123
Election. Page 124 Estople. Page 125
E
EXtinguishment. Page 125 Error. Page 126 Entry Page 133 Examination. Page 134
Engagement. Page 135 Exemplification. ibid. Endictments. Page 136 Exigent. Page
135 Execution. Page 139 Elegit. Page 142 Essoigne. Page 143 Exception. ibid.
Estate. ibid. Enrollment. Page 144 Escape. Page 145 Extent. ibid. Escheater.
Page 146
F
FIne. Page 146 Filing of Process, etc. Page 148 False Latin and form. Page 149
Forma Pauperis. Page 150 Forfeiture. ibid. Franchise. Page 151 Fees. Page 152
Faits vid. Deeds. Felony. Page 152 Fee Simple. Page 154 False Imprisonment.
ibid. Feofment. Page 155 Foundation. ibid. Fiction of Law. ibid.
G
GAvel kind. Page 156 Guardian. ibid. Good Behavior. Page 157
H
Heir. Page 158 Heriot. ibid. Habeas Corpus. ibid. Habere facias possessionem.
Page 160 Homage. Page 161 Hundred. ibid.
I
Jury. Page 161 Issue. Page 165 Judgment. Page 168 Infant. Page 184
Justification. ibid. Jurisdictions, vid. Courts. Page 185 Injunction. Page 186
Information. ibid. Justice of Peace. Page 188 Issues. Page 190 Judge. Page 191
Jeofails. Page 192 Interogatories. ibid. Intendment and Intentions. Page 193
Impossbility. Page 194 Impropriation. Page 194
L
LIvery and Seisin. Page 195 Lease, Lessor and Lessee. Page 196 Liberty. Page
199 Liver, vid. Book. Leet. Page 199 Limitation. Page 200 London. ibid.
Latitat. Page 201
M
Marshall. Page 201 Monstrance. ibid. Motion. ibid. Manslaughter. Page 204
Mortgage. Page 205 Message. ibid.
N
NOn-sute. Page 205 Nolle prosequi. Page 206 Nomine poenae. Page 207 Infancy.
ibid. Notice. ibid. Non omittas. Page 219 Negative preignans. Page 220
O
OAth. Page 220 Obligation. ibid. Orders. Page 223 Outlawry. Page 224 Office
and Officer. Page 225 Oyer of a Deed, etc. ibid.
P
PLaint. Page 226 Privilege. ibid. Prohibition. Page 227 Pleas and Pleading.
Page 232 Pardon. Page 247 Penalty. ibid. Perjury. Page 248 Process. ibid.
Provisoe. Page 251 Pledges. Page 252 Pardon. ibid. Presumption. Page 253 Ports.
Page 255 Property. Page 256 Partision. Page 258 Payment. ibid. Procedendo. Page
259 Practice. Page 260 Peace and Justice of Peace. ibid. Privilege. Page 262
Party and Privy. Page 265 Purchase. ibid. Prescription. Page 265 Parish. Page
266 Presentation. Page 267 Principal and accessory. ibid. Proof. ibid. Plaint.
Page 268 Poor. Page 269 Presentment. ibid. Parliament. Page 269 Presidents.
Page 270 Prison and Prisoner. ibid. Possession. Page 271 Peremptory. ibid.
Proclamation. Page 272
Q
Quashing of Endictments, Orders, etc. Page 272 Quo Warranto. Page 273 Quaere.
Page 274
R
REturn of Writs, etc. Page 274 Record. Page 278 Relief. Page 283 Rescous.
ibid. Request. ibid. Repeal. Page 284 Reversal. Page 285 Restitution and
Rerestitution. Page 287 Rule. Page 289 Rejoinder. Page 291 Remainder. ibid.
Revocation. Page 292 Riot. ibid. Recognizance. Page 293 Roll. ibid. Replevin.
ibid. Replication. Page 294 Reservation. ibid. Recovery. ibid. Release. Page
295. Recital and misrecital. Page 296 Report. ibid. Reversion. ibid. Reference.
ibid. Right and common Right. Page 297
S
SCire facias. Page 297 Statute. Page 300 Satisfaction. Page 302 Sheriff and
Vunder-Sheriff. Page 304 Suggestion or Surmise. Page 305 Surrender. ibid.
Supersedeas. Page 306 Surprisal. Page 307 Setlement. Page 308 Sessions, vid.
Cessions.
T
Trial. Page 308 Traverse. Page 318 Title. Page 319 Tenement. Page 320.
Tipstaff. ibid. Time. Page 321 Treason. ibid. Trespass. Page 322 Tales. Page
324 Terms. Page 325 Toft and Croft. ibid. Trover and conversion. Page 326
Trust. Page 326 Tenure. Page 327 Tender. ibid. Tithes. ibid.
V
VEnue and venire Facias. Page 328 Verdict. Page 334 Valuation. ibid. Use. Page
340 Usury. Page 341 Void and voidable. ibid. Vill. Page 342 Variance. ibid.
View. ibid.
W
WArden of a Church, or Churchwarden. Page 342 Wast. Page 343 Withernam. ibid.
Warranty. Page 344 Writ. ibid. Writ of Enquiry of Damages. Page 347 Way. Page
348 Wager of Law. ibid. Words Page 350 Witness. Page 353 Will. Page 357
Errata.
In the Preface. Page 5. line 27. for raised read Byased.

PAge 29. line 25. dele agreement. p. 49. l. 8 read breach. p. 50. l. 26. r.
whereof. p. 51. l. 19. r. are to be delivered to the Judes. p. 62. l. 9. r. and
in what. p. 64. l. 25. r. for. p 68. l. 7. r. if it. p. 78. l. 17. r. him p.
81. l. 7. r. such. p. 92. l. 11. r. wise. p. 93. l. 4. r. form. l. 23. r.
enact. p. 103. l. 33. r. let. p. 106. l. 4. r. an. p. 106. l. 32. r. they. p.
123. l. 28. r. Laws. l. 33. r. contemptoranea. p. 127. l. 16. r. in a. p. 141.
l. 23. dele a. p. 145. l. 3. r. that there was such an enrollment. p. 147. l 6.
r. to the use. p. 150. l. 9 dele does. p. 152. l. 18. r. the. p. 156. l. 27. r.
behavior. p. 163. l. 5. dele 23. p. 173. l. 3 a. r. be. p. 178. l. 26. r. 24.
Car p. 192. l. 22. r. Q. Whether if an issue. l. 24. for: r?. p. 207. l. 15. r.
and are presumed. p. 209. l. 23. r. into the Office. p. 125. r. this. p. 211.
l. ult. r. cases. p. 240. l ult. r. the. p. 241. l. 1. r. the. p. 242. l. 3.
dele if p. 243. l. 13. r. chief. p. 248. l. 25. r. although. l. 29. r. go to a
trial. p. 253. l. 17. r. the. p. 258. l. 7. former. p 260 l. 6. r. whither. p.
275. l. 1. r. writ. l. 2. r. of a. l. 6. r. them. p. 276. l. 22. r. only his.
p. 290. l 23. r. not. p. 303. l. 21. dele the. p. 304. l. 22. r. the. p. 307.
r. him. p. 311. l. 3. r. a good. p. 315. l. 8. r. of p. 319. l. 19. r. King. p.
331. l. 12. r must. p. 342. l. 8. r. a confined. l. 26. r. between p. 339. l.
11. r. if it be.

Reader, these Books following, are Printed for Charles Adams, and are to be
sold at his shop at the Talbot in Fleet Street.
A Treatise of Religion and Learning, and of Religious and Learned men; in
Alphabetical order, a Work seasonable for these times, wherein Religion and
Learning have so many enemies: By Edward Leigh Esquire Master of Arts of Magdalen
Hall in Oxford. In Folio. A Philological Commentary; or an illustration of the
most obvious and useful words in the Law, by the aforesaid Author, Edward Leigh
Esquire 8o. Reports of that Learned and Judicious Clerk, John Gouldesborough Esquire
sometimes one of the Protonotaries of the Court of the Common Pleas, being his
Collection of Chocie Cases, taken in the latter years of Queen Elizabeth, with
the Judges Resolutions thereupon: Published by William Style of the Inner
Temple Esquire in 4o. The French Cook, prescribing the way of making ready all
sorts of Meats, Fish, and Flesh; with their proper Sauces; Together with a
Treatise of Conserves, and the whole skill of Pastry-Work: Englished by J. D.
Gent. In 12o. The Innocent Lord, or the Divine Providence, being the
Incomparable History of Joseph; Englished by Sr William Lower. In 8o. Grati
Falicii Cynegeticon, or a Poem of Hunting, by Gratius, the Faliscian, Englished
and Illustrated by Christopher Wase Gent, In 12o. Moral discourses and Essays
upon several select subjects, by Thomas Culpeper Esquire 12o. A Learned discourse
of Ceremonies, by the Right Reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews, late
Bishop of Winchester, In 12o. An Answer to two Letters, the one of a Papist,
the other of a Presbyterian, by Tho. Swaddling, Dr. in Divinity, In 4o. New
Errors made palpable by an Old Light, or a cheap and easy way to cure the
dissentions of the times, by Anthony Norwood Esquire In 12o. A short and plain
Catechism, Instructing a Learner of Christian Religion, what he is to believe
and what to practice. The Practical Register, being Rules, Orders, and
Observations, concerning the general practice of the Law, but more especially
the way of practice in the Court of the Vpper-Bench, by William Style of the
Inner Temple Esquire In large 8o.
THE Practical Register.
Attorney.
EVery Attorney of the Upper Bench, ought to attend in the Court at the second
return of the Term, by the Ancient Rules of the Court, for the quicker dispatch
of Justice to be done to the people; and for that reason, if they did not, they
were to be put out of the Roll: and it was then Ordered that the Ancient Rules
of the Court for Regulating of the Atturnies in their practice, should be
renewed and set up in the Kings Bench Office, Hill. 21. Car. Banc. Reg.

One may not repeal a Warrant of Attorney given to an Attorney to appear for
him, to the intent to defraud the Plaintiff of his appearance, but the Attorney
ought by the Rules of the Court to appear for him, according to the Rules of
the Court, notwithstanding his Warrant be so repealed, Trin. 22. Car. B. r.

If an Attorney do practice deceitfully, an Attatchment lies against him out of
this Court, at the prayer of the party grieved, if he make it appear to the
Court, and good costs shall be given against him, 22. Car. B. r.

An Attorney and his Clerk were both committed by the Court for entering things
against express Rules of the Court, and after notice of those Rules given them
by the Attorney of the other side, 22. Car. B. r.

One Attorney ought not to suffer another Attorney to practice in his name, by
reason of many inconveniences that often happen to the Clyents by this means,
22. Car. B. r.

One G. H. an Attorney was ordered to be put out of the Roll of Atturneyes, for
entering a judgment against an express Rule in Court, Mich. Car. 22. B. r. but
it was not done.

The proper place for the Attorney General to sit upon any special matters,
wherein his attendence is required in Court, is under the Judges, on the left
hand of the Clerk of the Crown, Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

No Under Sheriff ought to be Attorney, for it is often the cause of increasing
of Suits, and also a hindrance in dispatch of Clyents causes, Trin. 23. Car. B.
r.

If the Attorney of the Plaintiff or Defendant do dye hanging the Suite, and
the other party whose Attorney is dead, have notice given of it, and will not
retain another Attorney to prosecute for him, the other party may proceed, and
is not bound to hinder his Clyents cause for it, Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

The Plaintiff or Defendant may change his Attorney pending the Suite, without
leave of the Court, but it is not fair practice to do it without just cause,
Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

It was the old course in proceeding in an Action of Trespass and Ejectment, to
deliver the Lease of Ejectment to the party to whom the Plaintiff had made a
Letter of Attorney to execute the Lease, and for the Attorney to deliver
possession of the Land, upon the delivery of the Lease, Pasc. 24. Car. reg.

If one have a Letter of Attorney to deliver a Deed to another, and also
authority from the party by word of mouth to do it, he may make use of which of
these he will to do it by, but not of both, for the first that he makes use of
shall be effectual, and the other shall be void, Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

An Infant ought not to appear to an Action by an Attorney, but by his
Guardian; for he cannot retain an Attorney, but the Court may assign him a
Guardian, Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

The Atturneys ought to be ordered in the ordinary manner of their practice by
the Master of the Office, and if differences arise betwixt them concerning it,
he is to hear both parties, and to order the matters in difference betwixt
them, and they are to submit to him, Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. and the Court is not
to be troubled but in extraordinary and difficult matters.

If there be diverse Defendants declared against in one Declaration, the
Attorney in the cause on the Defendants part, cannot be compelled to appear for
more of the Defendants; then for those from whom he has Warrant to appear, 24.
Car. B. r.

If one retain one by Warrant to be his Attorney in a Suite depending against
him in this Court, he may appear for him by that Warrant in all Suites which
are there depending against him, Hill. 1649. B. Sup.

Atturneys ought to be of some Inns of Court or Inn of Chancery, and not to
lodge in Inns or Alehouses, or in private places, By Roll chief Justice, Hill.
1649. B. Sup. 8. Feb.

Atturneys of the Upper Bench, ought to be allowed in all Circuits as the
Atturneys of the Common Pleas are, although it has been denied them in the
Western Circuit and ought not to be compelled to pay extraordinary Fees for
practicing there, per Roll Pasc. 1650. 1. Maii. vid. 1. H. 7. f. 12. a. that
the Atturneys of the Upper Bench are not Atturneys upon Record, Ergo quaere.

An Action upon the Case lies for the Clyent against his Attorney, if he plead
a Plea for him, for which he has not his Warrant, Hill. 49. B. Sup.

The Atturneys of this Court were ordered from hence forth to besworn as the
Atturneys of the Common Pleas are. by Roll Pasc. 1650. 1. Maii B. Sup.

One cannot force an Attorney to be his Attorney against his will, by Roll
Chief Justice.

One may be an Attorney for a Clyent upon Record and yet another Attorney may
act all the business for this Clyent.

An Attorney that has Warrant to appear for his Clyent, may plead for him
without another Warrant, by Roll Chief Justice. See Q. for diverse Clerks in
Court said privately that he cannot plead no any other Plea for his Clyent
without a special Warrant, but a non sum informatus.

If an Attnrney dye pending his Clyents cause, his Warrant of Attorney is
determined, and his Clerk may not proceed in the Suite without another Warrant,
by Roll Chief Justice.

Actions.
There ought to be both apparent malice in the Defendant, and prejudice also
done to the Plaintiff to ground an Action upon the Case upon, or else it will
not lie; for if there be only malice and no damage done by it, there can be
nothing recovered, and so the Action will be vain and to no purpose; and if
there be only damage and no malice, it is but damnum sine injuria, and not
punishable by Law, Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

Where there are two several damages done to the party, he ought to have two
several Actions, and not to join them in one Action. Entered Oct. 156. 20. Car.
Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

Although damage without wrong will not maintain an Action, nor malice without
damage, yet malice may aggravate the damages recoverable, where there is
damage and wrong meeting together, Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

Where two Actions, though of several natures do depend one upon the other, the
abatement of one of the Actions is the abatement of both, Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

In an Action upon the Case, grounded upon a promise; the Declaration is Actio
in super casum in the singular number, although the Action be brought upon
diverse promises, for the word Case includes all, 21. Car. B. r.

An Action brought against a Constable for a thing done by him by virtue of his
Office ought by the Statute, to be brought against him in the County where he
is Constable, and not else where, 21. Car. B. r.

A Transitory Action may be laid in any County at the will of the Plaintiff,
yet generally (and it seems the better and more indifferent course so to do) it
uses to be laid in that County where the cause of Action did first arise,
Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Transitory Actions ought not to be brought within Corporations, for their
privileges do properly and only extend for the trial of such Actions, the
causes whereof do arise within their own jurisdictions, Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Either an Action upon the Case, or an Action of Detinue at the Election of the
Plaintiff may be brought for goods detained from him, 22. Car. B. r.

An Action of Trover and Conversion, is in its nature but an Action upon the
Case to recover damages, Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

An Action upon the Case, does lie by the Statute against the Court of
Admiralty, for holding Plea of a matter which is not within their jurisdiction,
Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Where a promise is made by a Fem Covert, or by a Servant, for the Husband or
the Master, the Action for breach of this promise ought to be brought against
the Husband or the Master; for it is their promise, and the Wife and the
Servant are but instruments, Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

An Action upon the Case does lie against one for speaking such words falsely
and maliciously of another as if they were truly spoken of the party, he might
be punished as a Felon, or by some Statute fined or imprisoned, Mich. 22. Car.
B. r. as for calling him Thief, etc.

There is a difference betwixt bringing of an Action, and the laying of Action,
Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

It is cause sufficient to ground an Action upon the Case for one to put
another to the trouble and charges to Sue for that which is his own, Mich. 22.
Car. B. r.

The cause for bringing an Action upon the Case for the speaking of words
against one, is the temporal loss or damage which may accrue to the party
against whom they are spoken, by the speaking of them, and not the words
themselves, Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

An Action upon the Case does lie for speaking of words against a man, by
reason of which he lost his marriage, Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

An Action upon the Case does not lie for Arrerages of Rent due upon a Lease
for years, because the Law gives a proper Action for it, to wit, an Action of
Debt, Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Upon a promise made upon an insimul computaverunt, the party to whom the
promise is made, may either have an Action of Debt, or an Action upon the Case
at his Election, for the thing which was before in dispute and uncertain, is by
the account and promise reduced to a certainty, Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

For a Debt certain referred, amongst other things to an Arbitration, an Action
of Debt does not lie, but an Action upon the Case, Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

It is not safe to be too particular or over curious in the laying of an
Action, for it is often times a cause that the Action does fail, Hill. 22. Car.
B. r.

An Action upon the Case lies for calling one Whore in London, but this is by
the special custom of the City, Hill. 22. Car. B. r. yet 24. Car. Pasc. The
Court was divided in opinion in this question whether an Action does lie or not.

An Action upon the Case lies for a private nuisance, but not for a public,
Rasc. 23. Car. B. r.

An Action upon the Case does lie for scandal or for molestation, Pasc. 23.
Car. B. r.

Where a Joint Action does lie against diverse persons of whom some are known to
the Plantiff, and the rest are not known unto him, the Action may be brought
against them that are known by their particular names, and against them that
are not known generally with a Simul cum aliis, etc. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

In a trial upon a Trespass and Ejectment, or a Replevin touching the title of
the Land in question, although the Verdict pass against the Plaintiff; yet he
may bring a new Action for the same Land, for such trials are not final, Pasc.
23. Car. B. r. because the Land is not recovered in them, but the possession.

In a Case betwixt one Nichols and Webb in the Common Pleas for calling the
Plaintiff (being an Attorney at Law) Knave, a Verdict and judgment was given
for him; and this judgment being afterward remoyed by a Writ of Error into
this Court; the Judgment was affirmed, in Trin. 12. Car. Rot. 102. Pasc. 23.
Car. B. r.

An Action brought for Rent or breach of Covenant upon a Lease, may be laid
either in the County where the Lease was made, or in the County where the Lands
do lie, that are let by the Lease, Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Vexatious Actions are not favored in Law, nor by the Court, but may be
referred to the Master of the Office to consider of them, Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

A violent intendment may bring one within the compass of an Action, Mich. 23.
Car. B. r. by Roll.

One may in some Case bring an Action at the Common Law, for that for which he
may also have his remedy in the Eclesiastical Court, for the Common Law is to
be preferred before the Eclesiastical Law, where they stand in equal degree in
respect of the matter to be tried, Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

By a special custom an Action does lie in some Cases in which at the Common
Law no Action does lie, and so was it adjudged, 8. and 13. Car. Mich. 23. Car.
B. r.

The Kings Charter cannot enable the Pattentee to bring an Action which the
Common Law allows not, Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

If one bring an Action upon the Case for diverse words spoken, whereof some are
Actionable and some of them are not yet the Action lies, Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

The Husband may bring an Action alone for scandalous words spoken against him
and his Wife, and recover, and yet may afterward bring another Action for to
recover damages done to his Wife, by the speaking of the same words, Trin. 24.
Car. B. r. for the Husband and Wife are both particularly damnified by the
speaking of the words.

An Action upon the Case does not lie upon a contract which sounds in the
realty Q. if the contract be mixed with other matters which are not in the
realty, whether it will then lie or no? Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

If one take out a Latitat within the time limited by the Statute for the
limitation of Actions; it is a good bringing of the Action in due time, and he
is not barred by the Statute although he do no declare against the party within
the time limited by the Statute, Mich. 1649 B. S.

An Action of the Case does lie against one that does Arrest another without
cause, Pasc. 1650. 6. Maii B. S.

One may have an Action upon the Case against a Witness that is served with a
Subpoena to appear at a trial and does not appear, but by the Statute, Pasc.
1650. B. S. 18. Maii and 13. Nov.

A Joint Action of the Case does not lie against two several persons for
speaking the same scandalous words, for the words of one are not the words of
the other, but they must be severally spoken, and consequenly several Actions
ought to be brought against them, but a Joint Endictment does lie in such a
Case, 27. Jan. 1650. B. S. So ruled by the Court.

One may join two Debts due upon two several Obligations in one Action, and so
it is of other personal Actions, but it cannot be done in real Actions, 6. Feb.
1650. B. Sup.

If a Carriers servant or his son conspire to rob the Carrier, and do rob him,
the Carrier not being privy to the conspiracy; an Action will lie for the
Carrier against the Hundred, where he was robbed, upon the Statute of
Winchester: but this matter may be urged to the Jury upon the trial in
mitigation of damages, by Roll Chief Justice.

Amendment.
Original Writs are not amendable at the Common Law, for if the Writ be not
good, the party may have another. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

The leaving out of the Atturneys name in the Imparlance Roll is Amendable upon
a motion made to the Court to have leave to do it, but not without leave of the
Court; so that the Atturnys name be not left out in the Issue Roll, for then it
is not Amendable. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

If in a Replevin the Avowant do amend his Avowry before the Term and do pay
costs, the Plaintiff ought to reply the next Term following, but if he pay not
costs, he is not bound to reply the next Term. 21. Car. B. r.

Any fault in pleading which would be Amendable if the cause were depending in
an inferior Court, may be amended where the cause depends in a superior Court,
but not e contra 21. Car. B. r.

Where two several persons join in one Declaration, and one of them dye
depending the Suit, the Declaration cannot be Amended, but the other party that
survives must have a new Writ; for there is great difference betwixt a Joint
Action and a several. Trin. 22. Car. B. r.

A Plea may be amended upon giving of notice thereof to the other party, and
paying of costs, if the Plea be only entered in Paper, but if it be entered in
Parchment, it cannot be amended, for then it is a Plea upon Record. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r.

The Court of the Kings Bench will not Amend a Transcript of a Record removed
thither by a Writ of Error out of an inferior Court, but they will Amend a
Record removed thither out of the Common Pleas, if they see cause. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r.

If the Plaintiff desire to alter his Declaration, it is in election of the
Defendant to take costs of the Plaintiff, and to let him amend his Declaration,
or to refuse to take his costs, and to Imparle to the next Term. 22, Bar. B. r.
and 1650. B. S.

A Return upon a Habeas Corpus, or upon a Certiorari to remove Orders of
Sessions of the Peace, etc. cannot be Amended the Term after the Return is
made, but it may be Amended the same Term in which it is made. Hill. 23. Car.
B. r.

The Clerk of the Peace may Amend an Endictment removed into this Court at any
time, during the Term in which it came in here, but afterward it cannot be
Amended. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

The Plaintiff may Amend his Declaration though it be seven years past since he
Declared, if it be but in Paper. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

If the Plea Roll be rightly entered, though the Postea be mistaken in the
transcribing of it, yet the Postea may be amended. Paso. 24. Car. B. r.

A Declaration grounded upon an Original Writ if it be erroneous cannot be
amended, but if it be upon a Latitat or Bill of Middlesex, it may be amended,
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

If a Transcript of a Record removed out of the Common Pleas into this Court,
be to be Amended here, the Clerk in the Common Pleas is to bring in the
Original Record out of the Common Pleas into this Court, that the Transcript
may be here Amended by the Record it self. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

The Clerk of the Assizes may Amend the Postea by his Notes, if he be mistaken,
after that he has returned it into this Court. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

An Indictment removed into this Court may be amended the same Term it came in,
but not afterward but upon some extraordinary matter, Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

After the parties have joined in Demurrer; the Demurrer may be Amended if it
be but in Paper, Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

A Postea may be Amended by the Record in such things whereby the Amendment may
not bring the Jury within the Compass of an Attaint, Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

A Record may be Amended in a small matter after Issue joined, so that thereby
the Plea be not altered, Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

A Record may not be altered by the consent of the Atturneys on both sides,
without a Rule of the Court, and if it be, if the party grieved thereby will
inform the Court of it, the Court will order to make the Record as it was
before the Amendment, and will punish the Atturneys, 3 July 1650. B. S.

If the Plaintiff Amend his Declaration, though it be by Rule of the Court, yet
the Defendant may plead do nove.

The Imparlance Roll cannot be Amended by the Plea Roll, but the Plea Roll may
be Amended by the Imparlance Roll, Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

The Court Amends false Latin and form, in Bills presented unto them by the
grand Enquests by their consents, but they may not alter matters of substance
in them, Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

The Plaintiff may Amend his Declaration after the Defendant has pleaded to
it, paying costs if it be not entered; but if he do Amend it, the Defendant may
also after his Plea if he will, Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

And Issue entered upon Record, may upon leave by the Court be Amended in a
small matter, but not in a material thing, or in that which will deface the
Record, Hill. 22 Car. B. r.

An Original Writ cannot be Amended, because the party may take out another
Writ, Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

A thing that is Amendable by Statute, may be Amended in an upper Court, before
it be Amended in the inferior Court, if the matter be apparent and needs no
examination, Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

An Error in the Postea may be Amended, but not in the Plea Roll, Hill. 23.
Car. B. r.

A Plea cannot be Amended after the Plea is Demurred unto, not after Issue
joined, Mich. 24. Car. B. r. yet if the Demurrer be but in Paper, though it be
two or three Terms after the Plea was Demurred unto, the Demurrer may be
Amended, if the party Demurring will pay costs, though the other party have
joined in Demurrer, 21. Nov. 1650. B. S.

A Return of a Habeus Corpus may be Amended in matter of form only, the same
Term the Return was made, but not afterward, Trin. 1651. B. S.

It was not the Ancient course of practice to bring the Original Record out of
the Common Pleas into this Court to Amend the Transcript thereof by, until this
Court had agreed it should be Amended. This was observed to avoid needless
charge which might otherwise fall out to the Clyent, Pasc. 1652. B. Sup.

If the Common Pleas do Amend a Record there, which is not Amendable by Law,
this Court is not bound to receive the Record so Amended, but will refuse it,
Trin. 1652. B. Super.

After a Plea pleaded, and the Jury returned, the Defendant may not alter his
Plea without moving of the Court. But before the Jury is returned if the
Declaration, and the Plea be only in Paper, the party may Amend his
Declaration, paying costs, or giving an Imparlance, by Herne secondarie. Mich.
1655. B. Super.

Attatchment.
An Attatchment may be granted against one that stands Indicted of common
Barratry, and will not plead to the Indictment, Trin. 23. Car. B. Reg.

This Court will not grant an Attatchment against one for disobeying an Order
made by Justices of Assize, Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

An Attatchment may be granted against the party that does refuse to join in a
special Verdict agreed upon, and for refusing to join in the payment of the
costs expended upon the trial, Mich. 23. Car. B. r. or for refusing to bring it
into Court, Hill. 1649. 26. Jan. Saturday, Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

An Attachment is not to be granted against an Attorney for refusing to obey an
order made by a Judge of this Court in his Chamber, for this is no contempt to
the Court, because such an Order is not to be accounted for a Rule of Court,
Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

An Attachment may be granted against Justices of the Peace, for proceeding
upon an Indictment after a Certiorari out of this Court is delivered unto them,
to remove the Indictment hither, Hill. 23. Car B. r.

An Attatchment was granted against one of the parties, to a Suite in this
Court, for persuading the Jurors, returned to try the Issue in question, not to
appear at the day upon pretense that he had obtained an Injuction out of the
Chancery to stay the proceedings in the Suite, 25. Oct. 1650. B. Super.

If an Attorney undertake to appear for one, and afterward refuses to do it,
the Court will grant an Attatchment against him for his foul practice, Pasc.
24. Car. B. r.

The Court will not grant an Attatchment against one for disobeying a Rule of
the Court, except it be proved that personal notice was given to him of the
Rule, Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If one Arrest another upon a Latitat, and then convey him into a Corporation,
and Arrests him again there, and proceeds not against him upon the Latitat, but
in the Corporation, an Attatchment lies against him for abusing the process of
this Court and making it a stale to another intent, 27. Nov. 1650. B. Sup.

This Court will make no Rule for an Officer thereof to be paid his Fees,
before he have dispatched his Clyents business, but if the Clyent will not pay
him his Fees after he has done his business, the Court will grant an
Attatchment against him, by Roll Chief Justic^.

An Attatchment lies against the parties that will not pay such costs as are
taxed by the Master of the Office of this Court, 21. Car. B. r.

An Attatchment was granted against one for proceeding in an inferior Court,
notwithstanding that a Habeas Corpus Issued out of this Court, and thereupon a
Supersedeas also granted to stay the proceedings there, and an Amercement set
upon the party that was to return the Habeas Corpus for not making a return of
it, 21. Car. B. r.

In some eases the Court does not use to grant an Attatchment against persons
for misdemeanors done against the Court, but will send a Tipstaff of the Court
to bring in the offender, viz. if the party do live in or near the Town. 21.
Car. B. r.

An Attatchment was granted against a Sheriff, for refusing to bring moneys
into Court which he had leavied upon an Execution, and was ordered by the Court
to bring it in. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Generally an Attatchment does lie for any contempt done against the Court.
Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

An Attatchment was granted against one for taking out of an Execution without
warrant. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

An Attatchment does lie by the Rules of this Court for not making a Return of
a Habeas Corpus upon a Pluries Habeas Corpus issued forth. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

An Attatchment was granted against one for Arresting one three several times
upon Latitats taken out of this Court, for one and the same cause, and not
proceeding against the party Arrested upon any of them. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

An Attacthment was granted against two Bailiffs for Arresting the Tenants of
one Glover, upon a Latitat out of this Court upon the Lords day, when they
might have done it as easily upon any other day of the week. 23. Car. B. r.

An Attatchment was granted against a Baliff for executing of a Process of this
Court against the Rule of the Court. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. having notice of the
Rule.

Amercement.
The Clerk of the Peace is Amerceable by the Court of the Kings Bench, for
gross faults in Indictments drawn up by him and removed thither, and it has
often been so done. 21. Car. B. r.

If upon a Latitat taken out of this Court, the Sheriff do return a Cepi
Corpus, and the party Arrested upon this Process, does not appear at the day of
the Return, the Sheriff may be Amerced by the Court, yet if the Sheriff be
Amerced, if the party Arrested do appear within a week after the day he ought
to have appeared, the Amercement may by the course of the Court be taken off of
the Sheriff. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

The Sheriff is to be Amerced for the faults of his special Bailiffs, for the
Sheriff is the Officer to the Court, and not they. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

If the Sheriff be Amerced by the Court for the not doing a thing belonging to
his Office, and yet he continues to neglect to do it contrary to the Rule of
this Court, the Court may increase the Amercements upon him, until he perform
his duty therein. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

Amercements set upon the Sheriff, upon the motion of the party, if they be not
estreated into the Exchequer, may be with a respectuatur that is be respited,
if the party grieved who caused him to be Amerced will consent thereunto,
otherwise it cannot be. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

A Sheriff out of his Office cannot be Amerced by the Court, for then he is not
an Officer to the Court. But a Distring as Nuper Vice comiti may issue out
against him. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

An Amercement which is grounded upon a Presentment, which Presentment is only
voideable, by reason of some fault in it, is a good Amercement, but if it be
grounded upon a Presentment which is absolutely void the Americement is also
void. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

Assignement.
The Assigning of the general Error upon a Writ of Error, brought to reverse a
judgment, is to say that the Declaration is insufficient, that judgment is
given for the Plaintiff, whereas it should have been given for the Defendant,
etc. and it is not showed for what reason it is so. 21. Car. B. r.

If one bring an Action of Debt upon an Obligation that was given for
performance of Covenants upon supposition of breach of the Covenants, he must
Assign but one breach in that Action. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. otherwise the
Desendant cannot justify or take Issue.

A Statute Merchant or Staple cannot be Assigned over to another. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r.

If Lessee for years Assign all his Term to come in his Lease over unto
another, he cannot reserve a Rent, for if he do, such reservation is not good,
because the Less has no interest in the thing, by reason of which the Rent
reserved should be paid. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. 21. Ap. 1648. In the Case of one
Leach and Davy.

Averment.
Where a Statute is recited, there one may not Aver that there is no such
Record, for generally an Averment as this is, does not lie against a Record.
For a Record is a thing of a solemn and high nature, but an Averment is but
the Allegation of the party. 21. Car. B. r.

One may not Aver a thing contrary to the Condition of an Obligation, no more
then he may against a Record, for the Condition is part of the Deed which shall
be supposed to he made upon good deliberation, and before Witnesses, and not be
contradicted by a bare Averment. 7. No. 1650. B. S

It was said by the Court, that if one assume upon himself to do a future act,
and an Issue is joined upon this promise; whether he has done this thing or
no, the party needs not to Aver, that he has done it for the doing or not
doing of it, is Traversable, and the Plaintiff might have taken advantage upon
the Defendants Plea if it was not true.

Avowry.
If one make an Avowry for two causes, and can maintain his Avowry, but for one
of them, yet it is a good Avowry. 21. Car. B. r.

One Avowry may be made upon two several titles of land though the Avowry is
but for one Rent. 6. Feb. 1650.

Adjournment.
The Court is Adjourned by the Crier of the Court after he has made Oyes three
times, and the substance of the Adjournment is to give license to all parties
that have any thing to do in the Court to forbear their attendance, and to take
their ease till such a time precisely named, and then to attend in Court again.

Every last day of the Term and every Eve of a day which is not dies iuridicus,
or a Law day, whereof there is two such days in Mich. Term, viz. all Saints and
all Souls day, and one a piece in Hillary Term, Easter Term and Trinity Term,
viz. the day of the purification of our Lady in Hillary Term, Ascension day in
Easter Term, and Saint John the Baptists day in Trinity Term, the Court is
Adjourmed, and before the Statute for the proceedings of the Law in English, it
used to be done first in English and then in French two several times sitting
the Court toward the latter end of the day, a good space of time being between
the first and second pronouncing of the Adjournment but since the Statute the
Court is only Adjourned in English.

A Jury which does not appear full, cannot be Adjourned for such a Jury is not
accounted a Jury. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

The first Adjournment of the Court is about eleven of the clock, and the last
immediately before the rising of the Court.

Administration.
The mother ought to have the Administration of the Goods and Chattels of her
child before a son or a brother or a sister. 22. Car. B. r. Trin.

Where the payment of money would not be for the advantage of the Testator,
there the not paying of it cannot be pleaded to be to the retarding of the
Administration of his Goods and Chattels. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

All Actions which an Administrator can have is given unto him by several
Statutes. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Where an Administration is granted by such a jurisdiction as the Law takes
notice of, it is not necessary to show that the Letters of Administration were
granted by the Ordinary of such a place, but where the Law takes no notice of
the jurisdiction of that Court where the Administration was granted, the
Letters of Administration must be so pleaded, viz. per loci illius Ordinarium.
Mich 22. Car. B. r.

Letters of Administration may be revoked by a Revocation without a seal. Mich.
22. Car. B. r.

The Ordinary ought not to repeal Letters of Administration which he has duly
granted, but if they be unduly granted, viz. to such a person, who by Law ought
not to have them, he may revoke them. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

One of the half blood is in as equal a degree of kindred to the Intestate to
have Letters of Administration granted unto him as one of the whole blood is.
Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

An Indebitatus Assumpsit does not lie generally against an Administrator.
Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

Letters of Administration granted per Carolum Regem debito more adjudged to be
well granted in that form. Hill. 24. Car. B. r.

Where the parties that require Letters of Administration from the Ordinary,
are of equal degree of kindred to the Intestate, there it is in the discretion
of the Ordinary to grant them to which of them he pleases. Pasc. and Mich. 24.
Car. B. r.

Where one bequeaths a Legacy to one of his kindred, and the residue of his
goods to another. Administration ought to be granted to him to whom the residue
of the goods are bequeathed. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

Arrest.
If an Action of Debt be entered, in any of the Counters in London, a Serjant
may Arrest the party without the Sheriffs Warrant. Trin. 22. Car. B. r.

A Clerk of the Court ought not to be Arrested for any thing which is not
criminal, because he is supposed to be always present in Court, and must
answer the Plaintiff there; and therefore he that does Arrest him is punishable
by the Court. Trin. 23. Car. B r.

One ought not to be Arrested upon every slight suspicion of Felony, but there
ought to be a good ground showed for the suspicion before he is to be Arrested,
for Fame, Life and Liberty are precious things in the eye of the Law. Mich.
1649. B. Sup.

One that is not privileged from Arrest, by reason of his attendance upon his
business in some Court of Justice, or some other ways privileged by some
special Rule or Order of Court, may be Arrested in Westminster Hall, sitting
the Courts there. Mich. 1649. B. Sup. And it has been often done.

Appearance.
If one do give an Attorney Warrant to appear for him, and shall afterward
repeal this Warrant on purpose to delay his Appearance, the Court will
notwithstanding the repealing of his Warrant, compel his Attorney to appear for
him in such a manner as by the Rules of the Court he ought to have appeared if
his Warrant had not been repealed. Trin. 22. Car. B. r.

In all Cases where Process may Issue forth to take the persons body, there
every such person may appear in Court in his proper person. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

Though one do appear in Court upon the Return of a Writ Issued forth against
him, yet he does not admit the Writ to be good by such his Appearance; for he
cannot have Oyer of the Writ, until the party has declared against him. Hill.
22. Car. B. r. For he is Arrested upon a Warrant made by the Sheriff, upon
receipt of the Writ, and does not see the Writ.

The Principal cannot give a Warrant of Attorney to an Attorney to appear for
his Suerty. Pasc. 23. Can. B. r.

If an Attorney do promise to appear for his Clyont, and yet afterward
refuses to appear according to his promise, the Court will compel him to
appear for him, although he say he had no Warrant to appean. Hill. 22. Car. B.
r. And if he will not appear upon the Rule of the Court, an Attatchment lies
against him for his contempt to the Court. ^asc. 23 Car. B. r. and Mich. 24.
Car. B. r.

If there be diverse Defendants put in one Declaration, an Attorney is not bound
by the Rules of the Court to appear for more of them, then such as from whom he
has Warrant to appear. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

If the Desendants Attorney do receive a Declaration against his Clyent from
the Plaintiffs Attorney, this is an Appearance for him. 11. Nov. 1650. B. S.
24. Maii Pasc. 1650. B. S.

In the Court of Common Pleas, upon a Capias issued forth in an ejectione
firmae, the Defendant is by the Rules of that Court to appear and plead in one
and the same Term, but it is not so in the Kings Bench, for there he has
liberty to imparle to the next Term. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

An Infant ought to appear by his Guardian, and not by an Attorney, for he
cannot make an Attorney, but the Court may Assign him a Guardian with his
consent. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Trin. 1650.

If one appear in this Court, but does not put in Bail, this is accounted to be
no Appearance, for it is the putting in of Bail that Attacheth the Cause in
Court; yet in the Common Pleas, it is held a good Appearance before Bail be put
in. 7. Maii. 1650. B. Sup.

If an Attorney promise to appear for his Clyent, the Court will compel him to
put in Bail for him.

If one appear by a name which is not in truth his right name, and thereupon
the Plaintiff declares against him by that name, he shall be Estopped
afterward to say that he is not right named. 29. Oct. 1650 B S.

If the Attorney do appear for his Clyent but de been esse, that is, if his
Clyent shall like and approve of it; he may send back the Declaration delivered
him upon this Appearance, and is not bound to plead unto it. 14. Nov. 1650. B.
S.

Two Nichils returned upon a Scire Facias do amount to an Appearance upon which
the party may proceed. 19. Ap. 1650. B. Sup.

Affidavit.
An Affidavit made before a Master of the Chancery is of no force, nor ought to
be read in this Court; nor will the Court make any Rule upon such an Affidavit.
Trin. 22. Car. B. r. and Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

An Affidavit ought only to set forth the matter which the party intends to
prove by his Affidavit, and not to declare the merits of his Cause. 22. Car. B.
r.

An Affidavit touching the trial of the cause, ought to be made before one of
the Judges of that Court in which the Cause is depending, and also in Term
time, yet by special Rule of the Court it may be made in the vacation. Mich.
22. Car. B. r.

An Affidavit made against a Verdict is not to be admitted. Pasc. 23. Car. B. S.

Memorandum, Roll Chief Justice commanded the Secondary to enter a Rule in the
Office, that the party who does intend to move upon an Affidavit do give the
adverse party a Copy of the Affidavit, upon which he intends to move, that he
may be prepared to answer the matter contained in the Affidavit when the motion
is made, and need not to have longer time to answer it. Micls. 1650. B. S.

When an Affidavit has been read in Court, it ought to be filed, that the
other party may see it, and take a copy of it, if he please. By Roll Chief
Justice. Pasc. 1655.

Addition.
One may have one Addition at one day, and in one place, and yet may have
another different Addition at another day, and in another place. Mich. 22. Car.
B. r.

The Title of Knight or Baronet, is part of the parties name, and it is
material, to be rightly used in pleading, but the titles of Gentleman or
Yeoman, are additions ad placitum to be used or not used. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

But the Title of an Earl of Ireland, is not an Addition ad placitum. Mich.
1649. B. S.

Award.
An Award that is made, that one of the parties, who submitted themselves to
the Award, shall pay money in the house of a stranger, is not good, for this is
to Award him, to do a thing which will make him a Trespasser, and so liable to
an Action, which is unreasonable. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. But if the Award be to
pay the money in the house of one of the parties that submitted to the Award,
such an Award is good, for it implies a license from the party, for him to pay
it there. 10 Feb. 1650.

An Award to pay money at the house of a stranger, may be a good Award: for he
may come to the house (in many cases) and be no Trespasser: but if he cannot
come to the strangers house, without being a Trespasser to him, there such an
Award is not good, as I conceive. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

A conditional Award is not good, because it is not final to determine the
matters in difference, submitted to the Arbitration, as Awards ought to be.
Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If all the matters submitted to the Arbitrators, be not Awarded upon, the
Award is not good. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

An uncertain and doubtful award is not good, because it makes not an end of
all the matters submitted unto by both parties, but leaves them at large, to
sue and trouble each other, as they were before the award made. Trin. 23. Car.
B. r.

An Award may be void in some part, and yet good in another part, viz. if the
award do make an end of all the differences submitted unto the Arbitrators, by
the parties Trin. 23. Car. B. r. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

An Award ought to be final, and certain, else it is not good. Mich. 23. Car.
B. r.

If each party submitting to the Award, has power by the Award to compel the
other party, either by Law or equity to perform the Award; the Award is good
although the party be thereby put to his Action. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

An Award that a thing shall be done to a stranger, is a good Award, if it
appear that the parties who submitted to the Award, have benefit by the doing
of it Pasc. 1650 B. S. 4. Junii.

If an Award be good in any part of it, to all the parties that did submit to
it, if the Award be broken in that part, an Action will lie for that breach.
Pasc. 1650 B. S. 4. Maii.

An Arbitrator cannot delegate, or transfer the power given him by the parties
that submitted to the Arbitration, for it is contrary to the submission, but an
Arbitrator may refer a Ministeral act, touching the Arbitration to another.
Trin. 1650. B. S. 15. Junii.

The Court will not suppose any thing to be Awarded in an Award, which is not
submitted unto, except the Contrary be made to appear. 10. Feb. 1650. B. S.

Affirmance.
It is not proper to move to have a Judgment affirmed, after a Writ of Error
bought to Reverse it, before the Errors be Assigned, but one may move for
Execution upon the Judgment. 22. Car. B. r.

Agreement.
A forced Agreement of the party, is accounted to be no Argeement, and
therefore the Court will not compel him that did thus agree to a thing, to
perform his agreement. 22. Car. B. r.

An agreement which is made between the parties, only by Paroll, may be
discharged and made void at any time before it is broken by Parol without
satisfaction; but after it is broken, it cannot be discharged without
satisfaction of it. 22. Car. B. r.

If an Agreement made by Parol to do any thing, be afterward reduced into
writing, the Parol agreement is thereby discharged; and if an Action be to be
brought for the non performance of this agreement, it must be brought upon the
agreement reduced into writting, and not upon the Parol agreement. Pasc. 23.
Car. B. r.

The Plaintiff and Defendant, may (by agreement between them) give money to the
Jury before they pass upon the trial to defray their charges where the trial is
put off, and thereby they are forced to stay longer in Town then they expected.
Mich. 1649. B. S.

Agreement.
By Roll Chief Justice: If the Plaintiffs Atturnoy, and the Defendants
Attorney, do agree to things in order to the proceedings in their Clyents
cause, though the Clyents do afterward refuse to consent to their agreement,
yet the Court will compel the Atturneys to perform the agreement.

Atturnment.
An Atturnment made unto Cestuy que use, is a good Atturnment in Law to the
Feffee of the Land, if the Tenant of the land have notice of the use, when he
did Atturn Tenant to Cestuy que use. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

An Atturnment made after Sunset, is not a good Atturnment for an Atturnment
is a solmne act, and ought to be done so that notice may be taken of it, which
shall not be presumed to be in the night. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

Assumpsit or Promise.
A promise that is made upon a sufficient consideration, is, as if it were
made, upon a precedent condition. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

An Assumpsit or promise to do a thing upon consideration, that he to whom he
made the promise, shall surrender an indenture to him, is a good consideration
to ground an Action upon for breach of this promise, although he to whom the
Indenture is surrendered do take no estate by this surrender. Mich. 23. Car. B.
r.

If one upon a good consideration do assume or promise to do a thing, he that
promised to do it, shall have a reasonable time allowed to him for the doing of
it, and shall not have liberty to do it at any time during his life. Hill. 22.
Car. B. r.

Where an Assumpsit or promise is the very ground of the Action brought, there
it must be pleaded precisely; but where it is but the inducement to the
bringing of the Action, there it is not necessary, to set forth the promise
precisely in the pleading. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Every contract made betwixt parties, does in Law imply a promise that they
will perform the contract. Hill. 1649. B. S. 4. Feb.

He for whose benefit a promise is made, may have an Action for the breach of
this promise, although the promise was not made to him. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

The consideration to stay his proceedings in a Suit in Law, is a good
consideration to ground an Assumpsit. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. viz. for ever or for
a certain time. But if he promise to stay Paululum tempus it is not good.

If one part of the consideration, upon which a promise is made to do a thing
be against the Law, and so void; yet if another part of the consideration be
good and lawful, the consideration is good to ground an Assumpsit upon, for the
consideration may be divided, and if any part of it be good, it is sufficient
to make the promise good. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

An Assumpsit grounded upon a consideration which was past before the promise
made, is a good Assumpsit, if it be alleged to be made at the instance, or
request of the Defendant. Psac. 24. Car. B. r.

After a promise is broken, the party that made this promise cannot be
discharged of this promise by Parol, but where the promise is executory the
may. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

Where one becomes legally indebted to another, the Law creates a promise, that
he will pay this debt; and if he do not pay it, there is a sufficient ground
for the party to whom he is indebted, to bring his Action of Indebitatus
Assumpsit, against him to recover this Debt. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If the day of an Assumpsit made be pleaded in figures and not in words at
length, it is erroneous. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

If an Action be brought upon an Assumpsit, and upon proof it does appear that
the agreement was more, or that it was less in substance then the Plaintiff
has declared upon, he has failed in laying of his Action; otherwise it is if
some circumstance only be omitted Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

In an Action brought upon a promise, it is usual to ground the Action upon one
promise, in the substance of it, but to lay the promise diverse ways and by
different words in the Declaration, to the intent that upon the trial, the
Plaintiff may rest, or rely upon that way of laying it, that his witnesses are
best able to prove. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

If one be indebted to another, and do promise to pay this debt at a day to
come, the party to whom he made this promise, cannot bring his Action for the
Debt until the day be passed upon which he promised to pay it, By Roll Chief
Justice, and by German Justice; for he said that the promise is a suspention of
the Debt. pro tempore, 29. Jan. 1650. B. S.

If one promise unto a woman, that in consideration that she will marry with
him, he will intermarry with her; this is a mutual promise, and an Action lies
by either party against the other for breach of it. 18. Ap. 1650. B. S.

Appeal.
In a Writ of Appeal, all the pleadings ought to be in French, Mich. 22. Car.
B. r. This is since altered by the late Statute, that Enacts all proceedings in
Law to be in English.

If in an Appeal, the Defendant plead in abatement of the Writ, and the Writ be
adjudged good, it is peremptory, and he shall not be permitted to answer over,
but shall be condemned upon the Writ. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

In an Appeal, the Appellant ought to appear in Court in person, yet upon a
motion to the Court, the Court may admit him to prosecute his Suite by his
Attorney. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

The defect in any Process in an Appeal, does discontinue all the Appeal, and
makes an end of the Action, as well as a defect in the Original Writ. Hill. 22.
Car. B. r.

Age.
If the question be, whether the party be of full Age, or within Age, it shall
be tried by the Court, by inspection of the party, and not by a Jury. Hill. 22.
Car. B. r.

Advantage.
It is not good practice to take an advantage against the Defendant, to obtain
a trial the sooner against him, for it causes clamor from the party, and makes
him (oftentimes) press the Court for a new trial. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

He that will in pleading, take advantage of a particular Statute, must show
particularly, that he is comprised within the Statute. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Assize.
An Assize is to be Arraigned in French, and first the Defendants Council does
pray the Court, that the Tenant may be called, which the Court grants, and
thereupon he is called by the Crier of the Court, and if upon his calling he do
appear, then the Tenants Council do demand Oyer of the Writ of Assize, and the
Return of it, which is granted, and thereupon he prays leave of the Court that
he may Imparle, which is granted to a short day after, and the Jury is
adjourned by the Court to appear at that day. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

Note that the Jurors that are to try the Assize, are called Recognitors of
the Assize.

At the day granted to the Tenant to Imparle unto, the Tenant is called, and
upon his appearance he pleads to the Assize in Latin, and upon this an Issue is
joined between the parties, and after the Jury or Recognitors of the Assize are
examined upon oath, upon a voire dire, whether they had the view of the land in
question, and if they say they have had, then are they sworn to try the Issue,
and the Council do proceed to give them their evidence. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Arraignment.
If in an Appeal brought, the Writ be abated, the Defendant cannot be Arraigned
upon the count which is grounded upon this Writ. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

One Awbry that had been (formerly) Indicted for upon the Statute for having
two Wives, and was Outlawed upon this Indictment, was brought to the Bar and
Arraigned to this effect. First the secondary on the criminal side, spoke thus,
Awbry hold up thy hand, which the prisoner did; then he proceeded thus, Awbry
thou have been heretofore Indicted of Felony, and thereupon Outlawed in due
course of Law, for having of two Wives, and have been Arraigned thereupon, what
can thou say for thy self, why thou should not have sentence of death,
pronounced against thee. Prisoner, I take this exception to the Indictment,
that it is not said to be found per sacramentum duodecim proborum and legalium
hominum; and I desire I may have Twisden and Hales assigned for my Council.
Court. You shall have them. Thereupon the Council prayed that the prisoner
might bring a Writ of Error to Reverse the Out-lawry. Court. Let him have it.

Attaint.
An Attaint does lie against a Jury, that do give their Verdict, contrary to
the evidence that is given unto them. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Audita Querela.
Where the Bail is detained in prison, in Execution after the judgment, which
was given against the Principal is Reversed by a Writ of Error; there the Bail
may bring an Audita Querela, to be discharged. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

If one be taken in Execution, and is afterward set at liberty, and then is
taken again and detained in prison upon the same Execution, he may bring his
Audita Querela to be enlarged. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

If a judgment given in another Court, be removed into the Upper Bench Court
by a Writ of Error, and the party who had the judgment (notwithstanding the
removal of it by the Writ of Error) do bring an Action of debt upon this
Judgment in the Court where he obtained the Judgment, as he may do, if
afterward pending this Action of Debt, the Judgment be Reversed by the Writ
of Error, the Defendant against whom the Judgment was obtained, may bring his
Audita Querela, to be relieved against the Action of Debt, brought upon the
Judgment. 3. Feb. 1650. B. S.

One Tritton that was in Execution, brought his Audita Querela, and prayed he
might be Bailed, and it was granted, and he was bailed by four persons. 7. Feb.
1650. B. S.

Authority.
Doctor Cowels book, called the Interpreter, is not a book of Authority, to be
urged for Law, for it was condemned to be erroneous and scandalous by
Parliament, and by the authority thereof, was publikly burned as erroneous and
scandalous.

A verbal authority given by diverse Plaintiffs, in an Action of Trespass, and
Ejectment, to deliver a Lease of Ejectment, upon the Land, though the Lease be
signed and sealed by them off of the Land Let in the Lease, is a good authority
to execute this Lease. So held in a trial at the Bar, between Vanlore and
Crook. Mich. 1649. 7. No. B S.

Apurtenant and Apendant.
Yards, Orchards and Guardens, are Appurtenances to a Message, but Lands
cannot be said to be Appurtenant to a Message though they be used with the
Message, for the Message is a Message, though the Lands be taken away. Hill.
23. Car. B. r.

One Message cannot be Appurtenant to another Message, for they are (both)
entire things of themselves. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

Account.
An Action of Account, or an Action of Debt lies at the election of the
Plaintiff, against one for receiving money of a third person for the use of the
Plaintiff, although he had no authority given him to receive it. Hill. 23. Car.
B. r.

The Statute of limitations of Actions, does not bar the Plaintiff from
bringing an Action of account, although he do not bring the Action within the
time limited by the Statute, for before that Statute, one that had once cause
of Action, might bring it at any time afterward without restriction of time,
and this Action, is not mentioned in the Statute. Trin. 1650. 20. Junii. B. S.

An Action of Account does not lie for Rent (alone) due and arrear, for the
Rent demandable is certain, but if Rent be behind, and there are (also) other
things mixed with it, for which the Action is brought then an Action of Account
may be brought for both of them together, because it is uncertain upon the
whole matter what is due to the Plaintiff. Trin. 1651 B. S.

If one receive money due to me upon an Obligation, or for Rent due to me, I
may either have an Action of Account against him as my receiver, or an Action
of Debt, as owing me so much money as he has received: though in both cases he
do receive the money without my consent. Trin. 1651. B. S.

Auditor.
Many things are in charge with the Kings Auditors which are not in the Crown,
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

Auditors Assigned by the Court, upon an Action of Account brought to receive
the Account, are proper Judges of the cause. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

Argument.
Two that are of Council on one side, ought not to Argue for their Clyent both
of them upon one and the same day, except it be for concluding of all the
Arguments which are intended to be made for that party. Mich. 1649. B. S. By
the custom of the Court.

It is not the usual course of the Court, for one Councellor to argue the same
Case twice. By Roll Chief Justice. 12. Nov. 1650. B. S.

Aid and Aid Prayer.
A Tenant for life may pray in Aid of all such persons as are in remainder of
estate in the lands for which he is impleaded. 1649. 29 Julii. B. S.

Baron and Fem.
AN Action of Debt does lie against the Husband for goods that were delivered
to his Wife, if it may be intended that those goods did any ways come to the
use of the Husband. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

A Fem Covert cannot submit to an Award, for the submission is a free Act of
will, and the will of a Fem Covert is subject to the will of her Husband, and
so is not free. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. But another person may submit to an Award
for a matter which concerns the Fem, and such a submission is a good submission
in Law.

A Feofment made to a Fem Covert is a good Feofment in Law to pass the Lands,
if the Husband do know of it until the Husband do disagree to it, for if he
disagree from it, the Feofment is not good, but if he once agree to it, he
cannot afterward disagree from it, and if he once disagree, he cannot
afterward agree to it. Q. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

A Fem Covert may take a thing, though it be not by Deed. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.
viz. If her Husband consent to it.

If a Fem sole be indebted to I. S. and afterward the Fem does marry, this Debt
is become by the marriage, the Debt of the Husband and of the Wife, viz. the
proper Debt of the Wife, and the Debt of the Husband in right of his Wife, and
the Wife must be sued for this Debt jointly with her Husband; and if the
Husband dye, pending the Suite, yet is not the Debt gone, but she may be sued
for it after the death of her Husband. Pase. 24. Car. and Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

Bar in Actions.
A Recovery in a personal Action, is a Bar in all other personal Actions
touching the same matter. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. That is to say, it is a good
Ploa in Bar to a personal Action brought against the Defendant, to say that the
Plaintiff did formerly bring an Action against him for the same matter, and did
recover against him, and therefore he prays the Judgment of the Court,
whether he shall be permitted to proceed in his second Action.

In an Action brought to recover a thing from another, if a recovery be there
upon had by the Plaintiff, the Defendant may plead this recovery in Bar of a
second Action brought against him for the same thing. 21. Car. B. r.

A Plea in Bar which does not give a full answer, to all the matter which is
contained in the Plaintiffs Declaration, is not a good Plea. 21. Car. B. r.
viz. If it answer not all the material matter of it.

If the Plaintiff do reply to the Defendants Plea in Bar, this replication is a
confession in Law, that the Plea in Bar is a good Plea, although the Plea be
not good. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For the Plaintiff has slipped his advantage of
Demurring to the Defendants insufficient Plea by replying unto it.

If an Action of Debt be brought against one, and he Imparles to the next Term,
yet after his Imparlance, he may plead that the Plaintiff is Outlawed in Bar
of the Action. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

Bail.
One that is in Execution, is not Bailable by the Law. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. For
Bail is put in to secure the Plaintiff, that the Defendant shall perform the
Judgment of the Court, and now the Law has determined the matter, and there
remains only for the Defendant to perform the Judgment, and for the not
performing it he lies in Execution.

Before a Capias is taken out against the Bail, the Principal may render his
body to the Marshal of the Court, and the entry of this in the Marshals Book is
a sufficient ground to discharge the Bail, and it is not necessary to enter
this upon the Record; but if the Principal do render his body after a Capias
taken out against his Bail, it is in the power of the Court, whether it shall
be accepted or not; and they may (if they will) give the Plaintiff leave to
proceed against the Bail, notwithstanding the Principals rendering of his body.
21. Car. B. r. Because he did it not in due time, but has put the Plaintiff to
the charge, and trouble of suing out the Capias.

One that had been Indicted thirteen years before for suspicion of murder in
poisoning his servant, was brought in Court by a Habeas Corpus, and was bailed
to answer the fact. 21. Car. B. r.

Though one that is in Execution, do bring a Writ of Error to reverse the
Judgment given against him, yet the Court will not Bail him, except their
appear unto them very apparent Error in the Record. 21. Car. B. r. For else
they will suppose that the Writ of Error is only brought to gain the parties
liberty, and so to frustrate the Execution.

One Arnold James that was Bailed in the 44. and 45. year of Q. Eliz. upon a
Judgment given against him in the Lord Majors Court of London, was brought
into Court by a Habeas Corpus. Trin. 22. Car. B. r.

The Court did take Bail for a prisoner, against whom an Appeal of murder was
brought, because that he did not flee for the murder supposed, and had been
formerly Indicted for this murder, and acquitted upon the Indictment. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. Upon which presumptions they conceived he was not guilty, else would
not have Bailed him.

Bail pieces are small pieces of Parchment, in which is written the substance
of the Bail, and are filed in the Office of the Court, besides the Bail that is
filed upon Record. Mich. 22 Car. B. r. And are made at the Judges Chamber
(usually) before whom the Bail is taken.

If the Plaintiff require special Bail, he ought to show his cause of Action,
before the Judge that takes the Bail; or else, to declare against the
Defendant, that it may appear to the Court, that there is cause, why special
Bail should be given, otherwise common Bail is to be filed; and if he will not
declare against the Defendant till after three Terms, then by the course of the
Court he must take common Bail what ever the cause of Action be. Hill. 22. Car.
B. r. Trin. 24. Car. 1650. 22. Junii.

Where one is sued as an Executor, he is not compellable to put in special
Bail; but in case of a Devastavit for wasting the goods of the Testator, or
where the Action is brought for something done by him since he became Executor.
Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

If an Action be brought against Husband and Wife, and the Husband is only
Arrested; yet the Husband must put in Bail for his Wife, if the name of the
Wife be in the Writ, else he is not bound to put in Bail for her. Hill. 22.
Car. B. r. For it is the Writ that warrants the Bail.

One may deposite a sum of money in Court in lieu of Bail, if the Court please,
and they may thereupon order the Plaintiff to waive other Bail. 22. Car. B. r.
and Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

If the Defendant do render his body in custody in discharge of his Bail; the
Plaintiff ought by the Rules of the Court to make his choice whether he will
proceed afterward against the Principal or the Bail. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

After the Roll is marked to have special Bail, common Bail ought not to be
entered; but if the Roll be not marked for special Bail, common Bail may be
entered. Hill. Car. B. r.

One that stands Indicted for Felony, or for Forgery, ought not to be Bailed,
until he have pleaded to the Indictment. Pasc. and Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For
the parties shall be conceived to be guilty of the Crimes until they plead.

If one be committed to prison by the House of Commons in Parliament, the Court
will Bail the party, if in respect of his Fact he is Bailable in Law. Pasc. 23.
Car. B. r.

The Court will not Bail one that appears in Court upon the Return of his
Habeas Corpus, before they have considered of the Return, to enform themselves
whether he is Bailable by the Law or not. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

One committed by a Justice of Peace upon the Statute for having of two Wives,
and appearing in Court upon the Return of his Habeus Corpus was Bailed upon the
prayer of his Council. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

Where the not filing of common Bail, will make Error in the Record, there the
Court will compel the Plaintiff to accept of it. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

One that is within Age, is not to be admitted to be Bail for another. Trin.
23. Car. B. r. For he is not a person (of himself) responsable at the Law.

One committed for Felony and brought into this Court by his Habeas Corpus, may
not be Bailed with less then four Suerties Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For the Crime
being Capital, requires exttraordinary Bail.

One Judge alone will not take Bail of a prisoner that appears upon his Habeas
Corpus, Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

The putting in of a Declaration, and the acceptance of it by the Defendants
Attruney, with the privity of the Plaintiffes Attorney, is counted an
acceptance of the Bail. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. and 1650. Pasc. 14. Maii.

If a privileged person in this Court, do bring an Action against another in
this Court; he ought by the course of the Court to have special Bail put in to
his Action. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. Whether there be cause for special Bail or
not. This I suppose is ex gratia.

Though one be Assigned by the Court to be of Council on Record for a prisoner
that stands Indicted of Felony, yet he ought not to move to have the prisoner
Bailed. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For he must not move for things against Law.

One that is Outlawed, ought not to be Bailed until either the Out-lawry be
Reversed, or else he has brought a Writ of Error to Reverse it. Pasc. Car. B.
r. For an Outlawed person is to receive no favor in the Law.

One single Judge in Court will not Bail a prisoner in a difficult case, but
will advise with his Companions. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

One that is in Excution, in custody of the Marshall of this Court is not
compellable to find Bail if another Action be brought against him, but if he be
in the prison of the Fleet in Execution, and an Action be brought against him
in this Court, he must either be removed and committed unto the custody of the
Marshal of this Court, or else he must put in Bail to the Action. Trin 24. Car.
B. r.

Before a Supersedas be issued forth upon a Writ of Error brought, he that
brings the Writ of Error, ought to put in special Bail to pay what shall be
due, if the judgment be affirmed. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

It is not sufficient for the Plaintiffs Attorney only to mark the Roll for
special Bail, but he ought also to give the Defendants Arturney notice, that
special Bail is required to the Action. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. For the Roll may
be marked without notice, and so he know nothing of it, and plain practice is
always the best.

If the Judgment be Reversed by a Writ of Error which was given against the
principal, there may be a special Writ taken out to discharge the Bail. Mich.
24. Car. B. r.

Bail is to be accounted good Bail, which is taken de been esse, and before it
be filed until it be questioned, and disallowed. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. Upon
examination of it before the Judge. Hill. 1649. 11. Feb.

Bail is so called because the party Bailed is delivered by the Law into the
custody of those that are his Bail, and who are to answer the party if they do
not produce the principal to do it. Trin. 1650. B. S. 15. Junii. It is derived
of the French word Bailler, to deliver a thing to another.

If the Plaintiff do not declare against the Defendant in three Terms after
Bail is put in, the Bail is not chargeable. Trin. 1650. 2. Julii. For then the
Defendant is to go only upon common Bail

If the Plaintiffs Attorney do only tell the Defendants Attorney, that his
Clyent is to put in special Bail it is sufficient; and there common Bail is not
to be admitted, although the Roll be not marked for special Bail. 3. Feb. 1650
B. S. For the notice that there ought to be special Bail, is the thing
required, and the marking of the Roll, is but to give notice.

If one that lies in Execution do bring his Audita Querela, he is Bailable. 7.
Feb. 1650 B. S. So held in Trittons Case.

By a Rule of the Court, the Plaintiffs Attorney must receive the Bail given
before the Judge, from the Judge himself the same Term it was put in, upon pain
of five shillings. 21. Feb. 1650 B. S.

When one becomes Bail for another in an Action of Debt, he does (in Law)
assume or take upon him to render the body of the Principal, if he be
condemned, or else to pay the Debt he is condemned in. Pasc. 1652. per Roll.
B. S.

Until a Capias be Returned against the Principal, the Bail shall not forfeit
his Recognizance for the principals not appearance, by the Ancient course of
the Court; but at this day by the indulgence of the Court he shall not forfeit
his Recognizance, if the Principal come in at any time before the Return of the
second Scire Facias against the Bail. Trin. 1652. B. S.

If one be sued in this Court for twenty pounds or above, the Plaintiff may by
the course of the Court require special Bail, but if he sued for a less some
common Bail must be accepted. Per Barrel Clerk there.

Special Bail is not (generally) to be given in an Action of Battery, yet in
some such cases, the Court will compel the Defendant to put in special Bail,
viz where they perceive it was a foul Battery, and much damage done by it;
else an Action of Battery, is thought a slight Action, and not worthy of
special Bail.

If there be no Writ in the Roll, nor any notice given for special Bail, and
common Bail is filed, the Plaintiff cannot by the course of the Court, require
special Bail. By Roll Chief Justice.

Bail is not to be accounted Bail (properly) until it be filed, for then and
not before it is upon Record. By Roll Chief Justice.

If the Defendant put in Bail before a Judge, and it is allowed, and yet he
will not file it, the Plaintiff may if he will at his own charge file it. By
Roll Chief Justice. Pasc. 1655. To avoid Error.

If Bail be taken by the Judge, de been esse, the Plaintiff ought by the Rules
of the Court, either to allow the Bail, or to show cause to the contrary. By
Roll.

The sufficiency or non sufficiency of Bail ought to be first exaimed by the
judge at his Chamber before the Court is to be troubled with the matter; but if
the Judge cannot make the Plaintiff and Defendant agree in the giving and
taking of the Bail, then the Court is to be moved in it; whereupon they will
order both parties to attend and the Bail also, and will examine the cause of
Action, and the Bails sufficiency, and settle the matters in difference
according to reason. By Roll Chief Justice.

The cause of marking the Roll for special Bail in this Court, is, because the
cause of Action does not appear upon the Latitat, by which the party was
Arrested, but it is to be made appear by the Declaration. By Glyn Chief
Justice. But in the Common Pleas where they proceed upon an Original, the cause
of Action does appear.

Burglary.
Burglary may be committed by one, though he do not break a house open, for if
he be within the house, and steal away the goods in the house, and open the
door on the inside, and go out and carry away the goods, this is Burglary. 22.
Car. Trin. B. r.

Bankrupt.
He that is a Bankrupt to one Creditor, is accounted (in Law) to be a Bankrupt
to all. 22. Car. B. r.

He that is once adjudged to be a Bankrupt, is to be always accounted to be a
Bankrupt. 22. Car. B. r.

If one shall with an intent to support the credit of a Bankrupt, suffer him to
have his goods in his custody, and to dispose of them, the property of these
goods shall be accounted to be in the Bankrupt, and the true owner of the goods
shall lose the property in them. 18. Ap 1501. B. Sup. As a punishment for his
false dealing herein, and of the mischiefs which may grow by such devises to
evade the Laws.

Bench.
Where one brings an Action for a Covenant broken, he ought to Assign the
breach of it in such manner that the Defendant may justify or take an Issue.
Hill. 22. Car. B. r. Else the party can make no defense for himself.

If one bring an Action of Covenant against another, for not repairing houses,
etc. demised unto him, he ought to Assign particularly wherein the want of
reparations do consist, and not to declare generally. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For
reparations do consist of particulars.

If an Action of Debt be brought upon an Obligation for breach of the condition
thereof, the Plaintiff is not to Assign in what the breach is, until the
Defendant has pleaded performance of the condition. Hill 22. Car. B. r.

Baliff.
A Bailiff may execute a Writ out of the Hundred where he is Bailiff. Pasc. 23.
Car. B. r. For he is Bailiff all the County over, if he be the Sheriffs
Bailiff, and not a Bailiff of some Liberty within the County.

A Bailiff is a servant or minister of the Law, and by consequence he is a
servant to the party, at whose Suite he is to Arrest any one. Pasc. 24. Car. B.
r.

A Sheriffs Bailiff is not an Officer of the Court, but the Sheriff himself is
the Officer that the Court takes notice of. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

Bargain and Sale.
A Bargain and Sale made by one who is not in possession, though it be by Deed
enrolled, is not good if there be no Livery made thereupon. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

If one buy a thing of another, he that buys it ought to pay the money he has
agreed to pay for it, before the seller of it is bound to deliver it. Pasc. 23.
Car. B. r.

One may upon a good consideration, dissolve by Paroll only an absolute
Bargain. Pas. 24. Car. B. r.

One may sell his privilege given him by the Law, as his birthright, as a
freeborn subject, for a good consideration. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If one that is indebted do really and bona fide sell his Lands, though it be
with an intent to avoid the payment of his Debts; this sale is good, if the
Vendee be not privy to his intent. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

If one Bargain and Sell Lands, of which another is in possession, and claims
title to them, this Bargain and Sale is not good. Trin 1651. B. S. Because it
is a litigious title, the buying where the Law does not allow.

Battery.
To lay ones hands lightly or gently upon another, though he have no occasion
so to do, is no Battery to ground an Action upon. Trin. 24. Car B. r. For the
Law will not prosume the party is damnified by it.

Bill.
There is difference betwixt an Inland Bill of Exchange, and an Outland Bill of
Exchange which is made to return moneys beyond the Seas, for an Inland Bill is
but in nature of a Letter, but an Outland Bill is of another nature and more
regarded in the eye of the Law. 3. July 1650. B. S. Because it is more for the
advance of trade.

Book.
When Books are delivered to the Judges, in causes which are to be argued; the
Atturnyes that deliver the Books, ought to write the number Roll of the Cases
to be argued upon the Book, otherwise they will not receive them. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. That they may know in what year and term, the causes were entered,
that they may have recourse to the Records upon any occasion.

The Books which are to delivered to be the Judges, of causes to be argued, are
to be made at the equal charge of the Plaintiff and the Defendant. Pasc. 23.
Car. B. r. For the Law being doubtful in such Causes which are to be argued,
whether it be on the Plaintiffs side or on the Defendants; the arguing of the
Case does equally concern them, and therefore it is reason they should be at an
equal charge in bringing the cause to be argued and determined.

When Books are to be delivered to the Judges, in causes which are to be
argued; the Plaintiff ought to give Books to the Seignior Judges, and the
Defendant ought to give Books to the puisne Judges. Hill. 1649. B. S.

Courts and their Jurisdiction.
THe Court of York has not power to award a Capias in an Action upon the Case,
by the Statute of 14. H. 7. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

Inferior Courts ought not in pleading to show a thing by implication, but they
must set it forth expressly, and also Surplusage in an inferior Court will make
error, for they must keep their forms precisely. Hill. 21. B. r. For if they
should be suffered to break their forms, it would introduce all barbarism and
confusion.

If a condition of an Obligation for the payment of money, do express no place
where the money is to be paid; if the Obligee bring an Action of Debt upon this
Obligation for non-payment of the money according to the Condition of this
Obligation, he must make it appear that the money was to be paid within the
jurisdiction of the Court, where he brings his Action, or else the Action is
not well laid. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

The jurisdiction of an inferior Court must be set forth, and by what authority
it is held whether by Prescription or Letters Patents. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. For
every inferior Court must be held one of those ways.

The Court of Admiralty cannot hold Plea of a matter arising from a contract
made upon the land, though the contract was made concerning things belonging to
the Ship. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

In the year of 4 H. 4. there was a petition preferred in the Parliament
against the Court of Admiralty for holding of Pleas by the Spiritual Law, which
they ought not to do, but by the Laws of Oleron, and so it was held by the
House of Commons in Parliament at that time. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

If goods delivered a Shipboard be embeziled, all the Mariners ought to
contribute to the satisfaction of the party that lost his goods; every one of
them particularly according to their proportion, by the the Martime Law or
custom, and the cause is to be tried in the Court of the Admiralty; and in
such cases no prohibition ought to be granted. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

The Court of Admiralty ought not to try whether a fact were done in a place
which is comprehended within a League, made with a Foreign Prince, or whether
the place be without or not, nor ought to try whether the League were made at
the time of the fact done or no. 21. Car. B. r.

No Court can set a fine upon any person, for such an offense committed by him,
for which they cannot grant him a pardon for his offense, when he has paid the
fine that is so set upon him. 21. Car. B. r. 4. H. 7. 5. 21. H. 7. 35.

The Court ought Ex officio to take notice of matters contained in the Record
of the matter depending before them, but they are not tied to search the
Almanac to compute the times of doing of things. 21. Car. B. r.

An inferior Court ought to Return a Writ directed to them to stop their
proceedings, although they be not bound to allow the Writ directed to them by
giving obedience unto it, and in their Return of the Writ they are to show, why
they do not allow it, but do proceed notwithstanding the Writ directed unto
them. 22. Car. B. r. That they may not seem to contemn the Authority above them.

If a Court which has no jurisdiction of the cause depending in that Court do
proceed to Judgment in it; the Judgment is good, if the Defendant did not
plead to the jurisdiction, of the Court, but admitted it to have jurisdiction
of the cause, by making his defense 22. Car. B. r. Which was (once) in his
power to allow or disallow, as he pleased; but not having disallowed it when he
might, he shall be judged to have allowed the jurisdiction.

Although one plead in disallowance of the jurisdiction of a Court, yet he may
(afterward) come in and allow the jurisdiction and plead there. Mich. 22. Car.
B. r.

The Court of the Kings Bench, is to regulate all the Courts of Law throughout,
England, that they do not exceed their jurisdictions nor alter their forms. 22.
Car. B. r.

In some cases the jurisdiction of the Courts of the Cinque Ports extends
upon the high Sea. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

This Court may commit an Attorney, for doing of things against the express
Rules of the Court and notice of it. 22. Car. B. r.

This Court may issue out a Writ, to compel one that is elected to the Office
of Constable, and refuses to serve, to take his oath and to execute his
Office. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

The superior Courts at Westminster, and the inferior Courts elsewhere, do
differ in their forms in proceeding in many things. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

A Court that holts Plea by ventue of Letters Patents, ought to proceed
according to the course of the Common Law; but Courts that are Courts by
Custom, are not bound to proceed according to the strict Rules of the Common
Law; but may proceed according to their custom. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. So that
it be not contrary to Law.

One may sue in the Kings Bench Court, by Original as well as he may by Bill of
Midlesex or Writ of Latitat; but the common and most usual way of proceeding is
by Bill. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

It has been doubted whether the Marshals Court be a Court nor not, because it
is not annexed to any Corporation, but unto Whitehall, which is but a house,
and so it seems to be but a Court in Gross. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. This was
questioned when the Court was in being, but now that Court is taken away by
Stat, and the question is out of doors.

A County Court cannot enquire of damages arising out of the jurisdiction of
it. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

One ought not to Sue to Bastardise an Issue, in the Eclesiastical Court, but
the trial lies at the Common Law. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Whether a Wife or not Wife is triable at the Common Law; but whether lawfully
married or not lawfully married, is tryable in the Spiritual Court. Pasc. 23.
Car. B. r. For a marriage is pleaded to be according to the Laws of the holy
Church, viz. the Eclesiastical Laws; and therefore most proper for them to
determine whether the marriage were solemnised accordingly.

Where the principal matter is tryable in the Spiritual Court, and there is
(also) a thing incident to this trial, which is tryable at the Common Law, yet
a Prohibition shall not there be granted, Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. Quia principale,
trahit ad se accessorium suum.

A Recognizance in the Common Pleas is entered specially, but a Kecognizance in
the Kings Bench, is entered generally. Pasc. 23. Car. B r.

In the Universities they hold Pleas by custom, and do proceed according to
the Rules of the Civil Law. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

In the Court of the City of Exeter, they proceed in that manner as they do in
the Common Pleas, but they do not so generally in other inferior Courts. Pasc.
23. Car. B. r. But in Norwich they proceed as they do at Exeter, agreeing with
the Common Pleas.

The Common Pleas does not show at large, whence the venne shall come, but
inferior Courts ought to show it at large, and not with an etc. as the Common
Pleas does. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

The Court of the public Exchequer is a mixed Court, and does consist of Law
and Equity. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. The Pleas side is for matters of Law, and the
Chequer Chamber for matters of Equity.

The Court of the Kings Bench, is a Court of Air in that County wheresoever it
sits. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. For it is not a fixed Court as the Common Pleas Court
is, but removeable.

The Court of the Common Council of London, is not a Court of Record; but only
a Court of advice, and therefore neither a Writ of Error, nor an Attaint does
lie for matters done in that Court. Trin 23 Car. B. r.

One ought to speak against the jurisdiction of the Court, by pleading to it,
and not by speaking in Arrest of Judgment. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For then it is
too late.

The Palace Court, is a Court in the Air, and annexed to no Corporation, nor
is beneficial to any society of men; and from the Tunnel of White hall, and
twelve miles from thence in compass is called the Palace Court. By Roll Chief
Justice. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. Now that Court is taken away.

The Statute of Ieofails does extend to inferior Courts, if the Errors in their
proceedings cannot be amended by the comparing of their Papers or such other
matters, for it is a beneficial Law, and to be (therefore) largely expounded.
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

A Court cannot be held by Custom, and by Letters Patents also, for if one
have a Court by Custom, and he Purchase Letters Patents, and holds the Court
by them, the Custom is extinguished. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

This Court has authority to reform abuses in the behavior and carriages of
all persons whatsoever, throughout all England. Hill. 1649. Feb. 9. B. S.

The Parliament cannot take way the jurisdiction of this Court, without words
in the Negative, that is, that it shall not do thus or thus. 10 Feb. 1650. B. S.

This Court is not to be open more then two days after the Term for Demurrers
and Pleas, and but three days for Issues. Trin. 1651. B. S.

All Courts of Record were originally the Kings. Mich. 1651. B. S.

Corporation.
If a Corporation do become so poor, that it is not able to defray the public
charges, which are incident unto it as it is a Corporation; it is fit that the
Corporation be feised unto the hands of the King. Hill. 21. Car. For the
Corporation becomes useless and dishonorable.

If a Corporation does neglect to elect such Officers as they ought to Elect by
their Charter, or if they make a false Election not warranted by their Charter;
this is a forfeiture of their Corporation. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

The Corporation of the City of London is to answer for all particular
misdemeanors which are committed within any of the Courts of Justice within the
City; and for all other general misdemeanors committed within the City. Trin.
22. Car. B. r. So I conceive it is of all other Corporations.

A Body Politic is a creature of the King, created by Letters Patents. Hill.
22. Car. B. r. For though a Corporation may be by prescription, yet it shall be
intended, that such a Corporation did (originally) derive its Authority by
grant from the King.

Costs and Charges.
No Costs ought to be paid for the putting off of a trial, where no fault was
in the party against whom it is moved for Costs.

An Attatchment lies against the party that refuses to pay Costs which are
taxed by the Master of the Office. 21. Car. B. r. According to the Rule of the
Court.

If a Juror be withdrawn (upon a trial) by the consent of the Plaintiff and the
Defendant, they shall pay the Costs of the Jury equally between them. Trin. 22.
Car. B. r. For if one of the parties (alone) should pay the Costs, upon
bringing the Issue (again) to be tried by the same Jury, as the course is so to
do, it would be a sufficient matter for him that did not join in paying the
Costs, to challeng the Jury for favor to him that did pay the Costs. Trin. 22.
Car. B. r.

If upon a trial, the Plaintiff be forced to be non Suit, because his witnesses
did not appear, he may by Action recover his Costs expended against his
witnesses that did not appear. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

It is at the Election of the Defendant, if the Plaintiff do amend his
Declaration, either to accept of Costs and to plead, or else to refuse Costs
and to Imparle unto the next Term and not to plead. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

The taxing of Costs is the Act of the Court, although they be taxed by the
Secondary of the Office. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the Secondary is but the
Officer of the Court, and an instrument employed by the Court for such
purposes, and therefore the Court may alter the Taxes if they see cause.

Taxes ought not to be Taxed until the Atturneys on both sides be heard for
their Clyents before the Secondary. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Except it be where
either of the Atturneys does neglect to appear before the Secondary, having
notice thereof.

If an Endictment, taken in any County, be removed by Certiorary into the Kings
Bench; and the Court be moved, that it may be sent back again into the County
where it was taken, and if the Court (upon good cause showed) do order it
accordingly; it shall be removed back again, at his costs who dedesires it to
be removed. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For it shall be intended, that the removing of
it is for his benefit and ease.

When upon a trial the plaintiff becomes nonsuit, the Defendant must pay the
Jury their Costs. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For it is intended, he receives benefit
by the nonsuit.

If there be any such fault in the entering of a special verdict, so that it
must be amended, the Plaintiff or Defendant, who was the occasion of making the
fault, must pay the Costs for the amending it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. if it be
such a fault that Costs must be expended to amend it.

If a trial at the Bar be put off in favor of the Plaintiff or the
Defendant, and the party that was not the cause of putting it off, be compelled
by putting it off to keep his Witnesses in Town, he that caused the trial to
be put off, shall pay such Costs for keeping them in Town, as shall be taxed by
the Secondary. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

If one will give leave to another to sue in his Name, he that grants the leave
shall pay the Costs of the suit. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For he is the person upon
record, of whom the Law takes notice of, and the Court takes no notice of the
agreement between the parties.

Costs are not to be allowed for unreasonable motions, but only for such as the
party was necessarily put unto by the course of the Court. 22. Car. B. r.

Arbitrators are to make the Writings touching their arb trement, at their own
proper Costs; and ought not to award, that the parties that submitted to the
award shall pay for them. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Where the Judges of the Court do desire to have Books of the Cause depending
before them, to be advised of the matter in Law the better, by considering of
the pleadings; the Plaintiff and the Defendant ought to join in the Costs, for
the copying of the Books to be delivered to them. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

It is the course of the Court, to refer the taxing of the Costs to the
Secondary of the Office, and not to make any special rules for such matters.
Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

No Costs are to be allowed upon a Repleader. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For both the
parties were in fault, to suffer such an insufficient issue to be joined.

It is not necessary that the Jury should give Costs, but they may leave it to
the Court to do it. Mich. 23. B. r.

Upon a Judgment upon a Nihil dicit, in the Common Pleas, that Court will give
Costs and damages generally. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If there be a special verdict found in a Replevin, the Costs and damages
shall be given, either against the replevyer, or against the avowant, as the
issue shall be found, for, or against them. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

The Court will not order any thing concerning the increasing or mitigation of
Costs, but the parties are to attend the secondary in it, and to abide by his
order. 13. Nov. 1650. B. S. Except it be in extraordinary Cases.

If a Juror appear upon a trial which is to be at the bar, and the Jury is
adjourned, and he does not again appear, at the day of adjournment he shall
have no Charges allowed him for his former appearance. 2. May 1651. B. S.

Chancery.
A Master of the Chancery, has not power to take an Oath, but in a Cause which
is depending in the Court of Chancery. 21. Car. B. r.

The Chancery is not a fixed Court; neither in respect of the place where it
sits, nor of the time when they may sit; for they may sit out of the Term, and
what place they please. 12. Nov. 1650. B. S. By Roll Chief Justice.

Capias.
A Capias, duly sued out, may be filed afterward. 21. Car. B. r.

Challenge.
When the Jury appear at a Trial, before the Secondary calls them particularly
by Name, upon the panel, to be sworn: he bids the Plaintiff and Defendant, to
attend their Challenges. 21. Car. B. r.

It is not a sufficient cause to Challenge a Juror, because he had delivered
his opinion touching the title of the Land in question. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. Q.
tamen.

If one take a principal Challenge against a Juror, he cannot (afterward)
Challenge that Juror for favor, and waive his former Challenge. Pasc. 23. Car.
B. r.

If the Defendant, do not appear at the Trial when he is called, he loses
his Challenge to the Jurors, although he do afterward appear. Mich. 23. Car.
B. r.

If one Challenge a Juror, and do not make his Challenge good, and after the
Jury is adjourned; he shall not Challenge that Juror again at another day,
except it be for some matter which is happened since the adjournment. Mich. 23.
Car. B. r.

If one Challenge a Juror, he cannot (afterward) have him to be sworn, if the
Secondary have entered the Challenge. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Q. Whether he may
have him sworn if the Challenge be not entered.

It is a good Challenge against a Juror, to say that he was a Juror in a former
trial for the same Land in question, and upon the same title, though the
trial was between other parties. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

When the Array (that is the whole Jury) is Challenged, the Council of the
party that makes the Challenge, must read his Challenge in French: and after he
has so read it, it is to be delivered to the Secondary, who is to read it in
Latin. 6. Nov. 1650. B. S. Which was then done in a Challenge for want of
Hundreders. But now by the late Statute this is to be done in English.

After the foreman of the Jury is sworn, the Array cannot be Challenged. 6.
Nov. 1650. B. S. For then it is too late: for, to Challenge the Array, is to
Challenge the whole Jury.

A Challenge to a Juror for favor, is not accounted to be a principal
Challenge.

If some of the Jury be Challenged for favor, they shall be tried by the rest
of the Jury their companions, upon their Oaths, whether they be indifferent,
to try the matter in question, or not: without going from the bar, when they
have heard all the evidence that is given against them by the Council of the
party that takes the Challenge. 1655. B. S.

In a Case tried at the Bar, between the Earl of Leicester and the Lady Anne
Holborne, a Juror was Challenged, because he was returned by the Name of
Matthew, whereas (in truth) his Name was Mark, although he was (also) called
Matthew, as he affirmed, being examined upon a voire dire, to say what his Name
was; and upon this Challenge the Juror was drawn, and the Jury could not be
taken for want of him, but a tales was granted.

It is neither a principal Challenge, nor a Challenge for favor, to say that
the Juror challenged, was a supernumerary Juror in a former Jury returned for
the same parties, in a Cause betwixt them, and did receive money for his
charges, of the party for whom the verdict passed. By Glynn Chief Justice.

Certiorary.
It is not necessary to have a Judges hand to a Writ of Certiorari, to certify
a Writ of Error. 21. Car. B r.

A Certiorari to remove an Endictment, does lie by the course of the Court,
without moving the Court to it. Mich. 22 Car. B. r.

After a Writ of Error is brought, there must be a Writ of Certiorari directed
to the Court where the judgment was given, for the reversing whereof, the Writ
of Error is brought, to certify the record into this Court. Mich. 22. Car. B.
r.

A Certiorari to remove an Endictment, is good, although it do bear date
before the taking of the Endictment which is to be removed by the Certiorari.
Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the date is not material.

When a certificate of a Record is made out of an inferior Court, they ought to
make the Certifi^ate as they will stand to it at their peril, and it cannot be
afterward amended. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For a Writ of diminution is not
grantable to an inferior Court. Q.

This Court, will upon motion, grant a Certiorari, to remove a judgment given
in an inferior Court, to, the intent, that the Plaintiff may have a Scire
facias against the Defendant, to show cause, why he should not have execution
upon his judgment. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. This was done in the Case of Rooke
against Knight, to remove a judgment given in Dymchurch, a member of one of
the Cinque Ports in Kent: upon the motion of Lancelot Johnson of the Inner
Temple.

The Justices of Assize, may certify to this Court, if a Jury do find a
verdict against the evidence given them. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. That judgment
may not be speedily entered upon such a verdict.

It was doubted, whether a Certiorari do lie to the Cinque Ports. Pasc. 23.
Car. B. r. Notwithstanding, it was done in the Case of Rooke and Knight.

If one party pray a Certiorari, and have it granted, the other party cannot
have another Certiorari. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. viz. For the same thing.

If there be cause to certify the Court touching a custom used in the City of
London, this Certificate is not to be made in wr^ting, but the Recorder of
London is to certify the Custom to the Court, ore tenus, or by word of mouth.
Trin. 23. Car. B. r. But not if the Custom do concern the Lord Major
particularly. By Roll Chief Justice.

When Justices have authority given them by a Statute within a Liberty; a
Certiorari lies to them if the Liberty be not excepted. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

A Certiorari ought to be granted upon a matter in Law only, and not upon a
matter of fact. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Out of an inferior Court, the original Record ought to be certified into this
Court upon a Certiorari, directed to them upon a Writ of Error brought to
reverse their judgment: but the Common Pleas do only certify a transcript of
the Record before them. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

The Pronotaries of the Common Pleas will not make a certificate of any matter
before them unto this Court, without a Rule of this Court to enjoin them. Trin.
24. Car. B. r.

A Certiorari ought to be directed to the Custos brevium, and to be returned by
him, and is not to be directed to his deputy, or returned by him. Mich. 24.
Car. B. r.

A Certiorari does not lie to remove a Cause after a verdict is given in it.
Mich 24. Car. B. r. For then the Cause is determined.

If a Certiorari to certify a Record, be (by some mishap) so torn or defaced,
that the Record cannot be perfectly certified by it, the party may have an
alias Certiorari. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. Upon motion to the Court.

A Certiorari may be granted to remove an Act of Common Council of the City of
London, if the Act be made against the Law. 6. Maii. 1650. B. S.

The Court may grant a new Certiorari, to remove a Record before them upon a
Writ of Error brought, after that in nullo est erratum is pleaded: if it be ad
informandum conscientiam, in affirmance of the judgment: but at the prayer of
the party that brings the Writ of Error, and after in nullo est erratum
pleaded, they will not do it. Trin. 1651. B. r. For judgments are favored in
Law, and are to be supported, as much as justice will permit.

Roll Chief Justice said, That he did not use to grant a Certiorari to remove
an Endictment, but where the party that prays it, does show good cause why it
should be granted, viz. that there cannot be an indifferent trial had in the
County where the Endictment was found. And where he does grant it, he orders
that it shall be tried the next Term following. B. r. 24. Car.

A Certiorari ought not to be granted to remove an Endictment, after the party
endicted has traversed and pleaded to the Endictment. By Roll. Mich. 1654. B.
r.

A Certiorari to remove an Endictment, ought not to be made by any of the
Clerks in the Capital Office, without moving the Judges in it, and obtaining a
Judges hand to it, and a Warrant from the Master of the Capital Office.

Customs.
The Customs of London are confirmed by Magna Charta. C. 9.

Customs which are unreasonable are not good, nor to be allowed. Trin. 22.
Car. B. r.

Any Custom which may be intended to have had a lawful beginning, is a good
custom. 11. H. 7. 14. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

Any thing which may be good and lawful to be done, which had its original
from the Consent and agreement made betwixt parties, may be good and
warranntable to be done by virtue of a Custom. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

By the Custom of London, an Action upon the Case does lie against one for
calling a woman Whore. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. But she must be an Inhabitant of
London. But Q whether it lie or not; for by the Common Law it lies not; and
Bacon Justice thought the Custom not good: And quere it lie for a lodger.

The Customs of the Universities are confirmed by Act of Parliament. Pasc. 23.
Car. B. r.

The Customs of London. if there be a question in this Court, whether there be
such Customs or not, are to be certified by the mouth of the Recorder. Pasc.
24. Car. B. r.

By a Custom which they have in the Town of South-hampton, if a bastard child
be found within the Town, and the father of it cannot be discovered, he that
comes next into the Town, after the Child was found, must keep the Child.
Mich. 24. Car. B. r. It may be they of the Town, did time out of mind agree
amongst themselves that it should be so.

By a Custom of the City of Bristol, an Action brought against one upon a bare
promise of the party, that he would pay the money, or upon a concessit selvere,
is maintainable there: and so it is by the Custom of London. 31. Jan. 1649. B.
S.

If two persons be found in arrear upon an Account grounded upon the Custom of
Merchants, any one of them may be charged to pay the whole sum that both of
them were found to be arrear, upon the account: and this is, by the Custom of
Merchants. 26 Jan. 1650. B. S.

If there be a trial to be had, Whether there be such a Custom as is pretended
with in the City of London or not, this issue cannot be tried in the Upper
Bench, but it must be tried in London in the Hustings. 27. Jan. 1650. B. S.

By a Custom used at sea, the goods in a ship which is taken as prize, ought
not to be taken out of the ship, before the ship so taken be condemned for
prize in the Court of the Admiralty. By Roll Chief Justice, in the Case
betwixt Lever and Smith. Mich. 1654. B. S.

Compulsion.
None shall be Compelled by Law, to show or declare any thing, of which, by
common intendment, he cannot have knowledge. 38. H. 6. f. 3. Mich. 22. Gar. B.
r.

Counsel and Counselor.
A Counselor ought not to set his hand to a frivolus Plea or Demurrer, to
delay a trial. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For it is not fair practice.

After the Court has delivered their opinions of the matter in Law depending
before them; the Counsel at the bar ought not to urge any thing more for the
Clyent in that Cause. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For it is uncivil, not to acquiesce
in the judgment of the Court, but to seem unsatisfied therewith.

One that is endicted for felony, may have Counfell assigned him to speak to
matters in Law, which may arise upon the Endictment. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

One cannot have Counsel assigned by the Court upon an Endictment in forma
pauperis. Pasc. 23. Car. Mich. 1649 B. r. But Counsel must be assigned to him
by warrant under the hand and seal of the Lord Chief Justice, that the Counsel
may have it in his hand to show to the Court if they require.

Where Council is Assigned to one that is Indicted for Felony, the Council
Assigned, ought to be entered upon Record. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

County.
Some part of the County of Chester is not within the County Palatine of
Chester. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Where a River does run betwixt two several Counties, there one half of the
River belongs to one County, and the other half of it belongs the other County.
Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. viz. From the shore to the midst of the River, as far as
the River extends in length upon the County.

Constable.
If one that is elected to the Office of a Constable, do refuse to take his
Oath to serve in that Office, this Court may send forth a Writ unto him, to
compel him to do it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If a Court Leet do not elect a Constable where they ought to elect one, or do
not give him his Oath to execute his Office as they ought to do, the Quarter
Sessions in the County where the Leet lies may do it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

A Constable that is a Constable in one Town, cannot execute the Office of a
Constable in another Town. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

Commission and Commissioners.
The Commissioners of the Statute of Bankrupt have not authority by the Statute
of 1. Jac. to transfer any other Action to any person in order to the recovery
of any of the goods of the Bankrupt, but only such Actions as the Bankrupt
himself might have had to recover them if he had not been found a Bankrupt.
Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

The King may by his Commission make one or more Deputy Escheators, to find an
Office after the death of a noble man, or for some other special cause. Pass.
24. Car. B. r.

A Justice of Assize may have a special Commission to ride the Circuit alone,
but if his Commission be general and according to the Statute, he is to have
an Associat joined with him in the Commission. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

Sessions.
If a Court Leet do not choose a Constable, or do not give him his Oath to
execute his office, the quarter Sessions of the County where the Leet is, may
do it. Mhich. 22. Car. B. r.

If one speak of a thing to be done at the General Sessions of the Peace, it
shall be intended to be meant that it was done at the Quarter Sessions. Trin.
24. Car. B. r. For that is the most General Sessions, being held for the whole
body of the County.

Commitment.
None shall be committed for a contempt done to the Court, if the contempt do
not clearly appear to the Court. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Every Commitment to the Goal, ought to be made by Warrant under the hand and
seal of him that commits the party, and the cause why the party is committed
ought to be expressed in the Warrant. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. This is true of
Commitments made by Justices of the Peace in the Country; but this Court may
commit by Parol.

Contempt.
One may be committed for a Contempt done to the Court, but the matter of the
Contempt must be certain and not doubtful. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

An Attachment lies against one for a Contempt done to the Court. Hill. 22.
Car. B. r.

If the Court make a Rule in an Action of Trespass and Ejectment, that the
Defendant in the Action shall confess the Lease, Entry, and Ouster; and yet at
the Trial the Defendant will not do it, the Plaintiff must proceed
notwithstanding in his Trial; but he may also proceed in this Court against the
Defendant upon his Contempt in not obeying the Rule of the Court. Pasc. 24.
Car. B. r.

If one take out Execution upon a Judgment after that a Write of Error is
brought in this Court to Reverse the Judgment, and after the Writ of Error is
allowed in the Court where the Judgment was given; this is a Contempt to this
Court. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. But it is no contempt if the Roll be not marked, or
notice given to the party of the Writ of Error brought. Mich 1649. B. r.

The Plaintiffs Attorney is not bound to search the Record, whether a Writ of
Error be brought or not, but may take out Execution upon the Judgment given
for his Clyent, if there be not Supersedeas taken forth, or have not notice
given him of the Writ of Error. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

Condition.
There is difference between a Condition which is annexed to an Estate
subsequent, and a limitation subsequent, which is annexed to an Estate
presently vested. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

Causes.
The Clerk of the Court is to enter the causes which do depend in Court in his
book in the Office and out of it he ought to write several papers, viz. one for
every Judge in the Court of those causes concerning which any thing is to be
spoken in Court the next day, and to send the Papers to the Judges severally at
five a clock in the Evening, before the causes are to be spoken unto. Hill. 22.
Car. B. r. That the Judges may have time to advise of them.

Confirmation.
A confirmation of Letters Patents, which are void in respect that they are
against the Law, is a void Confirmation, although it be done by Act of
Parliament; but if they were not against the Law but did only want Law to
Authorize them if they be afterward Confirmed by Act of Parliament, the
Confirmation is good. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

Chattel.
One may by a conveyance raise a Chattel which may be determinable, as well as
it may be done by a last Will and Testament. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

Copyhold and Copyholder.
A Copyholder does forfeit his Copyhold by entting down of the Timber growing
upon the Lands belonging to the Copyhold Tenement. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. Except
it be for reparations of the Copyhold.

Q. Whether the King shall have a Copyhold, which is granted to one in trust
for an Alien. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. It seems he shall.

It is a forfeiture of the Copyhold, for the Copyholder to refuse to pay his
fine, if it be a fine certain, or to refuse to appear at his Lords Court, and
to do his service there. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. But if he refuse to pay a fine
uncertain after it is set, Q Whether it be a forfeiture or not, for the fine
may be unreasonable.

A Surrender of a Copyhold to a use, makes not one a Copyholder, as to a
purchase, but as to descent it is otherwise, 5. Feb. Hill. 1649. B. S. Q.

If a Copyholder for life cut down Trees, the Lord may carry them away. 6. Nov.
1650. B. S.

A Copyhold estate cannot be surrendered to another by an Attorney without Deed,
but one may be admitted to a Copyhold estate by Attorney without a Deed. 2. Ap.
1650, B. S. For there is difference betwixt the passing of an estate, and the
receiving of an estate passed.

Contract.
No usureous Contract can be grounded upon a direct bargain which may either be
accepted or refused by the party. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

If a Contract be usureous, and made, so that the Statute may be avoided, yet
it is a corrupt bargain, and shall be adjudged to be within the Statute. Hill.
21. Car. B. r.

An absolute Contract may be dissolved by Parol if there be a good
consideration for the dissolving of it. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

Every Contract does imply in it self an Assumpsit in Law for to perform the
Contract. 4. Feb. Hill. 1649. B. r.

If I do promise to pay a Debt to I. S. which Debt is owing to I. S. by G. D.
this is nudum pactum for want of a consideration; and if I do not pay it, yet
an Action does not lie against me for not paying it according to my promise. 3.
Feb. 1650. B. S.

Covenant.
If one do Covenant generally to levy a fine of certain Lands, he that does
thus Covenant, is not thereby bound to go before Commissioners Authorized by a
dedimus to take this fine to acknowledge his consent. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If a Lessee for years, Covenant expressly, to repair a house let unto him, and
during his term, the house is burned down, he is tied by the Law to repair or
new build it, whether it be burned by negligence or other ways. Mich. 1649. B.
S.

Consideration.
One may sell his Freedom and Privilege for a consideration. Trin. 24. Car. B.
r. But without a Consideration he cannot part with it so, but that he may recall
his grant of it at his pleasure.

If a Deed of Feoffment be made to two or three of Lands or Tenements, and no
Consideration is expressed in the Deed, for the making of the Deed; it shall be
intended by the Law, that it was made to them in trust for the feoffor. Mich.
24. Car. B. r. For it shall not be intended, he would part with his Land
without a Consideration.

If there be a double Consideration for the grounding of a promise, for the
breach whereof an Action is brought, though one of the Considerations be not
good, yet if the other be good, and the promise broken, the Action will well
lie upon that breach. Trin. 51. B. S. For that one Consideration is enough to
support the promise.

Common and Commoner.
Hoggs are not Commonable Cattle. Pasc. 1650. B. S. Yet by consent of the
Commoners amongst themselves, it is usual to put Hoggs upon Commons and wastes.

A Common which is of late times erected, must be crected by deed. 3. Nov.
1650. B. S.

The Lord of the soil of the Common, may either surcharge or enclose an
overplus of a Common, (that is,) so much of it as is more then needful for the
Commoners to common upon, in regard of the largeness of the Common, and the
small number of the Commoners and of their stock. But if there be not such an
overplus of Common, he cannot surcharge or enclose any part of the Common. 18.
Apr. 1650. B. S. Nor can he erect a Warrein of Coneys upon the Common.

Confession.
If the Plaintiff, in an Ejectione firm, will not fave the Tenant of the Land,
against whom the Actionis brought, harmless from all damages that may befall
him, by reason of the Action brought against him: the Court will suffer the
Tenant to Confess the Action: but if he will save him harmless, the Court will
not suffer him to do it. 12. Nov. 1650. B. S. For as its reason that the Tenant
should not be prejudiced by the suit which concerns him not; so neither is it
reason on the other side, that he should prejudice the Plaintiff, by doing of
that which he receives no just benefit by doing it.

Copy.
If upon a trial you will give part of a Copy of an Office in evidence to prove
a Deed, which Deed is to prove the parties title to the Land in question that
gives it in evidence: If that part of the Office given in evidence, be not so
much of the Office as does any way concern the Lands in question, the Court
will not admit it to be given in Evidence. 28. Apr. 1651. B. S.

The Jury upon a trial at the Bar, may not be admitted to have any Copies of
Deeds or other writings, which were given in evidence unto them, away with them
from the Bar to consider of their verdict; because they are not under seal.
28. Apr. 1651. B. S. But all Deeds or writings under seal and given in evidence
they may have, but nothing which was not given in evidence may they have.

Conveyance.
A Conveyance made unto one by his reputed Name, although he is not the same
person in Law as he is reputed, yet is the Conveyance good: but if such a
Conveyance be made to raise a use, then it is not good. 28. Apr. 1651. B. S.

A Conveyance cannot be fraudulent in part of it, and good as to the rest. 30.
Apr. 1650. B. S. For if it be fraudulent and void in part, it is void in all,
for it cannot be divided.

If I Covenant to Convey Lands to another, I am bound to do it at my own
charges: except it be otherwise agreed betwixt us. Trin. 1651. B. S.

Certificate.
This Court will not make a Rule, for a Judge to make a Certificate to them of a
matter done before them; but if the Judge will do it voluntarily they will
receive it.

Clarke.
By Roll Chief Justice, no Clarke ought to be admitted into the Office of the
Custos brevium, without the consent of the Lord Chief Justice first obtained;
and those that are admitted, ought to be chosen out of the best of the Clarks
in the Upper bench Office. 1655.

Departure.
When the Plaintiff does plead in his Replication, a matter which is contrary
to that which is admitted in his Declaration, this is a Departure from his
Plea. Mich. 24. Car. B. S.

Denison.
An Alien that is made a Denison by the Kings Letters Patents, is thereby
enabled to purchase Lands, but he is not thereby enabled to inherit the Lands
of his ancestors as Heir at Law, but as a Purchaser he may enjoy Lands of his
ancestors. Mich. 42. Car. B. S. But if he be Naturalized by Act of Parliament,
he may inherit them as Heir at Law, as well as have them by purchase.

Delivery.
It has been the course to Deliver a Lease of Ejectment to the party to whom
the Letter of Attorney is delivered, and for the Attorney, by virtue of his
Letter of Attorney, to deliver possession of the Land let by Lease upon his
delivery of the Lease. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

A Deed cannot be Delivered as an escrow to the party himself to whom the Deed
is made. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. But it must be delivered to a stranger as an
escroe, for so soon as it is Delivered to the party to whom it is made, it
takes effect as a Deed, and cannot be an escroe.

Dower.
A woman was not Dowable of Tithes, before the Statute of 32. H. 8. 24. Car. B.
r.

A woman is Dowable of a Common appendant, but not of a Common in gross. Pasc.
24. Car. B. r. For Common appendant belongs to Lands and Tenements whereof she
was endowable, and cannot be severed.

A woman may be endowed of the profits of an Office, or of a Fair, or of a
Market. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

Dower is favored in Law, and as it is favored in it self, so is the party
that sues to recover her Dower favored in her proceedings in Law to recover
it, as much as in jostice may be permitted. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

Difference.
There is a Difference between the Latin words in dilate and immediate, and it
is more proper to direct a Writ to be returned in dilate, then to direct it to
be returned immediate. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For to return it in dilate, is to
retorn it with as much speed as may be, and not to use any trifling excuses or
delays to retard the retorn of it: but to retorn it immediate, is impossible,
for it will require some convenient time to do it in, and as it may fall out,
longer then is expected.

Depositions.
Depositions taken in a Cause depending in Chancery, though the Cause be there
determined or dismissed, may be given in evidence at a trial at the Bar, in a
suit depending here between the same parties that sued in the Chancery: if the
party that deposed to the Interrogatories be dead at the time of the trial,
else not: but those Witnesses must appear in person in Court, and be examined
viva voce in the Cause, and so it is of Depositions taken in any other Court.
Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

Discretion.
Where a thing is left to any person to be done according to his Descretion the
Law does intend it must be done with sound Descretion and according to Law; And
this Court has power to redress things that are otherwise done,
notwithstanding they be left to the Descretion of those that do them. Trin. 23.
Car. B. r. For their Descretion is not properly Discretion, but folly or
madness.

Devise.
A Devise of the profits of Lands for years, is a Devise of the Lands
themselves, for so many years as the profits are Devised. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

If a man Deviss his Lands to his children without fayeing more; this is but a
Devise for life. 36. Eliz. B. r. In Dickons and Marshals Case adjudged. Hill
23. Car. B. r.

A Devise to one of any thing which the Law would have cast upon him, although
it had not been Devised untohim, is a void Devise. Mich. 24. Car. B r. For his
title to it by Law, is his ancient and best title, and the Law will adjudge him
to take by that.

An Administrator of a Term cannot Devise it; but an Executor of a Term may;
for an Executor has a greater interest in his own right, then an Administrator
has. 1651. B. r.

Deodands.
Deodands (that is) the Goods and Chattels, of which felo de se (that is) of
him that kills himself, do belong to the Kings chief Almoner (that is) he that
disposes of the Kings Alms, to distribute them to the poor, or to employ them
in other pious uses, and a discharge given for them to any person that has
such Goods of a felo de se in his possession by the Almoner or his Deputy, is a
good discharge in Law for them; but a discharge given for them by an
under-Deputy, it no good discharge. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

Demurrer.
If a Demurrer be entered, it cannot be waived, except both the Plaintiff and
Defendant do consent unto it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Nor then without leave of
the Court.

A Demurrer may be upon a replication Rejoinder, etc. as well as upon a Plea.
Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For all parts of a pleading to issue ought to be according
to the Rules of Law, and if any part fail, the whole is naught.

If the Court do perceive that a Demurrer is put in only to put off a trial,
or for delaying of the proceedings, they will not allow of such a Demurrer, nor
enjoin the other party to join in the Demurrer, but will give Judgment against
the party upon his frivolous demurrer. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. And 24. Car. B. r.

Where there ought to be alleged a place from whence the venue should come, and
it is not alleged, but omitted, and yet an issue is joined between the parties;
and the veni^e is from the body of the County, the Defendant may Demur upon the
venire facias (if he will) but if he do not Demur, but suffer the trial to
pass, this is a good trial. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For he has slipped his
advantage of Demurrer.

Where a Statute gives leave to plead generally, and the party waives this
leave and pleads specially, the other party may Demur upon his special Plea if
he see cause. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For though he needed not to have Pleaded
specially, yet having done it, the Plea must be good at his own peril.

A general Demurrer does not lie to a Scire facias. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For
it is in the nature of a judicial Writ.

Upon a Demurrer to an evidence given to a Jury at a trial, the Jury are to be
discharged and not to pass upon the trial: But the matter in Law (in question)
upon the Demurrer, is referred to the Judges to determine. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

A Demurrer to an evidence is, when the party that does demurre upon it, does
demand the judgment of the Court, whether the matter given in evidence be
sufficient (admitting it to be all true) to find a verdict for the Plaintiff,
upon the issue that is joined betwixt him and the Defendant. Pasc. 23. Car. B.
r. And when such a Demurrer is taken, the Plaintiff and the Defendant must
agree the matter of fact in dispute betwixt them, otherwise the Court cannot
proceed to determine the matter in Law: but there must be a Venire de novo to
try it. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

The party that is delayed in his proceedings by reason of a Demurrer, may move
the Court, to appoint a short day after to hear Counsel speak to the Demurrer,
and the Court will grant it. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

In a Demurrer upon an evidence, the party demurred unto, may demand judgment
of the Court, whether he ought to join in the Demurrer or not. Trin. 23. Car.
B. r. For, if there be not a colorable matter for to ground the Demurrer upon,
the Court will not force the party to join in it, but will overrule it.

One cannot demurre upon a thing upon which an issue cannot be taken, by reason
of the doubleness, and by consequence, doubtfullness of the matter. Trin. 23.
Car. B. r.

After the Plaintiff and Defendant have joined in the issue which is to be
tried betwixt them; neither of them can Demurre without the consent of the
other. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For, by their joining in the issue, both parties
have admitted the whole pleading to be good as to try the issue.

There must be a special Demurrer to a negative preignance, (that is) a
negative Plea, which does (also contain in it an affirmative, and to an
argumentative Plea, (that is) a Plea, which concludes nothing directly, but
only by way of argument or reasoning,) and to a double Plea, for a general
Demurrer, does admit them to be good. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For is does not show
any fault in them as a special Demurrer does.

One may demurre to a Demurrer for the doubleness of it; but if he that might
demurre, does not demurre to it, but joins in the Demurrer, he cannot demurre
afterward, for he has slipped his advantage, Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

A Demurrer is double, when that he that does demurre, does assign, in his
Demurrer, (for cause of it,) one error in fact, and another error in Law, to be
in the Plea upon which he demurres; which he ought not to do in one Demurrer.
Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

One may demurre to one part of a Declaration, and yet plead to the other part
of it with a Quo ad, etc. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

Discharge.
If an Attachment be granted by the Court against one, and he is thereupon
apprehended, he shall not be discharged upon an affidavit made on his behalf:
but he that is attached, must appear in person in Court, and be there
Discharged. Mich 22. Car. B. r. For it is a personal offense for which he is
attached, and he shall not therefore be discharged, except he yield obedience
in person.

A paroll agreement, before it is broken, may be discharged by paroll or word;
but after it is broken, it cannot be discharged without satisfaction made for
the breach of it. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For by the breach of it, an injury is
done to the party which requires satisfaction. Hill. 20. Car. B. r.

If one be arrested by a Latitat out of this Court, and the Plaintiff do not
declare against him in two Terms after; if the Defendant move the Court that he
may be discharged, because the Plaintiff does not prosecute his suit against
him, the Court will Discharg him. Pasc. 23 Car. B. r. For liberty is precious,
and much favored in Law.

If the Plaintiff, at whose suit the Defendant is in execution, do give the
Defendant leave to go at large (that is) out of prison, the execution is
thereby discharged: and if the Plaintiff do take the Defendant again upon the
same execution, and commit him to prison, the Defendant may bring an Audita
quercla against the Plaintiff, for his illegal imprisoning of him. Mich. 23.
Car. B. r. For it shall be intended, that the Plaintiff had satisfaction upon
the execution, or else he would not have given the Defendant leave to go at
large.

A Prisoner that is committed for Felony, and brought to this Bar by a Habeas
Corpus, cannot be discharged, although the retorn upon the Habeas Corpus be not
sufficient to give the Court satisfaction that he was justly committed, Pasc.
24. Car. B. r.

A Prisoner that is brought to the Bar, to be bailed by a Writ of Habeas
Corpus, if he were committed for matter on the Crown side, he must be brought
into Court on the Crown side, (that is) on that side of the Court where the
Master of the Crown-Office sits; but if he stands committed for a matter
determinable on the Pleas side, he must be brought into Court, to be bailed on
that side of the Court where the Master of the King's Bench Office sits, viz. on
the left hand of the Lord Chief Justice. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

Of later time it has been permitted by the Court to Discharge the bail, if he
bring in the principal before the return of the second Scire facias issued
out against the bail, but anciently it was not so. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

A Judgment cannot be Discharged by pleading a Paroll agreement between the
parties to discharge it. 27. Jan. 1650 B. S. For, matters of record are not to
be wiped off with words.

Disseisor.
If one enter wrongfully into my Lands, and after his entry I accept rent of
him for the Land, I cannot afterward take him for a Disseisor. Trin 24. Car.
B. r. For, by my acceptance of the rent I have assented to his entry.

Distress and Distringas.
The seizing of a stray is not a Distress of it, for he that does seize it
claims a property in it 21. Car. B. r. And no man can Distrain that which is
his own, for to Distrain, is but to take one thing from another, and to put it
into the custody of the Law, as a pledge for another thing which is due to him
that does Distrain, from him that is distrained.

An amercement lies not against a Sheriff out of his Office, for a misdemeanour
done by him, whilst he was in his Office; but a Distringas, nuper Vicecomiti,
lies against him for it. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

The Writ of Venire facias, for the Sheriff to summon a Jury, is retornable by
him into the Court: and upon the return made of it by him, there issues out of
the Court another Writ called a Distringas Juratores, to cause the Jury to
appear in Court at the trial of the Cause, if the trial be at the Bar in this
Court, or at the Assizes in the County where the Action lies, if the trial be
to be there. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

The Writ of Distringas Jurators, ought to be delivered unto the Sheriff so
timely, that he may warn the Jury to appear four days before the Writ is
retornable, if the Jurors live within forty miles of the place of trial, and
eight days if they live further off. 13. May. 1651. B. S.

Discontinuance.
A Discontinuance in process is helped, if there follow a verdict in the cause,
and the party do also appear upon the verdict. 21. Car. B. r. Q. Whether every
discontinuance of process may be thus helped.

Where a Vouchee may be essoigned, and the essoigne is not adjourned, this is a
Discontinuance: but where it is not necessary the vouchee should be essoigned,
there the want of adjournment of the essoigne, makes no Discontinuance. Hill.
22. Car. B. r.

An appeal may as well be Discontinued by the defect of the process or
proceeding in it, as it may be by insufficiency of the original Writ. Hill. 22.
Car. B. r.

The Plaintiff cannot Discontinue his Action after a general verdict found
against him, nor after a special verdict is found upon matter of Law, arising
upon the evidence given at the trial in the cause. 22. Car. B. r.

The Plaintiff may Discontinue his Action by the leave of the Court, after he
has joined in demurrer with the Defendant,; paying Costs to the Defendant, if
the demurrer was only upon matter of form in the pleading: But if the demurrer
was as well upon matter of substance as upon matter of form, there he cannot
Discontinue his Action by leave of the Court, Mich. 24. Car. B. r. Except the
Defendant will consent unto it.

A discontinuance of an Action or Suit, is not a perfect Discontinuance, until
it be entered upon the Roll: but if this Discontinuance be to be pleaded, it is
not necessary to plead the entry of it. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

Where a Demurrer is a general Demurrer, whereas it ought to have been a
special Demurrer; this is a Discontinuance, and there can be no judgment given
in the case upon such a Demurrer. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

After a Demurrer upon an Arbitration pleaded, it is not usual to Discontinue
the Action. Mich 24 Car. B. r.

Demand
Where there is a Demand of a thing to be made, there the Demand must be a
Legal Demand, (that is) it must be made in such manner as the Law requires;
otherwise he that made the Demand, can take no advantage in Law upon this
Demand. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

If there be no place expressed in a Deed, where a rent for Land, or a nomine
poenae, or any other thing demandable shall be made, the Law does then direct,
that the Demand shall be made upon the Land, etc. out of which the rent, or
nomine poenae, or other thing demandable do issue or go out of. Hill. 21. Car.
B. r.

A Demand of a rent reserved upon a Lease made of a Message with Lands
belonging to it, ought to be made at the Message; because the Message is the
most eminent part and place of the thing let, and most notorious for the Lessee
to take the best notice of the Demand. 21. Car. B. r. For the Lessee shall be
presumed to be more conversant there then in any other place. Yet if the Demand
were made upon any part of the Land, and the Lessor can prove that the Lessee
was there and took notice of it, I suppose it is a good Demand: but if he were
not there when the Demand was made, Q. wheth^r it be a good Demand.

The parties bringing of an Action of Debt for moneys due upon an Obligation,
and the taking of a distress for rent by him unto whom the rent is due, is a
good Demand in Law of the Debt due by the Obligation, and of the rent. Trin.
22. Car. B. R.

A Demand in a precipe to recover Lands, ought to be more certain than a Demand
in a Writ of Dowr. 18. Nov. 1650. B. S. For Dowr is one of the things favored
in Law.

Declaration.
A Declaration may be against one that is in custody of the Marshall of this
Court upon an information, although he do not appear to an Action. Hill. 21.
Car. B. R.

The Plaintiff is not compellable to file his Declararation; yet if it be not
filed, and afterward judgment is given in the Cause, the judgment is erroneous
for want of a Declaration. Hill. 21. Car. B. R. For before it is filed it is
not upon record, and so there is no Declaration to warrant the judgment.

If the Plaintiffs Attorney do file a Declaration against the Defendant in the
Kings Bench Office, the Defendant is bound to take notice of the Declaration at
his peril. 21. Car. B. r.

A Declaration ought not to vary or differ from the Plaint, that is, the Cause
which the Plaintiff does express in his Writ why he brings his Writ. 21. Car.
B. r. For the Writ is the ground of the Declaration, and that which warrants it.

If the Plaintiff declare against the Defendant upon a corrupt Contract made
against the Statute of 21. Jac. made against Usury, he must express in the
Declaration, that the Defendant corrupt agreavit, or else he must show, that
the Contract was made pro usura, contrary to the Statute. 21. Car. B. r. For he
must pursue the words of the Statute.

One may not Declare against one that is in the Kings Bench prison, that is not
either in custodia Mareschalli, or that has not filed his bail, or that is not
a privileged person in this Court. 21. Car. B. r.

If one be in custody of the Marescall of this Court at the suit of J. S; or
have put in bail in this Court to the Action of J. S; any other person may put
in a Declaration against him, the same Term he was committed, in custody, or
did put in bail as aforesaid. 21. Car B. r.

If the Plaintiffs Attorney deliver a Declaration to the Defendants Attorney,
and after does amend his Declaration, and tenders another Copy to the
Defendants Attorney, viz. as he has amended it; the Defendants Attorney is not
bound to receive it, except the Master of the Office do order him to receive
it, or that the matter be moved in Court, and thereupon the Court do order him
to receive it Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

The Plaintiff in this Court is not bound by the Law to Declare against the
Defendant, within three Terms next after his appearance in Court to the
Plaintiffs Action; but if he do not declare against him in three Terms next
after, the Plaintiff must then take common bail of him. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.
and Mich. 1650. B. S. For it shall be presumed, if there had been cause for
special bail, the Plaintiff would not have been so dilatory in his
proceedings, and besides the Defendants imprisonment is made longer by the
Plaintiffs delay, and is considerable.

A Declaration must be certain, and the Court is not to take things in it by
implication; and also if it be not certain, the Defendant cannot make a direct
answer unto it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. and Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. As he ought to do.

The Plaintiff is to enter his Declaration in the Office, and all Copies which
are made of it, and the record it self of the Cause, ought to be directed and
warranted by it. 22. Car. B. r.

If an Action upon the Case be brought upon an Assumpsit, the Plaintiff must
declare upon the whole promise made, and not upon part of it, else the
Declaration is not good. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Where the Plaintiff does declare upon a Will, or upon Letters of
Administration, he ought to set forth the Probate of the Will, and the Letters
of Administration granted unto him, in his Declaration, otherwisy the
Declaration is not good, but the Defendant may demurre upon it. Mich. 22. Car.
B. r. For without showing them, they do not entitle themselves to the Action
brought, nor make themselves persons enabled by Law to bring the Action.

If a Declaration be defective in matter of form only, and the Defendant does
take no exception against it, but pleads to issue, and a verdict is thereupon
found for the Plaintiff, the Defendant cannot afterward take advantage of this
defect in the Declaration, for the defect is helped by the verdict: but if the
Declaration be insufficient in matter of substance, the verdict will not help
it, but the Plaintiff may take advantage of the insufficiency of it after a
verdict. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

All matters which do lie in the cognizance of the Court, ought to be set forth
certainly in a Declaration; but it is not necessary to set forth certainly
matters of fact which are tryable by the Jury. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

If the Plaintiffs Attorney cannot find the Defendants Attorney, to deliver a
Declaration unto him, he may deliver the Declaration into the Office, and that
shall be accounted a good delivery of it; so that if the Defendant do not plead
according to the Rules of the Court, judgment may be entered against him. Pasc.
23. Car. B. r. For it is intended, that Attorneys ought to attend in the
Office, and there to inform themselves in the proceedings of their Clyents
Causes. Q. Whether if he can find him, whether he must deliver the Declaration
unto him; for the Court held he need not, but Hodsden the Secondary held the
contrary.

A thing that is good and warrantable to be put in a Writ, is good and
warrantable in a Declaration. Trin. 23. B. r. For the Declaration is grounded
upon, and warranted by the Writ.

If there be words in a Declaration which have no signification, the words
shall be adjudged to be void words, and shall not hurt the Declaration, but the
Declaration shall be taken, as if those words were left out of the Declaration.
Hill. 23. Car. B. r. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

A Declaration in English is not good, for all pleadings in Law, ought by the
Statute to be in Latin. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. But this is now altered by a late
Statute, which does exact, that all proceedings in Law shall be in English.

An Audita quaerela, and a Scir facias, are in the nature of a Declaration.
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For they do set forth at large the cause of the Plaintiffs
Action.

Declarations which are grounded upon original Writs, as all Declarations in
the Court of Common Pleas are: if they be faulty, they cannot be amended, but
Declarations grounded upon a Bill, as the Declarations in the Court of the
Kings Bench are, are amendable, if they be faulty. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

If a Declaration be drawn in one Term, but is not delivered to the Defendants
Attorney that Term, but is delivered unto him, before the first Essoine day,
of the next Term after, this shall be accounted, for a Declaration of that
Term when it was drawn, and not of that Term when it was delivered. Trin. 24.
Car. B. r. For before the Essoine day, the Term as to such purposes, is not
said to be begun.

A Declaration may be filed in the Office, many years after it was first drawn:
if it appear that it was only the Attorneys neglect that it was not filed as
it ought to have been. 24. Car. B. r. 19. Apr. 1648. B. r.

If bail be filed for the Defendant, the Plaintiff may declare against him, in
any other matter besides the matter that is contained in the Writ brought by
the Plaintiff against the Defendant. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

The Defendants Attorney is not bound to receive a Declaration against his
Clyent in the vacation time. Mich. 1650. B. S. For proceedings in Law ought to
be in the Term time.

A Declaration delivered with a Ly lo, is in the language and meaning of
Attorneys, such a Declaration that is delivered, with leave for the Defendant
to emparle until the next Term. Hill. 1649. 12. Feb B. S. The words by Ly lo,
do mean Licentia inter loquendi, which is as much as leave to emparle, or to
advise and speak with his Clyent to know what he should plead for him.

When one is arrested by a Latitat, or Bill of Middlesex out of this Court, he
is not said to be in custody of the Marshall, until he has put in bail to the
Plaintiffs Action, and the bail be filled: and if from that time, the Plaintiff
do not declare against the Defendant in three whole Terms after, which he
cannot be compelled to do, then he must accept of common bail, and discharge
the former bail. Trin. 1650. B. S.

The Plaintiffs Attorney is not bound to give a Copy of the Declaration against
the Defendant, to the Defendants Attorney. 13. Novem. 1650. B. S. For the
Defendants Attorney may take a Copy of it out of the Office, where the
Declaration is filled. Yet they usually do it.

It is not necessary for the Plaintiffs Attorney, to set his hand unto the
Declaration, which he delivers to the Defendants Attorney: but the Defendants
Attorney must receive it without his hand set to it: If he know him to be the
Attorney in the Cause. 28. Novem. 1650. B. S.

If one be in custody of the Marshall of this Court, any person may put in a
Declaration against him, and the Declaration so put in, is a good Declaration,
and the party must plead unto it, although he be illegally in custody, for the
Court will not trouble themselves to enquire how the party came into Prison.
Pasc 1652. B. S.

If a Prisoner be brought into the Court of the upper-Bench by a Writ of Habeas
Corpus, to answer a Suite there depending against him, a stranger cannot
declare against him there upon the by, until he be in custody of the Marshall:
but he that brought the Prisoner thither, by the Habeas Corpus may declare
against the Prisoner in Court, before he is turned over in custody to the
Marshall. Pasc. 1652. B. S.

One ought not to declare against a Defendant in this Court, until his bail be
filed. By Roll Chief Justice. Pasc. 1652. B. S. That is, if he do put in bail.

Duty.
The words foris faceret, may create a Duty. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. For the party
to whom a thing is forfeited, has an intrest in the thing forfeited, before he
recovers it.

Damages.
Damages ought not to be given for that which is not (at all) contained in the
Plaintiffs Declaration: or for that which is immaterially alleged, or against
Law: but only for that which is materially alleged, and set forth in the
Declaration. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. 23. Car. B. r.

Where an Action upon the Case, and an Action of trespass, are both founded
upon one and the same Damage done to the Plaintiff, he may recover joint
Damages upon both the Actions. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

Where a trespass, for which an Action is brought, is entire, and not several
trespasses, there ought not to be several Damages given against the
Defendant. Mich 21. Car. B. r.

Where one joint Action of trespass is brought for two several trespasses, and
the trespasses are found severally, the Damages may be several: but, if one
Action of Trespass be brought against three Trespassers, and two of the
Trespassers against whom the Action is brought be found guilty, and the third
is found not guilty, there the Damages may notwithstanding be entire. Mich.
22. Car. B. r. For the trespass is but one joint trespass, though the Action be
brought against diverse persons: But in the former Case, there are several
trespasses found, and so the Damages may be several, though the Action be a
joint Action.

In an Action upon the Case, the Jury may find less Damages, then the
Plaintiff lays in his Declaration: but they cannot find more then is laid in
the Declaration. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the Law presumes, that the Plaintiff
does best know how much he is damnified by the Defendant: and therefore, though
it may be, the Plaintiff will pretend he is more damnified then in truth he is,
(as is often done,) yet it shall not be presumed that the Plaintiff will say he
is less damnified by the Defendant, then in truth he is. And therefore, for the
Jury to give more Damages then the Plaintiff declares upon, would be
unreasonable, which the Law will not suffer.

Double Damages given for one and the same Trespass, are not well given. Mich.
22 Car. B. r. For the Law uses to proportion the amends or satisfaction for an
injury done, according to the loss which the party to whom the injury is done,
does receive by the injury.

Upon a judgment given upon a demurrer, upon an Action of the Case, the Court
is not to assesse the Damages, but the Jury is to do it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.
For the Court gives the judgment upon the matter in Law, but the Damages are
to be given upon consideration of the matter of fact, which is proper only for
the Jury to enquire of.

In an Assize, the Jury ought to give Damages pending the Suit, because there
is no remedy over to the Damages, as in an Ejectione firmae, but final
Damages are to be given. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Upon a demurrer to an evidence, the Court did direct the Jury, who should have
tried the issue, if the demurrer had not been, to find Damages for the
Plaintiff, if upon arguing the demurrer the Court should give judgment for him.
Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For the Jury may consider of the matter in fact, which
should have been tried, if the evidence had not been demurred unto.

Where Damages are found severally, the Plaintiff may relinquish part of the
Damages, and enter his judgment for the rest. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. But where
the Damages are entire, he may not do it without leave of the Court. Pasc. 24.
Car. B. r. and 19. Ap. 1648.

The Jury ought to find Damages in a special verdict found in an Action of
Trespass and Ejectment: for until the Plaintiffs Title is found, which is not
done by the special verdict, the Plaintiff shall be accounted a Trespasser
against the Defendant; because the Defendant was in possession of the Land,
when the Plaintiff entered and made the Lease of the Land. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.
For he that is in possession of Land, has title to it against all the world,
until a better title is proved. Melior est conditio possidentis.

Where a debt sued for, does appear certainly to the Court what it is, there if
the Plaintiff recover, the Court does tax the Damages, and not the Jury: but
where it does not appear certainly to the Court, there it is left to the Jury
to enquire of and to tax them. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

A Writ of Enquiry of Damages in a Cause tried in the Mareschals Court, may be
executed by the Judges in the Court there. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

Greatr Costs and Damages may be given in some Cases, then the Damages laid
in the Declaration. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For the Plaintiffs Declaration is only
for the Damages due unto him, by reason of the injury done him by the
Defendant. But the Costs are given in respect of the Plaintiffs expenses in his
suit to recover the Damages.

In a Replevin brought, and a special verdict thereupon found, Costs and
Damages shall be given on either side, according as the issue shall be found.

If a judgment be given upon a nihil dicit, in an Action of Debt brought in the
Common Plea^, that Court will give Costs and Damages, and so is it used to be
done in inferior Courts. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. But Q whether it be so inthis
Court.

If entire Damages be given in an Action brought for diverse several things,
whereas it is not possible to have Damages for some of them, the Damages
shall be accounted to be given for those things only for which Damages may be
given, and the expressing the other things shall be accounted idle and void.
Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If an Action of Trespass be brought, and the Defendant pleads, and the
Plaintiff joins issue with the Defendant, and after issue joined he is
nonsuit, he shall pay the Defendant Costs, for his false vexation of him, by
the Stat. of 4. Jac. And upon very good reason; For it shall be intended, that
if he had had good cause of Action against the Defendant, that he would not
have become nonsuit.

When a judgment is given by default, then the Court does assesse the Damages,
and not the Jury. Mich. 1649. B. r. For there is no issue tried.

If an Action of Trespass be brought against diverse persons, and some of them
plead to issue, and others do not, and the issue is found for the Plaintiff,
and Damages are given as well against those that joined not in the issue, as
against them that joined in the issue; these Damages are well given. Mich.
1649. B. S. For the Trespass is found, and that the Plaintiff was damnified so
much by reason thereof.

If Damages be assessed, and it is not expressed that they are assessed, pro
Misis and Custagiis, this is erroneous; for it does not appear by the Record,
for what the Damages are assessed as it ought to do. Hill. 1649. 31. Jan. B.
S. For Records ought to be certain and not ambiguous.

All Costs are given ex assensu partium, (that is) by the consent of the
Plaintiff and the Defendant. By Woodward Clarke. Hill. 1649. 4. Feb. B. S.

If the Defendant, whose title is concerned, in an Ejectione firmae, will not
defend his title to the Land in question, and the verdict do pass against the
Plaintiff, the ejector may release the Damages. 11. Feb. Hill. 1649. B. S. For
they do properly belong to hi^.

One that sues in forma pauperis, if the Cause go against him, yet he shall pay
no Costs, if he were admitted to sue in forma pauperis, in the suit which
passes against him, before the suit began: but if he were admitted to sue in
sorma pauperis, pendente lite, (that is) whilst the fuit depended, he shall pay
Costs. By Roll Chief Justice: who said, it had been so (anciently) held and
ruled. 16. Nov. 1650. B. S. But Q what Costs, whether the Costs of the whole
suit, or only with relation from the time he commenced his suit, to the time he
was admitted to sue in Forma pauperis.

In a Writ of Dowr, if the Plaintiff recover, and yet does not desire a Writ of
enquiry of Damages to recover the Damages, the Court may tax the Damages. 5.
Feb. 1650. B. S.

The Court may increase the Damages, which are found by the Jury, upon a Writ
of enquiry of Damages, in an Action of Assault, Battery and Wounding; if they
see cause, upon the view of the party that was beaten and wounded. Trin. 1651.
B. S. This was done in the Case of Davis Plaintiff, and the Lord Foliot
Defendant.

The Court will not compel the party that is nonsuit in a Cause, to pay his
Costs upon the nonsuit; but if the party will not pay them when they are
taxed, the Court will not suffer him to commence his suit again until he have
paid them. Pasc. 1652. B. S.

After judgment is given in a Cause depending in this Court, the Court cannot
make a Rule for the payment of the Costs which were expended in prosecuting the
suit. By Roll Chief Justice. 1655. B. S. For after judgment, the parties are
out of Court, for the Cause is determined. Q.

No other Costs or Damages shall be given upon a Recovery, in an Action
brought upon the Statute of 2o Edw. 6. for not setting forth of Tithes, than
the Damages which are expressed in the Statute, which is treble damages.
1655. B. S. For the course of the Common Law, in such cases is altered by the
Statute, and it shall be intended, that the Plaintiff has better satisfaction
thereby.

Deputies.
The Common Law does in many Cases take notice of Deputies, but it does never
take notice of under-Deputies. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. As of the Undersheriff,
who is but the Sheriffs Deputy, sub-Almoner, or Deputy-Almoner. For in many
Cases, an Officer may be Law make a Deputy; but a Deputy has no power to
depute another under him.

The King by his special Commission may make Deputy Escheators, to find an
Office, after the death of an Honorable Person. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. As of a
Duke, Earl, Marquess, Viscount, Baron, etc. Q. Whether in some special Case,
he may not do it after the death of one that is not of the Nobility. It seems
he may.

Default.
Before a verdict is taken by Default, the Crier of the Court does call the
Defendant three times; and then if the party do not appear, the Plaintiffs
Counsel does pray the verdict may be so entered. Hill. 21. B. r.

Debt.
An Action of Debt does lie against the Husband, for goods which were delivered
as sold unto the Wife, because the Law does intend, that they were employed and
came to the use of the Husband. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. And the Husband and Wife,
are but one person in Law.

If there be an erroneous judgment given for the Plaintiff in a personal Action
in the Common Pleas, and thereupon he brings an Action of Debt against the
Defendant upon the erroneous Judgment in this Court, the Action will well lie
here, until the Judgment in the Common Pleas be reversed by a Writ of Error.
21. Car. B. r. For an erroneous Judgment is not void but voidable. But when it
is made void by a Writ of Error, then there is no ground to support the Action
of Debt, so that then it cannot be maintained.

If one do assume upon a consideration, moving from I. S. to perform a thing
which concerns A. B. and do not perform it, I. S. may bring an Action of Debt
upon the Assumpsit against him, that did so assum upon himself. Mich. 22. Car.
B. r. For the Action is grounded upon the promise made, and the not performing
it to I. S. to whom it was made.

In some Case, an Action of Debt will ye, though there be no contract betwixt
the party that brings the Action, and him against whom the Action is brought.
Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

An Action of Debt lies against a Sheriff for moneys which he has levied by
virtue of a Writ of fieri facias, for the party that did recover the moneys;
for the Law does create a privity by the fieri facias, betwixt the Sheriff and
the party that sued out the fieri facias. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If An Action of Debt be to be brought against an Administrator for Rent which
was due by the Intestate upon a Contract made betwixt him and the Intestate in
his life time; the Action must he brought in the County where the Contract was
made; but if an Action of Debt be brought against an Administrator for Rent due
for Lands, left by the Plaintiff to the Intestate, but growing due in the time
of the Administrator, viz. since the Letters of Administration were granted
unto him the Action must be brought in the County where the Lands do lie for
which the Rent is due. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

An indebitatus assumpsit, generality is not good to create a Debt, but there
must something else be made appear to the Court to make a Debt to be due to the
party that brings an Action of Debt, or else the Action will not lie. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. For else to declare upon an indebitatus assumpsit, is no more then
if the parties declared upon a nudum pactum.

An Action of Debt does lie for a Councellor, or for an Attorney for their Fees
against the party that retained them. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Q. Whether it lie
for a Councellor for his Fee, is honorarium Quiddam, and not mercenarium, a
Gratuity rather then Wages or a Salary. By Roll Chief Justice.

An Action of Debt does lie upon a perfect Contract in Law betwixt the parties,
and not an Action upon the Case. 22. Car. B. r. For generally where the Law
directs a certain Action, there an Action upon the Case is not to be brought.

An Action of Debt brought against an Executor, for Rent grown due in the time
of the Executor, ought to be brought in the detinet and debet. Hill. 22. Car.
B. r. So then said to be adjudged in Royton and Mees Case. But if the Action be
brought for Rent due in the life of the Testator, the Action ought to be
brought in the detinet only.

Where a certain sum of money is to be paid upon an Obligation at several days
of payment, expressed in the Condition of the Obligation, though the money be
not paid accordingly, yet an Action of Debt cannot be brought for any part of
this money until all the days of payment expressed in the Obligation be past.
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Because the penalty of the Obligation is to be recovered
which is not wholly due until the whole Condition be broken, which is not so
until the party fail in the last day of payment.

If one deliver necessaries to an Infant, viz. meat, drink, or clothes, and he
promise to pay for them, an Action of Debt will lie against the Infant upon,
this promise if he perform it not. But if the party come to an account with the
Infant forwhat is due unto him from the Infant, and thereby does state the sum
due unto him, an Action of Debt does not lie against the Infant for the moneys
stated to be due unto the party upon this account. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If a woman sole be indebted, and then take a husband, the Debt is now thereby
become the Debt of the husband and of the wife; that is to say, the wives
proper Debt and the husbands Debt in the right of his wife, and the wife ought
to be sued for this Debt together with her husband, and if the husband dye,
whereby the Action is abated, yet the wife may be sued again for this Debt.
Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

A Judgment was Reversed in this Court by a Writ of Error, because it was
given to recover a Legacy. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For then a Legacy was not
recoverable at the Common Law, but in the Eclesiastical Court or in the
Chancery. But now by a late Statute an Action lies for a Legacy at the Common
Law. See the Statute.

An Action of Debt does not lie upon a Judgment given in this Court after the
Record thereof is removed by a Writ of Error out of this Court into the
Exchequer Chamber. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

An Action of Debt does not lie against an Executor which is grounded upon a
simple contract made by the Testator. Hill. 1649. Jan. 31. B. r. Q.

And Action of Debt does lie against a Jailer for suffering a prisoner in
Execution to escape, by the party at whose Suit the Prisoner was committed in
Execution. Trin. 1650. B. r. 15. Junii.

One may bring an Action of Debt for Rent in what County he pleases. 9. Nov.
1650. B. r. Because it sounds not in the realty. Q.

If a judgment be given for the Plaintiff, in an Action of Debt in the Common
Pleas, and afterward the transcript of the Record is removed into this Court
by a Writ of Error, yet the Plaintiff for whom the Judgment was there given,
may bring an Action of Debt there, upon that Judgment; but if the Judgment be
Reversed in this Court upon the Writ of Error, and after the party proceed in
the Common Pleas in his Action of Debt, the party against whom he thus
proceeds, may bring his Audita Querela to be relieved against this second
Action. 3. Feb. 1650. B. S. For by the reversal of the Judgment the ground of
the second Action is destroyed.

One may join two Debts due upon two several Obligations, from the same party
in one Action of Debt. 6. Feb. 1650. B. S. And declare in one Declaration upon
the several Obligations.

If one do deliver goods to I. S. to my use, if the party to whom they were
delivered, do refuse to deliver them unto me, I may have either an Action of
Debt or an Action of Account for them, against him to whom there were delivered
at my election 22. Ap. 1651. B. S.

Deeds.
Such construction ought to be made of a Deed, that it may agree with the
intent of the parties to the Deed, if their intent do not contradict the Rule
of Law. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

A Deed of Indenture made betwixt two, ought to be Sealed and Delivered by both
parties to the Indentures, otherwise it cannot be said to be a Deed indented.
Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

If all the parts of a Deed may by Law stand together no one part of that Deed
shall be so interpreted as to make either the whole Deed or any part of it to
be void. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

A Deed cannot be delivered as an escrew to the party himself, who is to take
by the Deed. Trin. 24. Car. B. r 1650. Trin. B. S. For the delivery of it makes
it the parties Deed.

If a Deed do say, This Indenture made, whereas the Deed is not endented, yet
it may be a good Deed, for it may work as a Deed Poll, though it cannot work as
an Indenture.

If it do not appear by the Fabric of a Deed, that Lands do pass by the Deed,
by way of Feoffment; yet the Land may pass by it by way of use if there be a
consideration, which is sufficient in Law to raise a use expressed in the Deed.

Ejectment.
IF one Seal a Lease of Ejectment to try a title of of Land, it is not
necessary to give notice of the sealing of this Lease unto him whose title is
concerned, but it is sufficient to give notice of the Lease to the Tenant or
Undertenant of the Land in question. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For the possession of
the Land is primarly in question in this Action, and is to be recovered and not
the title of the Land, though the title of the Land do come in question and is
tried collaterally. But now by the new way of practice, it is not usual to Seal
any Lease of Ejectment at all in an Action of Trespass and Ejectment, but the
Plaintiff that intends to try the title, delivers a Declaration to an Ejector
of his own making, and that Ejector sends or delivers the Declaration to to the
Tenant in possession, who gives notice thereof to his Lessor, whose title is
concerned to defend the title, and if neither the Tenant in possession, nor his
Lessor will defend the title, then the Ejector will confess a Judgment to the
Plaintiff, and so the Tenant will be stripped out of possession, but if they or
either of them will defend the title, then it is usual for them to move the
Court that they may be made Ejector to defend the title, which the Court will
grant if they will Consess, Lease, Entry, and Ouster at the trial, and stand
merely upon the title; and if at the trial they do not, then Judgment to be
entered against the Plaintiffes Ejector.

If one do do occupy the Lands in question in an Action of Trespass and
Ejectment, after the Ejectment Lease made to try the title of the Land is
Sealed; this is an Ejectment in Law of the Lands in question. Trin. 22. Car. B.
r. For the keeping of possession of the Lands against him to whom they are let
by the Lease does amount to an Entry upon him, although he was never in
possession of the Land let.

If there be two Ejectors made in an ejectione ^irmae, one of them may be found
guilty of the Trespass and Ejectment; and the other, as the case may fall out
may be acquitted. Trin. 22. Car. B. r.

An Ejector in Law is any person that comes upon any part of the Land. etc. in
the Ejectment Lease although it be by chance, and with no intent to disturb
the Lessee of the possession next after the Sealing and Delivery of the
Ejectment Lease; and such an Ejector is a good Ejector, to bring an Action of
ejectione firmae against, to try the title of the Land in question. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. 1650. B. S. And there is no prejudice to any person by having such
an Ejector.

He that is to try a title of Land by an Action of Trespass and Ejectment,
ought not to make an Ejector of his own against whom he may bring his Action,
or to consent, or agree with one to come upon the Land let in the Ejectment
Lease, with an intent to make him an Ejector, and to bring his Action against
him. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For by that means the Tenant in possession of the
Land, was often put out of possession, by a Writ of habere facias possessionem,
without any notice given either to him or his Lessor of the Suite. But now this
is altered by the new way of practice formerly mentioned.

In every ejectione firmae, the Plaintiff ought to set forth in his
Declaration, in what Parish the Lands in question do lie, that the venue may be
from the place where the Lands do lie, and not from the body of the County,
except it be when as the Lands in question do not lie in any Vill or Hamlet.
Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Or lieu Conus, for in all such causes, it is of necessity
that the Jury be of the body of the County because there is not any more
particular place from whence the venue may come.

If one doclare upon a Lease, in an ejectione firmae, and that by virtue of
that Lease, he was in possession of the Lands thereby let unto him, until that
he was Ejected by the Defendant, it is supposed that the Lessor that made the
Lease unto him was alive at the time when he brought his Action. Mich. 22. Car.
B. r.

An Ejectment or an Ouster, is either an actual Ejectment, as when the Lessee
is actually put out of the Land let unto him, or else it is an Ejectment by
implication of Law. Pasc. 22. Car. B. r.

An ejectione firmae ought to be brought for a thing that is certain, and not
of an uncertain thing. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For if the thing be uncertain, the
Sheriff cannot if the Plaintiff recover, know of what to deliver the possession
upon the Writ of habere facias possessionem.

If the Plaintiff in an ejectione firmae, do declare for a house lying in two
Parishes, if the house do lie in either of the Parishes, and do not lie in both
of them, yet is the Declaration good. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For there is
certainty enough in it.

Although in an ejectione firmae there be a Verdict and a Judgment against the
Plaintiff, yet the Plaintiff may bring another Action of Trespass and Ejectment
for the Land. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. He may bring diverse Actions one after
another if he please, for a Judgment in that Action is not final.

By Roll Chief Justice, It is doubtful whether an ejectione firmae do lie de
uno crofto. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For the incertainty of the word Croft, what it
is, and what it does contain.

If a Lease of Ejectment, to try the title of Lands in the possession of I. S.
be made to one, and after the Lease is made, the Wife of I. S. or the servant
of I. S. do keep the possession of the Land for I. S. and I. S. do after this
occupy the Land, I. S. is an Ejector against whom an Action may be brought to
try the title of the Land. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. 24. Car. B. r. Pasc.

One who has title to the Land in question in an ejectione firmae, may upon
motion to the Court be made a party to the Action, that he may thereby defend
his title, if he will confess the Lease, Entry and Ouster. Hill. 23. Car. B. S.
Vid. Supra.

If a Lease of Ejectment be made of a house and lands, occupied with it, to try
the title of them, and the wife of the occupyer of the house and land, continue
in possession of the house, after the Ejectment Lease is made, she is an
Ejector, as to the house, but not as to the Lands. Pasc. 1652.

He who is in any part of a Message, viz. in the Barn, Stable, Stall, etc.
after the Lease of Ejectment Sealed and Delivered to try the title of the
Message. is an Eject or for the whole Message. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

The owner of the Land may consent with the party that claims the Land to make
an Ejector to try the title of it, if it be not a plot betwixt him and the
Ejector. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. viz. To strip the Tenant of the Land in
possession, out of his possession of it; for the Law does not countenance fraud.

If diverse persons come together upon the Land in question, next after the
Ejectment Lease, to try the title of the Land, is Sealed and Delivered; it is
in the election of the Plaintiff that intends to try the title, to bring his
Action against which of them he pleases. 1650. B. S. For if the Plaintiff have
right, they be all Trespassors, and it is no wrong to bring the Action against
any of them.

If a Lease of Ejectment be made to one to try a title of a house, and the
Lessee to whom the Lease is made, go into the Entry of the house, to make his
Entry by virtue of the Lease, and one that is in the house shut an inner door
of the house, and keep the Lessee out of an inner room of the house; this is
not an Ejectment, nor is that person such an Ejector as an Action may be
brought against. Mich. 1650. B. S. For when he is entered in at the door of the
house, he is in possession of the house, and is not Ejected out of it, though
he have not possession of the whole house.

An ejectione firmae does not lie of a close of land without expressing either
the name or the nature of the Land. Hill. 1649. 30. Jan. B. S. Because it is
not known certainly what is meant by a Close without some description of it,
either by its name or nature. It was then said an ejectione firmae, does lie of
a Croft of Land, sed Q for it was formerly doubted.

If one Seal a Lease of Ejectment, and do thereupon give his Less possession
of the Lands let, and the Lessee is not ejected at that time, the Lessee may
enter into the Lands again at another time, and if the Lessee be then Ejected,
he may bring an Action of Trespass and Ejectment upon this Ejectment. Pasc.
1650. B. S. 10. Maii.

An ejectione firmae does lie of a Cottage. Pasc. 1650. 12. Maii.

Evidence.
The Allegation of the Council at the Bar, is no Evidence to the Jury, but the
matter which ensues upon this Allegation, to prove it is good Evidence upon a
trial at the Bar. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Witnesses who are to be made use of, to give their Testimony at a trial at the
Bar, if by reason of sickness or otherwise they be not able to travel and come
to the trial, may by order of the Court be examined upon Oath touching their
knowledge, in the Country where they live; and their Depositions so taken are
to be admitted to be read as Evidence to the Jury at the trial. Mich 22. Car.
B. r.

Depositions taken in Chancery, may be order of the Court be read as Evidence
to a Jury upon a trial at the Bar by the Plaintiff, or the Defendant, or both,
if the Depositions were taken in the cause which is to be tried at the Bar, and
between the same parties that are Plaintiff and Defendant in the trial. Mich.
22. Car. B. r. And so it is of Bills, Answers, Replications, etc. in Chancery.

But if the parties that Deposed in Chancery be living at the time of the
trial, they ought to be examined ore tenus in Court, and their Depositions are
not in such case to be made use of. Pasc. 1650. B. S.

The admittance of one to be an Administrator in an inferior Diocese, is a Bar
against the person that does so admit him to give Evidence at a trial, that the
Intestate had not bona not a bilia in diverse Diocesses at the time of his
death. Mich. 22. Car B. r. For such Evidence would be contrary to what he has
formerly admitted.

The Court will not permit the Jury upon a trial at the Bar, to carry any
wrightings with them out of the Court, as Evidence for them to consider of, but
such as are under Seal, and have been proved in Court. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For
others are of no credit.

An Evidence given to a Jury, may be answered by the Council, either by
confessing and avoiding it, or else by encountering the Evidence given, with
giving stronger Evidence and of greater credit on the other side. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r.

A thing which is concluded in the Ecclesiastical Court which does concern
Lands, is not to be given in Evidence to a Jury at a trial concerning those
Lands. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the Courts of Common Law are not to be guided
by their proceedings.

A person that may be admitted as a Witness, at a trial may give words in
Evidence to the Jury which were spoken to him by another person, who by the
Rules of the Court might not be admitted as a Witness at the trial. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. For it is but matter of Evidence and is left to the Jury how far
they will give credit to them.

It is not of necessity that a Deed or a Record given in Evidence to a Jury, be
showed in Court; but if it be proved that there was such a Deed, or such a
Record as are given in Evidence, it is sufficient. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For a
Deed or a Record may be imbezled or l^st, and so not to be produced.

The Judges of the Court cannot try a matter of Fact in question, upon a
Demurrer to an evidence; and therefore the Plaintiff and the Defendant must
agree upon it and confess it. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For else the Court will not
proceed to deliver their opinions touching the matter in Law Demurred upon.

Matter in Law ought not to be given in Evidence at a trial, but only matter
of Fact is to be given in Evidence, and the matter in Law, if there be any that
is disputable, is to be reserved to be spoken to in Arrest of Judgment. Trin.
23. Car. B. r. For the Jury are only to try matters of Fact.

If a Fem Covert acknowledge a thing at a trial, which is for the advantage of
her husband, but is for her own disadvantage, yet this is no good Evidence to a
Jury, Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For her husbands present advantage, is Hers also,
and is more looked upon then her future disadvantage.

The Defendants Council ought to conclude by way of answer to the Evidence that
is given unto the Jury by the Plaintiffs Council. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For if
the Plaintiffs Council does begin the Evidence, it is reason the Defendant
should speak last, because he is upon the defensive part, and is to give an
answer to all that is said against him in matter of Evidence, but the
Plaintiffs Council is to sum up his Evidence last to the Jury.

An ancient writing that is proved to have been found amongst Deeds and
Evidences of Land may be given in Evidence to a Jury, although the executing of
it cannot be proved. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. For it is very hard to prove things
that are very ancient, and the finding them in such a place, is a presumption,
that they were preserved as things of value and to be made use of.

A writing that is permitted to be read, to prove one part of an Evidence given
to a Jury, may be read to prove any other part of the whole evidence to be
given. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

If the Plaintiff or Defendant will give some part of an answer in Chancery in
Evidence to a Jury, the Court may order that the whole answer be read. Mich.
24. Car. B. r. That the Court and the Jury may the better consider what it
makes to the Evidence, and it may be if part only be read, it may prove good
Evidence for the party, whereas the whole answer taken together may be against
him.

He that takes out a Copy of part of a Record, out of any Office, with intent
to give the Copy in Evidence to a Jury, must take out so much of the Record, at
least, as does any ways concern the matter in question at the trial, or else
the Court will not suffer such Copy to be read in Evidence to the Jury. Pasc.
1650. 2. Maii. B. r. For if it be not so taken out, it cannot be sworn to be a
true Copy of so much of the Record as concerns the matter in question, which is
to be done before it can be read.

A transcript of a Record which is in another Court, or an Enrolement of a Deed
may be given in Evidence to a Jury. Mich. 1649. B. S. For they are things to be
credited, being made by Officers of trust.

Upon a trial at the Bar, the Council of that party who does begin to maintain
the Issue, that is, to be tried whether it be the Council of the Plaintiff, or
the Council of the Defendant ought to conclude the Evidence. Pasc. 1650. 1.
Maii. B. S.

If any one of the Jury that is sworn to try the Issue, be desired to give his
Testimony concerning some matter of Fact that lies in his particular knowledge,
and concerns the matter in question as Evidence, to his fellow Jurors, the
Court will have him examined openly in Court upon his Oath, touching his
knowledge therein, and he is not to deliver his Testimony in private unto his
fellow Jurors. 31. Oct. 1650. Mich. B. S. For the Court and Council on both
parts, are to hear the Evidence as well as the Jury.

In the case of Miller Plaintiff, and Collumbine Defendant, upon a trial at the
Bar, in an Action of Trespass and Ejectment. It was said by Roll Chief Justice,
That an Office which is found after the death of one that died Seized of Capite
Lands, in a County wherein the Lands found in that Office, do not lie, but in
another County, may notwithstanding it was not found in the County where the
Lands do lie, be given in Evidence to a Jury that is to try the title of those
Lands, if there was a special Livery granted unto the Heir of those Lands.
1654. B. S.

The Jury may view Depositions taken in Chancery, if they be exemplified under
the great Seal, and they may also have them with them from the Bar, to consider
of as part of the Evidence; but if they be not exemplified under the great
Seal, they may only look upon them at the Bar, but not have them with them out
of Court. 1655. B. S.

If one do produce a Lease made upon an Out-lawry, in Evidence to a Jury to
prove a title; he must also produce the Out-lawry it self, but if he produce
the Lease to prove other matter, he needs not to show the Out lawry, but may
have the Lease only read in Evidence, and so it is of an extent without
showing the Statute or Judgment on which the extent is grounded. So held in a
trial at the Bar between Johnson and Spencer. Pasc. 1655. B. S.

By Glynn Chief Justice, it was said, That all the Judges have agreed, that
upon the Meal Act, the Defendant shall give matters in Evidence to the Jury
which do only tend to prove the Issue in question, and no other matter. Trin.
1655. B. S. For that act is so mischeivous, that it is no way to be favored.

Emparlance.
If the Plaintiff do amend his Declaration at any time after it is delivered to
the Defendants Attorney, or after it is filed in the Office in any thing that
is matter of substance, the Defendant may by the Rules of the Court, Emparle to
the next Term after that the Declaration is so amended, if the Plaintiff do not
pay costs to the Defendant for his amendment; but if the Defendant do accept of
Costs of the Plaintiff, then the Defendant cannot Emparle. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

In what Term soever a declaration comes in against the Defendant, the
Defendant may by the Rules of the Court Emparle to the next Term after, before
he can be compelled to plead. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the Law does not force
any one to do any thing rashly and without advice, but gives the party time to
deliberate what to answer for himself.

Where the Defendants Case does necessitate him to plead a special Plea, and
the matter is difficult which is to be pleaded; the Court upon a motion made to
inform them of it, will, if the Defendant desire it, grant him longer time to
Emparle and put in his Plea, then otherwise by the Rules of the Court he ought
to have. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

Where the Plaintiff does keep any Deed or Writting, or other thing from the
Defendant, which does belong unto him, and whereby he is to make his Defense,
and is disabled by the detaining thereof to plead for his best advantage; the
Court upon motion and information thereof, will grant an Imparlance to the
Defendant, until the Plaintiff do deliver it unto him, and a convenient time
after, till he can draw up his Plea. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For the Law does give
every Defendant convenient time to make his best defense.

If the Plaintiff alter the venue from the place where he first laid it, the
Defendant may Emparle to the next Term after. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For thereby
he may be forced to alter his Plea.

If the Plaintiff do declare against the Defendant, but does not proceed
further thereupon for three whole Terms after, the Defendant may Emparle to the
next Term by the Rules of the Court. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

If the Plaintiff amend his Declaration, and pay Costs to the Defendant, the
Defendant may not Emparle, but if the Plaintiff give the Defendant a new
Declaration, or do so amend the old Declaration, that it is upon the matter a
new Declaration, then the Defendant may Emparle. Mich. 1654. B. S.

By Roll Chief Justice, If the Plaintiff and the Defendant have proceeded so
far, as to Issue in the Cause, and after that the Defendant do amend his Plea,
the Defendant shall pay the Plaintiff Costs, yet the Court will not grant an
Emparlance unto him, although the cause be not entered in the Judges book for
trial, if there be warning given to the Defendant of the trial. 1655. B. S.

Executor.
If one be indebted to I. S. in a certain sum of money, and I. S. makes his
Will, and devises this debt due unto him, unto A. B. and makes I. L. his
Executor and dies; this debt devised unto A. B. must be paid unto I. L. the
Executor, and not to A. B. the devisee. Mich. 22. Car. B. R. For the Executor
and not the Devisee can give a sufficient discharge for this debt.

If a Scire facias, be brought against an Executor, to show cause why he should
not pay a Debt unto the Plaintiff recovered against the Testator; the Executor
cannot plead fully Administered, but he must plead that no goods of the
Testators are come to his hands whereby he might discharge the Debt. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. For he may have fully Administered, and yet be liable in Law to pay
the debt demanded upon the Scire Facias.

An Executor which has Administered goods of the Testator as Executor, or that
is Executor of his own wrong, by disposing of the goods of the party deceased,
without authority given unto him, cannot waive a term of years for Land, etc.
of which the deceased dyed possessed of. Mich. 23. Car. B. R. For he h^th
charged himself to be answerable to all persons concerned, as far as the
deceased parties personal estate will amount unto. But if he have not Assets,
he may waive the Term. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

An Executor of his own wrong, is not by Law chargeable for more then the value
of the goods of the deceased does amount unto, and which did come unto his
hands, and with which he has intermedled. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

The word Executor, is a word collective, and does comprehend in it, the
Executor of an Executor. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For he is accountable for the
first Testators goods.

An Executor may recover a duty which was due to the Testator, although the
Executor was not named in the creation of that duty. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For
he represents the very person of the Testator.

An Execut or may be charged upon a Collateral promise made unto the party by
the Testator, if the promise was broken in the life time of the Testator, else
not. Mich. 149. B. S. And 16. April. 1650. B. S.

Escape.
An Administrator may bring an Action of Escape, for an Escape suffered of a
Prisoner of the Intestate in his life time. Trin. 23 Car. B. r.

An Escape in one place is an Escape in all places, so that for an Escape, the
party whose prisoner is escaped, may bring an Action for this Escape in what
County he pleases, for the Action is not Local or fixed to any certain place.
Trin. 24. Car. B. r. But transitory.

Endictment.
An Endictment that is framed upon a Statute, ought to pursue the words of the
Statute. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

The Justices of Assize will stay the proceedings against a person for a thing
done by him, during the time of war, and in relation to the war. Trin. 23. Car.
B. r. For Indictments are to be preferred against persons that act any thing in
the disturbance of a peaceable and settled Government.

If any one be perjured in an Affidavit made in any Court of Record, touching
any Cause depending in that Court, an Indictment may be preferred against him
for this perjury upon the Statute. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

An Indictment of forcible Entry, does not lie upon the Statute of 8. H. 6.
against one for entering forcibly into a Copyhold, but an Endictment does lie
in such a Case, by the Statute of 21. Jacob. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

Although exceptions be taken against an Endictment, to the intent the Court
should quash it, yet the Court will grant time to maintain the Endictment unto
the Kings Council, if they desire it. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

The Court does not usually quash Endictments for perjury, although the
Endictments be faulty, but will put the party to plead to the Endictment. Hill.
23. Car. B. r. For perjury is counted a great offense, and therefore the Court
does not favor such offenders.

An Endictment ought to be more certain then common pleadings in Law need to
be. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

An Endictment ought to express the year of our Lord in which it was taken.
Hill. 1649. 30. Jan. B. r.

If an Endictment be drawn so general and so uncertain, that the party
Endicted cannot tell how to make a certain answer unto it, such an Endictment
is not good, but may be quashed. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

If a word be left out in an Endictment, which is but only in matter of form,
yet the Endictment is good, but if be in matter of substance, it is not good.
Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If one be Endicted for doing of any thing, for which he is not by the Law to
be Endicted for, as for the enclosing of a Common, or some other Trespass for
which an Action at the Common Law, is to be brought; such an Endictment is not
good, but may be quashed. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

If one do interrupt a long continued possession of Lands by an unlawful means,
and the person that is so interrupted of his possession, do regaine his
possession by unlawful means also, yet an Endictment of forcible entry does not
lie against him for doing thereof. Mich. 24. Car B. r. For the Law favors long
possessions, and does not countenance the disturbers of them.

In most Cases the Endictment for a Fact done, ought to be laid in that County
where the Fact was done. But this holds not in all Cases. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.
And Mich. 25. Oct. 1650. B. r.

If one be Endicted at a Sessions in London, or in any other County, and the
party Endicted, do remove the Endictment by a Certiorari into this Court, and
do not thereupon quash the Endictment, the party that did remove it, ought by
the Rules of the Court, to try the Endictment at his own costs the next Term
after that the Indictment is removed. 13. Nov. 1650. B. S.

Exposition.
The best Exposition of the Starute Law, is to be had by the consulting with
the makers of them, and how they did in their times interpret them. Hill. 23.
Car. B. r. For they knew best for what end they made the Statutes.

Contemporarea expositio legis est optima.

The word videlicet in a Deed, is put to expound or make plain the premises of
the Deed in which it is put, and therefore that which it brings in, ought not
to be contrary to it, for if it be, the videlicet is void. Pasc. 23. Car. B r.

If all the words of a Deed can stand together without any absurdity, the Law
will make such an exposition of them, that the whole Deed may be good in Law.
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

Election.
An Action of Trespass upon the Case, or an Action of Trespass vi and armis, may
be brought against one that does rescue a Prisoner, at the Election of the
party who is damnified by this rescous. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Yet the judgments
are different in these two Actions.

Where one may bring an Action of Wast, for Trees cut down upon his Land, it is
at his Election to bring an Action of Wast, or else an Action of Trover and
Conversion for the Trees. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. But both he cannot bring.

An Action upon the Case, or an Assize, does lie against him that does
surcharge a Common, at the Election of him that is injured thereby. Mich. 1649.
B. S.

If a Prisoner escape, that lies in prison upon an execution; an Action of Debt
lies against the Jailer that suffered this escape, for the party at whose suit
he was in execution: but if he were not a prisoner in execution, and do make an
escape, it is in the Election of the party at whose suit he was a prisoner,
either to bring an Action upon the Case, or an Action of Debt against the
Jailer for this escape. Trin. 1650. 15. Junii. B. r.

If the Plaintiff amend his Declaration, it is at his Election, either to pay
the Defendant Costs for this amendment, or to give the Defendant an emparlance
to the next Term after the amendment; and the Defendant cannot hinder this
Election. 7. Feb. 1650. For the Defendant is at no prejudice by it.

Estople.
A recital in an Obligation is an Estople, against which he that made the
Obligation shall not be permitted to plead any thing to the contrary, if an
Action be brought against him upon this Obligation. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For
that were to contradict his own act and Deed.

If one enter into an Obligation by the title of an Esquire, whereas in truth
he is a Knight; if an Action be brought against him upon this Obligation, and
he is named an Esquire, he shall be Estopped to say in his Plea, that he was
not an Esquire, but a Knight, at the time he entered into the Obligation, in
abatement of the Writ. Hill. 1649. B. S. For constat de persona, that he was by
his own admission the same person that entered into the Obligation; and did then
admit the title of Esquire to be his true addition.

Where one has liberty to confess and avoid the matter which the Plaintiff
does set forth in his Declaration against him, there he cannot be Estopped to
plead such matter for his defense. 29. Jan. 1649. Hill. B. S.

Extinguishment.
If one have used to hold a Court by Custom (as by Law he may) if he do
afterward purchase Letters Pattents, to enable him to hold this Court; he has
thereby extinguished the Custom, and must now hold the Court by virtue of his
Letters Pattents. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. For the party has thereby waived the
Custom, and has made Election to hold his Court by another Authority.

Error.
If a Writ of Error be brought to reverse a judgment, and afterward this Writ
of Error is discontinued for want of prosecution of the party; yet execution
cannot be had upon the judgment, until this discontinuance of the Writ of
Error be certified from the Court where the Writ of Error is discontinued, unto
the Court where the judgment was given. 21. Car. B. r.

If a Writ of Error be brought merely to stop execution upon the judgment
given, and without any probable matter of Error to be alleged against the
judgment, and this does appear unto the Court where the Writ of Error is
brought; the Court will not hinder execution to be awarded upon the judgment,
notwithstanding the bringing of the Writ of Error to reverse it. 21. Car. B. r.
For the Law does require speedy justice to be done.

The assignment of the general Error upon a Writ of Error brought, is to say,
that the Declaration was insufficient, and that judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, whereas it ought to have been given for the Defendant, and such like
general frivolous matters, without alleging any particular colorable matter
of Error in the judgment. 21. Car. B. r.

A Writ of Error does lie for one that is committed by a Justice of the Peace,
for a forcible entry committed by him. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. For the commitment
is grounded upon a judgment given by the Justice against the party committed.

All parties that are grieved by an erroneous judgment, may join in a Writ of
Error to reverse the judgment: but persons that are not damnified by it, cannot
join with others that are damnified by it, to reverse it. Mich. 22 Car. B. r.
For the Law will not, favor any to sue who have no cause.

The Bail cannot join with the Principal in a Writ of Error, to reverse a
judgment given against the Principal. 22. Car. B. r. For the principal must
reverse the judgment alone if it be erroneous, because it was only given
against him, and not against the Bail.

Errors to a judgment ought to be assigned upon the Record. 22. Car. B. r.

No person shall be compelled to bring a Record into the Court, to make an
Error in another Record. Mich. 32. Car. B r. for the Law does favor matters of
Record, and will affirm them rather then question them, without apparent cause
shown.

If a judgment given in an inferior Court be entered in this manner, ideo
confideratum est, and the words per curiam, are omitted, as they ought not to
be the judgment is erroneous: but if a judgment given in a superior Court, viz.
in any of the Courts at Westminster be entered, and the words per curiam are
omitted, yet the judgment is not erroneous. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For inferior
Courts, are tied to observe their ancient forms of proceedings, and not to vary
from them.

He that has obtained a judgment, if he find that it is Erroneous, may move
the Court to have it reversed for his own dispatch; which the Court will do
when they are satisfied what the Error is. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For till such a
judgment is reversed, (...) Plaintiff cannot bring a new Action for the same
Cause for which that judgment was given: for if he should, the Defendant may
plead the judgment in bar of his second Action.

If the Defendant, after judgment given against him, do bring a Writ of Error
to reverse the judgment, but does not, certify the Record into this Court in
reasonable time, the Court will grant that the Defendant may have execution
upon the judgment; but he is not bound to certify the Record the same Term in
which he brings his Writ of Error, but if he do it the next Term after, it is
sufficient. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If a judgment be given in any of the Cinque Ports, if the Defendant will bring
a Writ of Error to reverse it, he must bring his Writ of Error before the
Warden and Constable of Dover, and not in this Court. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. This
is one of the Privileges that belong unto those that inhabit within any of the
Cinque Ports, or members thereof.

If an erroneous judgment be given in any of the Sheriffs Courts of the City of
London, the Writ of Error to reverse this judgment, must be brought in the
Court of Hustings before the Lord Major, Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For that is the
Superior Court.

A Writ of Error that is brought in the Parliament, is made retornable
immediately. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

A Writ of Error to reverse a judgment, ought not to be brought before the
judgment is signed. Pasc. 23. Car. For before it is signed it is not judgment,
and the Writ of Error runs thus, Si judicium sit redditum. Yet it is usual to
do it in inferior Courts.

Q Whether the Heir may bring a Writ of Error, to reverse an erroneous Judgment
given in a personal Action, which Judgment does charge the Lands of the Heir,
Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

He that brings a Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment ought by the Statute to
put in good Suerties to pay the debt recovered and the charges of the
Judgment, and those that shall be caused by bringing the Writ of Error; in
Case the Judgment shall be affirmed and not reversed upon the Writ of Error.
Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For it is reason the party should have recompense for his
causeless vexation and delay.

When a Writ of Error is brought to reverse a Judgment, the party that brings
the Writ must cause the Roll where the Judgment is entered to be marked,
whereby the other party may take notice upon Record, that the Writ of Error is
brought; and this marking of the Roll is a Supersedeas in it self, to hinder
Execution to be taken out upon the Judgment, but if the Roll be not marked,
Execution may be taken out upon the Judgment, notwithstanding the Writ of
Error; but if Execution be taken out after it is marked, the party grieved may
have a Supersedeas, quia erronice emauavis, to make void the Execution. Mich.
23. Car. B. r.

It is not usually for the Court of Common Pleas, upon a certiorari, directed
to them upon a Writ of Error brought to reverse a Judgment given in that Court
to Certify the Record into this Court; to Certify the Original Writ, upon
which the Action was commenced there, for that Writ is to remain with the
Custos brevium of that Court. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

A Writ of Error is not to be brought in Parliament to reverse a Judgment given
in the Common Pleas, but the Writ of Error ought to be brought in the Court of
the Kings Bench. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

The Chief Justice only, and not any other of the Judges of the Court ought to
allow a Writ of Error that is brought. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

If a Judgment given in this Court be erroneous in matter of Fact only, and
not in matter in Law, a Writ of Error may be brought, in this Court where the
Judgment was given to reverse it; and it it is not necessary to bring a Writ of
Error in Parliament; but if the Judgment be erroneous in matter in Law, then a
Writ of Error cannot be brought in this Court to reverse it. Pasc. 24. Car. B.
r. 1650. B. S. For error in fact is not the error of the Judges, and therefore
the reversing of a Judgment given by them which is only erroneous in matter
of fact, is not the reversing their own Judgment, but it is otherwise if the
Judgment were erroneous in matter in Law.

A Writ of Diminution in a Writ of Error, ought not to be granted to be
directed to an inferior Court. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If he that does bring a Writ of Error, do discontinue his Writ, before the
Defendant in the Writ of Error do plead unto it; he may have a new Writ of
Error, but if he discontinue his Writ, after the Defendant has pleaded to it,
he cannot have a new Writ. Mich. 1649. B. S.

If by any possibility there may be supposed to be error in the Record, any
person that may be damnified by this error may bring a Writ of Error to reverse
it, Hill. 1649. B. S. For although he be not named a party to the Record, yet
the Law has made him a party to it, by subjecting him to damage by it, and it
is therefore reason he should be permitted to use all lawful means to defend
himself from it.

A Judgment may be an erroneous Judgment, although it be not given for the
Plaintiff, but the Defendant is thereby acquitted; for it may be erroneons in
the entry of it, for it may it is entered with a Capiatur against the Plaintiff,
whereas it ought to be in Miserecordia pro falso Clamore. Hill. 1649. B. S.

A Writ of Error is not like another Writ, for a Writ of Error may be abated as
to one person, and yet may stand good as to another person, and so cannot
another Writ. But if the Writ of Error be brought in a Case where it will not
lie, it must be abated in the whole. Hill. 1649. B. S. 27. Jan. For there is no
ground for the Writ.

All the parties, privies to the Record may join in a Writ of Error to reverse
it, if it be erroneous. Hill. 1649. B. S.

A Writ of Error may be brought to Reverse a Judgment before a Writ of Enquiry
of damages, which Issues out upon the Judgment, be executed. Hill. 1649. 2.
Feb. B. S.

Q. The party who is to have benefit by a Judgment, may bring a Writ of Error
to reverse it, as well as the Defendant. Hill. 1649. B. S. 4. Feb.

If a Writ of habere facias possessionem, to deliver possession to the
Plaintiff, of Lands recovered by him, in an ejectione firmae does contain in it
more Acres of Land, then were contained in his Declaration the Writ is
erroneous; but if the Sheriff do deliver possession of more Acres of Land then
are contained in the Writ, this does not make the Writ erroneous; but there an
Action upon the Case does lie against the Sheriff for doing it, or an Assize
may be brought against him, that has the possession delivered to him, for the
Surplusage of the Land delivered unto him. 18. Nov. 1650. B. S.

A Writ of Error ought to mention before whom the Judgment was given for the
reversing whereof it is brought. 31. Jan. 1650. B. S.

A Writ of Error which is brought to reverse an Out-lawry, was wont to be
signed by the King. Q. Who shall sign it now, whether the Parliament or not? 3.
Feb. 2650. B. S. But now I suppose it shall be signed by the Protector.

If Judgment be given upon a matter, which does arise out of the jurisdiction
of the Court where the Judement is given, this is an erroneous Judgment. 3.
Feb. 1650. B. S. For such a Judgment is given coram non judice, and so is
void in toto.

If a Judgment be entered quod recuperare debeat, a Writ of Error cannot be
brought to reverse this Judgment; for it is not a perfect Judgment, for the
Judgment ought to be quod recuperet in the Present Tense. 10. Maii. 1651. B. S.

A Writ of Error does lie for the husband to reverse an Out-lawry against his
wife. 10. Maii. 1650. B. S. For his own interest is concerned in it.

If there be two Writs of Error brought to reverse one Judgment, and one of
the Writs is good, and the other is erroneous, the Court will take that which
is good without any consideration had of the other, if it be to affirm the
Judgment. Trin. 1651. B. S. For the Court does not favor overthrowing of
Judgments.

Entry.
If one Enter into the house of another without his consent, although the door
of the house was open when he Entered into the house, yet this is a forcible
Entry. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. Because it is against the will of the possessor of
the house.

Words alone cannot make an actual Entry and Ouster, although they be violent
and threatening, but there must be force used by the party to make it so. Mich.
1650. B. S. For the word Ouster does implye a violent act to be done, and not
words spoken only.

If he who has right of Entry into a Free hold in question, do Enter into part
of it, this Entry shall be accounted an Entry in all that part of it, which is
in the possession of one Tenant, but if there be several Tenants possessed of
the Freehold in question, there must be several Entrys made upon the several
Tenants, but if he who has no right to Enter does Enter, he shall gain title
to no more by his Entry, then that part only, whereupon he did make his actual
Entry. 8. Nov. 1650. B. S.

If one do make an Entry into Lands, etc. in the possession of another, and he
upon whose possession, the Entry is made, do notwithstanding such Entry
continue in possession of the Lands, etc. with his servants and cattle, such an
Entry is to no effect to gain the possession, but if upon the Entry his
servants and his cattle be Ousted from the Land, he that is thus Entered upon,
must prove that after this he did again make an actual Entry into the Lands, or
else he shall not be judged to have regained his possession. 25. Ap. 1650. B.
S. For there must be an actual re-entry to gain the possession against an
actual Ouster.

A special Entry into a house with which Lands are occupied by claiming the
whole is a good Entry, as to the whole house and Lands to reduce the title to
him that makes this special Entry from him that was in possession of it, and
upon whom he entered. Trin. 1651. B. S.

If one do live in the house with his father, and do continue in the house
after the death of his father who dyed in possession his continuing there,
shall not be said an Entry to avoid an estate in the house. Pasc. 1652. B. S.

If one will disclaim a Suit, he that does disclaim, must enter his disclaimer
upon Record. 1652. B. S. Or else the Court cannot take notice thereof.

Examination.
A witness that is to be at a trial to testify his knowledge there ought not
to be examined in any matters concerning the trial before the trial, except the
Plaintiff and the Defendant do agree thereunto. Hill. 1649. B. S.

It is usual in the Court of Common Pleas, when a Fem Covert levies a fine, for
the Judge to examine her, whether she do it willingly or no, before they take
the fine; which they will not take without her free consent. But where a Fem
Covert suffers a recovery, she is not examined. But Roll Chief Justice said,
That he does always examine a Fem Covert that comes before him to suffer a
recovery. 8. Nov. 1650 B. S. For the mischief may be as great by the not
examining of her in the one case as in the other.

If a Copy of a Will to be made use of at a trial be to be Examined in the
Prerogative Office, it ought to be Examined by the Original Will there, if the
Original Will be in the Office, and not by the Register Book there where the
Will is entered. 23. Ap. 1651. B. S. For the Will may be misentred there.

By Glynn Chief Justice, The Custos brevium ought to examine the Issue to be
tried with the Plaintiffs Attorney before the trial. Trin. 1655. B. S. That the
trial may not miscary, by reason of some slip in the making up the Issue.

Engagement.
A Merchant stranger is within the Statute made for the taking the Engagement.
18. Nov. 1650. B. S. That Statute is now taken away.

Exemplification.
One may Exemplify a Deed (that is) make a Copy of it under the great Seal in
Chancery, and so he may a Bill answer and Intergatories in Chancery, and other
proceedings there, and such an Exemplification is Authentic, and may be given
in evidence to a Jury upon a trial. 13. Maii. 1651. B. S.

A Rulle made in the Common Pleas may be Exemplified in that Court. By Pinsent
Preignotary, and the Court there. 1651. C. B. Q. Whether the like may not be in
this Court of the Upper Bench.

Exigent.
An Exigent against two which is returned in these words, Non Comparuerunt, and
the words Nec aliquis little comparuit, is erroneous and to be reversed. 21.
Car. B. r. For if any one of the two do appear upon the Exigent, he that
appears ought not to be Outlawed, and so the return is uncertain.

Endictment.
When an Endictment is special, the Evidence given upon the trial of this
Endictment, must prove this special matter, and maintain the Endictment, but if
it be a general Endictment, it is not so. 21. Car. B r.

An Endictment must be certain that the party Endicted may know how to plead to
it, or traverse, or else it is not good, but may be quashed. Hill. 21. Car. B.
r.

An Endictment ought to be in Latin, or else it is not good, but may be
quashed, except it be an Endictment taken before Commissioners of Sewers, which
may be in English. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. But now since the late Statute made for
all proceedings in Law to be in English, all Endictments must be in English.

The Parish in which the fact was done, for which the party is Endicted, ought
to be named in the Endictment. 21. Car. B. r.

An Endictment does lie against one that speaks blasphemous words. 21. Car B.
r. It lay then at the Common Law, but now by a late Act, it lies for speaking
of some blasphemous words named in that Act. But Q Whether it now lie at the
Common Law for speaking any other blasphemous words, not mentioned in the
Statute.

An Endictment for a nuisance does lie against the owner or proprietor of a Ship
that is sunk in a Haven or port. 21 Car. B. r. For thereby the trade of that
place where the Haven or that Port is, is hindered, and also navigation.

An Endictment that is framed upon a Statute ought to pursue the words of the
Statute, or else it is not good. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the offense being
made by the Statute, for which the party is Endicted, it is reason the Statute
should be punctually recited.

One that is convicted upon an erroneous Endictment cannot move after his
Conviction to have the Endictment quashed, but must bring his Writ of Error to
reverse the Judgment given against him upon the Endictment. Mich. 22. Car. B.
r. For after Judgment it is too late, for an Endictment is quashed for the
insufficiency in it, or because no good Judgment can be given upon an
erroneous Endictment.

The Court will not quash an Endictment, that is preferred for the public
good, although it be not a good Endictment, but will put the party Endicted to
traverse it, or to plead unto it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For it is by the favor
of the Court, that any Endictment is quashed, for if the Court please, they may
force the party to traverse or plead.

An Endictment removed by a Writ of Certiorari into this Court, may be sent
back again into the County or place, whence it was removed, if there be cause
to do it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If an Action upon the Case be brought against one for calling another Theif,
and the Defendant does justify the words, and upon the trial it be found for
the Defendant, an Endictment may be forthwith framed against the Plaintiff to
try him for the Felony. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the Felony appears to the
Court by the Verdict found for the Defendant.

An Endictment does lie against one that cheates another at play with false
Dice. Hill. 22. car. B. r. Or for any other way of cheating at play or
otherwise.

An Endictment does not lie for a private nuisance or other injuries, because
the nuisance or injury done, is not made ad commune nocumentum, but ad privatum,
and therefore an Action upon the Case does only lie for the party that (...)
damnified by this nuisance or injury. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. 11. Maii. 1651. For
Endictments are to punish public offenses only, and done against the public
peace.

An Endictment lies against one for assaulting and stopping of another in his
passing in the Highway. 22. Hill. Car. B. r.

One that it Endicted for Felony, may have Council Assigned him to speak for
him. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. But such Council are only to speak for him in matter
of Law, and not concerning matters of Fact.

Although a Bill of Endictment be preferred to a grand Jury upon Oath, yet they
are not bound to find the Bill, if they find cause to the contrary, and on the
otherside, although a Bill of Endictment be preferred unto them without Oath
made, yet they may find the Bill if they see cause. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. But it
is not usual to prefer a Bill unto them, before Oath be first made in Court.

Every Endictment ought to be preferred against the party for some offense
committed by him, either against the Common Law, or against some Statute. Trin.
23. Car. B. r.

There ought to be fifteen days between the preferring of an Endictment and
the convicting the party Endicted. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. Q. In what cases, for I
conceive it holds not in all.

An Endictment lies against one that makes a false oath, in an answer to a Bill
in Chancery, or in an Affidavit made in a cause depending there, or in any
other Court of Record. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. But Q. for what false oath made in
an answer it lies, for it has been held, that though the whole answer be not
in all points true, yet an Endictment lies not, because answers in the Chancery
are drawn by Council, and not the party himself.

Where the party Endicted is Outlawed upon the Endictment, the Court will not
quash the Endictment, although it be erroneous, but will force the party
Outlawed, to bring his Writ of Error to reverse the Out-lawry. Mich. 23. Car.
B. r.

An Endictment may be amended the same Term it is brought into the Court by the
Clerk of the Peace, but the next Term after he cannot amend it. Pasc. 24. Car.
B. r.

If only a word of form be left out in an Endictment, yet the Endictment is
good, but if one word of substance be omitted, the whole Endictment is naught.
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

An Endictment of forcible entry, does lie for a Tenant for years, who is
forcibly put out of his possession. By the Statute of 21. Jac. Pasc. 24. Car.
B. r.

Upon an Endictment preferred against one in the Kings Bench, there does issue
out an Attatchment against the party Endicted, to force him to appear. Pasc.
1650. 1. Maii. B. S.

Execution.
An Execution may issue forth out of this Court, notwithstanding a Writ of
Error be brought in the Exchequer Chamber, to reverse the Judgment given here;
and upon which the Execution is grounded, if this Court be satisfied that there
is no Error in the Judgment; or if the Record be not duly removed out of this
Court by the Writ of Error. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

One may pray for Execution upon a Judgment given in the Court where it was
given, although a Writ of Error be brought to remove the Record, and to reverse
the Judgment, if he that brings the Writ of Error, do not assign his errors in
due time. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

The Court may grant Execution upon a Judgment given, although a Writ of Error
be brought, to reverse the Judgment if the Court be satisfied, that the Writ
of Error is brought merely to delay the party from his Execution. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. For the Law does not countenance delays, but delights to have
speedy Justice done to all parties, though it loves not to surprise any person
by over hasty proceedings.

If Execution be not taken within two years after Judgment is given in a
Cause, there must be a Scire facias taken out to revive the Judgment, and
Execution cannot be taken out, Mich. 22. Car. B. r. But this Scire facias may
be taken out of course without moving the Court; But if Execution be not taken
out in seven years after or longer, then a Scire facias cannot be taken out to
revive such a Judgment without moving the Court, but upon motion the Court
will grant it.

The Court will not deliver one out of prison that lies there in Execution upon
an Affidavit. But the party may have a Writ of Supersedeas to Supersede the
Execution if there be cause. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. Be the matter contained in
the Affidavit never so strong for the prisoner because he lies in prison by
matter of Record, and must be delivered by an Act of as high a nature which an
Affidavit, although it be made before a Judge of the Court, and is filed in
Court, is not.

The Court cannot divide an Execution which is entire. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. For
this would be to divide the Judgment upon which it is grounded.

If the Record be not certified in due time after the Writ of Error is brought
to reverse a Judgment, he that has the Judgment; may take out Execution of
Course without moving the Court to have leave to do it. Mich. 1649. B. S. For
it shall be intended that the Writ of Error is merely brought for delay,
because the party does not prosecute it, and it shall be all one, as if it had
not been brought.

After a Judgment is signed, there may be Execution taken out immediately upon
it; and it is not necessary that the Plaintiff should forbear to take out his
Execution, until the Judgment be entered. Mich. 1649. For it is a perfect
Judgment of the Court before it is entered, for the entry of it, is the Act of
the Clerk, and not of the Court.

If the Plaintiff in a Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment be non-suite, yet
the Defendant in the a Writ ought not to take out Execution without a Scire
facias first sued out against the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error. 15. Nov.
1650. B. S. Q. tamen. For it seems the Plaintiff shall not bring another Writ
of Error to reverse that Judgment, but that such non-suite shall be peremptory
unto him.

If a Writ of Error be brought in the Exchequer Chamber, to reverse a Judgment
given in this Court, and the Judgment is affirmed there; yet that Court cannot
make out Execution upon the Judgment affirmed, but it must be done in this
Court where the Judgment was given. 18. Nov. 1650. B. S. For the affirming of
Judgment is not giving of Judgment, and so it is not their Judgment.

Notwithstanding the late Statute that enacted that a Writ of Error should be
no Supersedeas to stay Execution, this Court will not grant out Execution upon
a Judgment given here if the Record be removed by a Writ of Error into the
Exchequer Chamber; Nor will they grant a Supersedeas. 10. Feb. 1650. B. S. In
Needler and Guests Case, for it is doubtful whether the Statute do extend to
Writs of Error brought in the Exchequer Chamber or not, because that it is not
cemmonly brought.

If an Execution be returned and filed, the party can never have another
Execution upon that Judgment, upon which the Execution was grounded, but if it
be not returned and filed, he may have another Execution. 10. Feb. 1650. B. S.
For the returning and filing it, makes it to be an Execution executed; but
before it was returned and filed, it was but an Execution executory or in fieri.

If one have a Judgment given for him, and he does afterward bring an Action
of Debt upon this Judgment, but does not give any Declaration unto the
Defendant; the Plaintiff may at any time within the space of one year next
after the Judgment given for him, take out Execution upon his Judgment. 1652
B. S. For the bringing of an Action of Debt, does not take away his Judgment,
and his not prosecuting of his Action of Debt, does presume he will waive that
Action, and resort to his Execution upon the Judgment.

Elegit.
Upon a testatum, an Elegit does lie into the principality of Wales, or into
the County Palatine of Chester. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

Essoigne.
The Essoigne Roll in the Court of the Common Pleas, is a Record of the Court,
and does remain in the Custody of the Clerk of the Essiogns. Pasc. 23. Car. B.
r.

If a Declaration be delivered to the Defendant after the Essoigne day, the
Defendant is not bound to plead that Term; but may Emparle unto the next Term.
3. July. 1650. B. S. For it is accounted for a Declaration of that Term, and
not of the precedent Term.

Exception.
The Council at the Bar ought to take all their Exceptions to the Record at one
time, or at least before the Court have delivered any opinion in the cause.
Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For the Court is not bound to hear any afterward; for
this would hinder dispatch of business.

A Negative expression may be taken to inure to the same intent, as an
Exception does. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

Exceptio in non exceptis firmat regulam.

Estate.
No Estate can be limited to commence after a Fee simple determined, because a
Fee simple, is the largest Estate that can be and shall not be supposed to have
a possibility, to have an end or determination. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

Such an Estate which is not settled at the time of the making of it, but both
depend as to the being of it upon another estate which is not certain, but may
either take effect or not take effect, is a contingent Estate. Trin. 23. Car.
B. r. Because it depends upon an incertainty; and may be or not be, according
to the several event of things.

Enrollment.
An Enrollment of a Deed, is either an Enrollment of it, by the Common Law, or
an Enrollment of it according to the Statute of Enrollments. Trin. 23. Car. B.
r.

If a Deed be Enrolled by the Statute, and the Enrollement of that Deed, is to
be pleaded, it must be pleaded precisely, that it was Enrolled according to the
Statute. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. That the plea may be certain.

The Enrolling of a Deed does not make the Deed to be a Record, but by the
Enrollment it does only become a Deed Recorded. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For there
is difference between matter of Record, and a thing Recorded to be kept in
memory

If an Issue be, whether Enrollment or not Enrollment, this issue is tryable by
a Jury, and not by the Enrollment: because this issue is mixed with matter of
Fact. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

Before the 20 year of Q. Eliz. it was not used to Endorse the Enrollments of
Deeds upon the back of them, as it is now used to be done. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

An Enrollment of a Deed ought to be made in Parchment, and Recorded in Court.
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

If the Inrollment of a Deed be lost, yet the Enrollment is good evidence if it
can be proved to a Jury by circumstances, that there it was an Enrollment.
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

The Enrollement of a Deed is a sufficient proof of the Deed it self upon a
trial. Mich. 1650. B. S. For every Deed before it is Enrolled, is to be
acknowledged to be the Deed of the party.

If Lands be conveyed in a Deed for money only then that Deed must be Enrolled,
else the Lands will not pass by the Deed, but if Lands be conveyed in a Deed,
in consideration of money paid, and also in consideration of natural love and
affection, there it is not necessary to Enroll the Deed, but the Lands will
pass, though the Deed be not Enrolled. 5. Feb. 1649. Hill. B. S.

Escape.
If the Sheriff suffer one taken by him in Execution to Escape, the party, at
whose Suite he was taken in Execution, may either have an Alias Capias against
the party that Escaped, to take him again in Execution, or an Action upon the
Case against the Sheriff that suffered him to Escape. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

An Escape in one place, is not an Escape all England over, 6. Nov. 1650. B. S.

Extent.
Lands in the hands of a Trustee may be extended for a Debt due to the King.
Hill. 23. Car. B. r. Q Whether they are extendable for any other Debt.

Escheator.
The King may by his special Commission, make one or more Deputies Escheators,
to find an Office, and this is used to be done after the death of a Noble man
or other person of great quality. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

Fine.
A Fine for a license of Alienation to alien Lands held in Capite, is to be
paid in Chancery, for there is the pardon for Alienation of such Lands without
license to be sued forth. 21. Car. B. r.

If an Officer of this Court do not give his due attendance upon the Court, as
his place requires, the Court may set a Fine upon him for his neglect. Trin.
22. Car. B. r.

This Court may set a Fine upon the Clerk of the peace, who returns an
Endictment into this Court, upon a Certiorari directed to remove the Endictment
into this Court, if the Endictment be not good in matter of form. Trin. 22.
Car. B. r. For it shall be intended that it was his negligence, that the
Endictment was not well drawn, for it shall not be presumed that he can be
ignorant in the form of drawing Endictments.

The Court cannot set a Fine upon a Sheriff that is out of his Office. Mich.
22. Car. B. r. For then he ceases to be an Officer of the Court.

If the Conusee of a Fine levied of Lands, do pay money unto the Conusor of the
Fine at the time of the Fine levied, and there is no use declared to lead the
use of the Fine levied of these lands; the Law will construe the Fine to be
levied of these Lands to the use of the Conusee, to whom the Fine is levied;
but if there be no money paid by the Conusee, nor any use declared, the Fine
shall enure to use of the Conusor that levied the Fine. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.
For nothing appears, whereby it can be supposed that the parties had any
intention, the estate in the Lands should be altered by the Fine, but that the
Fine was levied in Corroboration only of the title of the Connsor.

If Justices of peace do proceed upon an Indictment after a Certiorari out of
this Court, is deliveed unto them, to remove the Endictment into this Court;
This Court may set a Fine upon them for their contempt to this Court. Hill. 23.
Car. B. r. This was done heretofore in the Case of Sir John Sedly, and Sir
Thomas Style, two Justices of the peace of the County of Kent.

If a Habeas Corpus, do issue out of this Court, and the party to whom it is
directed do make an insufficient return of it, this Court may set a Fine upon
the party for making this insufficient return. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

A Fine and recovery cannot destroy an estate executory, which depends upon
contingencies; but it will destroy a Remainder. Q. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

If part of a Fine that is set upon one that is convicted upon an Endictment,
or information for an offense done by him contrary to a Statute, do belong to a
subject, as it may if the Statute do so direct all the fine set upon the party,
ought not to be estreated into the Exchequer. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. But the
Kings part only ought to be estreated.

A fine sun Cognizance de droyt, come ceo, que il ad, de lour done, etc. levied
of Land, does admit the possession of the Lands, of which the Fine is levied to
pass by the Fine; but a Fine come droyt, levied of Lands, does only pass the
right of the Conusor in the Lands of which the Fine is levied. Mich. 1649. B. S.

A Fine sur Cognizance de droyt come ceo, etc. is a Fessment upon Record of the
Lands comprised in the Fine, and does imply a Livery and Seisin to be made of
those Lands. Hill. 1649. 29. Jan. B. S.

A Fine of twenty nobles, was set upon one, for bringing an Attaint against a
Jury, after the Jury had been formerly acquitted. Hill. 1649 4. Feb. B. S.

A Fine set upon one which is voideable, that is, may be avoided, is not void
absolutely, but continues to be a good Fine, until it be avoided by the Plea
of the party that is Fined. Pasc. 1650 4. Feb. B. S.

One may declare the use of a Fine by Paroll; and if there be such a
Declaration by Paroll, made to lead the use of a Fine, and it be defective, to
declare the intent of the parties, it may be afterward supplied and made good
by subsequent Parolls. 8. Nov. 1650. B. S.

Filing of Process or other thing.
A Capias that is duly sued forth, may be filed afterward, and it is not
necessary to File it at the time when it is taken forth. 21. Car. B. r. For the
Fileing of it does contribute nothing to the essence of the Writ.

A Declaration may be Filed in the Office after a Writ of Error is brought to
reverse the Judgment given in the cause wherein that Decleration was given;
and so is it of a Warrant of Attorney. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For the Defendant
is at no prejudice by the filing of them, and he did take notice of them, as
appears by his pleading and going to issue with the Plaintiff.

Affidavits which are not read in Court, may not be filed there, until the
secondary has made his report in the cause touching which, such Affidavits
were made, but if they be read in Court, they may be presently filed. Trin. 24.
Car. B. r. For the Court takes no notice of them, until they be read in Court.

An original Writ may be Filed after Judgment given in the cause, for which it
was sued forth; if it were sued forth before the Judgment given. Trin. 1650.
26. Junii. B S.

The Court will not compel the Plaintiff to sile a venire facias after a
Verdict, if the venire will make an Error, for if there be no venire, that
defect is helped by the Statute of Jeofailes, but if there be a venire, and
that venire is erroneous; this is not helped by the Statute. Trin. 1651. B. S.

False Latin and Form.
The Court does use to amend False Latin and Form in Bills presented unto them
by the grand Enquests every Term by their license and consent; but the Court
cannot amend matter of substance in them. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For that were to
make new Bills.

Forma Pauperis.
If one that is admitted to sue in Forma panperis will not proceed according to
the Rules of the Court, but uses delays to vex his adversary, the Court will
Dispauper him. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the Law does not favor the poor to do
injury to others, but to help them to recover their right.

If one that does does sue in forma pauperis, be non-suite at the trial, he
must pay costs to the Defendant, or else be whipped Pasc. 1652. B. S. For the
Law will Judge he had no cause of Action, and therefore he must make
satisfaction to the Defendant for injustly vexing of him, and if he cannot do
it by his purse, be shall do it in his person.

If it be proved unto the Court, that one who sues in forma pauperis is a
vexatious person, and has many frivolous Suites depending the Court will
Dispauper him. 1654. B. S. For this will be a means to make him less
contentious.

Roll Chief Justice said, That he did not use to admit any one generally to
sue in Forma pauperis; but only to sue so in one Cause, by virtue of that
admittance. 1654. B. S.

Forfeiture.
If one take a wife, that is Seized of Gavel-kind Lands, and she dies without
issue by her husband; her husband shall be Tenant by the courtesy of half of
the Lands so long as he shall live unmarried, but if he marry again he shall
Forfeit his estate in the Lands. Mich 22. Car. B. r. This is by the custom of
Kent, but by the same custom, if he had issue by his wife, then he shall be
Tenant by the courtesy of all the Lands his wife was seized of, and although he
do marry again, he shall not Forfeite his estate. Mich. 22. Car. Q. Whether in
the former Case, he shall forfeit his Tenancy by the courtesy, if he do live
incontinently.

If a Lease be so made, that it is to be Forfeited, if the Rent reserved in the
Lease be not paid, as the Lease does provide; although the Rent be not paid
accordingly, yet there is no Forfeiture to be taken, if there was not an actual
and Legal demand of the Rent made by the Lessor. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For the
Law does not favor defeating of estates.

If a Copyholder do deny to pay unto the Lord the fine which is ascertained
due unto him by the Copyholder, or do refuse to appear at his Lords Court, and
to do his Suite there; this is a Forfeiture of his Copyhold estate Trin. 24.
Car. B. r. For he holds his Copyhold of the Lord upon these conditions.

If a Copyholder do let his Copyhold unto another for years, and the Lessee
do sell the Timber growing upon the Copyhold, yet this is not a Forfeiture of
the Copyhold estate. 6. Nov. 1650. B. S.

Franchise.
Nor Franchise shall be allowed in any case where the Franchise does fail to
administer justice within the Franchise; but if there be such a failer, this
Court by their Authority may intermeddle (notwithstanding the privileges of
the Franchise) to compel them to do Justice. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For
privileges are not granted to protect men in neglecting to do right, or to do
wrong.

Fees.
In such Cases where the Sheriff is to have Fees there he is not bound to
execute his Office in returning of Writs, etc. until the Fees that are due
unto him, be tendered unto him. 22. Car. B. r.

The Statute of 23. H. 5. which does give Fees to Sheriffs, does only extend
to their executing of Writs of Execution. 22. Car. B. r.

There are no Fees due to the Sheriff by the Common Law by the Subject for
executing his Office; but the King ought to pay him his Salary. Mich. 22. Car.
B r. For as the people do owe Alleigance to their King, so the King does owe
Justice and protection unto his people.

An Action of Debt does lie for a Councellor or an Attorney for his Fees
against him that retained him in this cause. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Q. Whether it
lie for a Councellor?

If a Clyent, when his business in Court is dispatched, does refuse to pay unto
the Officer in Court, the Fees which are due unto him for doing his business;
the Court will upon motion grant an Attatchment to the Officer against the
Clyent, to ^ave him committed, until he pay the Fees due. By Roll Chief
Justice 1650.

Felony.
Where one is doing of an unlawful act, and the death of any person ensues
upon the doing of that act, though the death of the party was not intended by
him that did the act, yet this is Felony. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

If one be committed to the Goal for one Felony, the Justices of the Goal
delivery, may enquire and try him for another Felony for which he was not
committed. By Bacon Justice. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

It is Felony to personate a Bail. By Bacon Justice. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. Q.
Whether the procuring of one to personate a Bail be Felony.

The receiving only of stolen goods, is not Felony; but the receiving of them,
and comforting the Felon is Felony. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For he may receive
them, and not know them to be stolen, but the comforting the Felon, does prove
that he consented to the Felony.

If one be set upon in the Highway or other place to be robbed, and he do cast
away his goods with an intent to save them from the robber; and the robber does
take them up, and carry them away, this is a robbery and Felony committed to
the person of the party robbed, although he took nothing from his person. Mich.
1649. B. S. For the party is robbed of his goods, and the thief knew them to be
the parties goods, and came with an intent to take them from him, had he not
cast them away.

One ought not to be arrested upon suspicion of Felony, except that there be
good cause showed for the ground of this suspicion. 1649. B. S. For every
foolish fancy or conceit, is no ground of a suspicion sufficient to arrest one
for so high a crime.

It is Felony to take a Bill from off the File, after a Verdict in the cause
for which the Bill was sued forth. Mich. 1649. B S. For this is embezeling of a
Record.

The robbery of a servant of his masters money in his custody, if it be in the
presence of his master, is robbing of the master. Mich. 1649. B. r.

A robbery shall be said to be done in that Hundred where the party robbed is
first set upon, although his goods be taken from him, in another Hundred. Mich.
1649. B. S. For there the robbery was begun, and the peace first broken.

A Hundred shall not be charged for a robbery committed within it upon the
Statute of Winchester in Crepulsculo or twilight, that is, when it is neither
perfect day nor perfect night; but if it be committed by day light, although it
be before the rising of the Sun, or after the setting of it, the Hundred shall
be charged. 31. Oct. 1650. B. S.

A Hundred shall not be charged for a robbery committed within it in the night,
because hue and cry, cannot be made in the night, for that is a time for rest.
1650. B. S.

If a robbery be begun in the day light, but is not ended till dark night, yet
the Hundred where it was done is chargeable for it by the Statute of
Winchester. 1650. B. S.

Fee simple.
A Feffment made of Lands to one and his Heirs Males is a Fee simple. Mich. 23.
Car. B. S. For it is not an estate comprised within the Statute of West. 2. De
donis conditionalibus.

False Imprisonment.
An Action of False Imprisonment, does lie against a Baily, by the party that
is Arrested by him, after the Writ is returned, by Warrant whereof he was
Arrested. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For this is all one, as if he were Arrested
without a Writ for by the return of the Writ, the Sheriffs and Bailiffs power
are at an end, as to that Writ.

If a procedendo, be unduely obtained, and the party against whom it is had, be
thereupon taken and imprisoned, an Action of False Imprisonment does lie by the
party Imprisoned against him, at whose Suite, he is Imprisoned. Mich. 24. Car.
B. r.

Feoffment.
A Feoffment made of Lands unto a Fem Covert is a good Feoffment in Law, until
the husband do disagree to it. Hill. 23. Car B. r. Q. If the husband do not
know of the Feoffment made, and after the Feoffment does dye; what the
Feoffment shall operate?

Foundation.
None has power to Found a free Chapel but the King. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For
it is as much as to create a new Tenure.

The Foundation of a thing may alter the Law, as touching that thing. Hill. 23.
Car. B. r.

Fiction of Law.
The Law ought not to be satisfied with Fictions, where it may be really
satisfied. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Yet in some Cases Fictions of Law are necessary
and to be allowed.

Gavel-kinde.
IF one take to Wife a Woman Seized of Gavel-kind Lands, and the Wife dye
without having had any issue of her body by her husband; yet the husband shall
be Tenant by the courtesy of half of the Lands, during the time he continues
unmaryed. But if he marry he shall forfeit his Tenancy by the courtesy. But if
he had issue by the Wife, if the Wife dye he shall be Tenant by the courtesy
of the whole Land, and although he do marry, he shall not forfeit his Tenancy
by the courtesy. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. This is by the custom of Kent.

Guardian.
A Guardian of an Infant may acknowledge satisfaction upon Record for a Debt,
which he has recovered at Law for the Infant. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. But it must
be a Guardian, that is Assigned by the Court to sue for the Insant.

The Court will Assign a Guardian to an Infant to sue for him, if the Infant do
come into Court, and desire it of the Court, and name the party he desires to
have for his Guardian, and produce him in Court. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

Good Behavior.
If one do affront any Court of Justice, this is a good cause to bind the party
to his Good Behavior. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For the affronting of justice, is a
public misdemeanor, and not a private, although it be done, but to the person
of one man, as to the Judge of a Court, a Justice of peace, etc.

He that does, upon Articles sworn in Court, desire the party against whom the
Articles are sworn, may be bound thereupon to the Good behavior, must express
some special matter in those Articles, for which he ought to be bound to the
good behavior. For if the Articles be only general, the good behavior is not
to be granted upon them. Mich. 22, Car. B. r. For a general accusation is no
accusation for the incertainty of it.

Perjury is not an offense, for which the party perjured may be bound to the
Good behavior. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. But the party may be endicted for it, and
fined, if he be thereupon convicted.

One was bound to his Good behavior, for affrighting people in the night in
their houses, by shooting off of Muskets, and for the assaulting of one going
in the high way. Mich. 22 Car. B. r.

A woman that is a common scold may be bound unto the Good behavior. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. For she is a common disturber of the public peace.

The Good behavior was granted against one upon an Article sworn against him,
that he had maliciously pulled down a piece of another house. Hill. 22. Car.
B. r.

A Justice of Peace ought not to bind any person to the Good behavior, upon a
general accusation made against the party. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

One was bound to his Good behavior, for stopping of a Constable from making
pursuit after a felon. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For this is a public offense
against the Commonwealth.

The Good behavior is not to be granted against one, for speaking of words
only against one person: but it may be granted against one, for speaking of
words against diverse persons at several times. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For that
is a general misbehaviour.

The Good behavior was granted against one, upon an Article sworn and read
against him, that he said that he would burn down another man's house. Hill.
1649. B. S.

Heir.
THe word Heir is nomen collectivum, and extends unto all Heirs. Trin. 23. Car.
B. r.

The Heir is favored at the Common Law, for at the Common Law the Ancestor
could not convey away his Lands, from his Heir at Law, upon his death bed,
without the consent of the Heir. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. The Law is the preserver
of Inheritances.

Heriott.
A Heriott is the fruit of a Rent-service. Hill. 21. Car. B. R. This is to be
meant of Heriott service, and not of Heriott Custom.

Habeas Corpus.
If a Prisoner appear in Court, upon a return of a Habeas Corpus to remove him
hither; and there does appear by the return, that there was good cause to
commit the prisoner to prison, and to detain him there, the Court will remand
or send him back to the place where he was first committed; but if upon the
return, it does appear that there was no lawful cause to commit him, then the
Court will discharge the prisoner: but if it be doubtful to the Court, whether
he was lawfully committed or not, then the Court will bail the prisoner. Hill.
21. Car. B. r. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

A Habeas Corpus ad respondendum, is when any one is imprisoned, at the suit of
another upon a legal process, in the Fleet or any other prison, except the
Kings Bench prison, and a third person would sue that prisoner in this Court,
and cannot, because he is not in custody of the Mareschall of this Court, there
he may have a Habeas Corpus, to remove the prisoner out of the prison where he
is, into this Court, to answer unto his Action here. 21. Car. B. r.

A Habeas Corpus cum Causa, does remove the body of the party for whom it is
granted, and all the Causes which are then depending against him. 21. Car. B. r.

A Habeas Corpus, is either adsubjiciendum, granted on the Crown side: Or, ad
respondendum, granted on the Pleas side.

The Court will not grant a Habeas Corpus, retornable immediate; but in some
Cases they will give but a short time to return it. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For
though the Law does favor liberty, yet it allows convenient time for doing of
things.

After the retorn of a Habeas Corpus is read and filed in Court, it cannot be
amended. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For then it is a Record of the Court.

None ought to take out a Habeas Corpus for a Prisoner without his consent.
Trin. 23. Car. B. r. This holds not in all Cases; for one may take out an
Habeas Corpus without his consent, to charge him with an Action.

A Habeas Corpus, to remove one that was committed for debt, from one prison to
another, may be granted, retornable immediate, or rather in dilate: for this is
only a Habeas Corpus ad recipiendum, in the nature of it.

A Habeas Corpus was granted out of this Court, directed to the Sergeant at
Arms of the House of Commons in Parliament, for a prisoner committed unto him
by a Committee of the House of Commons. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

A Judge of this Court will not grant a Habeas Corpus in the vacation, for a
prisoner to follow his suit; but the Court may grant a special Habeas Corpus
for a prisoner to be at his trial in the vacation time. Pasc. 1650. 24. Maii
B. S.

The Court will grant a Habeas Corpus to one, to have a prisoner out of prison
to be a witness for him at a trial, but at the charge of him that desires the
Habeas Corpus, and at his peril, to take care that the prisoner do not make an
escape. 29. Junii 1640. Trin. B. S.

A Habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum, is granted on the Capital or Criminal side,
but a Habeas Corpus ad recipiendum and faciendum, is granted on the Pleas side.
1650. B. S. For so the Court of the upper Bench is divided in the practice of
it, viz. into Criminal Causes, which are between the Protector and the party,
and the Civil Causes, which are acted on the Pleas side, and are between one
subject and another.

Habere facias possessionem.
One may have a new Writ of Habere facias possessionem, if a former Writ of
Habere facias possessionem in the same Cause be not well executed or returned.
Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For that is all one as if such Writ had never been taken
out.

Homage.
When livery is granted to the Heir at full age, of the Lands for which he was
in ward to the King during his nonage, and which were by reason thereof in the
Kings hand: his homage which he should do to the King (by reason of his tenure)
at the time when the livery is sued forth, is respited for a certain sum of
money, to be paid yearly to the King by the heir, until the heir shall do his
homage, and these moneys are called respite of Homage: because by reason of
such moneys the Homage is respited or put off from year to year. 1655. B. S.

Hundred.
If a robbery be begun in the Hundred of Dale, and ended in the Hundred of
Sale; the Hundred of Dale is chargeable for this robbery, upon the Statute of
Winchester. 1655. B. S. Q. For it seems both should be chargeable.

Jury.
THe Court was moved, that a Jury of Merchants might be returned, to try an
issue between two Merchants, touching Merchants affairs, and it was granted.
Hill. 21. Car. B. r. Because it was conceived, they might have better knowledge
of the matters in difference which was to be tried, then others could who were
not of that profession.

A Jury may find a thing which is not given unto them in evidence, if they do
know it of their own knowledge. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For they may enform
themselves of the truth of the fact they are to try, by all possible and
lawful means they can, and are not solely tied to the evidence given at the
bare.

A Jury may take notice of a matter of Record, but they cannot try it. Mich.
22. Car. B. r. For a Record must be tried by it self.

In every Case where there is to be a special Jury returned, there ought to be
a special Writ of Venire facias to summon that Jury. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If more then twelve men be returned upon a Jury, and do appear, the first
twelve that stand in the panell, are to be sworn and to try the Cause. Pasc.
23. Car. B. S. If none of them be challenged: but if some of them be
challenged, and the challenge is also made good against them, then so many more
of those that remained above the number of twelve, shall be taken in, in order
as they are ranked in the panell, to fill up the number that wants, to make
it a full Jury.

If a Juror do inhabit in a house that is in the Parish of Dale, and do occupy
Lands that do lie in the Parish of Sale next adjoining, and he is returned upon
a Jury as of the Parish of Sale, this is well enough although he do not dwell
in Sale. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For he shall be said to be as well of the Parish
where the Lands lie which he occupies, as of the Parish where he inhabits: for
he is a parishioner in Sale, though an inhabitant in Dale

If more then twelve men do appear at a trial, after twelve of them are sworn,
the rest that are unsworn, must not continue upon the stand with those that are
sworn, but must depart. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

The Court may give the Jury leave to drink at the Bar, after the evidence is
given to them, and before the verdict, if the Plaintiff and the Defendant will
consent unto it. Pasc. 23. 23. Car. B. r. But they may not drink out of the
Court. A Jury had leave to drink at the bar, after a long evidence given, in a
very hot day in Easter Term abovesaid.

In Cases, where it is conceived an indifferent Jury will not be returned
between the parties by the Sheriff of the County where the venue lies, the
Court upon motion, will order the Sheriff to attend the Secondary of the Office
with his book of the Freehoulders of the County where he is Sheriff, that he
may see an indifferent Jury returned. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

A Jury cannot try a Consideration to ground an Assumpsit, if the Consideration
was given or acted out of that County where the action is tried. Trin. 23. Car.
B. r.

Upon a motion and an Affidavit made in Court, that the Cause to be tried at
the bar, is a Cause of very great consequence, the Court will make a Rule for
the Sheriff to return 48. Jurors upon the Jury. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

A Tenant that is within the distress of a Lord of a Manor or Leete, ought not
to serve upon a Jury, in a Cause that concerns the Lord Mich. 23. Car. B. r.
For it shall be presumed, he may not be indifferent, in regard of fearing to
displease his Lord.

After a Juror is sworn, he may not go from the Bar, until the evidence be
given, and the directions of the Court, for any cause whatsoever, without leave
of the Court: and although he have leave, he must have a keeper with him. Pasc.
24. Car. B. r.

If a Juror be challenged, and the Challenge entered by the Secondary, that
Juror cannot be after that sworn as a Jury man, to try that Cause wherein he
was challenged, viz. at that trial. 24. Car. Pasc. B. r. Q. Whether before the
Challenge entered, he may be sworn.

Where a trial is to be, for a thing that concerns the Undersheriff, there
the High Sheriff shall return the Jury. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For here shall be
no favor supposed; but if the trial concern the High Sheriff, the
Vnder-Sheri^ shall not return the Jury, for there may be presumed to be
favor: for the servant depends upon the master, and not the master upon the
servant.

The Jury ought not to have any writting with them when they go from the Bar,
which has not been proved, although such a writting has been given in
evidence unto them. Mich. 24 Car. B. r.

The Jury may find matter of Record, if they do know it of their own
knowledge. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 10. Maii. For a man's own knowledge is more certain
than any evidence can be given.

There are three grand-Juries returned every Term to serve in this Court, every
Jury consisting of 16, 17, 18, 19, or 20, Jurors, or more.

Though a man be very aged, yet if he be of an able body, and not infirm, he is
not to be excused from serving upon the grand Jury: One (...) Butler, a man of
72. years of age, was denied by Roll Chief Justice, to be excused to serve,
because he was of an able body. Hill. 1651. B. S.

One that has no Freehold in the County, or is a Constable, or a Surveyor of
the highway, or is a sequestered person, are not thereby to be excused from
serving upon the grand Jury. Pasc. 1651. B. S. By Roll Chief Justice. But Q.
of a sequestered person.

The Jurors that appear at a trial, shall not have their charges allowed them,
if the Cause be not tried for want of Jurors. Pasc. 1652. B. S. For their
appearance is to no benefit of any body.

When a Juror is withdrawn, he is struck out of the panell by the Secondary.

Upon a general issue, the Jury may find a Record, but not upon a null tyell
Record. Pleaded 1651.

If but eleven of the Jury be sworn, if the twelfth man do stand by, and hear
all the evidence that was given to his fellows, he may be sworn afterward,
and pass upon the trial. By Roll Chief Justice. 1654. Pasc. B. S. For the
Jurors are sworn to try the issue, upon the evidence they shall hear; so that
it seems, the time of being sworn is not material, whether before or after
the evidence. Q.

The Jury may take Depositions taken in Chancery, and exemplified there, given
in evidence to them, from the Bar with them: but if they be not exemplified,
they may only look upon them in Court, but not take them with them out of the
Court 1654. B. S. For to see them, is no more then to hear them read.

Issue.
Every Issue is to be joined in such a Court that has power to try it,
otherwise the Issue is not well joined. 21. Car. B. r. For if the Cause cannot
be tried the issue is fruitless.

If an Action of Trespass be brought against two, for entering into the
Plaintiffs Land, and one of them pleads that the Land is his freehold, and the
other that he entered into the Land by the commandment of him that pleads it is
his freehold, here is to be but one Issue joined. 21. Car. B. r. For but one of
the Defendants claims an interest in the Land, and the other justifies but as
a servant unto him, and if the trial pass for him that claims the interest,
there is no color of Action to be maintained against the other.

If there be a Demurrer to an evidence, and the party whose evidence is
demurred unto do plead to the demurrer, and join Issue with the Defendant upon
it, this Issue must not be joined upon a matter in fact in the evidence, but
that must be agreed, or else the Issue is not well joined; for the Court are
not to try matter of fact, for that would be for them to give a verdict. Mich
22. Car. B. r. Whereas the Court are only to declare the Law, whether,
admitting that all the matter given in evidence by the Plaintiff be true, it
does prove the Issue in question or not.

By the Rules of the Court, if the Plaintiff will not try his Issue after it is
joined, in such time as he ought by the course of the Court to do, the
Defendant may try it by Proviso if he will. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. That he may
free himself (if he can) of the danger and trouble he may be subject to, by the
depending of the Action brought against him, and to recover his damages for
his unjust vexation.

A judgment may be entered as to one part of an Issue, and a nolle prosequi to
another part of the same Issue. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. This is only where the
Issue may be divided.

Where there is a demurrer to part of an Issue, and the other part of it
remains to be tried by a Jury, the Trial of it may be either before or after
the arguing of the Demurrer at the Election of the Plaintiff. Pasc. 23. Car. B.
r. For the Demurrer and the Issue have no depondancy one upon the other.

Every issue ought to be joined upon the most material thing in the Cause
depending, that all the matter in question between the parties, may be tried,
Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For else the trial will prove to little purpose.

If an Issue be once joined between the parties, this Issue cannot afterward
be waved, except both parties do consent unto it, although the Issue be but in
paper, and not engrossed in parchment. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. Therefore it is
good to be well advised before the Issue be joined.

The place ought not to be made part of the Issue in a transitory action. Trin.
24. Car. B. r. For the place is not material, as it is in a real and mixed
action.

An immaterial Issue joined, which will not bring the matter in question to be
tried is not helped after Verdict, by the Statute of Jeofailes, but there must
be a Repleader, 26. Jan. Hill. 1649. Pasc. 1650. 4. Maij. B. S. For this is
matter of substance; For if there was no Issue, there could be no Verdict, and
so it is, as if nothing were done in the cause.

If there be two Issues joined in one cause, and one of them is a good Issue,
and well joined, and the other is not a good Issue, but ill joined, and upon
trial of the Cause, entire Damages are given upon both the Issues, this is
erroneous. 31. Jan. 1649. Hill. B. S. For here are Damages given, for a
matter, which is not rightly tried for want of joining a good Issue to bring it
in question.

An affirmative on the one part, and a negative on the other part, although it
be but an implied negative, do make a good Issue. 15. Maij. Pasc. 1650. B. S.
For an implied negative, does deny what is affirmed, although not so plainly,
as an express negative.

When a Plea is pleaded to the Plaintiffs Declaration, and the Plaintiffs
Attorneys hand, is set to this Plea, then the Issue is joined betwixt the
Plaintiff, and the Defendant, and not before. 6. Feb. 1650. B. S. For then both
parties are agreed of the matter in question betwixt them.

Judgment.
Upon a Recovery in any Action, where the Plaintiff does declare for a thing
done, vi and armis; the Judgment ought to be entered with a Capiatur for a Fine
for the King: But in an Action upon the Case, where the Plaintiff is not to
declare with a vi and armis, there the Judgment against the Defendant ought to
be, that he be in miscricordia. 21. Car. B. r. The Capiatur which is
imprisonment of the Party, and the Fine for the King, are for the breach of the
Public Peace, which every Action, vi and armis, does imply: But Trespasses on
the Case do not so, and therefore there the Party is only to be amerced, and
not to be imprisoned or fined.

Where there are several Judgments against the Defendant, one of those
Judgments may be reversed as erroneous, and yet the other Judgments stand in
force. 21. Car. B. r. This is meant where there are several Judgments upon one
Record.

All Judgments, given in any Court of Record, ought to be entered in Latin:
And if they be in English they are reversable by a Writ of Error. 21. Car. B.
r. This is now altered by the late Statute, that enacts all proceedings in Law
to be in English.

No Council ought, by the Rules of the Court, to move any thing in arrest of
Judgment, except the Roll, wherein the Judgment is entered, or the Postea be
in Court. 22. Car. B. r. That the Court may be satisfied, that the matter
moved, in arrest of Judgment, is truly recited from the Record.

There is difference between a customary Judgment, and a Judgment given,
according to the Common Law. Trin. 22. Car. B. r.

It is sufficient matter for the Defendant to move, in Arrest of Judgment, to
prove that he had not sufficient notice, given unto him of the trial, before
the trial, according to the Course of the Court. 22. Car. B. r. Hill.

If a Judgment be given, which is erroneous, and the Plaintiff do take out a
Scire facias, upon that Judgment, and have a Judgment upon that Scire facias:
The Judgment upon that Scire facias is erroneous also. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.
For if the foundation be naught, that which is built upon it, must needs fall;
And here the first Judgment is the ground of the second.

A Judgment which is given, contrary to the Verdict, which was found in the
Cause, is a void Judgment. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the Judgment is to be
warranted by the Verdict, and is but the affirmance of the Verdict, and
therefore it must not contradict the Verdict.

The COurt will not reverse a Judgment, given upon a Nihil dicit, and by the
Rules of the Court, but by the Consent of the Plaintiff and the Defendant, the
Court will grant a Repleader in the Case. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If a Verdict be given after the term, no Judgment can be given upon that
Verdict, until the next Term following. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. 23. Car. B. r.
For such proceedings in the Law, ought not to be in the Vacation time, but in
Term time; For the Judgment is the Act of the Court, and the Court sits not,
but in Term.

If a Judgment be obtained, but the Plaintiff does take out no Execution upon
this Judgment, in two whole years next after the Judgment given: The
Plaintiff cannot then take out Execution, until he have revived this Judgment
by a Scire facias, which Writ he may have without motion, by the course of
practice of the Court; but if there be an old Judgment, upon which no
Execution has been taken out, such a Judgment cannot be revived by a Scire
facias, without a motion, and leave of the Court. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. But the
Court does not use to deny a Scire facias in such a case.

If the Defendants Attorney do enter a Plea for his Clyent in the Office, the
Plaintiffs Attorney cannot enter a Judgment against the Defendant upon a Nihil
dicit, or for want of a Plea, although the Plea be not given unto him by the
Defendants Attorney. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. and Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For the
Office is the place where the Attorneyes on both sides are to inform themselves
of the proceedings in their Clyents Causes; and the delivery of Declarations
and Pleas, etc. by one Attorney to another in their Clyents Causes, is rather
matter of courtesy and civility, than of any necessity or duty.

Four days after the Plaintiffs Attorney does bring the Postea into the Court,
he may enter Judgment for his Clyent by the course of the Court. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. Except the Defendant do then, or before move something to the Court
to arrest or stay the Judgment.

Where a Judgment is arrested only for mispleading, there the Court will grant
a Repleader. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

A Judgment was reversed in this Court, for tautology used in it. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. That is, for repeating the same thing over and over. For the Law
will not suffer Barbarismes in the proceedings thereof.

If a Judgment be unduly obtained, and sufficient proof be made thereof unto
the Court, the Court will vacate the Judgment, and restore the party damnified
by it, to be in the same Condition that he was in before the Judgment. Mich.
22. Car. B. r. Without putting him to a Writ of Error. Pasc. 22. Car. B. r.
For the Court will not be made a stale to do any person injury.

If one will take advantage of a Defeasance of a Judgment, to avoid the
Judgment, whereupon it was made, he must plead this Defeasance in Court,
otherwise the Court cannot take notice of it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the
Defeasance is a private thing between the Parties, and no part of the Record.

A Judgment in an Action of Detinue, is given conditionally, that is to say,
that the Plaintiff recover the thing it self, which is detained, if it may be
had, but if it may not be had, that then he recover Damages for the thing.
Hill. 22. Car. B. r. viz. Damages to the full value of the thing it self, and
also for the detaining of it.

Wheresoever the Defendant is upon the Judgment to be fined to the King, there
the Judgment is to be with a Capiatur, but where he is not to be fined, there
the Judgment shall be, that the Defendant be in Misericordia. Hill. 22. Car.
B. r.

Though a Judgment be legally signed, yet if it be never entered it is no
Judgment. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For every Judgment must be matter of Record,
but before the Entry it is not so.

By the course of the Common Pleas, a Surety that is bound with one in an
Obligation, may plead for the principle to an Action brought upon this
Obligation, and acknowledge a Judgment against him; But this seems very hard,
and this Court will not admit of such practice. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. It is
said, that now the Common Pleas will not suffer it, but do agree in their
practice in this point with this Court.

The Defendant has all the Term, wherein a Judgment was given against him to
speak any thing to arrest it; For the Judgment is all the Term, wherein it was
given in the breast of the Judges, either to make it a Judgment, or not,
although it be entered upon Record. Pasc. 23. Car. and 24. Car. B. r. Yet the
Plaintiff may take out Execution, if nothing be spoken, to arrest the Judgment
in four days after the Postea is brought into Court any time after that in the
same Term.

A Judgment may be entered, as to part of an Issue, and a Nolle prosequi may be
entered, as to another part of it. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

When at a Trial the Defendant is called (which is used to be done three times
distinctly by the Crier of the Court) and he do not appear, Judgment shall be
taken against him by default. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. That is, for not appearing
to make his Defense; For the Law will presume he is guilty, and has no Defense
to make.

If Judgment be given for more then the Plaintiff does demand in his
Declaration, this Judgment is erroneous. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For to give one
more then is his due, is as equal injustice, as to deny any one that which is
his due. And it shall be presumed, that the Plaintiff best knows what is his
due, and will demand it to the full.

If an Action of the Case be brought against one for speaking of diverse,
distinct, scandalous words of another, and the Damages are laid severally for
them, viz. so much Damages for speaking of such of the words, and so much
Damages for the speaking of such other of the words, there Judgment may be
given for speaking of such of the words, as the Plaintiff was damnified by, and
not for the other words, by which he was not damnified; But if the Damages be
laid entire, for speaking of all the words, and some of the words be not
actionable, so that Damages cannot be given upon all the words, there shall be
no Judgment or Damages given for any of them. For the Court cannot proportion
the Damages.

Judgments given in inferior Courts, must be entered, Idea consideratum est
per curiam, in words at length, and not Ideo consideratum est, etc. as the use
is in the Courts at Westminster, for if they do not, they are erroneous there,
though it be not so in the Courts at Westminster. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For
inferior COurts are tied strictly to observe their ancient forms, and not to
vary from them; For if they should be permitted, many inconveniences would
quickly follow by the unskilfulness of the Clarks.

Although the Plaintiff have signed his Judgment against the Defendant, yet he
may wave it, if he will, and accept of a Plea from the Defendant. Trin. 23.
Car. B. r. and 24. Car. B. r. For the signing of it does not make it a Record
of the Court, but if it were entered, he could not wave it.

A special Judgment is, where one brings an action for diverse things, as for
example, A man brings an Ejectione firmae pro tofto crofto, etc. and the
Plaintiff has a Judgment for one, or more of the things, for which the Action
is brought, and does wave some one or more of the other things for which the
Action is brought; in such case he must release his Damages to all, and yet he
may have his Costs of Suit. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

If a Verdict pass for the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiff will not enter his
Judgment upon this Verdict, the Defendant may enter it, and so it is of a Writ
of Enquiry of Damages. Trin. 22. Car. B. S. If the Plaintiff will not file it,
the Defendant may do it. For the Plaintiff ought to be content with what the
Law gives him.

If a Clark of this Court will not appear to an Action that is brought here
against him, the Plaintiff may enter Judgment against him. By Woodward Clark
of the Court. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. But Q. What Judgment, whether a Judgment
upon a nihil dicit, or some other special Judgment.

The Court will not give a Judgment, which they know would be against the Law,
although the Plaintiff and Defendant do agree to have such a Judgment given.
Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For the Judges are to do equal justice according to their
best skill, and not to err wilfully.

If the Plaintiff will not bring in his Postea into the Court according to the
Rules of the Court, that the Defendant may have time to speak in Arrest of
Judgment; and the Defendant do make proof of this to the Court upon oath; the
Court will Arrest the Judgment until the Plaintiff shall move for Judgment.
Mich. 23. Car. B. r. And he may thank himself for this trouble and delay.

Judgment cannot be entered until four days after the Postea is brought in
and entered in the Office, but after that if nothing be spoken in the mean time
to Arrest the Judgment, it may be entered. Mich. 23. Car. and Pasc. 24. Car. B.
r.

If a Judgment be entered contrary to the Rule of Court, made to stay the entry
of it; the Court upon motion will vacate the Judgment and amerce the party
that entered it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Where a Verdict is imperfect, there can be no Judgment given upon it; but the
Court will grant a new venire facias to summon another Jury to try the issue
again. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For the parties shall not be compelled to go
further back in their proceedings then where the error was made, and that was
by the Jury.

If one bring a Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given in the Common Pleas,
and do not remove the Record by a Certiorari, the Plaintiff may move in the
Common Pleas for Execution, notwithstanding the Writ of Error brought. Mich.
23. Car. B. r. But Q Whether they will grant it, because by the Writ of Error,
their hands are foreclosed; but now by the late Act a Writ of Error is no
Supersedeas, and so the Law in this point is altered.

In a Judgment given for the Plaintiff to recover a sum of money, the sum must
not be written in figures, for if it be it is error, but it must be expressed
in words at length. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For a Judgment consists in words, and
words are made of letters and not of figures which can spell nothing.

If a Judgment be given upon an Issue tried in a cause wherein there is also
matter of Law in dispute upon another Issue in that cause before the matter in
Law be determined, yet the Judgment is good. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

Upon the Affirmance by the Parliament of a Judgment given in this Court, and
removed by a Writ of Error brought in Parliament to reverse this Judgment; the
Parliament uses to have a Remittitur entered upon the Judgment Roll, to send
it back into this Court, that this Court may award Execution upon the
Judgment. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For Execution ought always to Issue out of
that Court where the Judgment was given.

If a prisoner which is Endicted for Felony will not plead to the Endictment,
he is by the Law to be pressed; but if a prisoner endicted for Treason, will
not plead at all to the Endictment, or answers impertinently, and not to the
purpose, judgment shall be given against him, as if he were found guilty.
Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. In Sir John Stowels Case as I remember.

If there be not four days of a Term to come after a Postea is returned in
Court before the Term be ended, so that the Defendant cannot have four days
liberty to speak in Arrest of Judgment, as by the course of the Court he ought
to have, there ought not to be any Judgment given in the cause until the next
Term after, that the Defendant may have so much time to speak in Arrest of
Judgment, as he ought to have. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

If a Judgment be but seven years old, the party may by the course of the
Court, have a Scire facias to revive it without moving of the Court for it, and
if the Judgment be under ten years old, the party may move for a Scire facias,
to revive it at the side Bar; but if it be ten years old or more, a Scire
facias to revive it, must be moved for in Court. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

One may speak in Arrest of a Judgment given upon a nihil dicit, at any time
during the same Term that the Judgment was obtained. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For
the Defendant is more favored in a judgment given against him upon a nihil
dicit, then where a Judgment is given against him upon a Verdict, because in
the former Case he makes no defense, but in the latter case, it is intended he
has made his full defense.

Where one entire Judgment is given against two several persons, and one of
them is an Infant, the whole Judgment is void. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For it
being void to the Infant, and being an entire Judgment which cannot be
divided, it must necessarily be void as to the other, and so void in toto.

If a peremptory rule be given for the Defendant to plead at a certain day, if
he do not plead accordingly the Plaintiff may enter Judgment against him,
without any further moving of the Court. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For it was the
favor of the Court to give him that day, to plead, and if he make no good use
of it, it is his own fault, and the Court will not further delay the Plaintiff.

If the Plaintiff do demur to the Defendants Plea, and the Defendant do join in
the demurrer, if the Plaintiff will not maintain the demurrer, Judgment shall
be given against him. Trin, 24. Car. B. r. For thereby it is employed that he
confesses the Defendants Plea to be good, and consequently that he has no
cause of Action.

That which a Judge of this Court does act in his Chamber, as a Judge of this
Court is accounted to be done in Court. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For it is in order
to the proceedings in the Court. Q.

Where a Judgment is entire it cannot be reversed in part, and stand good as to
another part, but if it be not an entire Judgment it may. Trin 24. Car. B. r.
For an entire Judgment cannot be divided to make one part of it good and
another part of it to be erroneous.

If the Plaintiff do give the Defendant two rules for him to plead according to
the course of the Court, and the Defendant do not plead, when the time of those
two rules are out, the Plaintiff may enter a Judgment against him upon a nihil
dicit, but not before. Mich. 1644. B. r.

If a man bring an Action of Debt against two Executors, and they plead they
have not Assetts, and thereupon Issue is joined, and it is found that one of
the Executors had Assetts at the time of the Action brought, but that the other
Executor had not Assetts the Plaintiff shall have Judgment to recover the Debt
against that Executor who was found to have Assetts, and a nil Capiat per
billam shall be entered against the Plaintiff, as to the other Executor, who was
found to have no Assetts. Mich. 24. Car. B. r For the possession that one
Executor has of the Testators goods is not the possession of the other
Executor.

It is against the course of practice in this Court to admit the principal, to
acknowledge a Judgment for his Bail; but in the Common Pleas they use to
admit, it. Mich. 1649. B. S. But it is said that the Common Pleas will not
admit it now since the rules of regulation made.

If in an Action of Trespass and Ejectment brought to try the title of the
Land, the owner of the Land, whose title is concerned, will not save the party
that is made Ejector, harmeless from all prejudice that may befall him by
reason of the Suite; he may confess Judgment unto the Plaintiff, for the Land
in question. Mich. 1650. B. S. For to avoid further trouble and charge by
reason of the suite which concerns him not, either in gain or loss.

If a Judgment is given, which is not warranted by the Verdict upon which it
is given, that Judgment is not good. Mich. 1649. B. S.

If a Judgment given in an inferior Court, be not according to the ancient
form of Judgments given there: such Judgment is erroneous, and this Court
will reverse it upon a Writ of Error brought. Pasc. 1650. 24. Maii. B. S.

If an Action of Trespass, or Trover and Conversion be brought for diverse
several things, and the Verdict does find that the Defendant had but some of
the things for which the Action was brought, yet the Jury does give costs and
damages for all the things laid in the Declaration; if the Plaintiff will
release his costs and damages, for those things which were not found, he may
have Judgment for the other things which are found. Mich. 1649. B. S.

It is dangerous to take a Judgment acknowledged in the vacation, as of a
preceding Term; and it ought to be made a Judgment of the subsequent Term.
Mich. 1649. B. S. Yet it is common practice to do it.

If one be Outlawed in an Action brought upon a Jugdment by a nihil dicit; and
that Out-lawry is reversed by a Writ of Error, the Judgment is also to be
reversed. Mich. 1649. B. S. For it seems one may not be twice Outlawed upon
one Judgment which might be if the Judgment should not be reversed, for the
Plaintiff might bring a second Action upon the same Judgment, and Outlaw the
Defendant again.

If one take a Judgment he cannot consent to vacate it. Mich. 1649. B. r. But
he may acknowledge satisfaction upon record.

If the Defendant in an ejectione firmae, will not plead according to the rules
of the Court, Judgment ought to be entered against him by the ancient Rules of
the Court, without moving of the Court, and the moving for it is grown in use,
but of late times, and it is a new charge brought upon the Clyent, to put him
to this motion, and there was no inconvenience in the old way, and therefore
this order is to be set up in the Office, and to take effect the next Term, and
in the mean time the Clyents to have notice of it. Hill. 1649. 23. Jan. B. S.
By Roll Chief Justice.

A Judgment was reversed, because it was given for more then was demanded in
the Declaration. Pasc. 1650. 3. Maii. B. S.

A Judgment was reversed for these errors, because the time when the Judgment
given, was in figures. 2. Because the sum recovered was expressed in figures.
3. The venire facias was with an etc. And 4. the cause of Action did not appear
by the Record to be within the jurisdiction of the Court where the Judgment was
given. 1649. Hill. B. S. This was a Judgment given in an inferior Court.

A Judgment was reversed because it was entered thus, Ideo consideratum est ad
eandem curiam, whereas it ought to be per eandem curiam. Hill. 1649. 30. Jan.
and 1. Feb. For it might be considered at the Court, which is only the place
where the Court is held, and yet not be the Act of the Court.

After an Issue is joined to be tried by the Plaintiff and the Defendant; the
Plaintiff may if he will without going to trial accept of a Judgment from the
Defendant without any Verdict in the Case. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 24. Maii. For the
Defendant is not prejudiced by it, if he will acknowledge the Judgment, and
the Plaintiff could have recovered no more, if he had had a Verdict, and may
waive his costs if he please.

If a thing be entered in a Judgment, which is not mentioned in the Plaintiffs
Declaration, upon which the Judgment is given, the Judgment is not good.
Pasc. 1650. B. S.

Judgment was given against one of not sane memory, and held good, for by
Roll Chief Justice, the Defendant may bring a Writ of Error to reverse the
Judgment and Assign this for error. This was in the Case of Disne and
Grigson. Trin. 1650. B. S. 26. Junii.

A Judgment ought not to be entered, until the costs be taxed, and the
Judgment Signed by the Secondary of the Office. 2. Julii. 1650. Trin. B. S.

A Rule of Court was made upon a motion at the Bar, that the Secondary should
enter a Judgment in a Cause wherein a Trial was to be had, as a Judgment of
the Term, next preceding the Term wherein the Trial was to be, and that the
Secondary should express in the Rule, that the Rule was made by the consent of
the Plaintiff, and of the Defendant in the Cause. 2. July. 1650. B. S. For
consensus tollit errorem; and otherwise the Court would not have made such a
Rule.

This Court will not admit the principal in an obligation to suffer a Judgment
for his suerties that are bound with him in an obligation; but the Court of
Common Pleas does usually admit it. 12. Nov. 1650. B. S. By Roll Chief
Justice, But now they have altered that course in the Common Pleas, as it is
said; and in truth it was not reasonable; for though a man may be contented to
be a Suerty in an obligation for another, yet it follows not that he would be
contented to be liable to a Judgment for him, whereby his goods may be swept
away by an Execution, before he is aware of it.

The course for one to acknowledge a Judgment, is for him that does
acknowledge it, to give a general Warrant of Attorney for any Attorney or some
particular Attorney of that Court, where the Judgment is to be acknowledged to
appear for him at his suite, who is to have the Judgment acknowledged unto
him, and to receive a Declaration from him, and to plead Non sum informatus,
and thereupon Judgment is entered for want of a Plea. 14. Nov. 1650. B. S.

A Judgment upon a nihil dicit is not a perfect Judgment, until the Writ of
Enquiry of damages taken out upon this Judgment be executed. 16. Nov. 1650 B.
S. For the damages are to be exexpressed in the Judgment, which cannot be
known what they are, until the Jury Empanelled by the Sheriff, to enquire of
the damages have found them.

When a Plea is pleaded, if the Attorney on the other side will not set his
hand unto it as he ought, and join in the Issue, Judgment may be entered
against him by the Defendants Attorney. 6. Feb. 1650. B. S. Q.

If a Judgment in an ejectione firmae be quod recuperare debeat, and a Writ of
Error be brought to reverse this Judgment, this Writ of Error is not well
brought, but must abate, for here is no Judgment given for the present; for
then it should be recuperet in the present Tence. Trin. 1651. B S.

By Roll Chief Justice, a Judgment ought not to be entered for want of a
Counselors hand set unto a special Plea, as by the Rules of the Court, there
ought to be, without first acquainting of the Secondary of the intention to
enter Judgment, for such a Plea without a Counselors hand, is a Plea, and it
may be there needs not a special Plea, and the party must not be his own
Judge, whether it be good or no. B. S

By Roll Chief Justice, in an Action of Trespass brought quere vi and armis, a
Capiatur ought to be entered upon the Judgment where the Judgment is given
before the Act of Oblivion was made, but if Judgment be to be given in an
Action brought for a Trespass done since the Act of Oblivion was made, and
which is pardoned by the Act pardonatur ought to be entered upon the Judgment
and so the Judgment in the Trespass, and the Act of Oblivion are both
satisfied. 1651. B. S.

One may speak in Arrest of a Judgment given upon a nihil dicit, after the
Writ of Enquiry of damages is executed upon that Judgment. Mich. 23. Car. B.
r.

Infant.
An Infant ought not to appear to an Action brought against him by his
Attorney; but he must appear by his Guardian. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For he
cannot make an Attorney, and the Guardian is Assigned (but with the consent of
the Infant) by the Court. Trin. 24. Car.

An Action of Debt does lie against an Infant upon his promise to pay for
necessaries, as meat and drink, lodging and apparel; but if the Infant and the
party from whom he had these necessaries, do come to an account, and reduce
that which the Infant is endebted for them, to a certain sum of money, and upon
this account the party brings an Action against the Infant, for the money
stated to be due by the account; this Action will not lie against the Infant.
Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For the account upon which the Action is grounded, is
void; for an Infant can agree to no such account.

Justification.
Where the Action concerns a transitory thing, if the Defendant do justify the
taking or doing in one place, this is a Justification in all places; but if the
Action concern a local thing, a Justification in one place, is not a
Justification in another place. Pasc. 24. Car. B r. For in the former Case the
place is not material, but the mere doing or taking of the thing, but in the
latter the place is material, for the Defendant (it may be) may be able to
Justify in one place, and yet may be guilty in another place.

Jurisdictions.
The essential difference betwixt Free Chapels, and other Churches, and
Chapels is, that all free Chapels are free from the Jurisdiction of the
ordinary. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. So that the ordinary is not to intermeddle with
them in any thing that does concern them or to visit them; whereas all other
Churches, and Chapels are within the Jurisdiction of some ordinary, and may be
visited.

The Jurisdidiction of a Court where a cause is depending, cannot be extended
further in relation to that cause by the Consent of the Plaintiff and
Defendant, then of right it ought to extend. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For this
would be for the parties to erect (as it were a Court) which was not before,
for the trial of their cause; and by this means the Jurisdictions of every
Court would grow to be unlimited.

This Court has no conusance of the proceedings in Parliament. Pasc. 24. Car.
B. r. So held in John Lilburns Case; because the Parliament is the supreme
Court, and subject to no other Court.

This Court has a general Jurisdiction to reform the abuses of all persons in
their behavior throughout all England; and the abuses and miscarriages of all
Courts of Justice, throughout all England. 9. Feb. Hill. 1649 B. S. 3. Julii.
1650. B. S.

If the Court of Chancery do grant a Habeas Corpus to a prisoner that is in the
custody of the Marshall of this Court, this Court has not power to restrain
the prisoner, so long as the Habeas Corpus is in force. 3. July. 1650. Trin. B.
S. In the Case of Sir Arthur Smithes and Workman.

This Court has Jurisdiction over all the Courts of England in all Mandatory
Writs. 10. Feb. 1650. B. S.

Injunction.
An Injunction out of the Court of Chancery does not lie to stay execution
after a Judgment given at the Common Law; although the Bill upon which such
Injunction is granted, were put in before the Judgment given at Law, for
although the Chancery make a difference between exhibiting the Bill before the
Judgment given, and the exhibiting a Bill after the Judgment given, yet this
is no good difference, for it is a like in both Cases. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. But
the Chancery, may if there be cause, stay proceedings at Law before Judgment
given.

Information.
If by a penal Statute he that prefers an Information against another, for an
offense done against this Statute, is to have half of the penalty, which shall
be recovered upon this Information, there if an Informer do prefer an
Information upon the Statute, before any Information is preferred by the King;
the King cannot hinder the Informer from having his proportion of the penalty
given him by the Statute; but if the King do first prefer the Information, he
may Inform for the whole penalty. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For the King is not
bound to stay till an Informer prefer the Suit, but may sue at any time, and if
no body Inform, none has right to the penalty, but the King, and he may pardon
it.

If the Marshall of the Kings Bench do misdemean himself in his office, to the
prejudice of any person, he who is prejudiced by his misdemeanor, may prefer an
Information against him in this Court. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. And if he be found
guilty upon a trial thereupon had, he may be fined by this Court, or put put
out of his Office, if the Court shall see cause to do it.

The Clerk of the Crown ought not to set his hand to an Information without
examining the cause, for which it is preferred. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For if
there be not (at least in probabilities) good matter in Law to ground an
Information upon, the party that does prefer it, is not to be assisted and
encouraged in it; for the Law does abhor vexations and causeless suites.

An Information may be preferred in this Court against the Inhabitants of any
Town or Village in England for the not repairing the Highways which by Law
they are bound to repair. Mich. 1649. B. S. For this Court may punish offenses
done against the Weal Public all England over.

If an Information be preferred at the Suite of the party, there the Endictment
ought to be brought to a trial at the charges of the party, that prosecutes the
Endictment; but if an Endictment be preferred at the Suite of the King, there
the Endictment shall be brought to trial at the costs of the party against whom
the Information is brought. Pasc. 1650. 24. Maii. B. S.

Although an Information be faulty in the body of it, yet upon a motion the
Court will not quash it, but the Defendant must demur to it for its
insufficiency. Pasc. 1650. B. S 24. Maii.

Justice of Peace.
A man may be a Justice of Peace in one part of Yorkshire, and yet not be a
Justice of Peace in every part of the County. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For
Yorkshire is divided into diverse parts, called Ridings, viz. into the East
Riding, West Riding, and North Riding; and he may be a Justice of Peace in one
of those Ridings, and yet not a Justice of Peace in another of those Ridings;
but generally a Justice of Peace of a County, is a Justice of Peace all the
County over.

The Peace was prayed upon Articles read in Court against one, one of which
Articles was that the party against whom the peace was prayed, did threaten
that he would burn down the house of him that prayed the peace; and upon that
Article it was granted. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. To grant the Peace against one, is
to grant that the process of the Court may issue out of the Crown Office
against him, to bring him into the Court, to find suerties to be bound with
him in a recognisance to the King to keep the peace toward all the Kings Liege
people, but more especially toward the party that prays the Peace.

A Justice of Peace ought not to bind any person to the good behavior, upon a
general information, and if the party accused, does refuse to be so bound, and
find Suerties to be of good behavior; yet the Justice of Peace ought not by
the Law to send the party to the Goal for refusing it. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For
he that desires to have one bound to the good behavior, must show some
particular miscarriages, wherein the misbehaviour of the party consists; for
accusatio generalis est nulla, for what defense can be made to it?

The Justices of Peace ought by the duty of their places to attend at the
Assizes, and at the public Sessions of the Peace, held for the County whereof
they are Justices Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

The Commission of Oyer and Terminer does extend to those that are Justices of
the peace. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. Q. Whether it be generally so.

A Justice of Peace may actually Arrest and commit the party to prison, that
does a Felony in his own view, without any warrant made under his hand and seal
to arrest him; but if there be an information made to a Justice of Peace, that
one has committed Felony, there the Justice must make a Warrant under his hand
and seal to Arrest the Felon, and may not do it by word of mouth. 1650 B. S.

It is usual in the Capital Office, if one be bound to the peace there, to keep
him bound to the peace during his life. But by Roll Chief Justice, there is no
reason why this should be done. 13. Maii. 1651. B. S. For the party may be come
reformed, and so no cause to continue him bound and his suerties for so long a
time.

A Justice of Peace may require a Bond or Recognizance of a thousand pound of
one for his keeping the peace if he see cause for it, in regard that the party
to be bound, is a dangerous person, and likely to break the Peace, and to do
much mischief. Pasc. 1652. B. S.

This Court will bind one to the Peace if they see cause to do it, although
there be no Oath made by any person against him that is to be bound, that he
goes in fear of his life of him. Trin. 1652. B. S. For the Oath of a party is
but to manifest unto the Court, that there is just cause why the party should
be bound unto the Peace, and therefore if the Court be sufficiently satisfied
without such an Oath, that there is good cause to bind the party to the peace,
they may do it without such an Oath.

If one do take his Oath in this Court against another, that he does go in fear
of his life of him, and prays the peace against him, he against whom the peace
is thus sworn, and the Peace prayed, ought to be committed to prison, if he do
not find Suerties to keep the peace, although there be no Articles exhibited
and sworn against him. 1652. B S For there appears sufficient cause by the Oath
for the Court to do it, though there be no Articles exhibited, as the usual
course is to do.

Issues.
The Court does use upon a motion, to order that good Issues be set upon a
Sheriff or other Officer, for not bringing in the body of the party into Court,
upon a Writ of Habeas Corpus directed unto him, or for not making a good
return; but they will not order-what sum shall be set upon him, but leave
that to be done according to the custom of the Court. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For
where things are to go on in a common way of practice, there the Court will not
make a special Rule in the Case.

When Issues are set upon a Sheriff or other Officer by the Court, for the
neglect of his duty; and afterward upon some reasons showed to the Court, why
they should be taken off or discharged, the Court does discharge them: the Roll
ought to be marked, to show they are discharged, otherwise Process may issue
out to levy these Issues, notwithstanding they are discharged by order of
Court. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For as the Issues do appear upon the Record, so
they cannot be discharged but upon record.

If an Issue be not well joined, it is helped after a verdict, by the Statute
of Jeofailes: but if there be no Issue joined, and a Verdict passes, this is
erroneous and is not helped by the Statute. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. But there must
be a repleader, to the intent there may be an Issue joined, upon which a trial
may be had.

Judges.
The Judges are to have a paper of the Causes which are to be spoken to in
Court, sent unto them particularly at five of the Clock in the evening, the day
before they are to be spoken to in Court. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. That they may
have time to prepare to speak to them.

Justices of Oyer and Terminer, cannot proceed to try persons endicted upon
endictments not preferred before themselves, but the Justices of the
Goaledelivery may. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For the Justices of Goale-delivery,
have a more general Commission for proceeding against malefactors, than the
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer have.

The Judges of the Common Law, have no ordinary jurisdiction to examine
Witnesses in their Chambers, but by the consent of the parties, and by the Rule
of the Court they may do it: and there uses not to be any cross examinations
of the party, but the course is, to put the Depositions in writing on both
parts, and then the Judge does examine the parties upon their several oaths,
whether their Depositions be true. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

Where there do special and doubtful matters arise upon the reading of a
Record, so that the Court is not (for the present) satisfied of the Law; the
Attorneys on both sides ought to prepare Books, viz. Copies of the Record for
the Judges, at the Clyents equal charge, that the Judges may upon view of the
Record, the better consider of the matters in dispute. For it is the course for
the Attorneys, to make their Clyents for to pay for such Books in all such
Cases, although they never make any for the Judges. By Roll Chief Justice.

The Judges of this Court declared, that they would not sit longer in Court,
then till one a clock in the afternoon upon the last day of the Term, and so
they said the Common Pleas had done. Trin. 1651. B. S. This was, that the
Attorneys might not defer their Clyents businesses to the last of the Term, as
too usually some do

Jeofailes.
Q If an Issue be joined upon a collateral point, if there be no place alleged
whence the Venue may come, this is aided by the Statute of Jeofailes: but if
the Issue be not joined upon a collateral point, and there is no place alleged
from whence the Venue may come, it is not helped by the Statute. Mich. 22. Car.
B. r.

Interrogatory.
One who is by the rule of the Court to be examined upon Interrogatories, ought
to attend the Master of the Office, who is to examine him within four days
after the Interrogatories are put in for him to be examined upon. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r.

Intendment and Intentions.
The Law does not punish any one for the Intention to do ill, if the Intention
be not put in execution, except it be in the case of Treason; for there
Intentions, if they be clearly proved by circumstances, shall be punished
equally as if they had been put in execution. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. But this is
only in high treason, and is done in terrorem, to deter men from that odious
offense, and of so high a nature, being not acted against the Person of one
sole person, but even against the whole Kingdom, which would suffer by it.

There shall not be Intended to be more then one Parish in a City, although
there be many; except the contrary be showed. Trin 24. Car. B. r. For it is not
of the essence or constitution of a City, to consist of more Parishes then one,
but there may be a City that has but one Parish in it, as the City of
Rochester in Kent.

If one be bound in an Obligation to J. S. in a certain sum of money, and in
the solvendum of the Bond, it is not expressed unto whom the money shall be
paid, the Law will intend it is to be paid to the Obligee. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.
Because no other person is particularly named, unto whom the payment should be
made; for it shall be intended, the money was to be paid to some body, and
there being no person particularized to whom it should be paid, it is but
reasonable it should be paid to the Obligee.

A Court which is pleaded (generally) to be held secundum consuetudinem, shall
be intended to be held according to the Common Law; but if it be pleaded to be
held according to a Custom, whereof the memory of man is not to the contrary,
it shall be adjudged to be a Court held by Custom. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For a
Custom must be so particularly pleaded.

If the Plaintiff do plead, that the Defendant did become bound unto him per
Obligationem suam, it shall be intended, that this Obligation was sealed and
delivered unto the Plaintiff. Mich. 24. Car B. r. For else he did not become
bound unto him by his Obligation; for an Obligation that is not sealed and
delivered is no Obligatien, nor is the Obligee bound by it.

The Intent of the parties shall not be implied against the direct Rules of the
Law. 5. Feb. Hill. 1649. B. r. For an Intent is but to be guessed at, and does
not certainly appear: but the Law is direct and plain, and therefore it shall
not be presumed, the parties did mean to do any thing against Law, where their
intent does not appear by express words.

Impossibility.
A thing which is Impossible in the Law, is all one with a thing which is
Impossible in nature. 21. Car. B. r. For the Common Law is not contradictory in
any thing to the Law of nature, but agrees with it in all things, and may be
said to be the same in effect with it.

Impropriation.
An Impropriatinn cannot be made but by the License of the King. Mich. 1649. B.
Sup. And he may do it as he has the supreme authority in all Ecclesiastical,
as well as civil matters, within his dominions.

Livery and Seisin.
A Corporation cannot make Livery and Seisin to pass away the Freehold Lands
belonging to the Corporation, but they must make a Letter of Attorney to
another, under their Common Seal, to make Livery and Seisin. Mich. 23. Car. B.
r. For Livery and Seisin must be made by one, and not by a multitude.

If a Tenant for years of Land, do consent that Livery and Seisin shall be made
of the Land let unto him, unto him that has purchased the reversion of those
Lands, and it be made accordingly, this is a good Livery and Seisin to make the
reversion pass; although that the Tenant for years do not go off from the Land
at the time when the Livery and Seisin was made, but was then in actual
possession of it. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For his Term is not prejudiced by the
Livery: For only the reversion passes, and his Assent amounts but to an
Attornment to him, to whom the Livery is made.

If a Deed of Feofment be made of Land, Habendum a die datus, and the next day
after the date of the Deed, the Feoffee gives Livery and Seisin of this Land,
this is a good Livery and Seisin; but if this Livery and Seisin were made by an
Attorney. Q. Quid operatur. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

One may give Authority by Paroll unto another, to take Livery and Seisin of
Lands for him; and if such Livery and Seisin be taken accordingly, it is good.
By Roll Chief Justice. Mich. 1650. B. S. For this shows his assent to take the
Lands by the Livery and Seisin, and the other is but as a Conduit-pipe to
convey the Land unto him.

Lease, Lessor and Lessee.
If one take a Lease by Indenture for years of a ruinous house, or that wants
Reparations, and do covenant in the Lease to leave the house at the end of the
term in good repair, heis bound to do it, and an Action of Covenant does lie
for the Lessor against him, if he do it. 21. Car. B. r. But if he had not
covenanted expressly to do it, he had not been bound by Law to do it.

A Lease which is only voidable, and not absolutely void, must be made void by
the Lessors re-entry; but if a Lease be absolutely void, there needs no
re-entry. 21. Car. B. r. That is said voidable which may be made void, if the
Lessor will, and may be continued, if he please, at his election, it is made
void by re-entry, and putting out the Lessee, or else it is continued by
receiving the rent, and thereby acknowledging him still for his Tenant.

Where the Freehold of Lands in question, in an Action of Trespass and
Ejectment is entire, although these Lands be let out to several persons for
years by several Leases, if he whose title is concerned, and does intend to try
the Title of these Lands, do seal a Lease of Ejectment upon the Lands only that
are in the possession of one of the Tenants that holds parcel of these Lands;
This is a good Lease, to try the title of all the Lands: But if the Freehold of
the Lands in question, be not an entire Freehold, such a Lease sealed upon
parcel of the Lands in question, is not good to try the title of all the Lands.
Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For several Freeholds must have several Leases to try
them: because they are the Right and Titles of several persons, or by several
Titles.

A Lease for years, although it be a very long Lease, cannot be entailed; For
the nature of a Chattel cannot be turned into an Inheritance. Hill. 23. Car. B.
r. Which would be if such a Lease which is but a Chattel, might be entailed:
for an Estate intayl is an Estate of Inheritance.

A Lessee for years is not bound to repair the house let unto him, which is
burned by accident; if there be not a special Covenant in the Lease, that he
shall leave the house in good repair at the end of the term: But if the house
be burned by the negligence of the Lessee, he shall repair it, although there
be no such Covenant in the Lease. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For by the Lessees
Covenant, it shall be intended, that he took notice of what accidents might
happen, and his Covenant shall be taken generally, and without exception, and
strongest against himself.

In a Lease for years by Indenture the term is not certain before the habendum
and tenendum in the Lease. Term. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For though it do appear
before the habendum and tenendum, that the Lands in the Lease mentioned are
demised unto the Lessee, yet it does not appear for how many years they are
demised, nor when the Lease is to begin, nor when to end, until it is declared
in the habendum.

One may raise an Estate for life in Lands to another by way of use, viz. by
covenanting with A. B. to stand seized to the use of J. S. for and during the
natural life of J. S. without Livery and Seisin. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. For the
Estate is executed in the cestuy que use, by the Statute of Uses of 32. H. 8.
without Livery.

If one be in Possession of Lands of another, and has usually paid a Rent unto
him for these Lands, although it cannot be expressly proved, that the Lands were
demised at will to him that is thus in possession of the Lands, that is, that
he should hold them as long as both parties should please, yet this holding of
the Lands shall be interpreted to be by a Lease at will. Mich. 1650. B. S. For
it shall be presumed that he in possession does hold the Lands, and that the
owner of the Lands did receive the Rent for those Lands upon some Contract,
made between the parties, for holding the Lands for some term, and for paying
of such a rent for them, and a less time cannot be supposed, then to hold them
at will.

If one make a Lease for years, and after the Lessor enters upon the Lands let,
before the term is expired or determined, and does make a Lease of these Lands
to another, this second Lease is a good Lease, until the first Lessee does
re-enter. 2. Maii. Pasc. 1650. B. S. And then the first Lease is revived.

Although a Lessee for years do lose his Indenture of Demise, of the Lands let
unto him, yet he shall not lose his term in the Lands let by the Indenture,
which is so lost, If it can be proved any way, that there was such a term let
unto him by Indenture, and that it is not determined: so it is of any other
Estate in Lands, if the Deed that created the Estate be lost, if it can be
proved, that there was such a Deed made, and that such an Estate was conveyed
by the Deed. Pasc. 1650. 14. and 15. Maii. 1650. B. S. For the Estate in the
Lands is derived from the Party that made the Deed, and not from the Deed,
otherwise then instrumentally and declaratively, to show his mind and intent
that conveys the Estate, as also the mind and intent of him that receives it.

Liberty.
Matters which do concern the Liberty of any one, ought to be determined as
speedily, as lawfully they may be. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. For Liberty is counted
very precious, and exceedingly favored in Law, not only in respect of the
particular profit, which every one obtains by his Liberty, but also in respect
of the Weal-publique; For one in prison is disabled to be useful to himself,
or any other.

Where any thing is showed to be done within a Liberty or a Franchize, there it
is not necessary to show within what County that Liberty or Franchize does lie.
Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

Leet.
If a Court Leet do not choose a Constable to serve within that Leet, the
Quarter Sessions of that County, where that Leet is, may choose one. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. For the Commonwealth must not be unserved, and it much concerns the
Peace of the Commonwealth, but more especially of the County wherein the Leet
lies, to have such Officers chosen.

Q. Whether a Court Leet may enquire of private Assaults and batteries, if
there be no blood shed in the Case? For Bacon Justice, and Walker apprentise of
the Law of the Inner Temple, held that a Court Leet might enquire of them. But
Roll Justice held the contrary. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. because they are
actionable at the Common Law only, by the Party injured, and are not public
offenses against public.

Limitation.
If a Limitation of an Estate in Lands be uncertain, such a Limitation is not
good in Law, but void. Hill. 22. Car: B. r. For the Law cannot tell what
construction to make of such a Limitation, by reason of the incertainty of it.

There is a difference between a condition precedent, annexed to an estate
subsequent to this condition, and a Limitation subsequent annexed to an Estate
presently vested. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

A thing that is expressly limited in a Will by plain words, shall not be
afterward made uncertain, by general words which follow in the said Will.
Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For that were to encounter a thing that is plain and
certainly known, with that which is obscure and doubtful.

A Limitation of an Estate to begin after the determination of an absolute
Estate in Fee-simple, is a void-Limitation in Law, for if the Law should suffer
such a Limitation to be made, this would be to suffer perpetuities to be made,
which the Law does abhor: but yet a Limitation of an Estate to begin after a
Fee-simple upon a Contingency, is a good Limitation. 19. April. 1650. B. S. For
such an Estate may never take effect.

London.
By the ancient Custom of the City of London, there ought to be but four
hundred Carmen allowed within London. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

Latitat.
A Latitat out of this Court is in the nature of an original Writ, by which
they proceed upon in the Common Pleas. Mich 1649. B. S.

Mareschall.
THe Marshall of the Mareschalsea of this Court is intended to be always in
Court, while the Court is sitting. 21. Car. B. r. For it is his Office to be
always attending upon the Court to execute his Office in relation to the Court
upon all occasions that may fall out.

Monstrance.
None shall be compelled to show a thing in pleading, which by common
intendment they cannot have knowledge of. 22. Car. B. r. 38. H. 6. f. 3.

Motion to the Court.
Monday is a special day for motions in this Court by the ancient course. Mich.
22. Car. B. r. Yet motions are made upon any day, as the businesses of the
Court of the day will permit.

One ought not to move the Court for a thing against which they have delivered
their opinion. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. But ought to rest satisfied with the
Judgment of the Court.

If moneys be upon a motion ordered to be brought into the Court, and are
accordingly brought in, they ought not to be taken out of the Court, but upon a
motion, and rule of the Court made therein. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

If any thing be moved to the Court upon a Record, if the Record upon which the
motion is made be not in Court when the motion is made, the Court will make no
Rule upon such a motion. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For the Court will be satisfied
by the Record, whether the matter of the Record upon which the motion is
grounded, be so as is suggested by the Council, and will not rest upon
suggestions made at the bar.

If there be diverse Rules of the Court made in a Cause, and the party intends
to move upon these Rules, he must produce the Rule that was last made in the
Cause, and move upon that. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. Yet it is necessary also to
have all the Rules made in the Cause, to satisfy the Court how the Cause
stands in Court, and how it has been proceeded in from time to time, and how
the Rules depend upon one another.

One party ought not to surprise another by a motion in Court, but he ought to
move in such convenient time, that the other party against whom the motion is
made, may have time to be heard, and to make his Defense. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

It is against the Rule of the practice of this Court to move matters in Law
upon the last day of any Term, except it be where the Case is peremptory, or of
necessity to be moved then. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. Because the other Party cannot
have time to make his Defense, and that day is also a day appointed for motions.

One ought not to move the Court for a Rule for a thing to be done, which may
by the common Rules of practice of this Court be done without moving the Court
for it, much less ought the Court to be moved for the doing of that which is
against the common Rules of practice of the Court. 24. Car. B. r. For the Court
is not to be troubled with, nor the Clyent put to the charge of needless
motions, nor of motions not to be granted, and the former sort of such kind of
motions do savor of ignorance, and the latter of too much presumption.

When a thing questionable between the parties is to be moved to the Court, for
the settling thereof; he that intends to move it must give the adverse party
timely notice of the time (as near as he can) when he will move it. Mich. 1650.
B. S. And upon what he intends to move, that he may be prepared to answer the
motion at the time when he moves, for the quicker dispatch of businesses.

If a Rule of Court was grounded upon an Affidavit, he that will move the Court
to make the Rule void, must when he moves produce the Affidavit in Court. Hill.
1649. 22. Feb. B. S. That the Court may be informed upon what grounds the Rule
was made, and whether there be cause showed upon the motion, sufficient to
induce them to vacate the Rule.

It is against the course of practice of the Court for any person to make a
motion in his own Cause. 24. Maii. Pasc. 1650. B. S. So said in one Thurston
and Masons Case, viz. for a Counselor to do it.

When the Court does grant a thing to one upon a motion, which was in the power
of the Court, either to grant it, or not to grant it, the party that has his
motion so granted unto him, is by the rules of the Court to pay 12d to the box
for it. 1650. B. S. Which money is given to the prisoners of the Vpper-bench
prison, as it is said.

It is not usual to move for a Trial at the Bar upon the last day of the Term.
2. Julii. 1650. B. S. Nor for the Secondary to make a Report, nor for a
Prehibition, nor to vacate a Judgment, or such like cases, except both parties
be in Court, and are contented with the motion, and prepared to speak in it.

The three last days of the Term, if it be not an Issue Term, is appointed to
hear motions only, and not other businesses, except they be peremptory, or upon
other special occasions; But if it be not an Issue Term, then the two last
days are only for the hearing of motions. 30. Jan. 1650. B. S. The Issue Terms
are Hillary- Term, and Trinity- Term; and they are so called, because though
there be Issues joined in every Term, yet not so many by much, as in these
Terms, in regard of the Causes which are to be tried ( all England over) at
the Assizes, which do follow in the next Vacations after the said Terms, viz.
the Lent-Assizes, and the Summer-Assizes, as they are commonly called.

By Glyn Chief Justice, it is not the custom of the practice of the Common
Pleas for a Sergeant at Law, to move for a Clark of the Court, and afterward
for his Clyent. Mich. 1655. B. S. For it seems it is not intended there, that
he does move without a Fee for a Clark of the Court, and therefore if he should
be so heard, he would have a double motion at one time, which no Court does
allow.

Manslaughter.
A grand Jury may find a Bill of Manslaughter to be Billa vera per
infortunium. Pasc. 23. Car, B. r.

Mortgage.
If Lands be Mortgaged to one, the interest in Law in these Lands is in the
Mortgagee before the forfeiture of them. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For he has
purchased the Lands upon a valuable consideration, as the Law will intend, and
though the Mortgagee may redeem them, yet it is not known, whether he will do
it, or no; For it is in his power to do it, or not to do it, and if he do it
not, then the Estate is absolute in the Mortagee without any other act to be
done to pass the Estate.

Message.
One Message cannot be apurtenant unto another Message. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.
For a Message is an entire thing of it self, and cannot be apurtenant to
another thing.

Non-sute.
UPon a Trial, when the Jury comes in to deliver in their Verdict, and the
Plaintiff is called to hear the Verdict; If he do not appear after he is thrice
called by the Crier of the Court, he is to be Non-sute, and the Non-sute is to
be recorded by the Secondary, by the direction of the Court, at the prayer of
the Defendants Council. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

When a Plaintiff is Non-sute, if he will again proceed in the same Cause, he
must put in a new Declaration, and cannot proceed upon that Declaration,
whereupon he did proceed in the Cause, wherein he became Non-suite. 22. Car. B.
r. 16. Ap. 1650. B. S. For by his being Nonsuit, it shall be intended that he
had no such cause of Suite as he deelared in, and so that declaration is void.

The King of Spain has been Nonsuit in England. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. And this
stands with reason, for if a foraign Prince will take the benefit of the
national Laws here, he must proceed and stand to the Rules and orders of the
Court wherein he prefers his Action.

If the Plaintiff will not proceed upon his Declaration, as he ought to do by
the Rules of the Court, the Defendant may Nonsuit him. Mich. 1649. B. S.

Although upon a trial the Plaintiff be called to hear the Verdict, and do not
appear to hear the Verdict when he is called, and thereupon the Court direct
the Secondary to record the Non-suite; yet if afterward the Plaintiff do
appear, before the Non-suite be actually recorded, the Court may proceed to
take the Verdict. Trin. 1651. B. S. For it is not a Nonsuit until it be
recorded by the Secondary, and then it is made part of the record, and is in
the nature of a Judgment against the Plaintiff.

If the Plaintiff be not ready at the trial with his Record when the Jury is
called, the Court will call him Nonsuit. By Roll Chief Justice. 1651. B. S.
For it shall be intended, he will not proceed in his cause any further.

Nolle Prosequi.
A Nolle Prosequi is, where there are diverse Issues joined between the
Plaintiff and the Defendant, and the Plaintiff enters upon the Roll, a Nolle
Prosequi; That is to say, that he will not proceed upon one or more of the
Issues joined, and yet he may proceed to trial upon the rest of the Issues.
Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

Nuisance.
A Nuisance made in a Port or Haven by the sinking of a Ship there ought to be
removed by the owner of the Ship, and if he do it not, he may be endicted for
it, as for making a Common Nuisance. 21. Car. B. r. For it is prejudicial to the
Commonwealth in hindering of Trade.

An Action upon the Case ought to be brought against one that makes a private
Nuisance, and he ought not to be endicted for it. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For
Endictments ought to be in the Kings name, and do presume to be preferred for
offenses done against the public.

A common Nuisance may be abated or removed by those persons who are prejudiced
by it. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Nomine Poenae.
A Nomine Poenae for the non-payment of a Rent, ought to be legally demanded,
if the Rent be behind, as well as the Rent is to be demanded before the grantee
of the Rent can distrain for it. 21. Car. B. r. For the Nomine Poenae is of the
same nature as the Rent is, and is issuing out of the Land, out of which the
Rent does issue.

Notice.
The Plaintiff and Defendant are both bound at their peril, to take notice of
the general Rules of practice of this Court; but if there be a special
particular Rule of Court made for the Plaintiff, or for the Defendant, he for
whom the Rule is made, ought to give Notice of this Rule unto the other; or
else he is not bound generally to take notice of it, nor shall be in contempt
of the Court, although he do not obey it. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Mich. 1649. B.
S. For general rules are the general practice of the Court, whereof every one
must take Notice of that has to do there, but particular rules are made upon
particular and extraordinary matters, happening in the proceedings upon the
motion of one of the parties made to the Court, of which the other may be
ignorant.

The Court is bound Ex Osicio to take Notice of all matters which do appear
upon the Record depending before them; but of matters Dehors, viz. to search
the Almanac for days, and to compute times mentioned in the Record, they are
not bound Ex Oficio to do it. 21. Car. B. r. 24. Car. B. r. Q.

The Court is not bound to take Notice of the new style, but of the old English
style. 21. Car. B. r. For the old is that whereby all accounts in the Common
Law are guided, and not by the new which is foreign, and goes ten days before
the English style or account.

The Plaintiff ought to give the Defendant eight days Notice exclusive, before
he executes his Writ of Enquiry of Damages, or else the Court will quash it,
although he have executed it, and put him to a new Writ of Enquiry, upon the
motion of the Defendant made to the Court of his want of such Notice, and proof
thereof by Affidavit. Trin. 22 Car. B. R. and Pasc. 1652. B. r. Exclusive is
meant, that the day upon which the Notice is given, is not to be one of the
eight days, but the Writ is to be executed upon the ninth day; and so long
Notice is to be given that the Defendant may have time sufficient to defend
himself by his Council, and Witnesses, upon the evidence given against him
before the Sheriff and the Jury, by the Plaintiff.

The Common Law does not take Notice of the intentions of the party to do any
unlawful Act, except it be in case of high treason. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. For
man's Law is to regulate the words and Actions of men, and not the thoughts, of
which it cannot have conusanse: But Gods Law extends to the thoughts.

This Court is to take Notice of a general Ordinance of Parliament, viz. such a
one as concerns the Public; but not of a Parliament Ordinance which concerns
some particular persons. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. Except such particular Ordinance
do appear before them by pleading or otherwise.

If a Declaration be put into the Office, although it be not filed, yet is the
Defendants Attorney bound to take notice of it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For it is
the Duty of the Plaintiffs Attorney, only to put the Declaration into the
Officer, and the Officer in the Office is to file it, and though it be not
filed, yet may the Defendants Attorney take a Copy of it.

None is bound by the Law to give Notice to another of that which that other
person may otherwise inform himself of. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Except he tie
himself by special covenant and agreement to do it; for the Law will not put an
unnecessary trouble upon any man.

If one do commence an Action in this Court against another, and does not
proceed to a trial in his action, by the space of a whole year, next after he
began his Suit, he ought afterward by the Rules of the Court, to give the
Defendant one whole Terms Notice that he will try his cause, before he proceed
to a trial therein. Mich. 22. Car B. r. For his delay might give occasion to
the Defendant to conceive that he intended to let his Action fall, and so to
neglect to make provision for his Defense at the trial, and therefore it is but
reason that he should have more then ordinary Notice in an extraordinary case.

If the Plaintiff give the Defendant Notice for a trial against him, and do not
try his cause the same Term he gave Notice for the trial, he ought by the Rules
of the Court to give the Defendant new Notice before he proceed to a trial
afterward; but if the Plaintiff do try his cause the same Term wherein he gave
Notice he would try his cause, although it be at another day after the day he
gave Notice he would try it; yet he is not bound to give new Notice before he
try it, for the Defendant is bound to attend the try-all at his own peril.
Mich. 22. Car. B. r. So it is where Notice is given for a trial at the Assizes,
and by reason of multiplicity of business, the cause cannot be tried at that
Assizes: but though the cause cannot be tried at one day of that Assizes, yet
it may be tried at another day, and therefore the parties must attend all the
Assizes at their peril without further Notice.

If Notice for a trial be given to the Defendant himself, or to his Attorney,
this is a good Notice; but if Notice be given thereof to the Council of the
Defendant, it is not a good Notice. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For Council are not
bound to take notice of such a warning for a trial; nor to give the Clyent
Notice thereof, and it may be though one have been formerly of Council with the
Defendant in other business, or in the cause to be tried, yet he may not be of
Council at the trial.

The Plaintiff and Defendant are both bound to take Notice of such Rules of the
Court as do concern the proceedings of their cause, at their own perils. Hill.
22. Car. B. r. For if they know them not, yet they may inform themselves by
their Council and Atturneys. But this is only to be understood of the general
Rules and not of particular rules made upon the motion of either party, for of
such rules their ought to be notice given to the party concerned. Pasc. 24.
Car. B. r.

When Council are to argue a matter in Law in Court, the Judges ought to have
Notice thereof given unto them before the day, except it be where the Court
have appointed a set day for it, or if there be not such Notice given, then the
cause is to be put in the paper of causes, that it may come on in course to be
spoken unto. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. By putting it in the paper, the Judges have
Notice, for they have a paper of the causes to be spoken to in matter of Law
the day before they be spoken to by the Officer of the Court.

The Officers in Court ought to take Notice of the proceedings of the causes
depending in Court. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For, for that cause do they sit in
Court.

If the Plaintiff or his Attorney do give Notice unto the Solicitor of the
Defendant, that he intends to try his cause at such a time, this is a good
Notice of the trial, although it be not given unto the Defendant nor his
Attorney. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For it is the duty of the Solicitor to inform
his Clyent of it, and if he do it not, it shall be accounted the folly of the
Clyent, to entertain a Solicitor that is so careless in his business, and in
this case there is no default in the Plaintiff.

The Defendant ought to have eight days Notice of the trial of the Plaintiffs
cause before it be tried, if he live twenty or thirty miles off from the place
where the cause is to be tried; but if he live further off, he ought to have
fourteen days Notice before the trial. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. That the Defendant
may have convenient time for his journey, and to prepare his Council and
witnesses for his trial.

The Plaintiff may if he please give the Defendant Notice when he intends to
try his cause the same day that he has joined Issue with the Defendant in the
cause to be tried betwixt them. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

If one be bound by the rule of the Court, to give unto another personal Notice
of a thing, it is not sufficient that Notice be left at the dwelling house of
the party. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For personal Notice is Notice given to the
person of the party himself, and not to another.

It is not necessary for the Plaintiff to give new Notice of the trial of his
cause where a retraxit is entered; for this is but a forbearance to try his
cause hac vice, and he may afterward proceed notwithstanding the retraxit was
entered. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. The entering of a retraxit is when the Plaintiff
after he has entered his cause to be tried, and has put in his Record, does
make an entry in the Judges book, that he has withdrawn his record, and
intends not then to proceed to his trial.

It is sufficient upon an Action of Trespass and Ejectment brought to try the
title of Land, if the Tenant in possession of the Land, have Notice of the
Lease of Ejectment, although he be but an under Tenant of the Land, and
although no notice thereof is given to the upper Tenant or to the owner of the
Land whose title is concerned. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. and Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.
For the possession of the Land is only recoverable in this Action, and that
does chiefly concern the Tenant in possession of it.

A Clerk of Commissioners of Sewers is such a Clerk as the Law takes Notice of.
Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For he is an Officer appointed by Act of Parliament. Q.

If the Panel of the Jury Impanelled to try a cause, be returned, and be
afterward altered or changed before the trial, the other party ought to have
Notice of it, otherwise it is a surprizal of the party. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

If the Plaintiff give Notice to the Defendant for a trial, and there is no
Jury returned to try the cause, so that the cause cannot be tried at the day
appointed, if the Plaintiff will afterward try his cause, he must give the
Defendant new Notice of this trial. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Else the Defendant
cannot be able to know against what time he must attend to make his defense.

If the Plaintiff give but eight days Notice of a trial unto the Defendant,
where by the rules of the Court he ought to have given him fourteen days
Notice thereof, yet he may enlarge the eight days unto fourteen days after
the Notice of eight days given. By Hodsden Secondary. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

By the course of the Court, the Defendant ought to have convenient Notice of
the executing of a Writ of Enquiry of Damages, before it be executed, as well
upon a demurrer as a Verdict. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. That he may prepare to give
evidence to the Jury that are to inquire of the damages, for the mitigation of
them.

This Court is not bound to take notice of orders made, and of things which are
done at the Assizes, although it be by a Judge of this Court. Mich. 24. Car. B.
r. For the Justices of Assize, etc. do Act by special Commissions, and not as
Judges of the Common Law of any of the Courts at Westminister.

When either the Plaintiff or Defendant does intend to move the Court in any
matter which may prove disputable, the party that thus intends to move, ought
to give Notice to the other party, that he does intend to move the Court in it,
and to express for what he will move, and when. Mich. 1650. B. S. That he
against whom the motion is to be made, may not be surprised, but may have time
to provide, and may attend the Court to defend himself and answer the motion.

If the Plaintiff does tell the Defendant that he will try his cause the first
sitting in the next Term, this is a good Notice given of the trial, although he
do not expresely say upon what day of the month or week it is. Mich. 1649. B.
S. For the Defendant may inform himself of the precise day when that sitting
will be, although the Plaintiff do not express it, and it may be he did not
know it himself.

In the Common Pleas in an Action of Trespass and Ejectment, if there be not
Notice given to the Tenant in possession of the Land in question, who is the
Ejector in the Action, they will not suffer the Plaintiff to proceed to a trial
upon such a Lease. Mich. 1649. B. S. This I conceive is for the better
recovering of Costs, in case the Plaintiff be non-sute.

If the Plaintiff do give unto the Defendant Notice for a Trial, before Issue
is joined in the Cause, this is no good Notice. Hill. 1649. 5. Feb. B. S. For
before Issue joined, there is nothing to be tried, and so this is a vain
Notice, and to no purpose, and it may be there will never be any Issue or
Trial, and so the party, if he should attend upon such Notice, might lose his
pains and costs.

If the Plaintiff carry down his Cause to be tried at the Assizes, and it be
not then tried for want of time, and does bring it down again at the next
Assizes to try it, he is not bound to give the Defendant new Notice of this
Trial; but if he do not bring it down to be tried at the next Assizes, and yet
will try it at another Assizes after that, he must give the Defendant new
Notice before he try it. Pasc. 1650. 6. Maii. B. S. For the Defendant may doubt
whether he will try it or no, having desisted so long from trying it, and so
might be surprised, if he should not have new Notice of the Trial.

The party that intends to move the Court in a questionable matter, ought to
give Notice thereof to the party against whom he intends to move, or to his
Attorney or Solicitor, and not to his Council, for such Notice is not good.
1650. 3. Julij. 1650. B. S. For the Council is not concerned to take notice of
any thing, but from his Clyent.

It is a sufficient Notice for the Plaintiffs Attorney to tell the Defendants
Attorney that he has put in a Declaration into the Office against his Clyent,
and he is not bound to give him a Copy of it. 13. Nov. 1650. B. S. For there he
may take a Copy of it, but usually they do deliver Copies to one another of the
Declarations and Pleadings in their Clyents Causes.

If the Assizes that are to be held for that County where an Issue is to be
tried do fall out to be fourteen days after the end of that Term, wherein the
Issue was joined, It is not necessary to give fourteen days Notice before the
Trial that the Plaintiff will try his Cause at that Assizes, although the
Defendant do dwell above forty miles from the place where the Assizes are to
be held. 22. April. 1650. B. S. For the Defendant knows the Trial by the usual
course, is to be at that Assizes, and must attend there at his peril.

If one be bound by an Assumpsit to do a thing to another, he to whom the
promise is made must give him Notice when he will have him do it, but if he
promise that another person shall do it to him, there he to whom the thing is
to be done; is not bound to give Notice to that other person when he will have
it done. 13. May. 1651. Pasc. B. r. For it may be he may not know that other
person, and there is no privity of Contract between them two, as there is
betwixt the other two.

After a ne recipiatur is entered into the Judges Book, so that the Cause cannot
be tried at that time, if the Plaintiff will try his Cause afterward at
another time, according to fair practice, he ought to give the Defendant new
Notice before his Trial; but in strictness of practice, he is not bound to give
new Notice of it, for the first Notice is to serve for all that Term, and a ne
recipiatur serves only to hinder the Trial for that day, whereon it was set
down in the Judges Book to be tried. Trin. 1651. B. S. This is to be understood
of Causes that are to be tried by the Judges every Term, and some days after
the Term in London and Middlesex, and not of Causes to be tried at the Assizes.

One is not bound to give Notice to another of a Rule of Court made against
him, except part of the Rule be, that Notice shall be given unto him of the
Rule. Trin. 1651. B. S. For it is intended that his Attorney was in Court when
it was made, and that he did take notice of it, or else that there needs no
Notice in the Case, because, that the party ought to have done that which he is
ordered to do, without a special Rule made in the Case.

If a Cause be ready for Trial, and Notice is thereupon given of the Trial, and
afterward the Cause is put to a reference, and does depend two or three Terms
under reference, and being not determined, the Plaintiff intends to proceed to
a Trial, there he must give the Defendant new Notice; but if such Trial be to
be the next Term after the reference, it is not necessary to give new Notice of
it, for it may be tried by proviso. Trin. 1652. B. S.

If one give Notice of a Trial to the Defendant, and yet does not try his Cause
at the day appointed, but do defer his Trial for longer time than one Term
after, If after that he will try it, he must give a whole Terms Notice before
his Trial; but if he try it the next Term after, there needs no new notice; For
if the Plaintiff try it not, than the Defendant may try it by proviso. Trin.
1652. B. S.

If an Action be laid in London, and the Defendant do live fifty miles off, the
Plaintiff by the Rules of the Court ought to give the Defendant fourteen days
Notice of the Trial before he proceed to it. By Roll Chief Justice. In regard
of the distance of place, it is fit he should have time for his travel, and to
prepare for his Defense.

If the Defendant will try the Cause by proviso, he ought to give the Plaintiff
due Notice that he will try it, and may not take advantage of the Notice
formerly given by the Plaintiff. 1654. B. S. Because it lies in the Election of
the Defendant, either to try the Cause by proviso, or not to try it: And the
Plaintiff cannot presume he will try it, being Defendant in the Action, except
the Defendant give him Notice that he will try it.

If one give Notice to another, that he will move the Court in one thing, and
tell him in what; and at the time he moves the Court in another matter, and not
in that whereof he gave Notice that he would move the Court in, This is not
good Notice of the motion, but the Court will give the party further time to
answer the motion. By Roll Chief Justice. For by such deceitful Notice the
party concerned cannot prepare to answer the motion.

Notice given to the party concerned by the Council in the cause, that he
intends to move the Court against him at such a time, is not to be taken by the
Court for good Notice, upon the bare averment of the Council at the Bar, that
he gave such Notice; but if the Council will make Affidavit in writing, that he
gave such Notice, the Court will allow it.

This Court is not bound ex officio to take notice of private Orders made by
the Council of State. By Roll Chief Justice. For they are matters but of
particular concernment, and not matters of Law or public businesses, whereof
as Judges they are to take Notice.

Notice given in the night of a robbery by the party robbed, with an intent
that Hue and Cry should be made after the Fellons, is good Notice according to
the Statute, if it be given in convenient time after the robbery was done. By
Roll Chief Justice.

It is not necessary to give Notice of a robbery to the Vill that is next
within the Hundred, where the robbery was done, and unto that place where it
was done: For if the next Vill be out of the Hundred, yet Notice given there is
good Notice, according to the Statute of Winchester.

Non omittas.
If the Bailiff of a Liberty do not retorn a Warrant (made upon a Latitat out
of this Court, to arrest one within the Liberty) directed unto him, the party
that is prejudiced by his not making a retorn of it, may by the course of this
Court have a Writ called a Non omittas directed to the Sheriff of the County,
in which the Liberty lies, commanding him to enter into the Liberty, and to
make Execution of the Writ, viz. the Latitat. 21. Car. B. r. For Liberties must
not be privileged to hinder or delay the Execution of Justice; and if they or
their Ministers do neglect their duties herein, this Court may intermeddle,
notwithstanding their privileges, to put the process of this Court in
Execution, that the Law may receive no obstruction by them.

Negative preignans.
A Negative preignans is, when two matters are put in Issue in one plea. Hill.
23. Car. B. r. And this makes the plea to be naught, because the Plaintiff
cannot tell in which of these matters to join Issue with the Defendant, for the
incertainty upon which of the matters the Plaintiff does insist upon.

Oath.
OFficers of Justice are by the Common Law bound to take an Oath for their due
Execution of Justice, and if they refuse to take such an Oath, they may be
imprisoned for refusing to take it. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. So careful is the Law
to have Justice done to all parties.

One that is to testify on the behalf of the King upon an arraignment of a
Felon, cannot be examined upon his Oath for the prisoner against the King, but
he may be examined without giving him his Oath. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. He is
suffered to give his testimony for the prisoner against the King, and without
his Oath in favor of life.

The Court will rather believe the Oath of the Plaintiff, than the Oath of the
Defendant, if there be Oath against Oath; because it is supposed that the
Plaintiff has wrong done him, and that the Defendant is the wrong doer, and
may therefore be rather supposed to swear falsely to protect himself from the
Law, than the Plaintiff that is forced to fly to the Law to obtain his right.
Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

One that is to be a Witness in a Cause, may have two Oaths given him, one to
speak the truth to such things as the Court shall ask him concerning himself,
and the other to give testimony in the Cause, in which he is produced as a
Witness. The former is called an Oath upon a Voyre dire. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Obligation.
One ought not to be admitted to be a Witness to prove an Obligation or other
Deed, which he takes in the name of another. 21. Car. B. r. For if he might be
so admitted, this would be upon the matter to suffer him to be a Witness to
prove a Bond or Deed made to himself, which is not reasonable.

If a Sheriff take a Bond of the Defendant for his appearance to the Action,
upon which he is arrested by the Sheriff at the Plaintiffs suit, and the
Defendant does not appear accordingly, and according to the Condition of the
Bond, the Plaintiff may by the leave of the Sheriff sue this Bond in the
Sheriffs name, and proceed to Judgment upon it against the Defendant; but
without his leave it cannot be done, but it is at the election of the Plaintiff
to sue this Bond or not, for he may proceed if he please by amercements upon
the Sheriff, until he make a retorn of the Writ directed unto him. Hill. 22.
Car. B. r. For the Bond is only to save the Sheriff harmless against what may
befall him, if the Defendant do not appear, and does no way concern the
Plaintiff, but by agreement made afterward betwixt the Plaintiff and him, of
which the Court does not take notice, except they be moved in it.

An Obligation cannot be delivered as an escroe unto the Obligee himself, but
it may be delivered to another to the use of the Obligee, as an escroe. Trin.
24. Car. B. r. For the very delivery of it to the Obligee himself, and his
receiving it makes it work as a Deed in the very instant of the delivery of it,
according to the effect of the Deed; but being delivered to another to the use
of the Obligee, it cannot operate so, because he is no party to the Deed, nor
can take any thing by it, and does but only take it, as an escree, and as an
instrument to deliver it to the Obligee at such time, and in such manner as the
Obligor shall direct, and if he deliver it otherwise, the Obligor may plead non
est factum, if he be sued upon it by the Obligee.

If one be bound unto J. S. in an Obligation of twenty pound to be paid unto J.
D. this Obligation is not good. Trin. 24 Car. B. r. For to J. S. it cannot be
good, for the Obligor is not bound to pay him the twenty pound in which he is
bound, for the solvendum is to J. D. and to J. D. it cannot be good, for if he
pay him not the twenty pound, he cannot sue for it: For the Obligor is not
bound unto him by the Obligation, and so the Obligation is void to all intents.

If money be not paid according to the Condition of an Obligation, the
Obligation does thereby become a single Obligation, that is, it shall be taken
as an Obligation without a Condition, for the benefit of the Condition, which
the Obligor might have taken advantage of by the payment of the money according
to the Condition, is lost by the not paying of it, and so the Obligation rests
in force, as if it had no Condition. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

An Obligation is a good Obligation, although it do want a date. Hill. 1649. B.
S. 8. Feb. For the date is not of the essence of the Deed, but the sealing and
delivery of it: For if the sealing and delivery of it be proved, although the
time precisely of the doing it cannot be proved, yet it is a good Deed.

Orders.
This Court may quash any Orders made at any public or private Sessions of the
Peace, or made by any other Commissioners, if they see good cause for it. Mich.
22. Car. B. r. For this Court is the superintendent Court over all other
Courts, and is to regulate their proceedings, where they be irregular and
illegal.

If a Cause be put in the paper of Causes, that it may be spoken unto in matter
of Law by the Order of the Court, and the Attorney in the Cause does not attend
the Cause at the day, the Cause is to be put out of the paper, and not to be
put in again that Term. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Except very good cause be showed
to the contrary.

This Court does not take notice of Orders made in Chancery. Trin. 23. Car. B.
r. Nor in any other Court, as to be bound by them, but will proceed according
to the Rules and Orders of this Court.

By the Orders of this Court (the three last days of the Term) the Judges have
no paper of Causes, either of Records or Conciliums delivered unto them, for
those three days are to hear motions. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. That is, the three
last days of Hillary Term, and Trinity Term, which are Issue Terms: for the
two last days of Michaelmas Term, and of Easter Term only, are for motions.

Tuesdayes, Thursdayes and Saturdayes are the proper days by the Orders of
this Court, to hear matters of Law. Mich. 1649. B. S. But chiefly Saturday.

Outlawry.
The Court will not reverse an Outlawry, although both the parties consent to
it, viz. the party outlawed, and the party at whose suit he is outlawed, except
there be error assigned in the Outlawry. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For matters of
Record are not to be destroyed without sufficient cause, and the Outlawry also
does concern the King as well as the Parties.

An Outlawry which is grounded upon an Endictment grounded upon the Statute
against forcible entries, preferred against diverse persons, may be reversed as
to some of the parties endicted, and yet may stand good, as to others that are
outlawed upon the same endictment. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For the Outlawries
against them are several and not entire, and the proceedings to the Outlawry
may be good as to the Outlawing of some of them, and the proceedings to the
Outlawry as to others, may not be good.

An Outlawry that does not express that the party outlawed was proclaimed, as
he ought to be, is not good, but may be reversed. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

If the Defendant do not appear upon the quinto exactus made by the Sheriff of
the County at his County Court, in the County where the Defendant does dwell,
then he is outlawed by the Coroner. Pasc. 1650, 22. Maij. B. S. For the Coroner
is the chief Officer in criminal matters in the County.

Office and Officer.
The chief Crier of this Court has his Office by Patent from the King; and
this Office may be granted in resersion. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For the Court is
the Kings own proper Court, where himself used to sit in person, and it is for
his honor to have such Officers by Patent, who are upon the matter to attend
his own Person, and not to leave them to be disposed of by others; and it may
be granted in reversion, because it is but a ministerial place.

The Office of Assurance cannot assure the life of one that has an Office for
his life, as it may do the life of one that is at Sea, or beyond Seas, and
employed in Merchants affairs. Mich. 1649. B. S. For they have no power to
assure the life of any, but in case of Merchants affairs, by the Statute which
gave them their power, which is the Statute of 43. Eliz.

Oyer of a Deed, etc.
If one be sued upon an Obligation, he may pray Oyer of the Obligation, and
before he has Oyer of it, he is not bound to plead to the Plaintiffs
Declaration; yet he may plead without Oyer of it, if he please: But if he do
plead without Oyer of it, he cannot after his pleading wave his plea, and
demand Oyer of it. 18. April. 1650. B. r. To demand Oyer of the Obligation, is
not only for the Defendants Attorney to desire the Plaintiffs Attorney to reads
the Obligation unto him, as the word Oyer seems only to import, or to have a
sight of it, but that he may have a Copy of it, that his Clyent may consider by
it what to plead to the Action.

Plaint.
THe Plaint is the Cause which the Plaintiff does express in the Writ, for
which he does complain to the King, and for remedy whereof he desires and
obtains the Kings Writ. 21. Car. B. r. And in his Declaration the Plaintiff
does more at large express the same matter unto the Court, where he brings his
Action.

A Plaint in an inferior Court is in the nature of an original Writ. Pasc. 24.
Car. B. r. For upon the entering of it the process of the Court does issue forth
to bring in the Defendant to appear, and to plead to the Plaintiffs Action.

Privilege.
One that is a Committee-man of a Committee of Parliament, if he be not a
Member of the House of Parliament, is not thereby privileged from serving upon
the grand Enquests, which are returned every Term in this Court, to take
presentiments of misdemeanors done within the County of Middlesex. Hill. 21.
Car. B. r.

A Clark of this Court is not bound to lay any personal Action which he brings
against another out of the County where this Court does sit. Mich. 22. Car. B.
r. But by his privilege he may lay it here, notwithstanding the Cause of his
Action did arise in another County; and he is thus privileged in regard of the
constant attendance he is tied to give in this Court; yet in real Actions he
is not thus privileged: For such Actions are local, and must be tried in the
County where the Cause of Action did arise.

A Peer of the Realm cannot claim his Privilege of Peerage in an endictment
preferred against him. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Because an endictment is preferred
in the Name of the King, against whom the plea of Privilege, is not to be
allowed, but is only to be allowed in civil Causes, and not criminal.

One that has a Suit depending in this Court is privileged by the Court from
are^ing, in coming hither from his house or lodging to follow his Cause, and
also in departing from the Court back again, directly to his house or lodging;
and if he be arested in so doing, the Court upon a motion made to inform them
of it, will set the party at liberty, and punish him that arrested him, if he
did know he had a Suit depending here, and came hither to attend it.

The wife of an Attorney of this Court, if she be arrested, ought not to claim
the privilege of this Court, not to put in bail to the Action, as her husband
may, if he be arrested; but her husband must put in bail for her, and for want
thereof she is to be committed to prison. Trin. 1650. Jun. 25. B. S. For her
husband is privileged only in regard of his personal attendance upon the
Court, and of that tie which the Court has upon him in regard of his relation
to the Court.

Prohibition.
In a Prohibition prayed to be directed to the Court of Admiralty to stay their
proceedings, upon a suggestion that they did hold Plea there, upon a promise
which was made infra corpus comitatus, and so not triable there, but at the
Common Law; It was said by the Court, that the surmise must be absolute, that
the promise was made infra corpus comitatus, and not, that if there was any
promise made, it was made infra corpus comitatus, for this is uncertain, and
upon an uncertain surmise no prohibition can be granted; for no Issue can be
taken upon it, though it should be false. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

This Court may by the Common Law grant a Prohibition to the Court of Admiralty
to stay their proceedings, if they hold Plea of any matter, which the
jurisdiction of their Court does not extend unto. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

A Prohibition does lie in all Causes, wherein a Habeas Corpus does lie. Mich.
22. Car. B. r. For this Court has power as well to see Justice done concerning
a man's estate, as to his person.

Although it be questionable, Whether a Prohibition do lie in the Case wherein
it is moved for; Yet this Court will grant it, so that the parties concerned
may appear here, and plead, or demur, as they shall be advised, to the intent
the matter may come in question here and be decided, Whether a Prohibition do
lie in the Case or not? Mich. 22. Car. B. r. And if it shall appear to the
Court that a Prohibition does not lie, the Court will then grant a
consultation, whereby the party that was stopped in his proceedings by the
Prohibition may now proceed in that Court to which the Prohibition was
directed. Mich. 22 Car. B. r.

A Prohibition may be granted to the Prerogative Court, to hinder them from
granting Letters of Administration against the Law. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

Where there is a Suit depending in the Ecclesiastical, Court for a personal
Estate, and also for Lands, a Prohibition may be granted to stop their
proceedings there, as to the Lands only, and they may (nevertheless) proceed
there, as to the personal Estate. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For as to the one thy
have Jurisdiction, and as to the other they have none.

If the Common Law and the Spiritual Law do differ in the way of their
proceedings, in matter of substance, and the Ecclesiastical Court will proceed
according to the course of their Law, this Court will grant a Prohibition to
stop their proceedings. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For in things doubtful, the
Common Law is to be preferred before the Spiritual Law, as being the more
general Law, and more tending to the general good of the people, and the
public peace of the Nation.

If the Court of the Lord Mayor of London shall hold plea of a Cause after it
is removed into this Court by a Writ of Certiorari; This Court may grant a
Prohibition to that Court to stop their proceedings there. Trin 25. Car. B. r.
For after it is removed they have no further Conusance of the Cause.

A Prohibition may be granted out of this Court to any other Court that does
proceed in any Cause, which does not lie within their Jurisdiction. Trin. 23.
Car. B. r. For that is to exceed their Authority, which this Court will not
suffer, but is to keep all other inferior Courts within their own bounds.

A Prohibition may not be granted to an inferior Court to stop their
proceedings in a Cause which does not lie within their jurisdiction to try,
after that the Defendant has allowed the jurisdiction of the Court by pleading
to the Action. Trin 23. Car. B. r. For it is then too late to move for a
Prohibition, for he ought before he had pleaded, to have demurred to the
Jurisdiction of the Court, and then if they had proceeded, he might have had a
Prohibition, or without a Demurrer, I conceive he may move for a Prohibition,
and have it.

The Defendant in the Court of Admiralty may have a Prohibition to that Court
after he has pleaded there, although he cannot have it to an inferior Court
after he has pleaded; for an inferior Court does not draw the matter in
question ad alind examen, but do proceed therein according to the Common Law;
But the Court of Admiralty do draw the matter ad aliud examen, that is to try
it by the Civil Law. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. And therefore this Court will use
their Authority at any time to stay their proceedings in the Admiralty,
although the Defendant have by his incautelous pleading allowed their
Jurisdiction.

It is not necessary for him that Libels in the Court of Admiralty, to show in
his Libel, that the Common Law bath no Jurisdiction of the matter for which he
Libels; but he that prays a Prohibition to the Admiralty in this Court, must
suggest something wherein in respect of the Cause depending there, and for
which he prays the Prohibition, that Court has no Jurisdiction of the Cause.
Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For the Admiralty cannot determine, whether the Common Law
have Jurisdiction or not, and therefore it would be a vain allegation; but this
Court can judge of the Jurisdiction of the Courts of Common Law, and can
determine whether other Courts do intrence upon their Jurisdictions, or not.

If the Court of Admirality do hold plea of any matter, which is not maritime,
although the thing were done upon the Sea, yet this Court will grant a
Prohibition to stop their proceedings. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For the Court of
Admiralty has only Jurisdiction in maritime Causes, viz. such as only concern
sea-affairs, and not of all matters done at Sea, as Contracts, etc. the Trial
whereof belongs to the Common Law.

This Court will grant a Prohibition to the Admiralty, if there be cause for
it, although that a consultation have been granted in the Court of Common Pleas
in the same cause. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

This Court ought not to deny the party a Prohibition that does pray it, if
there appear cause for a Prohibition; for it is not a thing arbitrary, or ex
gratia curiae to grant it, or not to grant it. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For to deny
it were to deny Justice to the party, in denying him the benefit of the Common
Law, which is every freeborn English man's birthright.

A Prohibition may be granted to the Spiritual Court after a sentence given in
the Cause in that Court, for which the Prohibition is prayed, if there be
cause, but the Court will not do it, until they have heard Council speak on
both parts to inform their consciences, although before a sentence they use to
grant it upon a bare suggestion of the party. Tuesday 2. July. 1650. B. S. and
Pasc. 1652. B. S. For a sentence in an Ecclesiastical Court is in the nature of
a Judgment given at the Common Law, and presumed to be given upon mature
deliberation, and therefore this Court will not, but by good advice, make a
sentence there given void, or hinder the execution of it.

A Prohibition does not lie to the Court of Admiralty in the cases of Felony;
yet if there be cause, this Court will grant a Certiorari to remove the Cause
hither. By Roll Chief Justice in Dothicks Case. 29 Oct. 1650. B. S. Q. Tamen
quia curia advisare vult.

Pleas and Pleadings.
If an Action be grounded upon a Statute, there the Statute must be precisely
set forth in pleading; but if a Statute recited be but an inducement to the
action, there it is not necessary to recite the Statute precisely. Hill. 21.
Car. B. r. For if the Statute be not precisely recited, the Defendant cannot
tell how to plead to the Statute.

As a plea in bar may go per parts, so may in like manner a plea pleaded in
abatement of a Writ. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. A Plea is then said to go per parts,
as I conceive, when one part of it goes to one part of the Declaration, and
another part of the Plea answers another part of the Declaration.

One that appears in Court upon a Habeas Corpus, ought to plead the same Term,
wherein he comes in. Hill 21. Car. B. r.

If the Defendant do not plead according to the Rules of the Court, so that the
Plaintiff may enter Judgment upon a Nihil dicit, yet if after the Rules are
out the Defendant do put in his Plea into the Office before the Plaintiff has
entered his Judgment, this Plea is to be accepted, and the Plaintiff ought not
then to enter his Judgment, and therefore it behooves Attorneys to be vigilant
in their practice. 21. Car. B. r. and 23. Car. Hill. For a Judgment upon a
Nihil dicit is for want of a Plea; but in this Case here is a Plea, and if such
a Judgment should be entered, it would be in facto, an irregular Judgment.

If the Defendant in an Ejectione firmae do not plead in time, according to the
Rules of the Court, the Plaintiff may after the Rules for pleading be out, move
the Court to set a short day for him to plead, which will be granted, if the
Land lie near at hand, and if the Defendant do not plead at the time set by the
Court, the Plaintiff may enter Judgment upon a Nihil dicit, 21. Car. B. r. But
now such motions are not usual, for Judgment may be entered of course.

A foreign Plea is to be put in upon Oath of the Defendant, that is, he must
swear his Plea is true, or else such a Plea is not to be received. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

A foreign Plea is when the Defendant does plead such matter, that if it be
true, the cause cannot be tried in this Court; and in regard that thereby the
Defendant does endeavor to hinder the proceedings of this Court, and to delay
the Plaintiff, therefore the Court will make him swear his Plea to be true,
that the Court may not be deluded, nor the Plaintiff trifled with by a false
Plea, and if he will not swear his Plea to be true, the Plaintiff may enter
Judgment for want of a Plea. Trin. 1650. B. S.

If an Action of Debt be brought upon an erroneous Judgment, the Defendant may
plead, Null tyel Record, that is, that there is no such Record, as he frames
his Action upon. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For that which is erroneous is accounted
in Law, as null and void.

If the Defendant do plead a dilatory Plea, the Court at the Plaintiffs motion
will order him to plead such a Plea, as he will stand to. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.
For the Law favors not delays, whatsoever is vainly babled by the ignorant to
the contrary. And if he be ordered to put in a Plea, to which he will stand,
and he do it accordingly, if such his Plea be not good, the Court will not
permit him to amend it, but the Plaintiff shall take advantage of it by
demurring upon it, or otherwise as he shall be advised.

In any Action wherein the Plaintiff, in case he recover, shall only recover
Damages, the Defendant may plead in Bar to this Action an arbitrament with
satisfaction thereupon made unto the Plaintiff. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For if the
Plaintiff have satisfaction, the Law will not intend that he is damnified, and
so he has no Cause of Action.

When the Court does order one to plead presently, it is to be understood that
he shall plead in such convenient time after, as the Court shall judge
reasonable. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

The Defendant may amend his Plea, although it be three Terms after it was
pleaded, if he will pay Costs. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. But it must be by leave of
the Court, because it is against the common Rules of practice.

Although a Plea do contain diverse matters in it, upon which an Issue may be
taken, yet this Plea is not double, if the Plea could not have been good,
without alleging all those matters in it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For though the
Law does not allow captious Pleas, yet it does not deny the Defendant to plead
all such matters that his Case affords for his just Defense.

If the Defendant Plead an insufficient Plea, and there is a good Issue joined
upon that Plea, and a Verdict given upon that Islue for the Defendant; the
Plaintiff shall not afterward take advantage of the insufficiency of the Plea.
Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For it was his own sault to join Issue upon it when he
might have demurred upon it.

Where one Pleads Letters of Administration, which are granted by such an
ordinary, whereof the Law does take notice, he may Plead that they were granted
unto him debito more; but if they be granted by an inferior ordinary, of whom
the Law does not take notice of, he must Plead that they were granted unto him
per ordinarum illius loci. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. That the Court may the better
Judge whether they be well granted in regard of the power of the ordinary that
granted them or not.

If the Plaintiff do alter his Declaration after the Defendant has Pleaded to
it; the Defendant may alter his Plea. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For by the amendment
of it, it may be so altered in matter that it may require a different answer
from what was formerly Pleaded, and in that case if he should not amend his
Plea, he might be triced for want of a good Plea.

In an Appeal brought, all the Pleadings ought to be in French. Mich. 22. Car.
B. r. Because the Statute which enacted that all Pleadings should be in Latin,
extends not to this Action, and so the Pleadings therein are to be in French,
as all Pleadings were before that Statute. But now by the late Act they are to
be in English. Q. Tamen, Whether that Act do extend to this Action, or only to
such Pleas as were formerly in Latin.

When the Court does order that the Defendant shall Plead, it is intended that
he must Plead an Issuable Plea. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the rule is made to
quicken the Defendant, that the Plaintiff be not delayed by his Dilatoriness,
and if he might Plead a Dilatory Plea, and not issueable, the rule would be to
no purpose.

The Court will not upon a motion, rule the Defendant to Plead peremptorily by
a day, before the common rules of the Court for Pleading be out, but then they
will. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For till then it cannot be said that the Defendant
has delayed the Plaintiff.

If a Scire facias upon a Recognizance, be brought against an Infant, he cannot
Plead Infancy or nonage to it; but he must bring his audita querela, and set
forth his case therein, and thereby his age shall be tried by the Courts
inspecting of him, and not by a Jury. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

If the Plaintiff do release his cause of Action to the Defendant, yet the
Court will not upon a motion stop the Plaintiffs proceedings in the Action, but
the Defendant must Plead this release. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. In bar of the
Action, for the Court cannot take notice of the release upon a motion.

It is not a good Plea, to Plead a Paroll agreement in bar of an agreement made
by indenture between the parties. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For an agreement by
Indenture is a more solemn agreement, and of a higher nature then a Paroll
agreement, and must be discharged by some act of as high a nature as it is.

A double Plea is such a Plea, that one Issue cannot determine all the matter
issuable that is contained in it, and also where the Defendant is put to a
double answer. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. And such a Plea is not a good Plea.

If the Defendant do Plead a frivolous Plea, to the intent to delay the
Plaintiff, and to hinder him from going to a trial, the Court will upon the
Plaintiffs motion, order the Defendant to plead such a Plea as he will stand
to, or else to accept of a Demurrer from the Plaintiff unto his frivolous Plea.
Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For it is the Justice of the Court to speed the
proceedings in Law, and to bring suits to determination as soon as with
convenience and Justice to all parties, it may be done.

By the course of practice in the Court of Common Pleas, the principle in a
Bond may Plead for his Suerty without his leave or knowledge, and acknowledge a
Judgment upon the Bond, but this Court does judge it hard practice, and will
not allow it to be don here. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. Now it is said they do not
allow it there. The practice seemed hard in this respect, that the Suerty, who
intended only to be bound that the principal should pay the Debt, should by
the falsity of the principal, be presently liable to an Execution for the Debt,
and be enforced to pay it.

Where the Defendant may plead the general Issue, he ought so to Plead, that
the whole matter in question may come to be tried. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For
else the Plea is not good, because it tenders not such an Issue whereupon the
cause depending may be determined, which every Plea ought to do, for to Plead
otherwise, is to no purpose.

If one bring an Action upon a contract, it is a good Plea in bar for the
Defendant to Plead, quod exoneravit se de Contractu. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For
it sounds all one, as if he had Pleaded that he has performed the agreement.

A Concord by Paroll is no good Plea in bar to an Action brought upon a single
Bill which is not penal. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For bare words are not of so
great force as agreements put in writting.

Every Plea must be Pleaded either in bar to the Action brought, or in
abatement of the Writ upon which the Action is framed, otherwise it is but a
discourse and not a Plea, because the Plaintiff cannot take an Issue upon it,
and therefore if the Plaintiff do demur upon it, and his demurrer be adjudged
good, he shall have Judgment against the Defendant. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Anciently all Pleadings were in French, then by the Statute it was Enacted
they should be in Latin. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. Now by a late Act they must be in
English and not written in Court-hand.

The Plaintiffs Attorney is not bound to receive a Plea for the Defendant from
any person that is not an Attorney. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. Q. Whether he ought
not to receive it from the Defendant himself, if he tender it to him.

If the Plaintiff do put in a Replication to the Defendants Plea, the Defendant
ought to Plead unto it, although it did not come in, in due time, according to
the course of the Court. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

The Court will not direct any person how to plead, although the matter be
difficult, though they be moved to do it, but will bid them Plead at their own
perils. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For Council are to advise how to Plead, and the
Court is only to Judge of the Pleadings, whether they be good in Law or not.

A thing ought not to be Pleaded by implication, but in express words. Trin.
23. Car. B. r. For there can be no Issue taken upon it, because it is not a
direct affirmative, but by supposition.

If one Plead a Deed, he must produce it in Court, but one may give a Deed in
evidence, although he cannot produce it, if he can make it out by proofs that
there was such a Deed, and so he may do of a Record. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For
upon Pleading of a Deed, it is fit that the Defendant have a sight of it, that
he may know what defense to make, which he cannot (it may be) do without a
sight of it, and every Plea shall be taken to be true, except it be denied, but
an evidence is believed or not believed, as the circumstances of things do
weigh with the Jury.

Where the Defendant is not constrained to Plead a special Plea, he may Plead
the general issue proper for the Action brought, and give the special matter in
evidence. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For every Plea must be so framed that it may
give a full answer to the matters set forth in the Declaration, to wit, all
such as are material to be answered unto.

It has been adjudged a good Plea in a Scire Facias brought against an
Executor upon an Obligation entered into by the Testator, to Plead fully
Administered, but it is better for him to Plead that no goods of the Testators
are come to his hands with which he could satisfy the Debt, viz. since the
bringing of the Writ of Scire facias against him. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

One may Plead a matter in Law, although it do amount to no more then a non
culp. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For if the party be not guilty by Law,
notwithstanding that which is alleged against him be true, it is all one as
if the matter alleged against him were not true; for no man is further guilty
of a thing then the Law makes him guilty.

If one Plead an ill Plea, and the Plaintiff joins issue upon this Plea, and a
Verdict is thereupon found for the Plaintiff, the Defendant shall not
afterward take advantage of his own ill Plea to avoid the Plaintiffs Verdict.
Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

A Plea may be amended upon leave of the Court, if it be but in paper and not
entered, but the party that amends it, must pay costs unto the other. Hill. 23.
Car. B. r. For it is not reasonable that the Court should grant him favor to
the prejudice af the other party, who by this amendment is put to new trouble
and charges.

A Clerk of the Court ought not to refuse a Plea, although it be not put in in
time, but the Plaintiff must move the Court, and abide by their rule therein.
Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For the Court and not the Atturneys are to Judge of the
legality of the proceedings in all causes depending before them, as well as
they are to determine the matters in Law in them.

One that is Endicted of Felony or Treason, ought not by the Law to be admitted
to Plead to the Endictment, until he hold up his hand at the bar. Pasc. 24.
Car. B. r. Q. Whether it is to be done to the end that the Court, Jury, and
people, may take the better notice of the prisoner, or for what other reason.

One cannot Plead his pardon for treason, until he is charged in Court with
the Endictment of it. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For it must appear to the Court what
the crime is, before they can judge of the pardon of it.

If one tender an Issue in abatement of a Writ, and there is a Demurrer to it,
if the demurrer be overruled, there must be a respondes ouster, for the
overruling of the demurrer is not peremptory to the party. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.
For the matter in question is not determined by the demurrer, but only the
goodness of the Writ brought.

That Pleading of payment upon an Action brought upon a penal Bill, without
showing an acquittance, is but a Plea in abatement of the Writ, but with an
acquittance, it is a Plea in discharge of the Action it self. Trin. 24. Car. B.
r. Q.

A Dilatory Plea upon a demurrer is not peremptory, but it is otherwise upon
an Issue joined. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If one do demur upon such a Plea as ought not to be pleaded, by his demurrer
he does admit the Plea. Trin 24. Car. B. r. For the demurrer is but to try the
sufficiency of the Plea.

One may (sometimes) Plead a Plea which is properly a Plea in bar by way of
abatement; and a Plea which is properly a Plea in abatement, by way of a Plea
in bar. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. But this holds not in all cases.

A Plea in abatement of the Writ, ought not to be received after the Defendant
has Emparled, yet if it be received, and the Plaintiff does demur to it, the
demurrer is good. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For the Plaintiffs accepting of the Plea
after imparlance, is no prejudice to the Defendant, and therefore it is but
reason that he should take advantage of the insufficiency of the Plea, by
demurring to it, if he see cause.

It is intended in Law, that every Plea is entered when it is Pleaded, for
anciently the Sergeants at Law did use to Plead all the Pleas in Court at the
bar. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. And before they were entered they could not Plead them.

If one be sued upon an Obligation, he cannot be compelled to Plead before he
have Oyer of the condition of the Obligation. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If there be a Verdict given in a cause wherein no issue was joined, this is a
Jeofail, and it is not helped by the Statute; but if there must be a repleader.
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For there is nothing tried, and so there can be no Verdict.

Upon overruling of a Plea, which is only in abatement of the Writ, there
shall be a respondes ouster, that is, the Defendant shall only be ruled to put
in a better Plea; but upon overruling of a Plea which is Pleaded in bar of the
Action, Judgment shall be given against the Defendant, for such a Plea is
peremptory. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. But a Plea in abatement is only dilatory, and
is not to bring the matter in question to an Issue, but to delay the Plaintiff.

If a Plea be put into the Office in due time, it is well enough, although it
be not delivered to the Attorney of the Plaintiff. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. So that
he may not enter Judgment for want of a Plea.

In an Action of Debt brought for Rent, upon a Indenture of Demise for years,
the Defendant may Plead payment without showing the Deeds, for the Lease shall
be intended to be in being at the time of the Action brought. Trin. 24. Car. B.
r.

A colorable Plea ought to be entered, but that which is no Plea ought not to
be entered. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For a Colorable Plea is a Plea until it be
overruled.

Q Whether one may Plead a Lease for years by Indenture without showing the
Indenture. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

In an Action of Debt brought upon an Obligation, the Defendant is not bound to
Plead until he have Oyer of the Condition of the Obligation. Trin. 24. Car. B.
r. But he may Plead without Oyer of it if he please, and if he do Plead without
Oyer he cannot afterward have Oyer of it.

If one Plead a Plea that is not good, and the Plaintiff does demur upon it, he
cannot afterward amend that Plea, without the Plaintiffs consent. Mich. 24.
Car. B. r. For the Defendant shall not take advantage of his own ill Pleading
to delay the Plaintiff, and to put him to more trouble then by the Law he may
do.

A Dilatory Plea ought to be Pleaded upon the giving of the first rule in the
Office for the Defendant to Plead, and a Plea in the chief must be pleaded
after the second Rule given in the Office for the Defendant to Plead; and this
is the reason that Judgment cannot be entered against the Defendant for want of
a Plea, until the time given by the two rules to Plead be past. Mich. 24. Car.
B. r.

The ancient course of practice was for the Defendant to put in his Plea into
the Office, before that the Defendants Attorney did deliver it to the
Plaintiffs Attorney. Mich. 1649. B. S.

The Master of the Office of the Upper Bench, ought not to suffer the original
Pleas to be delivered out of the Office, but only Copies of them. Mich. 1649.
B. S. For by the Pleadings in the Office, are the Pleadings made up for the
Issue to be tried, and if any question arise about altering of them they are to
he examined and rectified if any alteration be by the Pleas in the Office.

A Plea that is grounded upon a Statute, if it be not good, is not helped after
a Verdict. Mich. 1649. B. S. For the Statute being the foundation of the Plea,
if it be not well laid, the Plea is naught in the very substance of it, and
such Pleas are not helped by the Statute of Jeofailes.

If an Action be brought in this Court to recover Lands, and the Defendant
emparls; yet he may (as it has been held) Plead that the Lands in question are
ancient Dernesne, and demand Judgment whether this Court may hold Plea of
them, but if he plead to the Defendant, and make a full defense, he cannot
after that plead to the jurisdiction of this Court. Mich. 1649. B. S. 8. Ap.
1650. B. S. Pasc. Q. For it has been doubted and held it could not be after
Imparlance. Pasc. 1650. 4. Maii.

If the Plaintiffs Attorney deliver an imperfect Declaration to the Defendants
Attorney, and he accept of it; yet he is not bound to Plead until the
Plaintiff have perfected his Declaration. Mich. 1649. B. S. For until it be
perfected, it is no Declaration. Q. Whether he may not demur to it.

If it be doubtful between the parties, whether a Plea be good or not, it
cannot be determined by the Court upon a motion made, that the Court would
deliver their opinions whether it be good or not, but there ought to be a
Demurrer upon the Plea, and upon hearing of arguments thereupon, the Court is
to judge whether that Plea be good or bad. Hill. 1649. B. S. Jan. 26.

If an indenture be only Pleaded by way of inducement, it is not necessary to
say, per indenturam suam in curia hic prolat: but if the party do derive any
title unto himself by the indenture Pleaded he must Plead it so. Hill. 1649 B.
S. Jan. 26. That the Court may judge whether the title he makes by the
Indenture, be warranted by it, and that the other party may consider what
answer to give unto it.

If an Action be laid in London, and be afterward removed by a Habeas Corpus
into this Court, the Defendant ought to Plead the same Term, the cause is
removed, and proceed to a trial. Hill. 1649. B. S. 9. Feb. For the Court will
not grant the party to take any advantage by the removing of the cause hither
to delay the other party in the course of his proceedings.

If an immaterial Issue be joined, it is not helped by the Statute of
Jeofailes; but there ought to be a repleader. Pasc. 1650. 5. Maii B. S. vid.
Issue.

A Plea that the Plaintiff has not taken the Engagement according to the late
Act, ought to be Pleaded in this manner, petit advisamentum curiae si volunt
procedere quia querens non subscripsit engageamento. And when the Plaintiff
has subscribed the Engagement, and made it appear to the Court that he has
done it, it shall be entered upon the Roll, Quod querens subscripsit
engageamento, and then the Plaintiff may proceed. It may also be averred upon
the Roll, that the Plaintiff has not taken the Engagement, although he have
Judgment in the cause, and thereby Execution shall be stayed until he have
subscribed it. Trin. 1650. B. S. 3. July. Now all this Pleading is out of doors
by the taking away the Act made for the subscribing of it by an order of the
Protector and his Council.

If the Defendants Plea do not answer all the matter contained in the
Plaintiffs Declaration, it is no good Plea; but the Plaintiff shall have his
Judgment entire against him for want of a Plea, although the Declaration be
naught in some part of it. Hill. 1650. B. S. 31. Jan: For although the
Defendant was not bound to have Pleaded to the Declaration, but might have
Demurred unto it for the insufficiency of it, yet the Defeudant not doing it,
it shall be intended he had no cause for it, and then not Pleading, Judgment
may be entered against him

When a Plea is Pleaded, the Attorney ought to set his hand to the Plea, and
then the Issue is joined, and if he will not set his hand to the Plea,
Judgment may be entered for want of a Plea. Hill. 1650. B. S. 5. Feb. But if it
be a special Plea, there must he a Counselors hand set unto it.

If one be sued by original Writ, he must Plead the same Term, in which the
original is returned. Hill. 1650. B. S. 6. Feb.

If one be compelled to allege double matter in his Plea, yet if he do insist
but upon one of them, the Plea is not double. Trin. 1651. B. S. For upon that
matter only upon which it is insisted upon, shall issue be joined.

If the Plaintiffs Attorney will consent unto it, the Defendant may waive his
Plea without moving the Court. By Roll Chief Justice, Trin. 1651. B. r. But if
he will not consent, it cannot be done without moving the Court.

A special Plea is a Plea, although it have not a Counselors hand set to it;
and therefore Judgment cannot be entered for want of a Plea, although a
Counselors hand be not to it, without acquainting the Secondary of the Office
and obtaining his leave to do it, for it may be there was no cause for a
special Plea, and the Plaintiff must not be his own Judge. Mich. 1651. B. S.
Per Roll Chief Justice.

The Prayer of the privilege of the Court is not properly a Plea, for it was
anciently demanded by Writ, although it be now usually allowed upon the Prayer
of the party who claims it. By Latch Apprentice in the Law.

If a Declaration be delivered to the Defendants Attorney, or put into the
Office after the Essoigne day of the Term, the Defendant cannot be compelled to
Plead that Term, but he may Emparle till the next Term. 1652. B. S. For the
Term was begun when the Declaration was delivered, and so it cannot be
accounted a Declaration of the proceeding Term.

Pardon.
He that will take the benefit of a general Pardon, ought to plead the Statute
by which the general Pardon was granted. 21. Car. B. r. 8. Ed. 4. 7. 4. H. 7.
8. That the Court may judge whether his offense be Pardoned or not.

One that is found guilty of manslaughter, must sue out his Pardon, or else
his burning in the hand cannot be dispensed withal, for manslaughter is
Felony. 23. Car. B. r.

Penalty.
This Court will not give the Penalty of an Obligation to the Obligee, which
was only made to perform the Covenants of an Indenture. 21. Car. B. r. Because
the party may recover upon the Covenants of the Indenture whatsoever he can be
damnisied by the breach of them, and the Bond was given for no other intent,
but to tie the Obligee to perform the Covenants, or to satisfy for the breach
of them, and not that the Obligee should take advantage of the penalty of the
bond (which it may be is a great sum) for the breach of a Covenant, whereby the
Obligee is very little damnified.

Perjury.
A false Oath taken before a person that has not authority by Law to give the
party his Oath in that cause wherein he is deposed, is not Perjury. 21. Car. B.
r. For the Oath is Coram non judice.

An Endictment for Perjury may be preferred against one for taking a false Oath
rashly, and for want of consideration; although the party that took the Oath
did not do it maliciously, and he may be convicted thereupon; but the fine
ought to be more moderate where the Perjury is committed out of rashness only,
then where it is committed maliciously. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For though the Law
does not tolerate offenses, though they be committed out of infirmity; yet
they have regard to the weaknest of man, and will not therefore punish them so
severely as offenses committed upon premeditated malice to the party against
whom they are committed.

Process and Proceedings in Law.
All legal Proceedings ought to take commencement by original Writ or by
Endictment, or by information. 21. Car. B. r. Or by Latitat, which is the
original Process of this Court, and is in the nature of an original, although
it does suppose a former Writ in the case for which it is issued forth.

If a Cepi Corpus be returned in one Term, the Defendant ought to Plead the
next Term after the return, so that the Plaintiff may go a trial the same Term,
and so it is if the Defendant be brought into Court by a Habeas Corpus, or an
alias, or pluries Habeas Corpus. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

After the Plaintiff is nonsuit, he must begin his Action again, and cannot
proceed upon his old Declaration. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For by the non suit the
cause as to that Action is determined, and the parties have no day in Court.

After a Verdict, there ought not to a repleader, but the Plea is discontinued.
Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Where the Defendant brings a Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given
against him, and has a Supersedeas to stay Execution upon the Judgment
directed to the Sheriff of that County where the Execution is to be done; and
yet he is taken by the Sheriff by virtue of an Execution taken out upon this
Judgment, upon moving of the Court they will grant him a Writ of Supersedeas
to Supersede this Execution, quia emanavit erronice. Mich 22. Car. B. r. For
such Execution ought not by Law to have issued out, much less to have been
executed.

A Latitat is called a Bill of Midlesex. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. But not all
Latitats, but only such as are directed to the Sheriffs of Midlesex, as I
conceive.

Where the Defendant did tender unto the Plaintiff the moneys for which the
Action is afterward brought against him, before the Action was brought, and
the Plaintiff refuses them, and will (notwithing) sue the Defendant for them
upon a motion, and making this appear to the Court, the Court will order the
money to be brought into the Court, and will stay the Plaintiffs Proceedings.
Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For the Court will not countenance any one to sue another,
who may have right done to him without suit, for this were to encourage men to
be vexatious.

The continuances of Processes in inferior Courts, ought to set forth the
manner of the continuances, and not to express them generally. Trin. 24. Car.
B. r.

The Proceedings in inferior Courts, are not so regular and formal as the
Proceedings are in the Courts at Westminster, but are entered only in short
notes. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Pasc. 1648. B. S.

If one be arrested by Process of this Court, and be thereupon in Custody, and
the Plaintiff do not declare against him in three Terms after, the Defendant is
by the rules of the Court to go out upon common Bail. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For
the Court will presume the cause of Action is not very great, because it is so
long before he declares, and they will not compel him to put in special Bail
but where it appears the cause requires it.

The continuances in the Process of this Court, are not entered until the
Judgment given in the cause proceeded in be entered. Mich. 1649. B. r. For not
till then the Record is made perfect.

An appearance will help a miscontinuance of Process. 9. Nov. 1650. B. S.

The bringing of a Writ of Error is a continuance of the Action. 10 Feb. 1650.
B. S. Hill. For the Action is not determined by the Judgment, if a Writ of
Error be brought, but is still depending, for the Judgment (it may be) may be
reversed.

If a cause to be spoken to in Court be entered into the paper of causes for the
day in the Office, although it be not put into the paper of the causes of the
day delivered to the Judges, yet the Court will proceed in them if they be
informed of it. Trin. 1651. B. S. For it was but a mistake of the Clerk, and it
may be Council on both sides are entertained for that day to speak in it.

Upon a Verdict or a Demurrer (sometimes) the continuances in the cause are not
entered, until after a Writ of Error be brought. Pasc. 1652. B. S.

Miscontinuance of Process is where one Process is used for another Process,
viz. a wrong Process in stead of a right. Trin. 1652. B. S.

Provisoe.
A Provisoe in a Deed which sounds in Covenant, is Collateral. 21. Car. B. r.
That is a Provisoe which is so penned, that it implies a Covenant in it; for
there is difference betwixt a Provisoe, and a Covenant of a Deed for a Provisoe
does often go by way of destruction of the whole Deed, or some part of it, or
of the estate created by it, but a Covenant always stands with the Deed, and
only an Action lies upon the breach of it.

A trial by Provisoe was ordained by the Statute, to the end that the Defendant
might free himself of suits brought against him, by trying the issue depending
betwixt him and the Plaintiff, in case the Plaintiff does not try it as he
ought, which he may do the next Term after the Plaintiff should have tried it
or at any time after that when he pleases. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

If a Provisoe in a Deed be insisted upon at a trial to destroy the Deed in
which it is, there must be punctual proof, that the thing provided to be done
or not done, was done or was not done according as the Provisoe directs.
Mich. 1650. B. S. For the Law does not favor the destruction of Deeds or
estates, but does favor the supporting and maintenance thereof, as much as may
stand with the rules of Justice.

Pledge.
The Plaintiffs Pledges that he shall prosecute (...) suite may be entered at
any time pending the suit. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. For the putting in of Pledges
is now but a mere formal thing, but what was the ancient use of putting them
in. Q.

Pardon.
A general Pardon does discharge not only the punishment which was to have
been inflicted upon the person of him that did commit the offense Pardoned, but
also the guilt of the offense it self. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

A Pardon may dispense with the burning in the hand of a person that is
convicted for Felony, but without a Pardon it may not b^ dispensed withal.
Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

The words Pardonavit remisit and relaxavit in a Charter of Pardon granted to
one for Felony, do not restore unto him the goods which he forfeited to the
King by his Felony, but the word restituit in the Pardon, does restore him to
his goods. Trin. 23 Car. B. r. For the former words go but only to the
Pardoning of the offense, but the latter to restoring to the estate forfeited
by the Felony.

A Pardon for treason cannot be pleaded until the prisoner be charged with the
Endictment for the offense committed. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For before he is
charged by the Endictment, it does not appear to the Court that he is the
person that is pardoned by the Pardon.

If one have a Charter of Pardon for Felony committed by him, the Court ought
to allow it upon the prayer of the party that has it, but he must produce it
at the Bar, and pray upon his knees that it may be allowed. 13. Nov. 1650. B.
S. And so it was then done in one Goffs case.

A general Pardon does Pardon public offenses done to the Commonwealth, but
it does not Pardon private injuries done to particular persons. Pasc. 1652. B.
S.

Postea.
The Postea is the issue or record engrossed in parchment upon which a trial is
had; and which is afterward to be entered in the roll of the Court where the
Action tried was brought, when the party enters his Judgment upon the Verdict
had at the trial. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. It is called the Postea from the word
Postea, which begins that which is entered by a Clerk of Assize upon the record
that was tried after the trial setting forth that Postea that is afterward,
after the issue joined at such a day and place, and before such a Judge, the
Plaintiff and Defendant came, etc. to hear Judgment, that is to try the cause
and hear the Verdict, and so sets forth the trial particularly and the Verdict.

The Court may stay the Postea, not suffering the party to enter Judgment upon
his Verdict if they find cause to do it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. viz. For undue
proceedings in the trial.

The Defendant has four days by the rules of the Court to speak in arrest of
Judgment after the Postea is brought into the Court, and if the party for whom
the Verdict passed, will not bring it in upon notice given to him by the other
party, that he intends to move in arrest of Judgment; the Court upon a motion
setting forth this matter, will order Judgment to be stayed, until four days
after it shall be brought in.

There is no general rule of Court for the Clerk of the Assize to bring in the
Posteas into this Court by a percise time; but if he be negligent, and return
the^ not in convenient time, the parties grieved may more the Court, and
thereupon the Court will make a rule that he bring them in speedily. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r.

If the Clerk of the Assize have mistaken himself in drawing up of the Postea,
he may amend it by his notes which he took, and drew it up by; although it be
returned. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. But it must be before it be filed, for then it
is a record of this Court.

After the Postea is entered upon record, and the record has been read in
Court, in order to the speaking to some matter in Law in it, the Attorney in
the cause ought not to have the Postea any longer in his custody, but it ought
to remain in Court. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

The Defendant may give rules in the Office for the Plaintiff to bring in the
Postea, and if he will not do it, he shall be non-suite. 18. Nov. 1650. B. S.
For though he have a Verdict, yet he has no Judgment, and so his suit is not
determined, and the Court will intend that he will proceed no further, and the
Defendant is not to be tied to attend upon his proceedings upon uncertain ties

Although the Verdict given be prejudicial to the Plaintiff, as he conceives,
yet he ought to bring in the Postea. Pasc. 1651. B. S. 13. Maii. For he must
abide by the trial, though it may prove prejudicial unto him.

A Postea is a record of this Court trusted with the Attorney in the cause by
the Clerk of the Assize, and the Attorney is bound, if he be so trusted, to
deliver it into the Office, that the Judgment may be entered by it by the
Officer of the Court. Trin. 1651. B. S.

It is not necessary to annex the Distringas unto the Postea, although it is
usual so to do. Trin. 1651. B. S.

Presumption.
Where the Plaintiff does declare in an action of Debt for Rent behind, due
upon an Indenture of Demise for years, it shall not be Presumed that there is
any other Rent due, or Lease made then that upon and for which the Plaintiff
does declare. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For this would be a foreign construction,
and for which there is no inducement.

Where diverse houses are let to one by one Lease, the Court will Presume that
the Lessee is in possession of them all, if the contrary does not appear. Pasc.
24. Car. B. r. For although the Lessee may possibly have passed away his
interest in some of them to other persons, yet this not appearing to the Court,
they will not presume it to be so.

One Court of Justice will not Presume that another Court of Justice will do
unjustice, except it do plainly appear unto them that it is so. Pasc. 24. Car.
B. r. For each Court ought to have an honorable opinion of the proceedings of
another Court.

Ports.
The Cinque Ports are not absolutely exclusive of the Common Law, so that it
may not intermedle in some Cases, with the proceedings in their Courts. Mich.
22. Car. B. r. For the Common Law is the universal and supreme Judge of the
Nation, and no place ought to be so privileged, either by custom or charter,
as totally to be exempted from its jurisdiction; for this might cause a failer
of Justice in some cases, if it should be so.

A Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given in the Cinque Ports, is to be
brought before the Warden and Constable of Dover. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Whether a Certiorari lies to any of the Cinque Ports has been a question.
Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. Yet a Certiorari was granted out of this Court, to remove
a Judgment given at Dymchurch in Kent, being a limb of one of the Cinque
Poots, in Rook and Knights case. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Rot. 381. moved by
Lancelot Johnson of the Inner Temple.

Property.
He that has the Land that lies on both sides of a High way, has the Property
of the soil of the Highway in him, although the King has the privilege for
his people to pass through it at their pleasures; for the Law presumes that the
way was at the first taken out of the Lands of the party that owes the Lands
that lie upon both sides of the way, Mich. 22. Car. B. r. By Roll. So that it
seems it is called the Kings Highway, because of the privilege that the King
has in it for his people to pass and repass through it, and not in respect of
any Property he has in the soil it self.

He that has the goods of another person delivered unto him to keep, has a
special Property in them, by reason of the delivery of them, and may maintain
an Action against a stranger that shall take them out of his possession;
although they be not his own proper goods. Hill. 22. Car. B. S. Because an
Action does lie against him to whom they were first delivered by him that did
deliver them, if he shall not redeliver them when he is demanded to do it.

A Legatee of goods has no Property in the goods bequeathed unto him before
they be delivered unto him by the Executor or Administrator. Mich. 23. Car. B.
r. For the property of them is not altered by the Will.

The Rector of a Parish Church shall be intended to be the proprietor or owner
of the tithes of the Parish, if the contrary be not showed. Trin. 24. Car. B.
r. Because generally tithes do belong to the Rector, although in many places
they do not.

If the Sea or a River shall by violent incursion and breaking forth, carry
away the soil of one, in so great a quantity that he that had the Property in
the soil can know where his Land is, he shall have it; but if his soil or land
be insensibly, or by little and little wasted by the Sea or the River, he must
lose his Land. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 11. Maii.

If one to support the credit of a Bankrupt, will suffer the Bankrupt to have
his goods in his custody, and to dispose of the Property of them, the Property
of the goods shall be accounted to be in the Bankrupt, and the other upon a
trial for the Property of them, shall be judged to have lost his Property in
them. Pasc. 1651. B. S. 18. Ap. Because by so doing he was a cause in part that
others were deceived by the Bankrupt, whose credit he supported, and therefore
he is justly punished.

Partition.
A Partition of Lands ought to be made according to the quality, and the true
value of the Lands, and not according to the quantity or equal number of Acres.
Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For the Partition ought to be equal, which is so in the
latter, but may not be so in the division by equality of Acres.

Payment.
Payment of money before the day of Payment appointed, is in Law a Payment at
the day. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For it cannot be in Presumption of Law, any
prejudice to him to whom the Payment is made, to have his money paid before the
time.

In an Action of Debt brought for Rent due upon an Indenture of Demise of
Lands, the Defendant may plead payment without a Deed, and it is a good Plea in
Bar of the Action. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. Because the Lessee cannot compel the
Lessor to make him any discharge by Deed or Writting upon Payment of the Rent.

If one buy any thing of another, he that buys it, must pay the money
contracted for to be paid for it, before the seller is bound to deliver him the
thing sold. Pasc. 24. Car. For the contract does imply such a condition in it.

A Payment of money shall be interpreted to be made according to his intention
that pays it, and not according to his intention that receives it. Mich. 1650.
B. S. 22. Nov. For every one ought to interpret the intention of his own act,
and not another.

Procedendo.
If this Court do proceed to try a Custom of London, there the Party may move
for a Procedendo, that the cause may be removed into London, that the Custom
may be tried there, for it cannot be tried here, and so if a Procedendo should
not be granted, the cause would remain untryed, and the party that brought the
Action, would be without remedy. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

After the Defendant has filed Bail in this Court, a Procedendo ought not to
be granted, much less after issue is joined in the cause. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.
For by admitting of the Bail, the Plaintiff has admitted the jurisdiction of
the Court, and it is then too late to move for a Procedendo.

It is not necessary that a Procedendo do agree in form with the Habeas Corpus,
by which the cause was removed into this Court, but it is sufficient if it do
agree in the matter with it. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If the Defendant has put in Bail in this Court, upon the removal of the cause
hither by Certiorari, or Habeas Corpus cum causa, if afterward the Bail be
disalowed by the Court, if the Defendant shall refuse to put in better Bail,
such as the Court shall approve of, a Procedendo may be granted to the
Plaintiff to remove the cause back again to try it where the Action was first
said. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. For disalowing of the Bail, makes the Defendant to
be in the same condition, as if he had put in no Bail.

If a Certiorari to remove a cause, be returned before a Judge and not in
Court. and their follows no proceedings in the cause after the Certiorari
returned, if the party who is concerned will move for a Procedendo, he must
move for it before the Judge, before whom the Certiorari was returned, and not
in the Court whether the cause is removed. Mich. 1649 B. S. Because the Judge
has been formerly acquainted with the return of the Certiorari, and may have
better knowledge, why it was granted, and therefore the Court will not
intermedle to undo what the Judge has done.

Practice.
If the Attorney for the Plaintiff do tell the Defendants Attorney, that he is
content to stay for a Plea till such a time, and yet does in the mean time
enter Judgment for want of a Plea, this is not fair practice, but if this be
made to appear to the Court, the Court will vacate the Judgment, and force him
to accept of a Plea. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For the Law will not countenance
fraud and falsehood in the proceedings thereof, but loves plain and fair
practice.

It is not fair practice for the Defendants Attorney to Demur to the Plaintiffs
Declaration without probable cause, but only to gain time to plead. Trin. 23.
Car. B. r. For this is apparent cause of delay.

Peace and Justice of Peace.
A Justice of Peace in one part of Yorkshire, is not a Justice of Peace
throughout the whole County, but only in that division of Yorkshire where he
is authorized by his Commission to be a Justice. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. This is
in regard of the large extent of that County; for in other Counties a Justice
of Peace in every County, is a Justice of Peace throughout the whole County.

The Peace was granted against one upon an Article sworn in Court amongst
others, that he did threaten to burn down the Plaintiffs house. Hill. 22 Car.
B. r. For such menaceing words are accounted to be a breach of the Peace, and
such persons are dangerous persons in the Commonwealth, and to be restrained
from doing mischief.

A Justice of Peace ought not to bind a man to his good behavior upon a
general Information, and if the party shall refuse to put in sureties for his
good behavior upon such an information; yet the Justice ought not to send him
to the Gaol for his refusal. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. But the information must be
particular, and show wherein the misbehaviour consists: for accusatio
generalis, non est applicabilis personae particulari.

It is the duty of Justices of Peace to attend duly at the quarter Sessions,
and at the Assizes held for the County where they are Justices. Pasc. 23. Car.
B. r. For there are the most important businesses which concern the Peace and
Government of the County managed.

The Commission of Oyer and Terminer does extend to Justices of the Peace.
Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

A Justice of Peace may himself actually arrest and commit a Felon, for a
Felony done in his own view, without any Warrant made to another to do it, but
he may not command one to be apprehended for Felony upon a bare information
made against the party but by a warrant under his hand and Seal, and not by
Paroll. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

It is the course used in the Capital Office, to continue one that is there
bound to the Peace to be so bound during his life; but by Roll Chief Justice,
this is not reasonable. Pasc. 1651. B. S. 13. Maii.

If the person that is to be bound unto the Peace, be a dangerous person, and
the cause for which he is to be bound, do require great security, a Justice of
Peace may require him to find extraordinary sureties to be bound with him, and
in what sum he shall judge the cause does require. Pasc. 1652. B. S.

If this Court do see cause to bind one to the Peace, they may do it, although
no person does make Oath, that he goes in fear of his Life of the party. Pasc.
1652. B. S. For such Oath is but evidence against the purty, that there is
cause to bind him to the peace, and if the Court be satisfied that there is
cause to do it without such evidence, the not having of such an Oath is no
hindrance unto them to do it.

If one do swear the Peace in Court against another, that is, does make Oath
that he goes in fear of his life or corporal hurt of him, the party against
whom this Oath is made, ought to be committed if he do not find sureties for
the Peace, although there be no Articles exhibited and sworn against him. Mich.
1652. B. S.

Privilege.
A Committee man of Parliament that is not a Member of the Parliament is not
Privileged from serving upon the grand enquest. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.

A Clerk of this Court is not to be compelled to lay his Action out of that
County where this Court does sit. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. By reason of the
constant attendance he is bound unto in this Court.

No Privilege is to be allowed to one that has an Indictment preferred
against him, although he be a Peer of the Realm. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For an
Endictment is at the suit of the King, and against him no Privilege is to be
allowed.

One that was coming unto this Court to attend upon his cause, was arrested as
he was coming, and was forced to put in Bail; but upon a motion, and making it
so to appear unto the Court, he and his Bail were both discharged. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. And the party that arrested him had been also punished, had he not
pleaded that he knew not that the party came about his business depending in
the Court.

One may have a Privilege in the Land of another by prescription; although he
has no title to the Freehold or soil. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For although he now
have it by prescription, it might arise originally by grant, and whatsoever
lies in grant, may be claimed by prescription.

One that is Privileged in this Court, ought not thereby to claim his
Privilege to have a trial at the Bar for to try the title of Lands which he
claims in reremainder. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For it is uncertain whether the
remainder may fall whilst he continues a Privileged person, and for the
present he claims no present interest in the Lands; Nay though he had a present
claim to them, yet he ought not to be so Privileged if the Lands in question
be not of a great value, or else the title very difficult to be tried, and in
such cases, any other person, though not Privileged, may have a trial at the
Bar.

A Privileged person shall not be allowed his Privilege upon a motion for it
to the Course; but he must appear and plead his Privilege, and upon his
pleading it, he shall be allowed it. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

A Philisers Clerk did claim to be Privileged in this Court, but was denied
it. Mich. 23. Car. For though the master may be Privileged, yet the Court
takes no notice of the servant.

The Lord Major of the City of London is Privileged from all Actions during
his Maioralty, in regard of his Office, except it be for Felony or Treason, or
Actions which concern Freehold. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For these are matters of
a high nature, and it much concerns the Public to have speedy Justice to be
done in them.

A Member of Parliament is Privileged, as well in his Lands and goods as in
his person. By Roll Chief Justice, Mich. 24. Car. B. r. In the Case of the
Lord Moon; for by being disturbed in any of them, he is hindered in serving of
the Commonwealth.

An Attorney of this Court may Plead his Privilege here, after he has made
his defense in the cause in another Court. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 4. Maii. For his
pleading there does not take away his Privilege here, but does only dispense
with it for that time.

The wife of an Attorney of this Court cannot claim her Privilege as his wife,
for the Privilege is inseperabley annexed unto his person. Pasc. 1650. B. S.
7. Maii. But if she be arrested, her husband must put in Bail for her.

An Attorney of this Court that is sued as an Executor, is not to be
Privileged, for he is sued in the right of the Testator, and not in his own
right. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 7. Maii.

The Prayer of Privilege is not properly a plea, for a Privileged person did
anciently demand his Privilege by Writ, but of latter times the party has
been admitted to his Privilege upon his prayer to the Court. By Latch
Apprentise. 1654. B. S.

Party and Privy.
Where one desires to be made a party to defend the title of the Land in
question, in an ejectione firmae, the Court will grant it, so that he will
confess, Lease, Entry, and Ouster, Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. In Prince and Warners
Case. 2. Maii. 1648. But now that rule is enlarged, for he must now confess,
Lease, Entry, and actual Ouster, and must not except against the Jury for want
of Hundreders, but insist only upon the trial of the title; and if at the
trial he do not all this, then Judgment is to be entered against the Lessors
own ejector.

Purchase.
An Alien cannot purchase Lands in England, because by this means the Realm
would be impoverished by transporting the treasure out of the Realm into
foreign Countries; and by putting thereby part of the Lands of this Realm, that
is to say, the Lands Purchased by the Alien, under the power of a foreign
prince. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Praescriptions.
One cannot prescribe to have two several ways by one joint Prescription, but
he must make several Prescriptions for them. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

Two Tenants in Common cannot Prescribe for one Warrein. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.
That is severally, for they cannot both have it severally.

A Copyholder for life cannot Prescribe against his Lord, by reason of his
Copyhold, but a Copyholder in Fee may Prescribe, for he holds his Copyhold,
in the nature of an inheritance. Mich. 6. Nov. B. S. 1650.

Parish.
A Parish may comprise many Vills within it. Hill. 23 Car. B. r. 24. Car. Pasc.
Yet generally a Parish shall not be accounted to have any more then one Vill in
it, except the contrary be showed. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

It shall not be intended that there is more then one Parish in a City, except
the contrary be made to appear. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For some Cities have but
one Parish.

If the father of poor children leave the Parish, and leave his children in the
Parish, if the children have a Grandfather in the Parish that is able to keep
them, the Parish is not bound to maintain them, but the Grandfather. Mich. 24.
Car. B. r.

If a Highway lie within a Parish, the Parish within which it lies is bound
to repair it of common right, if it do not appear that some other persons are
bound by Law to repair it. Mich. 1650. B. S. 24. Oct. For it shall be intended
that the Parishioners, where it lies, have the greatest benefit of it, and do
make the most use of it.

Presentation.
If the King do present to a Church by Laps, where he ought to present pleno
jure, and as Patron of the Church; such a Presentation is not good. Hill. 23.
Car. B. r. For the King is deceived in his grant.

The King may present to a Church by his letter sent to the Ordinary to
institute and induct such an one his Clerk to the Living. Mich. 1649. B. S. Q.
Whether he may do it by Paroll; and it seems to me he may, for a letter is but
a signification of his pleasure, which he may as well signify by word as by
writting.

Principal and Accessory.
One that is present and aiding to the stabbing of another, is not a Principal,
but only an Accessory to the stabbing, within the Act of 1. Jac. that made
stabbing to be murder. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

Proof.
Although a record of a thing be lost; yet the matter may be proved by
circumstances to a Jury. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For the right does not wholly
depend upon the Record, but a Record is to make the right more clearly appear,
and to preserve the memory of it to posterity.

If a Deed which is to be given in evidence at a trial, be enrolled, there
needs no other proof of the Deed, then to show the endorsement of the
Enrollment. Mich. 1649. B. S. For before a Deed can be enrolled, the party to
the Deed does acknowledge it before a master of the Chancery, that the Deed to
be enrolled is his Deed, if the Deed be to be enrolled there, or before a Judge
of that Court where it is enrolled, which is a sufficient authority to enroll
it, and to give credit to the Deed.

A provisoe in a Deed, which provisoe goes in destruction of the estate passed
by the Deed, must be punctually proved. Mich. 1649. B. S. For the Law does not
favor things which sound in destruction of estates, but such things as tend to
the affirmance and preservation of them.

If a Place be named with an alias, it is not necessary upon a trial to prove
both the names. By Roll Chief Justice. Mich. 1650. B. S. Q Tamen, For Crawley
when he was Justice was of another opinion.

A Deed which is enrolled, and is not acknowledged before a Master of the
Chancery, as a Deed which is enrolled act perpetuam rei memoriam, and not to
pass an estate, may be must be Proved by Witnesses, if it be given in evidence
at a trial. Mich. 1649. B. S. For the acknowledging of it before the master, is
that which gives credit to the Deed, and not the Endorsement of the Enrollment,
which is but the act of a Clerk in the Office.

A thing which is Proved to have been and continued for so long time as any one
living can remember, shall be presumed to have been beyond the memory of man,
and will be accounted a good prescription. Pase. 1650. B. S. 11. Maii. Because
the contrary cannot be proved.

Plaint.
A Plaint is the cause which the Plaintiff does express in the Writ, for which
he complains to the King against the Defendant, and for which he does obtain
his Writ. 21. Car. For as the King denis his Writ to none, if there be cause to
grant it, so he grants not his Writ to any without there be cause alleged for
it; for as the King is bound to help them to right that suffer wrong, so he is
bound (as much as in him lies) to defend his people from causeless vexation.

A Plaint in an inferior Court, is in the nature of an original Writ. Pasc.
1652. B. S. For therein is briefly set forth the Plaintiffs cause of Action.

Poor.
If the Father of Children do leave the Parish where he dwells, and there is
a Grandfather of the Children to be found, this Grandfather, if he be able, is
chargeable with the keeping of the Children, and not the Parish. Mich. 24. Car.
B. r. For the tie of Nature is a nearer tie then the Law can or does enjoin.

Presentment.
A Presentment taken before Commissioners of Sewers was quashed, because 1. it
did not appear in the Presentment by what authority the Commissioners did sit
that took the Presentment. And 2. because it did not appear that any of the
Commissioners before whom the Presentment was taken, were of the Quorum. Hill.
1649. B. S. As is directed by the Statute that gives them their authority.

Parliament.
The Parliament is not accounted to begin until the first day of the sitting
thereof, although Writs are returned, and many adjournments may be before.
Pasc. 1650. B. S. 21. Maii. The Writs mentioned are meant the Writs directed to
the Sheriffs of the several Counties, and to the Cities and Borrought, to Elect
Members for them to serve in Parliament.

Presidents.
If there be a special cause to alter the ancient President of a Writ, the
Cursitors are not to keep the old form, but are bound to alter it as the case
requires, and if they shall refuse to do it, this Court will compel them to
it. Trin. 1650. B. S. Else it would be very mischievous to the people, who by
that means may have their Writs abated, and be put to the trouble and charge of
purchasing of new Writs, by reason of their willfulness and ignorance.

Prisoner and Prison.
One that is imprisoned upon a Capias utlagatum, ought to be imprisoned as
strictly as he that is in prison upon an Execution. Trin. 1650. B. S. 3. Julii.
For he that refuses to answer the Law, offends in as high (if not in a higher
nature) then he that is condemned by the Law, and is to be punished as highly.

It is the course of the Court, when a Prisoner is delivered over by this Court
unto the Marshal of the Court, to endorse the day of this delivery upon the
back of the Writ. Mich. 1650 B. r. 20. Nov.

This Court may send for a Prisoner out of the Prison of the Marshal Sea,
without a Habeas Corpus, because that Prison does belong to this Court, but
they cannot send for a Prisoner out of any other Prison, but by a Writ of
Habeas Corpus. By Roll Chief Justice. Mich. 1650. B. S.

Possession.
If one do make an Entry into the Lands of another, and that other does
notwithstanding the Entry, keep the Possession of the Lands entered into with
his servants and cattle, the entry is no entry in Law, but if the servants and
cattle be put out to gain the Possession, he that is put thus out of
Possession, if he will prove a Possession in himself after this, he must prove
an actual entry afterward. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 25. Ap.

The proving of ones cattle, to be upon the Land in question, is not a
sufficient proof, that he whose cattle they were, was in possession of the Land
at that time when the cattle were there. Pasc. 1650. B. S. For the cattle might
be upon the Land Damage feasant.

Peremptory.
By the rules of the Court, a Peremptory day is not to be given to the
Defendant upon a Judgment given against him, upon a non sum informatus, at the
first reading of the record; but the Court will appoint a day to hear Council.
Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If the Defendant do tender an issue in abatement of the Writ, and the
Plaintiff does Demur upon the issue, and upon arguing of the Demurrer, the
issue is overruled, that is, is adjudged by the Court to be no good issue; the
Defendant is only to answer over, that is, to tender a better issue, for the
overruling of the former was not Peremptory to him. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. But
otherwise it is where such an issue and demurrer, is in bar of the Action, for
there the merits of the cause is put upon it, but in the former, the validity
of the Writ is only in question, and whether the defendant is thereby
compellable to plead to the Plaintiff or not.

If a Peremptory be put off by the Court, the party that will take advantage by
the putting of it off, ought to enter the rule of Court that was made for the
putting of it off. Trin. 1651. B. S. A Peremptery is when a business is by a
rule of Court to be spoken unto at a precise day, and if it cannot be spoken
unto then by reason of other businesses of the Court; the Court in such cases
does use at the prayer of the party, who is concerned, to dispense with the not
speaking to it at that time, and does give the party further time to speak in
it, without prejudice to him, and this is called the putting off of a
Peremptory.

Proclamation.
At the latter end of the Assizes, there uses to be Proclamation made, that no
more records of nisi prius be put in to be tried at that Assizes, and that they
shall not be received after, and all persons that are to attend their trials,
if the Records of nisi prius to be tried be not then put in, may depart, and
are bound to give no longer attendance at that Assizes. Pasc. 1652. B. S.

Quashing of Endictments, Orders, etc.
THis Court has authority to Quash Orders of Sessions, Presentiments,
Endictments, etc. made in inferior Courts, or before Justices of the Peace or
other Commissioners if there be cause, that is, if they be defective in matter
or form. Mich 22. Car. B. r. To Quash comes of the French word Quasser, or
rather Casser which signifies to break in pieces, to cancel, destroy, make null
or void. But this Quashing is but by favor of the Court: for the Court is not
tied Ex Officio to do it, but may leave the party to plead unto them, and to
take advantage of the insufficiency of them by pleading to them, as in many
cases they use to do.

An Endictment may be Quashed for false Latin, or for having in it insensible
words, or English words, or for defect in the form of it. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.
But now by the late Act it may be in English.

The Court will not Quash an Endictment of forcible entry after a Verdict,
before hearing of both the parties concerned in the cause. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

The Court will not Quash an information for a fault in the body of it, but
will leave the Defendant to demur unto it, if he believe it to be insufficient;
but it is otherwise of an Endictment. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 24 Maii. Quaere
rationem.

Quo Warranto.
A Quo Wvrranto was brought for vexation upon forty eight points, and the
Court being moved in it, did order that the prosecutor should wave that Quo
Warranto, and should bring a new one, and therein insist only upon three
points, but that he might proceed to a trial upon it, in such time as he might
have done upon the old. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

Quaere.
Whether one that is under an Arrest may make an Obligation to the Plaintiff at
whose suit he was arrested, for his appearance to his Action. Pasc. 24. Car. B.
r. Pasc. 1648. B. S. In Leach and Davyes Case.

If a Lessee for years cut down Timber upon the Land let unto him, and carry it
away from off the ground. Q. Whether the Lessor may bring an Action of Trover
and Conversion, for the Timber. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

Whether a fine levied of Land shall extend to a contingent use of that Land.
Mich. 24. Car. B. r. In Thomas and Kemishes Case.

If there be two Tenants in Common of Land, and one of them dye. Quaere. How
his wife shall be endowed of the Land which her husband beld in common, whether
by metes and bounds or not. 16. Nov. 1650. B. S.

Return of Writs, etc.
THe Court was moved, that a return made upon a Habeas Corpus might be amended
before it was filed, and it was granted. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. But after it is
filed it cannot be amended, for then it is a Record of the Court.

If a special Scire Facias do issue forth, a nihil cannot be returned upon this
Scire Facias. Hill. 21. Car. B r. For a nihil is a general return, which ought
not to be in this case; because the Writ is a special Writ.

If an inferior Court do make an ill return of a Habeas Corpus, the Court will
grant an alias Habeas Corpus, and also set an amercement upon them for making
an ill return of the former Habeas Corpus. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. Because
thereby, viz. by the ill return, Justice is delayed, and the party grieved is
also put to more trouble and charge to obtain it.

If a Writ out of this Court be directed to an inferior Court, which the
inferior Court is not bound to allow, but may proceed notwithstanding the Writ
sent unto them, yet they ought to make a Return upon the Writ, and in the
Return to show the cause, why they do not allow the Writ, but do proceed in the
Cause, notwithstanding the Writ. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For the Writs of this
Court are to be obeyed, if there be not very good reason showed to the contrary
why they ought not to be obeyed.

A prisoner brought to the Bar, upon the Return of his Habeas Corpus may have a
Copy of the Return, if he pray it, that he may take his exceptions to the
Return. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. But the Return must be first filed.

If the Under Sheriff of a County may be justly challenged, as partial to the
Plaintiff, or the Defendant in respect of kindred or alliance, or some other
cause that may render him not to be indifferent between the parties; and he be
to execute a Venire Facias, to summon to a Jury to try an issue joined betwixt
the Plaintiff and Defendant, in such cases the Court will upon motion of the
party that is likely to be prejudiced if a Jury should be returned by him,
order that the High Sheriff of the County shall himself Return the Jury. Mich.
22. Car. B. r.

If one be arrested by the Sheriffs Bailiff, and a Bond be given unto the
Sheriff, that the party arrested shall appear at the Return of the Writ; the
Sheriff ought not to Return a Non est inventus, but a Cepi Corpus, and if he do
Return a non est inventus, the Plaintiff may bring an Action upon the Case
against the Sheriff for making a false Return, or else the Court may amerce him
for it; and if the Sheriff do Return a Cepi Corpus, and yet the party Arrested
does not appear at the day, the Court will increase amercements upon the
Sheriff, until he make the party to appear. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For when the
party is arrested, he is in custody of the Sheriff, and he ought to keep him at
his peril, and bring him in at the day, and it is of favor to the party that
he takes Bond of him for his appearance, for he is not bound to do it; and if
he suffer by it, he may take his remedy against the party upon the bond.

It is not requisite that the Sheriff in making a Return should insert his
title or name of dignity or Christian, or surname, but only by his name of
office. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. Yet if he do insert those names which is usually
done, the Return is not thereby hurt or made defective.

If the Sheriff Return a Cepi Corpus, and the party arrested is sick and does
not appear, there may a Habeas Corpus licet languidus, issue out of this Court
to bring the party in, notwithstanding his sickness. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. So
that in some cases the party is not excused from obeying the Law, though the
hand of God be upon him; for the Law regards public Justice more then the
private good and welfare of any particular person, yea of mary particular
persons, although it be also tender of the persons of all.

If a Capias be awarded, and the party dye before the Return of it, he may be
helped by pleading of it. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

If a Writ be Returned by a person to whom it was not directed, the Return is
not good. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For Processes of Law are to be executed by such
persons only, as the Law takes notice of, as public ministers who are
accountable for their actions, and not by private persons.

A Return of the Sheriff ought not to mention the year of the Age of the King,
but the year of the reign of the Kings. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For the Sheriffs
and all ministers of Justice are Officers to the King in his politic capacity,
and not in his natural capacity, and as he is a King which relates to the time
he began to reign, and not as a man to the time of his birth.

Where a matter to be tried by a Jury does concern the title or interest of the
Undersheriff, there the Jury that is to try this matter, is to be returned by
the High Sheriff, and not the Undersheriff. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For it is to
be presumed that the Undersheriff will not Return an indifferent Jury, where
himself is concerned, for every one is apt to be partial for his own benefit.

It is not necessary for the Sheriff to Return the panel of the Juries names,
but to say that they are de vicineto of such a place, for so it shall be
intended and the form of all Returns of Juries are so. Triu. 24. Car. B. r.

It is not necessary that the Return of a Habeas Corpus, or a Return made by
Commissioners of Sewers, should be so formal and punctual, as a Plea ought to
be. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. Mich. 1649. For there is not so much prejudice to any
one by their informality as may be by informal and ill pleading, neither are
such Returns made by so learned men as pleadings are, and therefore the Court
expects not, they should be so curious in framing of them, but will accept of
them for good, if they be good in the substance of them, and to a common intent.

A Return of a Habeas Corpus ought to be written in Parchment and not in Paper;
and if it be made in Paper it is not good, nor will the Court accept of it.
Mich. 24. Car. B. r. Pasc. 1650. For the Return is to be filed, and made a
Record of the Court, and all records are to be in Parchment, that they may
continue to posterity, which they will not so well do, if they were written in
Paper.

If a Habeas Corpus cum causa, that is, a Habeat Corpus to remove the body of
the party, and of his cause depending, be directed to an inferior Court, they
ought to Return the body and all the causes that are there depending against
him, if they be for the value of above five pounds, and it is not sufficient to
Return one or some of the causes. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. For the word causa is
there taken for nomen collectivum comprehending more then one.

In criminal matters, proceedings which are erroneous, are not helped after a
Verdict, by the Statute of Jeofailes. Pasc. 1651 B. S. 11. Maii. This is in
favor of the life and liberty of the people which are most concerned in such
proceedings, and are much favored in Law.

Record.
A Habeas Corpus is not a Record, until it is returned and filed, and then it
cannot be amended, but before it be siled, it may. Hill. 21. Car B. r.

If the writing or form of a Letter in a Record be doubtful, so that it may be
taken either for one Lettter or another Letter, the Court will construe it to
stand for that letter, that is, for the maintaining and upholding of the
Record, and not that letter which will go to the making of the Record erroneous
and naught. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. For the Law does delight to maintaen the
reality and being of things, and favors not the destruction and nullifying of
them, and therefore if a Record be so penned, that the words may receive a
double construction, one to make the Record good, and another to make it
erroneous, the Court will interpret the words that way, that will make the
Record good, and not that way which will make it erroneous.

A matter of Record must be proved by the Record it self, and not by evidence;
for no issue can be joined upon it to be tried by a Jury, as it is of matters
of fact. 21. Car. B. r. For the credit of a Record is greater then any
testimony of witnesses.

A Record certified out of an inferior Court, upon a Writ of Error brought, and
a Certiorari thereupon directed to them to certify the Record, is not said to
be in this Court to be proceeded upon before it be entered here, or be in the
Office, although it be showed there. 21. Car. B. r.

A Record ought to be pleaded entire, that is the whole Record, and not part of
it, with an inter alia, in reference to the Record, and so ought a special
Verdict to find a Record. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For part of a Record, is not the
Record, for a Record cannot be taken by parcels.

This Court will not amend a Record which is moved out of an inferior Court;
but they will amend a Record which is removed hither out of the Common Pleas if
they see cause, and so they will do Records removed out of the County Palatine
of Chester, and some other Courts sometimes. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Because they
take no notice of the proceedings in inferior Courts, but the County Palatine
and some other Courts are of a higher nature.

The Court will not supply a blank left in a Record to make it perfect, whereas
before it was defective. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For this were for the Court to
make a Record which is not their Office to do, but to Judge of them, and by so
doing the party that might take advantage of the defect of the Record, would
thereby be deprived of it.

If the Record of the issue made up ready for the trial of the cause be
defective in some small thing which may be well amended without defacing of the
Record; the Court upon a motion will give the party leave to amend the Record
if he will pay costs to the Defendant; although it be entered for trial: but the
Court will not give leave to amend it if it cannot be done without defacing and
much altering of the Record. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

The Court will not make application of a Record produced to the matter for
which it was produced for the benefit of the party that does produce it, but
the party and his Council must do it. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For if the Court
should do it, it would be for them to act the part of Counselors, and not of
Judges, which they ought not to do

A transcript of a Record, which Record was amended in the Common Pleas, may by
leave of the Court, be amended in this Court by a Clerk of this Court, but
without leave of the Court, nor out of the Court it may not be done. Pasc. 23.
Car. B. r. For a Record cannot be amended without a rule of the Court, for that
is called the leave of the Court, for the Court speaks by their rules.

The Judges cannot judge of a Record given in evidence, if the Record be not
sub pede sigilli, that is, exemplified under seal, but a Jury may find a
Record, although it be not so, if they have other matter given them in evidence
sufficient to induce them to believe that there was such a Record. Pasc. 23.
Car. B. r. For the Judges are to judge only de existentibus, and apparentibus,
but the Jury are induced by things which are but probable, for the most part,
and accordingly they give their Verdict.

If a Record be removed into this Court by a Writ of Error, and the Defendants
Council in the Writ of Error, do not open the Record right as it is, unto the
Court, this false opening of it shall not be prejudicial to the Plaintiff in
the Writ of Error, but he may examine the Record afterward, and rectify the
misrecitals. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

A Record may be contradictory in appearance, and yet may in some case be
nevertheless a good Record Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

A Record that that is razed, remains a good Record notwithstanding the rasure
in it, yet he that razed it, is not to go unpunished for his offense. Mich.
1649.

Apparent faults of the Clerk only in Records removed out of inferior Courts
into this Court, are amendable here by the Statute of 8. H. 6. Trin. 23. Car.
B. r. But not other faults or errors in them.

Neither a Deed enrolled, or a Decree in Chancery enrolled, are Records, but it
is a Deed and a Decree Recorded. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For a Record of a Court
is made up of the proceedinge in some cause in that Court.

When a Record is to be spoken unto in Court, the Council at the Bar ought to
open the Record before it is to be read by the Clerk in Court, by the custom
of practice; yet the Court may suffer it to be first read if they please. Hill.
23. Car. B. r.

There was a rule of Court made, that every Attorney of the Court shall enter
the whole Record upon the roll, after a Trial had in the cause, before the next
Term after the trial so had, upon the pain of twenty shillings to be paid by
every such Attorney that shall not do it, toward the relief of the poor. Hill.
1649 B. S. That the Record may be spoken to the next Term after the trial, if
there be cause, which cannot be done until the Record be perfected, and so by
this the not perfecting it, the Clyent is delayed.

A Record cannot be removed by a Writ of Error, until the Judgment in that
Record be entered. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 12. Maii.

By Roll Chief Justice, it was the ancient custom to enter the Record of the
Cause before the cause was carried down to the Assizes to be tried; but this
course was found to be inconvenient, because it could not be amended after the
entry of it, and therefore now they use not to enter the cause before the trial
be past, and therefore he ordered a rule to be set up in the Office, that if
the trial do not proceed at the Assizes, at which the Record was carried down
to be tried, and the Plaintiff will carry it down again, that he give the
Defendant new notice of the trial, and so likewise is the Defendant to do where
he intends to try the cause by provisoe, that the adverse party may not attend
with his Council and Witnesses to no purpose. Trin. 1651. B. S.

Relief.
A Relief is the fruit of a Rent-service. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. And it is
twofold; that is to say, 1. A Relief at the Common Law; And 2. a Relief
grounded upon a custom.

Rescous.
An Endictment for a Rescous returned against one into this Court, ought not be
quashed, although it be erroneous, except the party that is endicted for it do
appear personally in Court. 21. Car. B. r. For he cannot in such a case appear
by Attorney, because the offense was criminal and personal.

An Endictment of Rescous ought to express the place where, and the time when
the Rescous was made, or else it is not good for the incertainty of it. Trin.
23. Car. B. r. So that the Defendant cannot tell what answer to make for
himself.

An Endictment of one that was Endicted for a Rescous, supposed to be made in
the fifteenth year of King Charles was quashed for its insufficiency, and yet
the Rescouser did not appear personally in Court (contrary to the common rule
observed in such cases) the cause thereof seems to be, because it was an old
Endictment, and no proceedings had been made upon it against the party. Pasc.
24. Car. B.

Request.
Where one is to do a Collateral thing, he ought to be requested to do it, but
where the thing to be done, is a part of the contract, there needs no Request
to be made to the party to do it. 21. Car. B. r. For by the contract he has
taken notice at his peril to do it.

Where one brings an Action of Covenant for not paying of moneys according to
the Covenant, he needs not allege, that he Requested the Defendant to pay
them; but where he brings an Action of Debt for money due by Covenant, he ought
to allege a Request. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. Q.

Where one is bound to make a special Request for the doing of a thing, a
general licet saepius requisitus in the Declaration is not sufficient. Trin.
24. Car. B. r. For those words are too general, and mere matter of form, and a
special Request ought to set forth the time and place, and manner of the
Request made.

In an Action of Debt brought for moneys due upon an Obligation, it is not
necessary to allege a Request. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For the very bringing of
the Action is a demand of the money in judgment of the Law; and the party was
bound by his own Deed, to pay the money at his peril.

One may make a Request by Attorney for the payment of moneys due upon an
Obligation. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

Upon a contract in the nature of a Debt, Request or no Request is not
material, but it is otherwise if the contract be a special contract for a
Collateral thing. Mich. 1650. B. S.

Repeal.
The Defendant cannot Repeal his Warrant of Attorney given to an Attorney to
appear for him; but he is compellable to appear by his Attorney according to
his Warrant by the rules of the Court, that he may not delay his appearance by
that means to the prejudice of the Plaintiff. Trin. 22. Car. B. r.

Reversal.
The chief Justice or the ancientest Judge in the Court in his absence, does
always pronounce the reversal of an erroneous judgment to be Reversed by a
Writ of Error openly in Court, upon the prayer of the party, and he pronounces
it in French, to this effect, Pur les errors avandit, et auters errors manifest
in les record, soyt les judgment reverse, and le Defendant restore, a tout ceo
que il ad per ceo perd. In English thus. For the aforesaid errors, and other
manifest errors in the Record, let the Judgment be Reversed and the Defendant
restored to all that which he has lost by it. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. But now the
Seignior Judge pronounces it, and does it in English.

The Reversal of a Judgment may be pronounced conditionally, that is, that the
Judgment is Reversed, if the Defendant in the Writ of Error do not show cause
to the contrary at an appointed time. Trin. 22. Car. B. r.

Where diverse persons stand Outlawed for a forcible entry, if the Out-lawry be
erroneous, it may be Reversed as to one of the persons Out lawed, and stand
good as to the others, but the possession of the Land cannot be restored until
the Out-lawry be Reversed in the whole. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

The Judge will not pronounce the Reversal of an erroneous Judgment, though it
be adjudged to be erroneous, except the Council for the Plaintiff in the Writ
of Error do pray it may be pronounced. Hill. 1649. B. S. 30 Jan. For the Judges
are only to do justice to those that desire it.

Restitution and Rerestitution.
No Restitution is to be granted by the Court, upon the suggestion of the
insufficiency of an endictment of forcible entry or other matter, until the
Certiorari granted to remove the endictment into this Court be returned. Mich.
22. Car. B. r. For before the ret^rn the Court has nothing before them upon
record to judge upon.

Where an endictment of forcible entry is quashed, the Court upon motion, does
usually grant the party endicted, a Writ of Rerestitution, to restore him to
the possession of the Land: yet the Court may (if they please) settle the
possession of the Land in question, according to their own discretions: viz.
where they shall conceive the most right to be for the possession. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r.

There ought to be no Restitution or Rerestitution granted of the possession of
Lands, where it cannot be grounded upon some matter of record. Hill. 22. Car.
B. r.

A Writ of Restitution lies, to restore one to the place of one of the Common
Council of London, or to the place of a Constable, if he be illegally put out
of such a place. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. Or to a Churchwardens place, or to a
Recorders or Town-Clarks place, and generally to any public Office, or place
of profit, or trust, but not to a private Office or place.

The words remisit and relaxavit, expressed in a Charter of pardon, granted by
the King unto one for a felony committed by him, do not restore him unto his
goods which he forfeited unto the King by being convict of the felony: but
there ought to be the word restituit, which does properly and in its genuine
signification, import a Restitution to a thing which he has not: whereas the
words remisit and relaxavit, may signify the remitting or releasing of the
claim which one has to a thing, which is in his possession to whom the release
is made. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

The proper nature of a Writ of Restitution is, to restore the party that has
it, unto the possession of a freehold or other matter of profit. Trin. 23.
Car. B. r. Yet this does not generally hold; for one may have a Writ of
Restitution, in some Cases, to be restored to a place of no profit, as is
before expressed.

The Law does oftentimes restore the possession to one without a Writ of
Restitution: to wit, by a Writ of Haberefacias possessionem, and otherwise, in
common course and proceedings of justice. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

A Writ of Restitution, is not properly to be granted, but in such Cases where
the party cannot be restored by an ordinary way of justice or course of Law,
and many times such cases do happen. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

If one be endicted for a forcible entry, and the party endicted do traverse
the endictment, he cannot have restitution granted unto him, before a trial,
and a verdict, and judgment also given for him, although the endictment be
erroneous. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. For it is too late to move
to quash the endictment after he has taken his traverse, and so the endictment
must stand good against him till the trial.

The Justices of Peace only before whom an endictment of forcible entry is
found, must give the party Restitution who was put out of possession by force,
and not other Justices of Peace of the County: but the Judges of this Court may
grant a Writ of Restitution though the endictment was not found before them.
Hill. 23. Car. B. r. For they have a superintendent power over all England.

Where a Judgment for Land is reversed in this Court by a Writ of Error, the
Court may grant a Writ of Restitution to the Sheriff, to put the party in
possession of the Land recovered from him by the erroneous judgment. Pasc. 24.
Car. B. r.

There may a Writ of Restitution be granted to one that stands endicted for a
forcible entry, after he has traversed the endictment, and before the trial,
if there do appear to be apparent delay in the proceeding of the Defendant upon
the traverse, else not, as is aforesaid. Trin. 24. Car B. r.

There cannot be a Writ of Rerestitution granted, where there does not appear
to have been a Writ of Restitution formerly granted in the Case. Mich. 1650. B.
S. For the very word Rerestitution does imply, that there was a Writ of
Restitution formerly granted.

A Writ of Rererestitution may be granted upon a motion for it, if the Court
see cause to grant it. By Ask Justice. Pasc. 1650 B S. 2. Maii.

Upon an endictment of forcible entry found against the party, if he do neither
traverse nor plead to the endictment, the party put out of possession, may be
restored to his possession without moving the Court. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 22. Maii.

Rule.
The Court will not make a Rule for a thing which may be done by the course of
the Court, without moving the Court: and if the Court be informed that they
have made such a Rule, they will vacate it. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the Court
is not to be troubled with needless motions, and to do impertinent and useless
things.

The Attorneys are bound to observe the Rules of the Court, for if they should
not, other Attorneys would not know what to do in their Clyents Causes, nor the
Judges how to judge of the legality or illegality of the proceedings in Causes.
Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For to proceed in any thing without a Rule, is to walk in
the dark, and tends to bring things to confusion.

If the Court do make a Rule which was grounded upon an Affidavit, he that will
move the Court against this Rule, must bring in the Affidavit into Court upon
which the Rule was made. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. That the Affidavit may be read in
Court, to put the Court in mind for what reasons they made the Rule, and
whether there be stronger reasons to vacate it, then there was for the making
it, or not.

The Plaintiff and Defendant are both bound at their peril, to take notice of
the Rules made in Court touching the Cause depending between them. Hill. 22.
Car. B. r. Except part of the Rule be, that one party shall give notice to the
other of the Rule made against him.

The Court ought not to give a Rule to any prisoner in the Mareschallsea
prison, to go at large, except such a prisoner have suits in Law of his own
depending, at the time of the Rule made. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

If there be diverse Rules of Court made in a Cause, and one of the parties
intends to move the Court upon a Rule formerly made, he ought to move upon the
last Rule made in the Cause. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For else the Court cannot
understand how far the Cause has been proceeded in.

The Court will make such a Rule, by the consent of both the parties, which
without their consent they would not have made. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For,
Consensus partium, tollit errorem.

The Court will not make a Rule for a prisoner that is not imprisoned in the
Mareschalsea. Pasc. 23. Car. For that only is the prison which properly belongs
to this Court, and of which this Court has jurisdiction over.

Any prisoner in the Mareschall, may have a Rule of Court, every day to go at
large, if such prisoner has business in Law of his own to follow: but such
Rules do only extend, to give him leave to go and return from his Council,
and nor for him to go elsewhere at his pleasure. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Rules of Court ought to be interpreted according to rule and order, and not
incertainly. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For were it otherwise, they would become
snares and not Rules.

One is not bound to take notice of a particular Rule of Court, except he have
particular notice given him of the Rule. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Q Tamen. For it
seems every one should be conusant, how the Court proceeds from time to time in
his cause depending there.

The Preignotaryes of the Common Pleas, will not make a Certificate to this
Court of their proceedings there, without a Rule of this Court to enjoin them
to do it. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. But then they are to do it for the better
informing of this Court, and that the course of Justice may not be interrupted
or delayed.

A Rule made in a Judges Chamber must be entered in the Office, or else it is of
no force to ground a motion upon. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 10. Maii.

If a prisoner have a day Rule, to permit him to go abroad, yet he ought not by
virtue thereof to go into the Country, except it be in case where he has
business in Law there. Mich. 1650. B. S. 12. Nov.

Rejoinder.
If the Defendant do in his Rejoinder depart from his Plea pleaded, in bar
this Rejoinder is not good. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For this is to say and unsay,
which the Law does not allow, for Pleas must be plain and certain.

One ought not to Rejoyn upon such words which are not contained in the
Declaration or Plea. Mich. 23. Car. For that is for the party to frame a
discourse of his own, and not to answer the Plaintiffs Plea.

Remainder.
A contingent Remainder may be destroyed, by destroying the particular estate
upon which it depends. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For take away the foundation that
supports the building, and the building must needs fall.

A Remainder is a residue of a thing going before; and yet in some case there
may be a Remainder without a particular estate in esse to support it; as it is
in the Case of a Use in Remainder. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. But this is not by the
Common Law, but by the Statute.

Residuum est ultima pars diversorum particularium. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

Revocation.
A Revocation of Letters of Administration may be without a seal. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. For it is but to signify the pleasure of the ordinary, touching the
administration of the goods of the intestate: but the Letters of Administration
must be under seal, because thereby the administrator derives his authority,
which ought to be fortified as well as may be.

If an Attorney appear for his Clyent, and accept of a Declaration, the Clyent
cannot revoke his warrant of Attorney, with an intent to stay the plaintiffs
proceedings. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. But the Court will force the Defendant to
plead, and if he do not plead, will order that judgment be entered against him
for not pleading.

Riot.
If diverse persons do assemble together in a peaceable manner, and after they
are so assembled, do act some Ryotous act, this is a Ryotous assembling of
them, although they did not assemble at the first in a ryotous manner, but
peaceably. Hill. 24. Car. B. r. For the ryotous act shall have relation to
their assembling together, so far as to construe it to be with a ryotous
intent, although it did not appear so^ at the first.

Two persons alone cannot make a Riot, but there must be three persons together
at the least to make a Riot. 22. Car. B. r. But two persons may take a
conspiracy.

Recognisance.
A Recognisance entered into in the Common Pleas, is entered specially; but a
Recognisance entered into in this Court, is entered generally. Pasc. 23. Car. B.
r.

Roll.
The Plea Roll, is of more credit and esteem in the Court then the Essoign
Roll, for the Plea Roll is the Roll of the Court. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

If a Writ of Error be brought to reverse a Judgment, it is not necessary to
mark the Roll; yet if it be not marked, that thereby the Attorney on the other
side may take notice of the bringing of the Writ of Error, nor the Attorney on
the other side, has notice given him of the bringing of the Writ of Error, if
he do proceed and take out execution upon the Judgment, it is no contempt to
the court. Mich. 1649. B. S. For it shall not be presumed he knew there was a
Writ of Error brought: yet though it be no contempt in him to take out the
Execution, yet the Execution shall be superseded, quia improvide emanavit, for
by bringing of the Writ of Error, the hands of the Court where the judgment was
given, were foreclosed from proceeding any further.

Replevin.
A Replevin ought to be certain, in setting forth the number and kinds of the
Cattle distrained, or else it is not good; because if it be uncertain, the
Sheriff cannot tell how to make deliverance of the Cattle, because he knows not
particularly what the cattle are that were distrained. Trin. 23 Car. B. r.

Replication.
If the Plaintiff do Reply to a Plea in Bar, which is not good by his replying
to it, he has confessed it to be good. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. And so it shall be
now taken to be, for he has lost his advantage of demurring unto it, by
passing by the defects of it, and replying unto it.

If an Action for the breach of the condition of an Obligation be brought, and
the Defendant do plead that he has performed the condition, the Plaintiff in
his Replication, must show in what, particularly, the Defendant has broken
this condition. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. That the Defendant may be able to give a
particular answer to the breach assigned; and if he do not assign a particular
breach, his Replication is idle, for it says no more then what was formerly
said in the Declaration.

Reservation.
If the Lessee for years, assign over all his term to another, and reserve a
Rent, the Reservation is void. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For by the assignment of
the whole term, he has no interest in the thing let, for the which he can
challenge any Rent to be due.

Recovery.
A Recovery cannot destroy a thing executory which does depend upon a
contingency. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Because it was uncertain at the time of the
Recovery suffered whether it would ever be or no, and a Recovery will not work
upon so remote and uncertain an estate.

If a Recovery be suffered by Baron and Fem of Lands whereof the Fem has an
estate in Fee Simple, although there was no Tenant to the precipe of the Lands,
yet this Recovery shall be a good estople against the Baron and Fem and their
Heirs, but it would be otherwise, if the Lands had been Entailed at the time of
the Recovery. By Roll Chief Justice. Mich. 1650. B. S. 8. Nov.

It is not necessary for the Judge to examine a Fem Covert, when she joins with
her husband to suffer a Recovery of her own Lands, yet it is prudential to do
it. Trin. 1651. B. S. By Roll, and he said that he used to do it.

Release.
If the Defendant in an ejectione firmae, will not defend the title of the Land
in case the Verdict pass against the Plaintiff; the Ejector may Release the
damages to the Plaintiff. Hill. 1649. B. S. 11. Feb. For he is the Defendant
in Law, although the title do not concern him, and it is the others fault that
he was not himself made Ejector to defend the title.

One is not bound to give a Release unto the Sheriff for moneys which he
receives from him, which he levied for him by virtue of an Execution; but he
must give him a note under his hand, that he has teceived it. Hill. 1650. B.
S. By Roll Chief Justice. Q. tamen, Whether he be bound to give him such a
note, for the Sheriff is an Officer of the Law, and upon payment of the money,
the Law gives him his discharge.

Recital and Misrecital.
If a Statute be Misrecited in pleading in a matter which goes to the ground of
the Action, which is brought upon the Statute; it is not helped after a
Verdict, by the Statute of Jeofailes; but if it be Misrecited only in a
circumstancial matter, and which goes not to the ground of the Action, it is
helped after a Verdict by that Statute. Trin. 1650. B. S. For the Statute helps
only matters mispleaded in matter of form, and not matters of substance.

Report.
By the custom of the Court, the Secondary ought not to make any report (of
any matters referred unto him by the Court) upon the last day of the Term, for
that day is properly appointed for motions only. Trin. 1650. B. S.

Reversion.
If one have a Reversion expectant upon a Lease for years, he may make a Lease
of this Reversion unto the Lessee for years, for one year, and after make a
Release in Fee to the Lessee for years of the Reversion, and by this
conveyance, the Reversion in Fee will pass to the Lessee. Mich. 1650. B. S.

Reference.
Matters of Fact betwixt the party, in a cause depending in Court, are not to
be Referred to the Secondary, for such matters are tryable by the Jury that is
to try the cause, but matters concerning the due proceedings, or undue
proceedings in the cause by either of the parties are properly to be Referred
unto him, and for him in some cases to compose the differences, and in others
to make his report to the Court how the matters do stand. Pasc. 1650. B. S.

If a matter in difference, betwixt the Plaintiff and the Defendant be referred
to the Secondary, and one of the parties will not attend at the time appointed,
to hear the business referred; the other party may proceed in the Reference
alone, and get the Secondary to make his report without hearing of the other
party. Trin. 1651. B. S. For one party cannot compel the other to attend; and
therefore such References would many times take no effect for want of the
presence of both parties, if a report may not be made notwithstanding one of
them refuses to attend.

Right.
Lands between the high water Mark, and the low water Mark do appertain to the
Lord of the Manor next adjoining, of Common Right. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. By
Roll. Q. tamen, Whether they do not rather belong to the King, for it has so
been held.

Scire Facias.
ONe may have a Scire Facias to revive a Judgment upon which no Execution was
taken, if it be but seven years past since the Judgment was had, without any
motion to the Court for it, and if it be under ten years since the Judgment
was had, a Scire Facias may be moved for to revive it at the side Bar, but if
it be above ten years since the Judgment was had, a Scire Facias may not be
had without moving the Court for it. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. But the Court will
not deny it, if it be moved for. The side Bar is a place where a rail or bar is
set up near to this Court below the Court in Westminister-hall, where the
Judges stand and rest themselves before the Court sits, and where they put on
their Robes, and put off their Robes; and there is another like it by the
Common Pleas, and it is called the side bar, because it is on one side of the
Court, and not in the face of it.

A Scire Facias to revive a Judgment, ought not to be granted, if the Record
be not in the Court where the Judgment was obtained. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. For
the Record is the Warrant for the Scire Faias.

A Scire Facias ought to be directed into the County where the original Action
was brought, upon which the Judgment to be revived by the Scire Facias was
obtained. Trin. 1650. B. S. 23. Car. B. r.

A Scire Facias ad audiendum errores is not well brought before the Record of
the Judgment be certified into the Court, to reverse which, the Writ of Error
was brought. 21. Car. B. r. For there is no record in Court to warrant the
granting of it.

If one sue out two Writs of Scire Facias one after the other, there ought to
be seven days distance between the first and the second Scire Facias. Mich.
21. Car. B. r.

The return of the second Scire Facias ought to bear date at the return of the
first Scire Facias. Mich. 21. Car. B. r.

A Scire Facias ought to be as short as possible, because it is the nature of
Writs to set forth things very briefly, and a Writ is therefore called a brief
from the Latin word breve, which signifies short or compendious. Mich. 21. Car.
B. r.

Of latter times it has been used to make out a Scire Facias with a Fieri
Facias or Writ of Execution comprised in it; and both make but one Writ,
whereas anciently a Scire Facias, and a Fieri Facias were two distinct Writs or
Processes. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. But they may make them distinct Writs at this
day if they please.

A Scire Facias may be traversed before Judgment given upon it, but after a
Judgment there can be no traverse, but a Writ of Error may be brought to
reverse the Judgment, if the Scire Facias was not good upon which it was
grounded. Trin. 22. Car. B. r.

When a Judgment is reversed by a Writ of Error in this Court, a Scire Facias
shall issue against the Plaintiff in the Judgment reversed, to show cause why
the Plaintiff in the Writ of Error, whereby the Judgment was reversed, should
not have the moneys which were recovered and levied upon him, by virtue of the
Judgment reversed. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

A Writ of Scire Facias is not an orginal Writ, but it is a Record at the time
of the Caption, before it is entered at Westminister, and an Action may be
brought where the Caption is. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

In a Scire Facias brought upon a Judgment given in the Common Pleas, it is
necessary to show before what Judge the judgment was given, but it is not
necessary to do it in a Scire Facias upon a Judgment given in this Court. 23.
Car. B. r.

An old Judgment may be revived by a Scire Facias granted upon a motion to the
Court, but if a Scire Facias be taken out to revive an old Judgment without
leave of the Court, the Scire Facias is not good, but is reversable. Trin. 23.
Car. B. r. For such a Scire Facias is not the Process of the Court.

If one do not proceed upon a Writ of a Scire Facias within a year and a day
after it was taken out, he cannot after that time proceed upon that Writ, but
must sue out a new Scire Facias, for the old Writ is discontinued. Hill. 1650.
B. S.

If an Administrator obtaines a Judgment for a Debt due to the Intestate, and
the Administrator does afterward dye Intestate, and letters of Administration
is granted to one de bonis non, etc. of him that dyed first Intestate; this
Administrator cannot have a Scire Facias to revive the Judgment obtained by
the Administrator of the first Intestate, but he must bring a new Action to
recover that Debt. Hill. 1650 B. S. For he is no ways privy to the first
Judgment.

Statute.
He that will take advantage of a Statute by pleading it must show in his
pleading, that he is within some Provison of that Statute, if the Statute which
he pleads, be a particular Statute, and not a general Statute. 21. Car. B. r
25. H. 7. f. 1. For the Judges are bound to take notice of general Statutes
which concern all the people; but not of particular which do only concern
particular persons or places.

The Statute of primo Jac. which concerns Atturneys and Solliciters does not
extend to special retainers of Atturneys and Solliciters. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.
For that Statute is a general Statute, and not a particular.

If an issue be joined upon a Collateral point, arising in the pleading, and no
place is alleged whence the venue may come, this fault is helped after a
Verdict, by the Statute of Jeofails; but if the issue be not joined upon a
Collateral matter, it is not helped by the Statute, if no place be alleged.

The Statute which concerns the returning of Juries does only extend to Juries
to be returned to any of the Courts at Westminster. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

The Statute of 23. H. 8. c. 5. concerning Sewers, was made for the ease and
benefit of the people, to wit, the Defendants who are prosecuted upon that
Statute, and they may plead that Statute or not plead it at their election.
Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

If one acknowledge two Statutes upon his Lands one after the other, and
satisfy the former Statute, and the Conusee of the latter Statute, take out an
extent upon the Lands; this extent may be avoided until the former Statute be
avoided by a Scire Facias. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For the Law is not to take
notice of private acts done between the parties.

A Statute which is made only in affirmance of the Common law, that is, that
does not enact any new thing, but does only enact that which was provided for
by the Common Law before the act made, is nevertheless a Statute, and may be
pleaded as a Statute, although the Defendant has a plea at the common Law.
Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

The ancient Statutes were made upon the Petition of the Commons in Parliament
unto the King, and passed not by Bill, as now they do. Pasc. 23; Car. B. r.

A Statute acknowledged upon Lands, is a present duty, and ought to be
satisfied before an Obligation, which is not so. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For a
Debt due upon an Obligation is but a chose in Action, and recoverable by Law,
and not a present duty.

It was held by this Court 5. Car. in Simons Case, that the Statute of 1.
Maria, was repealed by the Statute of 1. Eliz. But Quaere, for it was doubted
by the Court, whether it be repealed in the whole, or in part only. Mich. 23.
Car. B. r.

The Statute of 21. Jac. of Jeofailes, which is to help defects in pleadings,
does extend to all inferior Courts, as well as to the superior Courts, for it
is a beneficial Law for the people, and shall therefore be expounded largely,
and not with a restriction. Pase. 24. Car. B. r.

The misrecital of a Statute in pleading, in a thing which does not concern the
ground of the Action which is brought upon the Statute, is helped by the
Statute of Jeofailes. Trin. 1650. B. S.

Although a penal Statute shall not be extended to equity in the exposition of
it, yet it shall be so expounded, that the true intent and meaning of it may be
known. Mich. 1650. B. S. For if the former should be, the exposition would be
too large and arbitrary, and if the latter should not be, the exposition would
be to narrow, and would extenuate the force of the Statute.

Satisfaction.
Satisfaction pleaded to an Obligation which appears to be of a thing which was
performed before the date of the Obligation, is not good. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.
For the date of the Obligation shall not be intended to be after the ensealing
and delivery of it.

Moneys that are to be paid by an Executor, by virtue of a Decree in Chancery,
are not to be satisfied by the Executor before a Debt due upon an Obligation
made by the Testator, and grown due after the death of the Testator. By Roll
Chief Justice. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

Whether a Legacy given by the Testator, or a Covenant entered into by him in
his life time, and broken in the time of the Executor, shall be first
satisfied. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. Q. In Eeles and Lamberts Case.

A Guardian may acknowledge Satisfaction upon Record, for the Infant unto whom
he is Guardian, for a Debt, which as Guardin he has recovered for the Infant.
Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For it is reason that he that has power given him to
recover a Debt, should have power to discharge the party of whom it is
recovered, when he has received it.

The ancient course of this Court was, that if the Defendant will make the
Satisfaction for that which he is sued for, to the intent that the Court may
cause the Plaintiff to cease his prosecution, and may receive the Satisfaction
offered, that the Defendant should come into Court before he pleads, and tender
Satisfaction, or else the Court would not receive this tender, nor order any
thing in it. Hill. 1650. B. S. But now if the Defendant do offer this
Satisfaction after be has pleaded, the Court will not utterly reject it, but
will upon the prayer of the party, refer the matter to the Secondary to end the
matter, the Defendant making full Satisfaction for the principle matter, and
for costs and damages suffered and expended by the Plaintiff in the suite.

Sheriff and Undersheriff.
In some cases the Court will order the Sheriff to attend the Secondary of the
Office, with his Book of Freeholders of the County where the Land in question
does lie, that an indifferent Jury may be returned for a trial at the Bar.
Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

A Sheriff is not bound to return a Writ directed unto him, except the party
whom the Writ does concern, do tender him his Fees for the executing of it;
that is in such cases where he is allowed Fees. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Q. de ceo.
For the very words of the Writs do enjoin the Sheriff to make a return of them.
Mich. 22. Car. B. r. So that it seems he is to return them, whether the parties
concerned do call on him or not; and if he be not paid his Fees, where he is
allowed to take them, he may recover them by an Action.

A Sheriff out of his Office cannot be fined by the Court, but a Tipstaff may
be sent for him to bring him in to answer this misdemeanor committed by him
when he was in his Office. 22. Car. B. r.

The old Sheriff of a County, is Sheriff until the new Sheriff be sworn,
although he be chosen. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For the taking of his oath does
complete him in his Office.

The Undersheriff ought always to have his Deputy to be attendant in Court,
to receive and execute their commands, and to give account of businesses which
may fall out concerning the Sheriff. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

Both the Sheriffs of the City of London, are in Law but one Sheriff, and one
of them is not only Sheriff of Middlesex, and the other Sheriff of London, or
one the Kings Sheriff, and the other the City Sheriff, as it is commonly said.
11. Feb. Hill. 1650. B. S.

Every Sheriff ought to answer for the misdemeanors of his Bailiffs. Trin.
1651. B. S. For they are his servants, and ought to be under his Government.

Suggestion or Surmise.
A Suggestion made to the Court, that the thing for which it is libelled in the
Admiralty against the party, was done infra Corpus comitatus, where as in truth
it was done beyond the Seas, is notwithstanding a good Suggestion, for the
Court to grant a prohibition unto the Admiralty upon, for it is but to try the
jurisdiction of the Admiralty, and not the merits of the cause; and if it be
false, the Plaintiff in the Admiralty may join issue upon it, and try it at the
Law, and if the Verdict pass for him, the Court will grant a consultation that
he may proceed in the Admiralty. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Matters of Record ought not to be stayed upon the bare Suggestion or Surmise
of the party; but there ought to be an Affidavit made of the matter Suggested,
to induce the Court to ground a Rule for staying the proceedings upon the
Record. Mich. 1650. B. r.

Surrender.
If Lessee for Life, do accept of a Lease for years, it is a Surrender in Law
of his Lease for life. By Roll. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For if it should be
otherwise, the Lease for years would be made in vain and to no purpose, for
both the Leases cannot stand together, and where things may have an operation
by a reasonable construction in Law the Law will support them.

Supersedeas.
If a Writ of Error be brought, there ought not to be a Supersedeas granted to
him that brings the Writ of Error, to stay Execution upon the Judgment which
is to be reversed by the Writ of Error, until he that brings the Writ of
Error, have put in special Bail, to pay costs and damages, if the Judgment be
not reversed by the Writ of Error, but affirmed. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

It is very hard to compel the party that brings a Writ of Error, to take out
a Supersedeas, into all the Counties where he has Lands or goods liable to the
Execution upon the Judgment; for the reversing whereof, the Writ of Error was
brought. Mich. 1650. B. S. By Roll Chief Justice. Yet it is a sure way for him
that does bring the Writ of Error to do it, to avoid trouble and charge, which
may otherwise befall him by executing the Judgment, if he have a violent and
malicious adversary.

After a Writ of Error is brought and allowed by the Court where the Judgment
was given, for the reversal whereof, the Writ of Error is brought, the hands of
the Court are foreclosed, that is, stopped from proceeding upon the Judgment
any further, and there needs no Supersedeas to be directed unto them, nor is
it necessary to mark the Roll. Mich. 1049. B. S. For every one ought to take
notice of such general Writs as may any ways concern them.

If a Writ of Error be brought to reverse a Judgment given upon a nihil dicit,
the bringing of this Writ of Error, is a Supersedeas to stay Execution upon the
Judgment, notwithstanding the late Statute that enacts that a Writ of Error
shall be no Supersedeas to stay Execution upon a Judgment. Pasc. 1651. B. S.
13. Maii. For that Statute only extends to Judgments given upon a Verdict,
and not to Judgments given upon a nihil dicit, or upon a non sum informatus,
or upon a demurrer.

Surprisal.
The Court is always very cautious that no person, that has any cause
depending before them be Surprised, especially in such matters as are final
and penal to the party that is surprised. Mich. 1649. B. S. Because by
Surprisals, the parties Surprised, are deprived of making their full defense.

Setlement.
If one has hired a dwelling house in one Parish, and be settled in that house
but a small time; yet this is such a setlement in the Parish where the house is
that the Justices of the Peace have no power to make an order to remove the
party settled out of the Purish wherein he was so settled; except the party so
settled be lame or blind, or likely to be suddenly chargeable to the Parish
where he was so settled. Mich. 1650. B. S. 11. Nov.

Trial and Proceedings to it.
NOtice to an under-tenant of a house or land, that there is a Lease of
Ejectment sealed and delivered to Try the title of the thing of which he is in
possession, is no good notice in respect to the upper tenant thereof, or to him
in reversion whose title is properly concerned; and therefore if there be a
Trial, and a Verdict, and a Judgment, in such a case where there was notice
only given to the under-tenant as aforesaid, the Court upon a motion and proof
of this matter, will vacate such a Judgment as a fraudulent Judgment. Hill.
21. Car. B. r. For it is deceitfully obtained as to him in the reversion whose
title is concerned in the Judgment.

No trial ought to be had at the Bar, the same Term that the Defendants plea is
put in, but the Term following by the Rules of the Court. Hill. 21. Car. B. r.
Except it be by special rule of Court, or in causes depending on the Crown
side, wherein the King is a party.

This Court will grant a Habeas Corpus to Try a Felon at the Bar, although the
Felony was not committed in the County of Middlesex, isthere be not a Gaol
Delivery in the usual manner in the County where the Felony was committed.
Hill. 21. Car. B. r. This is done for the expedition of Justice, and that the
prisoner may not lie long in prison, for the Law favors liberty.

A Trial in that Court where the issue Tried was not joined, is not a good
Trial. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. For there was nothing before them to Try, and so it
was Coram non judice.

Where the Plaintiff will not Try his cause in such due time as he ought to do,
by the Rules of the Court the Defendant may upon warning given thereof to the
Plaintiff proceed to the Trial of it himself. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. That he may
free himself from the Action that is brought against him.

Justices of Peace may by there Commission Try a murder committed in the County
where they are Justices. Pasc. 22. Car. B. r. But they do not often do it, but
leave such matters to be Tried by the Justice of the Gaol Delivery at the
Assizes.

If any of the Defendants Witnesses to be used at a Trial, do live above forty
miles distant from London; the Plaintiff by the Rules of the Court ought to
give the Defendant fourteen days notice of the Trial before he Try his cause.
Pasc. 21. Car. B. r. That the Defendant be not surprised for want of sufficient
time to get his Witnesses to be at the Trial.

Upon a Trial at the Bar, when the Jury is at the Bar, and the Court ready, and
the panell of the Jurors names is delivered to the Secondary, he bids the crier
call the Defendant, which he does, and if his Council say they appear, then the
Secondary bids both parties take heed to their challenges, and then proceeds to
swear the Jurors; but if he do not appear after thrice calling by the Crier,
the Plaintiffs Council do pray the Court the Verdict may be taken by default.
Trin. 24. Car. B. r. It is called a Verdict by default, because if it pass
against the Defendant, where the Defendant had right, and might have defended
himself; it is not the fault of the Court or Jury, but his own, that would not
appear and defend his cause.

Where a Trial is had by provisoe, the Plaintiff may be called before the Jury
is sworn, if the Defendant do require it. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. For the
Plaintiff is as it were in the place of the Defendant, because the cause is
brought to a Trial by the Defendant.

The Court will not grant a Trial at the bar, except there be oath made, that
the matter to be Tried is very difficult, or of great value. Mich. 22. Car. B.
r. In which cases it is fit the Trial should be at the Bar, where Trials are
more solemn, and where more time may be spent in the Trial then can be at the
Assizes.

After a Trial has been in a cause, the Court ought not to order that there
shall be a new Trial of it, except it does appear that there was a surprisall
in the Trial had, or some fraudulent miscarriage in it; for if they might in
any case they please, order a new Trial, this would be for the Court to have an
Arbitrary power, which the Law will not permit. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For this
would weaken the Common Laws to the prejudice of the people.

Where warning is given of a Trial to the Attorney in the cause, and the
Attorney cannot give notice of this warning timely enough for his Clyent to
prepare for the Trial, the Court will not force the Attorney to go to a Trial,
but will give longer time. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Because the Court will not
surprise any person, and such Trials very seldom do determine the business,
but beget more trouble and charges to both parties.

Where there ought to have been a place alleged whence the venue should come,
and there is no place alleged, but an issue is joined, and the venire is de
corpore comitasus, and a Trial is thereupon had, this is good Trial, and there
ought not to be a repleader. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For here is a good pleading
and a good issue joined and well Tried, and a repleader is to be only where
the Pleading is vicious, and has not brought the issue in question, which was
to have been Tried.

If the Court do know that the Jury have given their Verdict against the
evidence given unto them, they may order a new Trial to be in the case. Mich.
22. Car. B. r. Q. Tamen, For the Jury are upon their Oaths, and it may be they
know something of their own knowledge more then the evidence which moved them
to give their Verdict so, and the party against whom the Verdict is given, is
not without remedy, for he may bring his Attaint against the Jury; yet new
Trials have sometimes de facto been awardes in such oases.

There may be a good Trial in a cause, although the Defendants plea be ill.
Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For the Trial depends not upon the plea, but upon the
issue joined; and if there be a good issue joined, the Trial is good, what ever
the plea be.

Where the Plaintiff will not try his cause after issue is joined, the
Defendant may try it afterward when he pleases. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. That he
may free himself from the suit.

When the Defendants Attorney has told the Plaintiffs Attorney what plea he
will plead, the Plaintiffs Attorney may give him warning for a Trial, although
the issue be not made up in the cause. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For after plea
pleaded, it is in the Plaintiffs choice whether he will reply or no, for he may
make up the issue when he pleases.

If a cause to be tried, be not entered into the Judges Book, before whom it is
to be tried four days before the cause is to be tried, the Plaintiff may enter
a ne receipiatur in the Judges book; that it may not be entered after that to be
tried at that time if the Defendant please. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

If upon a Trial to be had at the Bar, the Jury be not ready at the day to try
the cause, the cause cannot be tried at the Bar any other day of that Term,
without the consent of both parties. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For it would be too
long to keep the Witnesses in Town to another day; and if they should go out of
Town, it might be too short a time, and too much trouble to bring them up again
the same Term.

The agitation of a cause in one Court, is no cause to put off the Trial of the
same cause depending in another Court. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For the proceedings
of one Court of Law, ought not to clash with the proceedings of another Court,
but it is not so betwixt the Courts of Law and the Chancery, as it is a Court
of equity.

The King may try his own cause in what Court he pleases. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.
By his prerogatine; for they are all his Courts, and it is not reasonable he
should be straightened in his choice where he will proceed.

A local matter generally, is not to be tried in a foreign County, but in the
County where the cause of Action arises. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For there may
the best knowledge of the matter be had, and it is also for the greater ease of
the people, and less charge.

If one be committed to the Gaol for one Felony, yet the Justices may try him
for another Felony, for which he was not committed. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. By
Bacon Justice.

A Decree in Chancery shall be tried by a Jury and not by it self, for it is
not a Record, but it is a Decree recorded. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. And there is
difference betwixt a Record and a thing recorded, for a Record is a Judgment
or other act recorded, done in a Court of Record, but the Chancery as it is a
Court of equity, is not a Court of Record, but an arbitrary Court, although it
be a Court of Record as touching things agitated in the pettibag Office.

Although the Plaintiff after issue joined, and at the Assizes where he was to
try his cause, do enter a retraxit, yet he may try the cause at the next
Assizes after if he please, for the retraxit does only import, that he intends
to forbear to try his cause, hac vice only; and if he do not try it at the
next Assizes after, then the Defendant may, if he will, try it by provisoe; and
if the Defendant do not then try it by provisoe, the Plaintiff may give new
notice of a Trial to the Defendant, and try it at the next Assizes following.
Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

One that is not served with process to give his testimony at a Trial, may not
be examined upon a veire dire concerning any matter which concerns the Trial.
Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

A Trial at the Bar ought not to be had for houses lying within the City of
London. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

If the Plaintiff give notice to the Defendant that he will try his cause that
Term, although it be not tried at the day appointed, yet he is not bound to
give new notice of a Trial, if he try it any time within that Term, for one
notice is sufficient for the whole Term. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

According to the old use of practice in this Court, there ought to be but ten
Trials at the Bar in Easter Term. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Because Trials at the
Bar are a great hindrance to other businesses which are more proper for the
Court, yet now they are increased many times to donble the number.

If there be warning given for a Trial, and no Jury appear at the day, there
ought to be a new notice given if the party will try his cause at another day.
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

The consent of the owner of the Land, to make one Ejector to try the title of
the Land, is good if it be not a plot betwixt him and the Ejector to oust the
Lessee of the Land of his possession. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

A Trial at the Bar may not be had by the consent of the parties without leave
of the Court. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. For the Court is not bound Ex Officio to
grant a Trial at the Bar, but it is in their discretion to grant it, or not to
grant it.

In a Trial for substracting of tithes in an Action grounded upon the Statute
of 2. Ed. 6. the Plaintiff ought first to begin with the proof of the value of
the Tithes, before he proceeds to show his title to them. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

It is a mis-tryal for a thing to be tried before a Judge, who has interest in
the thing in question, and the request or consent of the parties concerned in
the Trial will not help it. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. For such a Trial cannot be
supposed to be indifferent, for none ought to be Judge in his own cause.

A mis trial is helped by the Statute of Jeofailes, but not a void Trial, to
wit, where there is no issue joined to be tried; but in such cases there must
be a repleader, that the matter in question may be put in issue to be tried.
Mich. 24, Car. B. r.

The day for a Trial ought to be entered into the Clerks book in the Office,
viz. the Clerk of the Papers. Mich. 1649. B. S. And before it be so entered,
there ought not to be notice given at the Trial. Q. Tamen.

One that is a privileged person in this Court, ought not by reason of his
privilege only, to have a Trial at the Bar granted unto him, but there must
be difficulty in the matter to be tried, or else it must be of great value.
Hill. 1649. B. S. 4. Feb.

A Trial at the Bar ought not to be granted before the Defendant has pleaded,
and issue be joined. Hill. 1649. B. S. 11. Feb. 12. Feb. 1656. For before that
the cause is not ready for a Trial, nor does it appear that the parties intend
to proceed to it Trial.

Of latter times there has been twenty Trials granted to be at the Bar in
Easter Term, but not above. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 1. Maii. But anciently not above
half the number.

Although the Defendant do go to a Trial without sufficient notice given unto
him of the Trial, and there be a Trial accordingly, this Trial is not binding
unto the Defendant, but he may (if he please) have a new Trial granted for want
of due notice. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 19. Ap. For the Rules of the Court are not to
be broken by the consent of the parties.

By the ancient practice of the Court, all the Trials at the Bar which are had
in Easter Term ought to be tried a fortnight before the end of the Term. Pasc.
1650. B. S. 1. Maii. And the remainder of the Term was to be spent in other
businesses more proper for the Court.

In ancient times there were wont to be Trials in Parliament by Juries, but of
latter times no such Trials have been. Pasc. 1650 B. S. 24. Maii.

The prosecutor in an information brought in this Court, ought to bring the
cause to a Trial at his own costs, but in an Endictment which is folely at the
suit of the King, he that is Endicted must bring the cause to a Trial at his
own charges. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 24. Maii. An information is preferred as well
for the benefit of the informer as the King, and therefore it is reason he
should bring it to Trial at his own charges.

If at a Trial the Court do see that one of the parties is surprised, but not
by any fault or laches of his own, but by some other casualty, they may in
their discretion put off the Trial to another time, until the party surprised
may be better provided for his Trial. Trin. 1650. 3. July. B. S. For this is
not to delay justice, but to give time that clearer justice may be done.

In criminal causes, Trials may be at the Bar in Hillary Term, and in Easter
Term, but not in other causes. Mich. 1650. B. S. But only in Michalemas and
Easter Term. This was the old course, but of late in some special cases, Trials
have been granted to be at the Bar in Hillary Term, and Trinity Term.

The Court of Chancery will not stay a Trial at Law by an injunction, when the
parties are ready for the Trial, and have expended their costs for the Trial;
but after the Trial they will grant an injunction to stay Judgment. Pase.
1652. B. S.

If the Plaintiff, in an Action of Trespass and Ejectment, do bring his cause
to be tried at the Bar, he cannot compel the Defendant to confess the Lease,
Entry, and Ouster, for the Trial at the Bar was not granted in favor of the
Defendant, but of the Plaintiff; but if the Defendant bring the cause to be
tried at the Bar, there he must confess the Lease, Entry, and Ouster, because
the Trial was granted to be at the Bar in his favor. Pasc. 1652. B. S.

If a cause be appointed to be tried in one Term, and the Plaintiff does not
then proceed in his Trial, but rests for a year or more after, if he will after
so long time try the cause, he must give the Defendant a whole Terms notice
before his Trial. Pasc. 1652. B. S.

If a Trial be had the last day of a Term, Judgment cannot be entered upon that
Verdict until the next Term after. By Roll Chief Justice. 1652. B. S. Nor
till the four first days within the Term be passed, for so long time has the
Defendant by the Rules of the Court to speak in arrest of Judgment.

It was said by Roll Chief Justice, that the City of Bristol will not bring a
matter to be tried here at the Bar, no more then the City of London will. 1654.
B. S.

If at a Trial at the Bar, in a Trespass and Ejectment, the Plaintiff and the
Defendant do consent, that the Jury shall have a view of the Lands in question,
there can no Trial proceed in the cause that Term. By Roll Chief Justice.
1654. B. S.

It is not usual to grant a Trial at the Bar the same Term it is moved for, but
the next Term after. 1654. B. S. Yet sometimes upon special reasons it is done.

A voluntary Affidavit made before a Master of the Chancery is not to be given
in evidence at a Trial at the Bar. Pasc. 1655. For a Master of the Chancery
has not authority to administer such an Oath, and therefore if the party did
swear falsely, it is not perjury, nor can he be endicted for it, because it is
Coram non judice; and therefore such oaths are of little credit to be given in
evidence.

If a Trial be had, and a Verdict thereupon given, the same issue may not be
tried again by the Jury that tried it before. 1655 B. S. For it is more then
probable they will give the same Verdict.

Traverse.
A Traverse ought to have an inducement to make it relate to the foregoing
matter, or else it is not good and formal. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If the Court shall change the venue, and lay it in a County where the cause of
Action did not arise, the party may Traverse the County if he please, and so
draw the venue into the right County where the cause of Action did arise. Trin.
23. Car. B. r.

If one will take a Traverse to a Declaration, he ought to Traverse that part
of it, that the doing thereof will make an end of the matter for which the
Plaintiff declares, and then is the Traverse good. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

Where the Defendant has given a particular answer in his Plea to all the
material matters contained in the Declaration, there he needs not to take a
Traverse. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Pasc. 1648. B. S. For a Traverse is a denial of
a thing, and when a thing is answered, what need is there of a denial of it?

Where there is a Disseisin, and a descent alleged in a Declaration, if the
Traversing of the Disseisin will make an end of all the matter, there the
Disseisin is to be Traversed, and not the descent, that is, in such cases where
by supposition the party may come to the estate by Disseisin. Pase. 24. Car. B.
r.

Where the Defendant has confessed and avoided all the matter that is
contained in the Declaration, there he needs not to take a Traverse. Pasc. 24.
Car. B. r. For a confessing and avoiding is a full answer of the matter
alleged, and so there needs no Traverse of it.

Title.
If there be an Inquisition found, by which the King is Entitled unto Lands,
and the Inquisition is not answered nor Traversed, the Lands found in the
Inquisition, shall be suppossed to be in the hands of the Kings. 21. Car. B. r.
Because there appears nothing to the contrary to question the Kings Title.

If one be admitted to traverse an Office, this admission of the party to the
traverse does suppose the Title to be in him. 21. Car. B. r.

If in an Action of Trespass and Ejectment, neither the Plaintiff nor the
Defendant can make out a good title, then the party that has had the most
ancient possession of the Lands in question, shall be judged to have the best
Title. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. Mich. 1649. B. S. For an ancient possession of
Lands is a badge of a Title to them.

In Action of Trespass brought for taking away of goods, the Plaintiff needs
not set forth his Title to the goods Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For by the bringing
of the Action, and by the Declaration it is supposed that they were in his
possession, before the Defendant took them away from him, and that possession
is Title enough to maintain the Action.

He that is made Ejector to try the Title of Land, is not bound to defend the
Title of the Land, if he whose Title is truly concerned, will not save him
harmeless if the trial shall pass against him; but he may confess a Judgment
and save himself of the trouble which otherwise may befall him by being made
Ejector. Mich. 1650. B. S.

The Officer of this Court, whose title was to be called the Clerk of the
Crown, is now called and Entitled Coroner and Attorney for the Keepers of the
Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament. Mich. 1650. 24. Oct. B. S. But
now that Title is also altered, and he is called Coroner and Attorney for the
Lord Protector.

Tenement.
A Tenement may be said to be any House, Land, or other such like thing which
is any way held or possessed; and it is a word of a very large and ambiguous
meaning, and therefore not fit to be used to denominate or express any thing
which requires a particular description. 21. Car. B. r.

Tipstaff.
The Court will not grant an Attatchment against an Officer of the Court for a
misdemeanor committed by him as an Officer of the Court, but one of the
Tipstaffs which are Officers of this Court, called by that name, by reason of a
staff which they carry tipped with silver, is to bring him into the Court. 21.
Car. B. r. And they are in the nature of Messengers or Pursuivants, etc.

If a Sheriff do commit a misdemeanor in relation to the Court during his
Office, and afterward a new Sheriff is elected, whereby the old Sheriff is out
of his Office; the Court may grant a Tipstaff to bring him in to answer the
misdemeanor; for being out of his Office, the Court cannot fine him for his
misdemeanor. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

A Tipstaff is to be granted for one that is in London or Westminister, but if
he be in the Country, an Attatchment is to be granted, and not a Tipstaff.
Hill. 22. Car. B. r. and 23. Car. and Pasc. 1650. For the Tipstaffs are
Officers to attend the Court, and are not therefore to be sent out of Town.

Treason.
An intention of Treason, if it can be proved by circumstances, is Treason in
the eye of the Law. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. To show the odiousness and greatness
of the offense of Treason, by punishing the very intentions of it, which are
not punishable in other offenses criminal.

Time.
Where the Law does not imply a certain Time for the doing of a thing, nor is
there any certain time agreed upon between the parties for the doing it; there
the Law does allow the party a convenient Time for the doing of it. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. To wit, such as shall be adjudged reasonable.

In some cases, one has time during his life, for the doing of a thing, if he
be not hastened to do it by request of the party for whom it is to be done, but
if he be hastened by request, then he is bound to do it in convenient Time
after such request made. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

Trespass.
An Action of Trespass does lie for him that has the possession of goods or of
a house or Lands, if he be disturbed in his possession. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If goods be taken by the Sheriff in Execution, and the goods be rescoued out
of his hands, an Action of Trespass lies against him that did rescue the goods.
Hill. 22. Car. B. r. viz. By the Sheriff, or by the party at whose suit they
were taken, and the party may be endicted for a rescous also, at the suit of
King for disturbing the peace and hindering the Execution of the Law.

One Action of Trespass may be brought for a Trespass committed in Lands which
lie in several Towns or Vills. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. So that those Vills do lie
in one and the same County.

An Action of Trespass does lie for a Parson against him that does take away
his Tithes after they are set forth. Pasc. 23. Car B. r. For after they are set
forth, the person has a property in Law in them, although the Parson never had
an actual possession of them.

If diverse Actions of Trespass be brought for one and the same cause, with an
intent only to vex the Defendant, if the Court be moved in it, and proof
thereof made by Affidavit, the Court will order the Plaintiff to join all his
Actions into one. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For the Judges of the Law do not favor
unjust vexations of the people.

If one do carry another with force into the house of a third person, he who
carries the other by force into the house, is the Trespassor unto the third
person, and not he who is carried thither by force, and so if one do drive my
cattle into the ground of a third person, he that drives my cattle into the
ground, is the Trespassor, and not I, who am owner of the cattle. Mich. 23.
Car. B. r. For one shall not be made a Trespassor against his will.

If a person or goods be rescued out of the hands of the Sheriff which he has
taken in Execution by virtue of his Office, it is at his election to bring an
Action upon the Case, or an Action of Trespass, vi and armis, against him that
made the rescous. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

If one bring a mere Action upon the Case, he may declare omitting the words vi
and armis, but if the Action be a bare Action of Trespass, there he must
declare that the Trespass was committed vi and armis. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. For
an Action of Trespass does implye a breach of the peace, and a capiatur is to
be entered in the Judgment against the Trespassor for his fine to the King, but
in an Action upon the Case it is otherwise, for there the Judgment is, that
the Defendant shall pay the damages, and be in misericordia.

Trespasses of several natures cannot be laid together in one Action. Mich. 24.
Car. B. r.

Upon a recovery of Lands in an Action of Treft pass and Ejectment, the
Plaintiff may afterward bring an Action of Trespass against the Defendant, for
the mean profits of the Land. So it was held in the case between Wilmot and
Holden. Trin 1652. B. S. The mean profits are such profits of the Land as did
grow due betwixt the time of the bringing of the Action and the time of the
recovery.

An Action does lie at the Common Law, for the person for taking away of Tithes
after they are severed from the Land. Mich. 24. Car. B. r. To wit, against the
occupyer of the Land. Q. tamen.

Tales.
Upon a Trial at the Bar, if the Jury do not appear full, the Court cannot
grant a Tales, de circumstantibus, but the Court upon a motion will grant a
Tales returnable in some convenient time the same Term to try the cause. Mich.
22. Car. B. r. 1650. B. r. For the Statute does not extend to trials at the
Bar, which did enable the making of a Tales. A Tales de circumstantibus, are so
many persons which are returned to serve on Juries to supply the places of
those that did not appear.

A Corporation Court cannot grant a Tales. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For the Statute
does not extend unto Corporations.

A Tales is not to be granted where the whole array or Jury, is challenged for
want of Hundreders, but in such case the whole panel, if the challenge be made
good, is to be quashed, and a new Jury is to be returned. Mich. 1650. B. S. For
a Tales consists but of some persons to supply the places of such of the Jurors
as wanted of the number of twelve, and is not to make a new Jury.

If the Sheriff take Bail of one for his appearance, who is not Bailable by
Law, although the party do not appear, an Action does not lie against the
Sheriff; but the Plaintiff must proceed against the Sheriff by way of
amercements. Mich. 1650. B. S. 26. Nov. For in regard that the Sheriff ought
not to have taken Bail, though he have taken it, yet it shall be accounted as
if he had not taken Bail.

Terms.
The Issue Terms, are Hillary Term and Trinity Term only, the other two Terms
are not so called, and the other Issue Terms are so called, because in them are
the Issues joined and made up, which are to be tried at the Lent Assizes, and
the Summer Assizes which do immediately and respectively follow them. Hill. 22.
Car. B. r.

The four days in Term are the day of, 1. Essoigne. 2. Exception. 3.
Appearance. 4. Return.
Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

All the Term in construction of Law is accounted but one day, and therefore a
Plea that is put in the last day of a Term, is a Plea of the first day of the
Term. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. Mich. 1649. B. S.

The Term is said to begin upon the first Essoign day, which is three days
before the Courts of Justice do sit, and not at the first day of sitting of the
Courts. Trin. 24. Car. B. r. Because some businesses of that Term do begin at
that time.

The same day of the week that Michaelmas Term does end the same day Hillary
Term does begin. By Woodward Clerk of the Court. Hill. 24. Car. B. r.

Toft and Croft.
A Toft is a place where an old house did formerly stand, and it also signifies
a decayed house not inhabited. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

A Croft is a small pieces or close of Land, that lies near a dwelling house.
Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Trover and Conversion.
Where the Trover of goods is one County, and the Conversion is in another
County, the Action brought for these goods may be laid in the County where the
Conversion was, for the Conversion of the goods is part of the cause of the
Action. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For the very name of the Action is called a Trover
and Conversion, and not a Trover only, and the Action is brought, as well for
the Defendants converting of the goods to his own use, as for the finding and
deteyning of them.

Two causes of Action for a Trover and a Conversion cannot be joined in one
Action. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

An Action of Trover and Conversion may be brought for goods, although the
goods for which the Action is brought, do come into the possession of the
Plaintiff that brings the Action before the Action brought. Pasc. 1651. 22. Ap.
B. S. For the coming of the goods into his possession before the bringing of
the Action for them does not purge the wrong, or make satisfaction for that,
which was done to the Plaintiff, by the finding and converting the goods, and
so he has still cause of Action, although his damages may not be very great.

Trust.
The Chancery will compel one to perform a Trust which he has taken upon him,
except it be a Trust taken upon him for the benefit of an Alien. Pasc. 23. Car.
B. r. For to compel that might (in many cases) prove prejudicial to the Common
Wealth, and repugnant to the Common Law.

The way of making conveyances by way of Trust, was invented to evade the
Statute of uses. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Cestuy que trust, cannot take the profits of the Land settled by the Trust, but
has only his remedy for them in equity, for the estate in the Land is only
in the party that has the Trust. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

Tenure.
Lands which are granted by the King, to hold of him of his Manor of East
Greenwitch in Kent, in capite, is a Tenure in Sorage, and the words in capite
in the grant are void. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. For those words are repugnant to
the Tenure created by the grant.

Tender.
A Tender of Rent to save the forfeiture of a Lease, ought to be a Tender of
the whole Rent, due at the time of the Tender, without any deduction of Taxes
of Parliament or other payments. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

Tithes.
The rector of a Church shall be accounted the proprietor of the Tithes of that
Parish, to which the Church does belong, if the contrary be not showed. Trin.
24. Car. B. r.

Tithes of Land which do not lie in an Parish, do properly belong to the King.
Mich. 24. Car. B. r. For that which no Subject can justly claim, is the Kings.

Lands which lie in a Forest, and are in the hands of the King, are free from
paying of Tithes, although they do lie within some Parish; but if they be
disaforested, and come into the hands of another, they ought to pay Tithes: for
the not paying of Tithes for them, whilst they were in the Kings hands is but
an immunity for the time, and not an absolute discharge. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

Tithes are not due to be paid Jure Divino, but per legem terrae, so held by
the Court, agreeing with J. Seldons History of Tithes. Mich. 1649 B. S.

If Lands paid no Tithes before the Statute of Ed. 6. or but very
inconsiderable Tithes, and afterward the Lands for which the Tithes were paid
are improved by the owner, he shall only pay the accustomed Tithes paid for
them before the improvement of them, to wit, for the seven last years
immediately preceding the improvement, but if no Tithes were paid for them
before the improvement, no Tithes shall be paid for them after the improvement.
1650. B. S.

Venue and Venire Facias.
AVenire Facias ought to be de aliquo vicineto, that is, neighborhood, and
there if the Writ of Venire do say Venire Facias homines Burgi, it is not a
good Venire, for it ought to be Venire Facias homines de Burgo. 21. Car. B. r.
Q Differentiam inter of and from.

If a special Verdict be imperfect in matter of substance, there must be a new
Venire that there may be a new Verdict found, because the ill Verdict does not
give the Court power to Judge of the matter in Law, and so it is also if a
demurrer upon an evidence be not good. By Roll. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. and Trin.
23. Car. B. r. Q.

A Venire Facias that is filed, cannot be altered without the consent of the
parties. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the filing of it does make it a Record.

In an Action of Trespass and Ejectment, the venue ought to be from the Vill or
Hamlet, where the Lands in question do lie; and if the Lands lie in no Vill or
Hamlet, the venue ought to be de corpore Comitatus, that is from the body of
the County. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

The Judges may alter the venue from the place whence by the Law it ought
otherwise to be, if they believe there cannot be an indifferent trial in the
County where the venue was first laid. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. By reason of the
great power that one party has in the County, or for some other cause.

Where the venue cannot be from a Vill, Hamlet or lieu conus, there it may be
de corpore comitatus. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For if it might not be so, the cause
could not be tried.

A lieu conus, is a Castle, Manor, or other notorious place well known, and
generally taken notice of by those that dwell about it, and not a close or
Pasture ground, or such like place of no repute. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

In all cases where there is to be a special Jury, there the Venire Facias must
be special. Mich 22. Car. B. r. For ordinary forms are not applicable to
extraordinary cases.

If the matter to be tried be within diverse places in one and the same County,
the Venire shall be general, but if the matter be in diverse Countries, there
the venire ought to be special, Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the general form of a
venire does not warrant to return a Jury in one cause out of diverse Counties;
but in such cases to prevent the failer of Justice, the Court has power to
vary from the old forms.

Where a certain place cannot be known whence the venue should be, the venue is
to be de corpore comitatus, and so it is where a custom of the County is to be
tried; for the custom runs through the whole County. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. And
therefore may be indifferently tried by Jurors returned from any part of the
County.

A fault in a Venire is helped after a Verdict by the Statute of Jeofailes, but
where the venire is wholly insufficient, it is not helped, for the Statute
extends not to such venires. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

After a Plea pleaded, and an issue joined in the cause, the Venire cannot be
amended, except the parties consent to it, Hill. 22. Car. B. r. Pasc. 24. Car.
B. r. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If the venue be laid in a foreign County, and the parties proceed to issue in
the cause, the Court will not change the Venue afterward, although the
Defendant would try the issue afterward by provisoe. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

Where the Verdict is imperfect, so that Judgment cannot be given upon it,
there must be a new venire to try the cause de novo. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For
the former trial is to no purpose.

If a matter in Law be depending undetermined, and an issue also joined in the
cause, there must be a special venire awarded, tam ad tryandum exitum quam,
etc. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

It is not necessary to enter the venire facias before the trial, but the
Plaintiffs Attorney ought to give a Copy of it unto the Defendants Attorney
before the trial, if he desire it; and after the trial it may be entered. Pasc.
24. Car. B. r.

A Venire de vicineto Civitatis, is good without naming of the Parish within
the City, out of which the Jurors are summoned, and so was it said to be
adjudged in Gavell and Gippoes case, 10. Jacob. contrary to the book of 5. H.
5. For a City may have but one Parish in it.

The party that will move to have the venue changed, he must move for it the
next Term after the Action is brought. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

This Court ought not to change the venue, so that by it, the cause cannot be
tried within the jurisdiction of the Court. Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

If the Defendant will move to change the venue, he must make oath that the
cause of Action, if any be, did arise in the County where he would have the
venue laid, and not in the County where the Plaintiff has laid his Action; and
the Defendants Attorney or his Clerk must make oath that he received the
Plaintiffs Declaration after the precedent Term and not before. Trin. 23. Car.
B. r. Or else the Court will not change it.

Where an Action is brought for a real thing which is called a real Action, the
venue ought to be laid in that County where the thing is for which the Action
is brought. Hill. 23. Car. B. r.

The Court will not change the venue in an Action brought upon an obligation.
Hill. 23. Car. B. r. Because the Action is personal and transitory, and it is
at the election of the party to lay it where he pleases, yet the rules of
Court for the laying of personal and transitory Actions have not been very
constant of latter times but the Courts do vary as they see cause.

A Judgment given in an inferior Court, was reversed here by a Writ of Error,
because the Venire was Venire facias, etc. and not at large. Hill. 1650. B. S.
But such a Venire in the Common Pleas is good: For the constant course there,
is to enter the Venire briefly with an etc.

The Defendant may move to alter the Venue, although the Plaintiffs Declaration
be not perfect. Mich. 1650. 25 Oct. B. S. For though it be not perfect in all
things, yet it may be so perfect that he understands where the Venue is laid,
and that is enough to ground a motion upon to alter it, if it be laid where it
ought not to be.

In an Action of Debt brought for Rent due for Land, the Venue may not be laid
out of the County where the Land lies for which the Rent is due: for the Action
is a local action, ratione terrae, out of which the rent is issuing. Hill.
1650. B. S. 29. Jan.

A Venue cannot be laid in Wales in a transitory Action, the Cause whereof did
arise in England; because this would be to remove the Cause to be tried out of
the jurisdiction of the Court, and then this Court can give no judgment in it.
Trin. 23. Car. B. r.

The Venue cannot be changed after the Defendant has pleaded, although the
Plaintiff have amended his Plea in a principal and material part of it, after
the Defendant put in his Plea, and though the Defendant do imparle by reason of
that amendment, for all this makes it not a new Declaration. 1650. B. S.

A Venire out of an inferior Court ought to run thus; Ideo praeceptum est in
eadem Curia, or, per candem Curiam. Hill. 1649. B. S. 30. Jan. But now those
Latin words must be in English.

It is not necessary to insert the Names of the Jurors in the Venire facias,
although it was the ancient course to do it. Hill. 1649. B. S. 4. Feb. So that
ancient forms may be altered upon good reason, else not.

Where the Declaration is good, but the Plea is uncertain, and yet an Issue is
joined and tried upon it, this is a mis-tryall; for there can be no judgment
given upon it: and therefore there must be a Repleader and a new Venire to
summon another Jury to try the Cause again. Hill. 1649. B. S. 8. Feb.

A Venire facias is oftentimes returned before the Plea be entered, and yet it
is well enough. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 24. Maii. For the Plea is a Plea before it is
entered, so that there is an Issue to be tried, which is a sufficient warrant
for awarding and retorning of the Venire.

A Venue is not to be changed in an Action of Debt brought for Rent, or upon an
Obligation, or in an Action of Covenant, or in an Action of Account. Trin.
1650. B. S. 26. Junii. Mich. 1650. B. S. 23. Nov.

The Venire ought to be delivered to the Sheriff, four days before the retorn
of it, if the Jury do dwell forty miles off, and eight days, if they dwell
further off then forty miles from the place where the trial is to be. Pasc.
1651. B. S. 13. Maii.

If the Defendant do move to change the Venue upon Affidavit made, that the
cause of Action, if any be, did arise either in Kent or Surrey (for example)
and not in London, where the Action is laid, the Plaintiff shall have his
election, to lay his Action either in Kent or in Surrey, upon giving the
Defendant notice, in which of them he will lay it, but shall not lay it in
London. 1651. B. S.

The Attorneys are sworn, not to lay personal Actions in foreign Counties,
but in the Counties where the causes of them did arise; and the Statute does
also prohibit it; for the laying them in foreign Counties, does put the people
to charge for motions to alter the Venues into their proper Counties; and
therefore it is fit the Attorneys should observe it. By Roll 1650. B. S. But
as yet the practice herein is unsettled and inconstant: And it may be it is not
settled, because there might great inconveniences grow by settling of it, and
tying up the hands of the Court, from doing that which the exigency of the case
may require.

Verdict.
If there be several ejectors of several parcels of Land mentioned in a Lease
of Ejectment, the Jury ought to find this matter especially. Hill. 21. Car. B.
r.

A Verdict which is found against a Record, is a void Verdict. Hill. 21. Car.
B. r. For a Record is of a higher nature, and more credit is to be given unto
it then unto a Verdict.

If a Verdict may be any ways construed, to make it good, there ought not to
be made a construction of it, to destroy it and make it void, Hill. 21. Car. B.
r. For the Law delights in the preservation of things, and would not have
things to be done in vain.

The Court will not take a Verdict by default, except the Plaintiffs Council
do pray it. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. For the Plaintiff may choose whether he will
take the Verdict or no, and therefore the Court will not take it except he
desire it.

If the Plaintiff does fail in proving of his Issue, the Verdict ought to be
found for the Defendant; except the Jury do know of their own knowledge that the
Defendant is guilty. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. So that the Jury is not so tied up by
the evidence, that they must always give their Verdict according to it.

If one of a Jury that found a Verdict, were outlawed at the time when the
Verdict was found, the Verdict is not good but may be reversed by error. Hill.
21. Car. B. r. For an out lawed person is out of the protection of the Law, and
is debarred from intermedling with any Civil affairs, as a person
excommunicated is from participating in Divine Ordinances.

If a Verdict be found for the Plaintiff, and he will not enter it, if the
Defendant move the Court in it, they will compel him to enter it: and so it is
where the Plaintiff does refuse to enter a Verdict found for him, upon the
executing of a Writ of enquiry of Damages. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For the
Plaintiff ought to rest satisfied with what the Law gives him: Or the Defendant
may enter it himself if he will.

A Declaration that is not good, is in many cases helped after a Verdict, by
the Statute of Jeofailes, but where the Declaration does not make it appear
that the Plaintiff had some cause of Action to warrant his Declaration, or
where some material and essential part of the Declaration is omitted, such
Declarations are not helped by the Statute. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. and Hill. 22.
Car. B. r.

If a special Verdict be drawn up contrary to the notes agreed upon by the
Council on both sides at the trial, the Court upon a motion, will rectify this
if the parties cannot agree between themselves to do it, or that the Council on
both sides did formerly consent to such an alteration. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If the Court do direct the Jury to find a special Verdict upon the prayer of
the Plaintiff or of the Defendant, the party at whose prayer the special
Verdict was found, ought to prosecute this special Verdict that the matter in
Law in it may be determined. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Because the Verdict was
directed to be so found in his favor.

Where the Court does direct the Jury to find a special Verdict, one of the
Council on both parts are to agree upon the notes for it, and to draw them up,
and to set their hands to them, and to deliver them in unto the Jury in
convenient time, or else the Court will take a general Verdict. Mich. 22. Car.
B. r.

The Chief Justice may in some special case take a Verdict out of Court, but
then the Verdict must afterward be pronounced in Court. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If a matter in fact be left out in the notes drawn up by the Council of the
special Verdict found by the Jury, this cannot be amended afterward, though
the Court be moved in it, and although the Council on both sides do consent.
Mich 22. Car. B. r. For this were for the Court and Council to make a new
Verdict against the finding of the Jury who have found the matter of Fact
already.

If one of the parties whom a special Verdict does concern, will not join with
the other in prosecuting of the special Verdict, the Court upon a motion will
order him to join in it; and if the Verdict be made up; and the party will not
bring it in to be entered and proceeded in, the Court will grant an Attachment
against the party. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

The Plaintiff and Defendant ought both of them to appear in Court to hear a
special Verdict, and the Jury is to be called, and to have the special Verdict
read unto them by the Secondary, and upon the reading of it, if there be any
mistake in the penning of it, the Council on either side has liberty to except
against it, and when the Council is agreed, then the Secondary demands of the
Jury whether they agree to find it so, and if they answer they do, then the
Verdict is found. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

If the Jury will find against the directions of the Court any thing in matter
of Law, the Court will not receive the Verdict, but compel them to find, as
the Law requires. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For the Court is judge of matters in
Law, as the Jury is of matters of fact.

If in an Action upon the Case brought for speaking of scandalous words, the
Jury do find that the Defendant did speak words which are Actionable against
the Plaintiff, and so give a Verdict for the Plaintiff, and it appears that the
words found are not expressed in the Declaration, this is not a good Verdict,
if there be not other words found which are in the Declaration which are
actionable. Trin 23. Car. B. r. For the words in the Declaration are only put
in issue to the Jury.

A special Verdict after the notes are agreed upon by the Conncel, and drawn
up, and their hands set unto them, is not a special Verdict, until it is
allowed by the Court. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For they are to judge whether the
matter in question be rightly stated or not.

Where a Verdict is imperfectly found by the Jury, there the Defendant is not
to move upon it in arrest of Judgment, for there cannot be any Judgment given
upon such a Verdict, and by consequence the motion is needless; but in such
case there ought to be a new venire to summon a new Jury to try the cause
again. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

Where a special Verdict is imperfectly drawn up and entered; the Judges will
not argue the matter in Law; for there can be no Judgment given in the cause,
by reason that the Verdict is not good, but in such a case there must be a new
venire that a new Verdict may be found. Hill. 23. Car. B. r. Mich. 1649. B. S.
13. Nov.

A cause depending in Court upon matter in Law, found by a special Verdict,
ought not by the ancient practice of the Court to be read in Court as a Record,
until books thereof be given unto the Judges of the Court, and so is the use
in the Exchequer at this day. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. That the Judges may have
sufficient time to consider of, and to speak to the matter in Law.

A misdemeanor of the Jury before they give their Verdict, is not a sufficient
cause to make void the Verdict. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Although they are
punishable for it.

If a Verdict be given where there is no issue joined; this is a Jeofaile, and
there can be no Judgment given upon such a Verdict, but there must be a
repleader to bring the matter to a trial. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For there was
nothing tried before for want of an issue joined.

A special Verdict ought to be prepared by Council; and delivered to the Jury
to consider of before they deliver their Verdict in private to the Judge, and
not the next morning when the Jury come to deliver their Verdict openly in
Court. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 2. Maii. For then the Court cannot expect till they
consider of it.

In criminal causes, if there be any errors in the proceedings, they are not
helped after a Verdict, by the Statute of Jeofailes. Pasc. 1651. B. S. 11.
Mati. For the Statute montions not criminal matters, and it shall not be
extended to equity, because it is in abridgment of the practice of the Common
Law.

Although the Court do bid the Secondary Record a non suit, yet if be not
Recorded, the Court may take the Verdict afterward. Trin. 1651. B. S. For the
non-sute is no non-sute before it be recorded.

If the Plaintiff and the Defendant do consent to have the Jury find a special
Verdict, the Jury ought not to refuse to find it. Trin. 1652. B. S. Q.

A Verdict by default is found in this manner, in an Action of Trespass and
ejectment. When the Jury is ready at the Bar to try the cause, the Secondary
bids the Crier call the Defendant, which he does thrice; and if he do not
appear, the Plaintiffs Council do pray the Court to take the enquest by
default, thereupon the Jury is sworn, and the Record is read unto them, then
the Plaintiffs Council do open the Record unto the Jury, and prove the Lease of
Ejectment, and cause it to he read, and then open the Plaintiffs title; and if
no evidence be given for the Defendant, the Jury find for the Plaintiff, and
give him damages and costs of Suit. 1654. B. S.

If the Jury find a matter specially, and do conclude a thing which can not
stand and agree with their finding, the conclusion is idle, and shall be taken
to signify nothing. By Roll Chief Justice. 1654. B. S. For the Verdict was
perfect without the conclusision, and therefore an idle and impertinent thing
shall not vitiate a good Verdict.

The Jury may find a matter of Record, if it be very ancient, or if the Record
be embezeled or cannot be found upon search made for it; notwithstanding what
is held in Scholasticas case to the contrary, although the Record be not showed
to the Jury. By Roll Chief Justice.

Valuation.
A Jewel is not Valuable, but according to the Valuation of the owner of it,
and is very uncertain. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. Q. Tamen, For it seems there is a
certain Value for Pearls and Diamonds, amongst the Merchant Jewellers,
according to their weight, bigness, and luster.

If one declare in an Action of Trespass, for the taking away of live cattle,
he ought to say that he took away his cattle pretii so much, but if he declare
for taking away of things without life, he ought to say ad valentiam of so
much. Mich. 1649. B. S. Q. Differentiam inter pretium and valentiam, or price
and value.

Use.
A Use and a Trust were all one at the Common Law, and did both rest in
privity, but are now distinguished by the Statute of 27. H. 8. Mich. 23. Car.
B. r.

The limitation of a Use was at the Common Law but a matter in equity, and the
party concerned was only relievable upon it in Chancery. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Feoffments to Uses, have the same acception as Deeds at the Common Law have,
and are not to be interpreted as Wills are. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

It is all one whether a Use be raised by way of Covenant, or by way of
Feoffment. Mich. 24. Car. B. r.

Privity of estate and confidence in the party, are the two great pillars by
which Uses are supported. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 18. Maii.

Usury.
Where there is not a Usurious contract preceding, although he that lends
money, do take more then eight pound per annum, per centum, upon a just
computing of the moneys received by him, whether it fall out by the miscasting
of the parties, or by the mistake of the Scrivener, this is not Usury forbidden
and punishable by the Statute. Trin. 22 Car. B. r.

Threescore pounds was reserved payable upon a Morgage of Lands for three
years, payable at every six months by equal portions, whereas the whole Use
money for three years, for the moneys lent upon the Morgage according to the
Statute, came but in the whole to sixty pounds, and yet this adjudged to be no
Usurious contract. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

Void and Voideable.
A thing is Void which is done against Law at the very time of the doing of
it, and such a thing done shall bind no person: but a thing which is only
voidable, and not absolutely void, is a thing which he that did it, ought not
to have done it, yet when it is done, he that did it cannot avoid it, but it
may be made void by his Heir, etc. 21. Car. B. r.

A Lease which is only Voidable, must be made Void by re-entry: but where a
Lease is absolutely void, there needs no re-entry. 22. Car. B. r.

Vill.
The Constable of one Vill cannot execute his Office in another Vill. 24. Car.
B. r. For every Vill has a particular Constable or Officer, and have confined
power to their several limits.

There is an ancient Book called Liber Villarum, wherein is contained all the
Vills and Parishes in England. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. This Book I take it is in
the Exchequer.

Variance.
If there do uppear to be a material variance tween the matter pleaded, and
the manner of the pleading of it, this is not a good Plea. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

View.
The Court will grant, that the Jury shall view the thing in question for them
to try, if they doubt of it, if the Plaintiff and Defendant will consent unto
it, otherwise not. 15. Nov Mich. 1650. B. S. But the Jury must find, without a
View, according to the light they have received from the evidence, as their
consciences shall direct them.

Warden of a Church, or Churchwarden.
A Churchwarden, is a Churchwarden although he do not take an Oath, for the
Oath was only enjoined him by the Bishop of the Diocese, by an usurped
authority, for he is an Officer, whereof the Common Law takes notice, and was
so before such an Oath was imposed upon him. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

Waste.
If Waste be done upon Lands which are let for Term of years, or for life, by
one against whom the Lessee can have no remedy in Law for committing this
Waste, the Lessee is not punishable by the Lessor for this Waste, except there
be a special covenant in the Lease, that he shall not commit or suffer Waste to
be done. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. So that a special covenant of the party does
bind him, where by the Law he was not bound. A Foreign enemy that invades the
Land, and makes destruction in Lands and Houses, is such an one as the Lessee
can by Law have no remedy against for Waste done by him.

If Timber Trees be growing in the Hedges of a Field or close let for years or
life, and the Lessee cuts them down, the Field shall not be forfeited in an
Action of Waste brought against the Lessee, but if the Trees cut did grow
scatteringly throughout the field or close, the whole field or close is
forfeited by cutting them down. By German Justice. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 17. Junii.
Q.

Withernam
Cattle which are taken in Withernam, ad valentiam, that is, to the value of
the cattle that were first distrained, and so detained, that the Sheriff cannot
execute the Replevin brought for them, is to be understood, not of the number
of the cattle first distrained, but according to their full worth and value.
1651. B. S. For else he that brings the Repliven and Withernam will be deprived
of his satisfaction he ought to have in case the distress were not lawfully
taken.

Warranty.
If one Warrant a horse, or any other thing sold after the time of the sale of
it, such a Warranty is not good to bind the party that made the Warranty, but
the Warranty must be made at the time of the sale, and then it is binding,
because it is part of the contract. Pasc. 1652. B. S.

Writ.
A Writ may be either a Mandatory Writ, or it may be a remedial Writ; a
Mandatory Writ, is a Writ which is directed unto the Cinque Ports, or to some
other privileged place to enjoin them, not to exceed their jurisdiction; but
this is not a remedial writ to the party that obtains it, conducing any ways
to his obtaining of right in his cause depending there. Trin. 22. Car. B. r.

An Original Writ is not amendable, if it be erroneous in substance, because he
that takes it out may have a new original, and so is not without remedy. Hill.
22. Car. B. r. Though the Writ be abated.

An original Writ which is defective in form only is abateable, if it be not
amendable by the Statute, as in some cases it is, and in others not. Hill. 22.
Car. B. r.

If the Prerogative Court shall refuse to grant Administration according to the
Testators will, this Court may grant a Writ at the prayer of the party grieved
to compel them to do it; and the Countess of Bark-shires case 29. Jac. and the
case of Saint Burien in Cornwell, were cited to prove it. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

If one bring a Writ of Ejectment, and pending the Suit, he makes an entry into
the Land for which the Action is brought, the Defendant may plead this entry in
abatement of his Writ. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

A Writ without a Test is not good. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For the time may be
material when the Writ was taken out.

A Writ issuing out of any of the Courts at Westminster do not run, that is,
are of no force within the County Palatine of Chester, or other County
Palatine. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. Because they have jura regalia within their
jurisdictions, and are not subject unto other jurisdictions.

The Sheriffs Bailiff cannot execute a Writ directed unto the Sheriff without
the Sheriffs Warrant. Pasc. 23. Car. And if he do, he is liable to an action.

Where the Sheriff is Judge of the Court, a Writ which should otherwise have
been directed unto him, shall be directed to the Sergeants of the Mace. Pasc.
23. Car. B. r. That is, in such places where there are such Sergeants.

After Judgment in a cause, there can no Plea be pleaded in abatement of the
Writ upon which the Action was commenced. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

In a Writ of Dower, the Tenant cannot plead bis petita in abatement of the
Writ of Dower. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. That is, that the Defendant has demaned
her Dower by another former Writ depending, for she can recover but once, Q.

In an Action of Debt, it is a good plea in abatement of the Plaintiffs Writ,
to say that the Plaintiff has received part of the Debt, for which he Sues,
since his Action brought; but it is no plea good in an Action upon the case.
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. Tria. 24. Car. B. r. For in Debt the Plaintiff is to
recover the whole Debt he declares for; but in an Action upon the ease, the
Plaintiff is to recover no more then he can prove he is damnified by not paying
of what he demands and the money received since the Action brought, can but
abate the damages, and does not destroy his Writ, for it was uncertain at the
bringing of Writ how much he was damnified.

The Writ directed to call one to the dignity of a Sergeant at the Law is a
close Writ that is sealed up to signify it is his duty to keep close his
Clyents cause and not to reveal it, but the Writ directed to one to call him to
the place and dignity of Chief Justice or other Judge, is an open Writ, and not
closed up to show that his duty is to do open Justice unto all. Mich. 24. Car.
B. r.

A Writ of Error brought by the Bail to reverse a Judgment given against the
Principal only, is abateable; and so is it (by Roll Chief Justice) where the
Judgment was given against the Principal and the Bail also. Mich. 1649. Q.
Tamen, In the latter case.

If the party be sued to an Out-lawry upon an original Writ, the Writ is
determined by the Out lawry, for it has had its full effect which was to make
the party to come in and appear, and answer the Plaintiff, or else to Outlaw
the Defendnat if he should not appear. By Roll Chief Justice. Hill. 1650. B. S.

Where the Sheriffs Bond which he took for the Defendants appearance is put in
Suit; the Writ taken out to arrest the Defendant upon this Bond, ought to be
directed unto the Coroner, because the Bond is to be sued in the name of the
Sheriff. Pasc. 1650. B. S. 17. Ap. And so is accounted (in Law) to be a Party.

Writ of Enquiry of Damages.
The Court will quash a Writ of Enquiry of Damages, and not suffer it to be
filed, if the Plaintiff do execute it without the giving of due notice of the
execution thereof unto the Defendant, and put him to take out a new Writ of
Enquiry. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

If it do not appear to the Court by the Return, or by some other way, that a
Writ of Enquiry has been executed, the Court will grant the Plaintiff a new
Writ (if he desire it) if the former Writ do take no effect. Mich. 22. Car. B.
r.

A Writ of Enquiry is to issue forth where a Judgment is had upon a nihil
dicit, or non sum informatus, or upon a demurrer, and not upon a Verdict; and
this Writ is to summon a Jury to try what Damages the Plaintiff has sustained
by the Defendant in the cause, because the damages were not formerly assessed,
the matter not being tried by a Jury. Hill. 22. Car. B. r.

If there be error in a Writ of Enquiry of Damages, the Court upon the prayer
of the party, will grant him a new Writ, but will not suffer the old Writ to be
amended. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

If a Writ of Error be brought in this Court to rereverse a Judgment given in
another Court, and the Judgment is affirmed in this Court, this Court may
grant a Writ of Enquiry of damages, if it was such a Judgment whereupon a
Writ of Enquiry did lie. Trin. 24. Car. B. r.

If upon the executing a Writ of Enquiry of Damages, the Sheriff do refuse to
swear and examine some of the Witnesses produced on either part, and yet does
execute the Writ; the Court will grant a new Writ to the party grieved, for the
old Writ was not well executed. 1651. B. S.

Way and High way.
There are three Ways taken notice of, to wit, Alta Via, Communis Via, and Via
by prescription, that is, a Highway, a Common Way, and a Way by prescription.
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

If a Highway lie within a Parish, the Parish is of common right, bound to
repair it, except it appear that it be to be repaired by some other person,
either by reason of tenure, or by prescription. Mich. 1650. B. S. 24. Oct.

If any person do enclose any part of a Way or waste, adjoining to a Highway,
he thereby does take upon him to keep the Way adjoining in repair, for thereby
he claims particular interest in it. 1651. B. S.

Wager of Law.
The Defendant cannot Wage his Law in an Action which does arise upon a realty,
but only where the Action is personal. Trin. 22. Car. B. r. And therefore if
an Action be brought for the Arrerages of rent, the Defendant cannot Wage his
Law, for the Rent does arise out of the Land, and Sounds in the realty.

The manner of Waging of Law is this, He that is to Wage his Law, stands at the
end of the Bar toward the right hand of the Chief Justice, and the Secondary
asks him, whether he will Wage his Law, if he answers that he will, the Judges
admonish him to be well advised, and tell him the danger of taking a false
Oath, and if notwithstanding he persist, then the Secondary speaks words to the
effect following unto him, and he that Wageth his Law, does repeat every
sentence distinctly after him, Hear ye this, ye Justices, that I W. S. do not
owe to B. B. the sum of (naming the sum in the Declaration) nor any penny
thereof in manner and form as B. B. has declared against me, So God me help,
and then he kisseth the book. But before he takes the Oath, the Plaintiff is
called by the Crier thrice, and if he do not appear, then the Defendant goes
quit without taking his oath, but if he appear, then he must take his oath, and
then he is discharged without pleading. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. Because if the
Plaintiff do not appear to hear the Defendant perform his Law, he is non-sute.
Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

The reason why Wager of Law is suffered, is because the contract upon which
the Action is brought being a private contract and not to be proved, it may be
intended that the discharge may be in private, and not to be proved otherwise
then by the Oath of the party whom the Law will not presume will take a false
oath. Hill. 1649. B. S. 31. Jan.

If one bring an Action of Debt upon a concessit solvere, as it is used to be
done in Bristol and some other places, the Defendant may Wage his Law. Hill.
1650. B. S. 5. Feb.

If the Defendant do tender his Law in Court, and is ready to perform it, and
the Plaintiff being called does not appear, he shall be non suit and pay costs,
but then he may bring another Action for the Debt if he please, but if the
Plaintiff do appear, and the Defendant does make his Law, then the Plaintiff
shall never bring another Action for that Debt, but shall be barred for ever.
Mich. 1650. B. S. 22. Nov. For it is as much as if a Verdict passed against him.

Words.
A Latin word used in pleading, which word does signify diverse things, is
nevertheless well used to express that thing which is intended to be expressed
by it, if there be an Anglice joined with it. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. For by the
word Anglice it is explained what the party does intend it shall signify in
English. This was more useful to be known, when all pleadings in Law were in
Latin.

Words which may be taken or interpreted in a general and common sense ought
not to receive a strained and unusual construction. Hill. 21. Car. B. r. For it
is likely the party that used them, had a plain and common meaning in them, and
not a strained and unusual

Words which are in themselves uncertain, may nevertheless be made certain by
subsequent or following words. Mich. 23. Car. B. r.

Although Words were not Actionable in themselves at the time of the speaking
of them, yet if an Action be brought for the speaking of them, they may be made
Actionable by the Defendants pleading by justifying of the Words. Mich. 22.
Car. B. r. For it may be that in such his justification, he may explain in what
sense he spoke them, which did not appear plainly before.

These Words, you are a Knave, spoken generally, will not bear an Action, but
if one call another Knave, and apply the words particularly to the profession
of him against whom they are spoken, as to call an Attorney at Law Knave, and
to apply it specially to him in relation to his practice as an Attorney, an
Action upon the Case will lie for speaking of them. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. For by
the application of them, they import a special damage done to the party by the
speaking of them.

A word which is written short or abreviated without a dash is not good. Hill.
22. Car. B. r. For the dash or turning up of a stroke or dash with a pen at the
end of it, is the general mark or sign to distinguish an abreviated word from
a word written at length.

Uncertain words in the Count or Declaration, may be made good and certain by a
plea in Bar. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. To wit, by the Defendants taking notice of
the meaning of them in his plea.

The different placing of the same words may cause them to have a different
sense or construction. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

The Court ought so to order the words of a Will, that they may receive such a
construction that may agree with Law, although by their misplacing, they cannot
receive such a construction. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. Vt res magis valeat quam
pereat.

Words in a Will, as they may be diversely penned, may either destroy a
condition, or create a condition where there was none before. Pasc. 23. Car. B.
r.

Morage of a Ship, is when the Ship lies on the ground in the More, Mire, or
Mudd within a Haven or Harbor, and does not float upon the watter. Pasc. 23.
Car. B. r.

The Ansty of the City of York, is that part of the County of the City which
extends without the City, and is a hundred, which is within the jurisdiction of
the City, and was added to it by Act of Parliament. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

The word relaxavit does not amount to a surrender in the case of a common
person, much less in the case of the King. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. But it amounts
only to a release, which differs much from a surrender, as appears by Litleton
in his tenures.

The word interest for borrowing of money, shall be intended eight pounds a
year per centum, if the contrary be not showed. Trin. 23. Car. B. r. This was
when money was at eight in the hundred, but now it shall be intended six pound
in the hundred.

The words of a Statute ought not to be so interpreted that thereby natural
Justice will be destroyed. Hill. 23. Car. For it is not the intent of any
particular Law of a Land or Nation, to destroy the general universal Law of
nature.

The word Simul is not a word copulative, when it is joined with the word et.
Trin. 24. Car. B. r. But Simul cum, are words copulative.

Where there is a Latin word in a Declaration, which is falsely Englished, the
English word shall be adjudged void, and the Latin word shall stand. Pasc. 24.
Car. B. r. Q Tamen.

Where senceless words which signify nothing are used in a Declaration to
express things, they shall be accounted void and idle, and shall not hurt the
Declaration if it be good without them; for no damages shall be intended to be
given by a Jury for those things which were intended to be expressed by those
senceless words. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

The word videlicet is used to explain the foregoing words in the Deed or other
wrighting where it is used, and if the words which the videlicit does usher in,
be contrary to the preceding words they are void. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r.

One may upon a consideration dissolve by Paroll, an absolute contract. Pasc.
24. Car. B. r.

One may give authority by Parol unto another to take Livery and Seisin for
him. Mich. 1650. B. S. For he is but an instrument or Conduit Pipe, to derive
the possession of the Land to another.

Words ambiguous ought to receive such a conconstruction as may make them stand
with Law and equity. Mich. 1650. B. S.

A mark made in the manner following, viz. A which is to show where a clause or
word left out and interlined in writing should come in, is called a tra. By
Roll Chief Justice. It seems to be derived from the Latin word trahere to
draw, because by it the words left out are signified to be there where it is
placed to be drawn into the writing. 1650. B. S.

Witness.
A Witness who by reason of sickness, extreme age, or other cause cannot come
to a trial, may by order of Court be examined in the Country by a Commission
out of the Chancery, or before any Judge of the Court where the cause depends,
and the testimony so taken, shall be allowed to be given in evidence at the
trial. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If a Witness be served with the Process of this Court to give his testimony at
a trial and will not come, the Court may grant an Attatchment against him for
his contempt to the Court, and the party may have his Action upon the Case to
recover the damages he received for want of his Testimony. Mich 22. Car. B. r.

The testimony of one single person, is a sufficient testimony for the King in
a cause wherein he is concerned. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. To wit, in criminal
causes; but Q. Whether it be so in civil causes.

A Witness that is to testify on the behalf of the King against one that is
arraigned for Felony, may not be sworn against the King to give his testimony,
but the prisoner may examine him, and desire his testimony without giving him
his oath. Mich. 22. Car. B. r.

If diverse persons be made parties to a suit, and some of them are either found
not guilty, or else the Plaintiff will give no evidence against them, they may
be allowed to be examined as witnesses in the cause whereunto they were made
parties. Mich. 22. Car. B. r. For now it appears they are not concerned in the
suit but are as strangers and indifferent persons.

He that will make use of Witnesses at a trial, must get them thither at his
own peril, and he shall not delay the other party for lack of his Witnesses.
Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For he has his remedy against his Witnesses, if he suffer
in his trial by reason of their absence.

One that has but a small Legacy given unto him by a Will, may be allowed as a
Witness to prove that will; but he that has Lands given unto him, by a Will,
may not be allowed for a Witness to prove that Will. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For
that were to suffer one to swear his own title, but in the former case the Law
will not intend that any one will forswear himself for a small matter.

It is not requisite for Witnesses to a Will, to set their hands unto it. Pasc.
23. Car. B. r. Nor for Witnesses to a Deed to do it, but it is very prudential
to do it, the better to keep things in memory.

A man may be a credible Witnesses that is one of good fame and credit, and yet
by Rules of the Law, he may not be a Witness in the cause, wherein he is
produced to his give testimony. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For he may be for some by
respect not indifferent in that particular cause, though otherwise accounted of
good credit and repute.

One that is made Executor of a Will, is not to be allowed as a Witness to
prove that Will. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For his own interest may be concerned in
the proof of the Will.

If the Council on both sides at a trial cannot agree what testimony a Witness
in a cause did give, the Court will examine him again. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.
That all things may be clear and without dispute.

Inhabitants within a Corporation, if they be not free of the Corporation, may
be admitted as Witnesses for the Corporation, as a trial which concerns the
Corporation. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For their interest is no way concerned, and
favor is not a good exception against a Witness, although it he against a Juror.

A Witness may not be compelled to answer upon a voir dire touching a Trespass
done for the doing whereof, he may himself be liable to an Action. Mich. 23.
Car. B. r. For nemo tenetur prodere scipsum.

One that is of Council in the cause on one side, may be examined as a Witness
in it on the other side, if he be served with Process to give his testimony
therein, but otherwise he may refuse to be examined. Mich. 23. Car. B. r. For
in the former case he is enjoined by Law to do it, which is to be preferred
before his Clyent, but otherwise it is a voluntary act, and it is not civil for
him to do it, nor is he to be pressed unto it.

Examination of Witnesses which were taken in perpetuam rei memoriam ought not
to be made use of at a trial, until the Witnesses so examined be dead. Hill.
23. Car. B. r. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. 19. Ap. For they were only examined for
their testimonies to be made use of only in the case of death.

One that is any ways concerned in the same Title of the Land in question, may
not be allowed as a Witness in the cause, although he be no ways then a party
to the suit. Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For his testimony tends to the corroboration
of his own title.

One that claims any benefit by a Deed, may not be allowed as a Witness to
prove the Deed. Mich. 1649. B. r. In regard of his interest.

One that is to be a Witness at a trial ought not to be examined before the
trial, but by consent of both parties. Hill. 1649. B. S.

The Court will upon a motion grant a Habeas Corpus to have a prisoner in
prison upon an Execution in the Marshall Sea, to be at a trial to be examined
as a Witness, if the trial be in London; but he that obtains the Habeas Corpus
must carry him thither, and bring him back at his own charge and peril, that he
make no escape. Trin. 1650. B. S. 29. Junii. Q Tamen, Whether it ought to be
done where the prisoner it in Execution.

If a Witness be sick, so that he cannot be at a trial, and it is so proved by
Affidavit, and that Witness has been formerly examined upon intergatories in
the Chancery in that matter upon which he is to be examined upon at the trial,
the intergatory may be admitted to be read in evidence to the Jury at the
trial. 1652. B. S.

If one that has been burnt in the hand for a Felony committed by him, and be
pardoned for the Felony, he may be admitted as a Witness in a cause. By Roll
Chief Justice. 1652. B. S. For by the pardon his offense is pardoned, and he is
made rectus in curia.

Will.
A Codicil may be added by Paroll unto a Will in Writing, and this Paroll
codicil shall be put in writing, and affixed to the Will, as a codicil; This
may as well be done as a Will in writing may be revoked by Paroll, as it may
well be. Hill. 22. Car. B. r. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r.

A Will which does only concern the bequeathing of Lands, etc. ought to be
proved in the Chancery, but if it be a mixed Will, and does concern Lands,
Goods, and Chattels also, it may be proved in the spiritual Court. Hill. 22.
Car. B. r.

The probate of a Will per testes is no corroboration of the Will. Hill. 22.
Car. B. r. Although the common opinion is otherwise; for if it come in question
at the Law, whether a Will or no Will, it is no evidence to a Jury to prove it
a Will, because it was proved per testes.

A Will in writing is a good Will to convey Lands, although the Will be not
sealed. Pasc. 23. Car. B. r. For the Statute of 32. H. 8. that enables to
convey Lands by Will, speaks nothing of sealing, but only of writing such
wills.

If the Testator make his Will by Paroll, and do give direction to put his
words in writing, which is done in his life time accordingly; this is a good
Will to convey Lands, although he do not afterward declare that writing to be
his Will during his Life, but if his words were not put in writing till after
his death, it is not a good will within the Statute to convey Lands. Pasc. 24.
Car. B. For it was not his will in writing, during his life as it must be to
convey Lands.

If the Testator do make his Will by Parol, which is afterward put by another
in writing by his direction, and there is more expressed in the writing, then
the Testator did express by Paroll, yet the Will in writing is good, as to so
much of it as can be proved was expressed by Paroll Pasc. 24. Car. B. r. For so
much of it was the Testators will, and what is expressed more shall be void.

If a Will be made by Parol and it is afterward put in writing, and the
writing is embezeled, lost or destroyed; yet is not the Will thereby destroyed
if it can be proved by witnesses. Pasc. 24. B. r. For the Paper is not the mind
or will of the Testator, but only a Declaration and Manifestation what his
mind and will was, and if that can be made appear any otherwise it sufficieth.

A Will by which Lands are conveyed, ought not to be kept in the Prerogative
Office, for it does properly belong to the Legatee of the Lands to support his
title by, if he be questioned for the Lands. Mich. 1649. But they may take a
copy of it, and enter it into their Leiger Book.

The Testator may if he be at that time of sane memory desire another person
to set his hand and seal to his Will for him, and if he do it, the Will is a
good Will, though the Testator did it not himself. Pasc. 1650. Maii. 5.

If one make his Will in his sickness by the over opportunity of his wife, to
the intent he may be at quiet, and not vexed and troubled by her; such a Will
shall be adjudged to be made by constraint, and is not a good Will. By Roll
Chief Justice, in the Case of one Hacher and Newborn tried at the Bar. Mich.
1654. B. r. Q. Tamen, For Voluntas non potest cogi, and it differs from the
cases of making of a Deed by Menace or Duress, as me seems.

FINIS.

