A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF The Virtuous Lady, and Honored, ANN, late Wife of
Thomas Yarburgh, Esquire;.

Preached on Monday, the 10th day of July, 1682.

By MATTHEW SVTCLIFFE.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey,
over against the Stocks-Market, 1682.

JOB 14.1. Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble.


WHEN the Royal Psalmist looked upon these aspectable Heavens, and beheld there
the glory of God written in Characters of Light, he admires that grace that
first made Man a little lower than the angels, Psalm. 8.5.
and crowned him with glory and honor; and that Providential care which is
mindful of him, and visi^ him every moment. Such an infinite distance there is
betwixt God and man, that it is a wonder God will spend a thought upon us.
Lord, Psalm. 134.3, 4.
what is man that thou take knowledge of him? or the son of man, that thou
take account of him? Man is like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that
passes away. His being in this world has nothing firm and solid, but is like
a shadow, which depends upon a cause that is always in motion, the light of the
Sun; and is always changing, till it vanishes in the darkness of the night.
The consideration whereof made the same Psalmist in another place break forth
in that pathetical exclamation, How vain a thing is man! How vain indeed in
every act and scene of his life, from his first entrance to his exit! He is
begotten in sin, formed in darkness, brought forth in pains. His first voice is
Cries; no sooner is he disclosed from his Maternal Cells into the open air, but
he weeps; and no wonder, seeing his birth is his unhappy entrance upon the
valley of tears, where he is attended with so many miseries, as nothing but the
shortness of his abode there could make tolerable: that so this compendious
Draught of Man might in all its parts be exactly conformable to the wretched
Original, which holy Job has exposed to our view, in the words of the Text,
Man that it born of a woman, is of few days, and full of trouble.

These words comprehend a picture of Man in Minature, but very like, and to the
life. He is born of a Woman, that is his Original; and as from thence he
receives his being, so together with it his weakness and infirmities; he lives
here a few days, but in so short a time he endures a multiformous multitude of
miseries. In each step of Man's progress we read his vanity. He is vain in his
procreation, born of a woman; there is nothing more mean, nothing more abject.
And lest the thoughts of that pleasure his senses may furnish him withal from
corporeal objects, should exalt him, in his very ingress into life he is sadly
warned of his departure out of it; he must not expect many days, for he shall
live but a few: And lest he should flatter himself, that this short space of
time which is allowed him, he shall enjoy free to himself, he is here told,
that even that time shall be taken up with misery and sorrow. His sew days are
full of trouble.

1. Let us consider Man in his Original, or first entrance into the World, and
in respect of that, How mean and abject is he? What came we from at first, and
originally, but from nothing? There was a time when we were not, having alone a
potential being, a being not yet in being, but wrapped up in the causes of it;
yea, there was a time when we were not in any secondary causes, but alone in
the Omnipotency of God, who was able to make us out of nothing. And that which
came from nothing, can surely be no excellent thing in it self, or if it have
any excellency, it has it from another, even from that Almighty Efficient
which did produce it, to whom the glory of it is due. But we must consider Man
in his natural or more immediate Original, or in his procreation; Man that is
born of a woman. He is the sinful Offspring of sinful Progenitors. To be born
of a woman, imports both the sinfulness and the weakness of our Nativity. We
are all conceived in sin, and before we enjoy the light, we are spotted and
stained in our Originals; and before we enter upon the scene of life, we
receive that infection which wraps up in it the seeds of death. The Infant of a
day old is not without sin; and the continuation of his life is but a
multiplication of that first guilt. Wherefore holy David had just cause to
deplore so sensibly the corruption of his nature, which bears equal date with
life it self, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me. And how can he be free from sin that is born in sin? Job
25.4
How can man be justified with God? Or how can he be clean which is born of a
woman? Sin has possessed our reins, and covered us in our mothers womb. Ephesians.
2.3.
We are all born children of wrath, and heirs of vengeance. Indeed our Nature,
as it proceeded from God, in our primitive creation, was perfectly pure and
undefiled; but as it comes now by natural generation propagated from Adam, it
is corrupted and unsound. All the good we possess in our life, and in our
faculties, in our senses and in our understanding, we received from God our
Creator, the chief Fountain of all good; but the vicious pollution which has
infected and depraved all these, proceeded not from that most pure Author of
our beings, but from Original sin committed by the wilful prevarication and
apostasy of man from his Maker.

Let the consideration of this teach us humility, and repress in us the poison
of pride; the first sin that ever sprung out in our natures next to Infidelity,
and last in rooting out. Consider, O man, thy Original; that thou wast born
void and destitute of all holiness, and in a state of pollution; and by reason
thereof a child of wrath, without any possibility to escape eternal damnation
by any merit or power of thy own; but must needs sink down to Hell, and be made
fuel for eternal burnings; and can thou find any thing in thy self whereof
to be proud? Let us therefore look back to the vileness of our Original, and be
humbled; let us lament and bewail our most wretched estate by nature, and
consider seriously how deeply our first Parents have engaged us in sin and
misery. Before we had any possession of felicity, or could claim any interest
in it, we had forfeited it in Adam. We had a punishment before we had a being.
We are all of us here born in the last age of the world, but we dyed in the
first. This is the portion left us by our Parents, Original sin, and a corrupt
inclination in our natures unto all evil. And sin being the cause and
forerunner of death, it has so sown and involved the seeds of it in our
natures, that as the Apostle says, The body is dead already because of sin.
Romans 8.10.
The Officers and Sergeants of Death, Dolours, Infirmities, and Diseases, have
seized already upon our bodies, and marked them out for lodgings, which shortly
must be the habitations of death. Not only is the sentence pronounced against
us, Thou art dust, Genesis 3.19.
and to dust thou shall return; but it is already begun to be executed. Our
carcasses are bound by the Officers of Death; and our life is but like that
short time which is granted to a condemned Criminal betwixt his Judgment and
his Execution. And this brings me to

2. The second thing we have to consider in the Text, Man's duration or abode
in the world, which is very short, he is of few days. Tho the hope of life may
so bewitch us, that in our false imagination we conceit there is more solidity
and continuance in one year that is before us, than in ten that are passed by
us; the time that is past being vanished like a thought: but that which is to
come, we are apt to think it longer than indeed in experience we shall find it;
yet the Spirit of God, who best knows how short and vain our life is, calls the
time we have to abide here, but a few days. And if we judge aright, he that
lives longest, has no more: for the days that are past are dead already, and
those that are yet to come, are uncertain; so that no more is left to us we can
be said to live, but the present moment; which immediately flies away to give
place to another, that by a succession of fleeting moments our vain life may be
prolonged. But that the days of man upon earth are few, I shall further show
you, by illustrating it in an instance or two.

1. Our days are few, if they be compared with God, and presented to measure
with Eternity. If the days of our life be set in comparison with the duration
of Gods Eternity, they bear no proportion to it, but vanish in the
consideration as nothing. Therefore David confesses unto God, Psalm. 39.4.
Thou have made my days as an hand breadth: and mine age is as nothing before
thee. And in another Psalm he says, Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27.
Of old, O God, thou have laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens
are the work of thy hands. They shall perish, but thou shall endure; yea, all
of them shall wax old like a garment, as a vesture shall thou change them, and
they shall be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.
And agreeable is that of holy Job, Job 10.5. Job 36 26.
Are thy days as the days of a man? Are thy years as man's days? And again, God
is great, we know him not, neither can the number of his years be searched out.
Therefore he is called the living God, as St. Acts 14.15
Paul in his Sermon to the Lystrians, opposes to their vain Idols the living
God. I need not make man worse than he is, nor his condition more miserable
than it is; but could I, if I would? As a man cannot flatter God, or over
praise him; so neither can he undervalue man. Job 7.3.
He is made to p^ssess months of vanity. But Gods Eternity is interminabilis
vitae, tota simul, and perfecta possessio. The Living God is a simple,
absolute, and eternal Being. There is no similitude will bear any proportion in
illustrating this comparison of our days with God. A furlong is a great journey
to a Snail; to a Horse, or a Hound, it is nothing. A Ship with a fair Wind,
will sail a great way in a day; but what is that to the Voyage of the Sun, that
every day surrounds the world? In all these there is an intermediate necessity
of place, time, and motion, which belongs not to the infinite Eternity of God.
Thus we are bounded, and bound up with time; but God is Eternity, and into
that, Time never entered. For Eternity is not all everlasting flux of Time; but
time is a short Parenthesis in a long Period; and Eternity had been the same
that it is, tho Time had never been at all.

2. Our days are few, if they be compared with what we our selves shall have
after this life: They bear no proportion to that Eternity of Joys or Misery
which shall succeed them. This mortal life is very short, if we compare it with
the life to come, which shall never have an end. The difference betwixt this
life, and that to come, is somewhat resembled by the difference betwixt a Lease
for years, and an Estate in Fee-simple: the one runs on still, but the other
expires at a certain period. So are our days but few, if we compare them to
that eternity of days we expect in Heaven. For this corruptible, 1 Cor. 15.53.
must put on incorruption: and this mortal, must put on immortality. There is
Eternity which has neither beginning nor end, which is the duration of God:
and there is Perpetuity, that which the Scripture calls everlasting Life, the
state of our Souls in Glory. This has a time to begin; but it shall outlive
time, and be when time shall be no more. Now what a minute is the life of the
durablest Creature to this Everlastingness? What a minute is a Man's life, in
respect of the Sun's, or a Tree's? The duration of the World, is but a minute
to Eternity: Man's life is but a minute to the World: Occasion is but a minute
to our life; and yet we scarce apprehend a minute of that occasion, if we do
not lay hold on this opportunity, wherein we may receive good, and become
blessed.

In both these respects it is manifest, That our days on earth are very few; of
which the Patriarch Jacob being sensible, confessed, Few and evil have the days
of my pilgrimage been. And holy Job, tho he was a man of sorrows, and a great
part of his lifetime was swallowed up by many bitter calamities; on which score
one would think he should rather complain of the tediousness, than of the
shortness of his life; (for sorrow makes time long, Minutes seem Hours, and
Days Months to the miserable. Our imagination makes the day of our sorrow like
Joshua's day, when the Sun stood in Gibeon; the Summer of our delight is too
short; but the Winter of our adversity goes slowly on): yet notwithstanding
this, he concludes, That man's days are few: he comes forth as a flower, and is
cut down; he flees also, as a shadow, and continues not. Whereunto is exactly
consonant that of the Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 40 6 7.
All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof, as the flower of the
field: the grass withers, the flower fades. Nay, the Scripture sometimes to
insinuate how short our time is, vouchsafes not to number it by days, but calls
our whole life a Day. Long life is a Summer day, short life is a Winter day,
joyful life is a Sunshine day, troublesome and sorrowful life, is a gloomy and
tempestuous day. But it seems a day is too long a term for it; and therefore
the Prophet calls it a moment; Isa. 26.20.
Hide thy self for a little moment, until the indignation be over-past. So vain
a thing is man!

And that our days are few, will further appear, if we consider those
similitudes by which the holy Scriptures do sometimes set forth the vanity of
this our mortal life. Job 7 6 7, 9.
Holy Job compares it to a Weaver's Shuttle, that runs swiftly through the Web;
to the Wind, that passes away speedily, and returns no more; to a Cloud,
which vanishes, and is seen no more, when the Sun, whose influence drew it up,
suddenly dissipates it by its Rays. He complains also, that his days were
swifter than a post, Job 9.25, 26.
they flee away, they see no good. He compares also the course of our life to
an hungry Eagle, who besides the velocity of her natural motion, being incited
by the eagerness of her Appetite, flies hastily upon her Prey: to a Ship
sailing swiftly before the Wind, which loosing from the Harbor with a
prosperous Gale, immediately leaves the land behind, and is soon out of sight,
leaving no footsteps or impression behind it, by which it can be discerned that
it has been there. And as it is with the passengers that sail in it, whether
they sit or walk, or howsoever they change their actions, yet do they still go
on to their designed Haven: So it is with us; whether we eat or sleep, or
whatsoever we do, we are still posting forward toward our end. Moses compares
our life to the grass, Psalm. 90 5, 6.
which in the morning flourishes and grows up, in the evening is cut down
and withers. To a Sleep, which insensibly passes away before we know what we
were doing in it: and to a dream of the night, than which nothing is more vain
or uncertain. This is a true representation of the vanity of our life, which
like the shadow of a Dial is in perpetual motion, tho its progression be by
minute and imperceptible steps. Our days vanish and fly away as a vapor, or
the morning dew, and we our selves as the flower of the field soon wither away.

By all this we see how little the Spirit of God esteems of that whereof the
sons of men esteem so much. Our sin has shortened our days, and made them few
and miserable. The pleasures of life are worm-eaten, and the glory of the flesh
is but like Jonas's gourd, which one day grows up, and the next day is consumed
by the worms. If Solomon, who had experimented all the pleasures this life
could yield, after trial of them cried out all is vanity; and Job when he was
divested of all his wealth, looking back to his fore passed days, was
constrained to confess, I have possessed months of vanity; how can we look to
find more comfort or felicity in this wretched life, than those holy men have
found before us? If we seek our comfort in the perishing gain, glory, or
pleasures of this life, we shall be compelled to lament at last, That we have
toiled all the night, and have taken nothing; we have wearied our selves in
vanity, and it does not profit us.

Since then our days are few, let it be our care to spend them well, and to
make the best improvement of them. Let us therefore pray with the Prophet
Moses, Psalm 90.12
Lerd so teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
And the consideration of the shortness and vanity of our life, will teach us
true wisdom in these respects.

In reference to the works or actions of our life, it will teach us to be
wisely diligent. Wisdom is requisite to direct our choice of the best business
for the employment of our time. For the best use we can make of this short
life, is to provide in it for a better. For when death comes upon the stage, it
sweeps away all, and as to the good things of this life, is an utter privation
of them. Then the soul must go forth of this world, and of all her followers in
life, can only be attended with good or evil: If she have done good in the
body, her reward is great and certain in heaven; but if she be surprised in
sin, hell shall be her share; hell, the lake of Gods wrath, the storehouse of
eternal fire, a bottomless Abyss of misery, where there is no evil but must be
expected, nor good that can be hoped. And as Wisdom, so Diligence is no less
required of us. Since we have much work to do, and but little time to do it in,
it behooves us to beware that we squander it not away in trifling or idleness.
Seeing our time is short, Eccl. 9 10.
we must double our diligence. Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with
thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge; nor wisdom in the
grave whither thou go. If we trifle away our days in vanity, he that is the
ancient of Days will call us to a severe account for them. We should therefore
be covetous of no worldly thing but Time, and that not for the duration of our
pleasures, but to work out the salvation of our souls. There is no usury so
allowable as this; not that men should sell time to improve money, but husband
time to improve grace. Otherwise a long time will bring but a long and a sad
reckoning. When God gives us time, to do the business we came for, it leaves us
either without imputation of idleness, or without excuse. Our life wears away
by living, and is diminished by addition; every day added to it, is so much
taken from it. Each step sets us forward to our graves; and we are nearer now,
than when we entered the Church doors. Time goes away by minutes, therefore it
is not perceived: the shorter steps it takes, the more insensibly it passes.
Therefore as it steals upon us, let us welcome it with good industry; and as
it steals from us, let us send it away with a good Testimony. Thus though it
quickly leaves us, it shall not leave us worse than it found us.

In reference to the good things of this world, Phil. 4.5.
it calls upon us to use moderation. Let your moderation be known to all men,
the Lord is at hand. The consideration of the fewness of our days, may justly
teach us to moderate both our desires and pursuits after, and our enjoyments of
the things of this world. For why should thou set thine heart upon that which
is not? As God said to Baruch by his Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 45.4, 5.
I will destroy this whole land, and seek thou great things for thy self?
So, shall we design or promise to our selves great things in this life, when
life it self so suddenly flies away? Or shall we set our affections on the
things of this world, when they cannot tarry with us? Or if they like true
servants could continue, yet we like frail Masters must vanish. This I say,
brethren, the time is short: 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.
it remains, both that they that have wives, be as they that have none; and
they that weep, as those that weep not; and they that rejoice, as those that
rejoice not; and they that buy, as those that possess not; and they that use
this world, as those that use it not: for the fashion of this world passes
away.

And in reference to the sufferings and afflictions of this life, it teaches
us to bear them with patience and true Christian magnanimity, because they are
but short, and can endure but a little while. Therefore we should not fear them
before they come, nor shrink under them, or be discouraged when they are come,
seeing we know they cannot last long, but must shortly have an end. The time of
trouble in the holy Scripture is called sometime a day of trial, and sometime
an hour of temptation. And as our blessed Lord said to the three Disciples,
Could ye not watch with me one hour? So may he say to us all so often as we
faint under affliction, Could ye not suffer with me one hour? It was the
comfort Athanasius gave to the Church in his time, against the cruel violence
of Julian, the persecuting Apostate, That he should be but Nubicula cito
transitura, a little stormy cloud that should quickly pass over: and it is
certainly true concerning all our troubles, and the instruments of them, that
if we wait a while upon our God with patience, we shall see them no more. And
then Olim hac meminisse juvabit; our sufferings here shall add to the weight of
our joy hereafter, and that by way of remembrance. 2 Cor. 4.17
For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a most
superlative eternal abundance of glory.

3. I come now to the third and last thing we are to consider in the text,
which is the quality of man's duration, and full of trouble. Trouble is a
disquiet or commotion of the mind, arising from the sense of some good thing
which we cannot attain, or cannot keep; or of some evil which is either felt or
feared. But I understand it here of the things which trouble us; those
afflictions and crosses either inward or outward, which are real troubles and
disquietments, to which our lives are subject. For as this holy man says, Job
5.6.
Although affliction comes not forth of the earth, neither does trouble spring
out of the ground; yet man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upwards. And
agreeably the Wise man has observed of man, all his days are sorrow, and his
travel grief. And if any man desire me to give him an example of this, I may
call upon the whole World to give an example to the contrary. Now the
meritorious or procuring cause of all our trouble, is sin: for as all trouble
is from God as the primary efficient Cause; so he never inflicts it without a
just reason. Never came Judgment from God, but some provocation from man went
before. The hand of Divine Justice never makes man smart without a cause. David
might complain of his cruel and malicious Enemies, They persecute me without a
cause. No man could ever challenge God of this; he is provoked every moment;
and woe were it for us if he should strike so often as he is provoked.

The objective cause is in those circumstances of the world, which are such, as
it cannot be otherwise. In hoc posi^i sumus; we are so placed, and in such
circumstances, as we cannot avoid being in trouble. Sorrows encompass our whole
life, as the earth is environed with the Seas; yea, as the Sea is vaster than
the Earth, so our happiness is exceeded by our infelicity. Few and evil have
the days of my pilgrimage been, said that Patriarch; he speaks not a word of
any good ones: and Job says, Our few days are full of trouble; so sull of
troubles, as if there were no room for any comforts to crowd in. Indeed if we
put our happiness in one balance, and our misery in the other, we shall find a
mighty difference, this last far outweighing the former. We drink misery, we
do but taste of happiness; we journey in misery, we do but walk in happiness;
nay, which is more, our misery is positive and dogmatical, our happiness is but
disputable and problematical. All men call troubles by the name of troubles;
but happiness changes the name according to the man, that either thinks
himself, or is thought by others to have it. Nay, there is scarce any happiness
that has not in it so much of false and baseimoney, as that the allay is more
than the Metal. All our felicity is like an Island floating in the Sea, it is
now in such a point, to morrow in another, and the next day quite overwhelmed.
Troubles break in upon us from the world, as waters from the Channels; and God
sends down others from above as waters from the Clouds; so that there are
undique flu^^us, troubles on every side.

And this being the universal Condition of humane life, we may the less wonder,
if this pious deceased Gentlewoman, whose Funeral we are now met together to
solemnize, had her share in it; since none, how holy soever, could ever obtain
a total exemption from trouble. She enjoyed indeed a fair and happy freedom
from outward troubles, and the causes of them; but it pleased God, who
dispenses all things most wisely, to imbitter the serenity of her external
condition, with some inward troubles, which are more pressing, and
insupportable. Yet was she not alone in this, nor suffered more than the
dearest Servants of God have before been exercised withal. How often does the
man after Gods own heart, complain in the bitterness of his Spirit; Thine
arrows stick fast in me, Psalm. 38.2, 3. and 69.1, 2. and 88.6, 7.
and thine hand presses me sore: There is no soundness in my flesh, because of
thine anger; neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin. And
again, Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps; thy
wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy waves. And
holy Job; Job 6.4. and 7.20.
The arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my
spirit: the terrors of God set themselves in array against me. And, Why have
thou set me as a mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my self? And it
was a bitter complaint of the good King Hezekiah; I reckoned till morning, Isa.
38.13, 14, 17.
that as a lion, so will he break all my bones: from day, even to night, will thou make an end of me. Like a Crane, or a Swallow, so did I chatter; I did
mourn as a Dove. It is not therefore always a mark of Gods wrath, to be in
trouble; but it is often a token of his Paternal love, an argument of our
Adoption, and a title to an excellent Inheritance. Heb. 12.6, 7, 8.
For God chasteneth every son whom he receives; and if we be not chastened,
then are we bastards, and not sons. And Christ says to the Church of Laodicea,
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. Rev. 3.19.
Therefore God suffers us to feel the more sorrows, that we may have the more
assurance of his Paternal love. It was the ground of that long Disputation
betwixt Job and his Friends, Whether that woeful calamity was a sign of Gods
love, or of his hatred to him. God himself was the Moderator, and decided the
question, That all this was in love to him, and tended to his salvation. If the
Lord be with us, Judge 6.13.
why then is all this befallen us? John 11.3.
It was Gideon's Expostulation with the Angel: and this was Mary's Message to
Christ, Lord, he whom thou love, is sick: Si amatur, quomodo infirmatur? As
if none could be sick whom God loves. Yes, therefore are they sick, because God
loves them. A Fever does not more burn up our blood, than our Lusts: and
together with sweating out the Surfeits of Nature at the Pores of the Body, we
weep out the sinful Corruption of our Nature, at the Pores of our Conscience.
Let us take heed of interpreting every heavy Cross, for a sign of Gods Anger;
and of making that an Argument of Rejection, which the Scripture makes an
Argument of Salvation. That whom the Lord loves, he chastens, is Orthodoxal
Truth; but that whom he scourges, he hates, what strange Divinity is this?
Where does the Scripture ever speak so? But lest any should think it strange,
concerning the more than ordinary trials and troubles of Gods own Servants;
because since the deceased Lady was so eminently exercised therewith, it seems
to me to have a great suitableness to the present occasion that has brought us
together, I shall endeavor to give you some further account of it. And,

1. This is founded in Nature: Good men are flesh and blood, built up of the
same Materials, produced from the same Original with other men; Eccles. 9.2.
and therefore subject to the same troubles, and all those evils that attend
mankind in this lapsed degenerate state. All things here come alike to all;
there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, etc. Whatsoever
difference Piety makes in men's Minds, in their Conversations, and in their
future states, it seldom makes any in their outward Condition in this World. We
are born to sufferings; the Laws of Mortality, which are unchangeable, subject
us to them. 1 Cor. 10.13.
And homo cum sim, humani nihil a me alienum puto. There has no temptation
befallen you, says the Apostle, but such as is common to men. It is the common
and ordinary lot of all men to suffer afflictions and troubles. We may not
therefore refuse to suffer that common lot to which all men are born; nor take
grievously what we can no way avoid.

2. It is more peculiarly founded in Grace. The state of Grace is a suffering
state; and it is the ordinary condition of Gods Servants to be in affliction,
and to be under the Cross. Acts 14.22.
We must through much tribulation, enter into the kingdom of God. God sees
that men are most miserable, in not being miserable: therefore he suffers those
he cares not for, to swim in pleasures; but they shall be sure to have
affliction and sorrow upon earth, to whom he intends joy in Heaven. It is the
greatest affliction, to be without affliction; and on this account, prosperity
is more to be suspected and feared, than adversity. It is a heavy judgment
which God threatens his people with; Ezekiel. 16.42.
I will make my fury toward thee to rest, and my jealousy shall depart from
thee; and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry. O, how deplorable and
wretched is that man's condition, from whom the Lord withdraws his jealousy,
and gives him up to his own ways! Not to be angry, is the greatest anger. There
can be no condition more fully repleat with danger and misery, than theirs is,
whom God lets alone in sin, and suffers to go to Hell undisturbed. Thus the
Psalmist observes of the wicked, That they are not in trouble as other men;
Psalm. 73.5.
neither are they plagued like other men. But God owes them a grievous payment,
whom he suffers to run on so long unquestioned. Their security is like that of
the Prophet Jonas, who slept most soundly, when he had most cause to watch and
pray. God was pursuing him as a Fugitive Servant; his Officers were gathered
about him, to lay hands on him: the Winds roared against him; the raging Waves
of the Sea refusing all other satisfaction offered by the Mariners, rolled with
impetuous violence about the Bark, resolved not to rest till they had
apprehended him: all his Companions in the Ship were astonished, and amazed,
and cried out every one to his God; only Jonas was fast asleep. Was this true
peace? or rather false security? So it is with the wicked: God is offended with
them, Heaven above is shut against them, Hell beneath opened to receive them;
Satan, that roaring Lion, watching when they shall be given him for a prey: All
this while they are eating, and drinking, and making merry, in the depth of a
dead sleep: But this wretched security shall have a dismal wakening, when they
shall be taken out of their bed of ease, and cast into the lake of Gods Wrath,
where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.

But if we look to the true pious Christian, Whose Crosses are so continual as
his? And who more exercised with inward troubles than he? Yet his comfort is,
That tho troubles interrupt his peace, they cannot destroy it, or take it from
him; but being sanctified to him, become a means to establish it the more.
Corda electorum aliquando concussa, melius solidantur. The hearts of the Elect,
are best settled after they have been shaken with troubles. And the servants of
God find by experience, that their inward troubles are Preparitives to inward
Consolations. As he that goes to build a House, the higher he intends to raise
it, the deeper he lays the Foundation: so God is pleased to humble them lowest
with troubles, to whom he pleases to communicate the highest measures of his
Consolations and Glory. 2 Cor. 1.5.
As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolations shall abound
through him.

And if it be enquired, Why it pleases God thus to suffer his own servants to
be in trouble, and to exercise them oftener, and more therewith, than other men?
it is answered, that he does it for great and weighty Reasons.

Sometimes for the trial of their Faith: James 1.1, 2.
My brethren, says St. James, count it all joy when ye fall into temptations,
knowing this, that the trial of your faith works patience. And Moses bids the
Israelites remember all the way which God led them forty years through the
wilderness, Deuteronomy. 8.2.
to prove them, and to know all that was in their hearts. Thus God dealt with
Job; and thus he deals with many of his servants: he casts them into the
Furnace of affliction, that their Faith being tried, may shine the brighter.

Sometimes for the exercise of their Graces. Romans 5.3, 4.
We glory in tribulations, says the Apostle, knowing that tribulation works
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope. Although afflictions be in
their own nature bitter, and not joyous, but grievous; yet they are the
occasions to exercise, and thereby to work in us the habit of many excellent
Virtues, such as patience, and Christian for titude, and constancy under the
greatest evils, which begets in us a great experience of our own hearts, and
knowledge of our sincerity: and this produces a firm hope in the promises of
God, which can never fail us in the day of Evil. Thus afflictions do but give
us opportunity for the Exercise of many noble acts of Religion, and of many
Divine Graces, which otherwise there would be no place for. For some virtues
are principally exercised with Evil, and all their strength is employed in the
victory of that. Wherein consists the honor of Patience, but in the quiet and
unmoved enduring of troubles? Nusquam est patientiae virtus in prosperis. Where
there are no troubles, patience has nothing to do. Had Job never been
afflicted, his Patience had wanted matter for Exercise, and had never become so
eminently Exemplary. This and such like Virtues, like Stars shine brightest in
the Night. Therefore Afflictions are called Gods Wine Press; when they happen
to good men, they do but press out the Sap and Juice of Grace that is in them,
and make those Graces, which lay hid before, manifest and apparent unto others.
The good man being pressed with troubles, brings forth the fruit of praise and
thanksgiving with patience. Sciut aromata odorem, non nisi cum accenduntur
expandunt; As sweet spices disperse not their odours till they be burnt or
beaten; so the Servants of God, who otherwise seem to be void of Spiritual
strength, when they are beaten with afflictions, send out a sweet smelling
savor of rich and manifold Graces.

Again, troubles in good men may sometimes have a respect to Sin, and that
either to Sin past, or future. In respect to past Sins, they are Medicinal
Restoratives, by which they are awakened to recover their health by Repentance
of those Sins through which they have become spiritually sick and diseased. For
howsoever God gives loose reins to the Children of wrath, and delivers them
up to their own hearts desires; yet he will hedge in with thorns the way of
those he purposes to save, and by some sharp Rod or other will awake them from
the mortal sleep of Security, as he awaked Jonas by casting him into the Sea;
and arrested Saul in the full career of his persecution, by striking him at
once from his horse, and from his carnal confidence in the flesh. And in
respect to future Sins, troubles are preservatives from such Sins, into which
God sees them of their weakness ready to fall, if they be not prevented: And
so he sent an Angel of Satan to buffet St. Paul, not for any Sin he had
committed, but for a Sin he might fall into; lest he should be exalted above
measure through the Abundance of his Revelations.

Again, the Servants of God are exercised with troubles, sometimes to withdraw
their affections from the World and to awaken their desires and pursuits after
those better and more enduring riches, which are reserved in Heaven for them.
Should they enjoy always an undisturbed course of prosperity, they would be
ready to say with St. Peter, when he saw the glory of Mount Tabor, It is good
to be here: and never think of any other Heaven. But when we find nothing but
trouble and disquietness here, then our hearts being thereby convinced of the
vanity and vexation of all earthly things, do long after that Rest which
remains for the People of God. There is no Rest to be found here. What the
Devil sought in envy, and Solomon in curiosity, that all men seek in vanity.
Mar. 12.43.
Walking through these dry places, they seek rest, and find none. Here we dwell
in Mesek, and meet with nothing but disquietness. And they that are tossed in a
tempest, how do they long for a good Haven, or harbor of rest! The more our
Pilgrimage is imbittered, the more we seek this Rest. But here we cannot find
it: the Heavens move, they have no rest; the Earth fructifies, it has no rest;
the Waters, Winds, Clouds, are all at work, they have no rest. Nor is any rest
allowed to man below. Let us not think to set up our rest here in this
tumultuous throng of troubles. Where envy and strife is, there is confusion,
and every evil work. Upon this Wheel, ever whirling about, we are no sooner set
down, but some trouble or other rowseth us in the words of the Prophet, Mic.
2.10.
Arise and depart, for this is not your rest.

Lastly, troubles prepare the Servants of God for Salvation: as Grapes must be
pressed before they become Wine, and Corn thrashed and ground, before it make
Bread. And tho this seem a mere paradox to the men of the World, who go on in a
course of Sin and Pleasure: Yet the Spirit of God has assured us; that tho no
chastening for the present be joyous but grievous; nevertheless afterward it
yeildeth the quiet and peaceable fruits of righteousness unto them that are
exercised thereby. As God sends afflictions to scourge us, so they scourge us
into the way to Him: and when they have showed us, that we are nothing in our
selves, they also show us, that Christ is all things to us. And tho they shall
remove us out of the World, yet they assure us, that no extremity of sickness,
no temptations of Satan, no horror of Death, shall remove us from him: but when
we dye, we shall dye in him, and by that death be united unto him that dyed for
us, and rose again. Thus God afflicts his own Servants here, that he may crown
them hereafter: they are exercised with troubles in this present life, that in
that to come they may have rest in the Lord. Thus the Apostle says, When we
are judged, 1 Cor. 11.32.
we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World.
The sorrows and troubles of the Saints, prepare them for Christ, and help to
gather them to him. Psalm. 126.5, 6.
They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. He that goes forth and weepeth,
bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his
sheaves with him.

And that that this was the Case of this excellent person, this deceased
Gentlewoman, whose earthly Relics we have committed to the Grave; those
manifold Graces, and Divine Virtues, that were so illustriously resplendent in
her whole Life, may give us a great and convincing Argument to believe, If we
should run through all the several ranks of Virtues, Intellectual, Moral, and
Theological, we should find her defectvie in none of them. But that being too
prolixa Theme for our narrow limits of time, I shall crave your pardon and
leave to mention briefly some few of those virtues that were most conspicuous
in her, tho without method or order, and as they occur to my thoughts.

Her intellectual Virtues were known to all that knew or conversed with her, to
be very great. Nature had furnished her with a great quickness of Apprehension,
acuteness of Wit, and Retentiveness of Memory, Solidity of Judgment; which she
had improved by diligent Reading and Conversation, whereby she had accomplished
her self in an eminent manner, with the knowledge of all things decent and
praiseworthy in her sex: and had acquired an ablity to discourse, (at least
with any of her Sex) in concerning most matters, either of humane or Divine
knowledge. She conversed much with the Books of various kinds of Learning, and
employed much time in Reading. But her chief study was, with those Noble
Bereans whom St. Paul commends, Acts 17.11, 12.
to search the Scripture daily, because she knew these only contain the Words
of eternal Life: and therefore with Mary she chose the better part of Learning,
even the Doctrine and Knowledge of Jesus Christ. In these sacred Books she
sought that Knowledge which alone is able to make men wise unto Salvation, which
she preferred before all other Wisdom: and by her serious and assiduous Study
and Meditation in them, she did adorn her Soul with the glorious Ornaments of
rich and manifold Graces.

Amongst her personal Moral Virtues, the Virtue this Gentlewoman did most study
and exercise, was Humility. This indeed is the peculiar Grace of Christians,
most becoming our state, both as Creatures, and as Sinners; the Parent and
Nurse of other Graces, that preserves us in the light of Faith, and heat of
Love; that procures Modesty in Prosperity, and Patience in adversity; and is so
lovely in the eyes of God, that tho he resists the proud, yet he gives grace
to the humble. It is the foundation of honor and glory: for he that humbles
himself shall be exalted. This Grace of Humility was most conspicuous through
the whole course of her Conversation, being most eminently apparent in the
meekness and modesty of her behavior, in the gentleness and affability of her
converse, in the low thoughts she had of her self, and her freedom from
censoriousness of others; in the plainness of her apparel and dress. She was,
as the Apostle exhorts, clothed with humility; and her chief ernaments were
those of a meek and quiet Spirit, which are in the sight of God of great price.

Her Temperance and Sobriety were great and exemplary, no further indulging the
body, but to make it more serviceable to her mind. She was far from excess,
even in lawful pleasures; but strictly abstinent from all that are unlawful,
that stain and debase the Soul, and alienate it from converse with God, and
mortify its taste to spiritual delights. Diligence was also a known Virtue in
her, her active mind filling up all the empty spaces of time with something
useful or delightful to her self or others.

But besides all her personal moral Virtues, her Piety toward God deserves our
serious consideration. Her Religion was grave and sober, not mimical, or
superstitious; free from Phanatical Whimsies, and Enthusiasms on one hand, and
superstitious Dotages and Fopperies on the other; not flourishing in the leaves
of a gay, but barren profession; but bringing forth the fruits of Faith,
Patience, Meekness, Mortification, Charity, Devotion, and holiness of Life. She
was a constant and diligent Attender upon the public Worship of God, and not
less careful in the performance of her private Devotions, giving her self with
great assiduity and intention of mind to Reading, Meditation and Prayer;
setting a part certain hours of every day, for the exercise of those holy
Duties; in which she was regular and constant, so long as her Memory and other
Rationals remained entire.

And in short, there shone in her such a happy Constellation of precious
Virtues, as sufficiently manifested it to have been her pious care and study,
to build up her self in all Grace and Holiness, and to add to her faith virtue,
and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience,
and to patience godliness, and brotherly kindness, and charity. And tho it
pleased God, either for the Causes by us before mentioned or others best known
to himself, to suffer these Lights in the latter end of her life to be eclipsed
and obscured by the thick fumes of a black Melancholy, and the distempers of a
troubled Spirit; yet we who have often seen the Sun setting in a Cloud, and yet
arise in his wonted luster, do no less hope, that these Graces shall rise, with
her a more bright and radiant in the morning of the Resurrection.

In fine, her whole life was led according to the strict Rules of Piety and
Virtue; whereupon we may in Charity believe, and on good grounds conclude, that
she has fought a good fight, she has finished her course, and kept the faith,
and is now gone to receive her reward, the crown of Righteousness, which the
Lord, the righteous Judge shall give to all that love his appearing.

Therefore leaving her to her quiet and happy rest, let us return to our
selves. You have heard how few our days are, and how full of trouble! Let the
consideration thereof awaken us, to pass the time of our sojourning here in
fear, and to give all diligence to work out our own salvation with fear and
trembling, that we may pass from this short and troublesome life, to that
everlasting one, which no troubles can disturb, or discompose, no end shall
ever determine. Let us prepare for that happy state by sincere repentance, and
a holy life; and send up our hearts to Heaven, as an Earnest, that we would
have our Souls there. Let our desires be above, tho our bodies are below; and
being weary of the troublesome vanities of this world, let us aspire and long
after the blessed Seat of Rest, wherein dwells Righteousness and her
inseparable Companions, Peace, Joy, Glory, Happiness, and eternal Life. As
there is no sin in Heaven, so there are no sufferings, no troubles there, no
sorrow can ever enter into those blessed Regions. Thither the reedee^^d of the
Lord shall come with everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall obtain joy
and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

FINIS.

