EPHEMERI VITA OR THE Natural History AND ANATOMY OF THE EPHEMERON* A Fly that
Lives but FIVE HOURS.

Written Originally in Low Dutch BY IO. SWAMMERDAM, M. D. OF AMSTERDAM.

LONDON. Printed for Henry Faithorne, and John Kersey, at the Rose in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1681.

TO THE READER.
THE account of so wonderful an Insect (and what is there indeed in the whole
Creation, if curiosly examined, but would excite our greatest Admiration, and
force us to adore the Infinite Wisdom of the Maker?) I doubt not but will be
acceptable to the Ingenious. Our Author, the Accurate and laborious Dr.
Swammerdam, as by his other Treatises so well received, so no less by this,
has highly deserved of the Learned; it containing so many Curious and New
Discoveries. It was Printed in Low Dutch in octavo. Anno 1675. containing above
420 pages: what made it so large, was his frequent, Pious Meditations, and
Poetry upon the various accidents of the Life, and extraordinary Mechanism of
this Creature: so natural a guide such Philosophy is to Divinity, that the
Apostle himself Romans 1.20.
tells us, (...). The Wisdom of God receives small honor from those vulgar
heads, that rudely stare about, and with a gross Rusticity admire His Works;
Those highly Magnify him, whose judicious inquiry into his Acts, and
deliberate research into his Creatures, return the Duty of a devout and learned
Admiration Religio Medici, p. m. 10.


But the Contemplations for some reasons are omitted in this Translation; and
we here only present you with the Philosophical part, the Natural History and
Anatomy of this strange Fly: a Fly that in all Ages has exercised the Pens of
the most Ingenious; but never any with that success and happiness, as our
Authors.

My chief design in the Publication is the improvement of Natural History;
which is better written from Natures own Copy, than the faulty Transcripts of
her many Commentators. Besides, the most that hitherto we have had, is but the
Shell; far greater Treasures lie hid within; and if we would understand how
it is that Nature gives Life and Motion to these Automata, we must unloose the
Case, and take asunder the several Wheels and Springs, and carefully observe
how she joins them all together. Not only See the Preliminary Discourse to the
Anatomy of the Porp^ss.
Physic, but a great part of Philosophy will receive a vast improvement from
such an Analysis of Animal bodies: And an History of Animals cannot rationally
be writ without their Anatomy; unless we would content our selves in admiring
their Clothing and Paint, and still remain ignorant how it is they live and
differ from one another.

Of late several things have been done this way; enough to encourage a farther
prosecution of it; and a great means to it, I think, may be, to make common,
such helps and assistances, as others labors and travails in it, have already
furnished. The Anatomy of one Animal, will be a Key to open several others; and
until such time as we can have the whole completed; it is very desirable to
have as many as we can of the most different, and anomalous. This curious piece
being in a Language less known to the generality of the Learned here, a
Translation of it was undertaken, (though otherwise out of his way) by a person
of my acquaintance, who had no other design than to gratify the Ingenious and
Curious in these Studies, that are unacquainted with that Language; and since
this was his aim, it is hoped he may receive a favorable Censure, if in all
things he have not so fully answered Expectation.

I doubt not but upon a strict enquiry we may meet with Ephemerons here in
England; if not the Haft of the Dutch, which is here described, yet several
other sorts. Our May-fly will well deserve to be examined; and what is here
performed, will very much facilitate the Anatomy of other Insects too: Which if
it shall have that success as to encourage other undertakers in such pleasant
and no less useful Studies, however Ignorance may deride the Curiosity, I shall
have fully attained my aim in handing this Translation to the Ingenious Reader.

Edw. Tyson, M. D.

On the History of the Ephemeron.
ALthough the Great Creators Wisdom shone
Both in his Footstool, and his Throne,
Though greater Bodies make the louder noise,
Yet in the lesser is a Voice,
A Voice, though still
That does the mind with Admiration fill,
And gives to man the Product of his will.
The Insect-world but lately known,
Does both his Skill and Glory too, declare,
They a Creator own
No less than does the Sun,
Their Rise, their Life, their End,
Sparks of Wise power comprehend.
Nay, if we Great with Small compare,
We sind these Little-Heraulds too, Proclaim
Jehovah's Mighty Name,
They tell his praise,
And Trophies to his Wisdom raise,
That does in Little much express,
Like the best Limners art, that most affects the less.
The smallest Ant does Providence Teach,
Does Foresight to the Sluggard Preach,
And here in this Ephemeron we see
An Emblem both of Change, and of Mortality.
How strong must be the Plastic force
That the small Eggs contain?
That Water makes not worse,
A Body fluid, cold;
Nay hatches 'em at last,
As well as gentle heat of Hen, or Sun,
A thing so strange, so bold,
As scarce perhaps no Author ever told,
Or heretofore was done:
Truth in new moulds is cast,
And Future Age may more unfold,
What from the Former we expect in vain,
This Treasure, where is enough, we from the Deep regain.
What instinct has the Worm to bore a Cell
Wherein he may securely dwell?
Whose hard fare, joined with Ease, and Sloth,
Perhaps does something to retard his growth.
Though meat be dry, yet drink there is good store,
Tipple still streaming by his door,
Like other Natives both begot and bred,
Where Thetis shows her Briny head,
And Neptune swaggers o'r the dead.
Well may both Worm and Man that Element desire,
Both moistening so require,
Which is so natural naught can be more,
Congenial to their first beginning
As to a Spider is her Spinning,
And is a means to both of getting higher.
After a long Subaqueous abode,
The Watery Native longs to range abroad,
Shoots through his liquor, and no sooner spy*
The Stranger Element, the Skies,
The Poets Metamorphosis
Was not more strange, more quick than this,
Vnstrips, his burden leaves, and then more nimbly Flies.
How many parts the Inside does contain?
All here made plain
And obvious to the mean Capacity,
What parts the Worm, and Fly,
What makes the Change of Name,
What parts are altered, what the same,
Into all which he that desires to pry,
Needs now no Microscope, but sees with half an eye.
T. GVIDOTT.
EPHEMERI VITA: OR THE Natural History AND ANATOMY OF THE EPHEMERON, A Fly that
lives but Five Hours.
CHAP. I.
That the Ephemeron is Produced out of an Egg.

AS all Vegetables proceed from a known Fructifying Seed; so is also the
Production of all Animals and Insects, viz. out of a Seed or Egg: So that
nothing we discern to have life, but it proceeds from an Egg, Man as well as
all other Creatures. And notwithstanding the Common Opinion that many Insects
named Exanguious, are chance-births, taking their original from Corruption,
that is, out of the motion of the moisture and warmth which proceeds from
Corrupting matter, either in Inanimate or Sensitive Bodies, or Vegetables;
constant experience teaches us the contrary, as, among other, appears in
this account of the Production of the Ephemeron, which proceeds from a
Visible and known Seed, contrary to that false opinion of men prejudiced to the
contrary, who believe they are Produced out of putrefying Clay and Water; as if
such a chance-Productor had the power to produce a Creature in all Ages to be
admired, and hardly by the most Ingenious and Wise to be described.

This Tab. 8. Fig. 2.
Ephemeron is a Four-winged creature, furnished with Two small Horns, Six Legs,
Two very long and straight hairy Tails, and living at longest in this shape or
form but Five Hours; is found yearly in all the mouths or entrances of the
Rhine, as the Maes, the Wael, the Leck, and the Isel; about Mid-summer flying
on the Surface of the water for Three days succeeding; but with this
difference, that those which have lived and flown the First day, die the same
Evening; and the same happens the Second and Third day, and then cease till
next Year and Season when the like happens again.

At the same time the Tab. 6. Fig. 1.
Female Ephemeron being risen out of the water, and in the rising, having shed
her Skin, and having for some time flown, and as it were sported above the
Surface of the water, she shoots her double Tab. 4. Fig. 3.
Egg cluster, or Ovarium in the water; after which the Tab. 8. Fig. 2.
Male also being risen out of the water, and as before in the rising having
shed his skin, and afterward on Land stripped another Tab. 7. Fig. 1, 2.
thin Film, also shoots his Seed on the Female Seed, and thereby fructifieth
it. But how properly this Generation is effected, and how these Insects rise
out of the water, and how in the water and on the land they shed their Skins,
shall be in this following relation more largely and circumstantially described.

This very wonderful flight of this Insect, living in this form and shape but
Five Hours, I have for the first time seen in a Branch of the Rhine, running by
Cuilenborch in the Year 1667. I find also in Clutius, who has writ of these
Insects, that they are also found at Arnhem, Zutphen, at the Cut by Vtrecht, at
Rotterdam, and several other places. As also that D. de Mey has given a
particular narration thereof, as may be found at the end of the Historical
Observations of Goedaert. And not only in our Age, but in some Ages past
mention has been made of these or the like Insects by the Philosophers, as by
Pliny, Aristotle, Aelian, and others, who have made search into the nature of
Insects, and by whom this Insect is described under the name of Hemerobius,
Ephemerus, and Diaria, as appears in their writings; as also in the
forementioned Book of Augerius Clutius, published An. 1634. But what degree of
knowledge they have had of this Insect, and what for truth they have recorded
thereof, will appear to those who shall take the pains to examine them
according to this Treatise.

The Eggs of the Ephemeron being in the forementioned manner shot in the water,
and besprinkled with the Milt or Seed of the Male, they sink gradually, and are
by means of the streaming water spread here and there on the clay or ground; as
also for that by their shape, which is a Tab 4. Fig. 1.
flattish round, they are fitted for a spreading in their sinking; and
therefore if with the point of a knife you shall let them down leisurely in the
water, you will find them neatly separate one from the other.

How long these Eggs remain under water unhatched, or in how many days the
tender limbs of the worm are so far grown as to have strength to break through
the shell or skin, is very difficult to be declared, notwithstanding by often
digging in the Clay, in search for them, or by keeping some of their Eggs in a
vessel with Water and Clay, some knowledge thereof might be attained. It shall
suffice for the present to say, that the Egg of the Ephemeron produces a
Six-legged Worm, which the Seamen and Fishermen name Dever Aas, or Shore-baite,
as hereafter shall be mentioned.

CHAP. II.
Out of the Egg of the Ephemeron proceeds a Six-Legged Worm.

THE Time when the Worm is hatched and named Aas, or Bait, being to me unknown;
I will proceed in my discoveries; and first, if after some considerable time
you dig in the Clay about the places where these worms are, you will find a
great number of Six-legged and very small worms; which differ not in form and
shape from those which are bigger: I said, a considerable time, because they
grow but slowly, for in the following year in the month of June, when the full
grown Worms shed their Skin, these Worms are in size but of about Tab. 1. Fig.
1.
one Holland inch long, viz. part of the length of the Tab. 1. Fig. 3.
full grown Worm.

Besides these Two sorts of Worms so considerably different in size, there is
at the same time also found in the Clay a Tab. 1. Fig. 2.
third sort, which exceed the smallest sort, being double the size of them, and
are ^ less than the full grown. Besides, those of each Size and Age differ
somewhat in length and thickness among themselves. So that whereas the full
grown Worm at the time that it is ready for flight is about Three Holland
inches long, the middle sort are about Two of the same inches long, and the
smallest about One inch.

There is also this further difference as to their Age, that those of the Tab.
1. Fig. 1.
first size have not only no wings, but also no appearance of them; but in the
second size the Tab 1. Fig. 2.
wing-cases appear, which in the third size are fully and plainly visible, Tab.
1. Fig. 3.
and as a flower in its bud, growing on, and as it were creeping out.

CHAP. III.
The Worm being hatched what its First Action is, and what its Food.

HAVING observed what kind of Worm is hatched out of the Egg of the Ephemeron,
I shall next describe what the Worms thus hatched first do, and what is their
Food.

It is very requisite to know that the Worms rarely or never are found on the
ground of the Rivers, or Swimming in the body of the water, for notwithstanding
they Swim indifferently swift, and make a kind of a Snake-like motion in the
water, bending sometimes their heads downward and sometimes upward, which waved
motion the body follows, yet they keep themselves always close the sides or
banks of the Rivers, in the stillest places of the water where they have their
Cells. And where the places dug for finding them are most Clayie, there are
they found in greatest number; yet are they seldom found on the outsides of the
Clay, but they have their habitation within the body thereof, and that in
oblong round cavities which themselves have made, not sloping downwards, but
straight and horizontal, and therefore Vander Kracht in Clutius says true,
that these Insects have each its proper Cell.

As the Bees by an admirable and possibly inimitable art make their own Cells
out of Wax; in like manner are these excavated Tab. 2. Fig. 2.
Cavities like Tubes made by these Worms, and dug out according to the size
of their bodies: wherefore as soon as these Worms are forced out of their Cells
and have nothing to creep on but the Surface of the Earth, having no support
for the sides of their Bodies, they soon lose their readiness and swiftness of
motion, notwithstanding they are surrounded with water, and by means of
Swimming can keep themselves up; yet have I found when I had taken a great
number of these out of their Cells for to Dissect them, that they always fell
on their backs, where they seemed to ly as unable to raise themselves again on
their Legs; whereas on the contrary they being in their Tube-like Cells, move
very swiftly backwards and forward and all manner of ways. And the same I have
also found common in all sorts of worms, that live in such excavated Cells,
which move very swiftly in them, but taken out seem to lie as fainting away. As
I have also found in the Worms which live in excavated holes of Trees; as also
in those which are found in Fruits, Excrescences of Leaves, and in the
wart-like Excrescences of Plants. It is very observable that a Wood-worm when
drawn out of its Cell, immediately spins a web about its whole body, by which
means it is assisted to make a new opening or Cell in the Wood, which without
this support of its body it could not do, having herein need thereof to press
its body against it.

The Worm out of its Cell is so weak, that Swimming in the water, and resting
there a small time, immediately and without order it sinketh to the ground and
there remains lying on its back.

But to proceed, the Worms as soon as hatched betake themselves to bore their
Cells, the which as is said they make in the Clay, oblong, sometimes straight
and sometimes crooked, which they by degrees enlarge according to the increase
of their body in bigness; so that the old Worms live in Tab. 2. Fig. 2.
wider Tubes or Cells, and the young Worms in Tab. 2. Fig. 2.
narrower.

To this purpose the wise Creator has furnished them with fit members; AAA
for besides that their Two Forelegs are formed somewhat like those of the
ordinary Moles or the Eve-Chur, BB
or Gryllo-talpa, he has also furnished them with two Toothy Cheeks, somewhat
like the Sheres of Lobsters, which serve them more readily to bore the Clay.

The Worms being placed in a Vessel with Clay mixed with some water, you will
immediately see them begin to make their Cells, and if it happen you provide
them not Clay enough, they cannot hide their design, but will be continually
wrooting the Clay through and through, and hiding under the Clay sometimes
their head, sometimes their body, and sometimes their tail, always endeavoring
to make new Cells.

The Fishermen assure us from their experience that when the water of the River
falls or runs off, they then bore their Cells lower and deeper in the
Clay, and when the water again rises they also rise higher; which I judge to
them most needful, in consideration of the many Lungs and Air-Vessels in these
Worms, for to supply which they must often take fresh air, which they could not
do, if they remained in the depth when the water rose.

I have often experienced that these Worms taken out of their holes and placed
in wet sand, do then rather creep out of the water than go downwards toward the
bottom under the sand, which they seem to do as well for want of Clay, as for
the warmth of the water which seems hurtful to them.

Concerning what their Food is, is difficult to find out except by help of
Anatomy, which has taught me their Food to be only Clay: for at what time
soever they are opened, in their Stomach is found Clay, as also in the thick
and small guts, in the same manner likewise is always found in the Intestines
of Earthworms, earth and sand; of which when they have fed, they eject the
remainder in a Crooked knobby form, as is to be seen in the entrance of their
Cells.

As for the Moths which eat Wool and Furr, there are two things very
considerable, and suiting very well with this relation; the first, that the
Cells they make to themselves, wherein they live, and with which as their
house, Tortoise-like, they move from place to place, they make of the matter
next at hand; the second is, that they feed also on the same: therefore when
you find their Cells, or rather coats or cases to be made of Yellow, Green,
Blew or Black cloth, you will also find their dung of the same color: So that
desiring to have most fine Chopped Cloth, you need but seek it in their dung, and
it were not possible to find finer shred flowers or herbs than in the dung of
those Insects that feed on them. Which possibly might be of good use for the
better extracting the Colors and Virtues of Vegetables, which appears after
it has rained for some days, at which time the dung of these Insects is in
that manner melted, that then walking through the Gardens, you will discern on
the Linen laid on the ground for Whitening, spots of several colors which are
very hard to be got out again. In those Boxes in which the Druggists and
Apothecaries keep their Drugs, you will sometimes find some Ounces of these
Evacuations, out of which might be extracted the virtue and color of the
Vegetable, whereas mistakingly they are often sold for the Seeds of those Drugs.

Like as the Moth feeds on the same substance whereof it makes its Cell or
Case, so do also our Worms; but as I said, this is not to be discovered but by
Dissecting them: which way of certainly knowing the Food of any Insect or other
creature, has not its only use in these Insects, but also in Fowls, Fishes and
other Animals, which we may desire to preserve and nourish. And for the
knowledge of what their food is, we may in the ordinary way be much to seek. It
has also its use concerning hurtful and much damage-causing creatures whose
destruction we therefore are desiring. In this manner I find commonly in the
stomach of the Mole, parts of Ground-worms, which they very greedily eat, and
for which cause alone they seem thus to wroot in the earth. It will be
therefore an easy way to destroy them, if with the blood of a Mole you mix
some Ratsbain and chopped Ground-worms, as experience has taught: to get the
blood of a Mole, clip off a piece of his Nose, whereat much blood will issue.

CHAP. IV.
How long this Worm feeds: why named Aas or Bait: And how strong its life is.

HAVING described the Egg, the Worm, and its Nourishment; the next thing
remarkable will be, to consider how long it feeds. For notwithstanding it may
seem strange to limit the duration of a Creatures feeding, whose life is as to
us wholly hid in the earth and water; yet it is not unfeasible by considering
the differing sizes of these Worms. For whereas the smallest size worms after
one years feeding, are in length of one Holland inch; and that the second size
are then in length 1 and of the same inches, it follows by consequence that
every Worm is Three years feeding, before it is fitted for its change, at which
third year the Worm now full grown is 2 inches long.

These full fed and full grown Worms now quit their Cells and the water to fly
in the air, as following I shall describe. But as no creature is without its
enemy, in like manner these Worms when they take the water to attain their
flight, are immediately preyed on by the Fish; and although they have escaped
that danger and attained the use of their wings, yet are they not free from a
second danger, namely, of being preyed on by Birds; which has given occasion
to some Seamen, Fishermen and other people, dwelling on the Banks of the Rhine
observing the same to use these Worms for a bait to fish with; which therefore
is the true reason why these Worms are named Aas or Bait, and O^ver Aas or
Shore-bait by those who live about Wyk te Deurstede, Cuilenborch, and other
places. And from hence also it is that when these Worms are become Fledged and
have taken the Air, they are in the aforesaid places named Uluchtich aas or
Flying bait, whereas by those of Rotterdam, S^hoonhoven, and Dordrecht, the
oldest City in Holland, this Worm being Fledged is named Haft, from whence that
so much known Low Dutch Proverb is derived, Het isser so dicht als Haft, they
are in multitude like Haft, for these Worms thus fledged fly in multitudes
like the falling Snow.

At all times of the Year when the Season is fit for Fishing, these Worms make
a good Bait; for because they live Three years in the water and clay before
they take their flight, they may at all times of the year be dug out of the
clay in those rivers for that use.

When the Fishermen bait their hooks with these Worms, they fix their hook in
the head of the Worm where it is hardest and strongest, and for that it lives
long, it is the more useful by its motion in the water to allure the Fish, to
swallow the hook.

The strength of this Worms life may be discerned by this Experiment, that when
once for drying and preserving one of them, I had pierced the head through with
a pin, it yet lived the next day, notwithstanding I had put it the whole night
before in a Vessel with Urine for to kill it: yet nevertheless being taken out
of their Clay Cells, and put in a Vessel with water and clay, they live not two
days. When these Worms therefore are to be preserved, they must only be placed
in moist sand or wetted clay, in which I have found the greatest sort to live
Four days, and the small worms Eight days, but wholly under water they cannot
subsist.

For sending these Worms elsewhere, there is no better way than to bind some of
the greatest hollow Reeds together, and to cause the worms to run in them,
wherein they will remain without hurting one another, which otherwise they are
subject to do, when moving nigh one the other; and this way they might be
removed into other Rivers, as Fish are removed.

CHAP. V.
A Description of the members, or outward parts of the Worm, its Color, and
Nature.

BY a strict examination of the Worm, I find it distinguished into Fourteen
annular incisures or divisions, whereof the First contains the Head, the
Three following the Breast, and the last Ten the Belly, with its appendant
Tails.

In the Tab. 2. Fig. 1.
Head are observable the A
Eyes covered with an entire smooth Film, having on each side its brushy hairs.
When the Worm sheddeth its Skin, this Film sheddeth also gradually from the
Eyes, which eyes when the worm is fledged appear like a net. Somewhat lower
under the eyes appear the two tender and sharp-ending BB
horns, which are as it were distinguished into several Joints. Next appear the
C
Toothlike sheres or cheeks which constitute the Beak, at whose beginning
underneath appear several other hairy and filmy parts, which have some
similitude with those found in Lobsters and Prawns.

At the first ring in the Breast are joined the D
Two foremost legs, in which is observable their shape and their Joints. Their
shape is somewhat like those creatures which wroot in the Earth, and therefore
these feet have their strongest motion outward, whereby like Moles they may
the better dig away the earth.

Every Leg has four joints and one Nail; the first joint is joined to the
Breast; the second joined to the first, is somewhat bent, as is also the third;
but withal of a more horn-like substance than the other, and having small
points sticking out like teeth of a sad Red color, and with many hairs on the
sides. The fourth joint is very small and armed with a Nail, in which are very
neatly placed the small muscles with their insertions, which very curiously
move the joints of the horn-like bony legs.

At the Second ring of the Breast, being the third of the body, which seems
most properly to represent the Back, and which is covered above, and under with
a horn-like bone, appear fastened the D
second pair of Legs, containing each five joints, and one nail, here and there
beset with hairs. Somewhat more backward appear on each-side the E
knobs, or wingcases, in which are enclosed the first pair of wings: These are
here and there interwoven with Air-vessels which appear on the outside like
common Veins, or Nerves. When the Worm is ready for shedding its Skin, these
enclosed wings neatly and curiously folded appear through these enclosing films
or cases.

At the Third Ring of the Breast being the Fourth of the Body, appear the
Second pair of wings which are much smaller, and wholly covered with the first
pair, which also in a manner cover the last pair of Legs, containing also each
five joints and one nail, and beset with several hairs for adornment.

The First Ring of the Belly, or the Fifth of the whole body, appears smooth
and even, without conjunction of Legs, Wings, or ought else: To the Six
following Rings on either side of the Belly are neatly adjoined FF
the always trembling and moving Gills, with which according to Clutius the
Worm swimmeth; but mistakingly, for these parts are truly the Gills of this
Worm: in Crabs, Lobsters, and the Zeekatten, which in many things agree with
the form of these Worms, are found the same parts, and placed almost in the
same manner, however with this difference, that in the Lobsters and Crabs they
are enclosed in the hard Scale that covers its back, and that in them they
are placed higher in the body than in our Worm, as it also is in the Zeekatten.
In the Figures of Kracht are Twelve of these Gills, represented on each side,
but by mistake, for there are in all but Twelve, viz. Six on each side.

The Eighth and Ninth Rings of the Belly, or the Twelfth and Thirteenth of the
Body, are wholly smooth and even, but the Tenth Ring of the Belly, and
Fourteenth of the Body is adorned with G
three hairy and bushy Tails, besides two crooked appendices which in the
Females are not so visible, and in the Males have some other appendices.

As to the Color of the Worm, the smallest are of a pale Blue, somewhat
inclining to Gray, which rather proceeds from the transparent Intestines,
than from the true Color of the Worms outside; also the eyes in all these
Worms are a Brown black, and the Black is speckt with pale Brown specks, the
which according to the age of the Worm grow blacker. The Beak of these Worms is
pale, with sad red teeth, as are also the Two tooth-like Sheres or Cheeks,
which are as it were a part of the mouth: the hornlike bony parts of the Legs
and the Nails of the feet, are likewise a sad Red.

The Wings which as it were bud forth change gradually from a Pale into a
Yellowish Color, which in time further changes into a Brown blue, till at
length it becomes of a Brownish black. The whole Worm in time attaineth a pale
Yellow, and the Blackish spots on its back, which constitute the upper parts of
the Belly, are gradually changed into a deeper Color.

Next in this Worm is to be considered the Sex. The Tab. 2. Fig. 1.
Male has its Eye in largeness double to that of the Tab. 1, Fig. 3.
Female. The body of the Male is commonly much less than that of the Female,
which according to my observation is the same in all Insects, and is so
contrived by Nature, or rather by the Omniscient God of Nature, that for the
great number of Eggs the Female bears, it might have a sufficient containing
place. The Tails of the Male are the longest; besides they have three or four
other appendices which in the Female are hardly visible, and of which some
appear on the sides, and some under. The Male represented in the first Figure
of the second Plate is the biggest I have ever seen, notwithstanding of Females
many larger are found.

Concerning the Nature of this Creature, I pretend to little experience
thereof, only I can assure you that among all the diverse sorts of Insects I
have been acquainted with, I never met with one better natured and more
harmless than this; for how often or how much soever it is touched or handled,
it seems always to be well pleased; and left at rest, it immediately betaketh
to its work of making its Cell. Only I have observed in the smallest sort, that
when they are handled somewhat too hard, they bend their head toward their
breast, and thereby make themselves as it were stiffer: Among all its actions,
none is more strange than the motion of its Gills, of which it has on each
side of its body Tab. 2. Fig. 1.
Six, which are moved so orderly and continually trembling, that it is
admirable. FF


CHAP. VI.
The Anatomy of the inward parts of this Insect.

HAVING described the Egg, the Worm, its Nourishment, and duration of Life, its
outward parts and its nature; I could now fitly proceed to its Change; but for
that this Change is so extreme sudden as consisting alone in the shedding of
two Films, and some members, I judged it better for the more clear
understanding of the difference between the Insect swimming, and the same
Flying* (that is, between the Worm and the Ephemeron) first to consider the
inward parts, the rather also for that we discern the same parts in both forms
of this Insect.

And now that I have undertaken to describe the inward parts of the Worm, and
that to effect it, I enter in a path untrod before, yet will I not with
Clutius, bewail the want of Books Treating hereof: for besides that Nature it
self best discovers its wonders, and the Books are so far only to be
received, as they agree with the truth of the natural appearances of things; I
therefore pity those who depending on the experiences of others receive also
therewith their endless untruths, and therewith deceive their Readers. Secondly
it is impossible, in the variety of Experiences, by our Conceptions and Reason
alone to keep the right path of truth, and with a clear Judgment to pass a true
sentence on the observations of others; the more for that we find the most
certain Experiences not agreeing with our judgment, or rather prejudice, to be
obstinately rejected: wherefore I appeal to the Experiences themselves,
notwithstanding I might complain, that for want of a sufficient number of
Worms, I could not Anatomize their parts to a full exactness, nor to my own
satisfaction. But afterward I have learned that the Works of God are
unsearchable and incomprehensible as is his Being. Wherefore we need not
further search into these his Works, than with admiration of our ignorance in
the same, to Praise and Love their Maker.

That I may as much as is possible clearly represent my Observations, I shall
withal describe the manner I have used in the Year 1670. to attain the true
Dissection of the parts of the Worm, for I will at no hand either deceive my
self or others. But before I proceed to the description of the Intestines, I
shall to assist the memory, in short, enumerate all the outward parts
observable in the Worm, and then, which are the inward parts in the Male, and
which in the Female.

The outward parts of the Worm are the Head, the Scull, the Horns, the Eyes,
the Teeth, the Beak, the Tongue with its hairy Films, which appear in the Worm
in the same manner as in the Lobster; the Breast, the Legs, the Nails, the
Wings, the Belly with its appurtenances, the uppermost twelve Gills, and the
under ten Finns, the Tails with their appendices, and lastly the openings of
the Air-vessels under the breast.

The Inward parts in the Male besides the Blood and the Films, are the Muscles,
the Fat, the Stomach, the Guts, the Lung-vessels, the Heart, the Medulla
spinalis, and the Seed-vessels.

In the Female having the same parts, is alone this difference, that in stead
of the Seed-bladders or Milt, is found the Egg-cluster, which is enclosed with
thin Films, throughout woven with very many air-vessels.

But whereas for want of a sufficient number of Worms, I have not exactly
enough examined the inward parts of the Head and Eyes, I shall therefore speak
little of them, as also of the parts of the Breast which for the most part is
filled with the Muscles of the Legs and Wings.

When a Male Worm (easily distinguished by the largeness of its eyes) is placed
on a small Deal board, covered either with black paper or linen which spotteth
not, with its belly upwards, and there fixed with a very fine Needle, you will
find immediately issue out of the wound in the Skin, a thin watery moisture
which is the true blood of this Worm, however it appears not of a Red color
as in Earthworms, in which, as in Four-footed Animals it is Red. To open the
Skin, there is nothing more fit, than a very sharp and fine small Scissers, for
that the Lancets, although never so sharp, are not in this work useful, for
they always tear up some of the parts and strain them asunder; especially when
they are of unequal hardnesses.

When with a sharp fine Lancet, or the point of a sharp grounded Needle, you
leisurely and with patience separate the upper Skin from the under parts, then
appears immediately the under Skin very thin and filmy, which, raised with
discretion, the Muscles of the Belly appear, and not only those Muscles which
extend in a straight line from one Ring of the Body to the other, but also
those which are placed oblique, and transverse, and others also which serve to
the motion of the Gills, the second Film appears also like threads, and
seems to be fast joined with the forementioned Muscles.

Next the Muscles, appears and is fast joined to them a very fine and thin
Film, which I judge to be the Peritonaeum, above and under the same appears
the Fat, which is composed of small and very thin White bladders, which contain
in them the true Fat, in the form of a liquid Oil; when these bladders are
viewed without a Microscope, it would easily be judged they were the Fat it
self, whereas they are but as the thin and extreme tender Vesicles thereof,
which contain that liquid Fat. Like as it is also in man, and all other beasts,
as will appear when these Fat-containing Vesicles, which are of a like
proportionate magnitude shall be viewed by a Microscope. The younger the beasts
are the better this Fat appears, for then it is spread here and there on the
Films, and not so close placed up together as in beasts of more Age.

Next appears the Tab. 4. Fig. 5.
Stomach, with the Guts thereon depending, viz. the Throat-gut, or Gula,
otherwise the upper Gut of the Stomach, which shoots forward in the form of a
thin thread from the Mouth or Cheeks through the back and breast, and
constituteth the upper part of the Stomach. Where this small Gut is joined with
the Stomach, it appears commonly straightened, A
which also appears in the lower part of the Stomach, otherwise the nether B
mouth of the same.

The Stomach C
notwithstanding it is composed of several parts, yet seems to be constituted
of a thin and very tender Film inwardly beset with rimples or very neat pleats,
outwardly it appears wholly smooth and extended, especially being filled with
food, or blown full of Air with a fine Glass pipe; Veins and Arteries there
appear none, for the watery color of the blood hinders the discerning of
those parts, and for which cause these Insects are named Exanguious, or without
blood.

Notwithstanding the C
Stomach appears supplied with many small Veins which seem to be
bloud-vessels, yet being viewed with a Microscope they clearly appear to be
branches of the Tab. 3. Fig. 1.
Lung-vessels, which communicate their Branches not only to the Stomach, but to
all the outward and inward parts of the body, AA
so that the very Bones and Nails are furnished therewith. The Tab. 4. Fig. 5.
Guts adjoined to the Stomach appear both in form and constitution threefold,
as the inward bended or DD
thin Gut. The thick or E
pleated Gut, and the straight F
or terminating Gut, within the thin Gut, somewhat low backwards appear some
Pleats G
like half circles in the same manner as the Valves in the thin Guts of men,
where they are named by Anatomists Annular or Conniventes. Somewhat lower where
it forms the ( E) thick Gut appear somewhat long strokes, which are very neat
and lively, like so many long and extended Musculous threads in the hollow
thereof, which agrees somewhat with the Boeck, which in four-footed Creatures
is a part of the Paunch; next follows the ( F) straight Gut which appears
very neatly pleated, till it extends as it were out of the body with an
indifferent opening at that end by which the Excrements are sent forth.

The C
Stomach is placed between the 4 th and 5 th Ring of the body, 4, 5,
where with the thin Gut it takes up all the remaining part of the Belly, as
the 6, 7, 8, 9, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
10, and 11 th Rings, whereas the three last of the body as the 12, 12, 13, 14.
13, and 14 th contain the thick and straight Gut. Like as the Stomach is
furnished with a great number of Air-vessels, so also are the Guts, and
especially the straight Gut, and that chiefly in that part, where it is
furnished with Tab. 4. Fig. 1.ii.
two Muscles for pressing out its Excrements.

And because the Worm is fed with Clay, the Stomach and Guts commonly appear
filled therewith. This Clay does almost always appear through the Stomach, the
Guts, and also through the whole body, but it is most visible through the back;
by which transparency of the Worms body, it happens that the Worm at different
times appears of different colors, according to the color of the Clay it
feeds on, viz. Paler, Greener or Wanner; or more or less digested or changed
in the Guts.

When the time approaches that the Worm is to Change into a Fly, then
appears no Clay at all in the Guts, the same also happens in Wood-worms, the
Worms of Bees, Silkworms, and several other Insects, which at the time of
their Change become as clear and transparent as Crystal, and some other Insects
are thus transparent during their whole life, so that their Veins and
Intestines with the motions of the same within their body can be clearly
discerned.

Among the inward parts of the Ephemeron, are very considerable the Tab. 3.
Fig. 1.
Lung-pipe, the Air-pipe, or Windpipe, as the same part is named in Birds,
Beasts and Man; AA
this Air-pipe or vessel is not constituted of one single trunk, as in the
forementioned Beasts and Man, but of two chief Trunks, which are placed on each
side of the body, curving Snake-like, and that not only in the Breast, as in
our bodies, but also in the Head, the Belly, the Legs, and the Wings; so that
the Stomach and the Guts, together with the Muscles and Sinews, are as it were
fed with Air, which truly is very wonderful, for that the Reason for which it
is so formed, is to us wholly incomprehensible, and teaches us that God in the
incomprehensibleness of his works is to be adored.

The Fabric of the Lung-vessels in this Insect, as in all other Insects I am
acquainted with, is constituted of innumerable stiff and curled-like parts,
which in the form of knotted Rings are joined together, and so close united by
means of very thin films drawn over them, that they very fitly contain the Air
in them, and send it to all the parts of the body backwards and forwards.

When the Worm sheddeth its Skin, I believe, the Lung-vessels also shed a Skin,
notwithstanding I have not yet seen it, for at that time when I happened to make
these observations, I knew not of it. In the Silkworms is this shedding of the
Skin of the Lung-vessels so considerable, that all humane understanding must
stand amazed thereat: for in that very small time when the Silkworm sheddeth
its Skin, several hundreds of Air-vessels in its body also shed their Skins,
being very thin films, all made up of those Rings beforementioned, which would
seem incredible in the Relation if I my self had not seen it distinctly, and
had shown it also to others.

The Color of these Lung-vessels is a Pearl color somewhat Gray, which as
they come to change their Skin, changes into a clear and shining White, for
which cause they are much Whiter in the Flies than in the Worms; they spread
throughout the whole body, to Communicate Air to all the parts outward and
inwards, so that those two great and remarkable Tab. 3. Fig. 1.
Air-vessels, which appear placed on each side of the Worm, send to all parts
of the body their Branches, AA
as in the Head BB
to the Nerves and Brains; in the Breast CC
to the Muscles of the Legs and Wings; in the Belly DD
to the oblique and straight thread-like Muscles. As also to the ( EEE) Medulla
Spinalis, to ( FFF) the Milt or Seed-vessels of the Male, to ( GG) the hairy
Gills, to Tab. 4. Fig. v. C.
the Stomach and Tab. 3. Fig. 1. H.
Guts, to ( III) the outward Skin, to ( KK) the Film of the wings, to Tab. 4.
Fig. 1. LL.
the Egg-cluster in the Female, to the Film ( MM) that covers the
Egg-cluster, to the Fig. 7. N.
Eggs, as they are taken out of the body, and to the Fig. 4. TT.
heart.

I have had much trouble to discover the outward openings of the Lung-vessels,
for they open neither in the Mouth or Throat as in other Creatures, and for
that Reason they lessen gradually as they nearer approach the Head, whereas
otherwise they ought there to widen, after a long search they seem to me to
have their openings, under and in the sides of the Breast, almost in the same
manner as I have afterward observed it in Grasshoppers, where these openings
are easier to be seen; but here in our Worm, by reason of its living in the
Water and Clay, are less, and therefore more troublesome to discover. In the
Silkworms these openings of the Air-vessels are more visible, for they have
Ten on each side of their body, viz. Eighteen large ones, and Two lesser, which
last not having any Brown spots are not so visible, and never appear clearer to
sight than when the Worm sheddeth its Skin, when out of all these Twenty
openings of these Air-vessels the shed Films thereof may be seen to issue out,

From these Observations, appears very clearly the reason why our Worms rise
higher into other Cells when the water of the River increases, for that
sometimes they must draw fresh Air, and breath, for which cause it may also be
said, that they follow the falling water, lest they should be too much dried up
by the surrounding Air, and that their vessels through the dripping out water
might be in danger of closing.

These Lung-vessels are best discovered when the Worms have been dead for some
days, and that their inwards are become blackish, for then they appear very
clear to the sight, which happens for that they they are of a Pearl color, and
like new boiled Silver, and also for that through their stiff and hard matter
of which they are made, they are not so subject to rot, for which reason also
at that time they better keep their Figure and roundness.

When with a Microscope you view these Worms on their Breast and Belly, the
whole belly seems as interwoven with Silver-white vessels: But now to know
truly whether they contain Air in them, lay them only in a drop of water, and
then close or press them with the point of a Needle whereby the enclosed Air
will presently appear; when these Creatures are Dissected under the water, and
that with fine Scissers you clip off some of their Lung-vessels, they rise
immediately to the Surface of the water, which also do all the parts of the
vessels broken off, with their ends upwards; in a dried Worm Dissected, these
Vessels are very easily discovered, because by their curled-like Rings they
remain constantly open, how much soever the other parts dry up.

One of the most remarkable things observable in these Lung-vessels is the
great number of them extending to the Tab. 3. Fig. 1.
Gills where are PPPP
three chief of them represented as cut off; the middlemost is always QQ
black, which notwithstanding just in the middle appears transparent White,
the other two appear on each side of the middlemost which is Black, and they
shoot out a great number of Silver white Vessels GG
in the Gills, which vessels are not very visible by their Color, by reason of
the very bright appearance of the Gills, which are in number Six Tab. 2. Fig. 1.
on each side of the body, and are pure shining White, under the same, FF
on each side are the Five Tab. 3. Fig. 1.
Finns of a Yellow Color with which the Worm swimmeth.

R RRRR
I had made some other Observations concerning the Gills and their Vessels,
which are missing, and which I cannot now find, and the Contents of them is
wholly out of my Memory; so that I remember not what is the use of SS
that Feather-like hairy part which is seen under the first and uncut pair of
Gills, as also whether it is found under the other Gills, what Communication
those Gills have with the Lung-vessels, and the Tab. 4. Fig. 4.
Lung-vessels with TT
the heart, I know not, so that I can relate no more thereof than what is
represented in this Delineation, OO
where all the Air-vessels about the heart are not represented, to prevent
confusion, only some are represented whole, and the others VV
as cut of.

I have also in all my delineations, not observed an exact proportion as to the
size of the parts, for that seemed to me a too tedious labor and of small use;
so that I have delineated one part somewhat larger than the other, never
thinking to have made these my Observations public, till I had anew more
examined them all over, which I also afterward found more necessary, as well
for the greater knowledge I afterward attained concerning the parts of
Insects, and also a greater readiness in the Anatomizing of them, but the kind
Reader is desired to pardon what is wanting, which I am conscious is very much;
and who is able in many years to describe this Insect, and the wonders therein
observable, which is the reason that I Communicate it thus to the world; the
more for that I now am resolved to addict my thoughts more to love the Creator
of these things, than to admire him in his Creatures.

The Tab. 4. Fig. 4.
heart appears placed above in the back as it is in Silkworms, the Worms of
Bees, Wood-worms, Caterpillars, TT
and other like Insects, here and there it appears somewhat XXXX
swelling out, like as in Silkworms, and noted by Malpighius, and from whence
he concludes, but not rightly, as I conceive, that in the same Worm should be
more than one heart; I have seen this heart move in the Ephemeron, but very
disorderly, and what I have here represented in the Figure is but a part of it,
and I have wholly forgotten in what part or division of the body it is placed.

The Tab. 3. Fig. 1.
Medulla Spinalis in this Insect, is like that in all the other sorts that I
have yet dissected, very wonderful and observable; YYY
it contains Eleven Swellings Oblong and Oval, the First of which represents
the Brains where the **
Optic Nerves very visibly appear shooting forth in the same manner like as
the other Nerves of the Body shoot out from the other Ten Swellings, but in
greater number from the upper Swellings than from the under. Here and there the
Medulla Spinalis appears very neatly fastened as it were with ZZ
bands, which are made partly of an horny bone, and partly of a Sinewy
substance, as is chiefly appearing in the Breast, where the Medulla Spinalis
shoots forth very strong Nerves to the aa
Muscles which move the Legs and the bb
Wings in like manner as it does to the Tab. 4. Fig. 1. CC
Muscles of the Gills and the Finns.

Out of every Swelling or Node of the Tab. 3. Fig. 1.
Medulla Spinalis shoot always two very strong Nerves which join in the next
Swelling, EE
and enlarges the same whereby the Medulla Spinalis appears throughout as if
Split and Gaping; but as it is naturally placed in the body that gaping
appears not, for whereas there the arising Nerves lie close one to the other,
they seem no^ gaping, as Tab. 4. Fig. 6. may be seen where the Medulla Spinalis
is represented, as it appears naturally in the body, as also the Fourteen
divisions corresponding to those of the body in which it is placed.

When you would see the Medulla Spinalis without hurting the Worm, you must
blow the same up with Wind from behind, whereby the Swelling Guts will press so
strongly against the transparent Skin that you may very conveniently see the
Natural position, or shape thereof, and that as well without as with a
Microscope, but this is chiefly practicable in the Male.

As all the other parts of the body have their Air-vessels, so has also the
Medulla Spinalis, and that in a great number, so that even the Brain and the
Nerves, receive a continual refreshment of Air. Whether it has Veins and
Arteries I have not seen, yet I firmly believe it; but in the Silkworms I have
seen it very plainly, viz. several Vessels and Veins issuing out of the heart,
which I filled with a Colored Liquor, notwithstanding I cannot hitherto
certainly affirm whether they are Veins or Arteries.

Concerning the Tab. 3. Fig. 1.
Seed-vessels, or Genital parts, they are as visible in the Male-worm the day
before he sheddeth his Skin, FFFFF
as in the Male of the Ephemeron, which has shed his Skin; on both sides of
the Stomach and the Guts appear these Seed-vessels, which wholly agree with the
Milt of Fishes, notwithstanding like the Seed-bladders in men, they are
somewhat crumpled and Pipe-like in shape.

In which they also agree with the Seed-bladders of some Four-footed Animals,
as with the Moles, Hedge-hogs, and the like. The shape of these Seed-vessels
are FFFFF
oblong, taking up the whole belly as may be seen in the Figure thereof, where
some of them is represented without the body and somewhat greater than that in
the body, those Vessels contain a very white Milky liquid substance which is
the Seed, the Vessels themselves also are very white and constituted of a thin
Film, having here and there many Air-vessels interwoven in the same.

In the nethermost Rings of the Belly appear two other Tab. 3. Fig. 1. dd
parts also, as it seems pertaining to the Seed-vessels, which seem to have
the same opening with the Seed-vessels, and with the e
Guts, which I could not so exactly observe when I made the Dissection, for
that a great number of these Insects are requisite to be opened, to repeat the
same search, and to find that in the following which could not be found, or was
omitted in the former, but this number of these Insects is not always
attainable.

The Tab. 4. Fig. 3.
Egg-cluster in the Female is double, and placed in these Insects in the same
manner as the Roe in Fishes. When with a fine sharp-pointed Scissers the Skin
of the Belly is a little clipped of, the Fig. 1.
Egg-clusters appear immediately, LL
which are placed on each side of the Flank of the Belly. In the middle between
the same appear the ff
Stomach, and the Guts shining through, but somewhat darkly, which are
indifferently fast joined to MMM
the Films of the Egg-clusters; the Stomach and Guts appear the clearer by how
much they are more filled with Clay, their nourishment; whereby also the Eggs
are more visible, which by that difference in color appear the Whiter.

This double Egg-cluster is supplied with an innumerable number of Air-vessels,
which are as it were knit together with a thin Film, enclosing the Egg-cluster,
and by which those Air-vessels are conducted to the enclosed Eggs. When the
Film is separated by the point of a sharp and a well cutting Needle, and that a
part thereof with the Eggs is laid in a Spoon with water, the Eggs immediately
separate one from another, and there remains a tender bunch Tab. 4. Fig. 7. g.
of very thin Veins as their Fibers, Pearl colored, which Fibers I conceive
for the most part to be constituted of Air-vessels.

The Tab. 4. Fig. 2.
Magnitude of the Egg is so small, as to be hardly visible, and therefore ought
to be viewed by a Microscope, being laid on Black or Blue paper which much
assisteth to the clear perception of them.

The Form of the Egg is a flattish round and oblong, and enclosed in a
reasonable strong Skin, which viewed through a Microscope appears cloudy; its
Color is White, like the inward Film of an Egg-shell: The smalness of the Egg
seems to be the reason why the Worms are Three years growing before they come
to their full growth and ready for change.

CHAP. VII.
Signs of the Worms being ready for Change; what is hurtful to it; and to which
order of Natural Change it pertains.

THE common preceding signs of the Worms Change at the exact season of the
year, are a Warm and dry Spring, a Mild Winter, little Rain and Snow, and a
soft gliding water. The particular signs that the Worm will soon fly, are the
swelling of the Wing-cases on the back, which at that time attain a thicker and
rounder form than formerly; whereby the watery Gluiness which otherwise is
found in the Wing-cases is now become tougher and thicker, so that it now
begins to attain the shape of the Wing, and appear through Tab. 5. Fig. 2.
the transparent Wing-cases.

These signs are yet more apparent when the Color of these enclosed Wings
change from a Pale Yellowish AA
into a Gray color; and yet more certain, when the Wing-cases can be separated
from the Wings, without hurting them; as in Tab. 3. ( hhh) is represented,
where the Wing is represented at large with its natural but rare pleatings.

A further sign thereof is, when Dissecting the Worm the Eggs are found to be
full grown, hard, and Oval, and also when the outward case may be clearly
separated from the Worm and thereby cause it to attain the form of the flying
Haft or Ephemeron.

At this time all their Intestines are cleared of all faeces; the Stomach and
Guts containing nothing but transparent and purified liquor, which the further
from Change they are, the more Clouded and Colored they are found; their
Color being sometimes Yellowish, and sometimes dark and Russet; at other times
there is found backward in the thick and straight Gut a little Clay, whereas
being now ready for Change, they are very clear and transparent.

That which retardeth the Change of the Worm, kills it, and hinders its
Change, is a hard and long Winter, much Snow and Rain, whereby their Cells are
closed, broke, or covered with Sand, whereby they come forth both fewer in
number, and later in the one year than the other. They are also hindered by too
much drought, which forces them to leave their Cells, and bore new ones, from
all which may be discerned what hinders or furthereth the Worms growth.

Many water and other Insects are found to be infested with Li^e; which
extends so far, that even no Creature living either on Land or Water, that
has not its peculiar Louse, which feeds on its blood and moisture, even from
the great Whale to the small Ant.

From what has been now related of the Signs of the full growth of the Worms
Wings, it clearly appears to which of the Four Orders of Natural Change, or
slow growing on of the Limbs it pertains; viz. to the Second Order, for all
the Insects thereunto belonging, change in the same manner like our Worm: Which
Second order of Change is, That the Worm of the Ephemeron having quitted its
Egg or Shell. comes forth a Six-footed Worm, and by nourishment received,
increases in all its Limbs to a full growth; so that now on its back appear
the Wings budded out; until it be grown ito a Nympha; which loses not its
motion, and afterward attaineth the shape of a Flying Creature, by the
shedding of its upper Skin or Coat, whereby it now becomes fit for Generation.
As of this and other like Changes I have treated more at large in my Treatise
of Insects, where I have enumerated a great number belonging to this second
Order.

Angerius Clutius supposes that our Worm Changes into a Nympha of the Third
Order, and then like the Nympha of the Silkworm it loses all motion, which he
also represents in Figure, although in truth it is otherwise; from whence may
appear how easily they may be mistaken, who declining the Truth of Experience,
only depend on their own Reasonings or the Affirmations of others.

CHAP. VIII.
In how wonderful a manner the Worm Changes into the Haft or Ephemeron.

THE time of the Worms Change being come, and their Wings in their Tab. 5. Fig.
2. AA
Cases, having attained their full stiffness and Color, and that the Worm is
forced as it were naturally to a Change; all the Worms thus fitted and
prepared, leave their Cells, betaking themselves to the water, and out of the
water to flight, which commonly happens in the Evening between the hours of Six
and Seven, as I have observed it in the year 1671. the 13 th of June.

Those other Worms that have not attained that maturity and growth remain yet
in their Cells, but those that have quitted their Cells and betaken themselves
to the water, make all the speed possible to attain the Surface of the water,
which the one attaineth sooner than the other, and then each Worm Tab. 5. Fig.
2.
immediately changes into a Fig. 1.
Winged Creature, which Change or shedding its Skin is so sudden, that by the
strictest observation it would be judged that they flew through the water as
they are.

All the Insects that I hitherto am acquainted with have a certain time by the
God of Nature allowed them, to stretch out their Wings and to dry them before
they betake themselves to flight: and notwithstanding the conceived King of
Bees, like our Worm suddenly leaves his Cell, yet not before he has for some
time in his Cell spread out his wings and dried them.

But on the contrary our Haft or Ephemeron is almost in the same Minute a Worm
and a Fly, for where you cast your Eye on the Surface of the water, and
perceive the water to bubble, you see them as it were flying out of the same.

When in a Boat you lie cross the stream, you may best perceive the bubling of
the water, and the rise of the Worm changed into a Fly, out of the water; but
how swift soever the hand is in Catching the Worm yet swimming in the water,
yet can it not bring it unfledged to sight; but if you bruise it a little about
the Breast you may bring it unfledged out of the water, which practice is
wholly necessary if you desire to view it unfledged and in its Skin.

But how this sudden expansion of the Wings can be effected is strange to
consider, for that they have neither Muscles nor Joints in the midst, being
only neatly foulded and pleated together in their cases, and which in a very
short time must shed another Film, but how it is is difficult to answer; for my
Conceptions were that these Wings ought to have been furnished in their middle
part with Muscles and Joints as we find in other Insects, by which means they
very neatly fold up their Wings in a small room, and by means thereof also
expand them again; as is chiefly observable in the Ear-worm, or Forfica, which
hide very large Wings under a small Shell or Case, as if they had none at all;
and like as the Ear-worm by means of Muscles and Joints placed in the midst of
its Wings, can fold them in a small compass in manner like the wings in our
Worm, and suddenly expand them again: I conceive the same need of like Muscles
and Joints in the wings of our Worm, but it has otherwise pleased the great
Creator who is various and wonderful in all his works, and not to be tied to
the same means in effecting the same thing in the one as in the other.

But yet to say something of my own observation in relation to the swift
expansion of its Wings, I conceive that the water pressing on all sides, and
being warmer on its Surface than in the body thereof, may much assist to this
expansion, by reason that the blood at that time moving from the heart to the
wings, to aid or effect that expansion, by the warmth may receive a more
vigorous motion; as for instance, when one has a Vein opened in his foot and
holding the same in warm water, by the warmth of the water his blood becomes
more briskly moved and runs swifter out. So also while all the blood and
moisture of this Insect when it swimmeth and sheddeth its Skin is briskly
moved, the surrounding water may be very assistant to add to the motion of the
enclosed moisture, and so cause a more vigorous expansion of the wings:
Therefore if at that time their Wings are hurt or cut, they soon bleed to
death, or at least the Wings flag and spread no more. And as assistant to the
ready* spreading out of the wings is also the Air which is conveyed into them
by a great number of Air-vessels, which may be useful to stiffen them, and
cause the moisture to exhale out. If the Wing of the Worm when it is ready for
flight be cut off and laid in a small vessel with water, it will immediately
spread it self in the same till in a short time it be fully expanded, that it
would be ready for flight if it were but dry and stiff. I have several times
reiterated this Experiment, and thereby learned in what manner they do expand,
for being laid, as before, in the water, Tab. 3. Fig. 1. bbb
First the great folds do open, whereupon Tab. 6. Fig. 2.
the Wing by degrees becomes extended in its length, and then are expanded the
Fig. 3.
long folds of the Wing very wonderfully, till at last the Fig. 4.
Wing spreads out in its full dimensions as is represented in the Fig. 1.
Figure of the Insect according to the life, but the representation of the Wing
in its folds, and the manner of unfolding was taken by the help of a
Microscope. When the Wings are yet in their folds their Color is a dark Gray,
but as they expand they become lighter Colored.

The manner of the Expansion of the Wings in other Insects is quite different
from this last mentioned as in those of the Dragon-flie, or the Libella or
Perla, as also the Tipula terrestris or Culex Maximus, and the Locusta or
Locust, which Insects have their Wings placed in their Cases in a very crumpled
manner, being neither long-wise folded, nor again, Snake-like, as in our Worm,
for which reason their Wings are expanded with more trouble, and require more
time thereto.

In the Schoen-lapper, the Witkens, or the Capellens (which are some sorts of
Butter-flies) is yet another manner in the fold of their Wings, for they are
close rumpled together, so that no pleats, folds or rumples appear, and neither
having in their middle part or sides any Joints or Muscles, as has the
Ear-worm, as before is mentioned: besides the Wings of the Capellen are
beautified with an infinite number of small Scaly Feathers, which are so
curiously placed one above the other, and do so wonderfully move the one from
the other when the Wing is expanded, that it would deserve an entire Treatise:
so wonderful is the wisdom of the great Creator seen in the shape of these
Wings, and indeed what would not be wonderful of which he is the Author?

The Tab. 5. Fig. 1.
Ephemeron having thus quitted the water endeavors with all possible speed
to attain a resting place on land, which having attained, it there Tab. 7. Fig.
1, 2.
sheddeth a second Skin, a very thin Film from its whole body, viz. from its
Head, Breast, Belly, Legs, Tails, and Wings. And this second Skin shedding on
land differs from the first in the water; for in the first Skin-shedding the
Worm loses wholly its former shape, which it does not in this second shedding.

In the first Skin-shedding, the Skin of the Worm bursting open on its Head and
Back, suddenly falls from its body and it as suddenly betaketh to flight, but
withal loses considerable parts, Tab. 2. Fig. 1.
all the Gills on both sides with the Ten Finns under them, besides these Gills
thus shed there remain no hairs, F F
which disappear so entirely as to leave but very small Signs or points
thereof, which on the side of the Belly make a kind of a small list. It loses
also C
its Teeth or Sheres, the shape of its DD
Legs, the E
Wing-Cases, the G
Tails, etc. So that by this First Skin-shedding, it comes forth wholly like
Tab. 5. Fig. 1. Tab. 6. Fig. 2.
another Creature.

But although this order or method is very difficult, if not impossible to be
observed, in this so sudden Change of the Worm; yet may it with much ease be
discerned, if of a Worm thus ready for Change the Skin be slowly and with Art
and Care taken of; for then the shedded Gills may be clearly seen remaining in
the shed Skin; also there may be seen the remaining points thereof sticking out
in the Fly; there may also be seen in the Skin the pits in which they stuck;
in the same is also visible the shed Skins of the Air-vessels of the Muscles,
the Arteries, Veins, Nerves which separate one from the other, like ripe fruit
that falls from the Tree.

Further, whereas the Fly in this First Skin shedding has all its Joints and
parts more extended in length, yet the horns barely shed their Skin without any
further extrusion, and become much tenderer and shorter in the Fly than they
were in the Worm. But more considerable is the Change about the Eyes, for the
horny Film of the Eyes which in the Worm appeared even and smooth, after the
Skin is shed in the Fly appears like a Net, being an aggregate of many Eyes.
The Legs and two Tails after the Skin is shed, become double the length, and
the third or middle Tail is also shed with the Skin.

When I say that the two Eyes in this Insect are made of an Aggregate of many
small Eyes, which in some of these Insects, I have found to be 6 or 7000. and
in some Insects spread up and down their body, as in Spiders, and the Scorpion
Fly, it must not therefore be conceived that they are in Form or make like the
Eyes of other known Creatures, or men, for in these is found no Humor, but
from every Globular partition of the same issues a Sexangular Filament which
terminates on the Net-like Film of these Eyes, and that in the Nerve and Brain,
so that the manner of seeing in these Insects is wholly different from what it
is in us, in whom it i^ effected by a Collection of Rays in the Eye, but in
them by means of a Collection of Nervous Filaments, which when they see are
only touched at the ends of their Convexities by the Visible qualities and
Rays of Light and Color, as I have mentioned at large in my Treatise of Bees.

Concerning the second Skin-shedding of the Ephemeron which soon succeeds the
first, it is observeable that the Ephemeron in seeking a resting place for to
shed its second Skin is wholly incurious, resting on whatsoever is in its way,
whether Wood, Stone, Earth, Beast or Man, and it is thus effected.

It fixes its Feet armed with sharp Nails on what it first lights on, then
being seized as with a cold shivering, the Skin splitteth open in the midst of
the back in the horny integument of the same, which split increases forwards so
far that the Fly can put forth its head, then it Tab. 7. Fig. 1, 2.
draws forth its Legs out of the Skin, while the Nails of the feet remain
fast to that whereon the Fly had taken hold, which Nails remain with the shed
Skin, and thereby furthers and facilitate the stripping thereof, First the Head
and Legs are drawn out of the Skin, as you would pull your foot out of your
Shoe, or Head out of a close sticking Cap, and then the Skin is drawn off the
remaining parts of the body, by turning the inside of the same outward, as we
usually flea Eeles, or pull off a Glove the inside outward, and when the Skin
is half way over the Wings they are like Tab. 7. Fig. 1.
captivated and bound, and so remain a small time without any perceptible
motion: the remaining part of the body in this second Skin-shedding is
considerably extended, and the Tails become a third part longer than in the
first shedding, so that the Tails and Legs at the first shedding which became a
Third part longer than before; are become in this second shedding longer than
they were in their first shedding, which yet is more considerable in the Tails,
than in the Legs, for because it is composed of many hollow Rings which by
extrusion shove one from the other, and thereby this stretching out is more
visible in them than in the Legs which only lay bent in the Skin, and by the
shedding thereof become extended in their full length. Further the hairs which
in the Worm did thick beset the Tail, do stand now in the Tail of the Fly more
thin set, and are become finer and thinner, for that they have now also twice
shed their Skins.

The Ephemeron having now a Second time shed its Skin flies again to the
water, on whose Surface it flies sportingly, sometimes higher sometimes lower,
Sometimes swifter sometimes slower, and between whiles resting on its Tails
beats its Wings together, in the mean while its Tails supporting it which are
hollow and beset with hairs, and being filled with Air, drive and Swim the
better on the water without sinking, the which also happens to other Insects
which by means of hairs in and between which the Air being enclosed they easily
Swim on the Surface of the water as appears in the Worms of the Gnat and
Gadflie, yet remain not these Tails always thus filled with Air, but become
empty thereof if a pin be run through them to dry them, for by that means the
Air issuing out, they fall in lank and crumpled: there is yet another reason
that our Fly thus lightly drives on the water, which is, that in its body it
has a fine bladder filled with Air, except it be said to be the Stomach, now
only filled with Air, which I cannot strictly say, having not fully satisfied
my self therein.

To proceed, this is here observable, that the Tab. 5. Fig. 1.
Male twice sheddeth its Skin, and the Tab. 6. Fig. 1.
Female but once which I cannot confidently affirm, yet have not hitherto
observed ought to the contrary, for this cause the Tails of the Female are
shorter than the Males. Another and more considerable difference is, that the
Eyes in the Male are double in largeness to those of the Female; the third
difference is, that the Gold color of the body draweth-somewhat more to Red in
the Male, than in the Female. Add hereto, that to the great Tails of the Male
are four Appendices, which appear like crooked Tags, which in the Female are
not so visible.

The Ephemeron Copulateth neither in the body of the Water, nor on Land, nor in
the Air; only the Female shoots her Eggs on the Surface of the Water, on
which the Male shoots or casts its Milt or Seed; to which end possibly it
is provided with larger Eyes, that it might the better discern the Eggs of the
Female in the water. As in like manner many sorts of Fish, without any
Copulation, cast their Seed in the water, which they eject not all at once in
one body, but sparsedly as loose and separated Seeds. That the Ephemeron
Copulateth not in the water appears hence, for that they come not out of
their Cells till such time as they are ready for Change, except they come out
to take Air, and it were impossible for them to Copulate in the body of the
water, for that they cannot keep themselves up in the water without constant
motion; for at any time ceasing their motion they immediately sink to the
ground, where they have no firm abode, till they have bored themselves new
Cells. Add hereto as the strongest reason, that no Insect ever Generateth till
having shed its last Skin, at least not by any observation of mine.

Neither do they Copulate in the Air, as may easily be perceived at the time
when they fly; as also that it were impossible for them to Copulate in the
Air, in consideration that after the last Skin-shedding the Legs of the Male
are extended to that length that Clutius judged them to be horns. Consider also
what requisites are necessary for to Copulate flying in the Air, as is
observable in Flies, and chiefly in the Dragon-flie, which perform the Act of
Copulation very wonderfully flying in the Air.

I conclude therefore my Observation, that the Ephemeron never Copulateth
either in the water or in the Air, but only that the Female having shed its
Eggs in the water, the Male sheddeth thereon its Milt or Seed as before is
said. All which in that short time of their life in this state is effected in
that haste and swiftness that it is impossible to make a narrower search
therein.

During the whole life of this Fly it eats nothing, as is common to many
other kinds of like Insects, and in some others, this not eating continues for
some weeks, yea months; as in Frogs, Lizards, Snakes and Camelions, as I have
observed.

What I have thus observed concerning the Generation of the Ephemeron, is very
considerable, but yet that is more considerable in the Snail, whereof each is
both Male and Female together; which I doubt whether it is so in any other
Animal. And although there are many Relations of those they name
Hermaphrodites, yet doubt I whether ever any such has been seen. I opened once
a Child reputed for such, but well examined, it was found a real Female;
notwithstanding that above the Female parts it had a rising, out of which it
evacuated its Urine, which happened for that it had no Urine-bladder, and the
passage of the Kidneys for evacuation was in that place, which caused the
easie-believing and not considering people to believe this Child was of both
Sexes. Among the Bees are Males and Females, and a sort that are neither; that
we name among them the King, is a Female; the Breeder which is a Male, and the
common Be which is neither. The same is also among Ants. Again those Animals
which grow fast to the Rocks, or live in hard Shells, and so remove not from
their place, must needs have another manner of Generating; all which compared
with the Generation of Vegetables having both Sexes in the same body, and the
power to Generate without Copulation, we may observe that the Omnipotent God
can produce the same thing by several means and ways.

CHAP. IX.
How long the Ephemeron lives, and what it is which hasteneth its death.

THE Ephemeron as before is said, flying up and down on the Surface of the
water, lives in that state but between 4 and 5 hours; that is from 6 a Clock,
or half an hour after in the Evening, till Eleven of the Clock in the night
following; which I have observed by enclosing one in a Box in my Chamber, and
with some care observed the time of its life; in that very short time they all
die, and that which is observable, none of them all die a natural death on
Land; for as soon as they have shed their second Skin, immediately they fly to
the water.

Besides that the life of the Ephemeron in the state of a Fly is so short, an
infinite number die ere they come out of the water, being devoured by the Fish;
and of the other who escape that danger by flight out of the water, many are
devoured by the Sea-Meawes, Swallows, and other like Birds, while they are
shedding their Skins and flying; and having escaped these two dangers, if in
their flying they come too night the water, or play therein on their Tails,
they are caught by the Fish; and flying too high in the Air they are caught by
the Birds.

When the Ephemeron is fledged, then are the Roch which feed thereon very fat,
and of a sweet and pleasant taste, as Dr. Nic. Tulp Burgomaster of Amsterdam
has assured me.

If the reason be asked (the forementioned dangers excepted) of the short life
of this Fly, it is to be considered that the Eggs in the Worm, while yet in
the water are perfect, so that as soon as the Fly by shedding its Skin, and
extending its members is as it were Newborn, the Eggs are ready for ejection.
Add hereto that these Eggs when first hatched have no need of the Parents care
as in other Animals: and because the only reason of their Change into a Fly
seems to be for Generation, which effected, the Fly dies; and to this end
it is for three years growing in the water and Clay, in the form of a Worm, as
also to this end it Changes its Form into a Fly, till having cast its Seed,
it ends its life.

Other Insects, as the Fly of the Silkworm, which are longer-liv'd, appear
with their Eggs yet very imperfect and weak, and bear them so long, till they
are hard and fit for ejection, and then they also end their life.

Some other Insects, although in time they lay their Eggs perfect, as the Ants
and Bees, whereof the Female-Bee, vulgarly named the King, lays in one year
about 6 thousand Eggs, and yet they dye not then, for they must feed their
young, and daily with much care and labor provide them food; which labor and
Care not being the duty of their Males, they soon die after they have
Generated, or else are miserably killed by their Consorts.

So that if we should rank all Animals, the Rational or Man not excepted, under
one of these Three forenamed Orders of Living; we should reduce Man under the
Third sort; for 12 or 13 years pass, before Man is fit for Generation; and also
more number of years are required for the Second, Third, 5 th, 10 th and last
Birth: the rest of the years are required to the necessary Education and
Instruction of the Children. So that all well considered, we may say, that for
Generation is the Beginning, Middle, and end of Man's life.

CHAP. X.
The Ephemeron does fly Three days, and sometimes on the Fourth day. Other
sorts of Ephemerons.

THE Ephemerons, as was said at first do fly for Three days on the Surface of
the water; but with this distinction: that those which have risen many
thousands of them out of the water, and flown the first day, die the same day:
living out of the water in the whole but about Five hours; on the Second day a
great number rise again out of the water, and fly and die the same day, and so
on the Third day; and then all cease till the same season the next following
year.

The truth hereof is known to many persons, who live near those Rivers, who see
the same yearly; yet I have seen them also fly the Fourth day, but in no great
number; as on the Fifth day also; and therefore I judge these Worms were later
fitted for flight than those that flew before; or were let by sickness or
otherwise. As also that those which appeared sooner, were sooner fit for their
flight; and for this reason I see not but that the Ephemeron might appear some
few days sooner or later than the precise time; for that by experience it is
found that they sometimes appear about 14 days sooner or later, according as
the season of the year is more or less agreeable.

The other sort of Insects have almost a like set time for their Change, which
being come they cannot hinder, as I have often found, and have endeavored by
several ways to retard their Change but in vain; for the time being come they
will force it forward although by the endeavored obstruction, it prove their
hurt or destruction: at which time notwithstanding by these endeavored
obstructions their Limbs are so compressed, that being dead all the pleat-folds
of their inward and hidden parts may easily be examined, which is of no small
use for those who labor i^ the search of these things.

If all what is hitherto related of the Ephemeron be well considered, the
saying of Moufet will prove true, viz. (...) sive Diaria mirabilis Musca est,
sive formam sive vitae brevitatem spectemus. That the Ephemeron is a wonderful
Fly if its Form and brevity of life be considered; but what he farther says
thereof, as also Aldrovandus; Ionstonus and Clutius, with those other Writers
that have writ thereof, agrees not much with truth; except that the Insect
they have described be some other than what we have described; for there are
different kinds of Ephemorons, only I advise that whoever in these matters
desires truth, that himself seek it in nature, which exceeds all Writers,
and teaches us more in a minutes time, than in years can be learned in Books
without her. Nature is an open book, in which her wonders are more intelligible
than in the relations of men subject to many mistakes, from which I acknowledge
my self not free.

I wondered to observe in the book of Augerius Clutius* that the Ephemeron of
Dortman is only drawn from a weak Memory or fancy, which observed by Goedard
who was informed by many observations of that kind, he has endeavored to
mend, by his own conceit and judgment, but very badly, for he has changed
nothing therein but what he judged to be mishaped; having left the whole
draught which was first made only by Memory, as it were; whereby appears how
inconsiderately the error committed by the one has been endeavored to be
mended by the other: which for that he only endeavored to do by his conceit,
has consequently doubled the error, for that he endeavored to make it to
appear more true-like, and yet he acknowledges never to have seen the Infect.
Wherefore the great Harvey has well said, Ex sens^ permanet sensatum; ex
permanentia sensati fit memoria: ex multipliei memoria experientia: ab
experientia ratio universalis; definitiones and maxima, sive axiomata communia,
cognitionis certissima principia.

At the time when I was searching and examining the nature of this Insect, I
have seen several sorts of Ephemerons, but I have never seen that of Hoefnagel
represented by Clutius, and which also is to be found in the Figures of the
said Hoefnagel, except once in the way to Diemermeer I found the Nympha
thereof, which was hurt by being trodden on, I judged it then to be derived
from a black and toothed Water-worm which has a thick rumpled skin, and
arrived to its full growth, leaves the water, and creeping on land, there
changes into a Nympha; which in time attaineth the shape of the Ephemeron
represented by Hoefnagel, and afterward shoots again its Eggs in the water.
That there are also other sorts of Insects, and also some kinds of Ephemerons
which I can show, as among other, some sorts which I have met with, and caught
in France in the River Loire by Saum^ur, which in shape differ little from
those with us, only much smaller. I have once seen the same Fly in great
troops; chancing to walk one Evening on the Bridge over the River by Saum^ur,
some of those which flew had yet fast on their Tails, the Second Skin which
they were shedding, with which they flew to and again over the Bridge; I cannot
relate more of this sort; nor of the other sorts, of which I have kept some,
and of which there are none which live so short a time as does our Ephemeron.
Some of those kinds live longer than others do, which causes me to conclude
that there are yet more differences to be observed in them; and therefore that
the Writers are not wholly to be rejected that write somewhat of these, and
other like Insects they have seen in other Countries, not wholly agreeing with
our Ephemeron: and it would be a great presumption in us to conclude otherwise,
for God is endless in the variety of his Works, which notwithstanding they here
and there differ in some accidents, yet in the chief parts they all agree,
which is one of Gods greatest wonders in nature; so that it might be said that
he had Created but one Animal hidden under several outward shapes, and endless
wonderful accidents.

Being in the year 1670. in the Village Slouton by Amsterdam in the month of
June, where as I walked toward the Evening through the Fields, I met with such
an infinite number of small Insects somewhat bigger than Gnats, which rested on
my body, that I was even covered therewith. Every one of these while resting on
my body shed a thin Film, which done they immediately repaired again to the
waters, where they, like the greater Ephemeron sport above the Surface of the
water. The Original of these Insects is not much unlike that of our Ephemeron,
for that they also live in Ditches and Trenches of water, which also at their
set times Change by shedding two Skins; the one in the water, the other on
Land. The Worms of this small Ephemeron differ herein from the greater, in that
they live not in the Clay, or in Cells, but on stony and Sandy ground, and are
therefore of a stronger Constitution, than the larger Ephemerons, and their
Skin agreeing more with that of the Lobster and Prawn. They have also on the
sides of their bodies Gills and Finns, when in the middle of Summer if you take
a stone out of the Rhine or Leck, as also out of some Inland waters, you will
find some of these Worms sitting thereon; which is also found in other
Countries and Rivers: as I have found in the Loire, the Seine, and other Rivers
of France: Whereby it appears that there are many sorts of Ephemerons, and
that therefore those Authors are not to be rejected when they describe an
Ephemeron differing from ours. The said Worms with what I have besides
represented of the Ephemeron, I can for the most part show any one to the life;
for that I have hitherto kept them by me, for a clearer demonstration of what I
have writ.

THE Explanation of the several TABLES.
The First Table.
Fig. 1.
IN the First Figure is represented the Worm one year old, being in length of
an Holland inch; it appears wholly without Wings or any signs thereof; it
has on each side 6 continually moving Gills turned over on its back each
against the other; whereby the 10 under placed Finns may be clearly seen.

Figure 2.
In the second Figure is represented the Worm Two year old, in length 1 of an
Holland inch; the signs of its Wings or their Cases, wherein the Wings are
enclosed, appearing; the two uppermost of them, much bigger than the two
lowermost; it has its Gills in a different manner turned over its back, than
in the first figure, which I therefore note, for that all these Worms are
represented to the life, and withal to signify how wonderful the motion is,
which they without ceasing make with these constantly trembling Gills.

Figure 3.
In the third Figure is represented the Worm Three years old, in length about 2
Holland inches, but among those of this age there is much difference bebetween
the length and thickness of the one and the other. The Worm here represented is
a Female, and one of the smallest size of that Sex, which difference of Sex is
to be discerned in the eyes, which in the Females are much smaller than in the
Males; the Wing-cases, in which the wings are enclosed, appear now very plain,
notwithstanding the upper pair so much cover the under pair; that at first
sight they are not visible, except the uppermost are lifted up; here is also
represented very clearly -- the 6 Gills, on each side of the body -- turned
over the back, whereby the undermost Ten Finns of each side are made visible;
at this time these Gills are never without-motion, yea even out of the water,
wherefore some have judged that the Worm swims by the help of them: But I judge
that is performed only by the Finns, as I have named them, placed under them;
while for many reasons I believe that the uppermost, which I name Gills, and
which agree with the Gills in Fish, do cool the blood in this Worm, as is done
in Fish.

The Explanation of the Second Table.
Figure 1.
HEre is represented one of the biggest Male worms, in which all its parts are
very neatly and distinctly represented, as its

A. Eyes double in size to those of the Female.

BB. The horns with their differing Articulations or Joints.

C. The Sheeres, Beak, or toothy Cheek-bones, wherewith they root up the earth.

DD. The First, Second and Third pair of legs with their joints.

E. The Cases of its Wings in which the first pair are enclosed, like a tender
flower in its bud.

FF. The always moving or trembling Gills which are shining and pure white, and
beset with thousands of fine hairs like Fur, the same are here very neatly
represented. The Finns in this Figure are not visible (being covered by the
Gills) but are already represented in the first and third Figure of the first
Table.

G. The three Tails, beset with Brushie hairs, with their Tag-like appendices.

Figure 2.
The long bellowed Cells in the Clay in which the Worm lives, moves,
creeps, and is fed, almost in the manner as the Worms of the Bees in the
combs or wax-cells, are here represented.

AA. The Cells of the greatest sort of Worms in the Clay.

BB. The Cells of the smallest Worms.

The Explanation of the 3 d and 4 th Tables.
I have in both these Tables used the same letters, for that the Explanation
required it; as also for that they represent the entire dissection of the Worm;
so that what letters are wanting in the third Table may be found in the fourth:
as also those which are wanting in the fourth may be found in the third.

Explanation of the 3 d Table.
Figure 1.
AA. THe Lung or Air-vessels of the Worm, which are two very remarkable and
constantly open Air-vessels, composed as it were of some thousand of
curled-like stiff-rings, by which the Air is conveyed to all the inward parts
of the Worm; the same are placed on both sides, the length of the Worm, and
waved Snake-like.

BB. The Air-vessels in the head of the Worm; the same are branched out of the
two first mentioned great vessels, AA, and run to the Brain and Nerves.

CC. Branches of the Air-vessels running to the Muscles of the Breast.

DDDD. Branches of the Air-vessels running to the Muscles of the Belly. The
said Muscles are represented on the other side of the body, wholly void of
vessels, where the oblique ascending Muscles in some manner cover the straight
Muscles; the use whereof is to move the rings of the belly; for driving forward
the blood and humors; and for discharging the Guts, in that they assist the
Guts in their motion.

EEE. The Lung-vessels running to the Medulla Spinalis; where, about the
globular parts thereof, they are very visible.

FFFFFF. The Lung or air-vessels running to the Milt, or Vesiculae seminales of
the Male-worm, one of these Vesiculae or Bags are represented in the body, as
it is there naturally placed; the other is placed out of the body, and
delineated somewhat bigger than naturally it is, or than that which is
represented in the body.

GGGGG. The air-vessels running to the Gills, which appear white like
new-boil'd Silver; two of these Gills only are represented; for that the other
ten are represented as cut off, to show the ten Finns. See RRR.

H. The air-vessels running to the lower part of the Guts; as also to the
seed-vessels next to them dd.

III. The air-vessels running to the fat, the films, and the outward skin, to
cool and supply them.

KK. The air-vessels running to the Wing-cases, and appear outwardly like ribs
or sins; their chiefest use I believe is, by the air conducted there to
assist the expansion of the wings; to which purpose the wings themselves are
supplied with a great number of these air-vessels.

PPP. Three chief air-vessels running without the body to the Gills, the same
are here represented as cut off, the better to show the under placed Finns,
beset with brushy hair, RRRRR.

QQ. The middlemost of the three forementioned air-vessels, of the perfect
white Gills; which is of a black color, and appearing through almost in the
midst of the transparent white Gills, whereby it seems as if the black stroke
or line of the Gills, were marked with white pricks.

RRRRR. The five Finns on each side of the body, beset most on one side with
dark gold-yellow, and stiff brushy hairs.

SS. A feather-like hairy part, placed under the first pair of Gills; of which
I have no remembrance, neither what it is, nor also whether it is found about
the other Gills.

YYYY. The Medulla spinalis constituted of eleven Nodes or globular partitions,
from whence are derived the Nerves running through the whole body; and impart
unto it sense and motion; see further concerning this in the 6th figure of the
4th Table.

ZZ. The places where the Medulla Spinalis as with strong ligatures is kept in
its place.

**. The Optic nerves arising out of the brain, or otherwise out of the
beginning of the Medulla Spinalis, at the first globule thereof.

aa. The Muscles of the breast, moving the legs; whither also some Nerves run
from the Medulla spinalis which communicate to them life, motion and sense.

bb. Some other Muscles of the breast, but cut through, which move the wings;
to which also the Medulla spinalis sends its Nerves.

dd. Two members which I conceive are pertaining to the seed-vessels of the
male; of which yet I am not very certain.

e. The Rectum or straight Gut cut off; which is better and neater represented
in the fourth plate, Figure 5.

hh. The very artificial foldings of the wing, as it is folded in the wing case
KK. and is not to be seen but about the time when the Worm is ready for Change,
by this wonderful manner of folding, and pleating of the wings, they can be
again readily unfolded, and expanded as is in some manner represented in the
6th plate, in the 2d, 3d and 4th figures.

Figure 2.
Here are represented all the described parts in their natural bigness.

Figure 3.
The natural representation of the Cell or nest of a Caterpillar, which is
wonderfully formed; it is somewhat more than a fingers length; at the close
end, somewhat sharp, and Pyramidal; it is built or framed of a great number of
small round sticks, bitten much of a length, which are piled the one upon the
other like the Beams of a Russia-house, the ends laid the one over, or resting
on the other, and are fastened together with a fine Web, instead of Lome or
Clay. The true bottom or foundation sticks, have twice the length and thickness
of the other, which are thereon piled tower-like. Besides this Nest is also
surrounded or covered over with a Web, thick, tough, and of equal thickness,
and lined within with a soft down to lie in.

The Explanation of the Fourth Table.
Figures 1, 4, and 7.
LL. SOme branches of the air-vessels, AA. represented in the former plate,
running to the Egg-cluster, or Ovarium.

MM. The air-vessels as they are seen in, and upon the film which covers the
Egg-cluster.

N. The same air-vessels together with a part of the egg-cluster, taken out of
the body; where very neatly is represented how these air-vessels are joined to
the Eggs, like as the stalk of a bunch of grapes is joined to each grape.

OOOO. The air-vessels running to the heart; where I have not delineated all
the vessels, which are sent from the two great trunks of the air-vessels AA, to
prevent confusion, by reason of the very great number that run thereto.

TT. Apart of the heart which here and there swells out; its natural place in
the body is in the back, and runs along the whole back.

VVVV. Some air-vessels cut and broke off which run to the heart and other
parts.

XXXX. The parts where the heart swells out and wideneth.

cc. The Muscles moving the Six Gills, and five Finns placed on each side of
the body, to which do run considerable Nerves to communicate to the same, life
and motion.

ff. The Stomach and the Guts, as they appear and swell through the
Egg-cluster; the Stomach and Guts are very neatly represented in the 5th figure
of this same Table.

g. The form or shape of the Eggs, which are flattish and oblong round.

ii. The Muscles of the Rectum, or straight Gut, which serves for ejecting out
of the body, the superfluities of the inward parts.

Figure 2.
Represents the Eggs of the Ephemeron, as the same appear to the naked sight
without help of a Microscope, whereas all the other parts have been viewed and
delineated by help of the Microscope.

Figure 3.
Represents the double Egg-cluster of the Worm, made up of an infinite number
of very small Eggs, which at the time when the Worm is changed into the
Ephemeron, and flies on the Surface of the water, are by the Female shot out
on the water, and are besprinkled by the Male Seed. So that these Insects are
Generated without Copulation.

Figure 4.
The Explanation of this Figure is comprehended in the explanation of the first
Figure of this plate.

Figure 5.
A. A part of the throat-gut, or Gula, (which conveyeth the food into the
Stomach) cut off close to the same.

B. The lower Orifice of the Stomach or Pylorus, through which the food is sent
into the Guts.

C. The Stomach it self wherein are represented some of its air-vessels which
run thereto from the great Trunk, as they are represented in the first Figure
of the third Plate. AA.

DD. The thin gut, which is as a branch of the Stomach, immediately annexed
thereto, so that the Stomach as it were narroweth into the same.

E. The thick or crumpled gut, wherein some long strokes or striae are
observable, which from within appear through it.

F. The straight gut, which appears very neatly rimpled.

G. Some transparent Valves, like half moons, which appear in the thin gut, and
are seen through it.

4.5.6. etc. These Figures denote eleven of those annular divisions of the body
of the Worm; and also show where the Stomach and the Guts have their natural
place.

Figure 6.
The Brain, the Medulla spinalis, and the Nerves arising out of the same are
here represented, according to the life; so that the Nerves of the Medulla
spinalis appear not so gaping, as is represented in the first Figure of the 3d
plate YY. for there they are represented, as they appear in a Microscope, when
with a fine Needle, they are separated, which can easily be done without
cutting or tearing.

1, 2, 3. etc. The Figures, 1, 2, 3, etc. represent the natural place and
posture of the Medulla spinalis in the body; and in what manner it is
distinguished by the Ring-like indentings, in relation to the head, breast and
belly.

Figure 7.
The Explanation hereof is contained in the Explanation of the first Figure of
this plate.

The Explanation of the Fifth Table.
Figure 1.
THis is the Figure of the Male Ephemeron, having shed its first Skin; or
representation of the Ephemeron as it first comes out of the water, where it
has lost its first Skin, and from a Worm is become a Fly, as a Worm it is
represented. Tab. 2. Fig. 1.

Figure 2.
The Female Worm as it is immediately before its Change, is here shown; in
which the Wings are now visible, appearing through their Cases.

AA. The cases of the Wings; which appear through the same very visible. How
these Wings appear, when the Case is shed, see in the 3d Table, fig. 1. in the
letters hhh, where they are at large represented.

The Explanation of the Sixth Table.
Figure 1.
Represents the Figure of the Female Ephemeron, just as it rises out of the
water, and has quitted its Skin, and from a Worm swimming, is become a Fly;
and its Skin now shed, may be seen driving on the water; as is represented in
the 5 Tab. fig. 2.

I have dried some of these shed Skins, which represent the Worm so naturally
and to the life, as if you saw the Worm alive before you.

Figure 2.
Represents in some manner how the wings do expand, which to apprehend more
clearly, it ought to be known that the wing represented in the first Figure of
the third Plate, with the letters, hhh, is there represented with its natural
foldings; and is here represented in the manner how it by degrees does expand,
and loses its neat pleats and folds.

Figure 3.
Represents the same wing losing first its Snake-like foldings, and then its
long folds, which are in the manner of a Brabants huik, or Vest, first pleated
in the length, and then folded again cross-wayes.

Figure 4.
Represents the same Wing almost fully expanded.

The Explanation of the Seventh Table.
THe several appearances of the Ephemeron, shedding or stripping off its Skin,
like a very thin shift or shirt, are here represented to the life.

Figure 1.
The Male endeavoring to shed its second Skin on land much more leisurely,
than it shed its first Skin in rising out of the water, which as is before
said, happens in a moment. Here is represented the body half-stript, the head,
the breast and the legs, in the manner as we pull our feet out of our Shoes or
Boots: but the Wings are in that manner stripped, that the inside of the Skin
turns outward, and the outside inwards; which is wonderfully effected: for
the Fly is at that time, like a captived and bound bird; for the Skin thus
drawn off, shuts close to its body, like a strong Swash wound about, which
keeps it as a prisoner, and causes it to shiver and quake.

Figure 2.
Represents the Male Ephemeron almost uncased, so that the two outermost
Wings and the Tails, by a small stripping off the Skin will become wholly freed.

The Explanation of the Eighth Table.
Figure 1.
Represents the thin Skin or film of the Ephemeron in this manner shed.

This film thus shed, remains not in the form as is here represented; for the
parts that did enclose the wings shrink commonly up together, and so come to
appear in another form.

Figure 2.
The Male Ephemeron having now shed two Skins successively, and assumed the
shape of a flying Insect; the Legs which in the Worm were short, are now
extended to about twice the length; which chiefly is visible in the Tails,
whose length by these two extensions, are now become three times longer than
they were in the Worm.

FINIS.



