SOA THANATOg, THE BODY of DEATH: Or, A DISCOURSE Concerning the SAINTS
Failings and Infirmities.

Wherein this Position, viz. That absolute freedom from sin is not
attainable in this life, is both proved and improved, in three SERMONS preached
in St Edmunds Church in the City of New-Sarum; The first upon Wednesday November
24. 1658. being the weekly Lecture day; The two last upon August 14. 1659.
being the Lords day.

By JOSEPH SWAFFEILD Minister of the Gospel at Odstocke in the County of Wilts.

There is not a just man upon the earth, that does good, and sins not.
Eccles. 7.20.

Quemlibet valde justum discutias in hac vita; quamvis jam sit dignus justi
vocabulo, non est tamen sine peccato. Aug. Tom. 9. Tract. 41. in Johan. p. 210.
Froben. 1529.

London, Printed by A. M. for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in
Fleetstreet. 1661.

DIGNISSIMO VIRO, JOHANNI BVLKELEY SARISBVRIAE NUPER HABITAS

THE Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
WHen these Sermons were first preached, I intended no further publication of
them, than from the Pulpit; nor did I desire to have them any otherwise
imprinted, than upon the fleshly Tables of the hearts of those, to whom they
were delivered.

The truth is, they had scarcely ever seen the light, had I not been earnestly
solicited by some Christian friends for Copies thereof; whose desires, as I
was not willing to deny, so I have not been able, through want of time,
hitherto to fulfill. To spare therefore my pains in transcribing them, was one
inducement, that moved me to communicate them in this way.

Moreover, having been frequently with much importunity pressed by several
Christians, to publish some other Meditations, preached during the time of our
late Distractions and Confusions, which though they were then seasonable (and I
hope) not altogether unprofitable, yet I hitherto judged it more convenient to
suppress, than to publish; and at some time or other (if providence should
afford an opportunity) to gratify those my friends, by putting some other
Meditations into their hands, which might be of more general use.

I confess, I am conscious of so many weaknesses and imperfections in this
Work, that had it not been for the Reasons abovementioned, I had never exposed
it to public view. And I have hitherto judged the publication hereof the less
necessary, because just at the time, while I was studying these Sermons, after
I had preached the first of them, I met with a printed Sermon of Reverend Mr.
Case, entitled, Eliah's Abatement: or, Corruption in the Saints; preached at
Chatham in Kent, at the Funeral of Mr. Gualter Rosewell, late Minister there;
in which Sermon, the same truth, that is here treated upon, is excellently
handled, though in another manner and method.

But, though I have upon that account hitherto for born the publication of
these Notes; yet, being of late in some danger of being removed from the place,
where for eleven years last past I have exercised my Ministry; and (although
that danger be through the good hand of Gods providence, I hope, now over; yet)
considering the weakness of my body, and my short time of sojourning here, I
became the more inclinable hereunto; knowing, that this may preach to my
people, when I cannot; yea, when I shall be no more. And I was the rather
inclined unto it, because although the Reverend Author beforementioned, and my
self prosecute the same Truth, yet in a different method; and the various
method of handling the same Truth, may render the repetition the less
unpleasing. I deny not, but here and there, in the two last Sermons, I have
borrowed a notion from him, as I have also done throughout the whole, from
several other known and approved Authors; yet herein, I trust; I have not
wronged either him or them, having for the most part restored it to the right
owner again in the Margin; and (I hope) I may without vanity affirm, that I
have not only used, but in some measure improved such borrowed notions.

For the style, in which these Sermons were preached, and in which they are now
published, I confess it is very plain. But I hope the Truth therein contained
will not find the less acceptance for the plainness of its dress. I remember,
it was St. Paul's glory, that he came not (to the Corinthians) with excellency
of speech, or wisdom to declare to them the testimony of God: and his speech
and his preaching was not with inticeing words of man's wisdom, Salvian.
but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power, 1 Cor. 2.1, 4. Ministers
should speak utilia potius quam plausibilia, rather such things, as may profit,
than such as may please: and they should follow St. Cyprians direction to
Donatus, to make choice not of diserta but fortia; and study rather to work
upon the affections, than to tickle the fancies of their hearers: and that rule
of the Apostle should be much respected by them, Let all things be done to
edification, 1 Cor. 14.26.

This Discourse therefore (such as it is) is now tendered to thy view, and thou
art desired to peruse it, and with those nohle Bereans, Act. 17.11.
to search the Scriptures, whether these things are so. I am sure, if the
matter of it be the truth of God, how plain soever the style be, it is worthy
of all acceptance for the Lords sake. If the Lord would but make it
isntrumental for the least good to any one soul, I have my desire. With him
therefore I leave it, and unto him, and to his grace I commend thee, Christian
Reader, resting

Thine, in any Gospel-service J. Swaffeild.
December. 18. 1660.
The CONTENTS.
Doct. THe best of men are not freed from sin in this life, but that in many
things they offend all. page 3 The Doctrine is proved by Scripture. p. 4 How
believers are freed from sin in this life, viz. 1. In respect of its dominion.
p. 6 2. In respect of its guilt. p. 7 3. In respect of its condemning power. p.
13
How believers are not freed from sin in this life. viz. 1. Not in respect of
its inherence. p. 14 2. Not in respect of its infectious property. p. 16 3. Not
in respect of its seducing and deceiving power. p. 18
Reasons, why God has not wholly freed his people from sin in this life, but
suffers them to carry about with them the remainders of corruption unpurged
out, while they abide in the flesh. p. 19 1. That the power of his grace might
be the more perspicuous in their perseverance. ib. 2. That the people of God
might have matter of humiliation. p. 20 3. That Saints might be brought into a
love with, and desire after that estate, wherein they shall be wholly freed
from sin. ib.
Reasons, why the Lord suffers this corruption of nature so far to prevail
even in godly men, as to lead them into the ways of sin; in so much that it is
true even of the best of men, that in many things they offend all. 21 These
Reasons are of two sorts, viz. 1. Some respecting God and Christ. p. 22. viz.
1. God permits it for the glory of his power and faithfullness. p. 22 2. God
permits it for the glory of his justifying grace by the righteousness of Jesus
Christ. p. 23
Other Reasons respecting the Saints. p. 24. viz. 1. Such as fall; and they are
two, 1. Gods permits it to preserve them from, or to cure them of carnal
confidence. 24 2. By this means God is sometimes pleased to weaken sin, and to
strengthen grace in them. p. 25, 26
2. Reasons respecting those that stand, viz. 1. God would hereby commend his
love to them in preserving them, and givs them some taste and comfortable
experience of his goodness in upholding them when others fall. p. 27 2. God
would hereby quicken them to prayer. p. 28

Quest. What is the difference between the Infirmities of the Saints, and the
falls of wicked men? p. 28, 29 Differ. 1. A godly man does not make a trade of
sin. p. 30 Differ. 2. A godly man does not sin with a full consent of his will.
p. 32, 33 Differ. 3. A godly man does not sin with a full purpose of heart. p.
36 Differ. 4. The falls of a gedly man do not spring from propensions of
nature, but from the strength and violence of temptation. 39 Differ. 5. A godly
man cannot sin with delight, but sin is a burden to him. p. 42 Differ. 6. A
godly man does not persevere in sin. p. 44 Use 1. Refutation; to give check to
the error of those, that assert a possibility of an absolute and perfect
freedom from sin in this life. p. 47 This opinion is proved to be contrary, 1.
To the Scripture. p. 48, 49, etc. 2. To Experience. p. 54 3. To the nature of
grace and sanctification. p. 54, 55 4. To the plentiful suffrage of Antiquity,
yea to the concessions of some of our Popish adversaries. p. 55, 56
Use 2. Caution both to sinners and Saints. 61 Caution to sinners. viz. Caution
1. Let them take heed how they imbolden themselves to sin by the falls of
Saints, which are recorded in the Scripture. p. 62 1. In so doing they wrest
and pervert the Scriptures to a quite contrary end, than ever the Holy Ghost
intended them. ib. 63 The ends why God has permitted the falls of Saints to be
recorded in Scripture. viz. 1. To preserve others from fainting under the
burden of their sins. p. 63 2. That their falls might be warnings to others, to
preserve them from falling. ibid.
2. Sinners will see but little reason to imbolden themselves in sin, by the
examples of the infirmities of Saints recorded in the Scripture, if they
consider, how deeply they have smarted for their sins. p. 66 3. The Scripture
records other things of Saints more worthy of imitation, than their sins. p. 69
Caution 2. Let sinners also take heed, how they insult over the godly, because
of their failings. p. 70 2. The children of God are sanctified but in part in
this life. ib. 2. If sinners did reflect upon themselves, they would find more
just cause to condemn themselves than them. p. 71 3. In judging the children of
God they condemn themselves. p. 72 Caution to Saints;
Caution 1. Let them take heed and beware of pride. p. 73 The sins of Saints
are 1. Of the same nature with the sins of wicked men. p. 75 2. Of the same
desert with the sins of wicked men. p. 76 3. In some respects more heinous than
the sins of wicked men. ib. 1. God is more dishonored by their sins. ib. 2.
Religion suffers more reproach by their sins. p. 77 3. There is more
unkindness in their sins. ib. 4. There is more unfaithfullness in their sins.
p. 79 5. Saints are advanced to a more excelcellent state than others are. p. 80


Caution 2. Let them that stand take heed lest they fall. p. 81 Directions to
preserve Saints from falling.
Direct. 1. Let them be watchful. ib. Direct. 2. Let them carefully shun the
occasions of sin. p. 84 Direct. 3. Let them look well to their company. p. 88
Direct. 4. Let them look well to their senses. p. 90. Direct. 5. Observe the
first risings of corruption, and resist them. p. 92 1. It is to no purpose to
fly. p. 93 2. It is to as little purpose to yield. p. 94 3. It is to as little
purpose to compound. ib. 4. It is then the best way to make resistance. p. 95
Rules for resisting.
1. Resist speedily. p. 95 2. Resist universally. p. 97 3. Enter not into a
parley or treaty with sin. ib. 4. Resist in the strength of Christ. ib.
Direct. 6. Possess your hearts always with apprehensions of Gods presence. 98
Direct. 7. Labor to possess your hearts always with the fear of God. p. 99
Direct. 8. Look up to Jesus Christ with faith flaming out in prayer. p. 100 Use
3. Exhortation. p. 101 1. Bless God that you are delivered from a sinful
state. ib. 2. Admire the justifying grace of God by the righteousness of Jesus
Christ. p. 102 3. Bless God for establishing grace. p. 104 4. Bless God for any
disappointments in the way of sin. p. 106 5. Every day labor for further
degrees of mortification. p. 108
Use 4. Consolation. ib. 1. Sin cannot separate Saints from the love of God. p.
109 2. God takes notice of and accepts that good which is in his Saints,
notwithstanding their sins. p. 110, 111 3. Jesus Christ, the High Priest of
Saints, is now in Heaven at Gods right hand making intercession for them. p.
114 4. There is a time approaching, and not far off, when Believers shall be
freed from the very being of sin. p. 116

THE Saints Failings AND INFIRMITIES.
James. 3.2. former part of the verse. For in many things we offend all.


IN the foregoing verse the Apostle dehorteth the beleiving Jews, to whom he
wrote this Epistle, from the sin of proud and uncharitable censureing; My
Brethern be not many masters; where the word master is taken (...) for a
supercilious reprover, for one that is gotten into the chair of arrogance,
whence he does pro imperio, Magisterially enough inveigh against the practices
of other men. See Mr. Mantons Lectures on James 3.1. Vide etiam Pareum ad locum.
And this dehortation the Apostle enforces with a double argument; the first
drawn a periculo, from the danger of this sin. Knowing that we shall receive
the greater condemnation, verse. 1. either here, from men; Or, (which I suppose
the Apostle does rather intend) hereafter, from the Judge of all the earth. It
will be just in God, to be severe to the failings of those that are so sharp in
censuring their Brethrens infirmities; by judging others, they do but pass
sentence upon themselves, and pronounce their own doom.

The second argument is laid down in my Text, and it is drawn a communj hominum
fragilitate Pareus ad loc.
, from that common frailty, which is incident to all men; In many things we
offend all. It is an unrighteous thing, to deny our Brethren that tenderness,
which we need our selves; and to judge and condemn others, for those failings,
from which the best of men are not free Inique facit, qui veniam qua opus
habet, alijs negat. Calvin. ad loc.
.

In many things we offend all. We] the Apostle does not except himself, though
he was an Apostle of singular holiness, and of such exact strictness, that he
was therefore surnamed the just. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 2. c. 1.


Offend] (...), It is in the present tense, and notes assiduity and frequency,
as a learned writer observes upon the Text Vult assiduitatem quandam, and
frequentiam significare. Estius ad loc.
.

I shall not handle the words with relation to the percedent verse, but
consider them as an entire proposition: and being so considered, they clearly
hold forth this Observation.

Doct. The best of men are not so freed from sin in this life, but that in many
things they offend all. The Proposition lies clear in this Text; so that had I
no other proof, the Text it self were sufficient; but it is easy to multiply
other Scriptures, which hold forth the same truth. I shall only desire you to
read two or three Texts of Scripture, which give in evidence thereunto, and
then I shall proceed.

See what a challenge Solomon makes to all the world, Prove. 20.9. Who can say
I have made my heart clean; I am pure from sin? Many indeed may say so boldly,
but who can say so truly? The interrogation has the force of an emphaticall
negation. So likewise, Eccle. 7.20. There is not a just man upon the earth,
that does good, and sins not. I hope none will be so vain, as to except
against these proofs, because out of the Old Testament, seeing St. James in my
Text, (which is a part of the New Testament) affirms as much. In many things
we offend all.

And lest you may think, that it was only one Doctors opinion, you may see St.
John, the beloved disciple that leaned on Jesus his breast John. 13.23.
, he, in other words speaks the same thing. 1 John 1.8. If we say, that we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. And you have
St. Paul bitterly complaining of that body of sin and death, that he carried
about with him, and should carry about with him to his dying day, Romans 7.14. ad
finem.

The Point (you see) is clear; in the prosecution of it I shall observe this
method,

First, I shall show you, how believers are freed from sin in this life.

Secondly, I shall show you, how they are not freed from sin in this life.

Thirdly, I shall lay down the reason of the Doctrine, for the confirmation of
it.

Fourthly, I shall show you, what is the difference between the Godly and the
wicked in their sinning.

Lastly, I shall apply the Doctrine.

I begin with the first, how believers are freed from sin in this life.

Believers are freed from sin in this life, in three respects.

First, Quoad vim dominandi
In respect of the dominion of it. The great Apostle of the Gentiles expressly
affirms it, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not
under the Law, but under Grace. Sin indeed has a being in believers, but it
does not reign in them, as formerly. Though sin act the part of a Tyrant, yet
it cannot act the part of a King in a believer; God sending his son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, Rom 8.3. Sin
is condemned; it is dead judicially. It received its deaths blow in the death
of Christ; though it lives, yet it reigns not, it has lost its strength,
because a believer is not under the Law, which is the strength of sin 1 Cor.
15.56.
, but under Grace.

Indeed its true, that, as it was said of Carthage, that Rome was more troubled
with it after it was subdued, than before Plus Romae negotij fuit cum semivicta
Carthagine quam cum integra Flor.
, by reason of frequent rebellions afterward so a Godly man may be more
troubled, and vexed with sin, when it is conquered, then he was while it
reigned. But yet though it may be turbulent, it shall not be prevalent. It was
before a King, but now a Captive in him; before upon a throne, now in chains.
Sin may molest and vex, even where it does not reign. What is spoken Dan. 7.12.
in another case; As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had their dominion
taken away, yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time; We may say by
way of allusion concerning sin; Its dominion is taken away, though its life be
prolonged for a season.

Now (my beloved) what a happiness is this, and what a mercy is it, that when
others are under the command of every lust, and led captive by every sin,
believers are freed from the commanding power of sin? sin does not reign in
them for they are not under the Law but under Grace.

Secondly, Quoad reatum
Believers are freed from sin in respect of its guilt. Jesus Christ has freed
them from the guilt of those sins, which otherwise would have sunk their souls
irrecoverably to the bottom of the nethermost hell; so that now there is no
sin can be charged upon believers account. Christ has fully paid their debt of
sin, and therefore God cannot in justice require it of them. Had the guilt of
any one sin of believers been unsatisfied for, it would have detained Jesus
Christ under the power of the Grave. He could never have risen from the dead,
nor have ascended into heaven, if he had not paid the uttermost farthing of
that debt, which believers sins had contracted. He has so freed believers
from the guilt of sin, that their sins shall never be charged upon them. The
Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of all believers, Esa. 55.6. And they
cannot be laid upon him, and upon believers too; but are in Gods account, as if
they had never been committed, never to be laid to their charge more. Therefore
it is called A taking away their iniquities. Hos. 14.2. And a taking away the
sins of the world, Joh. 1.29. Behold the lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world. And sometimes it is called a blotting out transgressions;
Esa. 43.25. I even I am he, that blotteth out thy transgressions; As a
debt-book is crossed, and the debt blotted out; so God blotteth out the sins
of his people, that they shall never be charged upon their account. The promise
is very emphaticall; I will blot out thy transgressions. If a writing be but
blured a little, and somewhat blotted, it may be read; but if it be blotted
out, it is no more legible. But the sins of Gods justified ones are not only
blotted, but blotted out, and that by God himself, who alone has the power of
life and death, of condeming and absolving. Though an inferior Officer should
blot out an indictment, that (perhaps) may stand a malefactor in no steed; but
when the King does it, who is the chief Judge, then the indictement cannot
return. Now it is the Lord himself does blot out sin; I even I am he, that
blottes out thy transgression. Our sinners are (as it were) fairly written, as
an evidence and record against us, and our iniquities testify against us, till
a pardon blotteth them out.

Sometimes also it is called blotting them out as a cloud; Esa. 44.22. I have
blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sins. Our
unpardoned iniquities, as a thick cloud eclipse the light of Gods countenance
from shineing upon us, till the beams of Gods free Grace and pordoning mercy
scatter this cloud.

Sometimes it is called a casting them into the hottom of the sea, where they
shall be so buried as never to rise again, Mic. 7.19. Thou will cast all their
sins into the depths of the sea. If a thing were cavt into a river, which
might be fadomed, it might be brought up again; or if it were cast upon the sea
only, it might be discerned and taken up again; but when it is in the depth,
cast into the depths, into the bottom of the sea it cannot be fadomed up again.
By which Metaphore the Lord expresses (as one observes Mr. Obadiah Sedgewick
in his doubting Beleiver. p. 251.252.
) the powerful energie of pardoning mercy, that sins shall rise no more
against us. He will clear them so, that being once forgiven, they shall come
upon the account no more: He will drown their guilt, that it shall not come up
against them before him the second time. Some think that it is an allusion to
Gods great judgment on Tharaoh, and the Egyptian Host, who when they pursued
Israel, were drowned in the bottomof the red sea Mr. Loves. Penitent pardoned.
p. 44.
. God will deal with sin as he dealt with Pharaoh and his Host. To show how
irrecoverably they perished, it is said, they sank as lead in the mighty
waters, Exodus. 15.10. when God pardons sin, sin lies like lead in the
bottom of the sea; the guilt thereof shall never rise against a pardoned sinner.

Sometimes it is called a covering sin, Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Now you know quod tegitur non
videtur Hieron. Si voluit segere, noluit videre, etc. Aug. in Psa. 32.
, etc. that which is covered is not seen, the glorious robe of Christ
righteousness covers all the spots of Gods justified people, as a garment
covers all the moles and blemishes and imperfections in the body of man: so
that the Lord sees no iniquity in Jacob nor transgression in Israel. Numb.
23.21. The meaning of which Text, is not, that there is no sin in them, which
God takes notice of; but that although God do see sin in them, with the eye of
his knowledge and omniscience; yet he does not see sin in them with the eye of
justice, so as to lay it to their charge. Their sins are covered (says one)
Not simply and absolutely, so as that God cannot see them; this would argue
impotency and imperfection in God; but secundum quid, so covered as that God
will not impute them Mr. Newman in his Sermon before the house of Commons Dec.
30. 1646. on Heb. 4.13. p. 21.
.

And moreover, the Sctipture holds forth, that the sins of Gods people are so
putt away, that if God should come afterward and make inquisition for sin in
them, it shall not be found; Jer. 50.20. In those days and in that time says
the Lord; the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none;
and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found. The meaning is not, that
there can no sins be found in the Saints; but that they shall not be found so,
as to have the guilt of them charged upon them. Why, what hinders the finding
of them? Or where shall they be hid? The last words of the verse will tell you
where they shall be hid viz. in the pardoning mercies of God: I the Lord will
pardon thove whom I reserve. The Lord will give such a full and free pardon of
sin, that what search and inquiry soever should be made after it, there shoud
not be so much as any scar or mark, not so much as any print or stain left, to
be a witness of their sin, or a plea for their condemnation. Which leads me to
the third particular

Thirdly, sin in respect of the condemning power thereof: Quoad vim damnandi.
So that now there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans
8.1. Though there be matter of condemnation, yet their is not condemnation it
self. Sin shall never bring those under condemnation, that have an interest in
Jesus Christ; for that were derogatory to Gods justice, to receive full payment
of our debt at the hand of Christ, and yet to require it of us too. The great
Judge of Heaven and earth will not do so unrighteously, as to expect that from
us, which Christ has paid for us to the uttermost farthing. Thus you have
heard how believers are free from sin this life.

Secondly, how believers are not freed from sin in this life? And this also I
shall lay open in three particulars.

First, Non quoad actum inhaerendi.
Believers are not freed from sin in respect of its inherence. Hence we read of
the indwelling of sin. It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me,
Romans 7.17, 20. Sin does not only lodge with us for a night, but it dwells in
us like a rebellious Tenant, that will keep possession in despite of the owner,
till the house be pulled down over his head Mr. Brinsly in his Treat. of
mystical Implantation. p. 120.
. The best Saint alive is troubled with Inmates. Though he forsake his sins,
yet his sins will not forsake him. Sin is by Epiphanius compared to Ivy in the
wall Epiphan. Haeres l. 2. H. 64. cited by Dr. Ed. Reynolds in his Treatise
concerning the sinfullness of sin.
. Though you cut off the body, and the stump, and the boughs, and the branches;
yet the root remaining fastened in the wall, it will sprout out again, till the
wall be pulled down. By others it is compared to the fretting Leprosy spoken of
Levit. 14.45. scrapeing will not serve the turn to remove it, but still it
spreads, till the house, the stones, and the timber thereof, etc. be broken
down Dr. Ed. Reynolds ubi supra. Mr. Watson in his Christians Charter.
. Sin cleaves so fast to our nature, that it will never totally and finnally
leave us, till these houses of clay be demollished. It sticks as fast to us, as
blackness to an Ethiopian, all the water in the Ocean cannot wash it off. As
long as there is wheat in the field, it will have chaff about it; as long as
there is water in the sea, it will retain its saltness; so sin will cleave and
adhere to us as long as we live. Hence the Apostle calls it an encompassing
sin (...).
Heb. 12.1. Erasmus rendereth the word Peccatum tenaciter inherens Leigh Crit.
Sac.
. A sin that does so tenaciously cleave to us, that it will not be shaken off.
A man may as soon shake of his skin from his back, as shake of this evil
inhabitant. It will dwell in us, while we dwell in these Tabernacles of clay.

Secondly, Non quoad vim inficiendi.
Believers are not freed from sin in respect of its infectious property: for it
not only cleaves to our natures, but it defiles our best performances. Hence
sometimes duties are in Scripture called dung; Mal. 2.3. I will spread dung
upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts, sc. Because of the
iniquity that cleaves to them. That the sins of unregenerate men are defiled
with sin is beyond dispute; their best services, as they come from them are
sinful; for bad trees cannot bring forth good fruit. The question is
concerning the services of regenerate men: And indeed it is a truth concerning
the best works of regenerate men. Though they are not sins, and hateful to God
(for to affirm so were to reproach the spirit and grace of Christ, by which they
are wrought) yet this I dare boldly say, there is abundance of iniquity
cleaving even to their holy things, and to their best services, that are done
by the concurrence and contribution of their own faculties; insomuch that did
not Jesus Christ their High Priest take away the iniquities of their holy
things, and perfume them with his sweet odours, they would not find acceptance.
Should God be severe to mark what is amiss in our best services, he would find
enough in them to condemn us Nullum unquam extitit pii hominis opus quod si
severo Dei judicio examinaretur, non esset damnabile. Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 14.
11.
. For our righteousnesses are as filthy rags and as a menstruous cloth. Esa.
64.6.

Thirdly, Non quoad vim seducendi.
in respect of its seduceing and deceiveing power. It still retains a power
to seduce us, and draw us into sinful practices; in so much that too often it
salleth out, that what we would and should do, we do not, and what we neither
would nor should do, that we do Romans 7.15.
; and when we would do good, evil is present with us; and by this law in our
members, which continually warreth against the law in our minds, we are too
often brought in captivity to the law of sin; so that we have too often cause
to cry out with the Apostle, Oh wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me
from this body of death? Romans 7.23, 24. And thus I have also discovered to you
how believers are freed from sin in this life.

Reasons of the Doctrine; and they are of two sorts.

First, why God has not wholly freed his people from sin in this life, but
suffers them to carry about with them the remainders of corruption unpurged
out, while they abide in the flesh.

Secondly, In many things they offend all.

First then, Why has not God wholly freed his people from sin in this life,
but suffers them to carry about with them the remainders of corruption unpurged
out, to their dying day?

I answer, it may be for these reasons;

First, standing, as well as their being in grace; and that it is only by the
mighty power of God, that they are kept through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet.
1.5. It must wonderfully magnify the power of Gods grace, that a spark of grace
should be kept alive in the midst of a sea of corruption.

Secondly, Israelites in the wilderness to be stung with fiery serpents and
scorpions to humble them Deuteronomy. 8.15.16.
. So while we are in this world, God suffers us to be stung with the fiery
serpent of sin, that we might be humble before him. Paul had a thorn in his
flesh, and a messenger of Satan to buffet him, that he might not be exalted
above measure, 2 Cor. 12.7. Beza thinks that this thorn in the flesh was
inherent corruption Concupicentiam intelligit, quae teli instar nobis inhaeret.
Beza.
, and that it is called a messenger of Satan, because he does kindle those
corruptions Qui illas cupiditates incendit. idem.
.

Thirdly, between a state of grace and a state of glory; and we shall by this
means find heaven the more sweet to us in the end, where we shall be beyond
all possibility of sinning. Our corruptions now, as the Children of Anak dismay
us; and as the Canaanites in Israel, they are left for pricks in our sides, and
thorns in our eyes, that so we may the more long after that estate of glory,
in which sin shall be no more. And so I have done with the first sort of
Reasons.

Secondly, why the Lord suffers this corruption of nature so far to prevail
even in Godly men, as to lead them into the ways of sin; insomuch that it is
true even of the best of men, that in many things they offend all. And the
reasons hereof are also of two sorts; viz.

1. First, there are some Reasons that respect God and Christ.

2. Secondly, There are some that respect believers.

I shall begin with those Reasons that respect God and Christ, and they are
these two viz.

1. First, God permits it for the glory of his power and faithfullness: and 2.
Secondly, For the glory of his justifying grace by the righteousness of Jesus
Christ.
First, for the glory of his power and faithfulness. God turns even the
falls of his children to the uses of his own glory. You will think it strange,
that even the falls of Saints should conduce to Gods glory. Indeed they do not
per se, but per accidens. For sin, especially in Gods children, does
exceedingly conduce to GOds dishonor: (as I shall discover more at large, when
I come to apply the point) but though in its own nature it redowneth to Gods
dishonor, yet through Gods wise ordering, it turns to the uses of his glory.
For God is so good, that he would not suffer sin, if he could not bring good
out of it. It is the prerogative of God alone, who commanded light to shine out
of darkness to bring good out of evil. Now God orders even the falls of
Saints to his own glory, even to the glory of his power and faithfullness, in
raising them after such falls. To recover a fallen Saint out of the mire of
sin, is a work of Gods almighty power; and as it conduces to the glory of his
power, so of his faithfullness too. For God has promised, that although the
righteous fall seven times a day, he shall rise again. Now God sometimes
withdraws his manutenency, and takes off the restraints of his grace, and
permits Saints to fall into foul and heinous sins, that so both his power and
faithfullness may appear the more conspicuous in raising them again.

Secondly, our legs again, and that though we commit new sins daily, yet there
should be new pardons issued out for those new sins; this does exceedingly
advance the riches of Gods grace in justifying us freely by the righteousness
of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, viz.

First, such as fall. Secondly, such as stand.
The Reasons which respect falling Saints are these;

First, to preserve them from, or to cure them of carnal considence.
Christians are too apt to think that they are rooted in themselves, and that by
their own strength they stand: and therefore God is pleased sometimes to
withdraw the supply of his spirit, and suffers them to fall, that he might keep
them from overmuch confidence in the strength of inherent grace. That was one
reason (as I conceive) why the Lord suffered Peter to fall so fowlly, to take
him off from carnal confidence. Who more cofident than Peter, when he
professed that though all men should deny Christ, yet he would not? Mat. 26.33.
yea that he would rather dye with him, than deny him, verse 35. yet because
Peter did not enough (if at all) renounce his own strength, how sadly did the
Lord suffer him to fall, not only to deny his Master but to forswear him; and
to his oath to add a curse and Imprecation, and damning himself (for so the
notation of the Greek word imports) imprecating Gods wrath and eternal
damnation upon himself, if he knew the man Caepit execrari, nempe se, h.e.
corpus and animam devovere aeterno exitio. Pareus, ad loc.
? I do not question but that Peter was real, when he made the foregoing
profession to Christ, and that he did not only complement with him, but that
he really intended no less, then his profession held forth. But Peter failed
in trusting too much to his own strength, and therefore the Lord suffered him
to fall, to take him off from such carnal confidence Justam paenam luit suae
confidentiae. Pareus.
.

Secondly, By this means God is sometimes pleased to weaken sin, and to
strengthen grace in them. By Gods wise ordering and disposeing of it, sin
loses strength by the falls of Godly men. I confess indeed, in wicked men sin
gets strength by every fresh act; the more a wicked man sins, the more he
would sin; the more he sins, the more he delights in sin; the more he
sins, the more he is hardened in sin. But in the Godly, relapses and falls
into sin, do per accidens, through the wisdom and goodness of God so
ordering it, conduce to the weakening of sin; for by this means there is wrought
in them, stronger hatred against sin, and deeper detestations of sin; more
experience of the deceitfulness of their own hearts, and more serious
watchfullness, and greater fear, and more firm dependence upon God, more
renewed vows and covenants and resolutions against sin. A man that climbes up
a tree, if one foot slip, or a bough break, is the more careful to take sure
footing afterward; so the falls of a Saint make him take better heed to his
steps, than he did before. A leg once broken and well set again, is (they say)
stronger than before. It is true in grace; grace grows stronger after falls
in the Saints; as we see in Peter, who though at first he was shaken by the
breath of a maid, yet like a Cedar in Lebanon he grew so strong afterward,
that the most violent winds of persecution, yea death it self could not shake
or overturn him.

Secondly, those that stand. First, God would here commend his love to them in
preserving them, and give them some taste and some comfortable experience of
his goodness to them, in upholding them when others fall. This does even fill
their souls with an holy astonishment and admiration of the unsearchable
goodness of God. Oh! (says the soul now) Lord, others of stronger parts, and
more eminent for grace, thou have suffered to fall foully, though not to fall
away; Others, that were tall cedars in comparison of me, thou have suffered to
be greivously shaken, though not plucked up by the roots; whence is it then that
I a poor shrub am preserved? how comes it to pass that thou upholdest me?
This wonderfully sets off, and commends the goodness and the love of God, and
fills the soul with the admiration of it.

Secondly, God would hereby quicken them to prayer Lapsus majorum, tremor
minorum.
: When a soul sees others of strong parts and eminent for grace to fall into
any sin, Oh! Then will the soul ply the throne of grace, and improve all his
interest in God, and go and beg of God the supply of his quickening spirit,
that he may be thereby kept through faith unto salvation.

And thus much for the Reasons of the Doctrine.

The next thing, what is the difference between the infirmities of the Saints,
and the falls of wicked men.

Beloved, this is a weighty question, and the clear resolution thereof may
(through Gods blessing) be very conducible to your spiritual good and
advantage; both for the preventing and removeing discouragements and
imbondageing thoughts of fear, out of the hearts of weak Christians; and also
for the preventing and removing of carnal confidence, which may possibly arise
in the hearts of others, from what has been delivered. For (my beloved) the
sins and the falls of Saints do usually very much disturb the peace of their
own consciences; and they are as frequently a snare to carnal hearts to
encourage them to sin; and therefore it will be worth the while to resolve this
question, viz. What is the difference between the Godly and the wicked in their
sinning? between the infirmities of Saints and the falls of wicked men? Godly
men sin, and wicked men sin; and yet there is a vast disparity and a manyfold
difference between the sinning of the one and the other: and what that
difference is I shall now discover to you.

First, does not make a trade of sin, he is not a customary sinner. Though
(possibly) he may sometimes sin over the same sin, and renew the same
transgression; yet the soul putteh in its plea and complaint against it, as the
Apostle does, Romans 7.24. where he cries out, Oh wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from this body of death? It is here as in civil matters; if
we make our challenge or demand, a custom is at an end; though possibly such
may be the power of the opposite party, that the acts may be renewed: So a
Godly man puts in his plea against sin, and although (possibly) through his
own weakness and the violence of Satan's temptations, he may be once and again
overtaken with it, yet he resolves against it, and prays against it, and
complains to God of the strength of his corruptions, and does not allow
himself in the least sin. David professes, that he had chosen the way of
truth, Psalm. 119.30. and yet he slipped with his tongue more than once; as when
he answered Ahimelech the Priest, the King has commanded me a business, and he
has said unto me, let not any man know any thing of the business whereabout I
send thee, and what I have commanded thee; and I have appointed my servant to
such a place 1 Samuel 21.2. and faulters again with his tongue, and speaks
either falsely or doubtfully, when the King of the Philistims asked him whether
have ye made a rode to day? And David said, Against the south of Judah, and
against the south of the Jerahmeelites, and against the south of the Kenites. 1 Samuel 27.10. When as his invasion was against other countries, verse 8.
Nevertheless David did not make a trade of lying, for he had chosen the way of
truth, Psalm. 119.30. and he professes afterward in the same Psalm, that he
hated every false way, verse 104. And this is the meaning of that place. 1
John. 3.9. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin (...).
, he does not trade in sin, and make it his work and his business.

But wicked men drive a trade of sin; they devise, plot, and contrive sin,
which acts denominate them workers of iniquity. They are so far from putting in
a plea against sin, that they will (as I shall show you afterward) rather
plead for their sins, and they will labor more to make excuses for them, than
to get the conquest over them. They are so far from making preparation to
resist the lusts of the flesh, that they make provision for the flesh to
fulfill the lust thereof, Romans 13.14. Wicked men by making a trade of sin
contract upon themselves a kind of cursed necessity of sinning. Sin by custom
becomes (as it were) another nature to them Consutudo quasi secunda, and quasi
affabricata natura. Aug. lib. 6. de music.
, so that they can almost as soon cease to be, as cease to sin.

Secondly, A Godly man does not sin with a full consent of his will: he does
not yield a willing subjection to the commands of sin. He does not yield a
ready and free obedience to it, as to a natural Lord, but only a forced and
involuntary obedience, as to a tyrant. Sin cannot say of believers, as the
Centurion of his servants; I say to this man go and he goes; and to another
come, and he comes, and to my servant do this, and does it, Mat. 8.9. For a
Saints heart rises against the imperius commands of sin; and the soul
complains, and cries to God for help against it. A Godly man sins with
much reluctance non voluntate plena sed semiplena.
; his heart never comes up heartly to the commands of sin, but the evil which
he would not do, that be does, Romans 7.19. There may be indeed a kind of
negative consent in a Godly man, as to some particular acts of sin, into which
he may perhaps be carried forth, without any open resistance; as when a thing
is put to the question, a man that is silent, may be said to give some kind of
consent, when he does suspend his own vote, and not openly declare his consent,
nor yet directly enter his dissent. But yet (beloved) though a Godly man may be
overborn sometimes, and hurryed into some particular acts of sin; yet he does
not directly or determinately consent thereunto. It is the sad complaint and
the mournful voice of grace, the evil, which I would not, that I do. But I
do sin, and I will sin; I do work iniquity, and I will work it; that is the
stubborn voice of a sinful nature. Even then, when a Godly man, through
violence of temptation, is drawn to the acting of sin, yet there remains in
the will a principle of opposition against it. As Jacob and Esau struggled
together in Rebeccahs womb, so there is constantly a spiritual struggling
between the flesh and the spirit in a believing soul: The flesh lusts after
the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, Gal. 5.17, Now where there is
this lusting and struggling against corruption, there cannot be a full consent
or compliance of the will with corruption. I told you before, that sin acts
the part of a Tyrant in a Godly man. Now you know all the service that is don
to a Tyrant, is out of of violence, not out of obedience. A Tyrant has only a
coactive power over the persons, but a King, besides that has a sweet power
over the wills and affections of his Subjects His duobus differt justum regimen
a Tyrannide. Regi legitimo subditi libenter obediunt, quicquid praeceperit
Tyranno inviti obtemperant, etc. Pareus in Romans 6.
, they love his person and delight in his service, which rule, though it be not
always true in civil governments (for the unwillingness of some to obey their
Sovereign may arise from their own rebellion, and not from his Tyranny) yet it
is most general and certain in the state of sin, which is never a King over
rebellious subjects, who reject its yoke and government. Sin may play the
Tyrant, and use Saints like captives sold under it, as Paul complains of
himself, that he was sold under sin, Romans 7.14. We read of Ahab, that he was
sold to sin King. 21.20.
, but in a different sense. Ahab sold himself, and became a voluntary in the
service of sin. But Paul was sold by Adam Adam vendidit se primo, ac per hoc
omne semen subjectum est peccato. Ambros. in Romans
, and from this captivity he could not utterly extricate himself, though he
were (as one expresses it) in bondage to sin, as the creaturs are to vanity,
not willingly but by reason of his act, that had subjected him long before Dr.
Ed. Reynoldes in his Treatise of the sinfullness of sin.
.

But now unregenerate men do readily obey sins commands, they yield their
members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity, Romans 6.19. They
have no principle of grace within, to restrain them from sin; but only
principles of rebellion, whereby they are impetuously carried forth into the
ways of sin in a full career, or like a ship under sail with a full wind.

Thirdly, A Godly man does not sin with a full purpose of heart. When a Godly
man sins he is out of his road; for purposes are the road of our hearts, as
custom is of our lives. The honest traveller purposes to keep on straight to
his journies end; and if he do at any time mistake his way, it is besides his
purpose. So --

Though Peter denied his Master, yet it was against the purpose of his heart,
yea against the promise of his mouth. Judas betrayed his master, but he was
resolved before so to do, as appears by his contract with the Scribes and
Pharisees. As for Peter, he denied his master, not because he purposed to do
it; but because he purposed not to do it, without depending upon Christ for
strength to preserve him from the violence of such a temptation A small blast
of temptation is sufficient to overturn a man, who is puffed up with confidence
of his own strength; as here, the voice of a Damsel overturneth Peter. Mr.
David Dickson on Mat. 26.69, 70.
. His fall indeed was dreadful and terrible, but it was a sudden surprise; the
fixed purpose of his heart was against it.

It is possible, that a Godly man may deliberate upon the committing of some
sin, when an occasion is presented; but I conceive, it is impossible for a
Godly man to deliberate, how he may find out occasions of sin. David, when he
was upon the house top had an object presented, but he did not go up thither
with an intention to seek one. Godly men may be suddenly surprised, and be
hurryed into the external acts of those sin, which they never intended, and
against which their purposes and resolutions were most strongly carried forth.

But now a wicked man sins with full purpose of heart; he sineth and
resolves to sin, even then when he seems to pray and protest against it. As
Augustine confesses, that before his conversion, when he prayed to the Lord to
mortify his corruption, he was afraid that the Lord would grant his prayer, and
mortify that lust, which he rather desired should be satisfied In exordio
adolescentiae petieram a te castitatem and contimentiam, etc. Timebam etc. ne
cito exaudires and sanares me a morbo coucupiscentiae, quam expleri malebam,
quam extingui. Aug.
. A wicked man sins, and the purposes of his heart are that way, as those
whom the Prophet mentions, Esaias. 56.12. who said Com ye, I will fetch wine, and
we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day,
and much more abundant, q. d. We have been drunk to day, and we will be more
drunk to morrow. And Ezekiel. 11.21. Their heart walks after the hear^ of their
detestable things, and their abominations, i. e. The inclinations and
resolutions of their hearts go or walk after their abominations.,

Fourthly, The falls of a Godly man do not spring from propensions of nature,
but from the strength and violence of temptation. That temptations are
exceeding powerful to hurry the best of men into sin is evident, by that
special direction, that our Savior gives us to pray against temptation, and
Gods special promise to preserve us therein. There is (says a worthy Divine)
a great difference, when a man sins from his own habituated principles in
wickedness, and from the overpowering force of some importunate temptations Mr.
Burgess Spiritual refineing. 2d. par. p. 211.
. Such may be sometimes the voiolence of temptation, as that Godly men may be
overborn thereby, and hurryed in to those sins, which according to the inward
man they abhor, and hate even with a perfect hatred. David professes, that he
hated every false way, Psalm. 119.4. and yet (as you heard before) he is over
taken once and again with that fault. A Godly man does in his inner man delight
in the Law of God, and hates those sins, into which he is drawn by the
overpowerings of temptation: his heart and those sins are upon terms of
defiance.

But on the contrary, the falls of unregenerate men proceed from propensions of
nature; nature is wholly set upon sin. You need not drive a dog to his vomit,
nor a sow to the mire; it is natural both to the one and the other. A natural
man (indeed) may be restrained for a while from his violent acting of his
wonted impieties, (it may be) by restraining grace, or (perhaps) only for fear
of the Magistrate, or want of opportunity, or some such occasion or other,
which may intervene to hinder him from furiously running on to all excess of
ungodlyness; but there is still in him such a natural propension and
inclination to the ways of sin, that like water that has been for a while
bayed up; if once the banks be broken down, or the floudgates opened, it
rusheth forth with the greater violence; so if once those restraints by which
formerly a wicked man has been held in, be taken off, he will break forth
again with the greater violence into his former lewd and ungodly practice. A
natural man may not unfitly be compared to a Lion or a Bear, that may be
(perhaps) for the present chained up to prevent his doing mischief, but still
retains his ravenous disposition, and has a natural inclination to do
mischief: So the heart of a wicked man, if only chained up by restraining
grace, or fear of the Magistrate, and not changed by renewing and sanctifying
grace, if he can but get loose from those restraints, will soon return to his
former vomit, to his former lewdness and ungodlyness; for he has a natural
propension and inclination to sin. A wicked man when he sins, is like a fish in
the water, in his proper element. The ways of sin are the proper element (if I
may so speak) they are most agreeable to the nature of a wicked man.

Fifthly, A Godly man cannot sin with delight but sin is a burden to him.
Though a Godly man sins, yet he hates the evil that he does, Romans 7.15. yea
he hates it with a deadly and irreconcilable hatred; so much the word
signifies, which David uses in that place quoted before, Psalm. 119.104. I hate
every false way (...) a radice (...) Odio prosecutus fuit.
. A Godly man that has learned that lesson which the Apostle Paul teaches us,
Romans 12.9. to abhor that which is evil, where the original word is very
emphaticall, it signifies to hate a thing with vehemence, and to loath it as
Hell it self. It is a compound word; the simple verb imports extreme
detestation; the signification therefore is aggravated by the composition Leegb
Crit. Sacra.
. Indeed sin is a Godly man's affliction and not his pleasure, as is evident by
the Apostles bitter complaint, so frequently mentioned already, Romans 7.24. Oh
wretched man that I am, etc. the original word signifies (as Beza notes) one
that is aerumnosis and perpetuis pugnis satigatus, wearyed with troublesome and
continual combats (...). Componitur a verbo (...) ( per syncopen (...))
suffero and (...) luctus. Alsted in Lexic. Theol.
. Calvin says it is vox anhelantis the voice of one breathing and panting,
desiring to be delivered from this servitude.

But now a wicked man sins with delight. Hence they are said to love evil
more than good, Psalm. 52.3. to choose their own way, and their souls to delight
in their abominations, Esa. 66.3. and to have pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. The comfort of their lives comes in by fulfilling their lusts; so
that they are discontented, when their lusts are not satisfied. Witness Ahab,
who was sick till he got Naboths vienyard, 1 King. 21.5. and Amnon, till he
could satify his lust upon his sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13. Such is their delight
in sinning, that they are unwearyed therein. Solomon gives us a notable
description of their restlesseness and unwearyedness in sinning. They sleep not
except they have done mischief; and their sleep is taken away unless they cause
some to fall, Romans 4.14, 16.

Lastly, A Godly man does not persevere in sin. The just man falls seven
times a day, but he rises again, Prove. 24.16. Hence it is, that the Scripture,
as it records the falls of any of the people of God, so it records their
riseing again, as it records David's adultery and murder, Hezekiahs pride,
Peter's denial and the falls of the Saints, so it records also the tears, and,
the sighs, the groans the meltings, the humiliations, and the repentance of
those precious Saints. In the 51. Psalm, you may read of David's repentance at
large; and although Hezekiahs heart was lifted up, yet you may read that
Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, 2 Chro. 32.35, 36. Peter
fell fearfully, but a look, a glance of love from Christ melted him into
tears, he went forth and wept bitterly, Luke 22.61. A look of mercy from Jesus
Christ broke Peter's heart, and opened the floudgate of his eyes too. And the
Lord turned and looked upon Peter, and Peter went out and wept bitterly.

But wicked men persist and persevere in the ways of sin; insomuch that
neither judgments threatened, nor judgments inflicted can reclaim them. They
sin, and care not; they sin, and fear not; they sin and they will sin, let God
say, or do what he will, to the contrary. As those did, Jer. 2.25. Withhold
thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from thrist, i. e. Why will ye go
down to Egypt for help? you will get nothing by it but bareness and thirst: but
they say, strangers we have loved, and strangers we will follow, q.d. Say thou
what thou will, we will take our own way and our own course. So Jer 44.16, 17.
notwithstanding God had denounced dreadful judgments against that people, and
that in great variety too, viz. Sword, Famine, and Pestilence, verse 11.12, 13.
yet they were resolved to go on in their Idolatrous practices; they answered
Jeremiah saying, As for the word that thou have spoken to us in the name of the
Lord, we will not hearken unto thee; but we will certainly do, whatsoever
thing goes forth of our own mouth, to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven,
etc. Their wills were fully set upon their sinful ways, let God say or do
what he would to the contrary. Thus also did the old world, though God stirred
up Noah a preacher of righteousness to warn them for an hundred and twenty
years together; yet they persisted in their own ways, and gave themselves, to
eating and drinking and ran on to all excess of riot, till the flood came
and swept them all away, Matthew. 24.38, 39. So Pharaoh, the Lord send Moses and
Aaron unto him ten times, and inflicted upon him ten plagues, one upon the neck
of another; yet Pharaoh was hardened in the ways of sin. So true is that of
the wise man Prove. 27.22. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar among
wheat with a pestell, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.

I have done with the Doctrinall part, I proceed now to application, and this
Doctrine may be improved several ways.

Use 1. First, Manichees, and the Cathari, who held that they could not so much
as sin in thought Rogers. on the articles of the Church of England. p. 64.
. Such were the Pelagians, and the Familists who imagined themselves so free
from sin, that they needed not to pray Forgive us our trespasses. Yea even in
our days this error is revived again, and therefore it will not be
unseasonable to speak something for your establishment in the truth, and
whereby you may be antidoted against the infection of this poisonous opinion.
And all, that I shall speak upon this Doctrine shall be by way of discovery,

1. How contrary this opinion is to the Scriptures. 2. How contrary it is to
the experience of Saints. 3. How contrary it is to the nature of grace and
sanctification. 4. How contrary to the plentiful suffrage of antiquiy, yea to
the concessions of some of our Popish adversaries.
First,

First, viz. That the best of men are not so freed from sin in this life, but
that in many things they offend all. Diverse Scriptures were alleged for the
proof of the Doctrine, that do clearly assert this truth. To those which were
then mentioned, I shall only add, 1 King. 8.46. where it is expressly
affirmed, that there is no man that sins not.

Secondly, It is contrary to such Scriptures, where the people of God. in their
petititions and supplications, do necessarily infer this truth, that there
is sin remaining in them. Otherwise how can they pray as David does, Psalm.
51.1, 2, 9? Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness,
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions.
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sins. Hide thy
face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities; and as our Savior
teaches his disciples Matthew. 6.12. Forgive us our debts?

Thirdly, Advocate, and an High Priest, to make intercession for believers,
viz. 1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, even
Jesus Christ the righteous. And Heb. 7.25. He ever lives to make intercession
for them. Now, this were altogether needless, if they had no sin in them. If
believers have no causes to plead, what need have they to have an advocate
continually in the Court? If the Saints were free from sinning, what need had
they of an High Priest to make intercession for them? So that this error
destroys the intercession of Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, perfect. Noah is styled a just man, and perfect, Genesis 6.9. and yet
afterward you may read that Noah planted a vineyard, and drank of the wine,
and was drunken and uncovered in his tent, Genesis 9.20, 21.

And Abraham, the father of the faitfull, to whom God said, walk before me, and
be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1. was not without his imperfections: for he fell
twice into the same sin, viz. of denying his wife, for which he was reproved by
two Heathen Kings, viz. Pharoch King of Egypt, and Abimelech King of Gerar.
Genesis 12, 12.13, 18, 19. and 20.2, 9.

So likewise David was by Gods own testimony a man after Gods own heart, Act.
13.22. which amounts to as much as a perfect man, and yet it is well known, he
was not without sin; witness his adultery with Bathsheba, and his murder of
Vriah, and his pride in numbering the people, 2 Samuel 11. and 24.

Job also is styled a perfect man, Job 1.1. and yet subject to infirmities, as
apeareth by his cursing his day, chap. 2.

Asa is styled a perfect man, 2 Chronicles. 15.17. the heart of Asa was perfect all
his days; and yet in the very next chapter you have no less than four
several sins of his upon record, viz. First, His seeking to Benhadad King of
Syria for aid against Badsha King of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 16.23. Secondly, His
imprisoning Hanany the Lords Prophet, because he reproved him for his sin verse
7, 8, 9, 10. Thirdly, His oppressing his subjects verse 10. Lastly, His seeking
to Physicians, and not the Lord in the time his sickness, verse 12.

And Hezekiah is said to have walked before God in truth and with a perfect
heart, 2 King. 20.3. and yet, when once God left him a little, to try what was
in him, how does he discover his imperfections? His ingratitude is recorded 2 Chronicles. 32.25. Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done unto
him. And his pride is also noted in the same verse, but his heart was lift up;
as also Esaias 39.2. where he too vaingloriously showed his treasures to the
Ambassadors of the King of Babylon, for which God threatens, and afterward in
his sons days brought the Captivity.

I Will give you but one instance more, and that is recorded Luke 1. Zacharias is
said to be righteous before God, and to have walked in all the Commandments of
God blameless; and yet afterward he is struck dumb for his unbelief, verse 22.

Now if absolute perfection and freedom from sin were attainable in this life,
questionless some of these eminent servants of God would have attained it;
which none of them ever did: for you have heard how the holy Ghost impeacheth
them all of humane frailties and infirmities.

Lastly, David's repentance is set down at large, Psalm. 51. and Hezekiahs
repentance is upon record, 2 Chronicles. 32.26. Hezekiah, humbled himself for the
pride of his heart; and Jobs repentance is set down, Job 42.6. I abhor my
self, and repent in dust and ashes: and Peter's repentance is mentioned in no
less than three of the Evangelists, viz. Matthew. 26.75. Mar. 14.22. Luke 22.61,
62. So that the poisonous nature of this opinion appears in nothing more, than
in this, that it takes away all grounds of humiliation and repentance and
Godly sorrow for sin, in those that believe. For he that says there is no sin
in Saints, does in effect say, that there is no need of repentance in Saints
This error (you see) eats into the very vitals of Godlyness; it overthrows
repentance; therefore beware of it, and thus I have showed you how contrary
this error is to the Scriptures.

Secondly, Joh did when he says, If I justify my self mine own mouth shall
condemn me, If I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse, Job 9.20.
And David Psalm. 130.3. If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who
shall stand? And St. Paul at large, Romans 7.14. ad finem. complains bitterly
of that sinful corruption, that did cleave close unto him, and hang fast upon
him, and would do to his dying day. The bosome-experience of all Saints, is
enough to confute this vain and fond conceit of perfection in this life.

Thirdly, which in this life (at the best) is but imperfect. The best Saints
have a flesh in them, as well as a spirit, and the one lusts against the
other, Gal. 5.17. they have two men in them, an Old as well as a New; and the
one must be put off, the other put on daily, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. and the doing
of both is a work of time, even of their whole lives. They have two laws in
them, one in their members, rebelling against the other, which is in their
minds, Romans 7.23. insomuch that though grace reign in them while they live,
yet corruption prevails often, and will dwell in them till they dye, verse 17.

Lastly, It is contrary to the plentiful suffrage of antiquity, yea to the
concessions of some of our Popish adversaries.

For Antiquity take the Judgment of three or four for all. Lactantius says
expressly, None can be without sin, as long as he is clothed with flesh Nemo
esse sine delicto potest, quamdiu indumento carnis oneratus est. Lactant. de
vero caltu lib. 6. c. 13.
. Blessed Cyprian also, that glorious confessor, and famous Martyr of Jesus
Christ, says, we must always confess our selves to be sinners, for whosoever
shall say, that he is without sin is either a proud man or a fool Semper
debemus nos confiteri peccatores, nam quisquis se immaculatum. and sine peccato
diceret, aut superbus est, aut stultus. Cyprian.
. And who doubts (says Augustine) that concupiscence may be lessened in this
life; but not consumed Concupiscentiam quis ambigat, in hac vita posse minui,
nou posse consumt? Aug.
? And Bernard says, that the flesh is Hostis, quem nec fugere possumus, nec
fugare; an enemy which we can neither flee, nor yet put to flight. And
elsewhere, speaking concerning the remainders of sin, he says, whether thou will or no, this Jebusite will dwell in thy borders; it may be subdued, but not
utterly rooted out Velis nolis, intra fincs tuos habitabit Jebusaeus; subjugari
pocest, exterminari non potest. Bernard.
. And the master of the sentences acknowledges, that we are not so redeemed
from it, that it should not have a being in us, but only that it should not
reign in us Non ab ea sic redempti sumus, at non sit, sed ut non dominetur,
Mag. sent l. 3. Did. 19.
. And Cajetan another learned Papist acknowledges, that sin is condemned,
but not extinguished Dumnatum est peccatum, non extinctum. Casetan.
And Estius another Popish author (howsoever he endeavor in other places to
blanch thematter) yet in his Commentary upon those words of the Apostle in Romans
6.12. Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies; that ye should obey it in the
lusts thereof, (upon those words I say) he has this note, The Apostle does not
say, let not sin be, but let it not reign, etc. because as long as we are in
this mortal body, sin is in us, and cannot be rooted out of us during this
life Non dicit Apostolus, non sit, sed non regnet peccatum, etc. quia quamdiu
sumus in hoc mortali corpore, est in nobis peccatum, neque durante hac vita
extirpari potest. Estius in Ep. ad Romanos.
. And elsewhere the same author acknowledges, that this is the constant
Doctrine of the Fathers, that a man cannot live without sin Doctrina haec adco
constans est apud patres ut passim affirment hominem non posse vivere sinc
peccatis, etc. Estius ad. 1 John. 1.3.
.

Thus I have showed you how contrary this opinion is to the Scripture; how
contrary to experience of believers; how contrary to the nature of grace and
sanctification, and how contrary to the suffrage of antiquity; yea to the
concessions of some of our Popish adversaries.

I need not spend time in answering the cavils of those, who assert, that
perfection and absolute freedom from sin is attainable in this life. There
have been hints enough given already in the foregoing discourse to overthrow
the most considerable of them. Should I therefore go about to answer them
particularly, I must of necessity speak over many of the same things again,
which have been already delivered; but that I presume will be a needless
trouble both to you and to me. Therefore I forbear: Only I cannot but take a
little notice of one Text of Scripture, upon which (though it be a precious
golden foundation) a late Author Dr. Tho. Drayton late Minisier of Chilwark in
the County of Wiles in his Book entitled the Proviso of the Promises.
has built much hay and stubble. It is that of the Apostle in 2 Cor. 7.1.
Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from
all filt hiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God. From which words the aforesaid Author infers his Doctrine of
perfection and freedom from sin in this life. But, how little strength or
solidity there is in his inference, will easily appear. For his whole discourse
runs upon a wrong supposition; and therefore the foundation being so feeble,
the superstructure may casely be overthrown.

Now the supposition, that he goes upon is this; that perfect cleansing etc.
is made a condition of the promises; and hence he infers, that if absolute
freedom from sin be not attaineable, the condition of the promises is
impossible, and conomine unjust.

But my beloved, condition of the promises, he would not have said, having
these promises, but rather, if ye would have these promises. The Apostle
supposes an interest in them, and from thence he infers duty, not as a
condition, to obtain an interest in them, but as a fruit or expression of our
thankfullness for an interest already obtained.

Besides, Dato sed non concesso, supposeing but not granting, that perfect
cleansing is a condition of the promises, the inference is a mere non sequitur;
it does not therefore follow, that the condition of the promises is eo nomine
unjust, because impossible. For God requires no more than once he bestowed
upon us; and we have lost it through our own default. This perfect purity we
had once in Adam, Eccl. 7.29. God made man upright, but he sought out many
inventions: and therefore our inability to obey does not take away Gods
authority to command. God does not lose his right to command, though man has
lost his power to obey. Our impotency does not at all dissolve our obligation.
Perfect cleansing is never the less our duty, for our inability to attain it
here.

Again Gods commands are not measures of our strength. We cannot draw a good
argument, a mandato ad effectum, from what God commands, to what we can do.
Things are thus expressed (says one) for another purpose, to show Gods right,
to convince the creature of weakness, to show us our duty, that man's endeavor
is required, and that we should do our ut most, to convince us wherein we have
failed, etc. Mr. Manton on James. p. 177.


But this may suffice to have been spoken to that use.

Secondly, Caution.
shall be an use of caution, and this use will concern both Sinners and Saints.

First, Caution to sinners to prevent the ill use they may make of this
Doctrine: To sinners.
and there are two words of Cautionary advice, which I would speak to them; the
Lord also speak, them home with power to their hearts, or else all that I shall
speak, will be in vain.

First, Let them take heed, by the falls of Saints, which are recorded in the
Scripture.

Secondly,

First, Cauti. 1.
Let them take heed how they imbolden themselves to sin, by the falls of Saints
recorded in the Scripture. It is an argument of a base spirit, for men to plead
Noah's drunkenness, Lots incest, David's adultery, Peter's denial, as examples to
encourage themselves to sin. Salvian complains, that in his times they
pleaded, Si David, cur non and ego? Si Noah, cur non and ego? If David
committed adultery, why may not I do so too, and yet besaved as well as he? If
Noah was drunk why may not I be so too, and yet be saved as well as he? The
best, have their faults, and in many things we offend all. Thus they did then
and thus men will still strengthen themselves in their wickedness. But let such
persons consider.

First, wrest and pervert the Scriptures when they make such carnal inferences
from the falls of Saints recorded therein; I say they pervert and wrest the
Scriptures to a quite contrary end, than ever the holy Ghost intended them.

For there are but two special ends of Gods recording in the Scriptures the
falls of his Saints: and they are these.

First,

Secondly, sea-markes to warn others to take heed, how they come near those
rocks and quicksands, where others have been splitt and sunk; and to avoid
those snares, wherein the most precious Saints of God in former ages have been
ensnared. Now these things are written for our examples (says the Apostle) 1
Cor. 10.6. Examples? How? Surely not for our imitation, but for our admonition,
as verse 11. to the intent, that we might not be surprised and overtaken with
the like temptation Ad nostram doctrinam, instructionem, and cautelam,
referenda sunt. Estius. ad 1 Cor. 10.6. Vt iis lectis vel auditis admoniti
sapriamus, ne similiter peccantes similiter patiamur. Estius. ad verse 11.
ejusdem capitis.
. This is the use which the holy Ghost teaches us to make of the falls of
Saints. And this use Nehemiah made of the sin of Solomon in marrying strange
wives. You may see his own words, Neh. 13.26, 27. Did not Solomon King of
Israel sin by these things? yet among many nations was their no King like him,
who was beloved of his God, and God made him King over all Israel;
Nevertheless, even him, did outlandish women cause to sin. Shall we then
hearken unto you, to do all this great evil, to transgress against our God
in marrying strange wives? q.d. If Solomon's marrying of strange wives was a
means to cause him to sin, how much greater cause have we to fear the like
effect of the like sin, if we should fall into it? Let us then make this use of
the falls of Saints recorded in the Scripture. Was such a man as Noah, of whom
the holy Ghost gives a very honorable testimony, that he was a just man and
perfect in his generation, Genesis 6.9. overtaken with that beastly sin of
drunkenness? Was such a man as David, a man after Gods own heart drawn to such
foul sins as adultery and murder? Did Moses the meekest man upon the earth
break forth into passion, and speak so unadvisedly with his lips, that he was
shut out of Canaan for it? Oh! how should their examples be warnings to us, who
come so far short of them in grace, to take heed of the occasions of the like
sins; and look well to our own feet, lest they also slip? Surely, it never
entered into the heart of God to record the falls of his Saints, that thereby
others, should have a cloak for their sins; but that hereby others might become
the more afraid of sin, and the more watchful over their own hearts. Did
David, and Peter, and others, who were such strong Saints, and like pillars in
the house of God, fall so dangerously? Oh! then how nearly does it concern us,
who stand in more slippery ground, to look well to our selves, and to take
heed, lest we also fall! Thus you see, they that take occasion from the falls
of Saints, which are upon record in the Scriptures, to encourage themselves in
sin, do grossly pervert and wrest the Scripture, and do in effect make God
the patron of sin. Therefore I beseech you take heed of it.

Secondly, sinned fowlly; but they hold forth, that they have smarted deeply.
Truly a man that considers, and lays well to heart, how severely God has
dealt, even with his own people, when they have sinned against him; what
frowns, what hidings of Gods face, and what broken bones their sins have cost
them; and how long some of them have roared upon the rack of Gods heavy
displeasure, before those broken bones have been set in joint again; besides
many temporal afflictions which they have undergone, though not sub ratione
penae as the fruits of vindictive justice; yet as the effects of fatherly
displeasure. Quamvis Deus absolvit vere penitentes propter Christi mortem, ab
omni pen a satisfactoria, non tamen illos liberat ab omni pena medicinali and
castlig^toria. Daren in Coloss. ed it. Camah. 1639. p. 127.
: would be loath to purchase the pleasure or the profit of any sin at so dear a
rate; much less would he imbolden himself to sin by their example. Though it
be true indeed that God never takes away his loving kindness from his people,
nor suffers his faithfulness to fail, Psalm. 89.33. yet if his vovenant people
forsake his Law, and walk not in his judgments; if they break his statutes, and
keep not his commandments; then will he visit their transgression with the
rod, and their iniquity with stripes, verse 30.31.32. The Scripture abounds
with instances of this. Moses his passion and unbelief shut him out of Canaan,
Numb. 20.12. and 27.13, 14. And David's Adultery and murder intailed the sword
upon him and his family to all generations; and the child born in adultery must
not live, but dye, and that for this very cause, because by this deed he had
given occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme. That Is the cause
alleged by God himself, 2 Samuel 12.10, 11, 12, 14. And Zacharias for his
unbeleef was struck dumb for a season, Luke 1.20. even because he believed not
the words of the Angel, which were to be fullfiled in their season. Methinkes
this consideration should startle such carnal wretches and cause them to stand
in awe, and not sin; that although the children of God are by Jesus Christ
delivered from the wrath to come; yet their very infirmities have caused them
to taste deeply of the cup of Gods fatherly displeasure, and exposed them and
their familyes to sore afflictions in this life, God thereby evidencing and
declaring to the world his impartiality, his hatred against sin wheresoever he
finds it, and his faithfullness to his own people, in chastening them here,
that they might not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32.

Now, friends, if you will be bold to partake of their sins, it is just with
God, that you should also partake of their sufferings. You may not promise your
selves an immunity from the like sufferings, if you indulge to your selves a
liberty to commit the like transgressions.

Thirdly, meekness of Moses, as well as as of his passion, of the holiness of
David as well as of his infirmities; the patience of Job, as well as his
impatience, in cursing his day: of the courage and boldness of Peter, as well
as of his cowardice in denying his master; in a word, you may read as well of
the graces, as of the corruptions of Gods children. Surely, it would be your
wisdom to observe what is commendable in them, and rather to imitate them in
their graces, than in their sins; to observe what was excellent in them, and to
make that a pattern for your imitation.

Secondly, Cauti. 2.
Let sinners also take heed how they insult over the Godly, because of their
fallings. If a professor of religion do but slip, how does the world
presently condemn him for an hypocrite: and even while themselves lie and
wallow in sin, and allow themselves in all manner of ungodlyness, how do they
insult over the Saints for their failings and infirmities? These be your
Puritans, your precisians, your Holy Brethren, your Saints; they are all a
company of hypocrites, and mere pretenders to Saintship, etc.

Now that you may see the sinfullness hereof, Consider

First; The Children of God are sanctified but in part in this life. Though in
regeneration the new creature be made partaker of the Divine nature; yet the
Old man is not utterly abolished. In conversion corruption is mortifyed, but
not nullifyed; sin is conquered, but not extinguished. The children of God,
when they become Saints, do not cease to be men; when they receive the Spirit,
they do not by and by wholly put off the flesh; but the flesh still lusts
against the spirit, Gal. 5.17. and the law in their members warreth against the
law of their minds, and too often brings them into captivity to the law of
sin, Romans 7.23. Therefore in insulting over them for their failings, you sin
against God, and wrong the generation of Gods children Psalm. 73.15.
.

Secondly, dwell in them? why? it reigns in thee. Do they sin through
weakness? thou sinnest through willfulluesse. Do they sin through infirmity?
thou sinnest through presumption. Are they sometimes overtaken with a
Temptation? thou many times go forth to meet a temptation; and rather than
fail, thou will turn Devil and tempt thy self. Thou hypocrite, do thou
judge thy Brother for the mote that is in his eye, when thou have a beam in
thine own eye? Mat. 7.3. Surely if thou wer'st better acquainted with thine own
heart, and was it thou not a stranger at home, thou would not be so busy
abroad.

Thirdly, Thou art inexcusable, oh man, whosoever thou art that judge for
wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge
do the same things, Romans 2.1. In censuring thy Brothers infirmities, thou
do but aggravate thine own impieties Turpe est Doctori, cum culpa redarguit
ipsum.
. If his mote seem so big in thine eye, how great (think thou) will thy beam
appear in Gods eye another day? Assure thy self, that with what judgment thou
judge, thou shall be judged; and with what measure thou metest, it shall be
measured to thee again, Mat. 7.2. and think not this oh man that judge and
condemnest the people of God for their infirmities, and art thy self guilty of
gross enormities that thou shall escape the judgment of God, Romans 2.3.

Thus much by way of Caution to sinners, to prevent the ill use, which they may
make of this Doctrine.

Secondly, Caution to Saints


First, thorn in your flesh prick the bladder of your pride. Surely the best of
us have enough within us to pull down the pride of our hearts: when we are with
the Peacock proud of our gay feathers, let us look upon our defiled feet, and
be humbled. Alas? what have we to be proud of? We have nothing of our own but
sin. As for our gifts and graces, we may truly say of them, as the young man
did of his hatchet, alas master, it was but borrowed 2 King. 6.5.
Or in the words of the Apostle, what have I that I have not received? and if I
did receive it, why should I boast, as if I had not received it 1 Cor. 4.7.
? When therefore the sense of grace at any time lifts us up, let the sense of
corruption lay us low. Certainly there is more of sin, than of grace; more of
the flesh, than of the spirit, in the holiest man upon the face of the earth.
As there are more weeds than flowers in the best garden, so there is more
corruption than grace in the best soul: our natures being stepmothers to grace,
as the earth is to flowers; and natural mothers to lust, as the earth is to
weeds; and the best men alive have cause to complain, that in them, that is, in
their flesh, there dwells no good thing. And certainly let men be never so
gracious, they have infinitely more matter of humiliation, through the
abundance of corruption remaining in them, than of pride and exaltation, for
the eminency or strength of grace; there is more in their sins to humble them,
than in their graces to lift them up? especially if we consider these three
things;

First, same nature with the sins of wicked men. What though sin does not reign
in Saints? It remains in them still; and is it ever the less sin, because it
does not reign? Certainly there is the same violation of Gods Law, the same
contrariety to Gods holy and Heavenly nature, the same disobedience to the will
of God, in the sins of Saints, as in the sins of other men. As a man cannot
give the greatest sin a worse, so neither can he give the least a better name,
than sin. I know no difference at all in nature between the sins of the Godly
and the wicked; there is indeed a difference in their persons, the one is
regenerate the other unregenerate; but sin is sin still in both; though it
reign in the one and not in the other. Surely this is a very humbling
consideration to the people of God.

Secondly, same nature, so they are of the same desert with the sins of wicked
men. All sin is in its own nature damning; and that sin does not prove damning
to the Saints, is (as one observes See Mr. Tho. Case Elias Abatement, or
corruption in the Saints. p. 107. 108.
) not from the sinfullness of their sin, but from the greatness of Gods mercy
not from the nature of their sin, but from the goodness of Gods nature. And
should not this be matter of deep humiliation to the Saints of God?

Thirdly, more heinous than the sins of other men, and that upona five-fold
account.

First, disorderly, than if those that are strangers, or have no relation to
him, walk disorderly: So, in regard of the near relation, that is between God
and his people, their sins redound more to Gods dishonor than the sins of
those, that are strangers to him.

Secondly, Belial are thereby opened to reproach the ways of God. Sins of
professors will be cast as dirt upon the profession it self Ecce quales sunt
qui Christum colunt. Salvian. de guhern. dei. lib. 4.
. Professors are in the highest orb in the Church, and if their motion be
irregular it is much noted. How sad is it, that wicked men should make a rod of
the sins of Saints to lash Religion with?

Thirdly, unkindnesse in the sins of Saints, than in the sins of other men.
Hence it is, that their sins are said to grieve the Holy Spirit of God Ephesians.
4.30. Res est delicata spiritus Dei. Tret.
. It goes nearer the heart of God, when his people sin against him, than when
other men sin against him. The sins of others provoke God to anger, but the
sins of saints do grieve his spirit See Mr. Buroughs Gracious spirit. p. 186.
. Siants are the objects of Gods special love, and therefore it must needs be
grevious to the Spirit of God, that they should offend him. The more a man
loves a wife, or a child, or a friend; the more does he take any unkindness
from them to heart. So when Gods own people offend, it goes nearer his heart,
than when others offend; for there is more unkindness in their sins. Sins in
Gods people are far more irksome, and grievous to his Spirit, than sins in
other men. See Jer. 32.30. The Children of Israel and the Children of Judah
have only done evil before me from their youth, etc. The Septuagint read it,
(...), they alone, or they only have been sinners before me; as if God did not
take notice of the sins of other Nations See Mr. Manton on James p. 150.
. Israel, Gods portion, whom he had avouched to be his people, are the only
sinners Indeed a wound is deeper, by how much the nearer the hand is, that
strikes it. What thou my son (...)
? said Caesar to Brutus, when he saw his hand amongst the rest stretched forth
against him. By how much the more kindness men sin against, by so much the
more unkindnesse there is in their sin, Psalm. 55.12. David complains, It was
not an enemy, that had done this, but it was thou, my friend, and my equal,
and my companion. The friend wounded more than the sword. To sin against
kindness is the greatest unkindness. What Absalom said to Hushai, 2 Samuel 16.17.
the same may God say to a sinning Saint. Is this thy kindness to thy friend?
This should be a soul-humbling consideration to the people of God, that every
sin they committ, is an unkindnesse done to a kind God.

Fourthly, and God expects better things from them. God speaks confidently
concerning them, Surely they are my people, Children that will not lie, etc.
Esa. 63.8. God confideth in them; and therefore for them to be unfaithful, for
his Vovenant People to forsake his Law, and break his Commandments, this must
needs be very heinous.

Lastly, Tit. 2.14. Exo. 19.5. Deuteronomy. 33.19.
they are his peculiar people, his peculiar treasure above all people in the
world; and therefore their sins must needs be much more heinous than the sins
of other men. Hence God complains of the provoking of his sonns and
daughters, Deuteronomy. 32.19. A late eminent Divine compares sins in the people of
God to a stain in a piece of Cambrick or Lawn Mr. Buroughs on Hoseah. vol 2.
p. 179.
, which are easily seen. Indeed wicked men are (if I may so speak) of a courser
thread, their heart is little worth, and therefore, though they are sullyed or
defiled, that is not much taken notice of: even as a spot in a piece of
sackcloth is not so much observed, as a stain in a piece of fine linen. But
now, the Godly are renewed after the image of God, and therefore a spot in them
is exceeding bad. And thus you see, in many respects sins in Saints are more
heinous, than sins in other men. Let these considerations take you off from
pride, and cause you to walk humbly with your God. And so much for the first
word of Caution to Saints.

I shall give you the second in the words of the Apostle, Let them that stand
take heed lest they fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. and to that purpose, in order to their
preservation from falling, let them be persuaded to follow these Directions.

First, Let them be watchful. prompt us to the foulest sins, that ever were
committed. Peter was not jealous enough of his own heart when he told Christ,
Though all men forsake the, yet I will not; nay he went further yet, and
promises, Though I dye with thee, I will not deny thee, Mat. 26.33, 25. and
yet Peter did both; he both forsook him, and denied him, and that with a curse
and an Oath, verse 70, 72, 74. Had Peter known his own heart better, he would
have been less confident. Truly good men do not know whither the corruption
of their hearts may hurry them before they dye; nor with what impetuous
violence they may be drawn to sin, should God leave them to themselves. Christ
therefore forewarneth his Disciples Luke 21 34. Take heed to your selves, lest
at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness, and the
cares of this life, etc, One would think this a strange exhortation, and an
useless caution to such good men as they were. Yet our Savior knew, that they
had the seeds of those sins in their natures, which he forewarned them of; and
the feeds of the same, yea of all manner of sins are in our natures, as well as
theirs; and therefore we had need take heed of security, and keep a jealous eye
over our own hearts; especially if we consider, that security lays us open to
temptation; and when we apprehend least danger, our danger is greatest. Sin and
Satan are ever watching their opportunity to do us mischief, and they have
most advantage against us, when we are most secure: and at such a time it is
just with God to let sin and Satan loose upon us, to affright us out of our
security. If we are secure, we grieve the holy spirit of God, and tempt him to
leave us to the temptations of the evil spirit; and the Devil watches for
our slumbering, and lies at catch for us, that he might take us napping. We are
never more in danger to become a prey to this roaring and devouring Lion, than
while we lie sleeping at his feet The Devil watches, that he might ensnare
us; Oh! Let us keep an holy watch, lest we be ensnared by him. The Devil
keeps a crafty and malicious watch, Oh! Let us keep an holy watch. Learn for
shame, of the Devil, (said holy Latimer) to watch, seeing he is so watchful.
Let us be awakened out of a sleepy security, to a religious watchful
jealousies over our hearts; Let them, who think they stand, take heed least
they fall; as certainly they shall (though they seem to be pillars,) as Peter
did, if they stand upon their own legs, and not upon his, that are as pillars
of marble set upon sockets of fine Gold, Cant. 5.15.

Secondly, occasions of sin. It is true (I confess) our sinful hearts would
put us upon the commission o^ of sin, if there were no occasion presented. But
yet it is as true that occasions do strengthen corrupt nature, as the
Philosopher tell us that acts do strengthen habits. The occasions of sin do
(as it were) awaken corrupt nature. What else can be the reason, that a man,
who did not think of sin before, upon an occasion persented, should presently
have a motion to commit it? Therefore be not over bold in ventureing upon the
occasions of sin. Those that carry Gunpowder-natures about them, had need
beware not only of fiery darts, but of the least sparks Mr. Manton on Ja. p.
4. 69.
. Christ teaches us to pray, Lead us not into Temptation Mat. 6.13.
: Surely the way to be kept from temptation, is to keep at a distance from the
occasions of sin. To pray, Lead us not into temptation, and then to rush upon
the Occasions of sin is all one, as for a man to pray, that he may not be
burned, and as soon as he has done, to thrust his fingers into the fire.
Surely we shall never overcome temptations, unless we turn from the occasions
of sin. A sad examle of this we have recorded by St. Augustine Aug. Confess.
lib. 6. cap. 8.
, of one Alipius, who was by the importunity of friends prevailed with to be
present at the Gladiatory-games of the Romans; but being there resolved to keep
his eyes fast all the while, so that though he was present in body, yet he
might be absent in heart: but upon a great shout, that the people gave at the
fall of one of the Combatants, he opened his eyes, and so became an approver of
that bloody and barbarous spectacle. Gods children are bound to abstain from
the appearance of evil. 1 These. 5.22. The Nazarites, that were commanded to
abstain from wine, were also forbidden to touch the very husk of the grape.
Numb. 6.3, 4. And it is observable Hos. 2.16, 17. that God would not be called
Baali, but Ishi. Thou shall call me Ishi, and shall call me no more Baali. For
I will take away the name Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall no more be
remembered by their name. Why, what hurt was there in that word? Surely none at
all in the word it self. The word is a very good word, and has a very good
signification, and (as a late writer has observed Mr. Jer. Buroughs in his
Lectures on Hosea p. 549.
) It is as proper to God, as any word that can be given him by the Church (but
that God did forbid it here) for it is no more, when the Church calls God
Baali, than if the Church should say, O God that art my Lord and my husband,
who art to rule and govern me. Yea, and we do find that God gives himself
this name, Es. 54.5. Thy maker is thy husband; the word that is rendered
husband is in the Hebrew Baali. Why then is the use of the word to be taken
away? why, because they had abused the word and given it to Idols ibid p. 556.
. Therefore God promises, that he would take away the name out of their
mouths, that they might have no occasion of returning to Idolatry; That they
might be kept from Idolatry, they must not so much as mention the name of Idols
So Deuteronomy. 25.13, 14. Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse weights, a great and
a small. Thou shall not have in thy house diverse measures, a great and a
small. Why? may some say, was it such a great matter for a man to have a great
and a small weight in his bag? and a great and a small measure in his house?
The thing in it self was not great, so they did not buy and sell by these
weights and measures. But therefore God forbids them, to have the one in their
bag, the other in their house, lest the having them there, should prove a
temptation to them, to bring them also into their scales, and into their shops
to buy and sell by them. God would have us keep off from the occasions of sin.
The best way to prevent falling into a Pit is to keep far enough from it; so
the best way to prevent falling into sin is to keep far enough from the
occasions of it.

Thirdly, company. Avoid intimate familiarity with such, whose society may
corrupt you. Shun such acquaintance, where you can expect no good, but may
receive much hurt. David makes this one character of a Citizen of Zion, that
in his eyes a vile person is contemned. Psa. 15.4. Joseph would not trust
himself in the company of his mistress, lest by her solicitations he might be
drawn to sin; he hearkened not unto her to lie by her, or to be with her. Genesis
39.20. Evil company is very infectious and dangerous, and therefore it is
Solomon's advice, Prove. 22.24.25. Make no friendship with an angry man, and with
a furious man thou shall not go, lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to
thy soul: which words, although they are spoken of an angry man, yet they are
true of all evil company whatsoever. All sinful and unclean societies are
infectious and dangerous societies; either to dissuade from that which is good,
or to persuade to that which is evil. Hence it is that Moses warned the
Israelites, to have nothing to do with the Canaanites, least they should be
misled by their examples, Deuteronomy. 7.1, 2, 3, 4. And when they acted against this
rule, they quickly brake all rules, as you may see, Psalm. 106.35, 36. They were
mingled with the Heathen, and then it immediately follows, and learned their
works. What works were these? Works of art or agriculture? of peace or
war? No such matter, but they were works of false worship and Idolatry, as
appears by the following words; They served their Idols, which were a snare
unto them. Therefore the Lord enjoined them to have no fellowship with them,
least they should learn their ways.

Be persweded therefore, to have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness. Ephesians. 5. and to induce you thereunto, consider that of Solomon, Prove.
13.20. He that walks with wise men shall be wise, but a company of fools
shall be destroyed.

Fourthly, senses. As in a City besieged, they look well to their Gates and
Posternes; so Saints, if they would prevent sin should look to their senses,
which are (as it were) the Gates and Windows of the soul; especially to the
eye, which affects, or rather indeed infects the heart with sin, from
sinne-occasioning Objects.

It is therefore said that Eve saw that the fruit was fair, and to be desired,
and then she did eat. Genesis 3.6. And as elsewhere The Sons of God saw the
daughters of men, that they were fair, and took them wives. Genesis 6.2. And
Tamar, when she had a desire to commit uncleanness with Judah sat (as our
translation has it) in an open place; but it is in Hebrew in the door of
eyes: so called, because it was such a place, where she might be so exposed to
open view (...) In conspectu ommum, locoo patente ubi in omnes parts patet
circumspectio. Paraeus ad loc. Fuit bivium ubi necesse erat ^udam transire,
undecunque veniret, Ea igitur conspecta ille mox libidine accenditur meretricem
ratus, Pareus ubi supra.
, that Judah should not pass that way, but he must of necessity see her, and
seeing her, might be tempted to commit Incest with her.

And it is said Genesis 39.7. that Joseph's Mistress cast her eyes upon Joseph,
and said lie with me. Her eyes infected her heart, and were the bellows, that
blew up such a flame of lust within her Oculi impudici inficiunt cor,
nunciantes ei objecta illicita, quae foris sunt. and borum specie oblata illud
inflammantes; ubi cor est inflammatum oculi porro sunt folles, quibus illicita
cordis desi deri a amplius sufflantur. Paraeus ad Genesis 39.7.
. And you know, that one idle glance upon Bathshebah was the cause of David's
fall, 2 Samuel 11.2, 3, 4. David's wandering eye ushered in those sins, which
afterward cost him broken bones. Hence we read of some, that had eyes full of
adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14. A sin which is in the eye, will quickly be at the heart;
which caused Job to make a covenant with his eyes, that he might not look upon
a maid, Job 31.1. He means, sinfully to lust after her. He knew that there is
a speedy and quick passage from the eye to the heart, though in the fabric of
the body, there seems to be a great distance between them. Therefore (says
he,) I have made a covenant with mine eyes, to avoid occasions of sin, lest
mine eye should pollute my heart with motions unto sin. And upon this account
David prays to God, that he would turn away his eyes from beholding vanity.
Psalm. 119.37.

Fifthly, them. Small breaches in a sea-bank occasions the ruin of the whole,
if not timely discovered and repaired; so sin will gain upon us by insensible
degrees; and those, that are once in the Devils snare, are soon taken by him at
his will and pleasure. Christians should therefore watch against the first
risings of sin, and having discovered them, resist them. Truly there is no
other means can do you good, if this be neglected.

There are but four ways Mr. Ralph Robinson in his Christian completely armed.
p. 47.
can be imagined, whereby we may help our selves when we are assaulted with
temptation; viz. either, 1o First To fly; or 2o Secondly To yield; or 3o
Thirdly To compound: or 4o Fourthly To stand our ground, and make resistance.
Now none of all these, but the last will do us any good.

First, it is to no purpose to fly; intestine enemy. As one said of Solomon,
that though he had no enemy abroad, yet he found one at home Hostem foris non
habbet, domi tamen reperit. Cun. de. rep. Heb. lib. 1.
; so it may be said of us: though we had no enemy without us, (which (such is
our misery) cannot be said of any of us) yet there are many noisome lusts
dwelling in us. which war against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. and are active and
ready to betray us to Satan. Whither therefore can we fly, as long as there
is an enemy within us, and will be within us, as long as we live, and follow us
whithersoever we go?

Secondly, yield, that is the high way to ruin; for sin, when it is finished,
brings forth death, James 1.15. And moreover, if you yield, you put your
selves (as one has well observed) out of the compass of Christ's prayer Mr.
Ralph Robinson, in his Christian complertly armed. p. 47.48
. I have prayed for thee (says Christ to Peter) that thy faith fail not Luke
22.32. Christ does not make intercession for such as yield, but for such as
resist. He prays that the faith of such as make resistance should not fail,
but he does not intercede, that such, as will not fight, should be defended.

Thirdly, Compounding will stand you in as little steed as either of the
former. Lust will never compound, but to your infinite disadvantage, if not to
your destruction. The snares of sin and Satan will in the end prove chains of
darkness.

Fourthly, It remains therefore, resisting is the way to overcome. If you make
a vigorous resistance, Christ will help you to put your feet upon the necks of
those lusts, that war against your souls, and you shall be more than
conquerours, through him that loved you and gave himself for you.

Now in resisting the risings of of sin, let me advise you to follow these
rules.

First, Resist speedily. give no place to the least temptation; oppose sin in
the birth; crush the Cockatrice in the egg. It is easier to keep an enemy out
of a Country, than to beat him out, when once he is gotten in: so it is easier
to keep out sin, than to beat it out. Dangerous diseases may be stopped in
time, which will afterward prove incurable Principiis obsta; sero medicina
paratur, Cum mala per longas invalueremoras. Ovid.
. Sin, if it be timely resisted, may probably prove no more dangerous to us,
than the Viper proved to Paul's hand, when he shook it off into the fire, and
it did him no harm Act. 28.5.
. But if we give way to it, and do not resist it in the first motion, it will
be hard for us to suppress it afterward.

Do you therefore to your sins as Pharaoh gave command to be done to the
Israelites male-children: he would not stay till the children were grown up to
years, but commanded the Midwives to slay them as soon as they were born. This
was a cruel act in him; but thus to deal with your sins will be a merciful
act in you to your souls. What therefore Pharaoh did cruelly against those poor
children, do you prudently against your sins; kill them, when they are in the
birth. That Is the first rule.

Secondly, Let your resistance be universal, you must resist all sin, every
false way. You must combat with all, though you can conquer none, as you
should and would. True hatred is (...), against the whole kind. You should not
therefore, while you frown upon one sin, smile upon another; and while you
thrust some out of doors, hug others in your bosom.

Thirdly, Enter not into a parley or treaty withsin; (...).
.

Lastly, Resist in the strength of Christ. Ephesians. 6.10.
. Fetch in divin strength and assistance; act faith upon the death of Christ,
for the killing of sin in you; and by prayer call in divine help. So much for
the fifth direction, observe the first rising and stirrings of corruption and
resist them.

Sixthly, set the Lord always before you, and walk as in his sight. It was the
grave advice of a Philosopher to his friend Seneca to his friend Lucilius.
, that he should always imagine, some severe Cato, or some other person
eminent for virtue, to be always present with him as overseer and censurers of
all his actions, that hereby he might be keept within compass, and restrained
from vice. And indeed there is much in the eyes of men, to keep men from
breaking forth into sin; yea the satyrist tells us Juvenal.
, that Maxima debetur pueris reverentia -- a man would not commit a gross sin
in the presence of a child. Is not then the pierceing and all-seeing eye of a
sin-revenging God much more sufficient to lay a restraint upon your spirits,
and to cause you to stand in awe, and not to, sin? Certainly this would be a
notable means to preserve you from breaking forth into sinful practices, did
you but seriously consider, that all sins are committed in the presence of a
sin-revenging God, who is able to look the soul of a sinner into Hell, with the
rebuke of his countenance Psalm. 80.16.
.

Seventhly, backsliding, as may be gathered from Jer. 32.4. where you have a
promise in these words, I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me. Hence that precept, Psalm. 4.4. Stand in awe, and sin not.
Indeed this holy fear of God is as a golden bridle to the soul, when it would
run out to any evil. It is like banks to the sea, which keeps in
therageing waves of corruption, when they would overflow all. And therefore in
scripture you have these two put together, fearing God, and eschewing evil,
Job 1.1, 8. Yea, you shall find that Eschewing evil is not only put as an
effect of the fear of God, but it is put into the definition it self of the
fear of God; the fear of the Lord is to hate evil, Pr. 8.13.

Lastly, strengthening grace in Jesus Christ. Therefore when you have the
greatest strength of grace in your selves, yet look beyond your selves unto
Christ, and say still as Jehosaphat did, when he had that great strength of
men, viz. an army 500000 strong, Lord, we know not what to do, only our eyes
are unto thee, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. And then, be your temptations never so violent,
your corruptions never so strong, yet remember, what the Lord said to Paul, 2
Cor. 12.9. My grace is sufficient for thee; sufficient to subdue thy
corruptions, sufficient to secure thy heart against the volence of Satan's
temptations. Therefore look up to Christ; commit your way unto him, and watch
and pray, that you enter not into temptation Mat. 26.41.
. So much for the use of Caution.

Thirdly, exhortation.

First, sinful state. Never look back upon Sodom, but with detestation, and
bless God that you are escaped; and be thankful to the Lord, who has given
you counsel in your reins Psalm. 16.7.
. You might have remained under the reign and dominion of sin, and have gone on
after the counsels of your own hearts to this day, had not the Lord graciously
turned you out of that way. Oh! belsse God, that has overpowered your souls,
and made you willing in the day of his power, to forsake your sinful ways, so
that although sin dwells in you, yet it reigns not as in times past. Oh!
bless God that has given you counsel, and caused you to understand aright.
Certainly, this is no other but a beam of divine light darted into your souls;
certainly this is no other, than a voice from Heaven that has said unto you,
This is the way, walk ye in it

Secondly, Romans, at large complained of the remainders of sin in him, of the
Law in his members, that warred against the law in his mind; after he had
cried out, oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of
death? verse 24. then he is presently rapt up in admiration of the justifying
grace of God by the righteousness of Jesus Christ; I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord, verse. 25. and then chap. 8. verse 1. he makes that
triumphant conclusion, There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus. A worthy divine now alive Dr. Tho. Goodwine in his trial of a
Christians growth, p. 47.
in a treatise by him published, observes an Emphasis in that little word
[now,] mark (says he) that word [now,] that [now] after such bloody wounds and
gashes, there should yet be no condemnation, this exceedingly exalts this
grace: for if ever, thought he I was in danger of condemnation, it was upon the
riseing and rebelling of these my corruptions, which, when they had carried me
captive, I might well have expected the sentence of condemnation to have
followed; but I find, says he, that God still pardones me, and accepts me, as
much as ever, upon my returning to him; and therefore do proclaim with wonder
to all the world, that Gods justifying grace in Christ is exceeding large and
rich. Thus far the aforesaid Author.

My beloved, this must needs extol the justifying grace of Christ, that where
there is so much matter of condemnation, there should not be condemnation it
self; that not only all the sins of the elect of God before conversion are
pardoned, but sins after regeneration; and though we run upon new scores every
day, yet these should be still paid, and that there should be riches of grace
enough, and merit enough to pardon us, this exceedingly advances the
justifying grace of God, and the righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, establishing grace. This is indeed a great wonder, that a child of
God should have so much corruption left in him, and that that corruption should
not destroy grace, but that this heavenly plant should thrive in the midst of
weeds; and this spark be kept alive in the midst of a sea of corruption. Our
first parents had no sinful nature in them, and yet being tempted by the Devil
they fell; but now, that believers, who have both a tempting Devil without, and
a corrupt nature within, should stand, and not fall away, this is the Lords
doing, and it should be marvelous in our eyes Psalm. 118.23.
. That we should be kept by the mighty power of God through faith unto
salvation 1 Pet. 1.
, that we should have such strong corruptions within us, warring against our
souls, and yet not be finally overcome by them, this magnifieth the
establishing grace of God. Grace cannot perserve it self, of its felfe, in the
midst of so much corruption. We should quickly turn bankrupts; and lose not
only degrees, of grace, but all grace, were it left in our own hands.

But that corruption, that dwells in us, and our frequent falls, may teach
us, that it is as as necessary, for God to afford us his preserving grace, to
continue what we had given us, as his preventing grace to give us what we had
not. The body of sin dwelling in us, may mind us, that it is by grace we
stand; that were we left to our selves, we should soon do as our Father Adam
did. There is naturally the same revolting spirit in us, that there was in him,
an aptness and inclination of heart ready to depart away, Jer. 5.23. And we
have the same enemy, the same tempter, to draw us away with the like
temptations: and in those, that are not preserved by the mighty power of God,
these things scil. corruption within, and temptation without, do prevail so
far, as to turn back many, who seemed to begin in the spirit, and to cause
them to make an end in the flesh Gal. 3.3.
, and to return with the dog to his former vomit, and with the sow, that is
washed, to her wallowing in the mire 2 Pet. 2.22.
. It is by grace we stand 2 Co. 1.24.
, and should God but with draw the supply of his spirit and the instuences
thereof from our souls, we should be obnoxious and liable to all assaults, not
of flesh and blood, but of principalities and powers, and spiritual wicked
nesses in high places, and open to all the furious attempts, and all the fiery
darts of the wicked. Therefore bless God for establishing and preserving grace.

Fourthly, disappointments, that you meet withal in the ways of sin. Truly
there is not a sadder judgment in the world, than for God to suffer us to go
on in sin without restraint; and it is as great a mercy, when God is pleased to
lay stumbling blocks in our way, to hinder us in any course of sin. It is
promised as a mercy to the Church, that she should meet with disappointments in
the ways of sin. She shall follow after her lovers but shall not overtake
them, and she shall seek them but shall not find them, Hos. 2.7. As
satisfaction in sin is a great judgment, whence that threatening, the
backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, Prove. 14.14. So
disappointment in sin is a great mercy. We should not therefore be troubled,
but bless God, when we cannot have our wills. It is a mercy, when carnal
desires are disappointed. Therefore God would have Abimelech acknowledge mercy
in a restraint. I withheld thee from sinning against me, therefore suffered I
thee not to touch her, Genesis 20.6. And David blessed God for preventing his
intended execution of his revenge against Naball, when he said to Abigail;
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me; and
blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from
coming to shed blood, and from avenging my self with mine own hand etc. 1 Samuel 25.32, 33, 34.

Lastly, mortification. Sin dwells in us, and it will dwell in us, while we
live. Therefore what St. Paul says of himself in another case, 1 Cor. 15.31. I
dye daily; so let us in respect of our sins dye daily. Let us not look upon
mortification, as the work of a day, or a month, or a year, but of our whole
life time. Let us therefore continue our endeavors therein, and make a daily
progress in this work, and every day labor to weaken the body of sin more and
more, praying against it, and watching against it, and striveing against it in
the strength of Christ. So much for the use of exhortation.

Lastly, Consola.
who are apt to be cast down and disquieted in their spirits by reason of the
remainders of corruption in them, and their frequent falls into sin.

Besides what has been already spoken, in the explication of the Doctrine,
that though sin does remain in believers in respect of its inherence, and its
infectious nature, and its seduceing power; yet they are freed from it in
respect of its dominion, guilt, and condemning power; and besides what has
been spoken before, concerning the difference between the infirmities of
Saints, and the falls of wicked men, which may conduce much to the comfort of
the people of God under their failings and infirmities; I shall now subjoyn
three or four other comfortable considerations, with which I shall put a period
to this discourse.

First, Sin cannot separate Saints from the love of God. If any thing in the
world could quench and extinguish the flame of Gods love to a believing soul,
that which carries in it the greatest contrariety to Gods holy and heavenly
nature must needs do it; and that is sin. But sin cannot do it. A state of
sin, before regeneration could not do it; much less shall an act of sin, now
you are in a state of grace, be able to effect it. For their is more malignity
in a state of sin, than in an act of sin. Now (says the Apostle) God
commends his love to us; in that when we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for
us, Rom 5.8. If God love sinners, while sinners; then suerly his love to Saints
cannot be broken off by sin. If the time of their blood was the time of his
love, as Ezck. 16.6. then surely his love to them, when Saints is invincible,
inviolable: he may (indeed) visit their iniquities with stripes, and their
transgressions with rods (it is a branch of his Covenant, Psalm. 89.30, 31.)
never thelesse his loving kindness will he not utterly take from them, nor
suffer his faithfulness to fail.

Secondly, is in his Saints, notwithstanding their sins. Indeed men are apt so
to mind their vices, that they forget their virtues; a little evil makes men
forget abundance of good. Men are apt to pitch only upon the weaknesses and
failings of of the people of God, and to overlook what is good in them; like
flies, that pitch upon the sore, and like vultures, that fly over the
pleasantest garden and pitch upon carrion; so wicked men watch for the haltings
of Gods people, and feed their malice with their failings.

But God takes notice of a little good in the midst of abundance of evil; of a
little gold in the midst of abundance of oar; of a little wheat in the midst
of abundance of chafe. And it is worth our choicest observation, that when the
Spirit of God in the Scripture gives us the characters of Saints, he hides
their failings, and takes notice only of their graces. I will give you a few
instances. If you look into Genesis 18.12. you shall find that Sarahs speech was
full of distrust and unbelief, shall I have pleasure my Lord also being old?
There was but one word, that of Lord, the note of rever ence and respect to her
husband, and that the holy Ghost elsewhere takes notice of 1 Pet. 3.6. she
called Abraham Lord.

And although Moses was sometimes passionate; yet the holy Ghost styles him
the meekest man upon the face of the earth, Numb. 12.3. Now the man Moses was
very meek, above all the men that were upon the face of the earth. And in Heb.
11.31. There is no mention of Rahabs lie, but only of her faith and peaceable
behavior toward the spies. David fell fearfully, and that more than once (as
you have heard before) and yet you may see, what a character God gave of him;
viz. that he kept his commandments, and followed the Lord with all his heart,
etc. 1 King. 14.8. Asa also had his great imperfections, and yet when an
account is given of his reign, the holy Ghost gives him this high encomium,
The heart of Asa was perfect all his days. 2 Chronicles. 15.17. So Job, The holy
Ghost says concerning him, J^m. 5.11 Ye have heard of the patience of Job.
Yes, and we have heard of his impatience too in cursing his day Job 2. But this
is not mentioned. Job was patient for the main, though sometimes the extremity
of his suffering extorted from him some expressions of impatience. Indeed where
the bent of the heart is right, the infirmities of Gods people are not
mentioned. He that drew the picture of Alexander, while he had a scarre in his
face, painted him with his finger upon the scarre; so God is graciously pleased
to put the finger of his mercy upon the scarres of his people. What a precious
cordial may this be, for the sinking and fainting hearts of Gods children,
mourning under the sense of their corruption? Heoverlooketh what is theirs in
them, and takes notice only of what is his own; and when he comes to weigh
them in the balance of the Sanctuary, he leaves out their corruptions, and
puts nothing into the scales, but their graces. He hides his eyes from what is
sinful, and takes notice only of what is good in them.

Thirdly, Heb. 7.25. Hence it is, that he is also called an Advocate, in that
comfortable Scripture, 1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the
father even Jesus Christ, the righteous. He is entered in within the veil Heb
6.19, 20.
, and there he appears before God, and pleads the causes of his people,
presenting his own merit unto his father, the merit of his death and passion,
whereby he has made (...) full satisfaction to divine Justice for all their
sins. It is upon this account, that the blood of Christ (...) said to speak
better things than the blood of Abel Heb. 12.24.
. Abels blood plead^ against Cain crying for vengeanc^ Genesis 4.10. The voice of
thy brother blood cries unto me from the ground, to wit, for vengeance. It is
as much as if the Lord had said, although there be none else to accuse thee,
yet the innocent blood of thy brother Abel which thou have shed, does speak,
yea cry aloud for vengeance Etsi nomo hominum te accuset, quippe cum nemo tri
sceleris fit conscius: tam^n est qui te accus^t apud me, videlicet itse sauguis
fra tris tui, ^^nocenter per te s^su^. Iste, inquam sanguis lo quitur coram me,
vindictam sui a me tanquam justo judice postulavi. ^isca^. in Genesis 4.10.
. But now the blood of Christ has a voice too, and that speaks better things
than the blood of Abel. The blood of Christ pleads for the Saints, crying not
for vengeance, but for mercy and pardon for them Non vindictam clamat, sed
veniam. Pataeus ad loc. Sanguis Abel vindictam loquebatur, -- Sanguis autem
Christi melius loquitur quia veniam loquitur and gratiam. Estius ad lo^.
, and by this means they are freed from the accusation and condemnation of the
Law, whereunto otherwise by reason of renewed transgressions, they do every
day, become obnoxious. And hence it is, that Paul throws down the gaunt-let (as
it were) and makes that triumphant challenge, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies. Who is he that condemns? It
is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes intercession for us, Romans 8.33, 34.

Lastly, David, Woe is me that I dwell in Mesech, that I sojourn in the tents
of Kedar, Psalm. 120.5. How long shall I be pestered with this troublesome
inmate? And with the Apostle, Oh wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me
from this body of death, Romans 7.24. But at death Saints shall be delivered from
sin. When the body of flesh dies, this body of death shall be quite destroyed.
Corruption shall be then totally destroyed, when this mortal shall put on
immortality, and this corruptible shall put on incorruption 1 Cor. 15.53.
The Saints shall never after death be proud more; nor grieve the Spirit of God
more; nor have cause any more to complain of the hardness of their hearts, and
the earthliness of their minds, and the vanity of their thoughts. Their sins
may accompany them to death, but they cannot proceed one step further.

It is with the people of God in this life, as it was with the people of
Israel; they were delivered from their Egyptian Taskmasters, and that was a
sweet mercy to them; but presently they see them at their heels, and upon their
backs again, and this was exceeding bitter, and therefore the Lord to comfort
them tells them, Exodus 14.13. Those Egyptians, whom ye have seen to day, ye
shall see them again no more for ever. So that it is with the the children of
God in reference to their sins; they are delivered from the bondage of their
sins; but yet their sins may trouble them, and put them into frights, and raise
in them many imbondageing thoughts of fear afterward; but yet at death their
deliverance shall be completed, and then they may stand upon the shore of the
other world, and see all these Egyptians drowned in the red sea of Christ's
blood, and may say in the highest triumph and exultation of Spirit, concerning
sin and Satan, and whatsoever else has the face or deserves to bear the name
of a mystical Egyptian; These Egyptians which we have seen and felt so often
in the days of our mortality, we shall not feel, nor so much as see them again
for ever. Consider what I have said and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

FINIS.
Through the Authors absence, many faults have escaped the Press. The smaller
literal mistakes and mispointings they indulgence (I hope) will pardon. Other
more material mistakes, thou art desired to correct with thy pen.
Errata. PAge 1. line penult read Brethren. p. 3. l. 16. r. precedent. ib. l.
26. r. sufficient. p. 5. l. 17. r. reasons. p. 9. l. 21. r. condemning. p. 10.
l. 15. r. pardoning. p. 12. l. 4. r. Christ's. ib. l. 26. r. Scripture. p. 14.
l. 2. r. there. ib. l. 5. r. there. p. 15. l. 24, and 25. r. finally. p. 16. l.
10. r inhaerens. p. 18. l. 15. r. into. p. 20. l. antep^nult r wherein. p. 21.
l. 22. dele also. p. 22. l. 9. r. permits. ib. l. 22 r. r^doundeth. p. 23. l.
24. r righteousness. p. 24. l. antepenult. r. as I. p. 15. l. 2. r. confident.
p. 31. l. 13. r servants. p. 32. l. 20. r. lusts. p. 33. l. 13. r. imperious.
ib. l. 18. r. heartily. l. 20. r. he. p. 34. l. 24. for after, r against p. 38.
l. 3. r sins. p. 41. l. 8. r. practices. p. 43. l. 3. r. fatigatus. p. 47 l. 4.
dele us. ib. l. 6. r. absolute l. 23. for Doct. r. Use p. 48. l. 22. r. there.
p. 50. l. 16. r. faithful. ^b. l. 22. r. Pharaoh. p. 51. l 22. r. attainable.
p. 58. l. 25. r therefore. p. 64. l. 15 r. there p 66 l 22. r dear p. 67. l.
10. r poenae p. 68. l. 16 r fullfilled p. 76. l. 12. r smallness. p. 78. l. ^
r. Saints. ib. l. 7 r. grievous. p. 8^. l. 5. r. thee. p. 84. l. 12. r.
jealousy. p. 85. l. 6. presented. l. antepenult. r. example. p. 86 l. 3. r.
being there, resolved. p. 90 l. 16. r. companion. p. 91. l. 3. d^le as. ib. l.
8 r sat. p. 93. l. 2. r occasion. p. 97. l. 25. r. might. ib l 26 r. divine p.
98 l. 14. r. overscers. ib l. 16. r kept. ^ult. dele comma. p. 100. l.
antepenult. r. violence. p. 101. l. 22. r. bless. p. 110. l. 8. r there ib. l.
14. r surely.

In the margin. ^ag. 6. r semiruta. p. 12. r Newcomen p. 15. r. mystical 16.
r. (...). p 20. r concupiscentiam. p. 32. r. (...). il r. cons^etudo. p. 56. l
penult. r ut p. 64. r. sapiamus p. 67. r pae^ tents ib r poena. ib. r.
castigatoria. ib. r. Daven. ib r. Cant p. 77. r Tert. p. 90. r loco. p. 93. r.
hab. bat. p. 94 r. complea^


