(...) HEAVEN and HELL EPITOMIZED. THE TRUE CHRISTIAN Characterized. AS ALSO An
Exhortation with Motives, Means, and Directions to be speedy and serious about
the work of Conversion. By George Swinnocke M. A. sometime fellow of Baliol
College in Oxford, and now Preacher of the Gospel at Rickmersworth in
Hertfordshire.

I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before
you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that both thou
and thy seed may live, Deuteronomy. 30.19

Accidiosi erubescere possunt qui non tam diligenter laborant ad impetrandum
gaudium coeli, sicut multi impiorum laborant ad impetrandum poenam inferni.
Fabritius indestruct. Vitior. part. 5. cap. 2.

Creed, Stude, Vive, Pinge Aeternitati. Cor. A Lapid.

London, Printed by E. M. for Tho. Parkhurst, and are to be sold at the Sign of
the three Crowns at the lower end of Cheapside, over against the Conduit, 1659.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL And my esteemed Friend RICHARD BERESFORD Esquire, Justice of
the Peace for the Liberty of St. Albans in the County of Hertford, and Clarke
of the Pleas in his Highness Court of Exchequer.
Worthy Sir,
THis small Treatise (part whereof was lately preached in your ears at the
Funeral of your dear Mother presents it self to your eyes, not for your
protection (Divine Truths desire none from men, and humane errors deserve none
from any) but for your direction. It contains that in it, which is able to
make you wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

You have a double right to the dedication of this book; partly in regard of
the occasion of it; partly in regard of the Authors obligation unto you, which
is great, for your liberality, but far greater for your encouraging of, and
exemplariness in the truth and life of Christianity.

I did not think my self a little bound to that Providence, which gave you
Relation to our Parish; and I suppose not without cause, when the power of
godliness has few such considerable Patrons. There is scarce one of a
thousand, cui praesens faeticitas si arrisit, non irrisit. Bern. lib. 2. de
consolat.
Men of your rank, though sometimes (to stop the mouth of conscience, or for
their credit) they take up a form and profession, yet do usually neglect, if
not cursedly deride the strictness and power of Religion. They are too often
like the Moon farthest from, and in most direct opposition unto the Sun of
Righteousn sse, when they are at the full of outward plenty, and receive most
light of Divine bounty from him: their carnal hearts, as the Sea, turn the
showers of mercies from heaven, and fresh streams from the earth, into the salt
waters of corruption. In our natural bodies, the more fat there is, the less
blood in the veins, and by consequence the fewer spirits. Greatness and
Goodness are beautiful and happy, Quies has no plural number; God seldom
gives two Heavens. Tamen aliquando Christus voluit Reginam in coelum vebere
says Luther of Elisabeth Queen of Denmark. Luth. in Epist ad Jo Agric.
but rare conjunctions. You know who has said, Not many such are called, 1
Cor. 1.26. And experience teaches us, that they are like Stars of the first
Magnitude thinly scattered in the Firmament of a Country. How much therefore
are you engaged to that distinguishing love, which enableth you to look after
the things of a better life!

I shall take the liberty (which I know you will give) to speak a few words to
you in your twofold capacity.

First as you are a Christian; and herein my counsel will be, that you would
more and more ensure your effectual calling. We say, where men intend to live
long, they build strong. I am confident all that you are worth, for your
endless condition in the other world, depends under Christ upon your inward
change. And if ever any wyers had need to be firm and strong, then
questionless they upon which such heavy weights hang, as your eternal
unchangeable estate.

You have a large room in the hearts of many that are holy: But alas Sir, the
best man's confidence of me would prove but a bad evidence for heaven: He is not
approved whom man commends, but whom the Lord commends.

The great affection which you bear to the souls of the people, amongst whom
you were born, is worthy of imitation: And so is your care and cost in
scattering some practical home-treatises in several families (whereby souls may
be converted, and wherein you may have comfort at the day of Christ) for
soul-charity is the soul of charity; but the best charity begins at home,
though it never ends there; your main business lies within your own doors, to
make sure that good work within you, which shall be perfected hereafter.

The ordinary security which most men trust to, will not serve when they come
in the other life, to lay their claims, and show their deeds for the
inheritance of the Saints in light. Many flaws will then be found in their
evidences, which now through their wilful blindness they neither see nor fear.
Pa^lens aurum melius est qu^m fulgens aurichalcum. Bern.
He had need to have armor of proof that would enter the list with his enemy
Death, and not be foiled. The heart not ballasted with renewing grace, may hold
out in the calm of life, and shallows of time; but when it meets with the storm
of death, and launcheth into the Ocean of eternity, it suffers a desperate
and everlasting shipwreck. The want of this is the leak which sinketh many a
precious vessel (soul I mean) in the gulf of perdition.

There is as much difference between a nominal and a real Christian, as between
a liveless picture and a living person. True Christianity, which consists in
the souls humble unfeigned acceptance of, and hearty resolved dedication unto
Christ, as Savior and Sovereign, is a Paradox to most. There are many
Christians (as Salvian complained in his time) without Christ, Christiani sine
Christo. Salv.
but they which know experimentally what the sanctification of the holy Ghost
means, are few indeed. The Moralist in his best dress of civility, the
Formalist in his gaudy attire of ceremonies, and the hypocrite in all his
royalty, is not arrayed like one of these. I do not write these things as in
the least suspecting your sincerity, but to quicken you to a godly jealousy
over your own soul. If the Apostles and Disciples needed such rousing cautions,
Take heed least that day come upon you unawares, Luke 21.34. Take heed least
any man fail of the grace of God, Heb. 12.15. then much more you and I, who are
more drowsy and prone to slumber, do require awakening considerations.

Secondly, As you are a Magistrate. And that relation calls upon you to be
very exemplary among men, and exceeding active for God*

Man is a creature which is led more by the eye than the ear, by patterns than
precepts. Great men therefore which are copies, after which many write, had
need to be exact. You are the looking-glasses by which others dress
themselves; the heads of the people, Deuteronomy. 1.15. now the whole body will go
along with the head.

Qui in excelso a gunt, eorum facta cuncti mortales n^vere Salust. ad Cae^arem.
You are like Beacons upon an hill, visible to all. The Sun may as soon go
unseen, as a Justice unobserved. A small Star may be darkened, and none take
notice of it; but if the great Luminaries are eclipsed or obscured, a thousand
eyes will be gazing on them. A little spot in silk or scarlet is more looked
on, than a great one in russet or sackcloth. A crack in a pebble is nothing so
eyed or prejudicial, as a small flaw in a jewel. Corruption optimi pessima.
Satan does therefore plant his strongest batteries against the Royal Forts of
Magistracy and Ministry (whoever are spared, David and Peter shall be sifted)
knowing that he gains a double advantage by their miscarriage, example and
scandal; by which two wings it will soar higher, and fly much farther An
ordinary Tradesmon may prove bankrupt without much noise; but if an Alderman or
Merchant that had a name for a great estate breaks, the the City and Country
ring of it. The honor of God and credit of the Gospel are much engaged in the
carriage of a Magistrate that is a Professor. The many eyes that look upon you,
the many feet that follow after you, and the glory of the blessed God which is
concerned in you, do all call aloud to you, to have your eyes in your head (as
the wise man's phrase is, Eccles. 2.14. to make straight paths for your feet,
and to walk nobly, exactly, worthy of the Lord, even unto all well-pleasing.

Besides, your very place is apt to be a snare and temptation, and therefore
requires the greater care and circumspection. Places of honor and power are
like strong meats, which being well concocted yield much good nourishment
(bring much glory to God and good to souls) but they are of very hard
digestion. He must have a strong brain that will bear much wine, and he much
grace that will walk humbly and closely with God in an high condition.

Your Office calls upon you to be zealous for God, as well as a pattern of
piety to your neighbors. So Mr. Pemble in loc.
Eccl. 7.16. Be not righteous overmuch, is the voice of carnal and corrupt
reason, which inciteth to an indifferency in good courses, and politic
forbearance of forwardness in piety. Such is the judgment of carnal policy,
that our very duty is but overmuch and needless preciseness. Moderation is
commendable in all things but Religion, because therein there can be no
excess. The lukewarm temper is of all others most loathsome to the Divine
Nature, Rev, 3.16. You should not think it below you, to be diligent in finding
out, and strict in punishing those that would debase God, by the breach of his
Laws, profanation of his day, and abuse of his Creatures. To serve the Lord is
your greatest honor. Jesus Christ humbled himself more for you: or O how low
had you been laid long ere this!

You have begun well with your honored John Beresford Esquire, one of the
Justice of the Peace for the same Liberty.
Uncle, my loving Friend, to beat up those headquarters of hell, Alehouses. I
wish you both an happy progress, and their ungodly disorders a speedy
conclusion. Foolish pity to men's sins is the greatest cruelty to their souls:
Favor or connivence encourages them in their rebellions, encourages them in
their reb^llions, and increases their corruptions, and thereby furthereth
their damnation; when the faithful wounds of wholesome severitie (if God have any
sanctifying or saving mercy for them) may reform and heal them. You cannot
easily do them a greater injury, than to let them alone in their enormities.
One of the greatest strokes that ever Israel felt from ^he hand of God, was not
to be stricken, Isai. ^.5.

Some Magistrates are like Mountains and Cypress trees, high and barren; but
God has ^ron hands for Justices that have leaden heels, and will shortly
strike them home for forswear^ng themselves to spare others. He will be a
^error to them, and make them terrors to themselves, who will not at his
command be terrors to ^vil doers. They are guilty of all the sins which they
can and do not hinder. They sin in others, whilst they suffer them to sin:
Vitia aliorum si feras, facis tua; And they that are partakers of others sins,
if we will believe the God of Truth, shall receive of their plagues, Rev. 18.4.
Some show at this day, that they accept such places to honor not God, but
themselves; and they shall know one day, that it were better offending all
their neighbors, nay all the world, than one God.

I suppose you do not wonder, that the cruel Lion roareth when he is disturbed
of his rest, nor that vicious men rage because they may not without some rubs
ruin their souls. Our Naturalists observe truly, that beasts hate fire: And so
do men of heastly principles and practices that heavenly fire zeal. The Dogs
will bark and fly at the Moon, not always when she shines, but when by
reason of the clouds hurried under by the winds, she seems to run faster than
ordinary. The wicked world can well enough endure a cursed neutrality, or (as
they term it) a prudential policy; Bona ^gere and mala pati Regium est.
but to serve the Lord with fervencie of spirit, is not more acceptable to God,
than abominable to them.

If they cannot make you wound your conscience, Didicit ille maledicere, and
ego contemnere said the Philosopher.
(according to the subtilty of the Serpent) they will wound your credit; but a
godly man's name is like an oyled post, on which such dirt will not stick. Their
good word might be a disgrace to you, and give you cause to reflect upon your
self (as that Heathen did) and say, What evil have I done, that such a
graceless fellow commends me? But their bad word^ does no more now, than the
treading with dirty feet on figures engraven in brass, which are thereby
rendered more bright and glorious. And hereafter you shall see a resurrectirn of
names as well as of bodies, when Christ will make the sinner pay back the stolen
rep^tation ^f his seevants with interest.

David was the song of the drunkards, and the scorn of the gluttons; and the
Son of David, that pattern of patterns, Luke 2.34.
was set for a sign to be spoken against, and endured the contradiction of
sinners, Hebr. 12.3. I hope you set your watch not by the Parish clock, but by
the dial of scripture, which ever goes true with the Sun of Righteousness.

In a word, your time is little, your work is great; your talents are many,
your account will be weighty; your Savior observes every moment how tender
you are of his honor, that was so tender of your eternal welfare; how you
testify your thankfulness to him, for all the bitter agony, and ignominy,
which he suffered for you. You shall shortly never more have the least
opportunity (though you would give a thousand worlds for it) to do any thing
in, for Gods glory, your own or others good. Work therefore the work of him
that sent you into the world, while it is the day of your life, for the night
of death is hastening on you, wherein you cannot work: Up and be doing, as a
Christian, as a Magistrate, and the Lord be with you.

Sir, I have no more to speak to you, but that the Hearer of prayers may hear
often from you, that I may take heed to the ministry which I have received of
the Lord, and fulfill it, and to assure you, that my prayers at the throne of
grace shall be, that you and your religious Consort may continue to dwell
together as fellow heirs of the grace of life; and your hopeful Children may be
planted with, and grow up in grace, till they shall be transplanted into the
true Paradise, the Kingdom of Glory. This, through the help of heaven, shall
be the petition of

Your real Servant in the ever blessed Savior, George Swinnocke.
Febr. 15. 1658./9.
Christian Reader,
THere are two thing which should be of highest regard with us, a serviceable
life, and a comfortable death; and they are both so inseparably conjoined, that
in vain do we hope for the one without the other; which of these is to be
preferred, was a doubt, which put the Apostle to an Anxious disquisition; on
the one side there was service, on the other side there was gain; if he lived
he should preach Christ; if he dyed he should enjoy Christ; and remain with him
for ever; therefore Paul was at a stand, and knew not what to determine; Surely
he had an holy heart that could thus set duty against enjoyment, and think his
service worthy to come into competition with his spiritual and eternal
interests! that which made Paul so indifferent and incurious, as to the means,
was the resolved fixing of his scope, his end and scope was Christ's glory* now
'twas all one to him how God would use him to such a purpose, as a man that is
resolved upon a journey, takes the way as he finds it, fair or foul, it is
enough that it leads him to his journeys end; so Christ might be glorified,
either by his Ministry; or by martyrdom, Paul was indifferent, 'twas enough
that Christ should be glorified; none have such an unfeighned respect to
Christ's glory, but those that live in the communion of his life; men's tendency
is according to the principle by which they are acted, carnal men that act by
their own life, and live upon their own root, bring forth fruit to themselves;
water rises no higher than its fountain; but those that have life from Christ
use it for him, to them to live is Christ, as they live in him and by him, so
they live for him and to him. We need then to take all occasions to press men
to get into Christ, that they may live in the communion of his life, and in the
strength and influence of it be carried out to his glory; this is that which
will make life serviceable, and death sweet; and to this we need to be pressed
by all kind of arguments, both those which are taken from Gods relation to us;
as also those which are taken from our expectations from him, Romans 14.8. We are
the Lords by every kind of right and title, and therefore owe all manner of
service to him, even though nothing should come of it; but they that do the
Lords work will not want his wages, though he might require our service out of
mere sovereignty, yet he condescendeth to propound a reward, and that so full
and ample, that it should ravish our hearts every time we think of it. These
considerations which I have here loosely discoursed of, are notably improved in
the ensuing treatise, which being communicated to me by a friend of the Author,
I could not but return it with this Character, that it is a discourse grave and
judicious, and yet quickened with such warmth and vigor of illustration, as
that it may be of great use to awaken men unto more seriousness in the great
concernments of their souls, among which nothing can be more momentous than our
living in Christ, that we may live to him, and then with him for evermore; this
being signified, I leave thee to the work it self, (which I cannot but judge to
proceed from one, both of a good head and heart) and profess my self

Thine in the service of the Gospel Tho. Manton.

THE PREFACE and EPISTLE TO THE READER, Especially of the Parish of
Rickmersworth in Hertfordshire, and Borden in Kent; as also the occasion of
this Treatise.
I Have sometime considered with my self, (not without some remorse and grief
of spirt) the multitudes of men and women, that even in those places, where the
Word of God is plainly and powerfully taught, run headlong in the broad way
which leads to destruction. And indeed if my head were waters, and mine eyes
a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night (though every tear were a
tear of blood) I could never sufficiently bewail the slain of the daughter of
my people, of that Parish to which the providence of God has called me.

That the lying vanities of this world should by most be so greedily pursued,
and the real mercies relating to a better world, so wretchedly despised: that
a brutish flesh, which must shortly be food for worms, should be so highly
prized, and constantly gratified; and an angelical spirit, the soul which must
live for ever, so basely slighted and unworthily neglected: that every
soul-damning lust should be so heartily embraced; and the soul-saving Lord but
coldly and complementally entertained: that the road to Hell should be so
exceedingly filled, and the way to Heaven almost wholly unoccupied. Surely this
ought to be for a bitter lamentation; and O what sea of blood is enough to
bemoan this horrid wickedness!

It has seemed to me therefore a matter worthy of diligent enquiry, what
special Malefactors should be indicted for these many soul-mischeifs, and
soul-murders, which are committed amongst us. And truly by that acquaintance
which I have with the Word of God, and experience of the soul-affairs of men, I
find, though many Accessaries might be named, that ignorance ought to be
arraigned and condemned as one of the principals. The people perish for want of
knowledge, Hos. 4.6, Inner darkness is the beaten path to utter darkness, to
the blackness of darkness for ever. Men in this mist of ignorance (like ships)
run upon those rocks which split them eternally. As the Indians prefer every
toy and trifle before their Mines of Gold; so they, every sensual sinful
pleasure, every foolish perishing creature, before the beautiful Image of God,
the unsearchable riches in Christ, the endless happiness in Heaven; because
they know not the vanity and emptiness of the former, the excellency and
pretiousness of the latter. Did men know the gift of God, and who it is that
speaks to them, Ignoti nulla cu^ido.
and what he offers, they would ask of him, and he would give them living
waters, John 4.10.

What is the reason, that so many make a mock of sin, and dance merrily over
the infernal pit, and play with the unquenchable fire, but ignorance? The Child
does not know that the fire will burn him. As the Horse they rush into the
battle (fighting against God and their souls) not knowing it will be to their
destruction, to their damnation. These Balaams run greedily after the wages of
unrighteousness, not seeing the Angel that stands in the way with a drawn
sword in his hand ready to kill them. Did they know what they do, when they
wilfully break Gods Law, they would sooner leap into a furnace of scalding
lead, than provoke so jealous a God. But sin goes in a disguise, and thence is
welcome; like Judas, it kisseth and kills; like Joab, it salutes and slayes. The
foolish sinner sees the pleasant streams of Jordan, but not the dead Sea,
into which they will certainly empty themselves to his ruin.

What is the reason that the Devil carries so many captive at his will,
leads them whither he pleases, but ignorance? They are ignorant of his
wiles, of his devices: they know not (as drunken Lot of his Daughters) when he
comes, nor when he goes. The Prince of darkness takes up his throne in dark
understandings. The god of this world blinds their minds, 2 Cor. 4.4. least
the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them. How easy is
it for him to lead blind men out of the way, and then to destroy them! as Pliny
says, the Eagle deals with the Heart, she lights upon his horns, and there
flutters up and down filling his eyes with dust, born in her feathers, that at
last he may cast himself from the rock, and so be made a prey unto her: so the
wicked one binds a muffler before men's eyes, and then turns them off the
ladder and executes them.

What is the cause of men's scandalous practices but ignorance? The dark corners
of the earth ar^ full of the habitations of cruelty, Psalm. 74.20. The
floodgates of wickedness are open, when the door of knowledge is shut; the
cause why there was no mercy, nor truth in the land, but swearing, and lying,
and stealing, comitting adultery, and blood touching blood, was ignorance, Hos.
4.1, 2. This is the root of bitterness on which those cursed fruits grow. This
is the blind Captain, which like Zilpah has a Gad, a troop of enormities
following him. Paul thanks ignorance for his blasphemy and persecuting the
Church, 1 Timothy 1.13. The reason why the heathen did not call on God, was
because they did not know him, Psalm. 79.6. The most ugly and monstrous
wickedness, which ever was hatched or brought forth, calls ignorance mother.
Had they known, they would never have crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8.
Act. 3.15.17. What Augustine says of Original sin, is (in some respects) true
of Ignorance, it is peccatum, poena peccati, and causa peccati; It is a sin as
contrary to the law of God which requires men to know him, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Lev.
5.15.18. It is the punishment of sin as the fruit of our apostasy from God; It
is the cause of sin, as toads and serpents grow in dark cellars; as blind
Alehouses are sinks and sources of all villainies, so are dark and blind hearts.
They are strangers to the life of God through the ignorance that is in them,
Ephesians 4.18.

Ignorantiae ^uae pessimaefiliae, Falsitas and Dubietas, Aug. de c^vit. d^i l.
22. c. 22.
What is the cause of men's erroneous principles but ignorance? They err, not
knowing the Scriptures, Mat. 22.29. Impostors like cozening tradesmen, when
they have men in a dark shop, put what rotten deceitful ware they please into
their hands; they lead captive silly women, that are ever learning and never
coming to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7. Heretics like nurses may
put meat or poison into their mouths who are babes in understanding; they that
are children in knowledge will be tossed to and fro with every wind of
doctrine. The blind man eats many a fly, and the ignorant man swallows many
an error. Men will easily be brought to deny the truths which they understand
not, and to speak evil of the things which they know not, Jude verse. 10. Simul
ac desinunt ignorare, desinunt odisse, says Tertullia^ (in apolog.) of them
that condemned the Christian Religion.

What is the reason that men put God off, either with no service or worship at
all, or else with a few cold superficial lazy duties, without either heat or
life, but their ignorance? They know not the Majesty, purity, jealousy, and
severity of God; they worship they know not whom, and therefore they worship
him they care not how; their Altars are of any slight form or fashion, because
(like the Athenians) they are dedicated to the unknown God; they that know not
their masters will, cannot obey it. Some cry up their good meanings to excuse
their ignorance; but ignorant devotion is like feet without eyes, which the
farther they carry men, the greater is their wandering and woe.

What is the reason that men take up short of Christ, and renewing grace, that
they please themselves with the shadow instead of the substance of Religion,
that they cry peace, peace, to their souls only upon some outward privileges
or a few inward good meanings (as they call them) when they are in a most
damnable condition, and sudden destruction is ready to seize on them (as
travail on a woman with child) which they cannot escape; surely it is ignorance
of the nature of Christianity and sanctification; they know not what
regeneration is, and what faith and repentance are, which are the conditions
upon which salvation may be had; therefore they rest in forms (which will fade)
when their hearts and lives deny the power of godliness. This, this is (not as
Papists would persuade their deluded votaries the mother of devotion, but) the
monster which causes such hideous births of corruption. This is the epidemical
disease that reigns all the year long, and kills (I fear) more souls then
any of our new distempers does bodies: For the Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; Which
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord
and from the glory of his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. This, this is the
sourse of men's sins on earth and eternal sufferings in hell.

But one would think such truths as these might be seasonable in Turkey or
India, or in Spain and Italy, where the tree of knowledge is forbidden fruit,
where they may not read their fathers mind in their mother tongue; but is it
possible that in England (where the will and word of God is more powerfully
preached, more practically applied, more clearly discovered than in any nation
of the world) there should be any ignorant persons? Alas, alas, We find by
woeful experience that there are many, very many Indians and heathen (for
ignorance) in England. Men and women that know as little of God and holiness of
Christ, his natures, offices, of true faith and repentance, as if they had been
born, and bred up all their time in Turkey or India. I am ashamed to write what
I know of the sottish stupid hellish ignorance of many, and some that are aged
too, that are going to dye, and yet never knew what it was to live, either to
God or their souls. The good Lord affect my heart more with the danger and
dreadfulnesse of their eternal conditions.

O how sad is it that so many precious souls should lie lazing on their beds of
security and idleness, and though the Sun shine brightly in upon them, they
will not draw their curtains and open their eyes to behold it! That in a valley
of vision, a Goshen, a land of light, thousands should live and dye in worse
then Egyptian darkness; that the Bible should be a sealed book to them, and
almost every one have the dark side of that glorious pillar toward him!

Reader, To cure this soul-murdering distemper, I have endeavored (according to
the trust committed to me, and the grace bestowed on me) to discover in this
Treatise the life in Christ, or true Christianity, with the matchless endless
felicity that accompanies it; as also the nature and danger of unregeneracy,
with the means to come out of it; by which thou may see that many cozen their
souls with counterfeit coin (false evidences for heaven) instead of true, which
will not abide the touchstone of Scripture, and so like Uriah, they carry those
letters about them, though they know it not, which will at last cost them their
lives, and cause their eternal deaths. That there is no fool like the sinner
who sells his soul for a song; his Savior, his eternal happiness, the
unspeakable pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore, for the perishing empty
profits, and base brutish pleasures of sin, which are but for a season; Though
sin be delightful in the act (to carnal wretches) yet it will be bitterness in
the end. It will be a bitter-sweet to all its lovers, when for their momentany
pleasure they shall be recompensed with eternity of intolerable unconceivable
pain. That it is not for nothing that Ministers call so loudly and earnestly to
thee, to kill those lusts which would kill thee, and to follow after holiness,
without which no man shall ever see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. It will teach thee,
that God and Christ, heaven and hell, thy soul and eternity, death and
judgment are not things to be dallied with; believe it, thou will one day find
that it is bad jesting with such edged tools. Surely the greatest seriousness
that is imaginable is too too little for them. O had thou but the thousandth
part of that seriousness about them which they deserve, and call for at thy
hands; surely thou would have other manner of thoughts of them, and carriage
toward them then now thou have. Well, I have four special things at present
from the living God to commend to thee and leave with thee in order to thine
eternal good (I known not how soon I may be taken from thee) If thou love thy
soul, practice them faithfully; if not, answer the contrary when thou and I
shall meet in the other world at the great and terrible day of the Lord Jesus.

First, do thou labor for the knowledge of God and his Son, thy self, and the
duty which thou owe to thy Maker and Redeemer; have thou not read the doleful
consequence of ignorance? and does it not nearly concern thee to get out of
that damnable condition?

Without this thou can never be Religious, notwithstanding all thy pretenses
that thou meanest well, and have as good an heart as the best. If thou know
not the God of thy fathers, thou can never serve him with a perfect heart, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. All thy worship will be but wild, and wandering from God; all thy
services but the sacrifice of a fool; The foundation of obedience must be laid
in knowledge, Mal. 1.8. till then thou offerest up to the Lord, the lame and
blind, which he will not accept. God expects reasonable services, Romans 12.1.
such for which thou can give a good reason out of his word, which must be the
warrant of thy worship. Be not therefore in shape a man, a reasonable creature,
and as NebuchadneZZar, in heart a beast; be not as the horse and mule which
has no understanding, Psalm. 32.9.

Without knowledge thou can not be saved; If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that perish, 2 Cor. 4.4. Wilful ignorance is a sad sign that thou art in
Gods black bill. If God will ever have thee to be saved, he will bring thee to
the knowledge of this truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. When Hammans face was covered, his
execution was near. Do not delude and destroy thy soul by presuming that thy
ignorance will not damn thee; for if thou art without knowledge, he that made
thee will not save thee, and he that formed thee will show thee no mercy, Isa.
27.11. Mark Reader but this one place, Psalm. 95.10, 11. where the God of truth
confirms it by an oath that they which do not know his ways, shall not enter
into his rest. One would think that a prisoner should be both earnest and
diligent to learn his neck verse, who knows he must be hanged if he cannot
read; and do not thou read in broad Characters, in the word of God, that thou
must be an eternal monument of divine fury in hell, if thou do not learn to
know the only true God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent? does it not then
behove thee to be diligent for knowledge?

1. How should thou wait on the word of God which enlightneth the mind, and
makes wise the simple! Auditus est sensus disciplinae.
Psalm. 19.7, 8. David had more understanding then the ancients, because Gods
word was his meditation, Psa. 119.98, 99. Watch at wisdoms gate, with an humble
hungry soul, and God may fill thee with good things; God makes manifest the
favor of his knowledge by his Mnisters in every place, 2 Cor. 2.14. If thou
would see, go where the Sun shines.

2. Ply the throne of grace with uncessant prayers, Been or assc est been
studuisse.
that God would enlighten thy mind in the knowledge of his will. If any man
lack wisdom or knowledge, let him ask it of God who gives liberally and
upbraideth not, Jam. 1.5. Entreat him to open thine eyes that thou may see
the wonderful things contained in his law, Psalm. 119.18. If thou cryest after
knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding; if thou seek her as
silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasure, then shall thou understand
the fear of the Lord and find the knowledge of God; For the Lord gives wisdom,
out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5, 6.

3. Take heed of sinning against those commands which thou know: Hold not
the truth in unrighteousness; Do not wanton away the light, least God give thee
up to judiciary darkness. Thou know thou should pray with thy family, and
in secret; make conscience of the Lords day, instruct thy children, forbear
drunkenness, swearing, lying, uncleanness, and the like; be sure thou do not
shut up this knowledge in thy conscience, and deny it in thy conversation, lest
(as a candle pent up in a dark lanthorn) it swail out quickly. If any man will
do my will, he shall know my doctrine whether it be of God or no, John 7.17. To
practice what you know, is the way to know what to practice; Knowledge is the
mother of obedience, it breeds it; and obedience is the nurse of knowledge, it
feeds and nurtureth it; if thou improvest thy little stock well, doubt not
but God will add to it and increase it; leave no means untried for the
obtaining this purchase. I have (if thou belongest to our Parish) offered thee
to instruct thee to my power in the mysteries of Christ, appointed also days
for that end; it may be thou art one of those many that ate too old to learn,
that scorn to be taught. I would ask thee one question, and think of it, Art
thou not too old to be saved? Do thou not scorn to go to heaven? Surely thou
do; by contemning the way thou scornest the end. Well take heed thou do not
die without knowledge; for if thou do, all the world cannot keep thee one
quarter of an hour out of hell, and then thou will have time enough to befool
thy self for refusing a good offer, and wilfully rejecting through thy pride
those things which concerned thine eternal peace. I shall conclude this head
with the words of that eminent and pious writer. Mr. Gurnal Arm 1 part, p. 239,
240.
How long (says he) may a poor Minister sit in his study before any of the
ignorant sort will come upon that errand ( i. e. to learn the knowledge of God
and themselves)! Lawyers have their Clients, and Physicians their Patients;
these are sought after and called up at midnight for counsel; but alas the soul
which is more worth then raiment and body too, that is neglected and the
Minister seldom thought one, till both these be sent away. Perhaps when the
Physician gives them over for dead, then we must come and close up their eyes
with comfort, which were never opened to see Christ in his truth, or else be
counted cruel, because we will not sprinkle them with this holy water, and
anoint them for the Kingdom of heaven, though they know not a step of the way
that leads to it. Ah, poor wretches, what comfort would you nave us speak to
those to whom God himself speaks terror? Is heaven ours to give to whom we
please? or is it in our power to alter the laws of the most High, and save
those whom he condemns? Do you remember the curse that is to fall upon his
head, that makes the blind to wander out of the way? Deuteronomy. 27.18. What curse
then would be our portion, if we should confirm such blind souls as are quite
out of the way to heaven, encouraging them to go on, and expect to reach heaven
at last, when God knows, their feet stand in those paths that lead to eternal
death? No, it is written, we cannot. God will not reverse it, you may read your
very names amongst those damned souls which Christ comes in flaming fire to
take vengeance on, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. And therefore in the fear of God let this
provoke you of what age or sex, rank or condition soever you be, to labor for
the saving knowledge of God in Christ, whom to know is life eternal, John 17.3.

Secondly, Do not rest in bare knowledge but endeavor to get thy will,
affections, and heart renewed; a clear head must be accompanied with a clean
heart; saving knowledge is ever a sanctifying knowledge. Content not thy self
with any thing short of regeneration and the power of godliness; Master Robert
Bolton, Mr. Boltons life ^y Master ^gshaw.
when dying, told his children, That he verily believed none of them durst
think to meet him at the great tribunal in an unregenerate estate. So I am
confident that none of you can with any comfort (nay without unspeakable horror
and sorrow) meet me at the Bar of Christ in your natural estates. O how sad
will it be for thee that art now asleep in sin, to awake (like the Jailor) at
the midnight of death, and to find this inward change, this new creation, this
life in Christ missing: what an heart quake will possess thee? how pale and
trembling will thou spring into the presence of Christ, in the other world for
thy particular judgment! Consider thy profession will not serve turn; the
storm of death will wash out all colors of profession that are not laid in the
oil of renewing grace, Mat. 25.8.

Thy privileges will not do it; circumcision is nothing, nor uncircumcision
but a new creature, Gal. 6.15. Thou may enjoy Scripture, and Sabbaths, and
Sacraments, and many seasons of grace, and hell at last. Nay the higher thy
exaltation (in regard of these privileges) if thou die unconverted, the
greater thy condemnation will be. None go to such Chambers of utter darkness,
as they that are lighted thither with the torches of Ordinances. Heathen will
keep holy day in hell, in comparison of those that are now lifted up to heaven
and perish. If the sweetest wine make such sharp vinegar, and the cold lead
when melted be so hot and scalding; how pure and weighty will that wrath be
which shall be extracted out of abused love and mercy! Grace is the sweetest
friend, but the bitterest enemy. If thou waste the riches of grace, God will
recover out of thee riches of glory. Thy performances also can be no infallible
evidence of thy good estate. The Pharisees prayed, fasted, did (many of them)
abound in outward acts of charity, righteousness and holiness (which are
commanded by God, and must be minded by all that will be saved) and yet Christ
tells us expressly, That except our righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of
heaven, Mat. 5.20. There was in them a^ in the young man one thing wanting, and
that was the regeneration of their natures, the actual predominancy of the
interest o^ God and Christ in their hearts above all interest of the flesh and
world. I beseech thee therefore make sure of the new birth, without which it is
impossible for thee to escape the second death. I have in the third use of this
Treatise endeavored to awake^ thee to, and to direct thee about this great
work, as in the first use I have discovered the unspeakable endless misery of
them that dye before it be done. Those which had the Sudor Anglicus or sweating
sicknes^, dyed assuredly if suffered to sleep; those were their best friends
that kept them waking, though they (possibly) had little thank for it. It may
be thou may think I am too sharp; but truly the wound is deep, dangerous,
yea deadly, and therefore though I put thee to pain by lancing it, I am forced
to it, otherwise thou will not be cured. Sin and hell, and holiness and
sanctification are other manner of things then the sleepy world dreameth of.

The Lord give thee an heart to obey his counsel in order to thy conversion,
and then I am sure thou will have cause to give him thanks that I would not let
thee sleep quietly on a bed that was in a flame, nor in an condition that was
next door to infinite misery and eternal desperation.

Thirdly, exalt godliness in thy family. If once Christ be chief in thy heart,
I am confident he will to thy utmost power be so in thy house; that thou art
really, which thou art relatively. Labor that thy children and servants may
know and serve God* Dwell with thy wife as a man of knowledge, as heirs
together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered. 1 Pet. 3.7.
Bring up thy children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6 4.
Teach thy servants their duty to God and their own souls. Consider these are
the laws of the righteous God; and ere long when thou shall leave all the dying
and lying vanities of this world, thou must give an account in the other world,
how thou have obeyed them. God has committed a great trust to thee, even the
charge of the souls of all in thy family; and does not thine heart tremble to
think of soul-blood, of soul-murder! I assure thee thou may be as truly and
really guilty of their deaths and damnations by starving them as by poisoning
them. I mean by not instructing, chatechizing, and principling them in the
things of God, by not praying with them, and over seeing that they mind the
worship of God, as in making them drunk, and teaching them to steal and swear.

For thy children, Do thou not know that they are born children of wrath, and
heirs of hell? and can thou be quiet till thou see in them some signs and
hopes of regeneration; an interest in Christ, and thereby a right to heaven?
When thou read of Herod, how he murdered poor children, thou condemnest him;
thou think Ah hard-hearted Herod! But do not thou do ten thousand times
worse, in murdering the souls and bodies of thy dear children for ever? Ah
hard-hearted, ah bloody father! Herod was a man of bowels, a merciful man to
thee. Is it any wonder to hear (says one) of that ship sunk, or dashed upon a
rock, that was put to sea without card of compass? nor is it a wonder to hear
of children sinking in perdition, who are thrust into the world, which is a sea
of temptations, without any knowledge of God and their duty. One would think
every time thou read and hear of the extremity and eternity of hells
torments, of the multitudes that must undergo them, of the few even of those
within the visible Church that shall be saved, and of the difficulty of
obtaining salvation, that thy loins should tremble, and thy joints smite
together; that thy head, yea heart should ache for fear any of thy dear children
should be among those many that must drink that cup of the Lords pure wrath;
and that thou should be restless night and day in wrestling with ^od, and
instructing them, in using all means to prevent their endless ruin; surely if
thou had a spark of true love to thy children, thus it would be with thee.

And for thy servants, unless thou art careful, that they serve the Lord, they
are but little beholden to thee for thy service; thou give them (possibly)
food and outward things convenient, but do thou not do as much for thy
cattle? And is it think thou, enough to do no more for those souls which
must live in unspeakable pain or pleasure for ever, then for thy beasts? If he
that provideth not for the bodies of his family, be worse then an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. surely he that provideth not for their souls, is kin to a devil; say
not, they are stubborn and will not be taught. Have not thou power in thy hands
either to teach them, or turn them out of doors? Let none serve thee that will
not serve God. Thou will not keep a servant that knows not how to do thy
work, at least if he will not learn, and then follow it with diligence; Now let
thy conscience be judge; Is not Gods work (the pleasing and glorifying his
infinite majesty) of far greater concernment than thy greatest and weightest
work? and dare thou keep one that neither knows how to do it, nor will
learn? Follow the man after Gods own heart, Ps. 101.2.9. I will walk within my
house with a perfect heart: Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful in the land
that they may dwell with me; he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve
me. It is said of Constantine (that in this he was truly great) that he would
have his whole Court gathered together, and cause the Scriptures to be read to
them, and instruction to be given them from the Word of God.

Besides, if thou did but regard thy own temporal good, thou would instruct
thy servants and children in spiritual things; for they that are unfaithful to
their Master and father in heaven, will be unfaithful to their master and
father on earth. They that make no conscience of their duty to God, but rob him
of his service and worship, will never make conscience of their duty to thee,
but if they have opportunity, will rob thee of thy time, service, and goods.

Be sure that thou perform family duties, as praying, reading, and the like,
morning and evening; do not serve the flesh and the world all day, and then put
God off with a few cold sleepy petitions at night; the command is, Pray
continually, 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Daniel was at it three times a day, Dan. 6.10.
David seven times a day, Psalm. 119.164. Gods mercies are renewed on thee every
morning, and should not thy prayers and praises be renewed every morning? Does
not the preservation of thy family every night, deserve family acknowledgement
in the morning? Wearisome nights are appointed to others; the beds of others
prove their graves, thou and thine might have awaken in hell; does this
distinguishing mercy deserve no thanks? Is not thy family every day liable to
many dangers, both bodily and spiritual? does it not need pitying, sanctifying,
pardoning, directing, preventing mercy every day, nay every moment? and is not
all this worth a prayer? Upon no account neglect the offering up of these
morning and evening sacrifices; let thy prayers and of the rest in the family
come up before the Lord in the morning like incense, and the lifting up of
thine hands at night as an evening sacrifice.

Do not say as sometimes I have heard of thee, that thou can not spare time
for these duties, thy family is great, and thou can not get them altogether,
thy business is great, and a little time spent this way, may wrong thee; I
answer thee, Can thou get all thy family together twice a day to set meals
for their bodies, and can thou not get them together twice a day for set
meals (family duties) for their souls? 2. What greater or weighter business
can thou have, then the working out the salvation of thy own, and the souls
committed to thy charge? are not the most important affairs thou can possibly
deal about, but toys and trifles to this? 3. Was not David's family greater then
thine, and his occasions weighter? and yet he could find time (though a King)
for family duties, Psalm. 101.9. He and his Queen did both instruct their child
in the things of God, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Pro. 4.3. to 10. Pro. 31. If thou art
poor, and say thou art to provide for thy family, see an answer to that in
this book, page 187.188.189. Though God will give you both another manner of
answer to your foolish pretenses, when ye appear at the judgment seat of
Christ.

Have a special care also of the sanctification of the Lords day in thy family;
remember the living God commands thee, that thou, thy son, thy daughter, thy
manservant, and thy maidservant, and all within thy gate keep that day holy.
Do not make the sins of others thine by thy pattern or permission; let not that
queen of days be defloured or profaned by idleness, earthly thoughts, words,
or actions; spend the whole time which thou sparest from the public
Ordinances, in secret and private duties, as praying, reading, singing,
chatechising, taking an account of thy children and servants, what they know of
the mysteries of Christ, and particularly what they have learned that day.
Esteem it a special privilege, a great mercy, that thou and thine may upon
that day sequester your selves wholly from worldly employments, and enjoy
communion with the blessed God in the means of grace. This I shall be bold to
tell thee, that Religion and the service of the most high God in thy family,
depends much, yea very much upon thy observation of the Lords day; thou may
expect its increase or decrease according to thy sanctification or profanation
of it. In the Primitive times when the question was Servasti Dominicum? the
answer was, Christianus sum, omittere non possum. Thou pretendest to be a
Christian, make conscience of every minute of that day of Christ. Be sure that
thou and as many of thy family as can possily be spared, attend with all
diligence and reverence at the public place of worship; there God receives
the greatest praises, and there he bestows the choicest mercies. O blessed
are they that dwell in his house, blessed are they that wait at Wisdoms gates,
that watch at the posts of her doors, Prove. 8. In all things show thy self a
pattern to them that are under thy care and charge; the peop!e committed to thy
government, will sooner imitate thy doings, then obey thy sayings. Sin comes
in at first by propagation, but is increased exceedingly by imitation; thou
that have thy children and servants following thee either to heaven or to hell,
have need choose a right path, even the narrow way that leads to life. Weigh
thy words, considering that they will learn thy language; avoid those sinful
expressions of Faith and Troth (let your yea be yea, and your nay nay; for
whatsoever is more is evil) of repeating others oaths, of speaking
irreverently of the great God and his word, of wishing evil on any man; for the
command is, Bless them that curse, Mat. 5.44. let no evil communication proceed
out of thy lips, but let thy speech be seasoned with grace, that it may
administer good, and be exemplary to the hearers. Look well to thy works, that
they be agreeable to the word of God. In thy Religious performances especially
manifest all reverence, fervency, and seriousness, that thy children and
servants may see that thou art in earnest about soul-affairs; about
eternity-concernments; thou little know how profitable such a pattern may be
unto them. Do thy utmost, use all means commanded thee to save thy self and
them that dwell with thee. Be confident that shortly Christ will say to thee as
Eliah to David, With whom have thou left those few sheep in the wilderness?
What is become of the children and servants which I entrusted thee with? will
it be enough think thou for thee then to answer, Lord, For my children, I
brought them up without any charge to the Parish; or Lord, I bred them
Gentlemen; or I put them out to trades, or I left them competent estates. And
for my servants, I paid them their wages, gave them their meat and drink,
according to my agreement with them. When Christ shall reply (Man) what is
become of their souls which I created capable of the immediate fruition of my
self, which I redeemed with my precious blood? what shame will then cover thy
face, and what horror fill thy heart, when the blood of their souls shall be
required of thee! O therefore let Joshuahs practice and resolution be thine,
That thou and thy house will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15.

Fourthly, Make Religion and the worshipping and glorifying the great God the
great business of thy whole life. Improve all thy time, power, estate,
interests, and talents whatsoever to the utmost, for the honor of God, and
thine own everlasting good. Look on thy self as created, preserved, supplied
with nightly, daily, hourly mercies (not for the service of thy flesh, no, that
end were mean and low, but) that thou might be enabled unto and encouraged
in the service of the glorious God; Surely says that noble Lord Du Plessi^, In
the epistle before Veritaes Christia. Relig.
If all the world were made for man, then man was made for more then the world.
All the favors thou enjoyest are but baitslaid by God to catch thy soul; as
they come all from him, so let them be improved all for him. It is godliness
alone that will hold out when thou come to the greatest hardships at the day
of affliction and the hour of thy dissolution. The good man and his godliness
are like Saul and Jonathan, lovely in their lives, and in their deaths they are
not divided, therefore exercise thy self unto godliness. It may be, thou art
one to whom God has given much in the world; I must tell thee that much will
be required of thee; the greater thy receipts are, the greater thy returns must
be, and the larger thy disbursements for God; make to thy self friends of the
Mammon of unrighteousness, that when that fails, thou may be received into
the Celestial habitation. The way to get that which thou can not part with,
is by charity to part with that which thou can not keep. Thou canct not carry
thy bags to heaven; it is good to take bills of exchange from the poor, whereby
thou may receive there what thou could not carry thither; Laudent te
esurientium viscera, non ructantium opulenta convivia, says Hierom. It is
storied of Alexander, that having given away almost all he had, one of his
friends asked him where his treasure was; he answered, pointing to the poor, In
scriniis, in his chest. He asked him what he had left for himself; Alexander
answers, spem majorum. Let thy charity especially relate to the souls of
people. What were it for thee to maintain four or six poor children at School,
whereby they may come to read, and learn to know the way to life? Does it not
grieve thee to understand the gross ignorance of many! and what do they tell us
(when we reprove them for it) that they are not book learned, they could never
read! What were it for thee that have (possibly) several hundreds per annum,
to give twenty pound a year this way? I tell thee that God expects more than
this for his service; and I am confident thou may have more comfort in such
acts of soul-charity, than in ten times the value bestowed on the world and the
flesh. I am sure God keeps an exact account how thou employest thy revenues;
and think of it again and again, what thou will do in such an hour, when thou
shall stand naked at the judgment seat of Christ, and all thy receipts and
disbursments shall be declared and mentioned before the Lord, Angels, and Men;
when Imprimis Pride comes with her Tailors long bill of so many thousands for
new fashions, foolish fancies, or gaudy attire for thee or thine, when the poor
members of Christ were ready to perish with nakedness. Item, Gluttony or
drunkenness, or luxury, so many thousands. Item, So many hundreds for Hauks or
Hounds, or gaming. Item, so many hundreds for idle needless expenses. Item, for
propagating the gospel, relieving the poor, exalting the interest of Christ, so
many pounds, or only some few scraps, which the Knight or Esquire, or
Gentleman could spare after he had made full provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof. Believe it, thou will wish then, thou had done
more for God and his interest, and less for the flesh. It was a wise speech of
Licon the Philosopher (when a wealthy Merchant bragd to him of the multitudes
of his ships and furniture for sea, Laert.
how he was able to trade into all parts) I esteem not that to be felicity
which hangs upon ropes and cables. Sure I am thy wealth has wings, and will
within a few days take an eternal flight from thee; the way to make the best
of it, is not to lay it up, but to lay it out as may be most for the glory of
God

Whoever thou art, whether poor or rich, make an absolute dedication of thy
self and thy all unto Christ, if thou would attain salvation by Christ. He
that cannot live of himself, must not live to himself; for if he does, he dies
eternally, he loses himself for ever. If heaven might be had upon men's cursed
terms of liberty for their lusts, Christ would have customers enough; but he
that bought the purchase is fittest to set the price.

Reader, I set before thee in this Treatise Life and Death, Heaven and Hell; if
thou art a true Isaac, and have a spiritual appetite, I dare promise thee such
savoury meat as thy soul loves; but if Gallio-like, thou carest for none of
these things, or as the two tribes and an half, desire thy portion on this
side the land of Canaan; If as Spira thou will put thy relations and
possessions, honor and pleasure, and outward good things in one scale; and God,
and Christ, and Heaven in the other; and then choose the former, and refuse the
latter; I hope I shall never envy thy happiness, nor desire to eat of thy
dainties, or drink of thy cup, but pray that the Lord would have mercy on the;
only let me tell thee; if thou would avoid the unconceivable endless misery
of the damned; if thou would attain the eternal matchless felicity of the
saved: If thou would have all thy former rebellions blotted out through the
blood of the Son; If thou would have thy person reconciled to the Father; If
thou would have God in Christ to stand by thee, when none of thy friends or
comforts shall own thee; if thou would appear at the dreadful Bar of Christ
with comfort, when thousands and millions shall weep and wail; If thou would
not have me, nor this book to be a witness against thee before the Lord, Angels
and men: then turn from sin speedily, cleave to thy Savior unfainedly, give up
thy self to all the commands of Christ unreservedly; To day if thou will hear
his voice, harden not thy heart, least he swear in his wrath, that thou shall
never enter into his rest, Heb. 3.

Reader I shall detain thee but a little longer in the porch, only to give
thee a brief account of this ensuing tractate; Though I confess I never liked
large Apologies for any publications; for if men's books are like to be
serviceable to the honor of the infinite God, and the welfare of the souls of
men, ^ small a Apology will serve; if they are ^ot, why do they trouble the
world ^ith them? It is not all the image and ^uperscription, which their
excuses can ^amp on them, shall ever make them ^urrant coin with me. I was
called to ^each a Sermon at Borden in Kent, October. 7. 1658. at the Funeral of a
grave Re^gious Gentlewoma^ (one that (as I am ^formed) was a tender mother of
her ^ildren, and a dutiful daughter to the ^ther of Spirits) Mistress Beresford,
wi^w of Master Michael Beresferd, a learn^ painful godly Minister of the Lord
Je^ Christ, who had a good report of ^ men (that feared God and knew ^) and of
the truth it self; He was ^nister of the abovenamed Parish above ^nty years.

^ was after the preaching of it, re^^ed to publish it, and promised that
^nsiderable number should be freely ^red in several families, whereby ^gh the
blessing of God, some poor souls might be turned from darkness unto light, and
from the power of Satan unto God. Before I had prepared the Sermon for the
Press, I was intreate^ to enlarge it into a Treatise. All which desires I was
willing to satisfy, part^ out of the great respect I did bear Mr. John
Beresford Citizen and Apothecary, one that fears the Lord abo^e many.
one especially that earnestly begd i^ but chiesly out of the weak desire I ^
to be instrumental for the conversion ^ the souls of them to whom the Serm^ was
preached, and of the Parish wh^ the Lord had committed to my cha^^ I considered
with my self that by r^son of my sickly and infirm body, I ^ not likely to
continue long with t^ people, to which the providence of ^ did at first join
me, and from which far greater things could never divorce ^ and therefore it
might not be need^ to leave them some testimony of my ^ fained desires of their
eternal welfa^ Who knows what this mean pi^ may do, if the divine power
pleas^ accompany it? Possibly out of the ^ that is here sown, when the husb^^
man is dead, an harvest may be ^ed of glory to God and good to souls.

Reader, If thou gain any spiritual profit by it, let God have the praise, and
let him be remembered in thy prayers, who is

Thy Servant for Christ's sake, George Swinnocke.
Febr. 22. 1658./9.
THE Contents.
TWo great Lessons to be learned of all page 1 The division of the Chapter p.
2, 3. The meaning of the words p. 4, 5. Doct. They that have Christ for their
life, shall have gain by their death p. 6. What is employed in, To me to live is
Christ p. 6. 1. Christ the principle of a Christians life p. 6, 7, 8. 2. Christ
the pattern p. 9, 10. 3. Christ the Comfort p. 11. 12, 13, 14. 4. Christ the
end p. 15. Wherein a Christian is a gainer by death p. 19. 1. He gains a
freedom from all evil ibi. 1. From the evil of sin p. 20. 1. From the
commission of it p. 20, 21, 22. 2. From temptations to it p. 24, 25, 26.
2. From the evil of suffering p. 27, 28. 1. From ignominy in his name p. 29,
30. 2. From infirmities in his body p. 31, 32. 3. From sorrow in his soul p.
33, 34.

2. He gains the fruition of all good p. 3^. 1. The society of perfect
Christians p 36, 37. 2. Nearest communnion with Jesus Christ p. 38, 39, 40. 3.
The enjoyment of the blessed God p. 42, 43, 44. which shall be Full p. 47, 48.
Immediate p. 49, 50, 51.


1. Use, by way of Information. The difference betwixt the estates of the good
and bad at death p. 54. to 63. 1. The sinner loses by death p. 64. 1. All his
carnal comforts, his relations, wealth, honor, mirth, and that for ever p. 65.
to 68. The difference between a Saints loss of outward things by death, and a
sinners p. 68. to 73. 2. All the means of grace p. 73. to 78. 3. The society of
all the Saints p. 78. to 82. 4. All his hopes of heaven p. 82. to 87. 5. His
precious soul p. 87. to 95. 6. The blessed God p. 95. to 102.
2. The sinner gains by death 1. Fullness of sin p. 102. to 105. 2. Fullness
of suffering In regard of intension p. 105. to 111. In regard of duration p.
111. to 122.





2. Use by way of Examination. To try our title to happiness p. 122. to 127. 1.
Arguments to enforce this use 1. It is easy and ordinary to mistake p. 127. to
132. 2. True Christians are very few p. 132. to 139. 3. The benefit of a
faithful trial p. 139. to 144.
2. Marks of a true Christian 1. To him to live is Christ 1. Is Christ the
principle of thy life p. 144. to 147. 2. Is Christ the pattern of thy life p.
147. to 150. 3. Is Christ the comfort of thy life p. 150. to 152. 4. Is Christ
the end of thy life p. 152. to 155.
2. He has the Spirit of God p. 155, 156. which is 1. A purifying Spirit p.
156. to 160. 2. Enabling to pray p. 160. to 163. Fervently p. 163. to 166.
Frequently p. 166. to 170.



Counsel to a Christian that upon trial finds his estate good p. 170. to 173.
To him that finds his estate bad p. 173, 174.


3. Use by way of Exhortation. To Labor for this spiritual life, and thereby
for this gain p. 175. to 180. Rich men should labor for it p. 180. to 185. Poor
men should p. 185. to 190.


Two requests to all that desire this spiritual life. 1. Req. To set about it
speedily p. 190. to 195. 1. Has not God waited on thee long enough already p.
195. to 198. 2. Have thou not served sin long enough p. 198. 3. Thou would
not defer things of less concernment p. 199. 4. The longer thou delayest, the
farther thou wandrest from God and happiness p. 200. 5. Thou can not promise
thy self the next hour p. 201. 6. Art thou sure God will accept thee hereafter
p. 202.
2. Req. To set about it seriously, and with all thy might p. 203. to 208.
Enforced by a fourfold supposition 1. Sup. Thou had seen the terror of the
day of judgment p. 208. to 213. ^. Sup. Thou were sure to dye this day month
p. 213. to 217. ^. Sup. Thou could speak with thy carnal, sloathful neighbors
in hell p. 217. to 218. 4. Sup. Thou had seen the Majesty and purity of the
infinite God p. 219. to 222.



Directions for the attaining this spiritual life. 1. Direct. Labor for the
knowledge of thy sins and misery p. 224. to 234. Mark that six sheets are false
figured in this place in the book 2. Direct. Get thy heart truly affected with,
and thoroughly humbled for thy sins and misery p. 234. to 271. 3. Direct. When
thy heart is humbled cast thy self wholly and only upon the merits of Jesus
Christ p. 171. to 186. 4. Direct. Dedicate thy self and all thou have to the
service, commands and glory of Christ p. 186. to 200. 5. Direct. Be diligent in
reading, hearing, and meditating on the word of God p. 200. to 208. 6. Direct.
Be frequent and fervent at the throne of grace p. 253. to 263.


Motives to labor for this spiritual life. 1. It is the most honorable life p.
263. to 267. 2. It is the most comfortable life p. 267. to 275 3. It is the
most profitable life p. 275. Conclusion of this large use to the unconverted p.
287.


4. Use by way of consolation to all that live spiritually p 288. It is
comfortable 1. Against persecution from the world p. 290. 2. Against the
temptations of the devil p. 294. 3. Against the corruptions of thy own heart p.
297. 4. Against our own deaths p. 300. 5. Againgst the death of our godly
friends and relations p. 303.
It is further comfortable if we consider 1. The excellency of this gain which
will appear p. 305. 1. By the foretastes of it p. 306. 2. By the price paid for
it p 309. 3. By the titles given to it p. 311.
2. The certainty of this gain p. 315. It is ensured by promise ibid. By
witness, by oath, by seals p. 317.
3. The eternity of it p. 318



REader, I desire thee to excuse the unsuitableness of some of the page titles,
that being the work of the Printers (I intended a running Title according to
the several heads which were handled) The Contents will make full satisfaction
for that error. My absence from the Press has occasioned also some few
mistakes in the body of the Book; the most considerable of which, I have
observed, and request thee to amend. The Greek and Latin are mangled in the
Margin, but I intending not the Treatise for Scholars, meddled little with
them, and am the less troubled for the mistakes about them.

Errata.
PAge 7. line 21. r. is p. 20. l. 10. r. there p. 23. l. 21. add i^ p. 37. l.
8. r. shall p. 41. l. 3. r. Demarathus p. 81. l. 23. r. such p. 116. l. 6. r.
life p. 123. l. 2. add shall p. 159. l. 25. 1. whose l. 26. r. may p. 192. l.
24. add for p. 198. l. 20. add years p. 278. l. 4. for Christ is a coheir r.
Christ is heir.

Margin. Page 4. r. an p. 35.^. adeptio p. 39. r. cummo.

Phil. 1.12. For to me to live, is Christ, and to dye is gain.


IT is a memorable observation of that Christian Heathen, Vivere t^ta vita
discendum est, and quod magis fortasse miraberis, tota vita discendum est mori.
Seen. ad Paulin. cap. 7.
as he has been sometime called, That the two great lessons, which every man
has to learn in the whole time of his life, are, how to live, and how to dye;
how to live virtuously, and how to die valiantly. These two weighty questions
are clearly and fully answered in this Text. It declares and delivers such
directions about life, as could never be learned in the school of nature,
improved to the utmost; It prepares and provideth such a cordial against
death, as could never be extracted out of all the creatures distilled together.
And indeed herein the excellency of the Christian Religion appears above all
Religions in the world. None enjoyneth such pious precepts, none subjoyneth
such precious promises, none sets the soul about so noble a work, none
satisfies it with such an ample reward.

The scope of the Apostle in this Epistle, Philippians in the faith of Christ,
against the scandal of the Cross;

In this first Chapter, Paul encourages them greatly to be constant in
Christianity.

1. From the nature of God, who never does his works by halves, but performs
what he promises, and perfecteth what he begins, ver. 6.

2. From his own prayer, which was for their increase, and perseverance in
grace, and that inoffensively to Gods glory, verse 9.10.

3. From the happy fruits of his sufferings for the faith. The Rod wherewith he
was scourged like Aarons Rod blossomed. First, The Gospel was the more
propagated, verse 12. The more the Husbandmen were dispersed, the more the seed
of the Word was scattered; and the deeper the ground was ploughed, it took the
better root, and brought forth the greater fruit. Secondly, The Ministers of
the Gospel were the more emboldned, ver. 14. True zeal like the fire, burns
hottest in the coldest season: and sincerity like the stars, though it may be
hid in a warm day, yet it will be sure to show it self in a frosty night.
Thirdly, Eveniunt mihi ut mi: his^ut salutaria. Trem. in Phil. 1.19.
Paul himself should be much advantaged, verse. 19. which latter he amplifieth
by acquainting them with the reason of that hope; namely the assistance of the
Spirit of Christ, verse 19. and the assurance God had wrought in him, from his
experience of what God had done for him, that his Savior should be honored,
and his salvation furthered, both by his life and death, ver. 20.21.

The Text considered relatively, contains the ground why the Philippians should
not be troubled so much at Paul's trials. For to me to live is Christ, and to
dye is gain, i. e. If I be a gainer in all conditions, why should you be
discouraged by my afflictions? If sufferings advantage the Pastor, why should
they dishearten the people? The children may well enjoy a calm in their
spirits, when their spiritual Father is safe, nay, a gainer in the grea^^st
storm.

Take the words absolutely, and they include first, the character of a
Christian while he lives, To me to live is Christ; and secondly, the comfort
of a Christian when he dies, and to die is gain. Or you may take notice of the
piety of a Saint in life; To me to live is Christ; and his profit by death, to
dye is gain.

For the meaning of the words.

To me, To me who am the mark at which hell and the world shoot their arrows
of persecution; (...).
To me whose life has been a ring of miseries ever since my conversion; To me
who am set to undergo both men's and devils opposition: yet to me there are
spiritual and inward consolations. For to me to live is Christ.

To me to live is Christ. To me who am in Christ, (...). Nam mihi vivere
Christus est, i. e. Tota meavita ad hoc ordinata est ut per meum ministerium
perque meam vocationem verbis and factis promoveam pro mea virili regnum
Christi. Au non hac res bona and cuique fideli optanda? Zanch. in loc.
to me to live is Christ. I live not only the life of nature, but I live also
the life of grace; I have not only a being from Christ as a man, but likewise a
well-being in Christ as a Christian; as I did receive my life from Christ, so I
do improve my life for Christ; his honor is my utmost desire, and my greatest
endeavor.

And to die is gain, i. e. (...). Diodate to this purpose.
I having had no other object, no employment but Christ and his service in my
life, shall certainly have an eternal advancement at my death. Or Christ is my
life here by grace, and hereafter by glory; He is both the Author and the end
of my life; I live for him, I live to him, I live in him, I live by him, and if
I be put to death, that shall no way endamage me, but rather bring me great
advantage, in regard that thereby I shall gain heaven for earth, an happy
eternal life for this miserable mortal life. So our larger Annotations sense
it. Atqui Christus in utroque membro subjectum esse debet; Christus vita in
vita; Christus lucrum in morte. Call. in loc. Mihi enim est Christus and in
vita, and in morte lumen. Beza.
Some indeed read the words, Christ is my gain both in life and death, and
therefore the Apostle was little troubled at, but rather indifferent to all
conditions. There is a certain truth in this Exposition, though Sic haec
sententia non cohaerebit u^ r^tiocum praecedente, quod tamen postulat
conjunctio (...); namaliud ^st gloria Christi, aliud salus Pauli. Piscat. in
loc.
Piscator will by no means grant it to be the mind of the Spirit in this place.

In the words you may see the sign of a Saint; to him to live is Christ, and
his solace; to him to die is gain; his holy description in the former, his
happy condition in the latter.

The Text being thus explained, affords this truth taking both parts of it
together.



He that lives in Christ on earth, shall live with Christ in heaven.

Where the soul has the seed of holiness, it shall reap an harvest of
happiness.

The Apostle when he summeth up the estate of a believer, counts death as a
part of his riches. Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life,
or death, all are yours, 1 Cor. 3.22 and ye are Christ's; he that can say I am
Christ's, may as truly say, Death is mine; If thou can say, I am Christ's
servant, I am Christ's Subject, thou may say, Death will be my preferment,
death will be my advancement.

For the Explication of this doctrine, I shall show first, what is meant by
that phrase, to me to live is Christ; and secondly, wherein it will appear that
death to such a man i^ gain.

Four things in the phrase, To me to live is Christ.
For the former, To me to live is Christ, may imply these four things.

1. Christ is the principle of my life. All living creatures have an inward
principle by which they live, and according to which they act. Plants have a
principle of vegetation, beasts have a principle of sense, Ad vitam spiritualem
quod attinet, certum est adnos derivari exiguos quosdam rivulos, ipsum autem
fontem in Christo latere. Daven. in Col. 3.3.
men have a principle of reason, and their lives are different, answerable to
their different principles. But a Christian has an higher principle (that is,
Christ dwelling in his heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.) and thence it is that he
lives an higher life. As the body lives by its union with the soul, so the
Christian lives by his union with Jesus Christ; Christ is the fountain and
spring of his life, the soul of his soul, and the life of his life. I live
says the Apostle, Gal. 2.20. yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God.

As the branches, they live, but it is by the root, they derive sap from it,
and so live by it: So the believer, he lives spiritually, but it is by Christ,
he deriveth the sap of grace from this true Vine, and so lives by him.

The water in the Rivers does not more depend upon the Ocean, nor the light in
the air upon the Sun, than the life of a Christian depends on Jesus Christ.
And therefore the Holy Ghost tells us, He that has the Son, 1 John 5.12.
has life; and he that has not the Son, has not life.

I have sometime read, that the Lioness brings forth her whelps dead, till
after some time the lion roareth aloud, and then they live. This is certain,
every man and woman is born dead; dead to God, dead in sins and trespasses,
till this lion of the tribe of Judah utters his voice; then they arise from
the dead, and Christ gives them life. When the soul (like the body of Lazarus)
has been dead so long that it stinketh and is unsavory, when it has been many
days, nay many years rotting in the grave of corruption, then if Jesus Christ
calls effectually, Lazarus, come forth, sinner come forth of thy carnal
unregenerate estate: then, and not till then the soul hears the voice of the
Son of God, and lives.

Grace is of a divine birth: Joh. 3.3 it is the seed of God; John 3.3. (...),
Except a man be born from above.
1 John 3.9. an unction from the holy One; 1 John 2.27. called dew, which is of
a celestial extraction; Psalm. 110.3. and light: 1 John 1.7. the fountain of
water is in the earth, but the fountain of light is in the Heavens.

Non nascimur, sed renascimur christiani.
The web of godliness was never spun out of man's own bowels: As none can see
the Sun but by its own light: so none can with an eye of faith see the Sun of
righteousness, but by the light of grace derived from him.

We are his workmanship, says the Apostle, created in Jesus Christ, unto good
works: His workmanship, not only in our natural capacity, as men, as creatures;
and in our civil capacity, as rich or poor, high or low; but also in our
spiritual capacity, as Christians, as new creatures.

Secondly, To me to live is Christ; i. e. Christ is the pattern of my life; my
life is not only from him, but according to him; Christ is the rule according
to which I walk; the copy after which I write: As sin and disobedience is a
resemblance of the first; so grace and holiness is a resemblance of the second
Adam.

True christianity consists in nothing but our conformity to, Sanctitas
dicitur per quam men's scipsam and suos act^^ applicat Deo. So the School^e.
and imitation of Jesus Christ: And indeed, as the child in generation
receives from the parent member for member, part for part, and the paper from
the press, word for word, letter for lettter, and the wax from the seal, figure
for figure: So in regeneration Christ is formed in the soul and it receives
(according to its proportion) grace for grace.

One end of Christ's incarnation and life in the flesh, was to set an exact
pattern for our lives in the spirit; He left us an example, that we shoeld
follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. All the actions of Christ are instructions to a
Christian: His actions were either moral or mediatory; In both the Christian
imitates him: In the former, doing as he did, exercising the same graces,
performing the same duties, resisting the same temptations, forbearing the same
corruptions: In the latter by similitude, dying to sin, as he died for sin;
rising to a spiritual life, as he rose again to a natural life. None indeed can
parallel the life of Christ, but every new creature imitateth Christ in his
life; he walks as Christ walked, Philip. 2
1 John 2.6. The same mind is in all the Saints (so far as they are
regenerated) that was in Christ, the same will, the same affections; they love
what he loves; they loath what he loatheth; what pleases him, pleases them;
what grieveth his spirit, grieveth their spirits: As the wicked are like their
father the Devil; unholy, as he is unholy; so the children of Christ are like
their everlasting Father; holy as he is holy; only with this difference, in
Christ there is a fullness, in them a measure; in Christ pureness, in them a
mixture.

Thirdly, To me to live is Christ, i. e. Christ is the comfort of my life;
though I have many crosses, yet I have Christ for my comfort: He is the comfort
of my life, and the life of all my comforts. All my joys come in at this door,
all my contentments come swimming in this stream.

Piscator observes that the consolation of Israel is the Periphrasis of Jesus
Christ, Luke 2.25. Because all the consolation of a true Israelite (as Jacobs
in Benjamin) is bound up in Christ; if he be gone, the soul goes down to the
grave with sorrow. As all the candles in a Country cannot make a day; no, it
must be the rising of the Sun that must do it: So all the health, wealth,
honors, pleasures, relations, possessions, nay the greatest confluence of
comforts, that the whole Creation affords, cannot make a day of light and
gladness in the heart of a believer; no, it must be the rising of this Sun of
Righteousness. The light of his countenance causes more joy than all the corn
and wine, and oil of this world can. He faith as Luther, Christ lives, or
otherwise I would not desire to live one moment. Or as that Noble Marquess of
Vico, Their money perish with them, that think all the wealth in the world worth
one hours Communion with Jesus Christ.

His comfort ebbeth and flows as Christ manifests himself to him, or
with-draweth himself from him; like the Mary-gold, he opens and shuts with
the rising and setting of this Sun. When the Bridegroom is taken away, the
children of the Bride-chamber mourn; the voice of the true Dove is ever doleful
in the absence of her Mate; many a long look has this gracious soul after its
absented Savior; many a time does it sigh out (for lovers hours are full of
eternity;) Why is his Chariot so long a coming? why tarry the wheels of his
Chariot? Make haste my beloved, and be thou like the Heart and Roe upon the
Mountain of spices; It like Zacheus, climbs up into the Sycamore-tree of the
Ordinances, that it may have a sight of its beloved; for it hears that he
uses to pass that way; and when it spieth him afar off (for love is
quick-sighted) coming toward it, hearken how the soul calls aloud to faith,
to lift up the gates, to lift open the everlasting doors, that the King of
glory may enter in; Desire like Joseph makes ready its Chariot to go forth to
meet this God of Jacob; and when he draws nigh, it comes down hastily, and
receives him joyfully; it cries out (with the Mr. Robert Glover. Acts and
Monum. Volum. third. p. 427. Land. An. 1641.
Martyr) in a flame of love, He is come, He is come; Now like Mary it closes
with him, cleaves to him, clingeth and claspeth about him, and thinks it can
never have enough of him, or be near enough to him. Who can express the
wel-come which this pious Soul gives him? what warm affection it has to him;
what complacency and delight it has in him; what enlarged egresse of spirit it
has after him; if the wise men were so glad when they saw the star that led to
him; how glad is this soul in seeing this Sun? if the babe in the womb of
Elizabeth sprang for joy, when the Mother of the Lord came to her; how does the
heart of this Christian spring with joy when the Lord of that Mother comes to
it? and out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Dearest Jesus why
came thou no sooner? why tarriest thou no longer? Sweetest Savior, why
should this meeting ever ever part? Be thou like a bundle of myrrh lodging all
night betwixt my breasts; yet be not like a wayfaring man to tarry with me but
for a night, but do thou abide in me, and dwell with me for ever: Good Lord,
how good is it to be here! O how blessed are they that dwell in thy house! they
ever (and not without infinite cause) praise thee. Lord, grant me this
happiness, what ever thou deniest me, that my heart may be thine everlasting
home. Ah, what an holy emulation has this Saint at the spirits above, that
they should have so much and he so little; that they should drink full draughts
out of the Rivers of pleasures, and he can only taste God to be gracious. Ah,
what an heavenly vexation has he at the necessities of his body and family
here below, that they must call him away, and hinder his Communion with his
beloved! O how willingly would this soul be separated from its dearest Wife,
that it might more nearly be conjoined to its dearer Husband. Surely such a
soul would with cheerfulness die in these embraces of Christ, breathing out
with Austin, Aug. on those words. Moriar Domine ^ut te vide^m.
Lord, since no man can see thee and live, O let me die, that I may see thee.

This indeed is the fore-taste of the Saints future happiness, their morning
of glory, the Suburbs of the new Jerusalem, the first fruits of their great and
eternal harvest, the joy that strangers intermeddle not with, ^erba non ^alent
ex^rimere, ^xperimen^ opus est.
Prove. 14.10. It may better be conceived and felt, then described or expressed;
and therefore is most fitly by the Apostle called joy unspeakable and glorious,
1 Pet. 1.8. Thus Christ is the comfort of a Christian.

Fourthly, To me to live is Christ, that is, Christ is the end of my life;
Christ is both the Author and the end of my life; as my life is from Christ,
so my life is for Christ; the great care of the Apostle, was to magnify Christ
both by his life and death, Phil. 1.20. Large Annot.
All the gain I aim at, both in life and death, is Christ, namely to glorify
him by my service.

According to the principles of a man, Op^rari sequ^tur esse.
such are his ends; He that acts from self, acts for self: That obedience
which arises from the creature, will be terminated in the creature. Solomon
says, Eccles. 1.7. All the Rivers run into the Sea; unto the place from whence
the rivers came, thither they return again; so the life of a Christian coming
from Christ, must necessarily tend to Christ. A sincere Saint does not like the
hypocrite, look asquint at self-applause, self-profit, and such beggarly ends,
but his eyes look straight on at the glory of Jesus Christ. If Christ be
glorified, though he be disgraced, he is satisfied; when Christ has honored
the soul by giving it grace, the soul honors Christ by giving him glory.
Grace is the most curious work, and therefore no wonder if it be for the credit
of the Workman, Trees bear fruit for the owner, Cant. 4.16. Of him and through
him are all things, therefore to him be glory for ever and ever, Romans 11.36.

It is confessed the flesh will propound other ends, but the Spirit carries the
vote. As some write of the heavenly Orbs, that they have a proper motion of
their own, different from the motion of the Primum Mobile, yet in obedience to
this first mover, they follow its motion; thus it is with the unregenerate part
of a man, it has proper ends of its own, pride, and flesh-pleasing, and the
like, contrary to the ends of the spirit, but in obedience to the regenerate
part, the Christian leaves the former ends, and follows the ends of the latter.

Bonum est mihi, si Deus me uti pro clipeo dignetur. Bern.
The honor of Christ is exceeding dear to a true Christian: It is dearer then
his name. Lord, says a Father, use me for thy shield to keep off those wounds
of dishonor which would fall on thy majesty. Let the reproaches wherewith they
would reproach thee, fall upon me: Prorsus Satan est Lutherus, sed vivit and
regnat Christus. Amen.
And Luther is called a Devil, says Luther, in an Epistle to Spalatinus; but
be it so, so long as Christ is magnified, I am well apaid, nay the honor of
Christ is dearer than life to a believer. Paul, as one says of him, stood a
tip-toe to see which way he might glorify Christ most, whether by life or
death. Neither count I my life dear unto me, so I may finish the Ministry I
have received of the Lord Jesus, Act. 20 and 24.

I come now to the second thing promised, and that is, to manifest wherein the
christian that has Christ for the principle, pattern, comfort, and end of his
life, shall be a gainer by death. And truly, Reader, in speaking of this gain I
shall acknowledge my self at a loss; though my tongue were as the pen of a
ready writer, it could never express it, and if my pen were as the tongue of a
ready speaker, it could never describe it. The land of Canaan, notwithstanding
all the helps we have, is still for the most part terra incognita, an unknown
land. The sights there, are light inaccessible, as to mortal eyes, 1 Timothy 6.16.
(...), i. e. quod fando explicari a quopiam homine non potest. Beza and ^rasm.
ita eo ponunt.
and the sounds there, are words not audible, as to mortal ears, 2 Cor. 12.4.
words which may not or cannot be uttered, or both.

One being asked, what God was; answered, that he must be God himself, before
he could know God fully. I am sure it is requisite, that that Christian should
be in heaven first, who would know heaven fully. Fame, which in other things is
too free and prodigal, in this is too sparing and penurious, and that in so
great a degree; that Reader, after thou have heard it set forth by the holiest
heavenliest man alive, though of the greatest capacity and oratory, yet if ever
thou gettest thither, thou will find cause to speak, as the Queen of Sheba did
in another case, 1 Kings 10, 6, 7. It was a true report that I heard in mine
own land of thy glory and thine excellency. Howbeit I believed not the words,
until I came, and mine eyes had seen it; and behold the half was not told me:
the delight and happiness exceeds the same which I heard. There it is indeed
that God does more for the believer then he is able to ask or think. As the
loss of the damned will be beyond the most melancholy man's fear: so the gain
of the saved will be above the strongest christians faith. The eye of a man may
see much good, the ear of a man may hear more, the heart of a man may conceive
most of all; but yet neither has eye seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter
into the heart of man to conceive what God has prepared for them that love
him, 1 Cor. 2.9. They which have written most of this subject, might have added
at the end of their books (as in other Treatises some have done) Desiderantur
nonnulla, or plurima desunt; More is desired, or more is wanting. It is as
easy, says one, to compass the Heavens with a span, to contain the Ocean in
a nutshel, as to relate heavens happiness.


Reader, I shall speak to this subject, but briefly: Set the Holy Land before
thee, (as it is in a Map in a little room, yet by what I shall speak in this
place, and in the the last use, (as the spies by the clusters of grapes) thou
may gather the land is good, it flows with milk and honey, and this is
some of the fruit of it, Numb. 13.27.

The christians gain by death will appear in these two particulars. He shall
gain a freedom from all evil, the fruition of all good; and is not this man a
gainer? Ademptio omnium malorum.


First, he shall by death be freed from all evil; the immediate and full
presence of the chiefest good which the believer shall enjoy after death, will
cause the absence of all evil: The influences of that Sun will scatter every
mist, and disperse all clouds, which now darken the conditions of pious souls:
The day of a christians dissolution will be the day of his redemption, Luke
21.28. this may be the reason why the Apostle places redemption last, says an
Expositor, 1 Cor. 1.30. Now we have Christ made into us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, but then redemption. When the Saint is passed
through the red Sea of death, and landed at the true Canaan, he shall then see
all his bodily and spiritual enemies dead on the shore. In the middle Region
there are storms and tempests, and so here below; but above all is calm and
quiet: While the christian is upon earth, evils like Jobs messengers follow
him, one upon the heels of another; but when he leaves the earth, every evil
will take it is eternal leave of him.

Therere are two evils, which are indeed the only evils (though the first is
by much the worst) the evil of sin, or defilement; and the evil of suffering,
or chastisement: Now a believer by death shall be freed from both these.

First, from the evil of sin: and in this take notice, that death will deliver
the christian both from the commission of it, and from all suggestions tending
to it.

First, Death will free the Saint from the commission of sin: In hell there is
nothing but wickedness: In heaven there is nothing but holiness: The
unregenerate man is never so wicked, as after death; now sin is in its
minority, then it will be in it is maturity now it is but the sinners evening,
but then i^ will be a perfect night of blackness, o^ darkness: The godly man
is never so holy as after death; grace is now in its infancy, then it will
attain to its full age; now it is as the morning light, then it will attain to
its noonday brightness: Sin is now by a spiritual life mortified, that it
does not reign; but then by death it shall be nullified, that it shall not so
much as remain in a believer.

The ungodly after death shall be perfectly like the Devil (the Indians some
write, have a conceit that death will transform them into the ugly shape of
the Devil; and therefore in their language they have the same word for a dead
man and a Devil) and the godly after death, shall be perfectly like God.

They are now partakers of the divine nature, and so like him (yet how much
unlike him!) but when they shall see him in heaven, then they shall be like him
indeed, 1 John 3.2. Pet. Martyr tells us of a deformed woman (married to an
uncomely man) that by looking much on beautiful pictures brought forth lovely
child^en. Loc. Com. pars. 1. cap. 6.
. Vision causes an assimulation in nature, Genesis 30.37, 38. in grace, 2 Cor.
3.18. so here in glory.

The Schoolmen put the question, How the Angels and souls of men in heaven,
come to be impeccable, or without sin Vis^o beatifica impotentes reddit ad
peccandum.
, and answer, that it is by the beatifical visions; The Apostle seems to
intimate as much in the fore-quoted place, When he shall appear we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is. As the Pearl by the often beating of
the sunbeams upon it, becomes radiant; so the Christian being ever beheld by
the Lord, and always beholding the face of his Father in heaven, shall be more
like him, then ever child was to father on earth; then that Profession of
Christ will be abundantly verified, Behold thou art fair my love, behold thou
art fair, thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4.1. and
7. Then the end of Christ's passion shall be fully attained, when he shall
present to himself a glorious Church without spot or wrinckle, or any such
thing, ( Ephesians. 5.27.) not only in regard of imputed righteousness, or
justification, but also in regard of imparted righteousness, or sanctification.

Here the heart of a Christian is like Rebeccahs womb, it has twins struggling
in it (the appearance of the Church is as it were the company of two Armies,
Cant. 6.13.) the old man, and the new man, flesh and spirit, the Law in the
members warring against the Law of the mind: As there was war betwixt Asa and
Baasha all their days* so there is betwixt the regenerate and unregenerate
part all the time of this life; but this gracious conflict shall then end in a
glorious conquest, when the death of the body shall quite destroy this body of
death: Sin in the heart is like the leprosy in the house, which would not out
till the house was pulled down, Levit. 14.44, 45. But when soul and body shall
be parted for a time, sin and the soul shall be separated to eternity.

And as the heart, so the life of a Christian is like a book which has many
errata's in it; and therefore legendus cum venia; the whitest swan has her
black feet; the best gold must have its grains of allowance. There is no man
that lives upon earth, and sins not, Eccles. 7.20. All of us offend in many
things, and many of us in all things. Jam. 3.2. Omne opus justi damnabile est
si judicio Dei judicetur. Luther in Alsert.
Our righteousness as a filthy rag. Isa 64.6. Our graces not without their
defects; Lord I believe, help mine unbelief, Mark 9.24. Our duties not without
their defaults; When I would do good, evil is present with me, Romans 7.21. The
purest fire has some smoke, the richest Wine some dregs, but death will turn
sin out of all its holds, and leave it not so much as a being in the
Christian. The bodies of men have usually a mighty shoot at death: but O what a
shoot will the soul of a Saint have, when it shall be carried by Angels to the
place, where the spirits of just men are made perfect! Heb. 12.23.

2. The soul alive in Christ shall be freed at death, from all suggestions and
temptations to sin. Then a Christian shall be above the reach of all Satan's
batteries; then that promise will be performed, That the God of peace will
tread Satan under the Saints feet, Romans 16.20. Now Peter is winnowed, Paul is
buffeted, David is stirred by the wicked one to number the people. If Joshua be
ministering unto the Lord, Satan will be at his right hand to resist him, Zach.
3.1. It Is no small unhappiness to a Saint, that he is here followed with
unwearied assaults, that the Prince of darkness is restless in casting in his
fireballs, to put the soul into an hellish flame; though he should never be
conquered, yet for the Christian to have his quarters beaten up night and day,
must needs disquiet him. To have blasphemous thoughts of a God infinitely great
and gracious, to have mean and vile apprehensions of a Savior imcomparably
precious, cast into him, though he close not with them, cannot but wound him to
the heart: As for a chaste Matron that loatheth the thoughts of dishonesty, to
be continually solicited to folly, is a sore vexation. The temptations of our
Lord Jesus, were a sad part of his humiliation.

But death will ease the soul of this trouble; As in heaven, there shall be no
tinder of a corrupt heart to take, so no devil like steel and flint to strike
fire. The crooked serpent could wind himself into the terrestrial, but shall
never creep into the celestial Paradise; his circuit is to go to and fro in the
earth, he cannot enter the confines of heaven; when he fell from his state of
integrity, he left that place of felicity, and cannot possibly recover it
again. The Saints on earth indeed are militant, fighting with him, but the
Saints in heaven are all Triumphant, wholly above him; more than conquerours
through him that loves them, Romans 8.37. There the children of God are gathered
together, and no Satan among them; there the son of David delivers his true
Israelites, from all their fears of this uncircumcised Philistine. When the
heavenly Mordecai comes to be a chief favorite in that high and holy Court, he
shall be freed from all his frights, about this enemy and adversary, this
wicked Haman.

The Ark and Dagon could not stand together in one house, much less can light
and darkness, Michael and the Dragon, God and the Devil dwell together in one
heaven.

If Ireland (as some write) be so pure a soil, that it will not nourish any
venomous creature; I am sure heaven is so pure, that into it can in no wise
enter any thing that defiles, Rev. 21. ult. it will not harbor those poisnous
serpents.

Heaven once (says an Author) spued them out, and it will not return to its
vomit, or lick them up again; no such dirty dog shall ever trample on that
golden pavement. There is such a cursed irreconcilable contrariety in their
natures, to the blessed company and exercises in heaven, that certainly they
cannot desire, much less delight in that place; If the Presence of Christ were
such a torment to them in his estate of humiliation: what a torment would it be
in his estate of exaltation! it is observable they left their own habitation,
Jude ver. 6. the word seems to imply, that when they lost their primitive
purity, they willingly lost that habitation of spiritual pleasures. But whether
he will or no, he shall be banished those coasts; though he now dog the Saint
at, and disturb him in every duty, he shall do it no more; The accuser of the
brethren shall be cast down, neither shall his place be found any more in
heaven, Rev. 12.8, 9.

Secondly, a Christian by death, shall not only be freed from the evil of sin
and defilement, but also from the evil of suffering and chastisement: Sublatae^
causa^, to^itur effectus.
the cause being taken away, the effects will cease. Sin is that
great-bellied mother (or rather Monster) which conceives and brings forth
all those losses, crosses, diseases, disgraces, sorrows and sufferings
whatsoever, that befall the children of men; though man may be the Butt, yet
sin is the mark at which the arrows of Divine displeasure are shot; man weaves
a spiders web of sin out of his own bowels, and then in entangled in it.
Wickedness alone is the original cause of all we, Lament. 3.39. Romans 6. ult.
But now at the death of a Saint, the fountain of sin will be dried up, and
therefore the streams of sufferings must be dried up also. The fuel being taken
away, the fire will go out of it self: sin and sorrow were born, do live, and
shall die together.

As sin is the original cause of all, so it is the final cause of most
afflictions. Sometimes they are for probation (as we shoot at good armor, that
we may prove it, and that we may praise it) but most commonly they are for
purgation, to amend something that is amiss: the fathers of the flesh chastize
for their pleasure; but the father of spirits for our profit, that we might be
partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.6. the quiet fruits of righteousness
blossom from the correcting rod: bitter Aloes purges the worms, winds and
thunder clear the air, frosts and showers whiten clothes; the husbandman uses
the flail to separate the chaff, and the refiner the fire to consume the
dross; but when the wheat shall be clean, there will be no need of the flail,
when the gold pure, no use of the fire: now says the Apostle, if need be, ye
are in heaviness, 1 Pet. 1.6. Mark, now if need be, now men have hard knots,
and therefore need sharp wedges: now men have strong corruptions, and therefore
need strong corrections; now the rod is as necessary as our daily bread:
chastisements are to teach men in Gods law, Psalm. 94.12. to search and heal
their spiritual sores; but now at death the Scholar in Christ's school will have
perfectly learned his lesson, and therefore there will be no need of a rod;
then the wounds of the soul will be perfectly cured, and these plasters will
fall off of themselves: Death will make him whole, that he can sin no more; and
so no worse, or so bad thing shall come to him.

There are three evils of affliction which I shall mention: The first on the
Name. The second on the Body. The third on the Soul.


From all which a believer shall be freed by death.

First, Death will free the Saint from ignominy on his name: Here if the world
cannot make the christian wound his conscience, they will be sure to wound his
credit: Elijah is counted the troubler of Israel, Nehemiah a rebel against the
King, David the song of the drunkards, and the scorn of the gluttons, Psalm
69.12.35.16. Isaiah and his children for signs and wonders, Isa. 8.18. Jeremiah
is a man of contention, Jer. 15.10. The son of man a wine-bibber and a glutton,
Paul a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition, Acts 24.10. the uprightest
Saint is marked for an hypocrite in the worlds Calendar: If they cannot smite
him with their hands (their arms are not long enough always) they will not
fail to smite him with their tongues: What a precise fool, say they, is such a
fellow! he dares not take up his cups as we do; but could we see his heart, it
is as bad as the worst of ours; he will do as bad or worse, when no body sees
him; he will not swear, but he will lie, I Will warrant you: He spends his time
in nothing but going to Sermons and meetings, and is as arrant a dissembler as
lives. Such an one of the same Society was guilty of such a sin, and they are
all alike: these are your professors. Thus the corruption of their hearts
breaks out at their lips, and they most wretchedly wound even Christ, through
the sides of the Christian.

But heaven will not only wipe away all tears from the christians eyes, but
also all blots off from his name. Upright Hezekiah in heaven is above the sound
of cursed Rabshekah's tongue, which was set on fire of hell. Now holy David is
got up that heavenly hill, that Mount Zion, he hears not the railings and
revilings of sinful Shimei. The most spiteful scorner of them all cannot throw
that dirt so high, with which he bespatters the Saints reputation here below.

Secondly, As death will free the christian from ignominy in his name; so
likewise from infirmities in his body: Diseases cause death, but death will
cure all diseases: In this life Job had his botches, Hezekiah his boil, David
his wounds and sores, the poor widow her issue of blood; one man wastes away
with a consumption, like a candle, till all the matter is spent: Another
labors under a continual ach, that like the importunate widow will give him
no rest day nor night: this man spends his days in pain, that man has
wearisome nights appointed to him: In some the bridle is taken off the fire,
and they burn with a Fever; in others the flood-gate is taken up from the
water, and they are like to be drowned with a dropsy. The patient man
complains, my breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the grave is ready for
me, Job 17.1. the upright man cries out, My wounds stink, and are corrupt, my
loins are filled with a loathsome disease: In one, the keepers of the house
tremble with a palsy or lamenesse. In a second, the sound of grinders is low,
through weakness. In a third, those that look out of the windows are darkened
through blindness. In a fourth, the daughters of Music are brought down with
deafness: O what an army, not only of moral, but natural adversaries, has
every man in his own bowels, constantly set in array against him, marching up,
sometimes one, Physicians tell us, that 2000 diseases annoy man's body, whereof
200 affect the eyes.
sometime another, as the Lord of hosts gives the word of command. So that
indeed man's body is a spittle or an hospital for diseases. But death will help
all this; as the blind man told the lame, when they met at the stake; Brother,
you may cast away your staff, death will cure us both: the Physician of souls
will by death heal all the diseases of the Saints bodies; there are some
diseases which are called opprobria medici, because they cannot cure them; but
none are opprobria Christi, he heals all whom he undertaketh. If the higher
an house stands on earth, it be esteemed the healthier; surely then the
highest heavens must be a pure air, and all health, Revel. 20.4. there shall be
no more death, nor any more pain, for the former things are past away: So that
every christian that dies in the faith, how diseased soever he were before,
shall then immediately (as in the Gospel) be made every whit whole, John 7.23.

Thirdly, As death will free the believer from diseases in his body, so also
from sorrows in his soul: The christian lives upon earth, as in a valley of
tears, and often mingleth his drink with weeping: As he is a man, he is born to
sorrows, as the sparks fly upward; he comes into the world crying, and goes
out groaning; and his whole life from the womb to the tomb is in some regard a
living death, or a dying life. But as he is a christian, he drinks deepest of
this cup of sorrows; the world is a tender mother to her children, but a
stepmother to strangers. Sometimes the afflictions of the good cause
high water in the Saints heart; by the rivers of Babylon he sits down and
weepeth, when he remembers Zion, Psalm. 137.1. He cannot but sympathize with
the miseries of his fellow members, as being himself in the body: Sometimes the
transgressions of the bad cloth him with mourning, like Croessus son, though
dumb before, yet he cries out when his father is wounded. As with a sword they
pierce his bones, when they blasphemously say unto him, Psalm. 42.10
Where is thy God? rivers of tears run down his eyes, because the wicked
forsake Gods Law, Psalm. 119.136. Sometimes his own corruptions, like so many
daggers stab him to the heart, that he should abuse such an Ocean of
unspeakable love, by so unsuitable a heart, and so unanswerable a life: He
confesses his iniquities, and is sorry for his sins, Psalm. 38.18. Sometimes
divine desertions darken and cloud all his comforts; When God hides his face,
he is troubled, Psalm. 30.7. As there are no joys like to those joys wherewith
God reviveth him in the day of his favor; so there is no sorrow like to those
sorrows wherewith God depresseth him in the day of his anger. Thus his life is
a circle of sorrows, but death will be the Funeral of his sorrows, and
resurrection of his joys now he sows in tears, but then he shall reap in
joy. The day of death is a Saints Marriage-day: Sampsons wife indeed wep^ on
her wedding day, Judge. 14.16. but when the soul, which in this life is
contracted shall at death be solemnly espoused, and more nearly conjoined unto
Jesus Christ, all tears shall be wiped from its eyes, there shall be no more
sorrow, Revel. 21.4. At that Marriage-day Christ will turn all water into wine,
all mourning into mirth, all sighing into singing, and cause the bones which he
has broken to rejoice: Now the Saints sorrows are not perfect sorrows, ( non
dantur purae tenebrae, to the believer) it shines and showreth at the same
time: he sorroweth not as they which have no hope; but his joy at death shall
be perfect joy, fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. ult. and permanent joy: when they
shall see Christ at death, their hearts shall rejoice, and their joy shall no
man take from them, John 16.22. then the ransomed of the Lord shall return and
come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away, Isa. 35. ult.

So much for the privative gain of a christian by death, or his freedom from
evil.

There is a second thing which is positive, Ade^pt ^o omnium bonoru^.
and that is the fruition of all good which a believer shall gain by death; and
in this Head I shall observe these three gradations.

First, a believer by death shall gain the company of perfect Christians: Death
will exempt him from all commerce with sinners, and teach him fully the meaning
of that article, The communion of Saints: In the field of this world the tares
and the wheat grow together; but in that heavenly Garner they are parted
asunder. There is no treacherous Judas among the Apostles, no covetous Demas
among the Disciples, no Amorites to be pricks in the eyes, and thorns in the
sides of the Israelite, no bestial Sodomite to vex righteous Lot with their
unclean conversation, no flattering Doeg sets his foot in that heavenly
Sanctuary. David does not there complain, Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech,
that I dwell in the tents of Kedar, My soul has long dwelt with him that
hates peace, Psalm. 120.4, 5. nor Isaiah, that he dwells among a people of
unclean lips, Isa. 6.5. nor Elijah, that he is left alone. Hell holds none
but sinners, and heaven has only Saints; He that dies in the Lord, goes to
the congregation of the firstborn, to the spirits of just men made perfect,
Heb. 12.23. And questionless the sweet company will be part of our felicity.
If Platinus the Philosopher could say, Let us make haste to our Country, there
are our parents, there are all our friends; and if Cicero the Orator could say,
O praeclaru^ diem, cum ad illud animorum concilium coetumque proficiscar, Cic
de Senect.
O what a brave day will that be, when I shall go to the council and company of
happy souls, to my Cato, and other Roman Worthies! How much better will it be
with the Christian! when he wall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in
the Kingdom of heaven, when he shall leave the rout and rabble of wicked ones,
and be admitted into the society of all that died in the faith, and be joyfully
welcomed by the melodious quire of Angels, and be heartily embraced by the
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, yea all the Saints! Surely if ever thar Proverb
were true, it is here, The more the merrier: The fair streams there will never
be drawn dry, though it be divided into many channels: the music there is not
the less harmonious, because many hear it; nor the light of the Sun of
righteousness the less pleasant, because many see it; and O what a gain will
this be, to enjoy the company of them that are holy? If Aaron when he met Moses
on earth was glad at his heart, certainly there was greater joy at their
meeting in heaven. If David placed all his delight in the Saints here below,
when they shined a little (with the light of purity) like the Moon, and had
their spots in them; what delight does he take in them above, now they have
perfect purity, and shine like the Sun in the firmament of their father! Matthew.
13.43. If it were so lovely a sight to see Solomon in his rags of mortality,
that the Queen of Sheba came so far to behold it, what will it be to see him in
his robes of glory!

Mr. Thomas Wilson, Minister of Maidstone in K^nt, an eminent servant of the
Lord Jesus.
I remember I have sometimes heard an able holy Minister (now with Christ) say,
that that sight of five hundred Saints, and Jesus Christ among them, 1 Cor.
15.6. was one of the bravest goodliest sights that ever eyes beheld on earth:
Sure I am they that are in heaven see a far better, beholding Jesus Christ in
the midst of many thousands.

Secondly, A Christian shall gain by death the nearest communion with the Lord
Jesus Christ; and O what happiness^ is included in this Head! The presence of
Christ on earth can make a mean cottage a most delightful court; to the three
children it turned the fiery furnace into a delectable palace; what will it do
then in Heaven. Bernard says, he had rather be in his chimny-corner with
Christ, Mallem in camino meo cum Christo quam in coelo sine Christo. Bern.
than in heaven without Christ. Luther says, he had rather be in hell with
Christ, than in heaven without Christ; communion with Christ can sweeten the
bitterest condition. Christ alone is the salt which seasons all the Saints
comforts, without which nothing is savoury to the spiritual taste. A duty
without Christ, is like a body without a soul, which has neither loveliness
nor life in it. Communion with Christ is one great motive which inciteth the
Saint to, and encourages him in the Ordinances of God: He attends on
Scriptures because they are they that testify of Christ; the pearl of price is
hid in that field: Cant. 5.1.
In them the lips of Christ, like lillies, drop sweet smelling myrrh; and O
how his heart burns within him, with love to Christ, whilst Christ is opening
to him the Scriptures! He frequenteth prayer, because therein Christ and his
soul converse together; in that Ordinance he enjoys much of Ch ists quickening
presence; he speaks to Christ by holy supplications, and Christ to him by
heavenly consolations: He minds fasting, because therein his soul may with
Jesus Christ have a spiritual feast; or the greatest cause of his weeping is
with Mary, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid
him: The means of grace are therefore so desirable and delightful, because rhey
are the Galleries wherein he walks, talks, feeds, and feasteth with the
Lord of glory.

The highest duty without Christ is as a dish without meat, from which he goes
as empty and unsatisfied as he came to it; It is to him as Tullies Hortens. to
Austine, of little worth, if the Name of Jesus be not there.

If he love the Saints with a love of complacency, it is because they are
Christ's seed; if he love the sinner with a love of pity, it is for Christ's sake;
his affections are contracted or enlarged toward any thing, as it has less
or more relation to Christ; and nothing is of true value or worth in his
esteem, which has not aliquid Christi, something of Christ in it.

Now consider Reader, if the presence of Christ be so precious, so pleasant to
the Christian here, when he can see so little of his excellent beauty, and
receive so little of his infinite bounty; what will it be when he shall appear
to the soul in all his royalty, and fill the water-pots of the soul up to the
brim, with the riches of grace and glory!

Demorrhathus of Corinth says, they lost the chief part of their lives
happiness, that did not see Alexander sit on the throne of Darius; if that
were such an happy sight, what a sight shall the Saints have to see Christ on
his Fathers Throne? O how much is included in those few words, To be with
Christ, which is the description of the Saints gain by death! Philip. 1.23.
This was the great Legacy and portion which Christ bequeathed his in his last
Will and Testament, John 17.24. This was the great promise and sweet meats
which the tender father provided to comfort his fainting children with at his
own Funeral, John 16.22. This was the great prayer which Paul makes for his
beloved Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.22. This was the enlivening cordial which the good
Physician administered to the dying patient, Luke 23.43. This is the great
reason for which the godly long for death, Philip. 1.23. I desire death, says
Melancthon, that I may enjoy the desirable fight of Christ: Ut desiderato fruar
conspectu Christi.
and O when will that blessed hour come! when shall I be dissolved? when shall
I be with Christ? said holy Mr. Robert Bolton, on his Deathbed: Surely then
this gain is great, which the Saint shall have by death. He that has Christ
with him by grace, may say with Peter, Master, it is good to be here; but he
that is with Christ in glory, may say with Paul, To be with Christ is far
better, without doubt best of all. They were blessed which saw him in his
estate of debasement, Luke 10.23. but much more blessed will they be, that
shall see him in his estate of advancement.

Thirdly, the Saint by death shall gain the full and immediate fruition of God.
The former were excellent; but this as the Sun among the Planets surpasses
them all: The other were as Rivers, this is the Ocean; they were as branches
bearing goodly fruit, but this is the root upon which they grow: they all as
lines meet in this center: this is the top-stone of the celestial building;
this is the highest stair, the apex of the Saints happiness. This is the
greatest gift which the creature can possibly ask, or the infinite God bestow.
The boundless God cannot well give a greater mercy than this. Is any thing,
yea are all things in heaven and earth equal to God? God alone is the highest
object of faith, 1 Pet. 1.21. and therefore the greatest ground of joy and
satisfaction to the soul, Psalm 17. ult. The Vision of God is the beatifical
vision, 1 John 3.3. and therefore the fruition of God will cause perfection in
the soul. The enjoyment of God is the great desire and delight of the Saints on
earth, Psalm 42.1, 2. nay it is the happiness of the humane nature of the Lord
Jesus, Psalm 16.5, 6. without question then it will be the Heaven of Heaven.
That excellent description of Heaven mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.28.
That God may be all in all.
1 Thessalonians. 4. ult. is a being ever with the Lord. This is all; the most fluent
tongue must be here silent, and the most capacious understanding will be soon
at a stand, in the consideration of the felicity which flows from the
fruition of God.

The presence of this King will make the Court indeed. For the Lord to be with
us is our chiefest security; though I walk in the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me; Psalm. 23.4. but for us to be
with the Lord, will be our choicest felicity. In his presence is fullness of
joy, at his right hand are pleasures for evermore, Solus tues jucunditas totus
mundus est amaritudine plenus. Aug. in Psa. 85.
Psalm. 16. ult. God is not wealth or honor, or comfort, or friends, or earth,
or heaven, but something infinitely beyond all these. God is an immense Ocean
of all excellencies and perfections, without either banks or bottom. God is
virtually eminently every thing, all things; As in the Wars between Charles the
fifth, and Francis the first, King of France, when the Emperors Herald had bid
defiance to the King, Heil. Geogra.
from Charles Emperor of Germany, King of Castile, Leon, Arragon, and Naples,
Archduke of Austria, with the rest of his Titles: the King commanded the
Heralds to return the challenge from Francis King of France, commanding them to
repeat France as many times as the other had Petty Earledomes in his style,
intimating that one France was worth them all; so truly, one God answers all
things. He is health and strength, riches and relations, joy and pleasures,
light and life, and much more; all the excellencies scattered and shadowed in
the creature, are united and reallized in the Creator who is blessed for ever;
One God is worth more than all his creatures can sum up in millions of ages.

This is the gain of a Saint by death, he shall gain the fruition of God. He
who has lost God, has nothing more to lose, he has lost all; the loss of
God is hell, 2 These. 1.7. But he that has gained God, has nothing more to
gain. He has got all, the gain of God is heaven.

It is worthy our observation, that Job speaking of God, Job 13.16. says, He
shall be my salvation. An Expositour observes on that Text, Job does not say,
He shall give me salvation, but he shall be my salvation. Car. in loc.
It more pleases a Saint that he enjoys God, then that he enjoys
salvation. As nothing that a godly man gives God, will content him, unless he
give God himself: so nothing which God gives a godly man will satisfy him,
Fecisti nos proptert^, and inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te.
Aug. confess. lib. 1. cap. 1.
unless God gives himself to him; His voice is non tua, sedte Domine. Lord
not thine, but thee; he is better pleased that God is his salvation, then that
he saves him; Whom have I in heaven but thee? says he; There are Saints,
Angels, Archangels, says Musculus; but in the presence of this glorious Sun,
those stars must vanish and disappeare. What are Saints, what are Angels
without God? and it is true of things, as well as persons; what is the glory,
what the pleasures, what the joys of heaven without God? What Is all the robes
and riches, what is all the crowns and comforts, what is all the delights, the
delicates, the diadems of heaven, without the God of heaven, but as the
Funeral-banquet for some eminent Prince, where is large provision, and great
cost, but no cheer? No, it is God alone that is the center to which the Saint
moves, and in which he rests.

O what happiness shall the holy man have at death, to be ever with God! If
that Queen could say of Solomon's attendants, Happy are thy men, happy are these
thy servants which stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom, 1 King.
10.8. how happy are they that dwell in Gods Mansionhouse, ever beholding his
face, and hearing his voice! It is reported of Eudoxius, that he was so extreme
desirous to be near the Sun, that he might see it, and know its nature, that he
professed, so he might obtain his desire, though but for one hour, he would
willingly be burn^ up by it the next hour; how much worth then is the sight and
knowledge of this Sun of righteousness; and what gainers are they by death,
that come thereby to see him as he is, and to know him as they are known of
him? 1 John 3.2. 1 Cor. 13.12.

But the Christian shall not barely enjoy God after death, for that he does in
this life, but he shall enjoy God fully. Now the Saint enjoys a little of
God, and O how refreshing is it to his weary soul! but then he shall have as
much of God, as his heart can wish or hold. In this life there is a
Communication of God, answerable to the capacities of men, and the fault is in
us, not in God that we receive no more of him on earth. The ground is not in
the Sun, but in the narrowness of our windows, that we partake no more of its
light; the cause is in the smallness of our vessels, not in the well, that we
carry away no more of its water. If our mouths were never so wide-opened, God
would fill them now: But then the windows of the soul shall be widened, and
the vessels of the heart enlarged, and so fitted for, and filled with a greater
participation of God. There is not the least complaint of want; All the
Patriarchs sacks are there filled with corn; There David's cup runs over;
there the holy Ephesians are filled with all the fullness of God. In that
Fathers house there is bread enough, and to spare for all his children. There
is given to all good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over,
Luke 6.38.

We say there is no fishing like to the Sea, because the Sea has the greatest
plenty, and the vastest capacity; there are fish enough to fill all our nets,
and lade all our ships. I may more truly say, there is no fruition like to the
fruition of God; he has enough, not only to supply all our indigencies, and to
satisfy all our necessities, and desires, but he can do abundantly for us,
above what we are able to ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. God has enough to fill
himself, as boundless a being as he is; surely then he has enough to fill the
limited soul of man; that which can fill the Ocean, may well fill a spoon.

Now a Christian is described by his hungring and thirsting, his panting and
breathing after a perfect conformity to God, that thereby he may be prepared
for perfect Communion with God; but blessed are they which now thus hunger and
thirst, for then they shall be filled, Matthew. 5.6. Well (...) a good bait, as
the word used by our Savior does signify; He that drinks of that water
which God shall there give him, shall thirst no more; (...) hoc proprie dicitur
de armentis; nam (...) prati vocant gramen aut pabulum.
That God who fills the bellies of his enemies on earth with the hidden
treasures of common bounty, will surely fill the souls of his children in
heaven, with the precious treasures of special mercy. The soul that now sippeth
of the water of life, shall then drink a full draught out of the Rivers of ^ods
pleasures. The Christian who can now only taste God to be gracious, shall then
have a full meal when he shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God. They are
before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple; and he
that sits on the Throne, shall dwell among them; they shall hunger no more,
neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat; For
the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne, shall feed them, and shall lead
them unto living fountains of waters, Rev. 7.15.16, 17.

Observe Reader; I say a Christian shall gain by death, Immediate fruition of
God.
a full immediate fruition of God; now the Saint drinks of the waters of
life, (and they are pleasant, though) through the Conduits and Cisterns of
Ordinances; but with what joy will he draw water immediately out of the Well of
salvation? Dulcius ^x ipso font, etc.
We read in Joshua 5.12. when Israel came to Canaan, Manna ceased, and they did
eat of the fruits of the Land. While the Saint is in the Wilderness of this
world, he needs, and feeds on the Manna of the Word, Sacraments, Prayer,
and the like; but when death shall land him at that place of which Canaan was
but a type, the Manna of Ordinances shall cease, he shall eat the fruits of
that Land. Ordinances are necessary for, and suitable to our state of
imperfection; Jacob drove his flocks, as they were able to go, so does Christ
his sheep.

Here we are in a state of uncleanenesse, and therefore want water in Baptism
to wash us, (says an Eminent Divine) in a state of darkness, and therefore
want the light of the Word to direct us; in a state of weariness, and
therefore want a Lords day of rest to refresh us; in a state of weakness, and
therefore want bread in the Supper to strengthen us; in a state of sorrow, and
therefore want wine to comfort us; in a state of beggary, and therefore want
prayer to fetch some spiritual alms from the beautiful Gate of Gods Temple:
Whilst the Saint is as a child, he thinks as a child, speaks as a child,
understands as a child; but when he shall come to be a perfect man, he shall
put away these childish things: when every earthly member shall be mortified,
and the body of death wholly destroyed, when the faculties of the soul shall be
enlarged, and the sanctification of the inner man perfected, when the rags of
mortality shall be put off, and grace swallowed up in glory, The Sun shall be
no more thy light by day, nor the Moon thy light by night, but the Lord thy God
thine everlasting light, and thy God thy glory, Isa. 60.19.

Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, are for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the edifying of the body of Christ, no longer then till we all come in the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11.12, 13.
When God shall be all in all, then (and not till then) Ordinances will be
nothing at all. When the Saint comes to his journeys end, he may throw away his
staff. Now how much will this add to the former, that the Christian shall
without ordinances enjoy God! How lovely is the face of God, though it be but
in the glass of the Gospel? 2 Cor. 3.18. this was the one thing which David
begged, that he might dwell in the house of the Lord, to see the beauty of his
face, Psalm. 27.4. Ah how lovely will he be, when the Christian shall see him
face to face! 1 Cor. 13.12.

If it be so good to draw near to God on earth, Psalm. 73. ult. and if they are
blessed that watch at Wisdoms gates, and wait at the posts of her doors, Prove.
8.34. how good will it be to draw near to God in heaven; and how blessed are
they that (wait not at the door, but) dwell in that house!

How pleasant will it be for the soul, when it is eyes shall be strengthened to
see God as he is, without the spectacles of Ordinances. We esteem that honey
sweetest which is sucked immediately out of the comb (though honey out of a dish
is sweet) and we do with more delight eat that fruit which we gather ourselvs
from the tree, than we do that which is brought to us through others hands: The
enjoyment of God is so sweet in the dish of a Duty, that a Christian would
sooner lose the best friend he has than it: But O how sweet will it be in the
comb of immediate communion! This fruit is very delightful and pleasant, as it
is conveyed through the hands of Ministers (though the liquor will sent of the
cask) but O with what delight (Christian, can thou read it, and thy heart not
warmed with joy?) with what pleasure will thou with thine own hands gather this
fruit from the Tree of life, that stands in the midst of Paradise? Rev. 22.

Thus I have given thee a little of that great gain which a Saint has by
death; death will free him ftom all evil, both of sin and suffering; it will
give him the fruition of ali good, in the enjoyment of perfect Saints, and the
blessed Savior, and in full immediate communion with the infinite God, who is
blessed, and blessing his for ever: This is the heritage of a righteous man
from God, and this is the portion of his cup: thus shall it be done to the man,
whom the King of heaven delights to honor. There is but one thing more
required to make the Christian perfectly happy; and that is the eternity of all
this: but I shall speak to that in the last use. I now proceed to the
application of the Point.

The first use which I shall make of this Doctrine, shall be by way of
information: If such as have Christ for their life, shall have gain by their
death; it informs us of the difference betwixt the deaths of the sinner and
the Saint: the one is an unspeakable gainer; the other an unconceivable loser
by death. Death to the good is the gate through which they go into the kingdom
of heaven: death to the bad is the trap-door through which they fall into hell.
The godly dies as well as the wicked; but the wicked man dies not so well as
the godly. The metal and the dross go both into the fire; but the metal is
refined, and the dross consumed: As the cloud in the wilderness had a light
side to the Israelite, but a dark side to the Egyptian: so death has nothing
but light and comfort for the Israel of God; nothing but darkness and sorrow
for the sinful Egyptians. Death to every one is a messenger sent from the Lord
of life; it comes to the regenerate, as the young Prophet to Jehu; I have an
errand to thee, O Captain; and what was his errand? he poured the oil on his
head, saying, Thus says the Lord, I have anointed thee King over Israel, 2
Kings 9.5, 6. It is a messenger from God to call the Christian to a Kingdom
which cannot be shaken. But it comes to the unregenerate, as Ehud to Eglon:
And Ehud said, I have a message from God unto thee; and what was his message?
Judges 3.20, 21. And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his
right thigh, and thrust it into Eglons belly: It is a messenger from God, with
a mortal wounding, killing, stabbing message to a sinner. The pale white horse
of death rides before, and the red fiery horse of hell follows after.

The people of God pass safely through this red Sea of death, which his enemies
assaying to do, are drowned, are damned.

There is a great dis-agreement in the lives of the holy and unholy; but O what
a vast difference is there in their deaths! they are like two parallel lines;
how far soever they go together, they never touch in a point. Their ways
differ, and therefore their ends must necessarily differ: Every man's end is
virtually in his way; their ways differ as much as light and darkness, and
therefore their ends must differ as far as heaven and hell. The one walks in
his own ways, Prove. 14.14. in the ways of his own heart, Eccles. 7.9. in the
broad way of the flesh and the world, Matthew. 7.13. and so his end is damnation,
Phil. 3.19. his latter end is, that he shall be destroyed, Fine discernuntur
improbi ab electis. Moller in Ps 37
for ever, Numb. 24.20. The other walks in the way of the Lord, Psalm 119.1.
in the way of his testimonies, ver. 14. in the narrow way of self-denial,
mortification, and crucifying the flesh, Ma^t. 7.14. and so his end is peace,
Psalm. 37.37. Such as the seed is which is sown, such is the crop which is
reaped; the unregenerate man sows to the flesh, and of the flesh reapeth
corruption: The sanctified soul sows to the spirit, and of the spirit reapeth
life everlasting, Galat. 6.6, 7.

The blind world indeed, as it sees not their difference in life, (the life of
a Saint is an hidden life, Col. 3.3. the Kings daughter is all glorious, but
it is within, Psalm. 45.13. the jewels of her graces are laid up in that privy
Drawer, the hidden man of the heart:) so it beholds not the difference in
their deaths: As dies the wise man, so dies the fool, to the eye of sense,
and they want the eye of faith, Eccles. 2.16. We see no difference, say they,
betwixt the death of them you call profane, and your precise ones; they die
both alike to our judgments.

But this conceit, Reader, if thou art such an Athiest, proceeds from thy
blindness and unbelief. Thou art probably in the chamber, when a drunkard, a
swearer, or a civil moral, yet unsanctified, neighbor departs this life;
thou see his body trembling, panting, groaning, dying; but thou do not see
the ten thousand times worse condition his poor soul is in: thou see his
kindred or relations weeping; but thou do not see the infernal spirits
rejoicing; thou do not see the greedy Devils, that waited by the bedside,
like so many roaring lions for their desired and deserved prey: thou do not
see when the soul left the body, how it was immediately seized on by those
frightful hell hounds in a most hideous horrible manner, and haled to the place
of intolerable and eternal torments; thou do not see the shoutings of those
legions in hell, at the coming in of a new prisoner, to bear a part in the
undergoing of divine fury, in their blasphemies against heavens Majesty, and
in their estate of hopelessnesse and desperation.

Men, says a modern writer, like silly fishes, see one another caught, and
jerkt out of the pond of life; but they see not (alas) the fire and pan into
which they are cast, who die in their sins; Oh it had been better surely for
such, if they had never been born, as Christ said of Judas, then to be brought
forth to the murderer (that old manslayer) to be hurled into hell, there to
suffer such things as they shall never be able to avoid, or abide.

On the other side, thou stand by a scorned persecuted Saint, when he is
bidding adieu to a sinful world; thou see the struglings and droopings of his
outward man, but thou see not the reviving cordial the Physician of souls is
preparing for his inward man; thou do not see those glorious Angels which
watch and wait upon this heaven-born soul.

That wagon or chariot, which the son of Joseph sends to fetch his relation
to a true Goshen, Never Roman Emperor rode in such a Chariot of Triumph, as the
Saint does to heaven.
the inheritance of the Saints in light, is as invisible to thee, as those
chariots of fire on the mountain were to the servant of the Prophet: When the
soul bids the body good night, till the morning of the resurrection, thou
do not see those ministering spirits (sent down for the good of this heir of
salvation) presently solacing and saluting it. Thou do not see how stately
it is attended, how safely conducted, how gladly received into the bosom of
Abraham, into the fathers house, into that City, whose builder and maker is
God. Thou do not see the soul putting off with the clothing of the body,
all sin and misery, and putting on the white linen of the Saints, even perfect
purity, matchless joy, and eternal felicity. When thou can see these things
with the eye of faith, thou will easily grant a vast difference between the
death of the gracious and graceless.

Reader, if thou art dead in thy sins, and unacquainted with this spiritual
life, which I have before described, nothing of that endless gain which the
godly shall enjoy at death, belongs to thee; none of that fullness of joy, of
those rivers of pleasures, of that eternal weight of glory shall thou partake
of; I may say to thee, as Simon Peter to Simon Magus, thou have no part, nor
^^t in this matter, for thine heart is not right in the sight of God: Thou
may like the madman at Athens, lay claim to all the vessels that come into
the haven; but the vessels of the promises richly laden with the treasures of
grace and love, do not at all appertain to thee. If like a dog thou snatchest
at the childrens bread, thou art more bold than wel-come, and wilt one day be
well beaten for thy presumption. Reader, if thou art unregenerate and so die,
look to thy self, for thy lot must fall on this side the promised Land. Thou
may like a Surveyour of Land, take a view of another Manor, and bring a
return, how stately the house is, how pleasant the gardens, how delightful the
walks, how fruitful the Pastures, how finely it is seated, how fully it is
woodded, how sweetly it is watered, how fitly it is every way accommodated: but
as long as the Pronoun is wanting, it can be but little comfort, it is none of
thine. So thou may read, and hear much of that comfort, joy and richness of
that incomparable Kingdom, which the holy shall immediately upon their deaths
enter into; but what is all this to thee, when thou must be without it for
ever? thou may see Abram afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom, but between him
and thee, there will be a great gulf.

As a stranger thou may hear the last Will and Testament of Christ read, and
therein the fair, rich and large portions, which he has bequeathed to his
children, John 17.24. Luke 12.32. but not the least mention made of any good
for thee; look from the beginning of Genesis, to the end of Revelation, and see
if there be one good word spoken to thee, whilst thou art in thy natural
estate. Moses like, thou may by the prospective of Scripture, have a Pisgah
sight of Palestine, of that good Land flowing with milk and honey; but as God is
true, if thou die in unregeneracy, thou shall never enjoy one foot of it.

The worst of a Saint is past when he dies; but thy worst O sinner is to come;
there are some dregs in the bottom which thou art yet to drink down, thou have
thy good things here, and he his evil things; but at death he is comforted, and
thou art tormented. He has all his hell upon earth, his heaven is to come;
thou have all thy heaven on earth, and thy hell is to come when thou passest
into another world; the hell of a Saint is an easy hell. But ah how hot is
that hell in hell, how fiery is that furnace, how how terrible those torments? I
may conceive somewhat the damned feel most, but no tongue can express them.

But it may be, Friend, thou art one that thrivest in this world, and therefore
do not trouble thy head, much less thy heart, with the things of another
world; thou art unwilling to put a spoonful of those thoughts into thy sauce,
least it should make thy meat unsavory, it would mar thy mirth, and spoil thy
sports. As Sigismund the Emperor, did not love the pronunciation of the Greek
Zeta, because it represented the gnashing teeth of a dying man; so thou art
resolved to banish such enemies (as thou think) out of thy coasts, and like
a bear, to go down that steep hill of death backward. But know thou, O man,
that whether thou will consider of thy death beforehand or no, it is hastening
upon thee; though thou put it far from thee, whether thou will or no it
draws nigh to thee; the ship moves not so fast in the waters, nor the Sun in
the heavens, as thou art hastening toward thy long, thine everlasting home,
and then death will bring thee up a reckoning for all thy sweet morsels, merry
meetings, time and talents whatsoever; believe it then, thou will have sour
sauce for all thy sweetmeats; thy presumption will prove but like Hamans
banquet before execution. What advantage then will thy suni-shiny morning of
common mercies bring thee, when (as on Sodom) it will be followed with flakes
of fire and brimstone before night? Do thou not know, that when the wicked
flourish, it is that they may be destroyed for ever? Psalm. 92.7. The higher
thou ascendest on this ladder, the greater thy fall, when death turns thee
off; thou art but ripening for ruin, and fatting on earth to fry in hell, all
the while thou art flourishing in a course of sinning; nay, thou may be much
nearer hell, then thou art aware of; The metal when it shines brightest in
the fire, is nearest melting; thou like a candle, may give a blaze when thou
art going out of the world, into blackness of darkness for ever. The Hawk
flies high, and is as highly prized being set upon a Perch, and set out with
the gingling bells of encouragement, and carried on his Masters fist, but being
once dead, and pitched over the Perch, is cast upon the dunghill as good for
nothing; The Hen scrapes in the dust, nothing rewarded while she lives, but
being dead, is brought as a choice dish to her Masters Table; Thus wicked men
in this life are set in high places, godly men lie grovelling with their mouths
in the dust; but being dead, the former is cast into hell, the latter brought
to Heavens Table.

But that I may awaken thy conscience, O secure sinner, and make thee look
about thee, whilst there is time and hope (if the gracious and powerful God
please to assist) I shall give thee an estimate of the sinners losses by death,
by which thou may see what a difference there is, between the death of the
titular, and the real Christian.

And here Reader thou must help me with thy conceptions, for I shall come
infinitely short in my expressions. As none can endure it, so none can declare
it; for who knows the power of Gods wrath? Psa. 90.11. The orator when he
would describe the violent death of the Cross, does it by an Aposiopesis. What
(says he) shall I say of the death of the Cross? Quid dicam in crucem
tollere? Tull.
much more cause have I to speak so of this death. What shall I say of this
eternal death?

1. By death thou shall lose all thy earthly delights; and carnal contentments;
The table of thy life possibly is richly spread with variety of outward
enjoyments, riches, relations, honors, pleasures, beauty, and bravery: but
death will come in with a voider, and take all away. It is called an
uncloathing, 2 Cor. 5.4. and indeed it will strip thee naked of all such
garments, and ornaments; Thine eye shall no more see good, Job 7.7. i. e. the
good things of this life, they will all die with thee, as to thy use and
comfort. It is a doleful expression of Abram to Dives, Thou had, or thou
receivedst thy good things in thy lifetime, Luke 16.25. O what a cutting word
was that to his heart, when he was passed into another world, Remember there
was a time when thou and they were joined together, but now ye are parted for
ever; to have been happy, Miserum est fuisse felicem.
was no small aggravation of his misery; It is with thee while in this world,
as it was with the Jews, in the Vineyards and fields of their Neighbors, pluck
and eat they might while there, but pocket up, and carry away they might not.
Deuteronomy. 23.24, 25.

Death is the great thief which will rob thee of all thy riches. The wealthiest
Emperor, the next moment after death, has no more than the poorest beggar. As
thou came forth of thy mothers womb, naked thou shall return, to go as thou
came, and shall take nothing in thy hand of all thy labor, Eccles. 5.15.
That gold which thou love, and trustest more than God, these pebbles which
thou valuest above the pearl of price, that treasure on earth, which thy heart
is set upon more than on the true treasure in heaven, will all leave thee when
death finds thee. In his Treatise of love.
Mr. Rogers tells us of one that being nigh death, clapped a twenty shilling
piece in his mouth, saying, Some wiser then some, I will take this with me
however; but alas poor fool, he could not be so good as his word. The Holy
Ghost excellently terms rich men; rich in this world, because riches will not
make men rich in another world, 1 Timothy 6.17.

Death will seal a Lease of ejectment, and turn thee out of all thy
possessions, and death will give thee a bil of divorce, and separate thee from
all thy relations. The relations of Husband and Wife, Parents and children, are
calculated only for the Meridian of this world, and shall not outlive this
life. Thy dear husband, or thy loving wife, and thy most dutiful children, will
all serve thee as Orpah did Ruth, Ruth. 1^4
follow thee while thou art full, but forsake thee when thou shall be empty;
cleave to thee in thy health and life, but leave thee in thy greatest danger at
death: and thy birth and breeding, honor and respect will serve thee in the
like kind; they are but a shadow which will not be seen when the Sun of thy life
is set. The great distinctions in the other world, will be holy or unholy, not
noble or ignoble.

Be not afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased;
for when he dies, he shall carry nothing away, Mors sceptra ligonibus aequat.
his glory shall not descend after him, Psa. 49.16, 17. Death is the great
leveller, making Princes and Peasants equal.

All thy sinful pleasures will also be lost; the sweet taste thou foundest in
thy mouth will be gone, though they will rise in thy stomach, and after in thy
belly be more bitter than gall. Thy merry meetings, jovial companions, witty
jests, sporting, recreations, pictures for thine eyes, music for thine ears,
dainties for thy taste, thine eating and drinking, and all these delights on
earth, which thou solacest thy sensual soul with, (desiring no other heaven)
will all like leaves in the Autumn of thy death, fall off from thee; though in
the short summer of thy life, thou art richly laden with them; yet in thy long,
thine everlasting Winter, thou shall be stripped naked of them.

Thou may say to all the forementioned delights of riches, relations,
honors, and pleasures, and what ever it is which thou foolishly rejoycest in,
as Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany (whom the world counted most happy)
did to his trophies, treasures and things of the like nature, A bite hinc, A
bite long, Be gone* get you far out of my sight. Be assured that as a false
harlot leaves her lovers, when they are arrested for debt, and follows other
customers: so this painted strumpe^ this deceitful world that now lays open
her fair breasts, to allure thee to go a who^ring after her, and commit
spiritual fornication with her, when death shall arre^ thee by a Writ from
heaven, will wholl^ forsake thee, and follow them that survive now what a loss
will this be?

But it may be thou comfortest thy self against this, that all, even good as
well as bad will join with thee in this loss. Reader, do thou consider, that
they who enjoy the stars all night, and come in the morning instead thereof to
enjoy the glorious Sun, are no losers; the Sun has all the light of the stars,
and far far more; Neither can the godly be properly called losers of these
comforts, because they enjoy them all, and infinitely more in the blessed God;
As money answers all things, Prove. 10.19. Money is equivalently sheep, oxen,
corn, meat, drink, cloth, whatsoever you want for this life, is virtually in
money; so God to a gracious soul after death will answer all things, he will be
eminently and virtually, Father, Mother, wife, child, wealth, honor, pleasure
and all things; though he loses them here, he will find them there and much
more; but when thou O sinner losest them in this world, they shall never be
made up to thee in another world; thou losest not only the streams, but the
fountain; not only the beams, but the Sun; and therefore thy portion will be
scorching, drought, and dismal darkness^ Besides, these things are not the
portion, the all of a good man, they are not his estate, or inheritance, they
are but an additional overplus, cast in over and above. So much the words of
Christ imply, Matthew. 6.33. And all other things shall be added to you. As when
a father gives his son a thousand pounds worth of ware, he casts in paper
and packthread; or one thousand yards of cloth, he does not stand upon the
breadth of the thumb, which is to be allowed in measurng; so God having given
himself and his Son to his Saints, out of his vast bounty, casts in the
creatures as an overplus; they are not their estate or portion, or all; no,
when a godly man at the great and terrible day of the Lord Jesus, shall see his
house, and land, and outward good things in that common flame, which shall burn
up the earth, he may then behold it with comfort, Omnia mea n eoum port^: ^ias.
and say with the Philosopher, I have my all still.

But sinner, thy loss of them will be a loss indeed; for these things are thy
all, they are all thy God, and all thy Christ, and all thy happiness, and all
thy heaven; they are all the fullness of joy, and all the rivers of pleasures,
and all the weight of glory which thou shall enjoy; They are all thy riches,
all thine inheritance, all thy consolation, all thy reward, all thy portion,
and all thou shall be worth for ever; look Luke 16.24 They have received their
consolation, (cold comfort indeed) ye have your reward, * Mat. 6.2. (...) they
receive it as their full pay, whence (...) an acquittance.
It is one of the saddest speeches in the Book of God, whose portion is in this
life, Psalm. 17.14. (ah poor portion.) Thou have no other Paradise but thy
garden, no other mansion but thy beautiful building, no other inheritance but
thy Land, no other kindred but thy wife and children, no other honor but the
stinking breath of thy flattering neighbors, no other God but thy gold, no
other heaven but the earth: all thy estate is in dust, rubbish, and lumber;
surely then it will be a loss with a witness, to lose all that in a moment,
and that for ever, wherein all thy happiness consists. Will it not be a sad
sight for thee to stand as it were upon the shore, and to see the vessel in
which is imbarqu'd all thy treasures, all thy near and dear relations, all thy
respect and esteem, all thy joy and delights sinking before thine eyes, and
lost for ever? or to see that house, in which is thy Plate and Jewels, thy wife
and children, and all that ever thou art to be worth, in a flame, and nothing
possible to be recovered, would not thine eyes affect thine heart with
unspeakable horror? Now this O Reader will be thy case, if thou art
unsanctified at death; when thou lie upon thy deathbed, and art going out of
the world, thou may take thy leave of thy friends, estate, honor and
delights in such language as this, Farewell my dear wife, children, and all my
friends, farewell for ever, I am going where lovers and friends will be put
far from me, I must never never have any friend more, but shall remain
friendlesse to all eternity. Farewell my house and Land, my silver and gold,
farewell for ever; I shall from henceforth and for ever be a beggar, and though
I beg but for one drop of water to cool my tongue, when this whole body shall
be in unquenchable flames, I must everlastingly be denied. Farewell my honors
and delights, farewell for ever, I shall never more be respected or comforted;
confusion of face, and easelesse pains are to be my endless and unchangeable
portion; Thus (man) thou will most miserably, even outlive thy felicity, and
when thou come to live indeed, i. e. in the other world, want all thy
comforts and joys.

2. Thou shall lose by death all thy spiritual preferment. It is now no mean
mercy to thee, had thou an heart to prize and improve it, that thou enjoyest
the Ordinances of God, the means of grace, many golden seasons, for the good of
thy soul, that thou may sit at Gods feet, and hear his voice out of
Scripture, fall down on thy knees, and seek his face by prayer; but know to thy
sorrow, death will rob thee of all these Jewels; Now thou have the tenders of
mercy, the entreaties of the Minister, the motions of the Spirit, the
invitations of Christ, liberty to cast thy self down at the footstool of
Heavens Majesty, and to be as fervent and instant as thou will, for mercy, but
then the gate will be shut, and there will be no praying, or hearing, or
preaching in the place whether thou art going. Psalm. 88.11 Shall thy loving
kindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness in destruction? the
interrogation is a strong negation. There is no preaching of Gods clemency or
fidelity, either in the grave or hell. All the Lectures read in the former, are
by worms of man's mortality; and all the Sermons heard in the latter, are of
man's misery, and Gods severity. Reader, I assure thee from the living God, that
though in this life thou art now and then bungling about a duty, and giving God
thy stinking breath, a few cold lazy petitions, which proceed from thy corrupt
lungs, thy cursed heart, thou shall do so no more after death. As the Saints
shall be above this mediate enjoyment of God, so thou shall be below it. And
truly, had thou ever had Communion with God in a duty, this loss would go
near thee; How amiable is the worshipping of God to a gracious soul? he prizeth
Ordinances, because they are the means of it in this world, above his estate,
and food, or what ever is dear to him, Psa. 119.14, 72, 111. Job 23.12. Psa.
84.1.2, 3. And this privilege he shall have by death, to be employed still
about the same work, (of pleasing, glorifying, worshipping, and enjoying God)
only he shall do it in a more excellent and more delightful way.

He continues as it were in the same School; death only removes him to an
higher form, or (if you will) death sends him from the School (in which he was
fitted and prepared) to the University of heaven; but O sinner, thou must be
deprived of this happiness; indeed now thou esteemest the Ordinances of God a
burden; as precious as they are to others, they are tedious to thee. The Church
is thy Goal, the Sabbath is thy ague-day, the commands of Christ are bonds and
fetters to thee, Psa. 72.3. The voice of thy carnal heart is, when will the
glass be out? when will the duty be done? when will the Sabbath be over? that
thou may follow the world, Amos 8.5. Thou think the prayer is too long,
the Sermon is too long, the Sabbath is too long, the duties are all too long;
well, be patient but a little, a short time, and thou shall never be troubled
with these long duties more; The night is coming, when there is no working,
Joh. 9.4. There is no enjoying Sabbath or Sacraments, or seasons of grace, no
wisdom, knowledge or device, in the grave to which thou art hastening, Eccles.
9.10.

Now the Minister exhorts thee to cast away thy sins, and come to thy
Savior, to reject thy soul-damning lusts, and accept of a soul-saving Lord;
The Father commands thee by his Sovereignty over thee, and propriety in thee
as thy Creator; The Son entreats thee, by presenting his bloody sweat and
sufferings unto thee, as he is thy Redeemer; The Spirit stirs thee to pity
thy precious soul, and to mind thine unchangeable estate, to consider
seriously in this day of Gods patience, the things which concern thy eternal
peace; The Gospel is a Treasure of inestimable value, freely offered to thee,
upon condition thou will but heartily embrace it and the easy yoke of Christ
together; The Word of God charge, inviteth, allureth, beseeches, promises,
threateneth; all these like so many Trumpets, do loudly sound a retreat, to
call thee off from thy slavery to the world and flesh, unto the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God: but thou art as deaf as the Adder, and wilt not
hear the voice of these heavenly charms; as hard as the Rock; the waves of
threatenings which dash unweariedly against thee, stir thee not; the showers
and dews of promises which fall on thee continually, make no impression,
neither mercies nor judgments, neither men nor God can prevail with thee;
Well sinner, think of it again and again (and thy heart is hardened with a
witness, if it do not tremble to think of it) the hour is approaching, when
thou shall never have these tenders, these invitations, these means, these
motions more, though thou shall earnestly, and uncessantly desire them, and
willingly accept of them if they could be granted thee; after thou have fried
as many millions of years in hell, as there are stars in the heavens, piles of
grass on the earth, and sands on the sea shore; yet thy entreaty upon such an
hard condition shall be denied, then thou will befool thy self to purpose, for
staying til the day after the fair, for not accepting when thou wast well
offered; then mercy will be mercy indeed, then grace will be grace indeed, then
the Gospel will be glad-tydings indeed, when by the want of them thou shall
fully know the worth of them.

Now God holds the Candle of his Word to thee, and instead of working, thou
playest; instead of working out thy own salvation, instead of working the works
of him that sent thee into the world, thou playest the fool, the drunkard, the
beast, the hypocrite, the Atheist; well, thou shall go into utter darkness,
where those lights which thou now enjoyest, will never shine.

Plutarch observes of Hannibal, he might once have taken Rome, and would not;
afterward he would and could not; now God offers thee heaven, thou choosest
earth, and notwithstanding he assures thee, that now is the only acceptable
time, now is the only day of salvation, yet thou will not hear when he calls;
I tell thee, the day is near, when thou would, but God will not; when thou
shall call, but he will not hear, and then thou shall find no place for
repentance, though Esau like, thou seek it carefully with tears; When once thy
particular judgment is passed, 'twil be in vain to beg a Psalm of mercy.

3. Thou shall at death lose the society of all the godly, even of those
excellent ones, in whom is the delight of Christ, Prove. 8.31. and all the
delight of Christians, Psa. 16.3. It is a blessing to thee upon earth, (did the
Lord but sanctify it to thee) that thy lot is cast in a Land, in a Parish, in
a family, where those holy ones are, that thou may hear their gracious
prayers, see their pious patterns, and enjoy their precious precepts. Homo boni
pedis.
A Saint is as the Proverb is in Africa, A man whose coming is prosperous; this
churlish Laban could confess, Genesis 30.27. and the Heathenish Egyptian found by
experience, Genesis 39.2. All the Country fares the better for a good and rich
Christian, he eats not his morsels alone, but keeps open house for all
comers.

He both desires, and endeavors that others might be not almost, but
altogether as he is. None are more spiritually covetous to make Proselites,
then the true Israelites. As the wall which receives heat from the Sun,
reflecteth it on the passengers: so he wishes so well to the worst, that they
were partakers of the same grace, that they may have fellowship with the
Father, and Jesus Christ his Son, John 1.1. Like the Be he goes to this and
that flower, to this and that Ordinance, and sucketh some sweetness, some
spiritual good, and carries all home to his house, to his hive. As sin is
diffusive, a little leaven, leaveneth the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5. and 6. Some
say, they that have the plague are very desirous to infect others: so is grace,
like oil spreading; the gracious desire to go to an innumerable company of
Angels, with a numerous company of Saints.

Their examples are amiable, and sometimes instrumental for the conversion of
others, 1 Pet. 3.1. 1 Cor. 7.16. Justin Martyr confesses of himself, that
beholding the Saints piety in life, and patience at death, he gathered their
doctrine to be the truth, and was converted; their prayers are desirable, and
that in the esteem of profane and ungodly men, Exodus 8.28. Exodus 9.28. Acts
8.24.

In a word, The Saints are clouds which water the earth, Heb. 12. the salt
which keeps the world from putrefaction, Mat. 6. That place Prove. 10.25. But
the righteous is an everlasting foundation, The Hebrews expound the righteous
are the foundation of the world, which but for their sakes, would soon shatter
and fall to ruin; Sanctum semen statumen terae Isa. 6.13 Absque stationibus
non staret ^undus.
I bear up the pillars thereof, says David, Psalm 75.9. It is for the sake of
the good, that the bad are spared. Acts 27.24. All that sailed with Paul, were
saved for his sake; How many a time have they stood in the gap, and diverted a
flood of wrath from breaking in? Psalm. 106.30. Numb. 14.20. How many a mercy
has come flying to the world upon the wings of their prayers?

But O sinners, herein will be a part of thy misery, that thou shall for ever be
banished their company; now possibly thou think the Parish the worse for
such strict inhabitants, thy dwelling the worse for such precise Neighbors,
thy family the worse for such an humble zealous child, or servant; now thou
do not know what thou gainest, when thou have their society, but thou shall
know what thou losest, when thou have lost them to eternity.

If Cicero did so bewail his banishment from the Roman Moralists, that though
the Countries through which he traveled, did him much honor, yet he would
often look toward Italy with sighs and tears; and if the Disciples wept so
much for the loss of Paul, they fell about his neck, and kissed him and wept;
sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, that they should see his
face no more in this world, Acts 20.37, 38. how will thou sigh and sob, weep
and wail, when thou shall be parted from them in the other world?

Did the devout men make suck great lamentation for the loss of one good man
for a little time? Act. 8.2. what lamentation shall thou make for the loss of
all good men to eternity? Surely, as in Ramah, there will be a voice heard,
lamentation, weeping and mourning for the loss of these children of God.

4. When thou die, thou shall lose all thy hope (or presumption rather.) Thy
dead hope (for Saints only have a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3.) will fail thee at
death. As thou have no true holiness, so thou can have no true hope; but
something it is likely thou have, upon which thou reliest as to thy future
estate. It may be, thou have the good things of this life, and thence
concludest thy right to a better life; as if because the great Housekeeper of
the world throws some bones to the dogs, therefore he must love them with a
paternal love; thou do not consider, their houses may be full of gold, whose
hearts are empty of grace, and whose souls shall assuredly come short of glory,
Job 22.17, 18. Psalm. 17.13, 14.

It may be it is thy profession of Religion, that holds thee up by the chin,
and keeps from sinking; as if because a stage player is dressed in the Robes,
and for a quarter of an hour acts the part of a King, he must therefore have
a real right to the Dignity, Dominions, and Revenues of the Regal Office, not
believing that those colors of the form, which are not laid in oil, in the
power of godliness, will be washed off at death, Matthew. 25.8. Or it is likely,
thou enjoyest the privileges of the Gospel; Sabbaths, Sacraments, and the
seasons of grace are the bladders, with the help of which (without an inward
change) thou think to swim to heaven; do thou not know that many go to
hell fire with Font-water on their faces, and from the table, to the tormentour?
Matthew. 22.13. that Esau a castaway, and Ishmael an outcast, had both Abram to
their father; and so had they whom truth it self assures, that they were of
their father the devil, John 8.44. Circumcision avails nothing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature, Gal. 6.15. All such things are but lying
words, where an internal work of grace is wanting, Jer. 7.4, 5, 6.

Or possibly thou art a man of many performances; thou mindest secret, family,
relation-duties, (which too too many neglect) praying, reading, hearing,
Christian communion; like the spider thou weavest a curious web out of thine
own bowels, and therewith make thee a house in which thou restest quietly;
but O friend, God has Job 8.14 15.
a besome of death which will sweep this down. This, and all the rest as nigh
as they seem to be to heaven, will prove but a Castle in the air; whether any
or all these, or something else be the Pillars by which thy hope is upheld in
life, they will fail thee at death; and then the rotten props being taken away,
the house of thy hope will fall. These are all but a sandy foundation, and
therefore when that great storm comes, they will down to the ground, Matthew.
7.26, 27.

It is possible thou may hope all the time thou live, but thy life and
hope will depart together; like thy neighbors, thou may be full of hope even
when thou art going into the pit of despair; and die in peace, though thou art
going unto the place of eternal war; but the next moment after death, thy hopes
will take wings and fly away. Prove. 11.7. When a wicked man dies, his
expectation shall perish, and the hope of unjust men perishes. He died perhaps
with his head full of hopes and expectation, as those seemed to have done, that
came bouncing at heavens gate, with Lord, Lord open to us; but soon were their
hearts filled with desperation, when they heard, Depart from me ye workers of
iniquity, I know you not. Etiam spes valentissima periit, as some read that
forecited place, His great hope shall be little worth. A false heart and false
hope can never hold out in such a real hardship. Job 27.8. What is the hope of
the hypocrite though he has gained, when God shall take away his soul. An
Expositor glosseth on it thus; The anchor of a wicked man's hope enters not
within the vail (as a godly man's does closing with God himself in Christ, Hebr.
6.19. which anchor in all storms is sure and steadfast) but is cast upon false
and loose ground, and therefore when the storm comes, his Anchor drives and is
unstedfast; and so his hope and heart fail together. The stoutest unregenerate
man alive will drop at last; when God comes to take away his soul, then his
crest falls, and his plumes flagge. The wicked is driven away in his
wickedness, Prove. 14.32.

He being arrested by death as a cruel sergeant, in the devils name is hurried
away, and hurld into hell; as Sirens are said to sing curiously while they live,
but to roar horribly when they die; so thou that art high in hope on earth,
wilt be lower in grief in hell; when thou shall see all thy hopes like Absoloms
Mule, to fail thee in thy greatest extremity.

We say, if it were not for hope, the heart would break; what will thou do
then, when thy hope shall depart, and thy heart continue?

How sad will thy condition be, when thou shall fall from the high pinnacle of
thy presumption into the bottomless gulf of desperation! surely thy raised
expectation disappointed, will prove a sore vexation; how extremely will thou be
perplexed, when thou shall fall as low as hell, whose hopes were raised as high
as heaven! If hope deferred make the heart sick, Prove. 13.12. then hope of such
happiness wholly frustrated, will kill it with a thousand deaths.

Improbidu^ spirant sperant: justus etiam cum expirat sperat.
When a gracious man dies, his hope is perfected in the fruition of all (and
ten thousand times more then) he hoped for; when a graceless man dies, his
hope perishes, in an utter disappointment of all that he (though with little
reason) so much expected.

5. Thou shall lose by death thy precious soul; this will be a loss indeed; the
price of this pearl is not known to thee on earth, but it will be fully known in
hell; this one head Reader, did thou but understand what is included in it,
would stab thee to the heart; and the thought of this one loss, would be
enough to imbitter the comforts of thy whole life. The soul of man is called
the man, Job. 4.19. though not in a natural, Quia animaest principalior pars
hominis, unumquodque autem consuevit appel^ari id quod in e^ est principalius.
Aquin. in Job 4.19.
yet in a moral consideration (says one upon that place) it being the most
noble, the most excellent part of man; and it is usual to denominate the whole
from the better part. The body is but an house of clay, its foundation is in
the earth; but the soul the inhabitant in this house, is of an Angelical,
spiritual nature; The generation of this was from heaven. Zachariah 12.1.

The operations of this are most noble; the Redemption of this cost the blood
of God, Psalm. 31.5. Acts 20.28. this is that part of man which is capable of
the Image of his Maker. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. the working out the salvation
of this, is the whole of a Saints care and labor, Phil. 2.14. it is upon the
welfare of this, that the body depends for its unchangeable estate; what a
loss then will the loss of this be?

Faci^is jactura sepulcri.
An Heathen can tell us, that it is an easiy matter to bear the loss of an
earthly house for our bodies, when we die; but certainly it will be hard to
bear the want of an heavenly habitation for thy soul. Let him that bought this
ware, speak to its worth, and thy loss; What is a man profited, if he shall
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul? Matthew. 16.26. Behold what an incomparable, what an
irreparable loss is here. It is such a loss, there is none like it; The gain
of the whole world, cannot balance the loss of one soul. If a temporal life
be more worth then meat, and the body then raiment, what is an immortal eternal
soul worth? Could thou set thy soul to sale for all the world, yet for all
that thou would be a loser, nay, as the rich man, a beggar. This is an
irrecoverable loss; If thou losest one eye, thou have another; if thou losest
one limb, thou have more; if thou losest thine estate, thou may recover it
again; if thou losest thy life, thou may be a gainer by it, thou may find
it again. Matthew. 16.25. but if thou losest thy soul at death, thou have no
more; there is no second throw to be cast, no after-game to be played, thou art
gone, thou art undone for ever. Here is a loss (man) that may make thy hair
stand an end thy head, yea, thy heart to ache when thou read or think of
it, do not thine ears tingle, and thy loins tremble to hear of it?

When God would smite the rich fool, under the fifth rib as it were, and strike
him so home, as that there need not a second thrust, he does it in these words,
Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee, Luke 12.20. Ah! sad
sentence, wherein every word speaks woe, every syllable sorrow and sighs; Had
it been, Thou wise man, the message might have been wel-come, and death
desirable as a passage to eternal life; but it is Thou fool; had it been this
year, or this month, nay, had it been this week, the man might have been
forewarned and fore-armed, but it is, this night thy soul shall be required of
thee; Had it been this night thy riches shall be required of thee, how harsh
would it have sounded in his ears who had no other God but his gold; who like
a Mole lived in the earth as his element! O how hard would it be to part this
covetous muck-worm, and his Mammon of unrighteousness! but it is not thy
silver, but thy soul shall be required of thee! Had it been, This night thy
relations shall be required of thee, thy wife and children, and all thy kindred
shall be required of thee, what heavy tidings would it have been to his heart,
that had had no kindred in heaven! with what wringing of hands, and watering of
cheeks, and sighs and sobs would such news have been entertained! many an eye
would a tender husband and father have cast upon his loving wife and lovely
babes; and O how would his eye have affected his heart with grief and sorrow,
to consider that these thriving hopeful plants must be removed into another
soil, that this near conjugal knot must be untied, and he and his dearest
relations, who had so often, and so much rejoiced together, so suddenly be
separated, and that for ever! but it is not thy wife that is one flesh with
thee, but thy Spouse that is a spirit within thee; thy soul shall be required
of thee. Had it been, This night all the means of grace shall be required of
thee, it had been worse then the loss of a limb to him that had had any
spiritual life; the Ordinances of God to a soul, are as the Sun to the world,
without which (notwithstanding all its earthly delights) it would be but a
place of darkness, and of the shadow of death, Matthew. 4.16. but it is thy
soul; the former might have spoken the man's condition very dangerous, but this
speaks it altogether desperate, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall he
required of thee. The former although sad, are yet nothing to this, not so much
as the noise of a podgun to the noise of a Cannon. This is the great Ordnance
which includes, and yet drowns those smaller pieces.

Could thou, Ambr. ult. page 69.
says one upen the forecited Text, purchase a Monopoly of all the world,
had thou the Gold of the West, the Treasures of the East, the Spices of the
South, the Pearls of the North; all is nothing to this incarnate Angel, this
invaluable soul: O wretched worldling, what have thou done, thus to undo thy
soul! Was it a wedge of gold, an heap of earth, an hoard of silver, to which
thou trustedst? see they are gone, and thy soul is required. Alas poor soul,
whither must it go? to heaven? No, there is another place for wandering sinners;
Go ye into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; thither
must it go with heaviness of heart, into a Kingdom of darkness, a lake of
fire, a prison of horrible confusion, and terrible tortures.

Reader, if thou art not newborn, put this case to thy self, and ask thy soul
what it will do in such an hour, when the grave shall come with an habeas corpus
for thy body, and the Devil with an habeas animam for thy soul; when thy soul
shall leave this dwelling of thy body, and pass naked of all its comforts into
a far country, where Devils and damned spirits are the inhabitants, where
screeching, yelling, and howling, is the language, where fire and brimstone is
the meat, and a cup of pure wrath without the least mixture is the drink, where
weeping and wailing is their calling, where a killing death is all their life.
Assure thy self if thou die unsanctified, thou will find far more, and worse
then all this.

O my soul, says Bernard, what a terrible day shall that be, Bern. medita.
when thou shall leave this mansion, and enter into an unknown Region? who can
deliver thee from those ramping Lions? who shall defend thee from those hellish
monsters.

Now thou most unworthily undervaluest thy precious soul, little caring what
flaws by sin thou causest in this Diamond; like the cock on the dunghill, thou
know not the worth of this Jewel, but preferrest thy barly-corns before it.
I have read, that there was a time when the Romans did wear Jewels on their
shoes;; thou do worse, thou tramplest this matchless Jewel under thy feet;
whilst thy dying body is clothed and pampered, thy ever-living soul is naked
and starved; some write of Herod (I suppose because of that infant massacre;)
It was better to be his swine than his Son; for when his superstition hindered
him from slaying his hogs, his ambition helped him to kill his child. I say, it
were better to be thy beast than thy soul; thou can every morning and evening
what ever happen, take care that thy beasts be watered and foddered, and many
times in the day look abroad after them, to see what they ail, and accordingly
take order for their supply; and yet O man, or rather O brute, thou can let
thy soul go an whole day, and never feed it with the set meals of prayer,
Scripture and meditation, yea, and in an whole day (nay, it may be an whole
week) not ask thy soul in good earnest how it does, what it wants, what sins
it has to be mortified, what grace it has to be bestowed or increased, what
spiritual necessities to be supplied.

Reader, Is it not so? let conscience speak; and can thou read these lines
without blushing and heartbreaking, that thou should spend more time and
strength upon thy beasts than upon that soul which truth it self says, is more
worth than a world? Matthew. 16.26. which is created capable of such an high
work, as pleasing, glorifying, and enjoying God, and of such an happy reward as
the immediate and eternal fruition of, and communion with his infinite majesty
in heaven! Well, this soul thus despised, when lost, though then too late, will
be esteemed. Hell will read thee such a Lecture of thy souls worth, that it
will make thee understand it, and believe it whether thou will or no, and then
thou shall have time enough (in that eternity in which thy soul shall be lost)
to befool thy self for thy desperate madness, in gratifying thy brutish
flesh, and thus basely neglecting thy soul, that heaven-born Spirit.

Sixthly, Thou shall by death lose the infinitely blessed God; this is the
loss of losses, the misery of miseries, the very hell of hell, such a loss as
there was never the like before it, nor ever shall be again after it, such a
loss as no tongue can express, as no heart can conceive, yet such a loss as
thou shall know fully, when experimentally. The four first losses might have
been born with comfort and delight by the person that had but gained this good,
and the first could not have been without this. The eternal death of the soul
consists in its farthest separation from that God, whose favor is far better
than life. This is the lowest round in that ladder, by which thou shall descend
into the bottomless pit. This is the foot of this black bloody account, the
head of that arrow which pierces the hearts of the damned.

This is the worst effect and fruit of sin, that it is privative of our union
with and fruition of God: Vines on James 4.8. page 23.
Depart from me is as terrible a word as everlasting fire: Ah whether do they
go, that go from him? when he alone has the power of eternal life: how dismal,
how dark must that dungeon be, where this Sun will not shine in the least
degree, with the light of his countenance well may it be called blackness of
darkness for ever, Jude 15. the hell of the hypocrites, which will be hottest
of all, is set out by this, Job 13.16. the hypocrite shall not come before God.
Could thou have all the mercies that the world can give, yet in this want of
God thou would be completely miserable. Ten thousand words cannot speak a
soul more unhappy than those two words, Without God, Ephesians. 2.12. Thou may
be without riches, without friends, without health, without liberty, nay
without all outward blessings, and yet blessed: but if without God, thou art
cursed with a curse. When God would couch all arguments in one to persuade to
duty, this is instead of all, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, Jer. 7.23.
when he would dissuade and drive them from iniquity, Sicut Sole recedente
succedunt densae tene brae: sic Deo recedente succedit horribilis maledictio.
Paraeus in ^. Hos.
this is the stinging whip, Be instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart
from thee, Jer. 6.8. When he would strike Israel dead with a blow, this is it,
Woe unto them when I depart from them, Hos. 9.12. How sad a saying is that of
Saul, I am sore distressed! (and well he might) the Philistines are upon me,
and God is departed from me, 1 Samuel 28.15.

If a partial Eclipse of the Sun cause such a drooping in the whole Creation;
what will a total Eclipse of this Sun cause? how mournfully does Micah bemoan
the loss of of his dunghill deity! Ye have taken away my gods, and what have I
mor^e and what is this that ye say unto me, what aileth thee? Judge. 18.24.
surely the damned, as they will have infinitely more cause, so they will with
more horror and anguish bewail the loss of the true God; though all the tears
in hell are not sufficient to bewail the loss of this heaven. If the body from
which the soul is parted be such a deformed sad spectacle, what shall the
condition of that soul be, from which God is parted for ever?

How unable are the children of God to bear the absence of God in this life,
though it be but in part, and for a short time; take Heman, Psalm. 88.14, 15.
Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? I am
afflicted, and ready to die, while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted.
Observe the good man is at deaths door, and no wonder, when as to his
apprehension the life of his soul had left him: for though no man can see the
essential face of God, and live; yet no Saint can live, unless he see the
providential face of God. Consider Job a man of courage, one that had entered
the list against Satan, and foild him. The Sabeans and Chaldeans were too hard
for his servants, and captivated his cattle, but Job was too hard for them, he
conquered them; the wind that blew down the house on his children, could not
blow down the tower of his confidence, his hold on Christ; yet when this
valiant Warrior comes to encounter with the withdrawings of God, how
exceedingly is his courage withdrawn, Job 13.24. wherefore hidest thou thy
face, and hold me for thine enemy? Why Lord, are all the appearances from
heaven so black and lowering? Why is it that I see not the former smiles of thy
face? O what is the cloud that hinders the light of thy countenance from
shining on me! What sin is the mist which is gathered about the true Sun,
impeding my fight of thee!

Behold our Lord Jesus himself, that could bear the spiteful buffetings of
some, the bloody scourgings of others, the scorn and derisions of many; that
could suffer the treason of one Apostle, the denial of another, and the
unkindnesse of them all, without complaining; yet when the Deity did but
withdraw it self for a time, that the humanity might suffer for our sins, how
mournfully does he sigh out that expression, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Matthew 27.46. It was not his torturing from men, nor the terrors
of devils, not the presence of all the powers of darkness that Christ
complained so much of; as the absence of God: Now meditate, O sinner, if the
departure of God* though partial and temporal, were so terrible to his Saints,
to his Son; how intolerable will the loss of God be to thee, when it shall be
total and eternal! Do they mourn so bitterly when for a small moment he
forsakes them, though with great mercies he gathers them, when in a little
wrath he hides his face from them, though with everlasting kindness he has
mercy on them? Isa. 54.7, 8. How bitterly will thou complain, when he shall
forsake thee to eternity, when he shall hide his face from thee for ever, and
not bestow on thee the least mercy or the smallest kindness! This will be a
woe with a witness: Suffering may be the portion of Saints; but separation
from God the punishment of Devils. As the face and comfortable presence of God
is the greatest felicity of the saved; Summa mors animae est alienatio a vita
Dei in aeternitate supplicii. Aug. de civit. Dei, lib. 6.
so the full withdrawings or absence of God will be the greatest misery of the
damned.

Now thou do not value the enjoyment of God, thou think often that he is
too near thee; the coming of God to thee is as to the Devils a torment, Matthew.
8.29. If he draw nigh to thee sometime in a Sermon, in a private Instruction,
in a motion of his spirit, or in a conviction of thy conscience, thou wishest
him farther off with his precise laws, that thou mighst have more liberty for
thy fleshly lusts: The voice of thine hellish heart unto God, is, Depart from
me, I desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14. Well, thy petition
shall be granted to thy destruction, and God will take thee at thy word, and
give thee thy wish to thy woe, when thy doom shall be to depart from him, Luke
13.27. Matthew. 25.41. and then thou shall know the incomparable worth of him;
thy understanding shall be cleared, though not changed, that thy knowledge may
increase thy sorrow: Thou art now wilfully ignorant of him and his Will: (some
never look up to the Sun, but in an Eclipse) but then thou shall know so much
of him to grind thee with tormenting grief for thy loss of him. As a prisoner
through the grates may see the costly apparel, the precious liberty, the
pleasant and plentiful provision which others enjoy, wh^lest he is vexed with
hunger, nakedness, cold, and bondage; So thou shall see bread enough in the
Fathers house, and the children sitting round about his table, eating bread,
and feasting in the Kingdom of heaven, while thou art perishing with hunger:
Thou shall see those Rivers of pleasures, wherein the godly bathe their souls,
those soul-ravishing delights which they enjoy in God, the fountain of all
good, whilst thou art sentenced to an eternal separation from him.

Now tell me whether the sinful wretch be not a loser by death, when he shall
lose all his wealth, friends, and opportunities of grace, the company of all
the Saints, all his false hopes of heaven, his precious soul, and the ever
blessed God; and tell me whither sin, how sweet soever it be in the commission,
will not be bitter in the conclusion; whether in such an hour, the Devil will
not pay thee thy full wages, for all thy wicked works; whether it be worth the
while to continue in thine unregenerate estate, though thou could gain never
so much, when it will certainly end in such inestimable loss. In a word,
answer me whether the greatest pleasure thou can gain for thy flesh, the
greatest addition thou can gain to thy estate, by a sinful irreligious life,
can countervail the everlasting loss of God and thy soul.

But this is not all, (sinner) I have not done with thee; yet I have told thee
a little of thy loss; for the whole of it, no tongue can tell, no pen can
write; I will now tell thee thy gain by death, and then do thou cast up the
account, and tell me whether thy wickedness will not end in woe.

First, By death thou shall gain a cursed perfection of sin, (if it may be
called a perfection) Upon earth the most notorious sinner is a lion chained up,
and kept in; but in hell he will be let loose, and then his ravenous nature and
cruel disposition will appear to purpose.

Gurnals Armor. Part. 1. p. 257.
Thou yet stand in a soil (says that accurate Writer) not so proper for the
ripening of sin, which will not come to its fullness, til trans-planted unto
hell. Thou who art here so maidenly and modest, as to blush at some sins out of
shame, and forbear the actings of others out of fear, when there thou shall see
thy case as desparate as the Devil does his; then thou will spit out thy
blasphemies with which thy nature is stufft, with the same malice that he does.
The vilest man in this world Is like a swine in a fair meadow; but in the other
world, there will be the wallowing in the mire. Thy heart now Is like the Sea
which cannot rest, but is ever casting up mire and dirt of sin, foaming out thy
own shame, yet still it is shut up with bars and doors of restraining grace;
hitherto shall thou come, and no further; and here shall thy proud waves be
stayed; but then the doors will be opened, the banks broken down, and the
floodgates taken up; and o what a deluge, what an overflow of sin will be
there! Here if God should not put a bridle into the mouth of these unruly
beasts, and hold them in, there would be no living for a Saint among them; but
then when the good shall be parted from them, the reins shall be laid (in some
respect) on their own necks, and then they will run to the same excess of riot
and sin with the very devils.

Voluntas morientis confirmatur in eo statu in quo moritur.
All the weeping in hell will not wash thee a whit the cleaner, and all the fire
there will not consume the least of thy dross. He that is filthy at death, will
be filthy still, and he that is unjust then, shall be unjust for ever. Rev.
22.11.

Arcem omnium turpitudinum.
Hell may fitly be called, as Tertullian called Pompeys theater (the glory of
old Rome) a stye of filthiness. Every bottle of wickedness, will be there
filled with those bitter waters; thou that now make a match with mischief,
shall then have thy belly full. Here sin is thy sin and defilement; but there
it will be thy hell, thy punishment. Here thou sportest with it, but there thou
shall smart for it; now it is thy pleasure, but then it will be thine
everlasting pain.

Sin is ugly to a Saint on earth, notwithstanding all her gaudy attire, and
painted face; but O what a deformed monster will she be in hell, when she shall
be stripped of all her ornaments of pleasure and profit, and when all her paint
shall be washed off with Rivers of brimstone. I thus preach, and thus think
(says Chrysostom) that it is more bitter to sin against Christ, then to
suffer the torments of hell. And holy Anselm says, that if the evil of sin
were proffered to him, and the torments of hell, he had rather choose hell then
sin. Thus odious sin is to a godly man in this world; and surely it will not
be amiable to a wicked man in the other world; but they who now glory in their
shame, will then be ashamed of their glory, and find their lusts more
burdensome to them (how lightly soever now they go with them) then ever
Prisoners did their chains and fettets.

If thy soul be so unhealthy in so pure an air as this (comparatively) is among
the Saints of God; how diseased will it be in that misty Region of darkness,
in that Pesthouse, among Devils and infectious spirits

2. Thou shall gain by death a fullness of sorrow; when thy sins come to their
highest degree, then will thy sorrows likewise, both in regard of intention and
duration.

1. In regard of intention; and how great this will be, I am not able to tell
thee. When one was desired to paint the Spanish Inquisition, he took a Table
and besmeared it with blood, implying the torments were so cruel and bloody,
that his pencil could not delineate them. Sure I am Phaleris Bull, Low Country
wracks, and all outlandish tortures whatsoever, are but plays and bug-bears to
the sufferings of the damned; There are no sorrows like to their sorrows,
wherewith the Lord afflicts them in the day of his fierce wrath; Unum guttula
malae conscientiae totum mare mundani gaudij ^bsorbet. Lu
If the wrath of God be kindled but a little, and a spark thereof light into
the conscience of a Saint, what a work does it make? there is no rest in his
flesh, nor quiet in his bones; when the arrows of the Almighty stick within
him, the poison thereof soon drinks up his spirits. Psalm. 38 3. Job 6.4. what
will their condition then be, against whom God shall stir up all his wrath,
Psalm. 78.39. Hell is said to be prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew.
25.41. as if the Almighty and infinite God had sat down, and studied the most
exquisite torments that could be, to inflict on them. As when he would glorify
the riches of his mercy, on them that love him and keep his commands, he
provideth fullness of joy, and greater pleasures than the heart of man can
possibly conceive; So when he would glorify his Justice in the highest degree
on them that hate him, and wilfully break his Laws, he prepares fullness of
sorrow, and greater pain then any, yea, then all the men in the world can
possibly comprehend. A melancholy man may fancy (says one) vast and terrible
fears, fire, sword, Dr. Reynolds on Hos. 14. p. 23. of Sermon 1.
tempests, wracks, furnaces, scalding-lead, boiling pitch, running bell-metal,
and being kept alive in all these, to feel their torment: but these come far
short of the wrath of God; for first there are bounds set to the hurting power
of the creature; the fire can burn, but it cannot drown; the serpent can sting,
but not tear in pieces. 2. The fears of the heart are bounded within those
narrow apprehensions which it self can frame of the hurts which may be done.
But the wrath of God proceeds from an infinite justice, and is executed by an
Omnipotent and unbounded power, comprising all the terror of all the creatures,
(as the Sun does all other light) eminently and excessively in it. It burns and
drowns, and tears, and stings, and can make nature feel much more than reason
is able to comprehend.

A wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18. 14. The wise man gives a challenge
to the whole creation, to find out a person that is strong enough to undergo
such a burden, and certainly none ever dared to accept the challenge. How
intolerable has such a weight been to them that are Lions for strength and
courage? This caused David's broken bones, and watered couch. This made Heman at
his wits end, Psalm. 88.15. This made Spira that seven years monument of Gods
justice, In his sincere convert.
(as Mr. Shepherd calls him) to roar so horribly out of anguish of spirit.
This made Daniel choose rather to be cast to the cruel Lions, then to carry
about with him such a ravenous Lion in his conscience. This made some of the
Martyrs to feel a very hell in their consciences after their recantation; no
wolf in the breast, no worm in the bowels, no frenzy so out-ragious as a
gnawing corroding conscience.

If the wrath of a King be as the roaring of a Lion; O what is the wrath of
God! and if his wrath be so terrible in this world, where there is ever some
mixture of mercy with it, what will it be in the other world, when the soul
shall have a cup of pure wrath to drink, when God shall show the
unconceiveablenesse of his strength, in tormenting the creature, Primamors
animam nolentem pellit a corpore; Secunda no^entem retinet in corpore. Aug. de
civit. dei lib. 21. cap. 3.
and preserving it to feel those torments? ( Who knows the power of his
anger? Psalm. 90.11.) there will be tribulation and anguish, indignation and
wrath on the soul of every man that does evil, Romans 2.8, 9. There is fire to
burn, and brimstone to choke, Matthew 13.40. and chains to bind, and serpents to
sting, and worms to gnaw, Mark 9.44. Jude 12. and darkness to affright; there
is variety, universality, and extremity of torments. Aug ibid l. 21. c. 13.
Austine admires it, and says, that for vehemence of heat it exceeds our fire,
as much as ours does fire painted on the wall. But the sufferings of thy soul
will be the soul of thy sufferings; the worm that never dies, will be the
killing death, when thou shall remember all thy former sinful pleasures, of
which nothing remains but thy present shame and pain; when thou shall reflect
upon the former offers thou have had, of all the dainties which others feed on
in heaven, and despair now of ever obtaining the least crumb that falls from
the Masters table; when thou shall foresee the great and terrible day of the
Lord Jesus, the re-uniting of thy body to thy soul, the easelesse and endless
torments which soul and body must endure together; Memoria praeteritorum,
sensus prasenaium and metus futurorum are the whole of the souls torments.
thy sins past will horribly perplex thee, thy present shame will lamentably
confound thee, thy future tortures will unspeakably affright thee. O it will be
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God! Heb. 12. ult. one
touch of it, made a man at arms to cry out sadly, Have pity upon me my friends,
have pity upon me, for the hand of God has touched me. Job. 19.21. One blow of
it broke the backs of the Angels, Jude 6. Alas sinner, what will thou do under
the whole weight of it? how will thy heart endure, or thy hands be strong, in
this day that the Lord shall thus deal with thee! the Lord has spoken it, and
he will do it, Ezekiel. 22.14.

Now thou can hear and read, and talk of hell, and be no more troubled, then
Physicians are at the many diseases which affect their Patients; nay, it may be
thou do jear when thou should fear; like Leviathan, Credo quae de inferit
dicuntur falsa existimas, said Cato to Caesar.
laugh at the shaking of this spear; if a Minister come to thee as Lot to his
Sons in-law, and warn thee to leave the Sodom of thy sinful sensual life, and
tell thee that otherwise the Lord will destroy thee, that fire and brimstone
will be thy portion; he seems to thee (as Lot to them, Genesis 19.14.) as one
that mocketh, thou think that he is in jest; but they feel what they would
not fear; now they are suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Jude 7. and so
will thou, if God prevent it not by renewing thy heart, and reforming thy life.
And though now thou art so senseless that the seat thou fittest in, and the
pillar thou leanest on, are as much affected with the threatenings and
denunciation of the judgments of God, as thou art, yet then thou will be
sensible enough; and thine eyes so dry now, will weep enough when they come to
that place, where is nothing but weeping and wailing, and gnashing of teeth,
Matthew. 24.51. As the love of God is a known unknown love, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. none
know it fully but they that enjoy it in glory; so the anger of God is a known
unknown anger, Psalm. 90.11. none can know it perfectly but they that shall feel
it eternally.

2. It will be full in regard of duration; all thy sad losses, and all thy
sorrowful gains will be for ever; there was nothing else wanting to make thee
completely miserable, but the everlasting duration of them, and lo here it is;
the positive part of thy punishment will be permanent; there the worm dies
not, and the fire is not quenched, Mark 9.44. and the privative part also shall
be perpetual, thou shall suffer everlasting perdition from the presence of the
Lord, 2 These. 1.9. Thou sinnest in thy eternity, and God will make thee suffer
in his eternity.

Thou sinnest against an infinite God, and therefore thy punishment must be
infinite; which because it cannot be, in regard of intention, thy back is not
strong enough to bear an infinite stroke; therefore it must be in duration;
Infinite power cannot inflict greater or longer pains than infinite Justice
does call for. The debt thou owe to the righteousness of God will be ever
paying, and never paid, and therefore thou shall not escape out of that prison,
till thou have paid the uttermost far thing, Matthew. 5.23.

Ita feri, ut se mori sentiat. Suer.
The command of Caius Caligula to the Executioner (after he had condemned a
malefactor) was so to strike, that they might feel themselves dying, and endure
the pains of an enduring death. Such will be the everlasting death of the
damned; they will be ever, ever dying, and never dead; they shall seek death,
but not find it, follow after it, but it will free from them, Rev. 9.6.

The same Author reports of one that requested of Tiberius Caesar death
rather than long imprisonment, Nondum tecum redii in gratiam.
how he was answered by the Emperor; You and I are not yet friends. The truth
is, the punishment there must needs be long, yea eternal, because God and the
sinner shall never be friends: In this life God treats with the soul by his
Ambassadors upon terms of peace; nay, he beseeches the sinner to be
reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.21. the carnal man still continues in his enmity against
God, walking contrary to him, and fighting against him; God continues many a
day, to some many a year, offering peace, desiring there may be a league made;
only it must be offensive and defensive; it must be an holy peace and league
against the Devil, the world, and the flesh; upon this the sinner breaks off,
he will not be an enemy to his old cursed friends: now at death this Treaty
dies, and the breach then continuing it is irreconcilable for ever. Then the
King of Kings causes his terrors to set themselves in array against the
sinner, and proclaims open and eternal war.

Reader, for thy souls sake let me beseech thee to ponder this but one half
quarter of an hour every morning, that the pain which sin brings will be
eternal. O how may it take off the edge of thy love to thy most pleasing lusts!
Endless misery must needs be easelesse: no condition so intolerable as a
miserable condition that is unalterable. Its a comfort to a woman in travel, in
the midst of her sharp throws and bitter pangs, to think these will have an
end; the hope of that does much help her to hold out; but woe and alas they
whose end is damnation, shall have damnation which has no end.

It does much support the Saints under the anger of God, that though it be
sharp, it will be but short, his anger endures but for a moment, Psalm. 30.5.
but then will not the heart of the sinner be rent in pieces with rage and
despair, to know that the wrath of God must abide on him? John 3. ult.

The Egyptians three days darkness was esteemed a sore plague, but what will
thy punishment (O sinner) be, when thou shall suffer utter darkness,
blackness of darkness for ever, Jude v. 12. Ah wounding word, ever, ever; the
most cutting word in comparison of it is healing; the bitterest word, in
respect of this, is sweet; Despair will be the cutting off of all hope; and to
have hope, the anchor of the soul, cut off, will be the deepest cut in the
world; then the vessel of the soul will be liable to all storms and tempests
imaginable.

Suppose that one of thy hands were to continue burning in one of our fires, as
many millions of years, as there have been minutes since the Creation, could
thou undergo it with any patience? what think thou of it? Alas! this were a
mercy, a heaven to the misery of men in hell; what will thou do when thy whole
man shall suffer the vengeance of eternal fire? Jude 7. Who can dwell with the
devouring fire? who can dwell with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33.14.

It is storied of one Roger Bishop of Salisbury, that being in prison extremely
tortured, live he would not, and die he could not: truly such will the case be
of rebellious ones; they shall long for death, but it will not come; and dig
for it more than for hid treasures. O how would they rejoice and be glad, if
they could find a grave! but a being must be given to them that are in misery,
and life to the bitter in soul: It is called death indeed, because (...) is
neither desired there, nor can it properly be said to be enjoyed; it is a
living death, or a dying life, such a death as shall never taste of life, and
such a life as shall never taste of death. After the murderer of his soul has
continued in that lake of fire, as many thousand years as there are fish in the
mighty Ocean, and as there are creatures great and small upon the whole earth,
and as there are stars in the heavens; and after this as many millions of ages
as there are hours in all the forementioned time, yet after all this his
torment will not be one moment nearer to an end. O eternity, eternity,
eternity, what art thou? to what shall I liken thee, or with what comparison
shall I compare thee? Thou art like a vast Ocean which has no banks, like an
outrageous fire which knows no bounds, like the grave that is never
satisfied, like the barren womb that never says, It is enough; in respect of
God thou art like Melchisedec, without father, without mother, having neither
beginning of days, nor end of life. In respect of the good, like a day which
had a morning, but shall never have an evening: in respect of the bad, like a
night which had an evening, but shall never have a morning. In thee it is that
the justice and severity of God, the sinfulness and malignity of sin, the
deceitfulness and vanity of the world, the madness and desperate folly of
sinners will sufficiently be demonstrated. In time men are whipped, but in thee
it is that they are executed. In thee it is that men must suffer long, for all
their abuse of the long-suffering of God. In thee it is that the swearer shall
have enough of wounds, and oaths, and blasphemies, when he shall have Devils
wounding his soul with their fiery darts, and when he shall blaspheme the Name
of God through extremity of torments. In thee it is that the Adulterer will
have enough of lust and lasciviousness, when he shall embrace deformed Devils,
and lie down in a bed of fire (instead of feathers) surrounded with curtains of
frightful fiends. In thee it is that the drunkard will have enough of his cups,
when a cup of the pure wrath of an infinitely incensed God, shall be presented
to him, and he forced to drink it all up, though there be eternity to the
bottom. In thee it is that the Sabbath-breaker shall have enough of disturbing
Gods rest, when he shall be tormented, and have no rest day nor night for ever
and ever, Revel. 14.16. In thee it is that the Atheist in his family shall have
enough of his prayerlessness and regardlessenesse of God, when he shall be
ever, ever praying with his whole heart for a drop of water to cool his tongue,
and God shall never, never show the least regard toward him. In thee it is
that the hypocrite will have enough of putting off God with a painted holiness,
when he shall find a real Hell. In thee, lastly, it is that the covetous
worldling, that like Corah is swallowed up of earth alive, and yet has never
enough, shall have fire enough, pain enough, and wrath enough in Hell.

Consider this, ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, when there is
none to deliver you, Psalm. 50.22. Good God! whether is man fallen? what
desperate hardness has seized on his heart, that he should be every moment
liable to such a boundless, bottomless sea of scalding wrath, and yet as
insensible of it, as if it did no whit concern him; Ah did but the seduced
world believe thy word, they would mind other works than now they do.

But Reader, what is thy judgment? is not the mirth of every sinner that makes
a mock of sin worse than madness? Should not the sting in sins tail deter
thee more than the false beauty of its face allure thee? Shall thou look hence
forward upon the most delightful sin as any better than Claudius his mushrome,
pleasant, and poison? Well, whoever thou art that read this Use, be
confident all this, and ten thousand times more is thy birthright; thou art by
nature an heir to this estate, that lies in the valley of Hinnom: All this is
the wages due to thee for thy service to sin; sin pays all that die its
servants in such black money; and should thou go out of this world before thou
art newborn, thou shall as certainly find and feel more than all this in the
other world, as there is a God in heaven, and as thou art a living creature on
earth. The God of truth has spoken it, and who shall dis-annul it? Matthew.
18.3. Matthew. 5.20. John 3.3. though thou art not actually under it, yet then
art every moment liable to it; this cloud of blood hangs night and day over thy
head, and thou know not how soon it may break and shower down upon thee. The
decree and sentence is already passed in heaven, that thou who turnst not in
time, shall burn to eternity; and thou can not tell how soon God may seal the
warrant for thy execution.

Bellarmine is of opinion, that one glimpse of hel-fire were enough to make a
man turn, not only Christian, but Monk, and to live after the strictest order.
Drexelius tells us of a young man given to his lust, that he could not endure
to lie awake in the dark; and on a time being sick, he could not sleep all
night; and then he had these thoughts, What! is it so tedious to lie awake one
night? to lie a few hours in the dark; what is it then to lie in everlasting
chains of darkness! I am here in my house, on a soft bed, kept from sleep one
night; O to lie in flames, and in darkness everlasting, how dreadful will that
be? this was the means of his conversion.

O that Reader, what I have written, might work such an effect upon thy soul;
how abundantly should I be satisfied for all my pains, how heartily should I
bless that God, who by his providence called me to this task? Shall I entreat
thee (as thou have the least spark of true love to thy dying body, to thy
immortal soul, to thine eternal peace) to break off thy sins by repentance, and
fly all ungodliness as hell; for do thou not perceive out of the Word of
the living and true God, that though thy lust may be sweet in the act, yet her
end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword, her feet go down to
death, her steps take hold of hell, Prove. 5.4, 5.

And in order hereunto, I desire thee to observe faithfully those directions I
shall give thee in the third use; for I would not only open the sore and show
its danger, but also by the help of the Physician of souls, prepare a plaster;
the Lord enable thee to apply it for thy cure.

Take a man that is most addicted to his pleasures, and bring him to the mouth
of a furnace red hot, and flaming, and ask him, How much pleasure would thou
take to continue burning in this furnace for one day? he would answer
undoubtedly, I would not be tormented in it one day, to gain the whole world,
and all the pleasures of it; ask him a second time, what reward would you take
to endure this fire half a day? propound what reward you will, there is nothing
so precious which he would buy at so dear a rate as those torments; and yet how
comes it to pass O God, that for a little gain, and that vile; for a little
honor, and that fugitive; for a little pleasure, and that fading, men so
little regard hel-fire which is eternal.

By this time I hope it is day in thine understanding, Drex. of etern. third
consid. Rhododaphne.
and thou see clearly that there is a difference between the death of the
righteous and the wicked; that as the same perfume, which is mortal to the
ravenous vulture, is refreshing to the true Dove; that as the same herb which
cures men stung with Serpents kills beasts: so the same mortal disease which
cuteth the Godly of all their spiritual and bodily distempers, kills the
wicked; they are killed with death, Rev. 6.

Heaviness to a Saint, may endure for the night of this life, but joy will come
in the morning of death; whereas the freshest streams of sinful delights, will
end in a salt sea of sorrows and tears.

I come now to a second use, and that will be by way of examination. If it be
so, that they who have Christ for their ^ife ^^ll have gain by their death;
then examine whether thou art one of them, to whom to die will be gain. Like a
Merchant, cast up the accounts between God and thy soul, and see how much thou
art worth for another world; It is good husbandry to know the state of thy
flock, Prove. 27.23. but there is a greater necessity of knowing the state of
thy soul, of communing with thy own heart. Psalm. 4.5. Is it not a thousand
pities to live known to others, and to die unknown to thy self? to speak so
often, Many a man may say of himself, as the ^pigram^matist of his unneighborly
Neighbor, In urbe tota nemo tam prope tam proculque nobis.
and so much to others, and yet in the many years that thou have lived, never
to have spent one hour in serious discourse with thy self, about thine eternal
condition, what shall become of thee for ever?

Friend, it may be thou have been very solicitous to know what shall befall
thee whilst thou live; is there not more cause for thee to be inquisitive,
what shall befall thee when thou die? I think it concernneth thee to be
faithful and diligent about this work of examining thy soul, whether Jesus
Christ be thy life, when all thy happiness hangs on this hinge, even thine
estate for eternity: Trivial matters may be passed over slightly, but things
of weight must be minded seriously. Reader, had thou ever a matter of greater
or equal concernment to thine unchangeable eternal estate? Are not thy
following thy trade, thy providing for thy family, thy eating, drinking,
sleeping, and the most necessary things thou can imagine about thy outward
man, but rattles and babies, but toys and trifles in comparison of this?

Suppose the title I am speaking of, did but concern an estate in Land of 100
pound per annum, which thou were buying, would thou not consult with this and
that man, whether the Title were good or no? would thou think two or three
days ill spent, in searching and advising to prevent the cozenage of thee and
thy children? And does not thy soul, thine eternal estate, deserve more care,
more time, more pains, more consulting, searching and questioning, for fear of
an everlasting miscarriage? Let thy reason be judge; Had not those wyers need
to be strong, that have such a weight as thy eternal welfare hanging on them?
Should not that Anchor be cast sure, which is entrusted with a vessel so richly
laden as with thy soul, that Jewel of inestimable value more worth than a
world? Can that foundation be too firmly laid, that has such a building as
eternity of happiness depending on it. Without question, those deeds and
evidences (if ever any) had need to be unquestionable, that convey the
inheritance which is incorruptible, undefiled, reserved in heaven.

And the rather should thou try thy soul thoroughly, because should thou
content thy self with a counterfeit Title to heaven, (as most men and women
amongst us do) by virtue only of some deeds which the devil and thy carnal
heart have forged, and should so die, thou would assuredly be dealt with as
a cheat, and cast into the prison of hell, and then thy condition will be most
lamentable, because it will be irrecoverable.

If thou missest at all when thou die, thou missest for all and for ever: An
error then can never be mended; there can be no second throw cast, no second
Edition come forth to correct the errors of the former; but the great work for
which thou were born not being done, thou art undone to eternity; and then (as
godly men befool themselves in this world, while they live, Psalm. 73.2. for
their corruption, so) thou will befool thy self in the other world, when thou
die for thy presumption, Jer. 17.11. that thou should think the rotten
props of a little profession of a few outward privileges, and inward good
meanings (as thou call'st them) could bear the weight of thy soul and thine
endless state, that thou should build so slightly for a dwelling of
perpetuity. Set thy heart therefore to all the words that I speak unto thee;
for it is not a vain thing, but it is for thy life, Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47.

Well friend, the great question which I shall put to thee, will be this; Can
thou say, (...) to pierce through and through, because by piercing, a thing is
tried what it is within, whether found or no.
To thee to live is Christ? thy gain by death depends on this, Examine thy
self thoroughly, prove thy self, whither thou art in the faith or no, 2 Cor.
13.5. The Eagle tries her young ones by the Sun, whether they be of the right
brood or no, as some affirm; do thou try thy self by this Sun of
righteousness, by this life in Christ, by thine ingraffing into Christ. Ask
thy soul whether it be acquainted with the new birth, the new Creation, the
Divine nature, the renewing in the spirit of thy mind, the sanctification of
the Spirit, the walking after the Spirit, the Image of God, the writing of his
Laws in thy heart, the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ, effectual calling;
unless thou have that one thing signified by all these things, thou have
nothing; then and not till then, thou have crossed thy line, shot the gulf, art
safely landed in Christ, and have attained that which ever accompanies
salvation.

But because this self-tryal, though it be a necessary duty, yet is a work of
much difficulty; It is easier for a man to speak to the stateliest King in the
world, then to him self as he ought to speak; and because naturally, men's sores
and corruptions make them so unwilling to be searched for fear of pain, I
shall annex two or three quickening motives to persuade thee to this much
neglected duty.

1. Consider how easy and ordinary it is to be deceived, though it be in a
work of such infinite weight; now where the business is weighty, and the
mistake ordinary and easy, it requires thee to search thoroughly. It Is one of
the most ordinary and easy things in the world, for a child of disobedience to
live and dye asleep in sin, and never dream of hell, till he come to awake in
the other world in a bed of fire; thy deceitful heart will be night and day
inclining thee to sleep, and the devil will be sure to keep the cradle rocking.

Alas, how very very few are there that will be persuaded to cast up their
spiritual accounts; but like men that we say are worse than naught, loath the
thoughts of looking into, or summing up their estates; or like some women, when
they come to be old, turn the backside of their looking-glasses toward them,
as unwilling to see their own wrinckles, and deformity.

And of those that do sometimes examine themselves, how many are there that do
it slightly and superficially, contenting themselves with false marks, quickly
believing what they would have, even all to be well till they are sent to be
undeceived in hell?

Maud mother to King Henry the second, being besieged at Oxford, she got away
with white apparel in the snow undiscovered. Cambd. Brit.
So do many hypocrites with their profession of snow like purity pass among
men, but God knows the heart.

All is not gold that glisters, nor is all grace that makes a fair show in the
flesh; there is much counterfeit coin in the world, that goes current among
men, as if it were as good as the best; so there is a great deal of counterfeit
holiness in the world, a great deal of civility, of morality, of common grace,
which is taken (or rather mistaken) by men for true saving grace; much fancy is
taken for faith, presumption for hope, self-love for Saint love, and worldly
sighs for godly sorrow.

What can the Saint do, but as to the outward appearance, the sinner may do the
same? as the devil is Gods ape, so is the self-deluding soul not seldom the
Saints ape.

Does the Saint abstain from gross sins? so does he whose Religion consisted
so much in Negatives, Luke 18.11. Does the Saint pray? so do the Pharisees, and
make long prayers too, Matthew. 23.14. Do the Saints fast? Nehem. 1.4. Dan. 9. So
do they, Matthew. 6.16, 9, 14. and it may be twice in one week, Luke 18.11. Do
the Saints give alms? Acts 10. so do they, Matthew. 6.1, 2. Do the Saints
confess sin, the sinner can do it in the very same words, 1 Samuel 15.24. Does
Ephraim repent? Jer. 31.18. so does Judas, Matthew. 27.3. Does Abram believe?
Romans 4. so does Simon Magus, Act. 8.13. Does Hezekiah humble himself? 2 Chronicles.
32.26. so does Ahab, and walk softly into the bargain, 1 Kings 22.15. Does the
man after Gods own heart fulfill all Gods will? Act. 13.22. you shall hear that
a Jehu shall do very much, and that by a testimony from Gods own mouth, 1 Kings
10.31. Thou have done well in executing that which was right in mine eyes, thou
have done unto the house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart: What
a great resemblance is there in all these outwardly? but a vast difference
inwardly. The ungodly sometimes do attain to the outward actions, but never to
the inward sanctified affections of the godly. As the painter may paint fire,
but he cannot paint heat, that is beyond his skill. Many titular Christians are
like the Onyx-stone, of which Naturalists write, that it is clear and bright in
the superficies, but dark and muddy at the center; men of civil conversation,
but not of sanctified affections. Now all this calls aloud to thee, to try
thy self whether thou go beyond them, that do all beforementioned, and yet
come short of heaven.

Besides it is not seldom that a true Christian, for want of a prudent trial
judges himself unsound; As the face of Moses, so his heart shines with grace,
and he knows it not; Christ is in him, as he was with the two Disciples, and
he (as they) is ignorant of it. Many Christians like Hagar, weep and mourn,
that they must die for thirst, when the water of life is by them, yea within
them.

There is that makes himself rich (full of peace and joy, from assurance of
Gods favor and his salvation, yet has nothing, (not one jot of grace or true
ground of joy) there is that makes himself poo^ (persuades himself to be in a
most wretched estate) and yet has great riches, Pro. 13.7.) is highly in Gods
favor, and has great store of saving grace.

But most commonly the error is on the other side; how does every swaggering,
or at best, civilized sinner presume that he is a Saint? how often has he
blear-eyed Leah lying by him all night, and he thinks it is beautiful Rachel,
til the light of the morning discover the contrary? how many have the Devil and
the world lodging in their arms and embraces, and think it is Christ, the
fairest of ten thousand, till upon examination it be found otherwise?

Reader, take heed this be not thy case, that thou like Uriah carriest letters
about thee, importing thy own execution, and yet thou not know of it; it is
ordinary for men to think they are spiritually rich, and increased with good,
and to have need of nothing, and not to know that they are wretched and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, Revel. 3.17. they cry like Agag,
Surely the bitterness of death is past; there is no fear of death, of wrath,
of hell, or damnation, when they are liable every moment to be hewn in pieces
before the Lord, to be torn in pieces by the roaring lion: O how many a
precious vessel (soul I mean) has been split upon this rock of presumption!
Does it not therefore concern thee to be serious and faithful in searching thy
heart, lest thou should (as the most) deceive thy self about a business of
such unspeakable consequence?

Secondly, consider the fewness of them that have Christ for their life, or
that live this spiritual life; every one almost that lives within the visible
Church is ready to say, that heaven is his inheritance, and he shall escape the
wrath to come; when the Word of God, and the works of men do clearly and fully
speak the contrary.

The Devil has his droves, all the earth wandreth after the beast, Rev. 17.8.
The whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John. 5.19. The enemies of God cover the
earth like grasshoppers for multitude, Judge. 7.12. they fill the Country, when
the Israeliter are like two little flocks of Kids, 1 Kings 20.27. The good and
the true shepherd calls his flock a little flock, Luke 12.32. nay a little,
little flock, (...).
there being in the original two diminutives to show there fewness. When four,
if not five Cities were destroyed, one righteous Lot with his small family is
delivered, Genesis 19.15. When an whole world is drowned, a few, that is, eight
souls are saved, 1 Pet. 3.20. Therefore the children of God are called a
remnant, Micah 7.18. two or three yards remaining of forty or fifty, and
compared to the gleanings after the vintage, Isa. 17.6. one or two bunches may
be left under some thick or outmost bough; but what are they to the many
baskets full that were gathered before. The Saints are jewels; now how few are
there of such pearls, in comparison of pebbles! Mal. 3.17. and strangers, Psalm.
119.19. how small is their number to natives, which are the worlds own, Joh.
15.19. The Church of Sardis has a few names only that have not defiled their
garments, Rev. 3.4.

Some have divided the world into thirty parts, and have affirmed nineteen of
those to be without Christ, (in whose name alone is salvation) and six of the
remaining eleven to be ^apists, which certainly are in no safe way to heaven,
and five parts of thirty only to be Protestants, amongst whom they that read of
their way of worship beyond the Seas, will find many of these to be but
mungrel-Protestants; But (to wave this, and) to come to England, where it is
generally by godly men believed, that God has as numerous an issue of newborn
children, as in any such quantity of ground in the world; and Reader, take the
public congregation thou do join with in the solemn worship of the
ever-blessed God upon his own day; and suppose one should come and sweep out of
it in the first place, all notorious sinners, drunkards, swearers, adulterers,
extortioners, liars, railers, scoffers at godliness, Sabbath Breakers, and the
like; upon whom whosoever looks with Scripture-spectacles, may see the Devils
mark on their foreheads, hell written on them in great letters, 1 Cor. Gal.
they continuing impenitent; would not such a besome sweep away much dust, even
a great part of the people of the Parish where thou live: but suppose one
should come in the second place, and purge out your civil and moral, yet
unsanctified men and women; such I mean, as are fair and just in their carriage
and dealings, you cannot say black is their eye; they pay to every man his due;
these are good second-Table men and women, their Religion consists altogether
in their righteousness toward men; they will not for a world wrong their
neighbor of a farthing, but they make no conscience of robbing God of the
great fear, chief love, choice delight, strong trust, which are due to his
Majesty; they know not what it is to know him and his will, to acknowledge him
by religious performances of prayer, reading, and the like in their Families
and Closets, they can scarce tell you what God is, or what Christ is; or what
the Lord Jesus has suffered or purchased for sinners: As old as many of them
are, they are more ignorant of the natures, offices, states of Christ, of
regeneration, justification, and sanctification, than little children; and yet
they are too old to learn; the Minister cannot persuade them to come to him,
and be instructed by him in the principles of the Oracles of God; nay, and they
will not believe that ignorance is a damning sin, though God has spoken so
peremptorily, That Christ shall come in flaming fire to render vengeance on
them that know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. and he has told them expressly, that men
perish for want of knowledge, Hosea. 4.6. Prove. 1.22, 29.

Suppose, I say, one should purge out all these civil righteous, yet ignorant
and irreligious persons, questionless he would purge out two parts of three of
the remaining ill humors; how very many would that blind Captain ignorance
lead out of a Congregation?

But suppose one came, in the third place, again, and take away them that are
righteous in their dealings with men, and seem teligious in their duties
toward God; that pray, and hear, and read, and fast, and instruct their
Families, and call upon God in secret, and yet are only so good to the eye of
man, being like some fruit, fair in the outside, but rotten at coare, having
self ends and carnal principles in all they do, Matthew. 23. and Matthew. 6.

After three such sweepings, how few think thou would be left in a
Congregation, or in a Parish? If Christ should come with his whip of cords, and
scourge all these out of his Temple (whom the Word of God clearly condemns)
would not Jesus be left almost quite alone, as he was in John 8.9?

Besides all those forementioned; Totus mundus est Arrianus. Hierom.
how many are there whose Religion consists merely in opinions, or heresies,
or schism, and separation from the people of God and public worship, and from
the good old way of faith and repentance, that mind neither Sabbath, nor
Sacraments, nor Family Duties, and trust for salvation to the light within
them, even till they come to utter darkness? 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. Jude 11, 12. 1
John 2.19. O how few are there that shall be saved! If Ulpian complained, there
were few true Philosophers, have not we more cause to complain, there are few
true belieers; for who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the
Lord revealed, Isaiah 53.1.

The terms of denying a man's self, of crucifying the flesh, with the
affections and lusts thereof, of cutting off right hands, and plucking out
right eyes, of hating father, mother, wife, child, name, house, and lands
(without which Christ will not save the soul) are so irksome, and contrary to
the sensual brutish man; that rather then admit them, they will take their
leave both of Savior and salvation: Straight is the gate, and narrow is the
way that leads to life, and few there be that find it, Matthew. 16.24. Galat.
5.24. Mark 9.43. Luke 14.26. Matthew. 7, 14.

Reader, I take not delight to number the people of God, much less to lessen
their number. The Lord knows, I have not written this Head without some
sorrow of heart; 2 Samuel 24.3.
my prayer is like that of Joabs, The Lord add unto his people an hundred
fold, and grant that his sons may come from far, and his daughters from the
ends of the earth, that the dominion of his son may be from Sea to Sea, and
from one end of the land unto the other; but without all controversy, they are
comparatively very few; and why does the Word of God mention it so much, but to
make thee more diligent and violent for the Kingdom of heaven! Matthew. 7.13,
14. If there were but few damned, and many saved out of the places where we
live, I think it would behove thee to try upon what ground thou stand, lest
thou should be one of those few that must suffer the vengeance of eternal
fire; but when so many, when such multitudes go in the broad way that leads
to destruction, when the love of many waxes cold; and it is but an he almost
that shall endure to the end, and be saved, Matthew. 24.12. how much, how much
does it concern thee to look about thee, that all things are right within
betwixt God and thy soul!

Thirdly, consider the profitablenesse of a serious faithful examination of thy
estate; if thou have this spiritual life, thy comfort depends upon the
knowledge of it. He that has true grace, shall go to heaven certainly; but he
only that knows it, De non apparentibus and non existentibus, eadem est ratio.
shall go to heaven comfortably. What the Lawyers say of civil things, I may
say of spiritual: Things that appear not, are all one as if they were not at al
in being. What comfort has he that is heir to a vast estate, till he know of
it, more than he that has nothing to do with it? What comfort is it to thee
that thou art a child of God, a member of Christ, an heir of heaven, unless
thou know it upon Scripture-grounds. If twenty or thirty are condemned, and
one be pardoned, this man torments himself with fears and terrors as much as
the rest, till he knows of his pardon. Does not many a Christian, like Jacob,
go down to the grave with sorrow, and refuse to be comforted, only upon a
false supposition, that the Joseph of their soul is dead, when indeed he is
alive, and in favor in the heavenly Court, as they upon a true search and
enquiry will find? vide Galat. 2.20. 2 Pet. 1.10. which will show this to be a
duty and attained unto by others, 2 Cor. 5.1. and indeed how contented will thou be in all conditions, when thou have once attained the knowledge of thy
good estate Godward! thou will bid every messenger welcome for his sake that
sends him; thou needst not fear any servant can night or day knock at thy
door with ill news; how willingly will thou go to duty? and with what alacrity
perform them? knowing the God whom thou drawest nigh to, is thy loving Father;
the Christ in whose Name thou approachest, is thy lovely Savior; nay, how
joyfully may thou think of death, as the portal through which thou shall go
into thy Masters joy and endless life! Believe it, thy life will be an heaven
upon earth. And should thou find thy estate lost, will it not be an infinite
mercy to thee, that thou did know it before it was too late! how will it
awaken thee out of thy security, and affrighten thee upon the apprehension of
thy misery! how will it quicken thee to mind thy duty! in loathing thy self, in
leaving thy sins, and in flying to thy Savior. Sound conversion begins at
self-examination; First we search and try our ways, and then turn to the Lord,
Lament. 3.39. The way to have our sores cured, is first to have them thoroughly
searched; I considered my ways, and turned my feet to thy testimonies, Psalm.
119.59. If thou would have thy face clean, look into the glass of the Law,
and view thy spots: He that knows not that he is in a wrong path, will not
turn back, though the farther he goes, the greater is his deviation and
danger. Jer. 31.19. After I was instructed, or after I was made known to my
self, I repented. As Abigail said to David, if thou hearken to thy servant, it
will be no grief of mind hereafter to my Lord, that thou art kept from shedding
of blood; so say I to thee; If thou will faithfully examine thy self, it will
be no cause of sorrow hereafter to thee, that thou were thereby kept from a
further shedding the blood of thy soul. Bish. Halls Meditat. and Vows, Cent. 2.
Meditat. 4.
I will conclude this motive with the meditation of the learned and holy
Bishop, now with Christ.

That which is said of the Elephant, that being guilty of his deformity, he
cannot abide to look on his face in the water (but seeks for troubled and muddy
channels) we see well moralized in men of evil conscience, who know their souls
are so filthy, that they dare not so much as view them, but shift off all
checks of their former iniquity, with the excuses of good fellowship. Whence it
is that every small reprehension galls them, because it calls the eye of the
soul home ^o it self, and makes them see a glimpse of what they would not: So
have I seen a foolish and timorous patient, which knowing his wound very deep,
would not endure the Surgeon to search it; whereon what can ensue, but a
festering of the part, and a danger of the whole body? so have I seen many
prodigal wasters run so far in books, that they cannot abide to hear of a
reckoning; It has been an old and true Proverb; Often and even reckonings make
long friends; I will often sum my estate with God, that I may know what I have
to expect and answer for; neither shall my score run on so long with God, that
I shall not know my debts, or fear an audit, or despair of pardon.

I come now to the touchstone, by which thou must be tried, whether thou art
true gold or counterfeit; it is likely thou presumest thy estate is good; well,
art thou willing, the Word of God that must whether thou will or no judge thee
for thy eternal life or death at the last day, Ad bunc librum, ut judicem; ad
alias, ut ^ judex divenio, says Melancth. of t^ ^ble.
should try thee at this day? If thy wares be right and good, thou will not be
afraid to bring them out of thy dark shop, into the light: If thy title be
sound and good, I know thou will be ready for a fair Trial at law, even at the
Law of God.

I shall try thee two ways, though both will lead to the same place; I must
first entreat thee to put those four particulars to thy soul, which in the
beginning I told thee were included in that expression, To me to live is Christ.

1. Ask thy soul what is the principle of thy Religious performances, what is
the spring of thy obedience; men indeed judge of others principles by their
practices, because they cannot discern the heart, whether it be right in a duty
or no; but God judges of men's practices by their principles, as we may see by
his speech of Paul, Behold he prays, Act. 9.11. Paul was a Pharisee, one of
the strictest of them, and they were much in prayer, but God who knew his heart
was wrong in former duties, takes not any notice of them; now behold he
prays; he might say a prayer before, but he never prayed a prayer til now;
when he had a right principle, being regenerated by the holy Ghost, then and
not till then he made a right prayer. Til the Tree be good, the fruit can never
be good, Matthew. 7.17. Now Friend, what is the principle of thy duties? is it
fear of men, hope of honor, desire of gain, or mearly the stopping the mouth
of conscience, or custom? are these the weights that make thy Clock to go? and
if these were taken off, would thy devotion stand still? then thy heart is not
right in the sight of God; entreat him for the Lords sake, that the thought of
thy heart may be forgiven thee; Or do thy pious actions flow from a renewed
will, and renewed affections? Does the outward correspondency of thy life to
the Law of God, proceed from an inward conformity in thy heart to the nature
and Law of God, from the Law written within? if it be thus, thy condition is
safe; for the deeper the spring is from whence the water comes, the sweeter the
water is, and thy services the more acceptable to God.

Speak thy self, whether thou prayest, read, hear, singest from the
Divine nature within, from love to the infinitely amiable God, from the delight
thou take in communion with him in duties; O how sweet is that honey, that
drops of its own accord from the comb! and how pure is that Wine which flows
freely from the grape! So grateful and acceptable is that sacrifice to God,
which is seasoned with sincere love. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord,
and delights greatly in his Commandments, Psalm. 128.1.

Or do thou worship God from the same principle the Sadduces do, who deny the
Resurrection? only from a desire it may go well with thee in this life; or from
the same principle from which the Persians do the devil? only from fear least
he should do thee hurt; surely that service will be sour, which like verjuice
is squeezed out of the crabs; To serve God with a filial fear is commendable,
but to serve him from a servile fear is unacceptable.

The upright Christian works from an inward principle, the new Creation
within; and thence it is, that spiritual things are so natural and delightful
to his regenerate part, as we see in David, I delight to do thy will, O my God;
how comes this to pass, but from an inward principle? Thy Law is within my
heart, Psalm. 40.8. or as it is in Hebrew, Thy Law is in the midst of my bowels.
But now an hypocrite usually acts from some outward principle, as the
Pharisees did, Matthew. 23.14, 27. Matthew. 6.1, 5. the wind from without makes
their Mill to go; some goads, or whips, force them forward; hence it is, that
like tired Jades, they are presently weary, and desire nothing more then to
rest, and cease from such unpleasant labor.

2. Ask thy soul what is the pattern of thy life; whom do thou labor to
imitate, is it Christ or thy Neighbor? Do thou set thy watch by the Town
Clock, or by the dial of Scripture, because that never fails of going
according to the Sun of Righteousness? A man dead spiritually (like dead fish)
ever swimmeth down with the stream of the times, will follow a multitude to do
evil, cannot endure to be singular; like the Planet Mercury (at best) if in
conjunction with good, he is good; if with bad, he is bad; or like water,
takes the figure of the vessel, what ever it be, into which it is put; But now
a living Christian does not dress himself by the glass of the times; whilst
he is in the Wilderness of this world, he may follow the cloud of faithful
Witnesses, but it must be no farther then they follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1.
Christ is the great standard by which he measures and tries, and which he
endeavors to imitate in his thoughts, words and actions; He does uti verbis
and nummis praesentibus, and vivere moribus praeteritis, use such words and
money as is current at present, but lives after that example which was in times
past; the patterns of godly men bear much sway with him; but he knows there
are some things in their lives, Admonet non omnes promiscue esse imitandos.
Calv. in Phil. 3.
which are sea-marks to be avoided, and not Landmarks to direct us; therefore
like the Eagle, he looks most at the Sun, Christ himself; Now Christian,
examine thy self whom do thou look upon for thy pattern; is it thy desire
and care to regulate thy Family and life, as such a Knight, or Esquire, or
Gentleman in the Parish where thou live orders his, or as thy profane
irreligious Neighbors do theirs? or do thou look upon, and labor to
resemble Jesus Christ, to govern thy house and heart as he did his, praying
with his Apostles, instructing them in the Mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven,
and the like? Matthew. 6. walking humbly, inoffensively, and worthy of the Lord,
even unto all well-pleasing, Heb. 7.26. 1 Pet. 1.19.

It is reported of Hierom, that having read the Religious life and death of
Hilarion, he cried out holding up the book, Well, Hilarion shall be the
Champion whom I will follow; So when thou read in the Scripture of the
heavenly pious life, and holy patient death of the Redeemer, how he did all
things well, and none could convince him of sin; is thy soul so ravished with
the beauty and luster of those many graces, which shined so eminently in him,
that it breaths out, O that I were like him, O that I could be as meek and
lowly as Christ, that I could deny my self, and despise the world, and glorify
God as much as Christ did, Christiani a Christ^ nomen acceperunt, and operae
pretium est ut sunt hae^edes nominis, ita sint imitatores sanctitatis. Bern.
Sentent. p. 496
that the same mind were in me that was in Christ Jesus! and though to thy
hearty sorrow, thou see how far short thou come of a perfect conformity to
him, yet thou resolvest to use all means appointed, that thou may be more
like him, and concludest, Well, Christ shall be the only Champion whom I will
follow. Answer thy conscience within thee, whether it be thus or no; for if
thou art a living Member, thou will resemble thy Head; Those whom God did
foreknow, he did predestinate to be conformable to the Image of his Son, Romans
8.29. As the Image in the glass resembles the face, in figure, feature, and
favor, so does the true Christian after his proportion resemble Jesus Christ.

3. Is Christ the comfort of thy life? when trouble like frosty weather
overtaketh thee, which is the fire at which thou warmest thy heart? is it this
friend, or that place of preferment, or any outward comfort whatsoever; or is
it thy Relation to Christ, and his affection to thee? when damps arise out of
the earth, is it the joy of thy soul that light springs down from heaven? or
do thou trust to the Candle of the creature, which will burn blew and go
out? Is Christ (man) or the world the door through which thy joys come in, the
dish on which thou feedest with most delight? If Christ should give thee the
long life of Methuselah, the strength of Sampson, the beauty of Absalom, the
wisdom, wealth and renown of Solomon, and deny himself to thee, can thou
contentedly bear his absence, or would thou say as Haman in another case and
Absalom? 2 Samuel 14.32. All this avails me nothing, so long as I may not see
the Kings face. Xenophon.
As Artabazus, when Cyrus gave him a cup of gold, and kissed Chrysantas, told
the King, The cup thou gave to me, was not half so good gold, as the kiss
thou gave Chrysantas; so says the living Saint when Christ blesses him
outwardly, and with-draweth himself from the soul; Lord, the cups, the wife and
children, the food and raiment, the pleasures and treasures, all the earthly
mercies thou give to me, are not a quarter so good gold, as the kisses of thy
love which thou give unto thy favorites; O kiss me with the kisses of thy
mouth, for thy love is better then wine, Cant. 1. Remember me, O Lord, with the
favor that thou bear unto thy children; O visit me with thy salvation, that
I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy
Nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance. Psalm. 106.4, 5. Look thou upon
me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto those that love thy Name.
Psalm. 119.132. These are the holy Petitions of a gracious soul for a child's
portion. Common mercies will never content them that have special grace, nor
satisfy them that are sanctified indeed. As the needle touched with the
Lodestone is restless, till it points toward the North; so the Saint that is
touched effectually by the Spirit of God, is unquiet till he turn unto and have
fellowship with Jesus Christ. He may flutter up and down (like the Dove) over
the waters of this world, but can find no rest for the soles of his feet, till
he return to Christ the true Ark, till Christ put forth his hand, and take him
in, Genesis 8.9. Then and not till then, he cries out with the Psalmish, Return
to thy rest O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.

Now Reader, what say thou, how is it with thee? Do thy affections as the
waters of Jordan, overflow their banks at the time of thine earthly harvest?
Josh. 3.15. Or like the bird, do thou then sing most merrily, when thou art
mounting up to heaven? Art thou willing to be served as the children of Abrams
Concubines, put off with ordinary gifts? or must thou like Isaac, have all,
even Jesus Christ, or else thou esteemest thy self to have nothing? Genesis 25 5,
6.

4. Is Christ the end of thy life? Is it thy main scope to live to him that
died for thee? Does the compass of thy soul without trepidation, stand right
to this pole the glory of Jesus Christ? For none of us lives to himself,
(says the Apostle) and no man dies to himself; but whether we live, we live
unto the Lord, and whether we die, we die unto the Lord; whether we live
therefore or die, we are the Lords. For to this end Christ both died, and rose
and revived, that he might be Lord both of dead and living, Romans 14.7, 8, 9. A
sincere Christian dedicates his body, soul, name, estate, relations, interests,
and his all to the glory of Christ, and wishes he had something better to
consecrate to him; As the Grecian told the Emperor, If I had more, more would
I give thee; so the Saint desires that he may believe more, and repent more,
and hate sin more, and for this end, that he may exalt Christ more. The
Philosopher tells us that means move by the goodness of their ends, Media
movent bonitate finis.
not by any absolute goodness of their own, but by their relative goodness,
the goodness of their ends; as we take Physic not for Physics sake, but for
healths sake; So duties and Ordinances move a Christian to mind them, not so
much for their own sake, as for their ^nds sake; he prays, fasteth, reads,
meditateth, that he may thereby and therein please, glorify and enjoy the Lord
Jesus Christ.

But now a Professor without the power of godliness, has another end; He
goes to Church, but it is as the cutpurse, not to seek God, but his prey. He
performs duties, but either for self-credit, Matthew. 6.2. as Pliny observes
of the Nightingale, As that Emperor who commanded all golden Idols to be pulled
down out of Churches, not out of hatred to the Idols, but out of love to the
gold
that she will sing much longer and louder when men are by, then when they are
not; or else for self-profit, Matthew. 23.14. Like him in the comedy that cried
out O heavens, but pointed to the earth. Religion is either this man's stirrup,
by which he hopes to get into the saddle above his Neighbors, or else it is
his stalking horse, which he contentedly follows all day, because it may
bring him in some gain at night; like Satan, he may assume the shape of Samuel,
but it is only upon some particular errand, and for his own ends; This man is
not holy, but crafty, and does not serve God, but himself of God. Reader,
search whether thou art not one of these; Thou art but an empty vine, if thou
bring forth fruit to thy self, Hos. 10.1. O how many a work, materially
good, being flie-blown with self, proves sormally bad, and so becomes stinking
and unsavory in the nostrils of God! Self is the pirate which too too often
intercepteth the golden fleet of religious performances, that they cannot
return fraughted with blessings. It concerns thee therefore to observe thy
ends; what are thy ends in thy eating, and drinking, and all thy natural and
civil actions? is thy end to please and gratify the flesh? or is it that thou
may get health and strength, and thereby be the more serviceable to thy Maker
and Redeemer? what is thy end in thy spiritual undertakings? is duty the end of
duty, or is obedience to the honor of, and Communion with Christ the end of
thy performances? make a pause before thou read farther, and answer the Lord
who commands thee to examine and know the state of thy soul.

But because I would willingly find thee out whoever thou art, and have thee
fully acquainted with thy spiritual condition, I shall desire thee to try thy
spiritual condition by the efficient cause of it, and that is the Spirit of
God. The holy Ghost is called the Spirit of life, Romans 8.2. and indeed he only
has this spiritual life, that has this Spirit of life; As all the members of
the natural body are actuated and enlivened by the same humane spirit from the
Head; So all the Members of the Mystical body are quickened and actuated by the
same Divine Spirit from their Head the Lord Jesus Christ. Mark therefore that
one place in Romans 8.9. how full it is to this purpose; for upon that place, the
weight of all I have to speak further about this Use of trial will depend. The
words are these, But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be the
Spirit of God dwell in you. (Mark) Now if any man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his. Observe I beseech thee, If any man, let him pretend
never so much, let his privileges be never so many, let his profession be
never so great, and his performances never so numerous, yet if he have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; so that if the Spirit of Christ have not
its habitation in thee, thou have no spiritual relation to Jesus Christ.

Now I shall teach thee to know, whether the Spirit be in thee or no, by two of
its effects or properties; the first will be more general, the second more
special.

1. The Spirit of God if it be in thee, will purify thee, for it is a
purifying Spirit. Sanctification is the proper work of the Spirit of Christ. It
is called the holy Ghost; and it is holy not only subjectively, but
effectively; it works holiness, and makes men holy, 1 Cor. 6.11. It infuseth
holy habits and principles into the soul, whereby it is enabled to fight with,
and by degrees to foyl its corruptions; It changes the understanding by
illumination, the will by renovation, and the affections by sanctification; it
does not infuse new faculties into the soul, but it does renew the old; it
turns the same waters into another Channel; they ran before after the world
and the flesh, but now after God and his ways; It is as it were the same viol,
only it is new tuned; before it could make no music in praying or singing, but
now it is so melodious, that it delights the heart, and ravisheth the ear of
God himself. The old Moon and the new are the same, only the new has a new
endowment of light from the Sun, which it had not before; so it is here, the
purified person is the same man he was before, only he has a new endowment of
the light of holiness, which he had not before. Now thus the Spirit ever
works where it dwells; it is therefore called a river of living waters,
John 7.37. not a pond of dead, but a river of living waters; a pond will suffer
dirt and mud to continue in it without opposition; but a river of living waters
purges out, and casts up its mire and dirt, its foam and scum, Isa. 57.20.
So the spirit of the world and flesh will let Atheism, pride, and unbelief to
lodge and lurk in the soul without resistance, unless it be a little from a
natural conscience; but the Spirit of God works out these gradually, as
generous wine works out lees and dregs. The Spirit is also called fire, Acts
2. Matthew. 3.11. for as fire fights with the cold water that is over it, and
by degrees conquereth it, and reduces the water to its own likeness of heat
in some measure; so the Spirit lusts and fights against the flesh, and by
degrees overcomes the interest of it, captivateth the soul to the obedience of
Christ, and conformeth the whole man in some measure to the Image of God.

Examine thy soul by this; Does the spirit within thee combat with, and conquer
thy corruptions? Does it enable thee to cast them away with shame and
detestation? Has it turned the bent of thy heart, and stream of thy
affections, after spiritual and heavenly things? The waters of the sea (as some
write) though by their natural course they follow the center; yet in obedience
to the Moon are subject to her motion, and so turn and return, ebb and flow.
So though thou by nature did follow the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the
eye, and the pride of life, yet in obedience to the Spirit do thou now follow
its motions? Has the interest of the Spirit an actual predominancy in thy
soul, above the interest of the flesh? Can thou say, that the interest of the
spirit, and the interest of the flesh, do often meet together, on a narrow
bridge, where both cannot go forward together, and usually thou suffer the
Spirit to go forward, and the flesh to go back? When two Masters walk together,
and a servant follows after, it is not easy to know to which of the two the
servant belongs, but when the Masters part, the servant is discovered whose he
is; When relgiion and the world have their interests together, thou may be
hid; but when thy credit and Christ, thy pleasure and the spirit come in
competition (as they will very often) thou may discover thy self clearly,
whore servant thou art. Speak friend, and let thy conscience witness, whether
it be thus or no; thou mast deceive and thereby undo thy self, but thou can
not deceive God; for if the Spirit do not sanctify thee, the Son will never
save thee. Pharao's Court admitted of Frogs and Lice, and Noah's Ark received
unclean Beasts into it; but no such vermin can crawle into the heavenly Court:
Into it can in no wise enter (observe Reader) in no wise any thing that is
defiled or unclean, Revel. 21.17. These are the words of the true and living
God. Can thou think that thou have the Spirit of God, and shall be a gainer
by death, who art a servant of unrighteousness, who have vainglory,
covetousness, hypocrisy, carnal-mindedness within thee, and never mournest
under them, as one heavy laden with them, nor longest after, Regeneratio
gratuitam coram deo justificationem individuo nexu comitatur, nec ab ea
separari potest, etiamsi distingui debeat. Polan. Syntag. lib* 6. cap. 37.
nor usest diligently the means for deliverance from them? Do thou live a
spiritual life, that instead of being dead to sin, art dead in sin? and shall
thou arrive at heaven, who walk in the road to hell? I assure thee, a King
will sooner admit dunghill-rakers and privy-cleaners, in their nastiest,
filthiest pickle into his bed, then God will take thee, if thou be such a one,
into heaven: No, Heaven is for the holy, and for them only.

2. The Spirit of God is a praying Spirit: it is called the spirit of grace and
supplication, Zach. 12.10. the spirit of adoption, Romans 8.15. and of his Son,
whereby they that have it cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6.

As Christ in Heaven makes intercession for them without them, Heb. 7.25. so
the Spirit of Christ on earth makes intercession for them within them; God
never had any still-born children. The fathers after the flesh sometimes have
dumb children, but the Father of spirits never had any such. Man's invocation
of God presently follows upon Gods effectual vocation of him: One of the
first signs of spiritual life in Paul was spiritual breathing; Behold he
prays, Acts 9.6. and it is observable, that prayer is the Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and the ending almost of all his Epistles: And David was three
times a day, Psalm. 55.17. nay seven times a day, at this blessed duty, Psalm.
119.164. yea, he was so wholly employed in it, that he speaks as if he were
altogether made up of it, Psalm. 109, 4. Et ego oration. Moller. legit.
But I prayer ( give my self unto, as it is read in our translations, is added
for explanation, as the different character shows) as if prayer had been his
essential constitutive part. Some write of Latimer, that he would pray so many
hours, that he was not able to rise. Nazianzen says of his Sister Gorgonia,
that she prayed so much, that her knees seemed to be grown to the very ground.
Hierom. in rit.
Paul the Eremite was found dead, kneeling upon his knees, holding up his
hands, and lifting up his eyes. Eusebius.
Constantine the Emperor would not have his effigies set up, as other Princes
had, in his armor leaning, but in a posture of prayer kneeling. Thus all the
Children of God are frequent at asking their heavenly Father blessing. Quorum
spiritus domiti sunt and qui ^ese deo subjiciunt (mendici spiritu) ^unius in
Mat. 5.3.
Now ask thy soul; Does the Spirit of ^od bring thee often upon thy knees? Art
thou one of the generation of seekers? Psalm. 24.6. Art thou one of Gods
suppliants? Zeph. 3.10. Do thou know what it is to be poor in spirit, It is
the character of the worst of sinners, they call not on God, Psalm 14.4. a man
once speechless is nigh unto death
to be a beggar, and to live altogether upon the almes-basket of heavens
bounty? Is there a constant trade driven betwixt God and thy soul, God sending
down mercies, and thou sending up prayers? This is the daily Exchange. Can
thou better live without thy daily bread then this daily duty? When thy heart
is big with grief, whither do thou go? Is this thy great ease, that thou
may empty thy soul into Gods ears?

Are thy prayers fervent prayers? Is this holy fire put to thy daily
sacrifices? Is thy prayer made without ceasing, or instantly! Acts 26.7.
stretched out upon the tenters; (...)
(as the word signifies) not so much in the length of the petitions, as in the
acting of holy affections; Do thou labor in prayer? Coloss. 4.12. i. e.
wrestle with God (as that word imports) bending and straining every joint of
the new man in the soul, (...). Romans 12.12. (...). instant in prayer, a
Met^phor from hunting dogs, which will not cease following the game till they
have got it. (...). Luke 11.8. Nazian says of his sister Gorgonia that ^
prayer she was modestly impudent.
that they may all help to prevail with God? Are all the heavenly forces within
thee united when thou prayest? that if possible thou may take the Kingdom of
heaven by storm, by violence? Matthew. 11.12.

What sai'st thou? Reader, do thou like the importunate Widow, take no
denial? but use an (humble) impudency, as the Word of Christ includes, when
thou art entreating the Divine Majesty for spirituals? Or do thou pray, but
it is as if thou prayedst not? so dully and coldly that thou can hardly hear
thy self? only as it were between sleeping and waking, thou mumblest over a few
petitions, either out of custom, or to stop the mouth of conscience, never
regarding whether God answer thy requests or no.

Did thou but consider the dreadful Majesty of that God to whom thou prayest,
the unvaluable worth of the soul, and endless state for which thou prayest, and
the poor pittance of time (upon which thy eternity depends) that thou have to
pray in, it might rouse thee out of thy security.

Common beggary as it is the poorest, so it is the easiest trade; A whispering
devotion is seldom answered with a loud echo from heaven. Dr. Arron Sermon. on
1 Samuel 7.12. p. 15.
but this special, as it is the richest, so it is the hardest. The fervent
prayer is the prevalent prayer, Jam. 5.16. The bullet will fly no farther than
the force of the powder will carry it. That arrow of prayer that would hit the
mark, must be drawn with full strength. He that in prayer for grace through an
humble dependence on Christ, will not be denied, shall not be denied.
Lip-labor does no more than a windy instrument, makes a loud noise, and that
is all. Prayer without the travail of the soul, is but the cold carcass of a
duty, and no wonder if it be unsavory in Gods nostrils. How many among us are
there that pray every day for pardon and holiness, and yet shall die without
them, and perish eternally for want of them? and all because they never begged
them in good earnest, but were always indifferent whether God heard them or
no; No day passed wherein Luther spent not 3 hours in prayer; once it fell out
that I heard him; (says Vitus Theodorus of him) Good God, what a spirit, what
a confidence was in his very expressions? with such reverence he prayed as to a
God, with such assurance as to a Father or friend. The child has escaped many
a stripe by his loud cry. Heartlesse motions do but bespeak a denial, whereas
fervent suits offer a sacred violence both to earth and heaven.
I would have such know, that the blessed God valueth his special ware at an
higher rate than to bestow it on such as will not esteem it something
answerably to its worth.

It were easy to instance how fiery and fervent the children of God, in whom
was this spirit of God (which is compared to fire) have been in their
supplications: look Genesis 32.24, 25. Psalm. 5. Ps. 77. Ps. 88. Jacob wrestled
with God, and would not let him go, unless he blessed him; Christ seemed
willing to shake him off; Let me go, says Christ: I will not let thee go,
unless thou bless me, says Jacob. My limbs may go, my life may go, but no
going for thee without a pawn, without a blessing. Thus indeed does the seed of
Jacob seek the face of their God, and thence are called Israelites; for as
Princes they have power with God, and prevail, Genesis 32.26, 27. And this is the
difference betwixt the prayer of a living and a dead Christian, the prayer of
the former is instant and fervent, not discouraged, but rather increasing by
opposition; as lime by water cast upon it burns the hotter, (see Matthew.
15.22. and 25.27.) the latter is flat and indifferent, easily put off, though
it be with a crum instead of a crown, with a bubble, a butterfly, instead of
the everlasting fruition of God. Any temporal good is satisfying to them that
have no true spiritual good in them, Psalm. 4.5. And the reason is clear, the
breath of a pair of bellows is cold, because it does not proceed from a living
principle within, but the breath of a man is warm, because it comes from a
principle of life within; so the prayer, the breath of an hypocrite is cold,
because it does not flow from the spirit of God, the only inward principle of
spiritual life; but the prayer, the breath of a sincere Saint is warm, is
fervent, because it proceeds from this living principle, the spirit of Christ
within. Indeed the Christian knows not how to pray as he ought, but the
spirit helps his infirmities with sighs and groanings, which cannot be
uttered, Romans 8.26. Do thou pray constantly? that duty which is done out of
conscience, will be done with perseverance. A godly man will seek Gods face
evermore, Psalm. 105.4. and Ps. 116.2. He calls upon God as long as he lives.
Breathing heavenward in prayer is the beginning and ending of his spiritual
life upon earth, as we see in Paul, Act. 9.6. and Stephen, Act. 7. ult.

He never takes his leave of prayer, till he is entering into the place of
praise. Prayer is his element, he cannot live without it, and communion with
God in it. Prayer is the vessel, by which he is continually trading into the
Holy Land; he sends it out fraught with precious graces, faith, hope, desire,
love, godly sorrow, and the like; and it comes home many times richly laden
with peace, joy, and increase of grace. But now an hypocrite, Job says, will
not pray always, he will not always call upon God, Job 27.10. possibly he may
sometimes cry out (as a Scholar undet the rod, or a Malefactor upon the Rack)
for deliverance out of some affliction; but when God opens his hand, and
bestows the mercy, his mouth is shut, and his heart too, that you shall hear
but little more of this duty. If he pray on his sick bed, and God raise him up,
he leaves his prayers sick a bed behind him. His prayer was but a messenger
sent about some particular errand; when that is done, the messenger returns:
As that story of the Friar speaks, how when he was a poor Friar, he went ever
sadly, casting his eyes upon the ground; but being Abbot, he went merrily,
looking upward; one of his companions asked him the reason of that alteration;
he answered, that when he was a common Friar, he went dejected by looking
downward for the keys of the Abbey, which now he had found, and therefore left
that posture.

So when an hypocrite has the temporal good thing he desires, (for that
usually is most desired by him) he has his ends, and his prayer an end too.

Or if God do not hear him presently, he will not submit patiently, but often
flingeth away in a rage, with that wicked King, Why should he wait upon the
Lord any longer?

If there come not in present profit, he will give over his trade; as Tully
said to his Brother, That he would pray to the Gods, but that they have given
over to hear. Whereas a godly man will cry in the day, and not be silent in the
night; he will direct his prayer to God, und look up, Psalm. 5.3. He will pray
and wait, wait and pray, as you see beggars in some places, they will beg and
knit, knit and beg, and continue still begging and knitting: So a right beggar
at Gods door, he will pray and work, work and pray, he will believe and pray,
hope and pray, read and pray, wait and pray; he knows that it is not good to
limit the holy One of Israel; but it is good that a soul should hope, and
quietly wait for the salvation of God, Lam, 3.26.

A Divine gives me this Simile, which does excellently illustrate our present
subject: Take some draught horse, Mr. Car. on Job 27.
and he will draw when the load is coming, Of Carolus Magnus it is said,
Carolus plus cum deo quam hominibus loquitur.
but if he feel it not coming, he will trample and not draw; but take a horse
of a right breed, and put his traces to a tree, or a post, he will strain and
strain, and die upon the place, before he will give over, though nothing comes:
So a rotten Christian, if he find no present gain coming, he gives over duty,
fearing all is lost; but a right Christian will pray continually, 1 Thessalonians.
5.17. whether God hear him presently or no; he knows that both the command of
God and his own wants call upon him never to give over.

Besides, this spirit of prayer abides in him for ever, John 4.14. and 16.

Examine thy heart by these marks faithfully, and do not by flattery or
self-love (or rather self-hatred) deceive thy soul (no deceit like soul-deceit)
but pass sentence upon thy self impartially, and if thou find thy condition
good, bless God, keep close to Jesus Christ, and labor that thou may walk
worthy of the Lord, Col. 1.10.
even unto all well-pleasing. The great and extraordinary privileges bestowed
on thee, do call aloud for gracious and extraordinary practices from thee. How
exemplary should thou live among men, who art to live eternally with God?
What singular things will thou do for that God, for that Savior, that has
done such singular things for thy soul? Can any love be too much? Can any
labor be too great? Can any honor be too high? Can any service be too holy for
that God, to whom thou art by millions of eternal obligations thus infinitely
infinitely bound? O let the fruitfulness of thy heart and life in holiness
proclaim thine abundant thankfulness for such mercies as for weight and worth
exceed the very thoughts of Men and Angels: How abundant should thou be in
the work of the Lord, when thou know that thy labor shall not be in vain in
the Lord? When thou art confessing thy sins, meditate on the choosing calling
love of that God, against whom thy sins are committed, and try whether the heat
of that burning love will not thaw thy heart, and dissolve it into tears, when
it is most hard and icie. When thou art backward to a duty that has some
difficulty in it, consider Jesus Christ was not backward to his bitter bloody
sufferings for thy sins. As the Soldier told Augustus, when he denied his
petition, I did not serve you so at the battle of Actium: So say to thy soul,
Jesus Christ did not serve thee so, when he was to drink the cup of his Fathers
fierce wrath for thee; and see whether such melting persuasions will not
prevail with thee to subject thy self to the hardest precept. When thou art
departing away from ^od by any sinister course or insincere carriage, remember
who thou art, one that art called not to sin, but sanctity; not to uncleanness,
but holiness. As Antigonus, being invited to a place, that might probably prove
a temptation to sin, asked counsel of Menedemus, what he should do? He bade him
only remember he was a Kings Son: So do thou remember thine high and heavenly
calling, and do nothing unworthy of the God that has enrolled thy name in the
Book of Life, that has ransomed thy soul with the precious blood of his Son,
and has sanctified thee by the effectual operations of his Spirit, but walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith and whereunto thou art called, Ephesians. 4.1.

It is an excellent meditation of Eusebius Emissenus; Though the Devil, says
he, should be damned for many sins, and I but for one, yet mine would exceed
the Devils impiety; they never sinned against a God that became an Angel for
them; they never sinned against a Mediator that was crucified for them; but
miserable and wretched I (and its wonderful that my heart melts not when it
thinks on it) I have sinned against a God that became a Man for me, against a
God that died an ignominious death for me; against a God that has left me an
example of love and holiness. I am more unworthy then the Devils.

Consider it Friend; no sins admit of higher aggravations, nor are matter of
deeper provocation, then the sins of those that are interested in Gods special
distinguishing affection. In a word (for I had not thought to have told thee so
much, it was for the sake of others principally that I penned this piece) since
it shall be thy reward to be like an Angel in happiness, ever to behold the
face of the Father, let it be thy work and endeavor to be like an Angel in
holiness, to do the will of God readily, heartily, and universally.

But if thou find upon a thorough search, that thou art a stranger to this
spiritual life; if conscience sent to enquire bring in its verdict, that this
purifying praying Spirit dwells not in thy soul: Let me beseeth thee, in the
fear of the Lord, to bethink thy self, what is like to become of thee for ever.
One of the Martyrs put his finger into the candle, to try how he could endure
the fire, in which he was afterward to be burnt; do thou but read over again
the former use of information, and consider whether thou art able to undergo
that loss, and that terrible intolerable eternal wrath of an omnipotent God,
which is therein declared, and by Scripture proved to be the portion of all
that live and dye in thy condition. Suppose thou should hear a voice this
hour, as that wicked Pope did, Ve^i Miser in judicium
Come thou wretch unto thy particular and eternal judgment; what would thou
do? where would thou appear? and where would thou leave thy glory? Isai.
10.3. I would not for a world take thy turn: How is it possible, that thou
can eat, or drink, or sleep with any quietness of mind: that in the day thy
meat is not sauced with sorrow, and thy drink mingled with weeping: that in the
night thou art not scared with dreams, and terrified with visions, when thy
whole eternity depends upon that little thread of life, which is in danger
every moment to be cut asunder, and thou to drop into hell! Art thou a man that
have reason, and can thou be contented one hour in such a condition? Art thou
a Christian, that believe the Word of God to be truth, and can thou
continue one moment longer in that Sodom of thy natural estate, which will be
punished with fire and brimstone?

I tell thee, did thou and the rest of thy carnal neighbors but give credit
to Scripture, thou and they too would sooner sleep in a chamber, where all the
walls round, the cieling above, and floor below, were in a burning light flame,
then rest quietly one moment in thine estate of sin and wrath. But for thy
sake, (thy condition yet not being desperate, though very dangerous) that thou
might avoid the easeless misery of the sinner, and attain the endless
felicity of the Saint, I have purposely written the next Use, which I request
thee, as thou love thy life, thy soul, thine unchangeable good; nay I charge
thee, as thou will answer the contrary at the great and dreadful day of the
Lord Jesus, that thou read carefully, and that thou practice faithfully the
means and directions, therein propounded out of the Word of God.

3. My third Use shall be, of exhortation to those that are dead in sins, to
labor for this spiritual life. Whoever thou art that would have gain by thy
death, then get Christ to be thy life. Have thou read of that fullness of joy,
of those rivers of pleasures, of that exceeding and eternal weight of glory, of
that Kingdom that cannot be shaken, of that enjoyment of Christ, of that full
immediate fruition of God, and in him of all good, of that perfect freedom from
all evil, which they (and only they) shall be partakers of, who have this
spiritual life? And is not thy heart inflamed with love to it? thy soul
enlarged in desire after it? Extrema Christianorum desiderantur etsi non ex^r
i^. Hi^^.
thy will resolved to venture all, and undertake any thing for it? Surely if
thou art a man, and have reason, thy will and affections will be carried out
after things that are good; but if thou have but a spark of Christianity, thou
can not but be exceedingly ravished with things so eminently, so
superlatively, so infinitely good. The Historian observes, that the riches of
Cyprus invited the Romans to hazard dangerous fights for the conquering it. How
many storms does the Merchant sail through for corruptible treasures? How often
does the Soldier venture his limbs, nay his life, for a little perishing
plunder? Reader, I am persuading thee to mind the true treasure, durable
riches, even those which will swim out with thee in the shipwreck of death.

Stephen Gardener said of justification by Faith only, that it was a good
supper doctrine, though not so good a breakfast one. So the power of
godliness, this spiritual life, though it be not so pleasant to live in as to
the flesh, yet it is most comfortable to die with.

When Moses had heard a little of the earthly Canaan, how earnestly does he beg
that he might see it! Deuteronomy. 3.25. I pray thee let me go over and see the good
Land that is beyond Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon. Thou have read a
little of the heavenly Canaan, and have thou not ten thousend times more cause
to desire it?

Plato says, If moral Philosophy could be seen with moral eyes it would draw
all men's hearts after it: May not I more truly say, if the gain of a Saint at
death could be seen with spiritual eyes, with the eye of faith, it would make
all men in love with it, and eager after it! Baalam, as bad as he was, did
desire to die the death of the righteous; and surely they that dislike their
way, cannot but desire their end; but God has joined them both together, and
it is not in the power of any man to put them asunder; therefore if thou
would die their deaths, thou must live their spiritual lives. Holiness is
the seed out of which that harvest grows. If thou would be safe when thou
shall launch into the vast Ocean of eternity; if thou would be received into
the celestial habitation, when thou shall be turned out of thy house of clay,
make sure of this life in Christ. If an Heathen Prince would not admit Virgins
to his bed before they were purified; Est. 2.12.
can thou think the King of Kings will take thee into his nearest and dearest
embraces, before thou art sanctified? Believe it, heaven must be in thee,
before thou shall be in heaven. Unless the Spirit of God adorn thy soul, (as
Abrams servant did Rebeckah) with the jewels of grace, thou art no fit Spouse
for the true Isaak the Lord of glory.

The brutish worldling indeed would willingly live profanely, and yet die
comfortably; dance with the Devil all day, and sup with Christ at night; have
his portion in this world with the rich man, in the other world with Lazarus.
There is a story of one, tha^ b i^g rep^^ved for his vicious life, and
p^rswaded to mind godliness, would an^ often That it was but say^ng three words
at his death, and he ^as sure to have eternal life; probably his three words
were, Mi^erere mei Deus: but he riding one day over a bridge, his horse
stumbled, and as both were falling into the river, he cries out, Capiat omnia
diabolus, ^o se and m^n and all to the Devil. As he l ved so he died, with
three words, (...) such as he hoped to have had.
As the young swaggerer told his graceless companion (when they had been with
Ambrose, and seen him on his deathbed, nothing affrighted at the approach of
the King of terrors, but triumphing over it) O that I might live with thee, and
die with Ambrose! But this cannot be; an happy death is the conclusion of an
holy life. The God who gives heaven has in great letters written in his Word,
upon what terms (and no other) it may be had. He chooses to salvation through
sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.

It is as possible for thee to enjoy the benefit of the Sons passion, without
the Fathers creation, as without the Spirits sanctification. Believe the word
of truth, John 3.3. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be born
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God: And Hebr. 12.14. Follow holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord. Consider Friend, this is the Word of
the true and living God; and this Law, this standing Law of Heaven, is like the
law of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be altered; not one iota or title
of it can possibly go unfulfilled, Math. 5.18. Dare thou think that the God
of truth will be found a liar for thy sake, as he must be if he save thee in
thy sinful unconverted state? I tell thee, the God of holiness and justice will
send millions of such carnal wretches as thou art to hell, there to suffer the
vengeance of the unquenchable fire, before he will stain his honor in the
least. No, he is more tender of his glory then so; though thou carest not how
much thou tramplest his honor in the dust, by the wilful breach of his
Commands, yet he is exceeding jealous of his great Name; and when his very
being is engaged for the accomplishment of his Word, he will not ungod himself
to glorify thee in an unsanctified condition; and therefore do not delude thy
soul, in presuming that he that made thee will not damn thee; for he says
himself, that unless thou art new made, and have that true understanding to
fear his Majesty, and depart from iniquity, He that made thee will not save
thee, and he that formed thee will show thee no mercy, Isai. 27.11, I hope
therefore thou art fully convinced, that it highly concerns thee to be night
and day with the greatest diligence imaginable, laboring for this spiritual
life, when thine everlasting comfort in the other world, thine eternal life
depends so much upon it.

Art thou rich? hearken to this word of counsel from God; look after these
durable riches, Prove. 6.18. thy earthly riches are not for ever, Prove. 27.24.
though thy heart possibly is more set upon thy houses and hoards, then upon
heaven, yet thou must take thine everlasting leave of them ere long; when these
unsearchable riches in Christ, which I am persuading thee to mind, outlive the
days of heaven, run parallel with the life of God, and line of eternity, Prove.
8.18. Nay till thou live this spiritual life, all thy wealth is want, all thy
glory is ignominy, all thy comforts are crosses, yea curses to thee, Prove.
1.32, Psalm. 69.22.

All thy outward comforts like the Rainbow show themselves in all their dainty
colors, and then vanish away; or if they stay with thee till death, then they
die with thee; Oh how has the Moon of great men's plenty often been eclipsed at
the full, and the Sun of their pomp gone down at noon!

Through the corruption of thy heart they prove but fuel for thy lusts on
earth; and if thou should die, having only this worlds goods, they will feed
the eternal fire in hell. It is storied of Heliogabalus, that he had silken
halters to hang himself with; ponds of sweet water to drown himself in; and
gilded poison to poison himself: Truly more hurtful are the worlds trinity,
riches, honors and pleasures, to them that have great estates in the world, but
no estate in the Covenant. Poison works more furiously in wine then in water;
and so does corruption many times bewray it self more in plenty then in
poverty: It is sad, that thou should not be led to God by that which came
from God. But O how lamentable is it, that thou should, Jehu like, fight
against thy Master with his own Soldiers; like the dunghill, the more the Sun
shines on it, it sends forth the more stinking savor; The Poet feigned Pluto
to be the god of riches, and Hell, as if they had been inseparable. Homer.
that thou should by the riches which his Majesty has given thee, only have
this cursed advantage, to be the greater Rebel! Many good works has Christ
done for thee, for which do thou stone him? John 10.32. for which of them
do thou stone him out of thy house? by oaths, or drunkenness, or gaming, or
by atheism, and irreligion, or at least by putting him off with a few short,
cold, formal prayers, and that but now and then neither: Many good works has
he done for thee, for which of them do thou stone him out of thy heart? by
letting the world and the things of the world have the highest seat there, the
throne, thy chiefest esteem, warmest love, and strongest trust? What say
thou, is it not thus? and is this to be led by his goodness to repentance? Oh
consider thy bodies mercies are holy baits laid by God to catch thy soul. He
tries the vessel with water, to see whether it will hold wine; do not like the
foolish fly, burn thy self in this flame of love; turn not his grace into
wantonness; but let the kindness of God be salvation unto thee; thou should
by those cords of love be drawn nearer unto him, and by those bands of mercies
be tied closer to his commands. How should thou gather, if the streams of
creatures be so sweet what sweetness is there in God who is the Fountain? If
he be so good in temporals, surely he is better in spirituals, and best of all
in eternals: How unsatisfied should thou be with all these outward gifts
which may consist with his everlasting hatred, and resolve with Luther, not to
be put off with the blessings of his left hand, Valde protestatus sum nolle
sic ab eo satiari. Melch. A^ in vit. Luth.
of his footstool? Thou have the more cause to look about thee, because few of
thy rank are truly religious; a little godliness will go a great way with great
men, though of all men they have most obligations from God: see James 2.5, God
chooses the poor of the world, rich in faith, and heirs of his Kingdom: And
Christ tells us, It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle,
then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 19.24. Our
Savior indeed does not speak of an impossibility, but of the difficulty of it,
and the rareness of it. Job unfolded the riddle, and got through the needles
eye with three thousand Camels; but it is hard to be wealthy and not wanton;
too too often are riches like bird-lime, hindering the soul in its flight
toward Heaven; a load of earth has sunk many a soul to hell; and the
enriching of the outward occasioned the impoverishing of the inward man. A rich
man is a rare dish at heavens table: Blessed be God there are some, but surely
few rich of those very few that shall be saved, 1 Cor. 1.26. The weighty burden
in a vessel, though it consisted of the most precious commodities, has not
seldom caused its miscarriage, when otherwise it had arrived safely at its
desired haven. As the Moon when she is at the full, is farthest from, and in
most direct opposition to the Sun; so it is the temper of most in thy condition
to be farthest from, and most opposite to Christ, when they receive the most
light of prosperity from him, and art fullest of the blessings of his goodness.
Take heed thou be not like the Horse and Mule, Psalm 32.9. to drink plentifully
of the streams, and never look to the Fountain; but let thine eyes, as the
Churches, be Doves eyes; When the Dove has pecked her corn, she turns her
eyes heavenward, she looks up, Cant. 1.15.

It is reported of the Spartans, that they use to choose their King every year,
during which year he lives in all abundance, but is, after the year be
expired, banished into some remote place for ever. One King knowing this, being
called to be King, did not as others prodigally spend his revenues, but heaped
up all the treasure he could get together, and sent it before to that place
whither he should be banished; and so in the year of his Government made a
comfortable provision for his whole life: So wise are they that lay up a
treasure in Heaven against the time of their departure out of this world.

Art thou poor? Labor for this spiritual life, it will make thee rich indeed.
Thou have little on earth, but thou may have a treasure in heaven. God
offers thee Grace, Christ, and Life* as freely as others; take heed thou
neglect them not and think as they in Sweden, that it is only for Gentlemen to
keep the Sabbath; that its only for Gentlemen to mind Religion; thou have a
soul to save; an endless estate to provide for; an hell to escape; an heaven
to attain; a dreadful day of judgment to prepare for, as well as they. It is a
great mercy, that though God difference thee from others in temporals, yet not
in spirituals. Among the Israelites the price for their ransom was equal, half
a shekel, the rich shall not give more, nor the poor less, Exodus 30.12, 15,
16. thereby Willet in loc.
signifying, that the same price was paid by Christ for the redemption of all,
poor as well as rich, and that the virtue and merits of Christ's passion belong
equally to all; thy outward condition does not exclude thee from an interest in
Christ's death, and intercession. Poor Lazarus may lie in the bosom of rich
Abraham. The poor may be gospellized, as that Matthew. 11.5. is sometimes read,
not only have the Gospel preached to them, but be changed by it. God accepted
the Lamb and Dove in sacrifice, when he rejected the Lion and Eagle. But thou
must be one of Gods poor, not of the Devils ragged Regiment: Will it not be sad
for thee to have two hels: one on earth, in cold, hunger, and thirst, and
wants, and another in hell, in heat, and unspeakable woe? How many of thy
condition serve the Devil and the world all their days in drudgery and
slavery, and are turned into hell as a Sumpter-horse at the night of death,
after all his hard travel, with his back full of gals and bruises.

A low man, if his eye be clear, may look as high as the tallest, B. Hall
Contempl.
the least Pigmie may from the lowest valley see the Sun as fully as a Giant
upon the highest mountain: Christ is now in Heaven; it is not the smalnesse of
our person, nor the meanness of our condition, that can let us from beholding
him. The soul has no stature, neither is heaven to be had with reaching. If
God clear the eyes of our faith, we shall be high enough to beho!d him.

Do not say, thou art to provide for thy wife and children, and have no time to
regard thy soul, in a solemn, serious performance of duties; remember the same
God that commands thee to follow thy particular calling as a man, injoyneth
thee likewise to follow thy general calling as a Christian, and that in the
first place; Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and
all other things shall be added to you, Mat. 6.33. and also with the greatest
labor, John 6.27. Phil. 2.12. Labor not for the food that perishes, but for
the food that endures to everlasting life.

Where our Savior does not indeed absolutely forbid labor for the body, but
comparatively; thy labor for thy soul should be so much, so great, that thy
labor for thy body should be no labor at all, not deserve the name of labor
in comparison of it. Now consider, what answer thou will make to the great God,
when he shall plead with thee for the breach of these commands; besides, have
not thou many spare hours in many evenings, and on wet days, wherein thou
might go to God in secret, and with thy family, and humble thy soul in a
mournful confession of thy sins, and sensible apprehension of the wrath which
is due to thee, and wherein thou might be importunate for pardon and grace,
without which thou art lost for ever? Nay, the Lord knows how many Lords
days thou have enjoyed, which days he has set apart, as well out of mercy as
out of soveraignity, not only for the glory of his Name, but also for the good
of thy soul, wherein thou might both publicly, privately and secretly have
furthered thy spiritual and eternal good; but how do thou squander away those
precious hours, sometime in corporal labor; always in spiritual idleness, in
sleeping, or walking, or sitting at thy door, or talking with thy neighbors,
and yet thou have no time for thy soul.

But lastly tell me, have thou time to eat, and drink, and work, and sleep, and
no time to work out thy salvation, to fit thy soul for death, for judgment,
for eternity? If thy house were in a flame thou would not let it burn, and
say, I have no time to quench it: If thy neighbor call thee to sit, or talk, or
dine, or it may be to go to the Alehouse with him, thou do not answer him, I
must provide for my family, I have no time; but when thy Maker and Preserver,
the blessed God, calls upon thee by his Spirit and Word to be diligent, for
the making thy calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. thou must provide for
thy family, thou have no time for this. Foolish worm, leave off thy vain and
cursed pretenses, and set upon the business for which thou wast sent into the
world, even the glorifying and obeying the Lord, or thou shall have another
manner of answer to thy simple excuses from the Judge of quick and dead, when
for thy want of time to serve him in, he shall give thee an eternity to suffer
in.

Reader I have two things to desire of thee, before I deliver thee the
directions which I have received of the Lord for thee; and indeed unless thou
grant me, or rather God and thy soul, these two requests, all that I have to
say will be to no purpose at all; my requests are, that thou would follow the
counsel of God in order to the recovery of thy soul out of its bottomless
misery with all speed, and with all diligence. Now because they are of such
exceeding importance, that if thou art once persuaded to them, my work will be
half effected; and because delays and laziness are the two great gulphs, in
which such multitudes of souls are drowned and perish, I shall speak the more
to them.

My first request to thee is, that thou would presently set about the affairs
of thy soul. We say of things that must be done, De rebus necessariis non est
deliberandum
there needs not any deliberation about them. Is not this the one thing
necessary to prepare for the last hour, to make sure of thine everlasting
welfare? In re tam justa nulla est consultatio.
If thou believe the word of God, thou will not give the flesh so much breath
as to debate it; muchless will thou as Felix did, put off the thoughts of
righteousness, and judgment to come, till thou art at better leisure, till
thou have a more convenient season. What more weighty work have thou to do,
then to work out thy own salvation? Is the following thy calling, hoarding up
an heaps of earth, feeding, clothing that flesh which shall shortly be food
for worms, is any of these half so necessary as thy provision for eternity?

If thou art old, its high time to begin to prepare for thy latter end. Thou
have the feet of thy body almost already in the earth, in the grave; and had
thou not need have the feet of thy soul, thy affections in heaven? Thou have
but a little time to converse with men; does it not behove thee to be much in
communion with God? Death often (possibly) knocks at thy door by the hand of
sickness, and warns thee to look after another habitation, for thou art to be
turned out of thy house of clay; Do thou take warning? what will thou do, if
thou should dye before thou did ever begin to live? If the Sun of thy life
should set, before the Sun of righteousness has arisen on thee, all the while
thou live thou art dead, and thou live long to add to thy torments, as
others have died soon to hasten them. Thou art but like stubble, laid out a
drying to burn the better in hell, all the while thou continuest a stranger to
the new birth.

Thou have every day been treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath; been
gathering as it were more wood to increase those flames in which thou (if thou
thus die) shall live for ever. Because judgment against an evil work is not
speedily executed, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them
to do evil; though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be
prolonged, it shall not go well with the wicked, Eccles. 8 11, 12, 23. The
sinner an hundred years old shall be accursed, Isa. 65.20.

I have read of the Circassians, a kind of mungrel Christians, that they divide
their time betwixt the Devil and God, dedicating their youth to robbery, and
their old age to repentance. How much time have thou spent in the service of
sin? how little time have thou left the service of God and thy soul? Is it not
high time for thee to number thy days, and to apply thy heart unto wisdom
speedily?

Old sinner, do thou not tremble, to think that there is but a step betwixt
thee and death! nay betwixt thee and hell. O the time, and talents, and
opportunities which thou have to reckon for, more then others! Happy, happy had
it been for thee to have been turned out of the womb into hell, rather then to
dye an old man, and not a babe in Christ. If thou have a spark of love to thy
self, mind thine inward change presently, least thy change come, even death,
and send thee to unchangeable misery.

If thou art young, Honor adolescentum est, timorem Dei habere. Ambros. de
offici.
mind the gathering the Manna of godliness in the morning of thine age; present
the first fruits of thy life to that God who desires the first ripe fruits,
Exodus 3.19. The firstlings are his darlings, Genesis 4.4. and that cloth will keep
color best that is died in the Wool; the vessel will sent longest of that
liquor with which it is first seasoned; let thy soul like Gideons Fleece drink
up betimes the dews of grace. As young as thou art, thy life is every moment at
the mercy of the Lord; There is a saying, that in Golgatha there are skulls of
all sizes; In the Churchyard thou may see graves of all sorts, and some of
thy very length; thou art concerned therefore to remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth. Aquinas tells us, the young man has death at his back,
the old man before his eyes; and that is the more dangerous enemy that pursues
thee, then that which marches up toward thy face. This calls for the
greater care and watchfulness. In the Isle of Man the maids spin their winding
sheets the first thing they spin; do thou in youth and health ponder and
prepare for thy death, lest as young and strong as thou art, death trip up thy
heels and throw thee, and it prove thine everlasting overthrow.

Besides, can thou imagine that such a sinner deserves favor who comes in
to serve God at last, when he can serve his lust no longer? Is it equal (be thy
own judge) to give the flower of thine age, the spring of thy life, the best of
thy time, thine health and strength to the devil, and thy brutish flesh; and to
give the dregs, the snuff, the bottom of all this to the infinitely glorious
God, whose creature thou art, at whose cost and charge thou live every day
and night, and who calls upon thee for thy service, not for the need he has
of thee, but because of the need thou stand in of him, all whose happiness
does consist in the pleasing and enjoying his Majesty?

Whoever thou art, of what age soever, either set speedily about thy soul-work,
or answer these few questions the Lord shall put to thee, or be speechless and
without excuse at the day of Christ.

First, Has not God waited upon thee long enough already? would have him
whom the heavens and the heaven of heavens cannot contain, who has millions of
glorious Angels waiting on his Majesty, to wait on thee miserable worm always?

I tell thee all the while thou art sinning, his eyes behold thee, his heart is
incensed against thee, and his hand can reach thee and avenge him on thee every
moment. How many has he sent into hell, that never tasted of his patience as
thou have done? The angels sinned and were not waited upon one hour for their
repentance; yet how many years has he endured thee with much long-suffering,
and still waits upon thee that he may be gracious unto thee, Isa. 30.18. The
last oath thou did swear he could have cursed and rotted thy tongue. The last
time that thou wentest prayerless to thy rest, he could have sent thee to
little ease, to the place where there is no rest day or night. The last time
thou did quench the motions of his Spirit, and stifle the convictions of thy
conscience, he could have taught thee by experience, what is the meaning of the
worm that never dies, and the fire that goes not out; and yet he spares
thee, stretching out his hands all the day long to a rebellious child, Isa.
65.2. Should not his long patience quicken thee to speedy repentance? Answer
God whether he has not waited enough, been long-suffering enough already; and
if he have not, continue in thy ungodly course, and see who shall suffer
longest at last, he or thou. It is one thing to forbear a debt, another thing
to forgive the debtor. The longer God is in fetching his hand about, the
heavier his blow will be when he strikes. The threatening is like a child, the
longer it is kept in the womb, the bigger it grows, and it will put thee to
the more pain, when it comes to the birth of its execution; therefore bethink
thy self before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chafe,
before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon thee, Zeph. 2.2.

Do thou not see in the Scriptures many examples of Gods severity upon the
abuse of his patience? What became of Sodom and Gomorrah when God waited in the
days of Lot? Are they not suffering the vengeance of eternal fire? Jude v. 7.
What became of the Jews upon whom Christ waited, calling upon them, and crying
to them to return and reform? is not wrath come upon them to the utmost? 1 Thessalonians. 2.16. Are not these like the Maste of a ship sunk in the sands, standing
up to warn thee to avoid their course, least thou split eternally? Have not
these the same inscription on them with Senacheribs tomb, Look on me and learn
to be godly? Do not the Sodomites seem to say, Look on us and learn to be
godly? Do not thy Atheistical neighbors in hell, that thought they had had time
enough before them, and futured their repentance cry, O look on us and learn to
be godly, and that with speed! Friend, take example by others, least thou be
made an example to others, To day after so long a time, thou will hear his
voice, harden not thy heart, Heb. 4.7.

My second question which I desire thee to answer, is, Have thou not served the
world and the flesh long enough already? Is it not yet time to serve God? has
not lust had too much of thy heart, and the flesh of thy life already? may not
the time past of thy life suffice thee to have wrought the will of the flesh? 1
Pet. 4. and 3. Can thou have the face to say with the sluggard, a little more
slumber, a little more sleep, a little more drunkenness, a little more
swearing, a little more wickedness? is not the debt which thou owe to Divine
Justice great enough? Is not the heap of wrath and fury which thou have
provided for thy self against death and judgment big enough? Do thou think
that thou may serve the flesh too little, and the Lord too much? It may be
thou have served the devil twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty or seventy, and
know not whether thou shall have so many hours to serve God in, and is it
not yet time to begin? Answer me; Have thou not wallowed long enough in the
mire of Atheism, worldliness and sensuality? will thou not yet be made clean
(Ah) when shall it once be? Jer. 13. ult.

3. If one should offer thee an house and land, or a bag of money, would thou
not presently accept it? would thou say I am not yet at leisure, hereafter
will be time enough? and is there not infinitely more reason why thou should
presently close with Christ, and leave thy sins, and seek the Kingdom of
heaven? Is not heaven more worth then earth? are not the fruits of Christ
better then silver, and his revenews then choice gold? Prove. 3.15.

When gold is offered thee, says Ambrose, thou do not say, I will come again
to morrow and take it, but art glad of present possession; but salvation being
proffered to our souls, few men haste to embrace it.

Is it not a sordid slighting of Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, for thee to be
more ready and hasty to take a little perishing wealth, then his most precious
blood?

Can thou read the story of Pope Gregory the seventh, how he made the Emperor
Henry the fourth, with his wife and child, to stand bare feet and bare legged
three days and three nights in a cold frosty season, before he would admit them
into the house, and thy heart not rise against the Popes pride and wickedness?
And why does it not rise against thy own obstinacy and vileness, that have
suffered the King of Kings to stand knocking at the door of thy heart till his
head has been wet with the dew, and his locks with the drops of the night? and
though he has waited thus many years, yet thou have denied him entrance, and
art not to this hour resolved to give him speedy acceptance.

4. Do thou not find by experience that the longer thou delayest, the
farther thou wandrest from God and holiness, and the more unfit thou art for,
and the more unwilling unto the work of conversion? is it not time therefore to
turn with speed, when continuance in sin insensibly hardens thy heart, and
gradually indisposeth it more to the work of repentance? as the ground, so is
thy heart; the longer it lies fallow, not ploughed up, the harder it will be;
will thou go one step farther from God, when thou must certainly come back
every step, and that by weeping cross all the way, or be damned for ever? The
purchase of heaven is like buying the Sybils prophesies, the longer thou
hold off, the dearer. A stain which has been long in clothes, is not easily
washed out; an house that has long run to ruin, will require the more cost and
labor for its reparation. Diseases that have been long in the body, are cured,
if at all, yet with much difficulty. The devil which had possessed the man from
his infancy, was hardly cast out, and not without much renting and raging, Mar.
9.21, 26. Satan thinks his evidence as good as eleven points at law, now he
has once got possession, and the longer he continues Commander in chief, in
the royal fort of thy heart, the more he fortifieth it against God, and
strengthens himself against the Almighty. All the while thou delayest, God is
more provoked; the wicked one more encouraged, thy heart more hardened, thy
debts more increased, thy soul more endangered, and all the difficulties of
conversion daily more and more multiplied upon thee, having a day more to
repent of, and a day less to repent in.

5. Can thou promise thy self the next hour to repent in, and dare thou
defer it to another hour? thou say thou will mind these things when thou art
old, but what if thou dyest while thou art young? It was a wise answer of one
that wa invited to dinner on the morrow; says he, A multis annis crastinum non
habui.
thou deferrest it till to morrow; but suppose thou dye to day, and God say to
thee as to the rich fool, This night thy soul shall be required of thee! Boast
not thy self of to morrow; thou know not what a day may bring forth, Pro.
27.1.

It is a good saying of Aquinas, That though God promise forgiveness to
repenting sinners, Waldus he the f^t^er of the Walden es seei^ one suddenly
f^ll ^own dead, was converted, wen^ ^ome and ^ecame a new man.
yet God promises not to morrow to repent in; think how many hundred
casualties thou art liable to, how many others dye suddenly; and take the
counsel of Michal to David, Save thy self to night, to morrow thou may be
slain: Save thy soul today, to morrow thou may be damned.

6. Art thou sure that God will accept thee hereafter, if thou should now
delay and dally with his Majesty? It is good seeking the Lord while he may be
found, and calling upon him while he is near, Psalm. 55.6. There is a time when
men shall call, but God will nor hear; cry, but he will not answer; and that
because when God called they would not hear, but set at naught his counsel,
Prove. 24. to 29. Whilst thine eyes are open, the things which concern thy
peace, may be hid from them, Luke 19.41. Thou may live to have thy soul
buried long before thy body, Ezekiel. 24.13, 14. God would purge thee now, and
thou will not; take heed he clap not the same curse upon thee, which he did on
some others, that thou shall never be purged till thou die. The Spirit of God
probably now stirs thee, to turn presently, and offers thee its help; if
thou love thy soul do not now deny it, least the spirit serve thee, as Samuel
did Saul; Saul disobeyed him, and Samuel came no more to Saul to the day of his
death, 1 Samuel 15. ult. i. e. never. So take heed of quenching this motion of
the holy Ghost, least it depart in a distaste, taking its everlasting leave of
thee, and thou never feel it more to the day of thy death. Now is the accepted
time, now is the day of salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. This day if thou will hear his
voice, harden not thy heart, least he swear in his wrath that thou shall never
enter into his rest, Psalm. 95.7.11.

My second request is, that thou would make the attaining this spiritual life
the whole business of thy natural life, that thou would esteem it as the
great end of thy creation, preservation, and of all the mercies and means of
grace which God bestows on thee, as the great end why God is so patient
toward thee, so provident over thee, so bountiful unto thee, that thou
might repent and return unto him from whom thou have gone astray.

Shall I entreat thee for the sake of thy poor soul, to let thy greatest labor
be for thine eternal welfare? Is not this a business of the greatest necessity,
of the greatest excellency, It is the unum necessarium, Luke 10. ult. The
primum quaerendum Mat. 6.33. The totum hominis, Eccl. 12.13.
and of the greatest commodity and profit that thou did ever undertake? To be
everlastingly in heaven or in hell, to enjoy endless and matchless pain, or
pleasure, are other manner of things than men dream of. Good Lord! that men did
but believe what it is to be happy, or miserable for ever, how then would they
fly from the wrath to come, and strive to enter in at the strait gate! Mat.
7.14. Surely things of the greatest weight call for the strongest work; matters
that concern thine unchangeabe felicity, require the greatest industry. Demost.
Non ta^ti emam poenitere


The Philosopher would not buy repentance at too dear a rate; Sure I am thou
can never buy this inheritance too dear, though thou spendest all thy time,
and strength, and sellest all thou have to purchase it. Friend, if ever thou
art saved, thou must work out thy own salvation, Phil. 2.12. God gives earth
to the meek and patient; but heaven to the strong and violent, Mat. 5.5. Mat
11.12. It is a saying of Lombard, God condemns none before he sins, nor crowns
any before he overcomes. The blind carnal world thinks that a man may go to
heaven without so much ado; as Judas said of the ointment, so they of diligence
in duties To what purpose is this waste? Mat. 26.8. They tell us it is waste
time to pray so frequently, and it is waste strength to pray so fervently, to
what purpose is this waste? They presume that godly men might spare a great
deal of their pains heavenward; As Seneca told the Jews that they lost a
seventh part of their time by their sanctification of the Sabbath: So the
earthly-minded man will tell us that such and such men spend all their time
almost in reading, or hearing, or praying, or instructing their families, or
neighbors; and they count it but lost time. These men if you will believe them,
have found out an easier and a nearer way to heaven then ever Jesus Christ did;
they are the right brood of wicked Jeroboam, that told the people, 1 King.
12.28. It was too much to go up to Jerusalem to worship; he had found out a
cheaper and an easier way of worship. The Calves at Dan and Bethel would save
them much labor, and in his conceit, serve to as much purpose* Thus they delude
themselves, that their lazy, cold trading Godward, their slight indifferent
prayers will bring them in as much gain, as the most zealous performances of
the Saints. But (Reader) I hope thou will obey the voice of God and not of men
in this; Consider his promise is to the laborious, They that seek him early
shall find him, Prove. 8.17.

He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. So Prove. 2.3, 4.
His precept is for labor, Aga^hocles g^t to be King of Sicily by his industry,
so may the Chrstian by violence attain the kingdom of heaven.
Mat. 7.13. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, be diligent to mak^ your
calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. So John 6.27. nay he curses them that
put him off with their lame sacrifices, For I am a great King, says the Lord
of hosts, and my name is dreadful, Mal. 1.13, 14. Further he is peremptory,
that the slothful shall be for utter darkness, Mat. 25.26. The Egyptian King
would have men of activity and industry to be his servants; and will God
think thou who is a pure act, accept of those that are not active? Can
thou imagine that he should ever bestow pardon of sin, eternal life, the
sanctification of the spirit, the precious contents of his own promise, the
invaluable fruits of Christ's purchase, upon those those do not judge them
worthy of all their strength and time, and hearts, and pains, and ten thousand
times more? Besides, for what reason do thou suppose God to have given thee
these things? Surely thou can not be so brutish as to think, that the great
God made thee, and serves thee in daily with such variety of mercies (health,
strength, food, raiment, influences of heaven, and fruits of the earth) only
or chiefly that thou should eat and drink and follow thy calling, and provide
for thy family; were such low ends the ground of his kindness? or is it not
that thou might ravish that pure and virgin inheritance, by an holy and
heavenly violence, that thou might employ them and improve them to the
utmost about his service and thy own salvation?

Reader, I must desire thee to consider and grant me these two or three
suppositions, in prosecution of this my second request to thee.

1. Suppose thou had seen the Son of man, who now sits at his Fathers
right hand, rising from his place, and attended with the thousand thousands
that are before him, and with the ten thousand times ten thousand that minister
to him, coming and sparkling so gloriously through the firmament, that he
dazaleth the very eyes of the Sun, and makes him to hide his head for shame,
and sitting down in the clouds, with the glory of his Father, a fire devouring
before him, and behind him a flame burning:

Conceive now with me, that thou hear him call to the Archangel, Sound the
last Trump, that the dead may arise and come to judgment: Hark to the sound
of the Trump, how it rendeth rocks, melts mountains, breaks in pieces the
bands of death, and bursts asunder the gates of hell, how it pierces the
ocean, and fetches from the bottom of the sea, the dust of Adams seed; how it
descends into the belly of the earth, and forces it to vomit up all the
bodies which it had ever taken down, how it opens the marble tombs of Princes
and Potentates, and makes their Highness and Majesty stoop as low as the
meanest, to the King of glory.

Do thou not see the bodies of the Saints? look how they fly upon the wings
of the wind to their souls, and both to the bosom of their beloved Savior. See
how the spirits of unregenerate ones leave for a little while, the dark vault
of hell, and enter (though most unwillingly) into the stinking carrion of their
bodies, and both haled by angels to the judgment seat of Christ.

When the Court is thus set, conceive the Commission read, wherein Jesus Christ
is authorized, in his humane nature, by his Divine Power, to be Judge of the
quick and dead; the law is produced, both of nature and Scripture; the books
are opened, hoth of Gods omniscience and man's conscience, by which all men are
to be tried for their everlasting lives and deaths.

The holy ones are now called, their persons through the righteousness of
Christ acquitted by public proclamation, before God, Angels and men, their
performances, duties, graces, services, sufferings, punctually related, to
their glory, and infinitely rewarded in their perfect freedom from all evil,
and eternal fruition of the chiefest good.

Behold, how the unholy are with violence draged to the bar, examined strictly
by the covenant of works, have all their sins, secret, open, personal,
relative, of nature, and practice, in thoughts, words, and deeds revealed
publicly, and aggravated fully with all their crimson crying bloody
circumstances; hark how pitifully they plead, what poor evidences they had for
salvation; what sorry excuses for their Atheism and abominations; their
conscience instead of a thousand witnesses accuses them, the law casts them,
the Judge pronounces against them a most severe sentence of condemnation; the
devils feise on them for its speedy execution; Now what confusion and shame of
face, what lamentation and forrow of heart possesses them? what doleful
screechings? what bitter yellow^ngs are heard among them? Here is body cursing
the soul for being so ungodly a guide, and soul cursing the body for being so
unready an instrument; and both cursing the time that ever they met together,
and wishing (though in vain) that they might for ever be parted asunder.

Now the worldling curses his flocks and his Farm, his gold and his silver,
that had more of his heart, and of his care and time then his precious soul.
Now the lazy Christian curses his madness and folly, that he should think a
little formal preparation were sufficient for such a strict examination. A
bloody husband have thou been to me, says the wife, thou mindedst provision
for me for a little time, and never regardedst my instruction about the things
of eternity. A cruel father have thou been to me, says the child, for
generating me a child of wrath, an heir of hell, and never endeavoring my
regeneration, whereby I might have been a child of God and an heir of heaven:
and thus cursing, crying, roaring, raging, they are sent to the place where is
mourning without mirth, sorrow without solace, darkness without light, death
without life, pure wrath without mixture, perfect pain without measure, nothing
but weeping and wailing, sighing, sobbing and gnashing of teeth for ever, ever,
ever.

Suppose I say that thou had heard and seen all this, and God should after it
try thee in this world forty years, would thou not night and day be
struggling and striving with God by prayer, watching over thy own heart, waiting
upon thy Savior? With what earnestness would thou pray? with what
seriousness would thou read and hear? with what exactness and exemplariness
would thou live? how diligent and laborious would thou be in a faithful
improvement of all thy time, talents, and opportunities, that thou might
find mercy at such a day, even the mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal
life! Would thou after such a sight think any time too much, or any pains too
great, for thy eternal good? Could thou give the world and the flesh, the
choicest place in thy heart, and the chiefest part of thy life as now thou
do? should thou dare to be nibbling again at the devils baits, or to be
playing with the eternal fire, or to put off God with a few cold formal
prayers, and that by fits, in stead of hearty, fiery, continual supplication?
or to put off Jesus Christ with a complement, that thou wearest his livery, and
professest thy self a Christian, in stead of a sincere resolved dedication of
heart and life to his word and law. What say thou man? And why will thou not
be as diligent and as holy now? thou may in the glass of Scripture see all
that I have spoken (for the substance of it at least) if thou have but an eye
of faith; and without question the sight of faith is as sure and true as a
sight of sense; what reason can thou have, why thou should not work as
industriously to escape hell, and obtain heaven, as if thou had known these
things experimentally, when the word of the living and true God speaks it so
expressly? look 2 Cor. 5. and 10. Acts 17.13. Eccles. 12.2. ult. verse.

2. Suppose thou were sure to die this day come month, and take possession of
thine eternal estate, to do that which thou never did before, nor shall ever
do again; even to throw thy last cast for eternity, would thou not then lay
aside all other matters, and make it thy only business to ensure an interest
in Christ, and to make sure of a regenerated sanctified nature? would thou
not then think, Well now, there is no daubing, no dallying any longer, I am now
going to my long long everlasting home; if I now deceive my self with any thing
in stead of the power of godliness, and mistake at death, I shall miscarry for
ever; if I be not then right, I shall be wrong for ever. Now or never, now and
ever.

Would thou not highly prize every week of that month, every day of those
weeks, every hour of those days, yea and every minute of those hours, and say,
Ah, desperate folly to leave a work of such infinite weight (for which my whole
life was little little enough) to so short a space; and yet O infinite mercy,
that I have any seasons of grace left, wherein I may yet work out my salvation
with fear and trembling? How would thou labor as for life in this duty, and
that ordinance, hanging on those breasts, and tugging hard for some spiritual
good! Would thou not with Jacob wrestle with God, weep and make supplication?
would thou not with the Ninivites cry mightily unto God for mercy? How would
thy prayers proceed from the very bottom of thy heart? and with what force
would they pierce the very heavens? how would thou with the Bereans search
the Scriptutes? and see upon what terms Christ and heaven may be had. Would
thou not strive to break thy heart with the hammer of the law, and to melt it
with the Sun shine of the Gospel, that thou might repent? Would thou not
encourage thy soul from the freeness of Gods mercy, the fullness of Christ's
merit to believe? O what sad thoughts would thou now have of thy soul, and
thy sins? what serious thoughts would thou have of God, and Christ, of hell,
and heaven, of death and judgment? Surely other manner of thoughts then now
thou have.

Thus friend it would be with thee if thou were to leave this world within a
month, or thou were worse then a mad man. And why shall it not be thus with
thee now, when thou art so far from ensuring thy life for a month, that thou
can not promise thy self the next hour? do thou not believe that thy
foundation is in the dust? Job 4.19. that man at his best estate is altogether
vanity? Psalm. 32.5. that one dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease
and quiet, his breasts being full of milk, and his bones moistened with marrow,
Job. 21.23, 24. Thou art not a tenant at thy own will, whilst thou dwell in
thy house of clay. Thou cuttest large thongs of Gods time, if thou assurest thy
self another week. But look, Reader, do thou not see that eternity is at the
very threshold of thy house, Mortalium nemo est qui crastinum sibi audeat
pollireri, Euripid.
that there is but a step, a thin paper wall of life, between thee and
eternity! Is there not much more reason that thou should be more industrious
for thy soul and salvation when thou art not sure to live a day, than if thou
were sure to live a month?

There is a bird peculiar to Ireland, called the Cock of the wood, remarkable
for its fine flesh and folly; all the difficulty to kill them, is to find
them; they fly in woods in flocks; and if one be shot, the rest remove not but
to the next tree, and there stand staring at the shooter, till the whole covey
be destroyed; yet as foolish as this bird is, it may be the Emblem of most
wise men in point of mortality; death sweeps away one and one, and one and
another, and all the rest remain no whit moved, till at last they are
destroyed, and then their folly is (though too late) bewailed.

3. Suppose thou could speak with thy carnal unregenerate neighbors or
friends, that are now under endless remorse, frying in those unquenchable
flames, and should ask them what caused them to miscarry for ever, and how
they came to that place of torment; and they should tell thee, O friend, I
thought heaven might have been had without so much ado, that there had been no
need of that seriousness and laboriousness which a few precise ones practiced,
and which Ministers so much pressed. I thought I might do well enough with a
formal lazy outside serving of God, because my neighbors did no better: I
presumed, that because God was merciful, and Christ meritorious, and I enjoyed
the outward privileges of the Gospel, and gave God some of the time I could
spare from the world and the flesh in a little heartless devotion, that I
should be saved; never looking at that inward renovation and outward
reformation which (I see now to my sorrow are required in all, to whom the
special mercy of God and merit of Christ shall be extended; and now woe and
alas, I am tormented in these flames.

After such an hearing from hell, would thou not be diligent to prevent thy
damnation? would thou not take heed of those knives of negligence, idleness
and formality, resting in a few good means, which did cut the throat of others
souls? would thou after this, jest at heaven and hell, or trifle about
regeneration or the new birth? Would thou again mock God, or cozen thy self
with a form, a shell, a carcass of Religion? Would not the words thou had
lately heard, be always sounding in thine ears, and piercing thy heart, and
quickening thee to be sedulous and industrious about thy soul affairs? And why
will thou not do as much now, when I can assure thee from the mighty possessor
of heaven and earth, that this is as true (namely that many souls are eternally
sunk by reason of those quicksands) as if thou had heard it from the mouth
of hell; nay it is possible a damned wretch may deceive thee, but it is
impossible that the blessed God (who speaks as much with his own mouth)
should deceive thee. Look 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. Mat. 7.21, 22, 23.

4. Suppose thou had with Moses had a sight of the back parts of the infinite
God (about whose service I am persuading thee to be diligent) or with Isaiah,
had seen some extraordinary manifestation of his glory; or had been with
the disciples at the transfiguration of Christ? Or suppose thou had been in
heaven, and seen the royalty and majesty of God in those glorious Angels and
Saints which continually wait upon him, and in the glorified Savior, who
sits at his right hand, and represents him as lively and fully as is
possible to the eyes of men: Suppose thou had taken strict notice of the
number (how many millions) and order of Gods servants there, how high and noble
their works; how holy and pure their worship, and had known the infinite
power, holiness, wisdom, and justice of God as they do, and God should turn
thee again into this world, would thou slubber over thy duties, and play with
his Ordinances as now thou do? would thou pray to this God as if thou
prayedst not? or hear from his Majesty as if thou heardest not? or attend on
him so carelessly, as if thou did not attend on him at all? or would thou
not rather think I can never be too serious in the service of such a God; I can
never wait on him with humility enough, and with watchfulness enough, with
uprightness enough, and with care and diligence enough.

Should thou not be laborious in the service of such a good God? Give me
leave to urge this thought a little farther, and to give thee a Scripture or
two, which through the free grace of God have sometimes helped me against
deadness and dullness in duties. The one is 2 Chronicles. 2. and 5. where Solomon
tells us, The house I am to build must be great (mark the reason) for great
is our God above all gods. If God be so great a God, how greatly is he to be
reverenced? can thou do too much service for him? or give too much glory to
him? Can thy love to him be too great? or can thy fear of him be too great? or
can thy labor for him be too great, when this God is so great, That he
measures the ocean in the hollow of his hand, and meteth out the heavens with
a span, and comprehends the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighs the
mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance. Behold the Nations are as a
drop of the bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance. Behold
he takes up the Isles as a very little thing. And Lebanon is not sufficient to
burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt-offering. All Nations
before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him as less then nothing
and vanity, Isa. 40.12, 15, 16, 17. God is a great God and therefore greatly to
be feared, Psalm. 89.7. God is a great God, and therefore greatly to be praised;
for his greatness is unsearchable, Psalm. 145.3.

If he be a great God, he may well require a great house to be his material
temple, and if he be a great God, may he not justly call for a great part of,
yea all thy heart to be his spiritual temple? It is likely the Son Solomon
learned this of his father David, who gives us this as the reason why he
danced before the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord of the whole earth with all
his might, 2 Samuel 6.14. and 21. It was (says he) before the Lord: as if he had
said, Had it been before men only, or in their service, I might have been cold
and careless, slothful and sluggish; but it was before the Lord, the infinite,
incomprehensible, and holy God, to whom I am unspeakably obliged for his
distinguishing mercy; and therefore all my might, and all my strength was
little enough for such a God. I might mind thee further that thou have wrought
hard in thy slavery to the world and thy flesh, in thy drudgery to the devil
and thy lusts, whose reward and wages is nothing but disappointment and
vexation, hell and damnation; and should thou not be fervent fiery (seething
hot as the word signifies) in spirit when thou art serving the Lord? (...).
Romans 11.12.
Romans 11.12. I might also ask thee to whom thou owe thy whole strength, and
thy whole heart if not to God? Art thou so much indebted to the world and thy
flesh, those enemies of thy salvation, as thou art to the blessed God? and who
will at last pay thee best for thy strength and time? God or the world, Christ
or the flesh. But I may speak more to this in another place.

Well Reader, have I yet, or rather the Lord by me, persuaded thee to set about
this great business (upon which thy eternal felicity depends) timely, that is
presently, and thoroughly, that is withal thy strength, as the main chief and
only work thou have to do? Art thou resolved to do thine utmost endeavor, and
through the strength of Christ faithfully to follow the directions which I
shall commend to thee from the Lord, in order to thy recovery out of that
bottomless misery, into which thou have plunged thy self? Is there not
abundant reason in what thou have read? Are they the words of a sinfu^ dying
man, or of the jealous everliving God? Is it I only that call upon thee, to
mind this spiritual life, or do not the daily and nightly mercies which thou
(unworthy wretch) injoyest? do not the dreadful judgments which others feel,
and thou have too much cause to fear? do not thy sweet babes, thy dear
children, cry often and aloud in thine ears, O thar there were an heart in our
Father, in our Mother, to fear the Lord, and keep all his Commandments
always, that it might go well with them and with their children for ever?
Deuteronomy. 5.29. Nay, does not the Almighty God, who observes all thy wickedness,
in whose hands thou art every hour, who can with a word speak thee into that
place of woe, where the worth of grace and holiness is better known, and where
the weight of sin and ungodliness is more felt? In hope that thou will not be
such an enemy to the God that made thee, that thou will not do that despite to
the Spirit that moves thee, that thou will not be such a wilful murderer of
thy precious soul as to neglect them, I shall set them down; the Lord set them
home to thy heart.

Come along with me, and I will show thee the Bride, the Lambs Wife, how she
must be trimmed and adorned for the marriage.

First, Get thine understanding enlightened in the knowledge of thy sins and
misery: 1. Direction Illumination.
The knowledge of thy disease and danger must precede thy recovery and cure. O
how many thousand souls have miscarried in the dark of ignorance? Did men know,
surely they would not daily by their sins crucify the Lord of glory: Did they
know their misery, they would not be so merry as they are in ways of iniquity;
they rush into sin as the horse rusheth into the battle, not knowing it will be
to their death, to their destruction. I have sometime read a story of a King
that was ever pensive, and never seen to smile, and being asked by his Brother
the cause of it, he put him off till the next day for an answer; and in the
mean time caused a deep pit to be made, commanding his servants to fill it half
full with fiery coals, and then causes an old rotten board to be laid over it,
and over the board to hang a two-edged sword by a small slender thread, with the
point downwards, and close by the pit to set a table full of all manner of
delicacies. His Brother coming next day for an answer, was placed at the board,
and four men with drawn swords about him, and with all the best music that
could be had to play before him: Then the King called to him, saying, Rejoice
and be merry Brother, eat, drink, and laugh, for here is pleasant being. But he
replied, O my Lord and King, how can I be merry, being in such danger on every
side? Then said the King, Look how it is now with thee, so it is always with
me; for If I look above me, I see the great and dreadful Judge, to whom I must
give an account of all my thoughts, words, and deeds; if I look under me, I see
the endless torments of hell, whereinto I shall be cast if I die in my sins;
if I look behind me, I see all the sins which I have committed, and the time
which I have spent unprofitably; if I look before me, I see death every day
drawing nearer and nearer unto me; if I look on my right hand, I see my
conscience accusing me of all the evil I have done, and good I have left undone
in this world; and if I look on my left hand, I see the creatures on their
Makers behalf, crying out for vengeance against me a Rebel. Now then cease
hereafter to wonder, why I cannot rejoice in the things of this world.

This is the condition of every unsanctified man and woman, and did they but
know it, they would see but little cause to spend their days in pastimes and
pleasure; but what the eye sees not, the heart greives not: Had Haman known he
had been so nigh his funeral, he would hardly have boasted so much to his
friends; but it is the policy of the God of this world, to blind men's eyes,
least they should see and avoid damnation. As when a Malefactor is for some
capital crime cast at the Assize, Diogenes being demanded what burden the
earth did d^d bea^, most heavy; answered, An ignorant man.
he is then carried into a dark dungeon, and thence to execution: So the Devil,
knowing that all the Sons and Daughters of Adam are cast by the Law of God (the
Law shutting them all up under sin and wrath) endeavors to keep them in the
dungeon of ignorance, till the day of their execution. When Nebuchadnezzar had
conquered Zedekiah, 2 Kings 25. and 7. he put out his eyes, bound him in
fetters, and then carried him away to Babylon: Thus Satan as soon as he
enters into the soul, labors to put out the eyes of the understanding, and
so to lead them hood-winkt to hell. Did men know what they had done against
God, and how they had undone themselves, they would be restless till they
attained a remedy: Did the sinner but know the purity, jealousy, power, and
justice of that God, whom he daily provokes? Did he but know the love and
kindness, the blood and bowels of that Savior, whom he undervalueth: Did he
but know the pleasures, and joy, and happiness in heaven, which he neglects:
Did he but know the beauty and amiableness, the delights and comforts of grace
and holiness, which he despises: Did he but know the emptiness and vanity of
this deceitful world, which he so heartily embraces: Did he but know where sin
is in the premises, sorrow and hell (without faith and sanctification) must be
in the conclusion; Did men, I say, but know these things, how quickly would
they turn from sin unto God, giving a bill of divorce to their most beloved
lusts, and entering into a most solemn covenant with the Lord! But having their
understandings darkened, they are alienated from the life of God (that is, a
life of holiness) through the ignorance that is in them, because of the
blindness of their hearts, Ephesians. 4.18. Observe how expressly the Spirit of God
speaks ignorance to be the reason, why men are such strangers to the power of
Religion.

Reader, thou may by all this see the necessity of knowledge, if ever thou
would be converted and saved. The Devil (as I said before) carries men
hood-winkt to hell; but God will never carry thee blindfold to heaven: The end
of a Saint is the inheritance in light, Col. 1.12. and the way thither is a way
of light; The path of the just is as shining light, Prove. 4.18. and surely in
respect of knowledge as well as in other respects. Do not please thy self, that
though thou art not book-learned, yet thou have as good an heart as others (as
thy foolish ignorant neighbors will prate) for when thou thus speak, thou
speak beside thy book; for the Book of God tells us otherwise.

The soul without knowledge is not good, Proverbs 19.2. There may be a clear
head without a clean heart, the light of knowledge without the heat of grace;
but a gracious heart in a grown person not distracted, was ever accompanied
with a competency of knowledge in the head. And indeed knowledge is so near a
kin to grace, that it is often in the Word of God put for it, John 17.3. It is
life eternal to know thee to be the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent. So 1 Cor. 2.2. Phil. 3.8. Isai. 53.11.

If thou would be sanctified and saved, get knowledge, seek knowledge as
silver, and search for it as for hid treasure, Prove. 2.3, 4. This is the first
thing to be done; it is first in the Ministers Commission, Acts 26.18. I send
thee, says God to Paul, to open the eyes of the blind, and to turn men from
darkness unto light; and this is first in the Spirits operation on the soul. It
convinces the man of his sins, John 16.10, 11. It presents to the
understanding a catalogue of its many and bloody provocations. Imprimis, thus
Guilty in Adam of high treason against Heavens Majesty, and thereby of want of
original righteousness, and of a deep deadly pollution in the whole nature.
Item, so many hundred ungodly actions; so many thousand unholy and idle
expressions; so many millions of evil thoughts and suggestions: Item. so many
omissions, and so many commissions: Item. so much precious time misspent, a
moment of which cannot be recalled or purchased with the revenues of the world:
Item, so many talents of health, strength, food raiment, esteem, riches, and
the like misimployed: Item. so many Sacraments, Sabbaths, seasons of grace
mis-improved: Item. so much uncorrigiblenesse under afflictions, so much
unprofitablenesse under mercies: Thus the Spirit inlighteneth the sinners mind
to see his sins with their circumstances, and black aggravations; as also what
is like to be the fruit and effect of sin, even nothing less than suffering
everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord. It may be the Spirit may
cause him, as it were, to see the smoke that ascends from the bottomless
pit, to smell the scent of that infernal brimstone, and fire; to hear the
roarings and howlings of the damned; nay possibly to feel a very hell in his
own conscience. The Spirit indeed is a free Agent, and works in what manner
and measure he pleases: But this is certain, he convinces all of their sins
and miseries; conviction does go before conversion. The Physician of souls will
heal none, but such as know both their distemper and their danger, and thereby
how infinitely they are obliged to him for their cure; As in the first creation
one of the first thing God made was light; so in the forming the new creature
illumination is before sanctification, Every one is able to say in Christ as he
in the Gospel, This I know, whereas I was blind, now I see, John 9.25.

This is absolutely necessary in order to the second direction I have to
commend to thee; which is the sincere humiliation of thy soul. There must be a
daybreak of light in the understanding, before there can be an heart-break of
sorrow in the affections; till sin and wrath be discerned by knowledge in the
mind, they will be no burden to the conscience, nor grief to the spirit: As no
good wrapped up in darkness excites desire, so no evil swathed up in ignorance
strikes terror. We may observe this by the holy Apostles expression; I was
alive without the law, but when the commandment came, sin revived and I died,
Romans 7.9. i. e. the time was that I was ignorant both of the laws strictness
and my own sinfulness, and then I thought my self to be very safe, my
conscience was very quiet, and my heart full of hope (or more properly
presumption) about my future eternal happiness; thus I was alive without the
law; but when my eyes were enlightened, to see how exceeding broad the
Commandments of God were, and that once I compared my crooked race with that
strait rule, and took notice how far short I came of that obedience which the
law required, I was then a dead, a lost man; I quickly pulled in my plumes, and
took down my sails, with which I was hastening in my conceit to Heaven; for I
found that I was in very deed in the road to hell. When the Commandment came,
sin revived and I died: There was then life enough in my lusts to wound me unto
death, for I dyed.

Reader, if thou art convinced so far of the absolute necessity of
conversion, as to desire it unfeignedly, let me request thee, for the sake of
thy poor soul, to set some considerable time apart; thy body has had many
years; surely thy soul deserves one day, and that speedily, to be serious in
about its endless estate, and to compare thy wicked life with the pure Law of
God, and observe how exceedingly thou have swerved from the precepts therein
commanded; consider not only its outward and literal, but likewise its inward
and spiritual meaning, and thou may presently discern, that thy whole
conversation for so many years as thou have lived, has been a continued
aberration and wandering from the Lord and his Laws. If thou look aright in
that glass, it will discover all the spots, all the dirt, that have been in
the face of thy heart and life, Jam. 1.23. By the Law is the knowledge of sin,
Romans 3.20.

Consider also, that thy breach of the Law makes thee liable to the curse of
the Law, which is the infinite eternal wrath of the Lawgiver. Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things that are written in the book of the Law
to do them, Gal. 3.10.

The Law must be satisfied; since not in its accomplishment, it will in thy
punishment.

If God cast the glorious Angels out of heaven and reserved them in chains of
darkness, to the judgment of the great day for one sin, and that (as some
think) in thought; into what an hell may he cast thee, whose iniquities for
weight are like the sand of the sea, and for number like the sparks of a
furnace, and the stars in the firmament! Think of it with all possible
seriousness; thou hangest over the mouth of hell every moment by a small
thread of life, and if that should be cut asunder, the whole world cannot save
thee from dropping into it.

2. Direction, Humiliation.
2. In the next place labor to get thy heart deeply and thoroughly affected with
thy sins and misery. Humiliation must follow Illumination. It is not enough for
this knowledge of the transgressions thou have committed, and the wrath thou
have deserved, to swim in thy head (it may be there as fire in the flint to no
profit) but it must sink down into thy heart, and be beaten out into an
application of, and lamentation for thy guilt and wickedness.

Man is so sinfully subtle, that he can bear the historical knowledge of these
things in his understanding, he can hear the name of sin and hell, and be no
more troubled then at a painted devil, or a tale of purgatory; but when God
brings down sin from being a notion to be an obligation, and enters an action
against the soul within it self, then it will begin to melt and mourn under the
sense of its sins and sufferings. Thus after the Spirt of God has been a
spirit of conviction, it becomes a spirit of bondage; that eye which was
before enlightened to see the lewdness of his heart and life, comes now to
affect his heart with grief and sorrow: This we find in those Converts, Acts
2.37. when they had heard of their sin and guilt, they began to recant and
repent: When they heard those things they were pricked to the heart. The nails
which had pierced Christ's hands now pierce their hearts. It was with them
(says one) as if the sharp points of daggers had been stuck or fastened in
their hearts. They wounded themselves with sorrow, that ever they had wounded
the Lord Jesus with their sins.

The whole life indeed of a true Christian is (in some respects) a life of
repentance: He is often greiving Gods Spirit, and therefore he is often greived
in his own spirit: As long as the ship leaketh, the pump must go. Though the
Christian does not paddle or wallow in the mire of sin every day, as graceless
ones do; yet he finds, that daily his hands contract dirt, and his soul
guilt, therefore he must daily wash with faith and repentance.

Some report of Mary Magdalen, that she spent thirty years in Galba in weeping
for her sins: And Tertullian says of himself, That he was born for repentance.
Anselm tells us, That with grief he considered the whole course of his life;
I found ( In lib. meditat.
writes he) the infancy of sin in the sins of my infancy; the youth and growth
of sin in the sins of my youth and growth; and the ripeness of all sin in the
sins of my ripe and perfect age; and then he breaks out into this pathetical
expression; What remains for thee, wretched man, but that thou spend thy
whole life in bewayling thy whole life?

But especially at the time of a Christians conversion he is to mind
contrition; when the vessel is newly tapt, then it runs most freely and
plentifully. None might approach the King of Persia's Court in sackcloth and
mourning, Est. 4.2. but no wandering sinner may draw near to the King of Heaven
without it. Aut paenitendum, aut pereundum
Except ye repent ye shall perish. God is resolved to break the sinners heart
on earth, or his back in hell. He will have the wound searched, and the pain of
it felt, before it be bound up and cured. The wicked Prodigal must come to his
Father with compunction in his soul, as well as confession in his mouth.

Look therefore, O sinner, into the book of thy conscience, and read over the
black lines that still are in thy cursed heart, and the bloody leaves of thy
wicked life; how long thou have lived to little purpose, yea, to the killing of
thy soul for ever; how far thou have been from accomplishing the end for
which thou wast born, and the errand for which thou wast sent into the world.
Keep a petty Assize in thy heart; prefer a large Bill of Indictment against
thy self; accuse and condemn thy self, not only verbally, but cordially, if
ever thou would have Christ to acquit thee. Thou have spent many years in
sinning, and should thou not spend some hours in sorrowing? Thou did make
the soul of Jesus Christ sorrowful unto death; shall not therefore thy soul be
sorrowful, when thy sorrow may be unto life? Did the Rocks rent when he died
for sin, and shall not thy rocky heart that thou have lived (...) sin? He bled
for thee, and wilt not thou weep for thy self? Thou have filled Gods Job 14.17.
Bag with thy fins, and have thou no tears for his Psalm. 46.8.
Bottle? Have thou so long broken the holy Commandments of God, and shall not
thy heart now at last be broken? The damned feel sin, it lies heavy on their
souls; could thou lay thy ear to the mouth of that bottomless pit, thou
might perceive by their yellowings and howlings, that sin is sin in hell, how
lightly soever it is regarded by men upon earth. The Lord Jesus felt sin; Had
thou been in the garden, and seen his blessed body all over in a goar blood,
beheld those drops, yea clods of blood that trickled down his face, surely thou
would have believed that it was some heavy weight indeed which caused such a
bloody sweat in a cold winter night.

And art not thou yet weary and heavy laden? Do I speak to a man or a beast? to
a living creature, or to a rock that will never be moved? If thou have a
disease in thy body, thou can greive and complain; and why not for the
diseases of thy soul? Are not they far more deadly, more dangerous? If thou
losest a child, O what crying and roaring, what wringing of hands and watering
of cheeks? nay, if thou losest a place of profit, an house, or a beast, thou
can mourn, and think of it often with sorrow; And does it not greive thee,
that thou have lost, not thy child or cattle, but thy Christ, thy Savior, thy
Soul, thy God to eternity? If thou missest a good bargain that was offered
thee, whereby thou might increase thy estate; or if thou buyest or hirest at
too dear a rate how do thou beshrew and befool thy self for it? Have thou not
ten thousand times more cause to be really and highly displeased with thy self,
and to abhor thy self in dust and ashes, that thou should have all the
riches, and glory, and pleasures of the eternal Kingdom tendered to thee with
many entreaties, and yet thou have refused them for the lying vanities of this
world, and for the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season? Thou have
denied Heavens, happiness for a bubble, a butterfly; all things for nothing.
Did ever any fool buy so dear, and sell so cheap? Like Saul, busy himself in
seeking Asses, when a Kingdom sought him: Like Shimei, seek his servant, and
thereby lose himself. No fool like the sinner, that embraces a shadow which
will certainly flee from him, and neglects the substance which endures to
eternity.

Honorius the Emperor hearing that Rome was lost, cried, Alas, alas, very
mournfully, fearing it had been his hen so called, which he exceedingly loved;
but hearing it was the famous City of Rome that was become a prey to his cruel
enemies, he made a tush at it: Thus too too many can greive sufficiently for
the loss of vanities, riches, but not at all for the loss of God, and Christ,
and enduring felicities.

Well Friend, repent timely and truly of this thy folly, for I must tell thee,
shortly it will be too late; if repentance be hid from thy heart now,
repentance will be hid from Gods eye then, by whose Law thou art now a
condemned man already; if thy heart be hardened now in sinning, the heart of
God will ere long be hardened in sentencing thee to an eternity of suffering.

It is an infinite mercy, that God yet allows thee liberty for second
thoughts, that notwithstanding thou have shipwracked thy soul, yet thou may
swim out safe upon the plank of repentance. O therefore think no pains too
great to break thy stony heart; it is worth the while, when free grace has
promised a vast reward to that heaven-born work. Had thou once offered up to
God the sacrifice of a spirit truly sorrowful, out of love to God, and
self-loathing, because of fin, I could tell thee as good, as joyful news, as
ever thine ears heard: The Father of mercies, and God of comforts, will be
reconciled to thee in the Lord Jesus: Thy prayers for pardon and life will
pierce Gods ears, and find acceptance if they proceed from a broken heart, from
sincere repentance. A penitent tear is a messenger that never went away without
a satisfactory answer. Prayers with such tears are prevalent; yea (in Luthers
phrase) omnipotent: Music upon the waters sounds most pleasantly: Thou have
heard the voice of my weeping, says David, Psalm. 6.8.

Augustus Caesar having promised a great reward to any that could bring him the
head of a famous Pirate, did yet, when the Pirate heard of it, and brought it
himself, and laid it at his feet, Suet. in vit.
not only pardon, but teward him for his confidence in his mercy.

As Plutarch in v^t. Alex.
Antipater was answered by Alexander, Thou have written a long Letter against
my Mother, but do thou not know that one tear of hers will wash out all her
faults? When the returning sinner weeps, the tenderhearted Father smi!es: As
he rejoices and laugheth at obstinate sinners destruction and ruin, Quod^
Deus loqui^ur cum risu, tu legas cum fletu. Aug.
Proverbs 1.26. so he rejoices and smileth at the penitent sinners conversion.
He will do something for an hypocritical humiliation, to assure us, that he
will do any thing upon a sincere humiliation. See thou, says God, how Ahab
humbles himself? this judgment shall not be in his days, but in his Sons
days, 1 Kings 21, 29. A pitiful humiliation it was God knew; he looked sadly
like a Fox in a trap, merely to get out, yet God takes notice of it, and
deferreth the judgment upon it. If God set such a price upon counterfeit, what
will he upon true gold? Fierce Esau relenteth toward submitting Jacob, though
he came against him ready and resolved to destroy him. Surely then the God of
compassions (to whose pity and mercy the bowels of all the creatures are but as
a drop to the Ocean) who calls those that go from him, will not cast away
those that come to him.

Reader, little do thou think how much he longs for thy conversion and
humiliation: Little do thou know what kisses and embraces, what robes and
rings, what mercies and merits, what an heaven and happiness, what a God, and
Christ, and Grace, and Glory, are all ready for thee, and wait only for thy
readiness and preparedness for them, by thy humiliation for an aversion from
thy deceitful corruptions.

Alexanders Macedonians having offended him, laid by their Arms, Plut. in vit.
Alex.
put on mourning apparel, came running in troops to his tent, where for almost
three days together they remained with loud cries and tears to testify their
remorse for offending him; and wilt not thou do as much for offending God?

As thou therefore love the life of thy soul, endeavor to get thy heart
thoroughly humbled for thy sins; take a view of thy sins in the word of God, in
the glass of his law, how in its nature it is contrary to his blessed nature
and perfect law, and for its effects it makes thee obnoxious to all the
threatenings of the word, to all the vials of ^ods wrath, to all the miseries of
this life, and to all the torments of hell for ever.

Consider while thou live in thy estate of impenitency, thou art a cursed
sinner, and if thou die in it thou art a damned creature; the hand of God
which is lifted up in the commination and threatening, will fall down in
execution. If the wrath of a King be as a messenger of death, O what then will
will the wrath of a God be! As that Christian King of Hungary told his brother
(that sprang into his presence pale and trembling, because of the Executioner
and Deaths-man, that had sounded his trumpet at his chamber door in the dead
time of the night, to call him away to execution) O Brother, thou have loved
me, and never offended me, and is the sight of my Executioner so dreadful to
thee? how then should I a grievous sinner, fear to be brought to judgment
before Jesus Christ? Consider the day of the Lords wrath is coming, and who
shall abide it? This terrible fire is kindled; this horrible tempest is
gathered, and ready to fall on thy head every moment. Do not put these things
far off, as many do, who thereby deprive themselves of the happy effects
which these thoughts might produce. A Cannon afar off, though never so great,
does no execution; men will not tremble and fall down for fear of it, when once
they apprehend it many miles off: Things afar off, though very big, will seem
very small: A Star that is bigger than the whole earth seems no bigger than a
Torch, being many miles from us. Look therefore on all that misery that is
treated of, in the first use, as thy portion, and as nigh to thee, even at the
very door; like a Sergeant it waits continually to arrest thee, and hale thee
to the prison of hell. There is not a night in which thou lie down to sleep,
but this roaring Lion of the wrath of God lies down beside thee, and is ready,
when thou art asleep little dreaming of it, to rend thee asunder, and tear thy
soul in pieces. In the morning when thou risest it waits upon thee, dogging
thee all the day long, whatsoever thou do, and following thee like a
blood-hound wheresoever thou go; thou may as soon fly from thy self as
from it, till thou art effectually humbled for thy sins, the cause of it. And
be not insensible of it, because it is invisible to thee. The influences of the
Sun are hottest among the minerals in the bowels of the earth, where it is not
at all visible, not they sensible: So the fire of divine fury is hottest where
it is not visible, nor the person sensible: Though thou may see it as plainly
in the Scripture, as the Sun at noon day; God is angry with the wicked every
day, Psalm 7.12. There is wrath prepared for the workers of iniquity, and it
will assuredly and speedily be inflicted, if thou art not timely and truly
humbled and converted.

I would also desire thee to ponder much the free grace of God, which is
discovered in the Gospel; what bowels of compassion in the Father to give his
Son; what infinite affection in the Son, to give himself for the reconciliation
and salvation of his enemies. It is probable the heat of this unknown love may
melt thy frozen spirit: This is the most ingenuous sorrow which is never to be
sorrowed for, which springs from the consideration that thou have sinned
against so good, so pure, so perfect a God, in conformity to whom, and
communion with whom, all thy happiness consists. The Law indeed is of
excellent use to open the sore, to search the wound, to make the Patient feel
his need of, and set a price upon his Physician; thus it is a Schoolmaster to
drive the soul to Christ; but winter fruits are more harsh and sour, when
summer fruits are sweet and pleasant. God takes most delight in those tears
and sorrow, which are the fruits of hot love to his blessed Majesty. And could
I see them once in thee, I durst joy thee of thy Babe of Grace, the new
Creation. They are at least the kindly bearing throws of one in travail, very
near her hour of delivery, as also often the after-paines: A stroke from guilt,
from wrath, broke Judas heart into despair: A look from love, from Christ,
broke Peter's into tears. Aspexit Christus and flevit Petrus. Ambr.
That sap and moisture which in frost and snow lies hid and buried in the
earth, shows it self pleasantly in the fruits of the trees, when it is called
forth by the warmth of the Sun.

Even Saul himself will lift up his voice, and weep when he sees a clear
testimony of the love and undeserved kindness of David.

Have thou never beheld a condemned prisoner dissolved into tears, upon the
unexpected and unmerited receipt of a pardon, who all the time before was as
hard as a flint? The hammer of the Law may break the icie heart of man with
terrors and horror, and yet it may remain ice still, unchanged: But when the
fire of love kindly thaweth this ice, it is changed and dissolved into water,
it is no longer ice, but of another nature. Where the Sun is most ptedominant,
there are the sweetest Spices, the richest Mines, and the costliest Jewels. Do
thou therefore meditate much on the love of God and Christ to thy unworthy
soul: Think what love is it that still spares thee, notwithstanding all thy
God-daring and soul-damning provocations, and that when others (probably better
than thy self) are every day and night sent to that place, where God has large
interest for his long patience. What love is it, not only to forbear thee, but
also to do thee good! thou his enemy art hungry, he feeds thee; thou art
thirsty, he gives thee drink. If a man find his enemy will he let him go, 1 Samuel 24.19. but lo God finds thee every moment; as all thy sins are within
the reach of his eye, so thou thy self art continually within the reach of his
arm; he can as easily turn thee into hell, as tell thee of hell: And yet he
lets thee go, and more than that, does thee good. Thou spends every hour
upon the stock of mercy. God is at great charge and much cost in continuing
meat, and drink, and health, and strength, and time which thou do ravel out,
and wanton away unprofitably.

What love was that in the Father which sent his own Son to die, that thou
might live! Well might the beloved Disciple say, God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, might not
perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3.16. In this the bowels of divine love
are naked, as in an Anatomy: In other things the love of God is as the beams
of the Sun scattered, which are warm and comfortable; but in this it is as the
beams of the Sun united in a burning-glasse, hot fiery burning love; God so
loved the world, so dearly, so entirely, so incomparably, so infinitely: It is
a sic without a sicut (as one observes) a pattern which can never be
paralleled. In this God commended his love toward us, in that when we were
sinners Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. when God sent his Son into the world, he
did as it were say to him, My dear Son, thou Son of my chiefest love and
choicest delight, go to the wicked unworthy world, commend me to them, and tell
them, that in thee I have sent them such a love-token, such an unquestionable
testimony of my favor and good will toward them, that hereafter they shall
never have the least color of reason to suspect my love, or to say, Wherein
have thou loved us? Malachi 1.2.

What love was that in the Son of God, which moved him to become the son of man
that thou might become the son of God? What love was that which made him so
willingly undergo the scorns, and flouts, and derisions of wretched men, the
rage, and malice, and assaults of ravenous devils, the wrath and fury of a
righteous God; such pangs and tortures in his body as no mouth can express,
such sorrows and horror in his soul as no mind can conceive; and all that thou
might escape such misery, and obtain everlasting mercy!

Greater love than this has no man, that a man lay down his life for his
friend, John 15.13. The passion of Christ was the greatest evidence of his
affection. The laying down of life did abundantly proclaim his love. His love
before was like wine in a cask, hardly seen; but O how did it sparkle and cast
its color in the glass of his sufferings! This Diamond before hid in the
shell, does shine radiantly in the ring of his death: If his tears did so much
speak his love to Lazarus, that the Jews who saw him weeeping, cried out, Lo
how he loved him! surely his heart-blood does far more demonstrate his love to
his members. They that beheld him bleeding in the garden, had far more reason
to say, Look, lo how he loved his!

What love is that which did all this for such a worm as thou art? such a
sinner, such a rebel; what would God lose, if thou were eternally lost? the
least tittle of his happiness would not be diminished; this Sun is no loser,
when men shut their eyes, and will not behold its light: what gains God, if
he gain thee to himself, to his service? thou can not add the least cubit to
the stature of his perfections; the refreshment is to men, not to the Spring
when the weary passengers drink of it. He does not command thee to repent from
any need he has of thee, but from the pity he has to thee. He entreats thee
to return, not that he may be blessed and happy, but that he may be bountiful
and liberal in bestowing on thee those blessings which accompany salvation.
Methinks the apprehension of Gods great love and goodness should have such an
impression on thee as to make thee little and low in thine own thoughts. Is it
not a wonder, that God should vouchsafe a gracious look upon such a clod of
earth, a piece of clay as thou art? but what admiration can answer this love
and condescension, that God should wait and entreat to lift thee up, who
would cast him down! That an Emperor should sue to a traitor; that Majesty
should thus stoop to misery; that the Lord of life and glory should prepare for
thee exceeding rich and precious promises, a crown of life, a purchased
possession, and beseech thee to accept of them. Were thy heart never such hard
metal, one would think that such an hot fire of burning love should melt it. I
hsve in two or three Authors read of five men that met together, and asked each
other what means they used to abstain from sin? The first said, The thoughts of
the certainty of death, and uncertainty of the time moved him to live every
day, as if it were his last day. The second said, He meditated of the day of of
judgment, and the torments of hell, and they frighted him from meddling with his
dangerous enemy, sin. The third considered of the deformity of sin, and beauty
of holiness. The fourth, of the abundant happiness provided in heaven for
holy ones. The last continually thought of the Lord Jesus Christ and his love;
and this made him ashamed to sin against God.

Reader, if thou have but any ingenuity, the abuse of such love and kindness
should work upon thee. Some say, the blood of a goat will soften an Adamant:
shall not then the blood of this true goat dissolve thy adamantine heart?
Beasts themselves have been won by kindness, and will thou be worse than a
beast, that such Philanthrophy and kindness of God shall no whit stir thee or
humble thee?

There is a twofold necessity of a deep serious humiliation (for which cause I
have been the more large upon it, though indeed I have added very much more
than I first intended) in order to the two next directions which I shall
prescribe thee.

First, in order to thy hearty acceptance of Jesus Christ. Humiliation is like
John Baptist, to prepare the way of Christ before him. Christ will not be a
Savior to them that do not set an high valuation upon him: now an unhumbled
sinner is a man (conceitedly) whole, seeing no need of, and therefore setting
little price upon the Physician of souls. Till men see that they are cast by
the Law of God, and condemned men, they will never heartily desire and value a
psalm of mercy. According to a man's sense of misery, such is his estimation of
mercy: When Paul saw himself the chiefest of sinners, then that saying, That
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, was worthy of all
acceptance. This sharp sauce of repentance does commend Christ exceedingly
unto the spiritual palate: The more bitter and irksome sin is, the more sweet
and welcome Jesus Christ will be to the soul. When the sinner sees that he is
lost in himself, then (and not till then) will he truly request to be found in
Christ; the prodigal did not prize the bread in his fathers house, till he was
ready to perish for hunger. Ministers preach much of the infinite excellencies
that are in Christ, of the unspeakable misery of sinners without Christ, of the
absolute necessity that men and women stand in of Christ, and yet preach to
little purpose; most prize their shops and their lands, their relations, yea,
and their sensual lusts above the Lord Jesus, notwithstanding all their
pretenses to the contrary; they see no such need of him, nor such worth in him,
as the Preachers and Scriptures speak of: What Is the reason of it? truly this;
They were never sensible of the stings of the fiery serpents; if they had, they
would look up to the brazen serpent with an eye of greater respect. They were
never pricked to the heart, and therefore cry not out, Men and brethren, what
shall we do to be saved? But when God discovers his wrath to the soul, and
shuts the soul up under it, when he commands conscience in his Name to
arrest the soul for all its debts, which it owes to divine justice; and when
in pursuance thereof conscience does in the name of the dreadful God, charge on
the sinner the guilt of all his sins, and hales him to the Judgmentseat of God,
where he sees nothing but frowns and fury, fire and brimstone, and feels
nothing but tribulation and anguish, indignation and wrath: now the sinner
cries out in bitterness of spirit, O wretched miserable man, alas, alas, I am
undone! What desperate madness possessed my soul thus to provoke the Almighty
God by my sins? Into what a sea of misery have I brought my self by mine
iniquities? The God whom I see is angry, the wrath which I feel is heavy, the
torments which I fear are infinite. The Law which shows no mercy is violated;
the God who will have full satisfaction for the breach of his law, is incensed;
conscience which is his Jailour is commissionated to wound and terrify me: And
whether shall I go? wrath above me, wrath below me, wrath without me, wrath
within me. A world (mark now) for a surety to discharge me of these debts; a
thousand worlds for that balm which can heal this wounded conscience. Ten
thousand thousand worlds for a Jesus that can deliver from the wrath to come.
When sin comes to be sin indeed, then and not till then a Savior will be a
Savior indeed.

Secondly, humiliation is necessary in order to the souls hearty resignation of
it self, to every Law and Command of Christ. According to a man's humiliation,
such will his subjection to Christ be; Humilation is (in some sense) the
foundation of a Christians obedience; and the strength of the building
depends upon the strength of the foundation. The reason why the Religious
buildings of hundreds of Professors in our days (though they have been very
fair and beautiful to the eye) have miscarried is this, the want of this
foundation, their hearts were never thoroughly humbled. The reason why the stony
ground did not bring forth good fruit, was this, the plough had not gone deep
enough, it did not take deep root, Matthew. 13.20, 21.

Men would never dally with God as they do, or halt as the Israelites between
two opinions, be sometimes for God, and sometimes for the world; holy by fits
and girts, if they had ever felt the weight of sin. Christ when he comes into
the soul as a Savior, will come also as a Sovereign to command and govern the
whole man; He is the true Sun, and he will have the whole heaven, the whole
heart to himself; he will allow no writ of partition; his Law forbids
inmates as well as man's. Now against this, Probably therefore, fleshly lusts
may be called earthly members. Col. 3. not only because they flow from the body
of death, but also because they are as dear to men as their bodily members
the natural carnal man rises and rebelleth exceedingly; He has ever at this
time some lust or other which he valueth as his * limbs, some right hand that
he desires may not be cut off, some right eye which he would not have plucked
out, some Herodias that must not be meddled with, some Absalom that the sinner
entreats Christ to spare, and deal gently with for his sake. Therefore before
the Lord of hosts can make an absolute conquest, before he can persuade the
besieged soul to surrender it self wholly and altogether to his government, he
is forced by the Grenades, and thundering Cannons of the Laws curse, and Gods
wrath, to fire and fright it out of all its sinful holds. Then it will come up
to those excellent terms of the Lord, which are most honorable for the
Savior, and most profitable for the soul. Now he sees most certainly such a
sting in sins tail, that he dares plead no longer for the beauty of its face;
Now he feels it as a dart in his liver, as an arrow sticking in his heart, as
a coal of fire in his hand; he is heartily willing, yea, thinks himself much
beholden to that Redeemer that will pluck out this dart, this arrow. O how
readily does he throw away this coal of fire, fearing to be burnt by it any
more! We have two famous instances of this in Scripture. The one is in Paul,
Acts 9.6. When Paul that was posting in the road to hell, comes to be knocked
down, and to feel those tremblings and terrors in his spirit, he cries out,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? He had probably heard much before of God:
but he regarded it not, till now he receives a word, and a blow; a word from
without, and a wound within to set it home; now it is, Lord, what will thou
have me to do? before it was, What will the high Priest, the Scribes and
Pharisees have me to do? and what will the vain imaginations, and high thoughts
which exalted themselves against God and Christ, have me to do? but now it is,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? Before his heart was like hard wax, it
would take no impression from God; but now it is softened by this fire of inward
humiliation, it is ready for any stamp. God may imprint what he pleases; Lord,
what will thou have me do? The other instance is in the cruel, rough,
hard-hearted Jaylour; After the earthquake, and the heart-quake which God had
caused, he springs trembling in, and fell down before Paul and Silas, crying
out, Sirs, What shall I do to be saved? Acts 16. 29, 30. Observe, now the man
is heartsick indeed; he is willing to take the most bitter pills; As if he had
said, Sirs, Do but tell me what I must do for salvation; though the terms be
never so hard, the conditions never so unpleasant, the price never so much, the
pains never so great, yet I will submit to any thing, to all things for
salvation. What must I do to be saved?

When the Israelite first sets out toward Canaan, there is a mixed multitude of
carnal affections which desire and endeavor to bear him company; now because
God knows that the land is too good for such evil inhabitants, and besides
that they will cause many mutinies in the way, he brings therefore the
Israelite into the wilderness, to humble him, and to cut them off.

Before the soul be thoroughly humbled, it dodgeth with Christ, it plays fast
and loose, off and on; this it likes, and that it disliketh; this part of the
yoke is uneasy; this burden is too heavy, and such and such commandments are
grievous; fain it would have Christ and his precious promises, but loath it is
to forego its old friends, its beloved lusts; but when God is pleased to take
the sinner by the throat, and to shake him out of his security, by showing him
sin and wrath in their colors, making him sensible of the one, and terrifying
him with a fearful expectation of the other, laying him at the pits brink,
within the smoke of hell, within the smell of that brimstone, within the
sorchings of that eternal fire which is prepared for the Devil and his Angles,
now the sinner sees that God is in earnest, and therefore dares not halt or
halve it any longer; now he is in a boisterous storm, and casts all those
goods his darling-sinnes into the sea, perceiving that he must perish if he do
not.

God is necessitated to lance men's wounds, and put them to pain, because
otherwise they cannot be cured. When the metal is thus melted, God may cast it
into what mold he pleases. O thrice happy is that heart which has been deeply
and truly humbled; it shall hold out in those tempests, wherein many others
shall make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience.

Thirdly, 3 Direction. Application of Christ.
if thou have been faithful in following my former advice, to get thy mind
enlightened to see, and thy heart thoroughly humbled for thy sin and misery: thy
next work is to rest and rely upon the Lord Jesus Christ for pardon, grace and
salvation. To look upon him, as one appointed by the father, given by himself,
sanctified by the spirit, and revealed in the word of truth, the Gospel, to be
the only and all-sufficient Savior of lost souls. It is now the proper time
for thee to cast thy soul, thy sins, thine eternal estate, upon the infinite
meritoriousnesse of the blessed Redeemer. Experience shows, that it is very
easy for an unbroken sinner to presume; but surely it is very hard for an
humbled sinner that has had all his vileness and unworthiness displayed
before his eye, and the infinite wrath of God like a mountain of lead
oppressing his conscience, to believe, and therefore I have prepared some
choice cordials for such fainting spirits, which I shall give thee anon. But my
work now is to beseech thee, broken heart, that thou take heed of thinking to
lick, thy self whole. I know the Devil and thy heart will be both busy and
diligent to get thee to make a Christ of thy contrition, and a Savior of thy
humiliation: O how unwilling is man when he has shipwrack't his soul, to
commit himself naked to the sea of Christ's blood? how earnest is he to have the
chains and jewels of his earthly affections along with him, This spiritual life
is a li^e of Faith; and indeed upon this the whole almost of thy work depends
Fide regen^ramur; resipiscontia non solum fidem subs^quitur sed ex ea nascitur.
Calv.
and to swim out upon the rotten boards of his own works!

Reader, now therefore especially, if thy soul be in a flame, be careful out of
what well thou drawest thy water to quench it. This is one of the chiefest (nay
the chiefest of all) fundamentals in Religion; and therefore it behooves thee
to be very tender. Now thou art nigh drowning, near sinking in the Ocean of
divine fury, thou had need to make sure that the bough or stake, or what ever
it be by which thou hold be strong enough, and able to bear thy weight. It
is likely, (nay it is certain, if thou art humbled as aforesaid) thou prayest,
thou mournest, thou sighest, thou loathest thy self for thy wickedness, thou
admirest God for his forbearance, thou longest after help and deliverance; be
sure that thou do not look on these as so much money wherewith thou may
purchase thy pardon, and buy off thy guilt; for believe it if thou do, as
white as thy silver is, it will draw black lines, instead of wiping off thy old
score, thou will thereby run further in debt. Evangelical humiliation is
required, not so much to make thee acceptable to Christ, as to make Christ
acceptable to thee. It is a good evidence of the beginnings of sanctification,
but it is a bad advocate for thy justification. It is as truly dangerous to
appear before God in the rags of thy own righteousness, as in thy sinful
nakedness.

If ever thou receive the blessing of pardon and love from thy heavenly father,
it must be by appearing in the garments of thine elder brother. He makes his
acceptable, but it is in Christ the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. Nothing but perfect
righteousness will pacify Gods anger, or satisfy his justice, or please
those eyes which are purer than to behold the least iniquity: And this
righteousness is only in Christ, who was made sin for thee, that thou might
become the righteousness of God in him, 2 Corinthians. 5. ult.

Do not therefore, when thou ceasest to be an Athiest, begin to be a Papist, in
relying upon thy good works; for though God will not save thee without them,
yet he will never save thee for them.

Shepherds Sincere Convert. p. 107. Edit. 5.
Can thou (says an eminent Minister now with Christ) make thy self a Christ
for thy self? Can thou bear, and come from under an infinite wrath? can
thou bring in perfect righteousness into the presence of God? This Christ must
do, else he could not satisfy and redeem. And if thou can not do this, and
have no Christ, desire and pray, till heaven and earth shake, till thou have
worn thy tongue to the stumps; endeavor as much as thou can, and others
commend thee for a diligent Christian: mourn in some wilderness, till
Doomsday; dig thy grave there with thy nails; weep buckets full of hourly
tears, till thou can weep no more; fast and pray, till thy skin and bones
cleave together; promise and purpose, with full resolution to be better; nay,
reform thy head, heart, life and tongue; and some, nay all fins; live like an
Angel, shine like a Sun, walk up and down the world like a distressed pilgrim
going to another Country; so that all Christians commend and admire thee; die
ten thousand deaths, lie at the fire-back in hell so many millions of years as
there be piles of grass upon the earth, or sands upon the seashore, or stars
in the firmament, or motes in the Sun: I tell thee, not one spark of the wrath
of God against thy sin shall be, can be quenched by all these duties, nor by
any of these sorrows; for these are not the blood of Christ.

It is both unacceptable and unprofitable for thee to approach God, either in
himself, or in thy self. I dare not meddle with an absolute God, says Luther.
Nolo Deum ab olutum. Luth.
God in himself is a consuming fire but in his Son a loving father. Do thou
therefore, now thou know thy self and sin; labor to know Jesus Christ, and
him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. And count all things dung and dross, for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus thy Lord, Phil. 3.8. Read, and
pray, and weep, and pant, and thirst, that thou may be found in him; not
having thy own righteousness, which is according to the law; but that which is
through the faith of him, the righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil.
3.9. Take a view of him in the Gospel, where he is crucified before thine eyes,
and behold him displayed in both his natures and all his offices, and therein
his suitableness unto, and sufficiency for all the wants and necessities of
thy dying soul. Do thou see a cloud of judgments gathering apace, and ready
to pour down on thy head, run to him for shelter; he is both a shadow from the
heat, and a shelter from the storm. Is thy conscience wounded with thy sins?
hasten to the wounds of thy Savior; by his stripes thou may be healed, Isa.
53. Do the murdering pieces of the Laws curses threaten to destroy thee? fly
like the distressed Dove to the clifts of the rock of ages, the bored hands and
feet, the pierced side of the blessed Redeemer, there thy soul may be sure of
safety. He is the only Ark wherein thou may be saved, when the whole world
that lies in wickedness, shall be drowned, shall be damned. He is the little
Zoar whither thou may retire, and thy soul shall live, when fire and
brimstone, yea hell Gehenna e caelo. Salv.
shall be rained from heaven on ungodly ones. He is the true City of refuge,
wherein thou may assuredly escape the wrath of God, which like the avenger of
blood pursues thee. An hearty thankful acceptance of Jesus Christ, as he is
tendered in the Gospel, will at the day of judgment be a plea as acceptable
unto God, and profitable unto thee as perfect subjection to all the commands of
the Law.

Consider how full his merits are, he is en horn of salvation, Luke 1.69. i. e.
strong to save, the strength of the noble beasts lying in their horns: It Is a
folly to think that an Emperors Revenues will not pay a beggars debts. Christ
has undertook to satisfy, and he has money enough to pay. Free grace can show
you large accounts, and a long b^ll cancelled by the blood of Christ. Mr.
Manton on Jam. p. ult.
There is no sinner so black, but the blood of this Savior can make white,
Rev. 7.14. There are some diseases which other Physicians cannot cure, but he
heals all diseases. All are dangerously, but none desperately sick whom he
undertaketh. Thou owe a vast debt to Justice, but the Lord Jesus is an able
Surety; He is able to save to the uttermost those that come unto God by him.
Heb. 7.25.

O what is it that thou want, which perfect righteousness and infinite
meritoriousnesse cannot procure! Do thou want Remission? God forgiveth sin
for Christ's sake, Ephesians. 4. ult. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses
form all sin. 1 John 1.7. He was a great sinner (as Luther observes) by
imputation, that thou might be innocent through condonation and pardon.
Themistocles appeased the anger of K. Admetus, by holding the Kings young son
in his arms; so does the Christian appease the beholding his Son in the arms
of faith.
Do thou want reconciliation with God? He makes peace through the blood of
his Cross, Coloss. 1.20. God is in Christ reconciling the world to himself. 2
Cor. 5.20. He endured his Fathers frowns and fury, that thou might enjoy his
smiles and favor. Do thou want sanctification? His blood is sanctifying as
well as justifying, Heb. 9.14. He did not only buy off thy score of guilt, but
also purchased a new stock of grace for his bank-rupt creature to set up with
again.

The oil of grace was abundantly poured on the Churches head, that it might
fall down on the skirts and members. Of his fullness thou may receive grace
for grace. Joh. 1.16. Do thou want salvation? He has the power and gift of
eternal life. Joh. 10.28. John 17.24. He is the Author of eternal salvation.
Heb. 5.9. Thou may have boldness through the blood of Jesus, to enter into
the holy of holies. Heb. 10.19, 20. He paid an infinite sum, to purchase the
Fathers house for thine everlasting home. What ever thy need be, he is able to
supply it, for he is an universal Treasure which can never be spent, a Spring
that can never be drawn dry. In him dwells the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. Col. 2.9.

Consider also how free his mercy is, as well as his merits full. Thou may
drink of the water of life freely. Rev. 22.17. If thou will buy his benefits,
thou must leave thy money behind thee. His wine and milk is to be had without
money, and without price. Isa. 55.2. Do not hold off, thinking to carry
worthiness to Christ, but believe on him, and thou may fetch worthiness from
Christ. The same free grace which gave Christ for thee without thy prayer, will
at thy desire give Christ to thee. Do not always lie poring upon thy
unworthiness, but if thou art sensible of it, and sorrowful for it, believe it,
thou art worthy enough to Divine acceptance, though not to Divine
satisfaction. As his Omnipotency answers thy weakness, and his fullness thy
wants: so does his free grace all thy unworthiness. The natural Sun does not
inlighten more freely, then this Sun of Righteousness does enliven all that
come under the shadow of his wings.

Ponder how universal his offers of grace are. Jesus Christ with all his merits
are tendered to all. The proposals of Divine mercy and love are general and
universal. Go preach the Gospel (observe) to every creature. He that believes
shall be saved. Ho every one that thirsts, Isa. 55.1. If any man (let him be
poor or rich, high or low) thirst, let him come to me and drink. John 7.37.

It Is a great encouragement, that in the offers of pardon and life, none are
excluded; why then should thou exclude thy self? Come to me all ye that are
weary and heavy-laden, Matthew. 11.28. Mark (poor sinner) all ye. Art not thou
one of that all? Is not thy wickedness thy weight, and thy corruption thy
burden? then thou art called particularly as well as generally; Jesus Christ
takes thee aside from the crowd, and whispereth thee in the ear, O poor sinner
that art weary of the work, and heavy laden with the weight of sin, be
entreated to come to me, I will give thee rest. Why does thy heart suggest,
that he does not intend thee in that call? Does he not by that qualification,
as good as name thee? Ah, it is an unworthy, a base jealousy to mistrust a
loving Christ without the least cause.

Once more meditate, how willing he is to heal thy wounded spirit, and be not
faithless but believing; He is willing to accept of thee, if thou art willing
to accept him. What mean his affectionate invitations? He seeks to draw thee
with cords of love, cords that are woven and spun out of Christ's heart and
bowels. Cant. 4.8. Come away from Lebanon, my sister, my Spouse, from the lions
dens, Mr. Mantor. on Jude p. 75.
from the mountains of Leopards. Christ's love is hot and burning, he thinks
thou tarriest too long from his embraces. Open to me my sister, my Love, my
Dove, my undefiled. Cant. 5.2. Christ stands begging for entrance? Lost man, do
but suffer me to save thee; Poor sinner, suffer me to love thee; These are the
charms of Gospel Rhetoric. None sings so sweetly as the Bird of Paradise,
the Turtle that chirpeth upon the Churches hedges, that he may cluck sinners to
himself. What mean his pathetical expostulations? Why will ye die? Ezekiel. 33.11.
What reason have thou thus to run upon thy death and ruin? What iniquity have
your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me? Jer. 2.5. what harm
have I ever done them? what evil do they know by me, that they walk so contrary
to me? but one place for all. Micah 6.3, 4. O my people, what have I done unto
thee? and wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me. For I brought thee
out of the Land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of servants. O my
people, remember now what bowels of love are here sounding in every line; what
fiery affection is there in such sweet expostulations! O admirable
condescension!

What means his sorrow for them that refuse him for their Savior? He is
grieved because of the hardness of men's hearts, Mark 3.5.

He shed tears for them that shed his blood. When he came nigh that City (which
was the slaughterhouse of the Prophets of the Lord, and of the Lord of the
Prophets) he wept, Luke 19.41. If thou had known, even thou in this thy day!
The brokennesse of his speech, shows the brokennesse of his spirit. He is
pitiful toward their souls, that are so cruel to themselves, and weepeth for
them that go laughing to hell.

What means his joy at the birthday of the new creature, when he is received
with wel-come into the sinners heart? The mother is as much pleased that her
full breasts are drawn, as the child can be. The day of thy cordal acceptance
of him, will be the day of the gladness of his heart; At such an hour he
rejoiced in spirit, says the Evangelist, Luke 10.22. He wept twice, and he
bled (as some affirm) seven times; but we never read of his rejoicing, (if I
mistake not) but in this place. And surely it was something that did
extraordinarily take the heart of Christ, which could in the time of his
humiliation tune his spirit into a merry note, and cause this man of sorrows to
rejoice. Ah sinner, believe it, he would never so willingly have died such a
cursed painful death, if he had not been willing that sinners should live a
spiritual and eternal life.

What mean I say his invitations, expostulations, grief upon refusal, joy upon
acceptance, his commands, entreaties, promises, threatenings, his woing thee by
the Ministers of his Word, by the motions of his Spirit, by his daily, nightly,
hourly mercies, by his gracious providence, by his unwearied patience, but to
assure thee that he is heartily willing to accept thee for his servant, for his
son, if thou art heartily willing to accept him for thy Savior, and for thy
Sovereign. He would never present thee with such costly gifts, if his offer of
marriage were not in earnest: Besides (brokenhearted sinner, for it is to thee
that all this while I have been speaking) how dare thou any longer entertain
such a Traitor against the King of Saints in thy breast, as a thought that the
Lord Jesus can be guilty in any of the forementioned particulars, of the least
insincerity?

Do not therefore, like the silly Heart, go ever up and down, moaning and
bleeding with the arrow in thy side, thy sins sticking in thy heart, but
desire his helping hand to pluck them out, and without question thou shall have
it. He had a special command and commission from his Father to remember and
redeem thee, to bind up the brokenhearted, Isa. 61.1, 2, 3.
to proclaim liberty to the captive, and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound, to comfort them that mourn; and do thou think it possible for him
to be unfaithful in his Office, or to his Father? No certainly, he keeps all
his Fathers Commandments and continues in his love, John 15.

When he was upon earth, like a Physician, he was in his Element when among
sick and diseased persons, so much did he love to heal and cure: And now he is
in heaven, though he be free from passion, yet not from compassion; his heart
pitieth thee most tenderly, and his hand will help thee effectually. Cheer up
at last O drooping soul, and look up with an eye of faith to this Lord of life,
to this brazen Serpent. I may say to thee, as Martha to Mary, The Master is
come, and he calls for thee; Hark how loudly he proclaims his general
tender of grace; Vocations and interjections speak very affection are bowels
toward the distressed; God lays his mouth as it were to the deaf ear of the
unbeliever and cries aloud. Ho every one that thirsts.
Ho every one that thirsts come to the waters, Isa. 55.1. how lovingly he
beseeches. As though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead
be ye reconciled to God. 2 Cor. 5.20. See how cheerfully he looks, out of hope
that thou will by believing receive him into thy heart; His countenance is as
Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars, His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is
altogether lovely. Cant. 5.15. how hastily he runs to meet thee more then half
way! loves pace is very swift, Behold he comes leaping over the mountains,
skipping upon the hills. Cant. 2.8. Observe how bountifully he provideth for
thy entertainment, A feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat
things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined. Isa. 25.6. Behold he
stands at the door and knocks, if thou hear his voice and open to him, he
will come in and sup with thee, and thou with him. Rev. 3.20.

4. Direct. Dedication to God.
Fourthly, Dedicate thy self, soul, and body, and all thou have unto the service
and glory of Jesus Christ. If thou have been unfaigned in the practice of the
former directions; I doubt not in the least of thy willingness to this: If thy
sorrow for sin has been sincere, like a burnt child thou will dread that fire;
The Jewel of faith must be laid up in the cabinet of a good conscience Though
faith justify our persons, yet good works must justify our faith.
The sense of former unkindnesse to Christ is fresh in thy heart, and a very
glutton in pain under a distemper dares not but forbear such meats as will feed
it. If thy Marriage to Christ has been hearty, thou have given an universal
bill of divorce to other lovers, and have accepted him for thy head and
husband, to govern and command thee as well as to protect and provide for thee,
and instate heaven as a Jointure upon thee. If thou expectest an immortal life
from him, thou must consecrate thy mortal life to him. I hope then thou art
contented to take Jesus Christ, for better, for worse; with his shameful cross
as well as his crown of glory; with his trials as well as triumphs; with his
gracious precepts as well as his precious promises; nay I hope thou see so
much equity in his commands, so much beauty in his ways and worship, so much
of thy souls felicity wrapped up in holiness (in order to its perfection and
happiness) that thou would much rather choose the easy yoke, the light
burden of Christ, than the drudgery of the world, or the bondage of
corruption. Truly, thus it must be with thee, if ever thou art saved; and thus
I thought to have found thee, at least to leave thee.

One excellently compares holiness and happiness to those two sisters, Leah
and Rachel. Salvation or happiness, like Rachel, seems the fairer (even a
carnal heart may fall in love with that) but sanctification or holiness, like
Leah is the elder and beautiful also, though in this life it appears with some
disadvantage, her eyes being bleared with tears of repentance, and her face
furrowed with the works of mortification. But this is the law of that heavenly
Country, that the younger sister must not be bestowed before the elder; We
cannot enjoy fair Rachel, heaven and happiness, except first we embrace
tender-eyed Leah, holiness, mortification, self-denial, and all those severe
duties which the Churches Lawgiver enjoineth.

Friend, sit down, and consider what it may cost thee to be a Christian. It
must cost thee the absolute denial of thy sinful carnal self, of the body of
death and its earthly members, which are expressly forbidden in the Word of God;
and thy main work must be every day to crucify and mortify them. Sin must die
(though it may be never so dear to thee) or thy Soul cannot live. If thou
let any sin go, since every one is appointed by God to destruction, thy
life must go for its life, as the Prophet told Ahab, 1 Kings 20.42. When Christ
came in the flesh, sin crucified him; but when Christ comes in the spirit, he
will crucify it. As Samson, an eminent type of Christ pulled down the house
upon the heads of the Lords of the Philistines, that he might slay them, and so
be avenged on them for his two eyes. So Jesus Christ, if he be thy Savior, is
resolved to pull the house in which sin harbors it self down about its ears,
and by its slaughter to be revenged on it for his two eyes, for all the
ignominy and shame, agony and pain which sin put him to; He will teach thee
better than to beg the life of those Barrabasses, those soul-murderers and
robbers of God of his glory. And surely ingenuity will learn thee otherwise
than to expect such infinite favors from this King, and yet to entertain in
thy heart any that are rebels against his Majesty.

Thus it will cost thee the absolute denial of thy sinful self; It must cost
thee the conditional denial of thy natural self, and all that is outwardly dear
unto thee; nay, it may cost thee the actual loss of relations, possessions,
honor, pleasure, liberty, limbs, life, and all these for Jesus Christ. Thou
must resolve when ever they come in opposition unto, or competition with Christ
his glory, Kingdom and Command, to let them go. As when Levies relations came
in competition with the glory of God, he did not know his father, nor would he
acknowledge his brethren, Deuteronomy. 33.9. When Moses, his glory and pleasures came
in competition with a precept of God, he chooses to suffer affliction with the
people of God, rather than to enjoy the pleasures of the Court. Heb. 11.25.
When Paul's liberty and life come in competition with the Kingdom of Christ, he
is ready not only to be bound, but to die for the name of the Lord Jesus. Acts
20.24. They all willingly left their own comforts to obey Gods call and
commands. Dr. Reyn. Sermon on self-denial.
In conversion as one well observes, the use and the property of all we have
is altered; All our vessels, all our Merchandise must be super-scribed with a
new title, Holiness to the Lord. Isa. 23.18. Zach. 14.20, 21. Then men's chief
care will be to honor the Lord with their substance. Prove. 3.9. to bring their
sons, their silver, their gold to the name of the Lord the holy One of Israel.
Isa. 60.9. All we are, or have, we have it on this condition, to use it, to
leave it, to lay it out, to lay it down unto the honor of our Master, from
whose bounty we received it.

It was a notable saying of a Noble Lord of this Land, That that person may be
deceived, L. Brooks.
who thinks to save any thing by his Religion more than his soul; (And surely,
he that saves his soul, saves all that is worth saving;) He meant that his
Religion might cost him the loss of all other things. There is certainly (if
thou will be a Christian indeed) a necessity of laying thy health, strength,
time, estate, name, friends, interests, in the world, thy calling and comforts
whatsoever, at the feet of Christ, to be employed wholly in his service, and
improved altogether for his glory, and to be denied or enjoyed in whole, or in
part, according to his call and command. This may seem an hard saying to carnal
minds, that rather than break, and leave off all show of trading with God, (to
which their stirred consciences will by no means yield) would willingly
compound and give Christ a part, and the world and flesh the other part. But as
Christ is worthy of, so he will have all acceptance. The gods of the Heathen
are good fellows, and share their honor among themselves; but this Lord over
all, who is God blessed for ever, will not give his glory to others; he will
not suffer that superlative esteem, trust, and love of the soul, to be bestowed
upon any but himself, o^ to be divided betwixt himself and any other. He will
allow no superior, nay, no equal. As Alexander answered Darius (when Darius
sent to him about peace, because there were Empires enough in the world to
satisfy them both) The whole world could endure but one sun, but one
Alexander; So the heart of man must have but one General, but one Commander in
chief, and that must be Jesus Christ.

Truly Reader, I hope that these things will not discourage thee from the ways
of God. Do but rationally consider them; Is it not most just and equal, that
since all these things come freely from him, that they should be laid out
purely for him? Thou give thy servant a little meat, and drink, and money, (or
rather God by thee) and what service do thou require of him? Thou art
instrumental (under God) to the birth and breeding of thy children, and what
duty do thou expect from them? Art not thou ten thousand times more engaged
to Jesus Christ, for every bit of bread and breath of air, for every nights
sleep and days supply, for every mercy that thine enjoy, for every moments
abode on this side hell, for every soul-favour, and body-kindness?

In him thou live, movest, and have thy being; the light does not so much
depend on the Sun, as thy life and all thy comforts depend on Christ. Now (be
thy own judge) what service, what obedience may the Lord Jesus look for at thy
hands? If the world or the flesh could do half so much for thee, thou were
more excuseable, then now thou art in doing so much for them.

Again, when the question arises, Whether Christ or the flesh, Christ or the
world should have thy greatest esteem, or love, or trust, or the most of thy
time and strength, and talents; One would think thou should be ashamed to put
such a question, or at least, that the very mention of it would be a sufficient
answer to it. Alas, what are all the honors and pleasures, riches and
relations, delicates and diadems of the whole world to Jesus Christ, but as
pebbles to pearls, dirt to Diamonds, dross to gold, nothing to all things?
there is surely no comparison. The whole world of heaven and earth does not so
far excel a feather as Jesus Christ does the whole world.

Besides, this request of mine should rather encourage thee, in regard this
absolute resignation of thy self to Christ, tends to the perfection and
happiness of thy soul. Thy misery by thy fall is chiefly in this, that thou
have thereby lost the Image of God. Thy want of conformity to him, is the cause
why thou have not communion with him. Beasts do not converse with men, nor
trees with beasts, because they do not live the life of each other. Sense must
fit trees to converse with beasts, and reason must fit beasts to converse with
men, and grace and holiness must fit thee to converse with God. When thou once
live the life of God, as this unreserved soul-resignation or sanctification
is called, Ephesians. 4.18. thou may then bathe thy soul in his love.

Now this is the way to it. The life of Christianity consists in an hearty
dedication of thy self and all thou have to Christ. When thou have done this
thou art a Christian indeed.

The excellency of every thing stands in two things; Dr. Reyn. on Hos. 14.
Sermon 7.
first, the perfection of beauty in which it was made; and the perfection of
use for which it was made; now the beauty of man consists in this, that he
was made like unto God, Genesis 1 26. and his end and use is this, that he was
made for God; first to serve him, and after to enjoy him; for the Lord has set
apart him that is godly for himself; therefore to recover the Image of God,
which consists in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness, to work to
the service and glory of God, to aspire to the possession and fruition of God,
must needs be man's greatest good.

By what has been largely spoken before in this Use, thou may perceive that
there is no going to heaven per saltum, by leaping out of a dirty and stinking
jakes, into the presence of the glorious God. There is a being made meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Coloss. 1.12. Operatione,
and acceptatione divina idonei constituimur ad participandam sortem sanctorum.
Davenant in loc.
which is by sanctification. As clothes are by lighter colors fitted to
receive a deep Scarlet dye; so thou must by this spiritual life of holiness, be
fitted for the eternal life of glory. Observe 2 Cor. 5.5. the Apostle tells us,
He that has wrought us for the self-same thing (i. e. heaven) is God. Man is a
rugged piece of timber, an unhewn stone; now the stone must be polished, and
the timber squared, before it can be fit for the heavenly building wrought for
it.

Joseph, when he was sent for to Pharaoh out of prison, changed his Raiment and
trimmed himself, and then appeared before the King.

And as there must be Regeneration, or the beginning of grace, so there must be
a proficiency or growth in grace, to prepare the soul for the weight of glory.
Mr. Strong. Holiness the way to happiness. page 45.
There is a double right which every child of God has to heaven. 1. Jus
haereditarium, an hereditary right, and that is at regeneration, when he is put
into Christ, and made a Coheir with him of his Inheritance, having grace begun
in him, which shall be perfected in glory, and was given as a principle
ordained to such a perfection. 2. Jus aptitudinarium, and that is a right of
fitness, whereby we are qualified to receive such a mercy; and that as an heir
has a right of inheritance in his nonage, but he has not a right of fitness
till he come to years, and be able to manage his estate, when he has received
it. Reader, in both these respects there is a necessity that thou presently
make a deed of gift of thy self, and thy all unto Jesus Christ, and that thou
never more look upon thy self (or any thing thou have) as thine own, but as a
servant entrusted with them for thy Masters use and advantage.

Well Reader, I suppose thou do ere this fully understand the conditions upon
which thy soul may be contracted unto Christ. My work is to treat with thee
about this marriage. I am commanded by the Lord (as Abraham's Steward by his
Lord) Genesis 24. to provide a Wife for my Masters son. I do here in the presence
of the living God, by commission from his Majesty, tender thee the most
honorable, profitable, delightful match, that was ever offered to mortals: It
is the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of life and glory, the only begotten of the
Father, the fairest of ten thousands, to be thy head and husband; hereby thou
shall have the King of Kings, the Lord of heaven and earth for thy Father; a
Queen the Church for thy Mother; the Saints those truly excellent, noble,
illustrious ones, higher then the Kings of the earth, for thy brethren and
sisters; the Covenant of Grace (in comparison of which all the gold of the
Indies is but dirt and dung) for thy treasure; glorious Angels for thy
servants, the flesh of the Son of God for thy meat, and his precious blood for
thy drink; perfect Righteousness, which is more beautiful then the unspotted
innocence of Adam or Angels, for thy raiment; a palace of pleasures, a place of
glory, a building of God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the
heavens, for thy habitation: And all this only upon these terms, that thou will be a loving, faithful and obedient Wife (which the poorest beggar in the
country expects from his wife) that thou will heartily give up thy self and all
thou have to his service and glory; and this he desires also for thy good and
benefit, that he may make thee a more excellent creature, and render thee more
acceptable to God, and more capable of his dearest love and eternal embraces:
(as the rain is sent up from the earth in thick and foggy vapors, but the
heavens return it in pure and silver showers; so though thou give an
unbelieving, hard, earthly heart unto Christ, he will return it unto thee
again, believing, tender, heavenly, such an heart as shall be more pleasing
both to God and thy self;) and for this he is pleased (though ten thousand Suns
united into one are but darkness to him, so great is his glory) to condescend
to become a Suitor to thee, to beseech thee to accept of him, who knows thy
portion to be misery and beggary, who sees thy person to be full of ugliness
and deformity, who gains no addition to his happiness by thine acceptance of
his love, nor suffers the least diminution by thy refusal. Well, what say
thou to this match? Art thou heartily willing to take Jesus Christ for thy
wedded Husband to protect and direct thee, to purify and pardon thee, to
sanctify and save thee, to guide thee by his counsel, and afterward to
receive thee to glory? And will thou here in the presence of the Lord, and
before thy conscience, which is as ten thousand witnesses, promise and covenant
to obey him universally, to love him unfainedly, to resign up thy self, and all
thou have to his disposal unreservedly? What say thou? Art thou willing or
no? Take heed of dallying in a match that is so unquestionably and infinitely
for thy advantage; Believe it, thou shall not have such offers every day. Do
not stick at any of his Precepts, for he can require nothing but what is equal,
excellent and honorable: do not trifle or defer it (if thou love thy soul)
for this may be the very last time of asking. If thou will deal kindly and
truly with my Master, tell me; or if not, tell me, that I may return an answer
to him that sent me, Genesis 24.49.

These four directions which I have laid down already, are without question the
whole of Christianity; and that soul shall be certainly saved by whom they are
uprightly practiced; yet there are two special means which God has appointed
for the enabling the soul to perform them, which I shall speak briefly to, and
for method sake join them altogether.

Five Directions. Attendance on the Word.
Fifthly, If thou would attain this spiritual life, be much conversant with
the Word of God, be often reading it, meditating on it, but especial frequent
it in public where it is preached; by losing one Sermon (for ^ought thou
know) thou may lose one soul.

Death at first entered into the world by the ear, Genesis 3. and so does life;
Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. thou see in the Gospel that Faith and
Repentance are this spiritual life, Mark 16.16. Gal. 2.20. and thou may see
as clearly, that they are both the fruits of the ministry of the Word: For
Faith, that fore quoted place, Romans 10.17. is full; and for Repentance, that of
Acts 2.37. speaks home, When they heard these things, they were pricked to
the heart; mark, When they heard these things. The Word of God is an hammer
with which God is pleased to break the stony heart; and a fire wherewith he
melts the hard metal, Jerem. 23.29. In this respect it is that the Minister
is called the Father of some Converts, namely those whom he begets through
the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. Jo^. Isaac a Jew was converted by reading the 53. of
Isaiah. Junius by the first of John's Gospel. Augustine by the 13. of Romans I
will never forget thy precepts, for by them thou have quickened me. David Psalm.
119.93.


There is a resurrection of souls at this day, when Ministers lift up their
voice like a trumpet, Isai. 58.1. Acts 2.37. as well as there shall be a
resurrection of bodies at the last day by the Trump of the Archangel. This is
the net which God is pleased to cast into the sea of the world, and wherewith
he harh caught many a soul; three thousand at one draught, Acts 2.41. Spiritual
life is the gift of God as well as eternal; the gift of all grace is of grace;
but ordinarily, of his own will he begets souls by the word of truth, Jam. 1
18. If thou will have Wisdoms dole, thou must wait at Wisdoms gate, for there
it is given, Prove. 8.34.

Grace is the law written in the heart, and usually the ministry of the Word is
the pen wherewith the Spirit of God writes it.

That is the bed wherein the children of God are begotten, Cantic. 1.16. That
is the school wherein the Disciples are taught of God, and learn the truth as
it is in Jesus. The Ministers Commission does abundantly evince this, I send
thee, says God to Paul, to open the eyes of the blind, and to turn men from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to the living God.

God indeed is a most free Agent, and can work when and how he pleases; but it
has pleased him to make the Gospel of Christ his own power unto salvation,
Romans 1.16. and it pleases him by the foolishness of preaching to save them
that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. Abana and Pharpar, Rivers of Damascus, to the eye of
sense, may seem better then all the waters of Israel; but Jordan can cleanse
and heal when those cannot, because it has a divine precept and promise
annexed to it. Nay observe how God is pleased to dignifie his Word, and to
honor his own Ordinance. When he has begun the work of conversion himself
immediately, he will not perfect it without the ministry of his Word. He
sends Paul to Ananias, Acts 9.21. to learn what he should do; and bids
Cornelius by an Angel (for an Angel must not do that work) to send for Peter,
and from him to hear words whereby he and his house should be saved, Acts 10.5,
6. David who was wiser then the ancients, then his enemies, then his teachers,
lies many months asleep on the bed of security, in a most filthy pickle, till
a Prophet is sent to call him up and awake him; then, and not till then, he
minds cleansing, as appears plainly by the title and body of the 51. Psalm;
So David's heart smote him for numbering the people; but mark the means of it;
For (says the Text) when David was up in the morning, the word of the Lord
came to Gad, and commanded him to go to David, 2 Samuel 24.10, 11, 12.

Yea, the very honor of saving souls, the most High ascribes to the ministry
of his Word, 1 Timothy 4.16. Timothy is spoken of, as saving himself and them that
hear him, i. e, instrumentally; thus highly God does magnify his Ordinances,
though many men vilify them. Do not thou therefore forsake the assemblies of
the Saints, as the manner of some is, Heb. 10.25. but lie constantly at the
pool, Some that have come to church to sleep (as Mr. Latimer says) have been
taken napping.
praying and waiting for the troubling of the waters of the Sanctuary. The
Angel of the Covenant may move there, and thy diseased soul thereby be healed.
As thou would learn that lesson whereby thou may be wise to salvation, do
not play the truant, but frequent that School where the Prophet of the Church
teaches. As thou would not quench the Spirit, despise not prophesying, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19, 20.

They that came to catch the Preacher, have been caught by the Sermon, as
Austin by Ambrose. Aust. Confess. 5. lib. 14. And they that come to see
fashions, as Moses came to the Bush, maybe called as he was. The Soldiers or
Officers that went to apprehend Christ were probably apprehended by Christ,
John 7.46. Wh n Henry Zatphen was Preacher at Breme, the Papists sent the^r
Chaplains to hear, that they might entrap him, but God converted by his
ministry many of them. Sleid. Comment.
If thou would have thy heart thoroughly humbled, make use of the Word; you may
read of a bad, hard, cursed heart indeed humbled by this, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. and
18. v. Manasses in his affliction humbled himself greatly; for God sent unto
him Prophets and Seers, that spoke unto him in the name of the Lord: so 2 Samuel
24.10, 11, 12.

Would thou rest upon Jesus Christ for salvation? Mind the Word, Every one
that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me, John 6.45.

Would thou have thine inward man renewed and changed? This may be done by
the blessing of God accompanying his Word; therefore it is called the engraffed
Word, Jam. 1.21. To teach us, that as the sciences of a good apple graffed into
a crabtree stock, has virtue to change the nature of it; so has the word
preached (for of that he speaks as is manifest, v, 19, 22, 23.) virtue to
change the heart of man.

Reader let me persuade thee to have a reverent esteem of, and to be very
familiar with the Word of God, reading it constantly, and hearing it frequently
as the Lord shall give thee opportunities; but take heed how thou hear, Luke
8.18. how thou read. Attend on the Word (having first laid aside all
superfluity of naughtiness; weeds, must be rooted up before the ground of man's
heart is fit to receive the seed of the Word) 1. With meekness of spirit, Jam.
1.21. The humble sinner is fittest to be Christ's Scholar. The meek he will
teach his way, the meek he will guide in judgment, Psalm. 25.8, 9. When the
heart is tender, it is most teachable, it is like white paper for any
inscription, like soft wax for any impression. A proud person is too good (in
his own conceit) to be taught; he quarrelleth and rages either at the person
that preaches, or at the plainness of the sermon, but to his own ruin. He
rejects the counsel of God, but it is against himself, to his own hurt, Luke
7.30. The weak corn, which yields to the wind, receives no damage by it; but
the proud sturdy oak which resists it, is often broken in pieces.

2. Attend on the Word with a resolution to obey whatever the Lord shall in his
Word command thee. O it is excellent to sit at Gods feet, hearing his voice
purposely that thou might do his will: like a servant, to go to thy master
and know his mind, that thou may fulfill it; when thou can say, I am here
present before the Lord to hear and do the things that are commanded me of
God, Acts 10.33. like the Romans, deliver up thy self wholly to that form of
doctrine which God has delivered down unto thee, (...).
as metal for any stamp and mould, Romans 6.17.

3. Plato as he walked in the streets, if he saw any dissolute or disordered,
would reflect on himself, with Number ego talis, Am I such a one as ^his man is?
Diogen. Laert. in vita.
With self application; do not think this concerns such a man, and now the
minister hitteth such a one; but consider, now God speaks to my soul, and
this truth does nearly concern me; If the word be not mixed with faith, it will
not be profitable to them that hear it, Hebr. 4.2. Whilst truths rest in
generals, little good will be done; but when they come to be particularly
applied, and to sink down into the heart, then they work effectually for the
souls salvation. Truths generally received are like the charging a piece, but
the particular application of them does the execution upon sin.

4. With supplication before and after reading or hearing; begin with God, Lord
open mine eyes that I may see the wonderful things of thy Law, Psalm. 119.18.
Begin duty with duty; The preparation of the heart in man is from the Lord;
Prove. 16.1. And after thou have heard or read, pray as the Disciples after they
had heard, Lord open to us this parable, Matthew. 15, 15. This Scripture, Write
thy law in my heart, and thy truth in mine inward parts; teach me thy way, lead
me in thy righteousness, give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law, yea,
I shall observe it with my whole heart, Psalm. 119.34.

Urge thy soul with the necessity of this duty, that thou must be converted or
condemned; and it is the law of the Lord that is perfect, converting the soul,
Psalm. 19.7. That thou must know thy misery, or feel it eternally; and it is the
preiept of the Lord that is pure enlightening the mind, Psa. 19.8. That thou
must repent or be ruined; and it is by hearing that men come to be pricked at
the heart, Acts 2.37. That thou must believe or perish; and how shall thou
believe on him of whom thou have not heard? Romans 10. As ships will ride a long
time in a road-steed (when they might be in the haven) for this end that they
may be in the winds way to take the first opportunity that shall be offered for
their intended voyage: So do thou ride in the road of Gods Ordinances, waiting
for the gales of the Spirit; thou know not how soon that wind may blow on the
waters of the Sanctuary, and drive the vessel of thy soul swiftly, and land it
safely at the haven of happiness of Heaven.

Direction
If thou would attain this spiritual life, be frequent and fervent at the
throne of grace, Prayer.
that the God of all grace would infuse grace into thee, and breath into thy
soul the breath of this spiritual life. As Abram pleaded for Ishmael, Genesis
17.18. O that Ishmael might live before thee! so do thou for thy soul, O that
my soul might live before thee! And ^s the Ruler for his son, Lord, come down
quickly ere my soul die, yea ere it die eternally.

Go to God with a sense of thy own unworthiness and iniquities, that though
thou come to his Majesty for the greatest favors, yet thou art less than
the least of all his mercies, acknowledging that thou have sinned hainously
against heaven, and before him, and art unworthy to be called his son; Confess
thy original, actual, heart, life sins, with their bloody aggravations, and
entreat him to pardon and purify thee: O with what humility, reverence, and
self-abhorrency, should such a guilty prisoner approach the Judge of the whole
earth! Arraign, accuse and condemn thy self and thy sins, if ever thou would
have God to acquit thee.

Pray also with a sense of thy own impotency and weakness. That though there
be a necessity of humiliation, if ever thou would escape damnation, yet thou
can as soon fetch water out of a rock, as tears from thine eyes, or sorrow
from thine heart for thy sins (till the wind of the Spirit blows, those
waters will never flow; It is God that must give to thee a poor Gentile
repentance unto life, Non minus difficile est nobis velle credere quam cadaveri
volare. Beza Confess. p. 22.
Acts 11.18.) That thou must believe, or thou can not be saved; yet thou
can as easily cause iron to swim, as thy soul to believe in the Son of God; (
Faith is the gift of God, Phil. 1.29. Zeph. 8.) It is as hard a work to believe
the Gospel, as to keep the Law perfectly. Nothing less than omnipotency can
enable the soul to either. As thy first birth and generation, so is thy second
birth and regeneration from the Lord. Men and means may be instrumental and
subservient, but their efficacy and success depends on God. As Protogenes,
when he saw a line curiously drawn in a Painters shop, cried out, None but
Apelles could draw that line; so when thou see the new Creation, thou may
say, None but a God could do that.

When thou have through the strength of Christ wrought thy heart to some sense
of thy weakness and unworthiness, then look into the Scriptures, and fetch
arguments from Gods own mouth, weapons from his own Armory, whereby thou may
prevail with him, and overcome him. Beseech him to consult his glorious Name
and gracious Nature; mind him, that he is the Lord, the Lord God, gracious,
merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin, Exodus 34.6. Tell him, that he delights not in the
death of sinners; that he takes more pleasure in unbloody conquests; in the
cheerful services than in the painful sufferings of his Creatures: That he had
much rather have trees for fruit than for the fire. Say, Have mercy upon me, O
God, according to thy loving kindness, and after the multitude of thy tender
mercies blot out mine offenses, Psalm. 51.1. O thou that art rich in mercy, for
the great love wherewith thou love souls, quicken me in Christ, that by grace
I may be sanctified and saved. Since thou delightest in mercy, be pleased Lord
to delight both thy self and thy servant, by extending thine hand of mercy to
pluck me out of this bottomless depth of misery. Entreat God to consult his
own Honor, as well as his gracious Nature. Mind him, that if he condescend to
convert and save thee, he shall have the glory of his patience, in waiting thus
long to be gracious; the glory of his providence in causing all things to work
together for thy good; the glory of mercy in pitying and pardoning such a
grievous sinner; the glory of his justice in that noble satisfaction it shall
have from the death of his Son; the glory of his power, in bringing such a
rebellious heart into subjection unto Jesus Christ. Entreat his Majesty to
consider, that he may pardon and cleanse thee through Christ, without the least
diminution to his glory; nay, that far more revenues will come to his crown
from thy salvation, then from thy damnation. That the forced confessions of
them that perish (as of Malefactors upon a wrack) do not sound forth his
praises so much, nor so well, as the joyful hearty acclamations of his saved
ones; Say, Lord, if thou suffer me to continue in my filth and pollution, and
never wash me by the blood and spirit of thy Son, and suffer me to perish
eternally, thou art righteous; but Lord, if I perish I shall not praise thee;
(thy glory will rather be forced out of me with blows, as fire out of a flint;
thou delightest to see poor creatures volunteers in thy service:) The damned do
not celebrate thy praise, Psalm. 30.9.
they that go into the infernal pit give thee no thanks; The living, Psalm.
88.10, 11. Isa. 38.19.
the living they shall praise thee, they that live spiritually, and they that
live with thee eternally. O what Hosanna's and Halelujah's? what honor, and
glory, and blessing, and praise do they give to the Lord, and to the Lamb that
sits upon the throne for ever? O let my soul live, and it shall praise thee.
Thine is the kingdom and power; do thou work within me by thy grace, and thine
shall be the glory.

Desire God to consider his own promise as well as his praise. Urge his own
word, That they that ask shall receive, that seek shall find, that knock shall
have heaven opened. That if men know how to give good gifts to them that ask,
how much more will the Father in heaven give his holy Spirit to them that ask.
That he will circumcise the hearts of men and women to love him, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
That he will put his fear into their hearts, and they shall never depart away
from him Jer. 32.40. That he will write his Law in their hearts, Ezekiel. 31.33.
Go in to him when thou art full of heaviness, as Bathsheba did to David, and
say, 1 Kings 1^ 17, 18.
Did not my Lord promise thus and thus? and is it thy mind that thy word should
go unfulfilled? Lord, are not these thy own words? thine own hand writing?
whose staff and bracelet is this? If thou had not promised, I should not
have found in my heart to pray: And if thou should not perform, where would
be the glory of thy truth? Thy mercy, O Lord, is great unto the heavens, and
thy truth unto the clouds, Psalm. 57.10. My soul cleaves unto the dust, quicken
thou me according to thy word, Psalm. 119.25. Remember thy word unto thy
servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope, Psa. 119.49.

Beseech him to consider thy misery; like a beggar, uncover thy nakedness,
show thy sores and wounds to move him to pity: Tell him, that in regard of thy
spiritual condition, Rev. 3.17.
thou art at present wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and naked, without God,
without Christ, without hope, an alien from the Commonwealth of Israel, and a
stranger from the Covenants of promise; and that thine eternal state is like to
be the worm that never dies, the fire that never goes out, amongst devils and
damned ones, in blackness of darkness for ever. Say Lord, open thine eyes,
and see thy poor creature weltring, Ezekiel. 16.
wallowing, polluted in his own soul blood; and now I am in my blood, open thy
mouth and say unto me, Live; yea, now I am in my blood, say unto me, Live.
Since no eye pitieth me to do any good unto me, open thine heart, and let thy
bowels yearn toward me: Let this time be my time of love; spread thy skirt
over me, and cover all my nakedness: Enter into a covenant with me, and enable
me to become thine for ever. Since thou beholdest all the wants and necessities
of my poor soul, open thine hand and supply all my spiritual need. There is
bread enough, and to spare, in the Fathers house, O let not my dying soul
perish for hunger. Open thine ears and hear the prayers and supplications
which thy servant pours out before thee night and day. Thou have the key of
David, and openest, and no man shuts. Open the iron gate of my heart (which
will never open of its own accord) that the King of glory may enter in. Thou
did open the rock, and cause it to send forth water; Bow the heavens and come
down; Break open this rockie heart, and come in, and take an effectual,
universal, eternal possession of my soul. Consider thy bottomless mercy,
Christ's infinite merits, my unspeakable misery, and let thine heart be opened
in pity, and thine hand in bounty, that my lips may be opened, and my mouth
may everlastingly show forth thy praise.

Only in thy prayers be instant, constant, and look up to Jesus Christ. Beg
hard (though humbly) when thou art begging for heaven.

Have thou never heard a Malefactor condemned to be hanged, begging for a
reprieve or pardon? with what tears and prayers, what bended knees, watered
cheeks, strained joints, he entreats for his mortal life! Thou have much more
cause to be earnest, when thou art begging for spiritual life. Think of it; thy
soul, thy eternal condition, are engaged and at stake in thy prayer: O how
should all the parts and faculties of thy body and soul work and unite in
prayers that are of such concernment? What fervencie should thou use,
considering that if thou art denied thou art undone! if thy prayers be lost,
thy God is lost, thy soul is lost, thy happiness is lost for ever.

Pray constantly, resolve to give God no rest day nor night, till he give thee
rest in his Son: Besides set times every day (for which thou can not offer so
little as two hours a day, it being soul-work, God-work, eternitie-work, and in
which I would desire thee to be as serious and solemn as is possible) thou
may often in the shop, or in the field, in thy journying, on thy bed, thou
may turn up thy heart to heaven, in some ejaculations (it is thy great
privilege where ever thou art, thou may find ^od out) such as these, O when
will thou come unto me? Psa. 101.2.
Hear me speedily, O my God, make no tarrying. Ps. 40.17.
Shall I never be made clean good Lord? when shall it once be! Save me Master
or I perish.

But be sure in all thy addresses to God thou look up to Jesus Christ as thine
Advocate with the Father, as the only Master of requests, to present and
perfume all thy prayers, and thereby make them prevalent. Through him we have
access with confidence unto the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. It is possible thou may
have seen a Child going to be scourged for its faults by a stern Mother, the
tender Father sitting by, and how the Child seeing the rod taken down, and the
Mother in earnest, casts a pitiful lamentable look upon its Father, both
longing and expecting to be saved by his mediation. Go thou and do likewise;
and know for thy encouragement, that if David heard Joah (whom he loved but
little) for rebellious Absalom; and if Herod heard Blastus a servant for those
of Tire and Sidon, who had offended him, then without doubt God will hear the
Son of his infinite love for thee. And if thou art but sensible of thy
soul-sicknesse, thou may be confident, that thy spiritual Physician (who is
authorized by his Father to practice, and delights exceedingly in the
employment) will come and heal thee; thy sickness shall not be unto death, but
for the glory of God and thine eternal good.

I shall in the next place only annex three properties of this spiritual life,
as motives to encourage thee to a laborious endeavoring after it, Si daretur
mihi optio, eligerem Christiani rustici agreste opus, praeomnibus victoriis
Alexandri Magni and ^ulii Caesaris. Luth. in Genesis 39.
and then leave both thee and this exhortation to the blessing of God.

First, This spiritual life is the most honorable life. No life has so much
excellency in it, as the life of godliness. If I had my wish, says Luther, I
would choose the homely work of a rustical Christian before all the victories
of Alexander the great, and Julius Caesar. The excellency and dignity of
every life depends upon the form, which is its principle, and its
specificating difference. Therefore the life of a man is more noble than the
life of a beast, because it has a more noble form, a rational soul, which
distinguishes it specifically from, and enableth it to act more nobly and
highly than a beast. And truly, therefore the life of a Christian is more
honorable and excellent than the life of any other man, because he has a more
noble form (which is the principle of it, and differenceth it specificallie
from the life of graceless men) Jesus Christ the Lord of life and glory
dwelling in his heart, by his Spirit, as the principle of his spiritual life.
If there be an excellency in that body which is united to a soul, what
excellency is there in that soul which is united to a Savior? It is called
the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. Surely no life can be more honorable than the life
of God; yet in their measure the sanctified ones live the very same life that
the glorious God (the fountain of all true honor) lives. David, though a King,
thought himself honored by being Gods subject; and therefore as others before
their works mention those titles which belong to them, and speak their honor,
David styles himself before the six and thirtieth Psalm a servant of God, as
his most honorable title, Constantine and Valentinian, two Emperors, subscribed
themselves Vasallos Christi. Socr.
A Psalm of David a servant of the Lord. If it be such an honor to serve an
Earl, a King, what is it to serve the King of Kings and Lord of Lords?

Godliness is called a walking with God, Genesis 5.24. a conversing or having
fellowship with the Father, and Jesus Christ his Son, 1 John 1.3. For God to
walk and converse with us, is his greatest humiliation; but for us to walk or
converse with God, is our highest exaltation.

The righteous, says the wise man (who had judgment to set a due price upon
persons) is more excellent then his neighbor, Prove. 12.26. Let him live by
never so rich or great men, yet if they want grace, they are not comparable to
him.

Sumus Domini non tantum in Genitivo singulari; sed etiam in Nominativo
plurali. Luth.
The godly man has the most honorable birth, he is born of God, John 1.13. the
most honorable breeding, he is brought up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord; the most honorable Tutor and Teacher, the good Spirit of God, John 14.16.
the most honorable Attendants, the glorious Angels; the most honorable
employment, his main work is to wait upon God.

The most honorable Relations: A King for his Father, 2 Cor. 6. ult. A Queen
for his Mother, Gal. 4.26. The excellent of the earth, Psalm. 16.3. Lords in all
Lands, Psalm. 45.16. Higher then the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27. Those
Worthies, of whom the world is not worthy, for his Brethren, Hebr. 11.

Numa second King in Rome, though an Heathen, could say, That he held it an
higher honor to serve God, then to rule over men.

The Jews say, That those seventie souls which went down into Egypt, were more
worth then all the seventie Nations of the world beside. If the glorious Angels
in heaven are more honorable than the Devils, sure I am, it is holiness that
makes the difference.

The most gaudy and goodly fruits of morality, springing from the soil of
nature manured and improved to the utmost; The Heavens bespangled with those
glittering Stars, and adorned with that illustrious Sun, are nothing glorious
in comparison of the heart of a poor Christian that is embroidered with grace.
It is godliness alone that adds worth and value to all our civil and natural
things, as the Diamond to the Ring. Nothing does really debase and degrade a
man but sin; and nothing does truly advance or innoble the soul but holiness.
Job scraping himself on the dunghill, and Jeremiah sinking in the mire, were
more honorable and glorious, than Ahab and Ahaz on their Thrones with their
Crowns. If the respect we have from others makes us honorable, then they that
are most precious in Gods sight are most honorable, Isai. 43.4. If it be some
internal excellency that makes men honorable, then they that have the Image of
God must be most honorable.

It is worthy our observation; that sin is so ignoble and base, that those
wicked ones, who love it most, are ashamed to own it openly; but because of the
excellency of holiness, will set that forth for their colors, their banners,
though indeed they fight Satan's battles: That forlorn hope for hell, 2 Timothy
3.5. of covenant-breakers, blasphemers, men without natural affection, yet they
will have a form of godliness; though they do sins drudgery, yet they are
ashamed of their base master, and therefore wear the Saints livery, having a
form of godliness. Nay the Devil himself will appear in Samuel's mantle, and
transform himself into an Angel of light.

But holiness is so excellent that God is pleased to esteem it as his own
beauty and glory. How often is he called The holy One of Israel? The Angels
ascribe holiness to him by way of eminency; Holy, Holy, Holy, Isai. 6.3. (we
read not in Scripture of any of Gods other Attributes thrice repeated, to show
that the Dignity of God consists in this) And so do the Saints in heaven
praise him for it as his Excellency, Rev. 6.10. and the Saints on earth, Exodus
15.11. Holiness is the character of Jesus Christ; The Image of the infinitely
glorious God; nay, it is called the divine nature: Surely then they that have
most of it are most honorable; and they which want it, how full soever they are
of all other excellencies, are base and contemptible.

Secondly, As this spiritual life is most honorable, so it is most comfortable.
There is no life so pleasant and delightful as the life of a Saint. The merry
grigs, and jolly gallants of the world (whose sinful mirth is worse than
madness) will needs tell us, that godliness makes men mopish and melancholy;
that when once we salute Religion, we take our leave of all delight and
consolation; whereas indeed there never was true peace born, but it had purity
for its parent. All other is spurious and illegitimate. But the world, like the
Primitive Persecutors, put Christians into the skins of Bears and Bulls, and
then bait them, as if they were really such. And the hand of the Devil is in
all this, who like the Indians, makes great fires to fright Mariners from
landing at such Coasts as would be most for their comfort and contentment.
Believe (Reader) the true and faithful Witness, His ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all his paths are peace, Prove. 3.17. It is not sanctity, but
their want of it, or mistake about it, which makes them sorrowful.

It is confessed Saints may be sad; they do not cease to be men when they begin
to be Christians. It was in thy company (it may be) O sinner: No wonder. Fish
cannot sport themselves when they are out of their element. Birds do not sing
on the ground, but when they are mounting on high toward heaven. And probably
their hearts were heavy out of compassion to thee, whom they observed to be
hastening to hell, and dancing merrily over the very pit or destruction and
easeless misery. Thou see their sorrows sometimes, thine eyes may behold
their tears, but thou do not see their joys, thy heart cannot conceive them.

Saint Aust^ne relates concerning an heathen that showed the father his idol
gods, saying, Here is my God, where is thine? and then pointing up to the Sun,
he said, Here is my God, but where is thine? I showed him not my God, says
Austine, not because I had none to show, but because he had no eyes to see him.
Thus the joys of a Saint are invisible to the wicked because they are inward,
spiritual joys, though they are joys unspeakable and glorious. Austines confess.

They have such joy as thou art not to intermeddle with, Prove. 14.10. They have
meat to eat which thou know not of. Their life is an hidden life, Col. 3.3.
and their comforts are hidden comforts; their secret meals fatten their souls,
and their bread eaten in secret how pleasant is it?

The kingdom of God, which is this spiritual life, consists not in meats and
drink, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.
And besides, it comes not with observation, Luke 17.20. the world takes no
notice of it. It does not consist in the laughter of the face, in the smiles of
the brow, but in the tranquillity of the mind, solid contentment in the breast.

Christ takes his Spouse apart from the crowd of the world, and then gives her
the sweetest kisses, the dearest embraces, yea her very fill of love. Many a
loving visit has the Saint from his Savior; when Christ came in at the
backdoor, the neighbors neither saw when he came, nor when he went away. A true
Christian has the most heart-chearing wine, though he hangs out no bush,
makes no show of it in the world; the wealthy Merchant that is worth
thousands, does not cry his commodities up and down the City.

The parlor wherein the spirit of Christ entertains the Christian, is an inner
room, not next the street for every one that goes by to smell the feast; the
stranger does not meddle with his joy, Prove. 14.10. Christ and the soul may sit
at supper within, Mr. Gurnal Arm. 2 part. page, 343.
and thou not see one dish go in, nor hear the Music that sounds so sweetly in
the Christians ears. Perhaps thou think he wants peace, because he does not
hang out a sign in his countenance of that peace and joy within. Alas poor
wretch! may not the Saint have a peaceful conscience with a solemn, yea sad
countenance, as well as thou and thy companions have a sorrowful heart, when
there is nothing but fair weather in your faces?

Whether they have the greatest comfort or no, do thou judge. Sure I am, there
are none in this world that have so much ground to be comfortable as they have.
They have the most delightful company, they walk with God, they suppe with
Christ; their fellowship is with the Father and Jesus Christ his Son, which is
the only good fellowship, 1 John 1.3. They have the most delightful food; they
eat of the bread that came down from heaven, and drink of that love which is
better than wine. Psalm. 36.8*
They are abundantly satisfied with the fatness of Gods house, and made to
drink of the rivers of his (own) pleasures, and are bidden welcome, with eat, O
friends, drink abundantly, O beloved. These are exceedings indeed, but (if it
be not their own fault) they have them often, besides their every hours fare of
a good conscience which is a continual feast. They have the most delightful
Music, they hear the joyful sound of the Gospel of peace, the glad tidings of
pardon, adoption, salvation, and so may rejoice in hope of glory; many a time
surely their hearts are warmed, and their ears ravished at the hearing of the
affection which Christ bears to them, and the benefits he has bought for
them. They have the most delightful lodging; they lie all night between Christ's
arms, in the chamber of the great King; They have the richest mercies, the
special love of the Father, the precious blood of the Son, and the divine
graces of the spirit; when others have only the blessings of the footstool, of
the left hand, such giftless gifts (as one calls them) as may consist with an
eternal separation from God; they have the mercies of the throne, of the right
hand, the blessings of his own children, and such as do accompany salvation. No
wonder that they sit under Christ's shadow with great delight and his fruit is
sweet unto their taste, Can. 2.3.

The child of God by virtue of a good conscience, in the midst of the waves of
affliction, is as secure as that child which in a shipwreck was upon a plank
with his mother till she awaked him then securely sleeping, and then with his
pretty countenance, sweetly smiling, and by and by sportingly asking a stroke
to beat the naughty waves; at last when they continued boystrous for all that,
sharply chiding them as if they had been his play-fellows. O the innocence! O
the comfort of peace of conscience, Dr. Stoughton.

It is likely indeed that when they wander from Christ they may come home by
weeping-cross (as out-lying Deer are full of fear; and therefore it is observed
seldom fat) but they run the ways of Gods commandments with enlarged hearts.
And what ever be the cause of their sorrow, whether their own sins, or thine,
or others, or the afflictions of the church, whatever it be, their mourning is
better then the carnal mirth.

And this I dare undertake for them, that in their most disconsolate condition,
they shall not change with the most prosperous Prince in the world that is out
of Christ. Alas, the comfort of a sinner as it is but short, like the crackling
of thorns under a pot, so it is but shallow, skin deep at most, like a sudden
storm of rain which wetteth the surface of the earth, Caeterae hilaritates non
implent pectus, sed frontem re^mittunt. Sen. epi. 23
but never sinketh to the root; their joy may smooth the brow, but cannot warm
the breast; their looks may be sometimes lively, but their hearts are always
heavy; For there is no peace to the wicked says my God, Isa. 57.20. Their
mirth is like some juicy plumbs which have stones with a bitter kernel. The
stateliest and best accommodated houses of unsanctified men, I is not the great
cage that makes the bird sing, nor the great estate that brings real comfort.
are but like the nests of Wasps, where there may be curious combs, but no
honey; many outward mercies, but no true inward mirth, no sweetness: when the
voice of joy and salvation is in the tabernacles of the righteous, Psalm.
118.15. They only have the strong consolations, Heb. 6.18. The joy unspeakable
and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. The peace of God which passes all understanding, to
garrison their hearts and minds through Christ Jesus, Phil. 4.7.

As they have more afflictions than others (the disciple of Christ must take up
his cross) so they have more consolations than others; and their soul comforts
are not seldom the sweetest when their bodily crosses are greatest (as the
sweetest Roses grow nearest the most stinking weeds) although the blind world
see them not. As a man standing, says a Divine, upon the seashore, sees a
great heap of waters, one wave riding upon the neck of another, and hears
loud roarings thereof, but though he sees the waters, yet he does not see the
wealth, the infinite riches, that lie buried in them: So wicked men see the
waters, the afflictions, the conflicts, but not the wealth, the comforts, the
inward joy of the children of God.

Thirdly, as this spiritual life is the most honorable and comfortable, so it
is the most profitable life: no calling brings in such advantage as
Christianity; godliness is profitable unto all things, 1 Timothy 4.8. There is an
universal gainfulness in real godliness. Plutarch tells us that the
Babylonians make above three hundred several commodities of the Palm Tree; but
there are many thousand benefits which godliness brings; no Merchant ever had
his vessels returned so richly laden, as he that tradeth heavenward.

Observe Reader, after the Apostles affirmation, his full confirmation of it.
Godliness (says he) is profitable unto all things; It has the promise of this
life, and that to come, i. e. It has heaven and earth entailed on it; and
therefore it must needs be profitable. It gives the Christian much in
possession, the promise of this life; but infinitely more in reversion, the
life that is to come.

The promises of God are exceeding great (for their quantity) and precious (for
their quality) promises, and they all belong to a godly man, he is called an
heir of the promises, Heb. 6.17. Whenever the tree of the Scripture is
shaken, whatsoever fruit of those precious promises falls down, it falls
into the lap of a godly man. If at any time that box of costly ointment be
broken, and sends forth its fragrant sent and virtue, it is to the
refreshment only of the Saints.

Godliness is profitable to thy self; If thou art wise thou art wise for thy
self; and if a scorner thou alone shall bear it, Prove. 9.12. The sinner is no
bodies foe so much as his own; the murdering pieces of sin which he discharges
against God, miss their mark, but do constantly recoyle and wound himself. The
Saint is no bodies friend so much as his own; others fare the better for his
great stock of grace; but the propriety in all the comfort of all, and the
profit by all is his own. It enables him to give away the more at his door, but
how rich a table does he thereby keep for himself?

Godliness is profitable for thy children: the just man walks in his
integrity and his children are blessed after him, Prove. 20.7. personal piety is
profitable to posterity, yet not of merit but mercy. Though grace come not by
generation, but donation, and though God has mercy on whom he will; yet the
seed of the Saints are visibly nearer the quickening influences of the spirit,
then the children of others. When God says, he will be a ^od to the godly man,
and his children. I believe he intends more in that promise for the comfort
of godly parents, then most of them think of. Acts 2.36. Genesis 17.7. The
children of believers are heirs apparent to the covenant of grace in their
parents right; Godliness is profitable in prosperity; it gives a spiritual
right to temporal good things; a gracious man holds his mercies in capite, in
Christ (that is his tenure) as Christ is a coheir of all things, he being
married to him by this spiritual life, is a coheir with him; he enjoys
earthly things by an heavenly title; and one penny enjoyed by special promise,
is far more worth than millions which ungodly men enjoy by a general
providence, as the beasts of the field do their provender: It is godliness that
causes a sanctified improvement of mercies. Grace alone like Christ turns
water into wine, corporal mercies into spiritual advantages. The more God oiles
the wheels, the more cheerfully and swiftly he moves in the way to heaven; the
more showers of heaven fall down upon him, the more fruitful and abundant he is
in the work of the Lord, as we see in that gracious King Iehosophat, 2 Chronicles.
17.5, 6. The Lord established the Kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought
presents unto him, and he had riches and honor in abundance; and his heart was
lift up in the ways of God. Mark, the more Gods hand was enlarged in bounty,
the more his heart was enlarged in duty. The more highly God thinks of David,
the more lowly he thought of himself, 2 Samuel 7.18. Outward mercies to a
believer are a ladder by which he mounteth up nearer to heaven. Thus godliness
like the Philosophers stone, turns iron and every thing into gold; but the
want of this spiritual life causes a cursed hellish use of mercies; ungodly
men like the spider suck poison out of those flowers, out of which the Bees,
the Saints suck honey. Their mercies are like cordials to a foul stomach, which
do but increase the peccant humor. He feeds on such plenty that he surfeits
himself, because of their abundance, Job 21.7, 8, 9, to 14. Therefore they say
unto the Almighty, Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways; like the Israelites, they make of the jewels which God gives, a golden
Calf and worship that in stead of God.

Godliness is profitable in adversity; it makes a Christian like a Rabbit, to
thrive the better in frosty weather. The child of God learneth the better for
the rod; Before he was afflicted he went astray, but now he keeps Gods word,
Psalm. 119.67. Well may grace be called the divine nature, for it can bring not
only light out of light, spiritual comfort and good out of outward good
things, but also light out of darkness, good out of evil, gain out of losses,
life out of death. It will like Sampson, fetch meat out of the eater like the
Ostrich digest stones, like Mithridates fetch nourishment out of poison. When
wicked men like Ahaz in their distress, sin more against the Lord; as fire the
more it is kept in, in an Oven, the more it rages, so does corruption; but
godly men far otherwise are by the fire of affliction the more refined and
purified for their masters use.

Godliness is profitable to thee while thou live; In doubts it will direct
thee as a light to thy feet, and a lanthorn to thy paths; In dangers it will
protect thee, by setting thee on high, and giving thee for a place of defense
the munition of rocks; in wants it will supply thee by affording thee bread in
the word, when thou have none on the board; and money in the promise, 1 Timothy
4.8. (which is by thousands the better) when thou have none in thy purse; in
thy pain it will ease thee; in disgrace It will honor thee; in sorrows it will
comfort thee; in sickness it will strengthen, by causing thee to count the
crosses of this life as nothing, and unworthy to be compared to the pleasures
and glory which shall revealed; in all distresses it will support thee, and
make thee more then a conqueror over all, through him that loves us, Romans 8.37.

Lastly, godliness will be profitable to thee when thou die; death which is
the terrible of terribles to others, will be the comfortable of comfortables to
thee. Thou need never fear ill news in thine ears, having Christ and grace
in thy heart; others shall not be such unspeakable loosers by death, but thou
shall be as great a gainer.

When thou lie on thy death bed (where all thy friends and riches, and
earthly comforts will fail thee) this spiritual life is the good part which
shall never be taken from thee) Thou may look upward, and see (as it were)
God smiling on thee in the face of Christ, and hear him call to his angels to
go and fetch thee his child (who have been all this while at nurse) home to
the fathers house. Thou may look downward on thy relations, and with much
faith and cheerfulness commit thy fatherless children to God, and bid thy
weeping widow trust in him, who will be infinitely better to them than ten
thousand of the richest tenderest fathers and husbands in the world. Thou may
look without thee into Scripture, and behold it as a garden full of sweet
flowers, comforting cordials, refreshing, heart-reviing promises; and though it
be an enclosure to others, its open and free to thee; thou may pick and
choose, cull and gather where thou please, and needst not fear to be chidden.
In the multitude of those perplexing thoughts which at that time may be within
thee. thou may find choice comforts there to refresh thy spirit. If thou
look within thee, thou shall not have thy conscience like an unquiet wife
frowning on thee, and scolding at thee; but thou shall hear a little bird
singing merrily and sweetly in thy breast, Lord, Now let thou thy servant
depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have seeen thy salvation.

How joyful may thou leave thy dearest wife, to go to thine infinitely dearer
husband? How willingly may thou forsake thy lovely children, to go to thy
loving God and Father? How freely may thou part with all thy friends, honors,
and pleasures, to go to the Congregation of the firstborn, those rivers of
pleasures, and eternal weight of glory! How cheerfully may thou bid adieu to
nothing for all things, to stars and streams (at best) for a full, immediate,
eternal enjoyment of the Sun himself, of an immense Ocean of happiness! With
what a lively color in thy face and true comfort in thy heart may thou
behold that pale-faced messenger death (the thought of whom though a far off is
death to others) entering into thy Chamber, and coming up to thy bedside, how
heartily welcome may thou bid him, as knowing that he comes purposely to
give thee actual possession of fullness of joy, unspeakable delights, a Kingdom
of glory that is eternal in the heavens! O the gain of godliness, the profit of
piety, surely the price of this pearl is scarce known in this world!

A Merchant will in a morning gain five hundred pound by a bargain, whereas
poor people work hard a whole day for a shilling; such a rich trade drives the
godly man; godliness brings in thousands and millions at a clap, when the
moral and civil, yet unsanctified man may work hard, and yet earn but some poor
business, some outward blessing God may give them and his eternal wrath at
last.

Now Reader, consider, if here be not abundant encouragement for thee,
presently and diligently to labor for this spiritual life. Is it not the
gainfullest calling that ever was followed, the richest trade ever was driven?
Why do thou spend thy strength for what is not bread, and thy labor for that
which will not satisfy? Hearken to me, and eat thou that which is good, and
let thy soul delight it self in fatness.

As Saul said to his servants, Hear now ye Benjamites, will the son of Jesse
give you fields, and vineyards, and make you all captains of thousands, and
captains of hundreds? 1 Samuel 22.7. So say I to thee, hearken O friend, will a
sensual fleshly life give thee such honor, as to be the son of the infinite
God, such comfort as to drink of the pure rivers of Gods own pleasures, and
will it make thee bold at death, and confident at judgment, an heir of heaven,
and so happy in every condition? Can it do this? Can it give thee (as godliness
can) so much in hand, and infinitely more in hope? If it can, I will give up my
cause and leave thee to thy choice; but if it cannot, as doubtless thou art
convinced, so (unless thou art an Heathen among Christians) why do thou
labor so much and so eagerly for the pampering and pleasing thy flesh, for the
food that perishes, and so little and so lazily for this food, which will
endure unto everlasting life?

It was an excellent answer of one of the Martyrs, when he was offered riches
and honors if he would recant; Do but offer me somewhat that is better than my
Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall see what I will say to you.

Reader, Could the world, or the flesh, show thee any thing that were equal,
nay, that were but ten thousand degrees inferior to Christ and godliness, thou
might have some color for thy gratifying the flesh, and unwillingness to
walk after the Spirit; but when the disproportion is so vast, that the one is
not worthy in the least to be compared with the other; when the difference is
as great, as between a sea of honey and a spoonful of gall; a whole world of
pearls and a little heap of dirt; an heaven of happiness and an hell of
horror: Is it not unconceivable madness, and inexcusable folly, to choose that
life which is after the flesh, and refuse that which is after the Spirit?

Reader, if thou would be truly honorable in the esteem of God himself, who
is the fountain of all honor: If thou would have those spiritual
consolations, which can warm the heart in the coldest night of affliction: If
thou would be profitable to thy dear children, to thy own soul; be a real
gainer in prosperity, in adversity, while thou live, when thou dyest: If thou
would when thy wealth, and friends, and flesh, and heart shall fail thee,
have God in Christ to be the strength of thy heart, and thy portion for ever:
If thou would in thy greatest extremity, when thy soul shall be turned (naked
of all earthly delights) out of thy body, escape the fury of roaring Devils,
and unquenchable burnings: If thou would in that hour of thy misery find
mercy, and be received into the place of endless bliss; then get this
spiritual life, this true wisdom, to fear God and depart from evil: Get wisdom,
get understanding, forget it not; above all thy gettings get wisdom. Happy is
the man that finds wisdom, and the man that gets understanding: For the
merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof than fine gold. She is more precious than rubies, and all the things
thou can desire are not to be compared to her. Length of days is in her
right hand; and in her left hand riches and honor. Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. She is a tree of life to all that
lay hold upon her; and happy is every one that retains her, Prove. 3.13, 14,
15, 16, 17, 18.

ANd now, Reader, I have done this large Use of Exhortation, which is of such
infinite concernment to thy precious soul; but what thou will do, or what use
thou will make of it, I know not. Could I have told what other holy bait to
have laid, which had been more likely to have caught thy soul, it is probable I
should have la^d it. I appeal to thy conscience, whether t^ere be not
unspeakable weight, and unquestionable truth, in the particulars which are laid
down. Well what say thou to them, and what effect have they wrought upon
thee? Art thou resolved through the help of heaven, speedily and diligently to
practice the directions, which I have from the Almighty God enjoined thee? Is
it not a thousand thousand pities, that such endless, matchless happiness
should be so graciously offered by God, and so unworthily neglected by men!
that an empty, perishing world should be so eagerly pursued, and heartily
embraced, when the unsearchable riches in Christ, the Image of the blessed God,
eternal weight of Glory, are basely undervalued, and wretchedly despised! Good
Lord, what tears of blood are sufficient to bewail this monstrous
unthankfulness. Friend, if thou art truly resolved to obey the counsel of God,
thou will have cause to bless that Providence which called me to this task;
and I may rejoice in thee, and thou in me, at the day of Christ. But if thou
either delayest the work till thou art more at leisure; or dalliest about it,
doing it as if thou did it not, I am sure the greatest wrong will be to thy
self; for behold thou sinnest against the Lord, and be confident, thy sins will
sooner or later find thee out.

I come in the next place to my last Use, which will be of consolation. If they
who have Christ for their life, shall have gain by their death, what comfort is
here to the new born Creature! Here is wine indeed to make glad the heart of
every one that is holy. Reader, art thou sanctified and alive in Christ? then
thou art freed from all the misery which is mentioned in the first Use, as the
portion of the ungodly. I may say to thee, as Gryneus, when he had been
reproving and threatening sinners, would, turning to the Saint, say; Bone vir,
hoc nihil ad te, Good man, all this is nothing to thee. Though they are losers,
thou shall be a gainer by death. Come but with the mouth of faith, and thou
may suck much honey from this comb, thou may draw much milk of consolation
from this breast; to thee to die shall be gain. Surely here is enough to
ballast thy soul, and keep it steady, in the most tempestuous condition, and to
balance and weigh down the greatest, the heaviest affliction.

Hierom comforted the Hermit that was in a wilderness sad and pensive,
Meditare coelum, and tam diu non eris in eremo.

If thou had hope only in this life, thou were of all men most miserable; but
because thou have hope beyond this life, thou may be of all men most
comfortable.

Should such a man as I fly? Nehem. 6.11. Should sucha a man as thou fear, that
art heir to a Crown, to a Kingdom? Luke 12.32. Fear not little flock, it is
your Fathers pleasure to give you a Kingdom. In thy greatest losses this may
support thee, that death will be thy gain, by giving thee possession of a life
which will make amends for all. If an heathen could say, It is unbecoming a
Roman spirit to cry out, I am undone, while Caesar was safe; sure it is more
uncomely for a Christian to complain, as if he were undone, when his soul is
safe, his eternal estate is secure.

For thy help, I shall digest this Use into this method briefly:

First to show thee against what it is comfortable.

Secondly, wherein it is comfortable.

For the first: It is comfortable first against the opposition of the world;
The world will hate thee, because thou art not of the world, John 15.19. She is
a Paradise to her children and lovers; but a Purgatory to aliens and strangers.
Whilst thou art in the stormy sea of this world, thou art a ship bound for the
Streights. He that goes toward the Sun, shall have his shadow following him;
but he that goes from it shall have it fly before. He that goes toward the
Sun of Righteousness shall be sure to have these shadows, these afflictions at
his heels.

Infinite Wisdom sees fit to imbitter the breasts of the creatures to wean
thee from them. Trouble upon earth is one legacy which thy Savior has left
thee: In the world ye shall have trouble, John 16. ult. The Soldiers were to
have his garments. Joseph was to have his body. His Father was to have his
soul. He had his cross left, and that he bequeaths to his Disciples. But be of
good cheer, he did not only leave thee his cross, but has also made thee heir
to a Crown.

He never looked over the threshold of Heaven, Bish. Hall, Heaven upon e^rth,
Sect. 14.
that cannot more rejoice that he shall be glorious, than mourn in present that
he is miserable.

Oppose thy future felicity to thy present misery, thy happiness at death to
the hardships thou meetest with in life; thi^ will be the way to counterpoise
the temptation, and to keep thee from fainting in tribulation, whilst thou
look not at the things which are seen, which are temporal, but at the things
which are not seen, which are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.

I have read of one Giacopo Senzaro an Italian, who having been long in love,
and much crossed about his match, filled a pot full of black stones, only one
white stone among them, and being asked the reason, answered, There will come
one white day (meaning his marriage day) which will make amends for all my
black days. So whatsoever poverty, nakedness, hunger, cold, pain, shame,
losses thou undergoest here in this world, how many soever thy black days are
of trials and troubles, of persecutions and opposition, thou may say, there
is one white day of death, one long day of eternity coming, which will make
amends for all.

It was a brave speech of Luther, when he was demanded, where he would be when
the Emperor should with all his forces fall upon the Elector of Saxony, who
was the chief Protector of Protestants? He answered, Aut in coelo, aut sub
coelo, either in heaven, or under heaven.

Why should thou be discouraged at any loss, considering thou have a
treasure in heaven, a more enduring substance? At any disgrace, considering
thou art heir to a Crown of glory? At any pain or sorrow, when thou art
entitled to fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore?

No storm should disquiet thee, that shall shortly enjoy an everlasting calm.
What a pitiful thing was it, that Alexander, that was Lord almost of the world,
should be troubled that Ivy would not grow in his garden at Babylon? And is it
not a poor thing for thee, that art a Child of God, the Spouse of Christ, the
Temple of the Spirit, an Heir of the most glorious, rich, and delightful
Kingdom that ever was, to lie whining and pining if thy head do but ache, or thy
estate decrease, or thy friend forsake thee? For shame remember who thou art,
and to what thou art called, and say as the Martyr, Hold out Faith and
Patience, your work is almost at an end: Thou shall ere long leave this world,
and all its evils, and go where there is neither sorrow nor sin; and indeed
there can be no affliction there, because there will be no corruption there,
which is the original of all miseries. As there cannot be any thunder or
lightning in the upper Region, because the vapors, which are the materials of
it, cannot ascend so high: So because no unclean thing can be there, therefore
no sorrow, no suffering, can be there.

How may this comfort thee? Basil tells us, Basil (...).
how the Martyrs that were cast out naked in a winters night, being to be
burned the next day, solaced their souls with these words; Sharp is the cold,
but sweet is Paradise: Troublesome is the way, but pleasant shall be the end of
our journey: Let us endure cold a little, and the Patriarchs bosom shall soon
warm us: Let our feet burn a while, that we may dance for ever with Angels.

2. It is a comfort against the temptations of the Devil. Whilst thou live in
this world, thou art liable to his wiles. If thou will go to heaven, so
boundless is his malice, that he raises all the powers of hell against thee,
and forces thee to fight every foot of the way. He is the strong man that has
full possession of carnal unregenerate ones, and therefore all is at peace with
them. Matthew. 12. What need a Captain bend his Forces against a Town which has
delivered up it self into his hands? What need he plant his Canons and
batteries against these gates which are already set open to him? This Jailer
does not trouble himself much about those prisoners which are fast in his
dungeon, with his irons on their legs, and are led captive by him at his will,
1 Timothy 2.26. But for thee who have by the help of Christ broken prison, and in
part got out of his power, he raises all the Country with Hue and cry to bring
thee back to thy old place of bondage. But be comforted, Christ has conquered
him already in his own person as thy head; is daily conquering him in thee his
member by his Spirit; and will shortly crush him fully under thy feet, Romans
16.20. Paraeus in loc
Some refer that shortly to the day of judgment, which will come shortly, and
wherein Satan shall be utterly crushed under all the Saints feet for ever. And
it is as true of the day of death, in reference to every particular Saint. As
when a man dies, all those vexatious lawsuits, with which he was before
molested, do cease: So when the believer dies, all those false actions which
Satan had commenced against him in the court of his conscience, and all that
inward trouble which did arise thereupon do all cease.

It is no bad sign now, O Christian, (if thou resistest) that thou art
assaulted by the wicked one. A Theif will not break into an house that is
empty. A Pirate will not fight but for some considerable prize. A Father will
not seek to destroy his own Children. Temptation is no sign of Gods hatred but
of the Devils: But let this be thy solace, that within a few days thou shall
be at rest, not only from thy own labors, but also from Satan's snares and
suggestions. God does thee much good by them now; the noise of those guns
causes the Conies to hasten to their burrowes, and the Birds to their places
of refuge. The more the tops of sound trees are shaken with the wind, the more
deeply their roots are fixed in the earth: the more eagerly Satan follows
thee, the faster thou fliest, and the closer thou clingest to Jesus Christ. But
God will do thee the greatest good without them; and when that shall be, thou
shall be wholly freed from them. Since the Devils were cast out of Heaven, we
read of their being sometimes in the Sea, Matthew. 8.33. sometimes in the Earth,
Job 1.7. and sometimes in the Air, Ephesians. 2.3. and they are called Principalities
and spiritual wickednesses in high places, Ephesians. 6.12. but never in Heaven. They
aspire to get as high as they can, but they can get no further than the Air;
Satan and his Angels find no more place in heaven, Rev. 12.8.

Now what comfort is this, O Christian, that thou shall serve the Lord without
distraction, without temptations?

3. It is comfortable against the corruptions of thine own heart. What is it
now that is thy greatest sorrow? Is it not thy sin? These are the weights which
hang on the clock of thy heart, and will not suffer it to rest day or night.
Well, rejoice in hope; at death all these Achans, which are the troublers of
thy peace, shall be stoned to death; all these Jonahs, which cause such storms
in thy soul, shall be cast overboard; all these Hamans which seek the ruin of
thee and thy people, shall be executed.

Now it is thy great care in every Ordinance to kill thy sins. Do thou not
like Joab set the Uriah of thy beloved lust in the forefront of every duty,
and retire from it out of pious policy, that it may be slain? And when at any
time it pleases the Captain of thy salvation to send the supplies of his
Spirit, and wound mortally thy corruption, that it lies gasping and dying
before thee; do thou not look up to Christ and say (as Cushi to David
concerning dead Absalom) Would to God, that all the enemies of my Lord the
King, and all that rise against thee to do thee hurt were as that young man is.
Lord, that all my sins might drink of the same cup, and be served the same
sauce. Blessed be the Lord my God, which has avenged me this day of mine
enemy. If God should thrust the knife of mortification up to the haft, in the
very hearts of all thy sins, that thou could see thy pride, distrust,
unthankfulness, hardness of heart, and every corruption in a goar-blood,
fetching their last breath, would it not be a lovely sight to thee? Would
thou not look upon it, with as much content as Hannibal did upon a pit full of
the blood of men, when he cried out, O beautiful sight? O formosum specta culum!
Or as that Queen, that cried out, when she saw her Subjects lie dead before
her eyes, The goodliest tapestry that ever she beheld? At death all this shall
be done for thee. One touch of Jesus Christ at death will quite dry up that
issue of corruption. Death will give thee a Writ of ease from all those weights
and sins which do so easily beset thee. Thou shall be without fault before the
Throne of God, Rev. 14.5.

Will it not indeed be a brave world with thee in the other world, when thou
shall have as much holiness as thy heart can wish or hold? If God should grant
thee such a request upon earth, that thou should have as much of his Image
and of his Spirit as thou could desire, would thou not think thy self the
happiest man alive? I am confident thou would; and also that nothing less
than perfect purity would be thy prayer. Well, death will help thee to this;
When I awake I shall be satisfied with thy likeness, Psalm. 17. ult.

Now thou have enough to stay thy stomach, but then thou shall have a full
meal. When the Israelites went out of Egypt toward Canaan, there was not one
feeble person among them. When the Christian enters into the true Canaan, he
that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David, nay as the Angel of
the Lord before him.

When thy frame of nature shall be ruined, thy frame of grace shall be
perfected, and raised to the height of glory.

4. It is comfortable against thy dissolution. To thee to die is gain; death
will be thy passage into eternal life. Thou needst not fear death as a foe, it
will be one of thy best friends. How did this hope of happiness at death hold
up the Martyrs heads above water, and carry them through those boistrous waves
of violent and cruel deaths, with the greatest serenity and alacrity of spirit.

Xenophon.
Agesilaus King of Sparta used to say, that they which live virtuously, are not
yet blessed persons, but they had attained true felicity who died virtuously.

What is there in death, that thou art so afraid of it? Will thou fear a Be
without a sting? Do thou not know it had but one sting for Christ and
Christians, and that was left in Christ the head; whereby now, though it may
buz and make a noise about their ears, yet it can never sting or hurt the
members. The waters of Jordan, though tempestuous before, yet were calm and
stood still when the Ark was to pass over.

If thou had been banished many years from thy dear Relations, whom thou
lovedst as thy own soul, and from thy rich possessions and comforts which might
have made thy life pleasant and delightful, into a place of bondage, a valley
of tears, a prison where thy feet were fettered with irons, and thy face
furrowed with weeping: Mors non vitamrapit, sed reformat. Prudentius.
would thou be afraid of a messenger that came to knock off thy shackles, and
fetch thee out of prison and carry thee to those friends and comforts? And why
art thou afraid of death, which comes to free thee from thy bondage to Satan,
sin, and sorrow; and to give thee present possession of the glorious liberty of
the sons of God? Art thou afraid to be rid of thy corruptions? of Satan's
temptations? of the worlds persecutions? Art thou afraid to go to ^aints, where
are no sinners, to Christ without his cross, to the full immediate eternal
fruition of the blessed God? then why art thou afraid to dye, and do not
rather desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ; knowing that while thou
art present in the body, thou art absent from the Lord? 2 Cor. 5.6. Calvin in
loc. J^el was offended at one that in h s sickness prayed for his life.
Well the best of it is, thou art more afraid then hurt.

It is well observed by a judicious expositor, that the Periphrasis of death,
mentioned John 13.1. where it is called a departing out of the world and a
going to the father, does belong to all the children of God; it is to them but
a going out of the world to their dear and loving father. And questionless this
was that which made the Saints so desirous of death. Basil when the Emperors
Lieutenant threatened to kill him, said, I would he would, for then he would
quickly send me to my father, to whom I now live, and to whom I desire to
hasten. Calvin in his painful sickness was never heard to complain, but often
lifting up his eyes to heaven to cry out, How long Lord! How long Lord!

Plutarch. in vit.
It is reported of an heathen, Epaminondas, that when he was wounded with a dart
(at Mantinea in a battle against the Lacedaemonians) and told by the
Chirurgions that when the dart was drawn out of his body, Dicique beatus Ante
obitum nemo, etc.
he must needs dye, he called for his Squire, and asked him Whether he had not
lost his shield? Non est timendum quod nos liberat ab omni timendo. Tertull.
he told him no; whereupon he bade them pull out the dart, and so died. Surely
Christian, thou have more cause to dye with courage, when thou have not lost
thy God, nor thy soul, nor any thing that was worth the keeping.

5. It is comfortable against the death of thy friends, and relations which dye
in the Lord. To dye is gain; if it be their gain, why should it be thy grief?
nature will teach thee to mourn, but grace must moderate that mourning. We may
water our plants, but must not drown them. We may sorrow, but not as they which
have no hope, least we sin.

When Anaxagoras was told that both his sons were dead, he boldly answered the
messenger, I knew that I begat mortal creatures.

The people were enraged and perplexed at the death of Romulus, but were
afterward quieted and comforted with the news which Proculus brought, That he
saw him in glory riding up to heaven. So when thou art sorrowing for the death
of thy child or husband, or father, or mother, or brother, or sister, that
sleep in Jesus, thou should hearken to the news which faith brings, that it
saw them filled with joy, mounting up to heaven, and there enjoying rivers of
pleasures and a weight of glory; and surely if after such news thou should
continue weeping, it should be for joy.

Friend, this text contains choice sweet meats for thee to feed on, at the
funeral of thy dearest godly friend.

Lugeatur mortuus, sed ille quem gehenna suscipit, quem Tartarus devorat. Hier.
I suppose if thy relation died out of Christ, thou have not a little cause of
sorrow; and probably that was the sharp edge of the sword, which wounded the
soul of David for the death of Absalom, that he died in his sins; his fear was
that his son died not only in rebellion against the father of his flesh, but
also against the father of spirits. But when thy relation dies in the Lord,
thou have surely more cause to rejoice that thou ever had such a friend, or
relation, who shall to eternity be employed in the cheerful glorifying and
beatifical vision of God, then to mourn that thou have lost him for a little
time. It was a memorable speech of William Hunters mother, when her son was to
dye a violent death (for he suffered Martyrdom under Bonner) I am glad (says
she) that ever I was so happy as to bear such a child that can find in his
heart to lose his life for Christ; and then kneeling down on her knees, she
said, I pray God strengthen thee my son to the end; I think thee as well
bestowed as any child that ever I bore.

Take the counsel of the spirit not to sorrow as others, which have no hope;
and know this for thy comfort, that those which sleep in Jesus will God bring
with him; for the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall
rise first; then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up together
with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be
with the Lord; wherefore comfort one another with these words, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
to the end.

I shall show thee farther in what respects it is comfortable, and then
conclude.

1. It is comfortable if thou considerest the excellency of this gain; as David
said of Goliahs sword, so I may of this gain of a Saint by death, There is none
like it. In hist. Eccles.
Nicephorus tells us of one Agbarus a great man, that hearing so much of
Christ's fame, by reason of the miracles that he wrought, he sent a Painter to
take his picture, and that the Painter when he came was not able to do it,
because of the radiancy and divine splendour which sat on Christ's face; whether
this be true or no, I leave to the author; but without controversy, there is
such a radiancy on the glorified head and members in heaven that none can
conceive it, much less describe it.

There are three things which will speak a little how great the gain of every
godly man is by death.

1. The fore-tastes of it do show that it is excellent; Saints here have the
first fruits, Romans 8.23. and they do speak what the harvest will be.

The Jewish Rabbis report that when Joseph in the years of plenty had gathered
much corn in Egypt, he threw the chafe into the river Nilus, that so flowing
to the neighbor Countries, they might know what abundance was laid up for
themselves and others. So God is pleased that we might know the plenty in
heaven, to give us some sign, some taste of it here upon earth. He enableth us
to conclude, if his ways are ways of pleasantness, how pleasant will the end
be? If his people have songs in their pilgrimage, in their banishment; surely
they have Halelujahs in their Country, in their fathers house. If there be so
much goodness laid out upon them in this valley of tears, how infinite is that
goodness which is laid up for them in the masters joy?

Christian, Did thou never taste and see that the Lord is gracious? Did
thou never in thy closet enjoy fellowship with the father, and with Jesus
Christ his Son? Did thou never find one day in Gods Courts, nay one hour,
better then a thousand elsewhere? Did the Lord Jesus never call thee aside from
others, and carry thee into his banqueting house and cause his banner over thee
to be love? Did he never kiss thee with the kisses of his lips, and embrace
thee in his dearest arms? Have thou not sometimes seen the smiles of his face,
and found them better then life? And hearing his voice, known thy heart-burning
toward him with love? Do thou not remember at such a time he took thee up
into his Chariot, and gave thee a token for good, showing thee a glimpse of thy
future glory, solacing thy soul with a sense of his favor, ravishing thy heart
with hopes of thy eternal happiness, when thou did wonder exceedingly at the
creatures emptiness, and befool thy self for doting so much upon nothing, when
thou did see sin in its opposition and contrariety to the divine nature, and
thy own welfare, and did curse thy lusts with the most bitter curses, whereby
thou had offended so gracious a Lord; when thou did behold the Lord Jesus in
all his embroydery and glory! O how lovely was he in thine eyes! how sweet was
he to thy taste! how precious was he in thy esteem! how closely was thy soul
joined to him! how largely was thy spirit drawn out after him! how earnestly
did thou desire to be ever with him! when thou thoughtest what joy is there
in being with Christ, if there be so much in Christ's being with me! How happy
are they that enjoy the fountain, if some small streams are so pleasant! when
thou said, Master it is good to be here, Let us build a tabernacle! My soul
is filled with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful
lips. One thing do I desire of the Lord, that I may dwell in the house of the
Lord for ever and ever. This is the foretaste of glory, by this thou may
conceive what heaven will be. As Fulgentius when he beheld the beauty and
bravery, the glory and gallantry of Rome cried out, If earthly Rome be so
glorious, how glorious is heavenly Rome! Si talis est R ma terrestris, quatis
est Roma coelestis!
so thou may gather, if thou have so much joy when thou have heaven only in
hope, what joy shall thou have when thou shall have it in hand!

If the seed-time be so joyous, how great will the joy of harvest be! If the
promise can stay one that is ready to die, surely the performance will be
better then life from from the dead.

If Jerusalem below be paved with Gold, then questionless Jerusalem above is
paved with Pearl.

2. The price paid for it, speaks the excellency of it; where there is
honesty and righteousness in the seller, and wisdom in the buyer, there the
price of a thing will speak its worth. Now here there was infinite
righteousness in God the seller, and the treasures of wisdom and knowledge in
Christ the purchaser; therefore the price laid down for heaven will speak the
excellency of it: If the price were very great, the place must be very glorious.

Heven is called the purchased possession, Ephesians. 1.14. because it was bought
with the blood of the Son of God. Reader, wonder at this price, and at this
place, We are bold to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, Heb. 10.19.

When thou hear of a purchase on earth that costeth a hundred thousand
pound, or a million, would not thou presently conclude, Surely that must be
an incomparable seat for delight! what pleasant Springs! what stately rooms!
what curious contrivances! what unheard of excellencies must be there! without
question all things imaginable for riches, glory, and comfort. But when thou
read in Scripture of a purchase which cost the blood of God (to which all
the wealth in the world is as dirt, as nothing) sit down and consider what an
house, what an heaven that must be, if thou considerest God did infinitely love
his Son, and was not so prodigal of his blood, as to let one drop more be shed
then heaven was worth.

Besides can thou think that the Lord Jesus would humble himself to such a
contemptible birth, live such a miserable life, dye such a lamentable painful
death, to purchase low mean things or any thing less then eminent, excellent,
unspeakable, unconceivable happiness?

3. The titles given to it do abundantly speak the excellency of it. The holy
men of God do as it were strive for expressions and words to set out the glory,
richness, joy, magnificence of this gain.

To the weary, it is rest, Isa. 2.57. Rev. 14.13. To the hungry, it is hidden
manna, Rev. 2.17. To the thirsty, rivers of pleasures, Psalm. 36.8. To the
sorrowful, the joy of the Lord, Mat. 25.21. Fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. ult. To
the disgraced, Glory, Romans 8.18. A crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5.4. A far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. To them that walk in
darkness and see no light, it is the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col.
1.12. To them that are dying, it is life, Colos. 3.3. yea eternal life, John
10.28. It is a kingdom, Luk 12.32. A kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12.28.
Where all the inhabitants are Kings and Queens, Rev. 1.5. with palms and
scepters in their hands, Rev. 7.9. crowns on their heads, Iam. 2.5. sitting on
thrones, Rev. 3.21. and shall reign with Christ for ever and ever, Rev. 22.5.

It is a being in Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22. A being with Christ, Phil. 1.23.
A being ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. A seeing God as he is, 1 John 3.2. A
seeing God face to face, a knowing God as we are known of God, 1 Cor. 13.12.
And many more expressions does the spirit of God use to describe the excellency
of the Saints happiness; and why in such variety of phrases, but to assure us
that whatsoever is requisite or desirable in order ^o happiness it is there?
the holy Ghost does gather as it were a posie of the most sweet beautiful
pleasant choice flowers that grow in the whole garden of this world, and
tells us, this is heaven. Do but abstract all the imperfections that attend
the riches, and honor, and pleasures of earthly kindoms, and they may be dark
resemblances that shadow out the glory and excellency of the heavenly kingdom.
The Philosophers could say, That happiness must consist in such a state wherein
was an aggregation of all good things: So that though a man had all good
things, and wanted but one, he could not be called an happy man; therefore in
Scripture the Hebrew word for happiness is in the plural number, M^. Anthony
Burges on Ioh. 172.
because not twenty or forty things can make a man happy, but there must be
all good things; and for this reason the holy Ghost uses such variety of
resemblances to represent this blessedness, to show that it has all desirable
good things.

Reader, when thou art feeding on all those glorious descriptions of heaven
that are set before thee on the table of the Scripture, do not swallow them all
together, but chew them severally, and thou may get much spiritual
nourishment out of them. As for example, It is called the joy of thy Lord, or
the Masters joy, Mat. 25.21. Now what joy must that be? What infinite
unconceivable joy has the blessed God, the fountain of all joy, and the God of
all consolations! Thou shall partake of the very same joy according to thy
capacity; Thou shall sit at the same table, drink of the same cup, and feed on
the same dainties with his Majesty. Can it then enter into thy heart to imagine
either the pureness or fullness of thy Lords joy? Is not the best joy of the
servants on earth sorrow, and their greatest mirth mourning, to the Masters joy
in heaven? Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord; a joy too big to enter into us,
we must enter into it. A joy more meet for the Lord then the servant; yet such
a Lord do we serve as will honor his servants with his own joy.

Again, it is called a City whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11.10. Hence
thou may gather, That structure must be beautiful indeed which has such a
builder; what a glorious fabric must that be which has such a workman as he
is, who has infinite richness to adorn, infinite bounty to bestow, and
infinite power to erect? what a City must that be? If poor mortals can set up
such stately buildings, what a place, what a palace must that be, whose builder
and maker is God?

Besides, it is called the fathers house; here I might expatiate, and tell
thee, that great Princes have great seats often for their servants, but they
have glorious ones indeed for themselves; In their own houses they manifest all
their wealth and worth, their bounty and bravery, their honor and magnificence.
What an house then has the King of kings for his mansion house? If the several
excellencies of all the Princes palaces in the world were united in one,
suppose it had the foundations of marble, the floors of pearl, the cielings of
wrought gold; all the varieties of Babel, the glory of Solomon's house, the
richness of the temple at Jerusalem; suppose it had the stateliest rooms, the
pleasantest music, the greatest dainties, the richest furniture, that this
inferior world could afford; suppose all the choice perfections of the whole
creation here below, were extracted, and the quintessence of them all bestowed
upon it, yet after all this it would be but like an house of dirt made by
children, in comparison of the fathers house, of that house not made with hands
but eternal in the heavens. But Christian, I leave these titles to be
considered and enlarged in thy own meditations.

Secondly, it is comfortable if thou considerest the certainty of it. It is not
only excellent but certain; though it were never so excellent, yet if it were
not certain, it would be but little comfort; but know to the joy of thine
heart, that as heaven is a place of unspeakable excellency, so thy enjoyment of
it (O newborn creature) is of unquestionable certainty. It is worthy our
admiration, how many ways the most high God (out of condescension to our
capacities and compassion to our infirmities) does confirm and ensure this gain
by death to believers.

1. By his promise, Luke 12.22. Fear not little flock, it is your fathers
pleasure to give you a kingdom. So Ioh. 3.16. Now all the promises of God are
yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. They as good as performances. Not one good thing
fails of all the good things which the Lord promises, Josh. 23.14. But mark
(friend) one place for many, Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal life which God that
cannot lie has promised; ^ods people are a people that will not lie, Isa.
63.8. but God is a God that cannot lie; it is impossible for God to lie. Every
lie proceeds either from weakness, or from wickedness. Some are weak; they
would be as good as their words, but cannot; others are wicked; they can be as
good as their words but will not. Neither of these can be charged on the
blessed God; he is able to perform his promise, for he is the almighty God,
Genesis 17.1. I know that thou can do all things, says Job, Job 42.2.
Omnipotency never met with a difficulty too hard for it: the promises of ^od
will eat their way through all the Alps of opposition, because he is a ^od of
infinite power; and as he is able, and free from weakness, so he is righteous
and holy, and so free from wickedness; There is no unrighteousness in him, Psa.
92. ult. He is light and in him is no darkness at all, 1 Io. 1.5. There is not
the least spot in this Sun; His truth reaches unto the heavens, and his
faithfulness is above the clouds.

2. By an oath God has confirmed it, Omnia verba Dei sunt juramenta quoad
certitudinem, says Philo; sed infirmatatis nostrae causa ut si non credamus
De^ promittenti, credamus saltem pro nostra sa^us^ juranti.
Hebr. 6.17, 18. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of
promise the immutability of his counsel confirmed it by an oath; that by two
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have
strong consolation. Thou would take the word of a good man, and will thou not
take the word of a God? But wonder at his goodness; he tendereth further
security by his oath, nay by the greatest oath imaginable; having no greater to
swear by, he swear by himself, Hebr. 6.16.

3. By his Seals; we have the broad Seal of Heaven, the Seals of the Covenant,
to confirm this to us: The Sacraments are seals of the Covenant of Grace, Romans
4.11. And we have the privy Seal of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. So that if the hand
and seal of a God will do it, Heaven is ensured to all that are sanctified.

4. By an earnest, that makes a bargain sure: Who has sealed us, and given the
earnest of the spirit in our hearts, 2 Cor. 1.22.

When Christ went from us, he left his Spirit with us, to assure us, that he
would come to us; and took our flesh with him, to assure us, that we shall come
to him.

5. By first fruits, Romans 8.23. which did assure the Jews of their harvest.

6. By the death of Christ. Heaven is given to the holy by testament, by Will;
John 17.24. Father, I will (says the then dying Savior) that they whom thou
have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory. Now
because a Testament or Will is of no force whilst the Testator lives,
therefore Christ died to make his Will valid, Hebr. 9.16, 17.

Thirdly, it is comfortable if thou considerest the eternity of it. Though it
were never so excellent and certain, yet if it were for a short time only, it
would afford but little comfort. Nay, the greater our joy were in the
possession of it, the greater our sorrow would be in our separation from it.
The very thought of ever losing such incomparable happiness would be a deep
wound to a Christians heart, and without question abate much of his joy whilst
he did enjoy it. Nothing less than eternity can perfect the Saints felicity;
And lo here it is; thy gain is not only of unspeakable excellency, and
unquestionable certainty, but also durable even unto eternity.

The pleasures of the Saints are for evermore, Ps. 16. ult. The pleasures of
the wicked on earth are like a standing pool quickly dried up by the scorching
heat of Gods wrath, leaving nothing behind, save the mud of vexation: But the
pleasures of the godly in heaven are rivers of pleasures, running over, and
running ever, because they flow from the fountain of living waters.

The joy of the sinner is like the crackling of thorns under a pot; it may make
a busling noise, but quickly goes out; but the joy of a Saint will be like the
fire upon the Altar, which never goes out day nor night: Their joy shall no
man take from them, John 16.

The glory of a Christian there, will be an eternal weight of glory: the shame
of a Christian here is transitory, like a cloud upon the face of the Sun, which
will soon be scattered; and the honor of a graceless man here is short like a
fleeting shadow; Tacitus
as Sejanus was one day adored like a God, and a little after with the greatest
ignominy committed to the Goal. But the honor of a Christian there, is an
eternal noontide of glory; heaven is an everlasting home to the Saints, Luke
16.9. 2 Cor. 5.1. when their earthly tabernacles are dissolved, they enjoy the
building of God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens.

They enjoy the society of the good for ever; they sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, Mat. 8.11. Standing is a posture of
going, or at least of but staying little; but siting is a posture of staying
long. They shall enjoy God for ever; they shall ever be with the Lord, Angels
in the Syrisck have their name from a word wh ch signifies face, because ^t is
their honor and office alwa es to behold Gods face.
1 Thessalonians. 4. ult. The Saints shall in heaven be like Angels, Mat. 22.30. Now
Angels always behold the face of their Father, Matthew. 18.10. Now God sometimes
shows himself unto, and sometimes hides his face from his children; that a
godly man may say to Christ, as Jacob to his Wives, I perceive that thy fathers
countenance is not toward me as at other times, Genesis 31.5. Some sin or other,
like a cloud, interposeth and hinders the light of his gracious countenance;
but there will be no cloud, or mist of sin, and the Sun of Righteousness will
ever behold the soul with the same favorable aspect. And therefore the joy and
happiness of the Saint will be ever like the Moon at the full, because that
Sun will ever look upon him with the same lightsome countenance.

O what a long day will eternity be to the damned, and what a short day to the
saved? Eternal pain will make every moment seem eternity; eternal pleasure will
make eternity seem but a moment: the joys there will be so great and many,
that the days there will seem small and few; the delights there will spring
every moment so fresh and full, that a Christian, like Jacob, will think them
but few days for the love he will bear to them.

Reader, if thou art in Christ, ponder much in time, the eternity of pleasure
which is prepared for thee. Consider if there be so much felicity in seeing the
lovely face of God in the glass of his Ordinances for one hour, what will
there be when thou shall see him face to face, and always behold the face of
thy Father?

When Christ and thy soul meet sweetly in a duty on the Lords day, and thou
sit under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit is sweet unto thy
taste, thou think the duty is done too soon, and the Sabbath is too short;
thou could wish the Sun would stand still (as in the days of Joshua) and
that day to be longer; but be encouraged; though thy Sabbaths now begin and
end, yet within a few days thou shall begin that eternal Sabbath which shall
never end.

In his Epistle before Discourse of t ue happiness.
Certain it is (says Mr. Robert Bolton) that if a man were crowned with the
royal state, and imperial command of all the kingdoms upon earth; if his heart
were enlarged to the utmost of all created capacities, and filled with all the
exquisite and unmixed pleasures that the reach of mortality and most ambitious
curiosity could possibly devise, and might without any interruption or distaste
enjoy them the length of the worlds duration, they were all nothing to the
precious and peerless comforts of the Kingdom of Grace but for one hour; I
speak the truth in Christ, and use no Hyperbole; the Spirit of all comfort, and
consciences of all true Christians, bearing me witness. What then will it be,
my friend, to enjoy the unconceivable comforts of the Kingdom of Glory for
ever? If one day in Gods Courts on earth be better to thee than a thousand
elsewhere, how happy will thou be, when thou shall dwell in the heavenly House
of the Lord, and that for ever, ever? when thou shall be a pillar in the Temple
of thy God, and shall go no more out for ever, Rev. 3.12. O sweet word, ever,
ever; thou art music to the ear, and hon^y to the taste, and melody to the
heart indeed: to be free from all evil, both of sin and suffering, and to be
for ever free from them; to be with the Lord, enjoying all good imaginable, and
ever to be with the Lord. O how much worth does this one word ever add to the
Saints portion in the other world!

Mortality is a flaw in all earthly tenures, which abateth their price, and
imbittereth their pleasures; but eternity is a diamond which sparkleth most
radiantly in the crown of glory, and makes it beyond all expression or
comparison weighty.

Christian, how may this persuade thee to be exact in thy walking with God,
when in doing of his commands there is such great reward? Thy temporal
obedience shall have an eternal recompense. If Zeuxis the famous Painter was so
curious in drawing his lines, because he painted for Eternity; how exact
should thou be in all thy duties, how curious in the whole course of thy
life, when thou do all for eternity?

How may this support thee in the greatest dangers? Thy sufferings are
temporal, but thy solace shall be eternal. If Saul, when called to an earthly
kingdom for a short time, could hold his peace, when men despised and derided
him; surely thou may be steady in the greatest storm, and in all hardships
bear up thy spirit with the lively hope of that heavenly eternal Kingdom to
which thou art called. Do thou not know, that all the sufferings of this life
(though all the sufferings of the mystical body of Christ were laid on thy
back) are not worthy to be compared to that far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory! Romans 8.18.

Thus thy felicicy in heaven will be complete felicity, and thy consolation in
the fore-thoughts of it may well be a full consolation; since for its
perfections it is unspeakable, thy fruition of it is unquestionable, and thy
condition in it will be unchangeable and eternal. When thou have filled thy
heart with that fullness of joy, and bathed thy soul in those rivers of
pleasures, as many millions of years as there have been minutes since the
Creation, and after that as many thousand ages as there are creatures great and
small in heaven, earth, and sea; and after that as many thousand millions of
ages as all the men in the world can reckon up all the time of their lives; yet
after all this thou shall not have one moment less to continue in heaven, and
enjoy that perfect happiness. The very greatest and highest numerations and
multiplications of time, are but drops, yea ciphers and nothing to this
boundless bottomless ocean of eternity. For of eternity, as Drexelius says,
Truly there is no

FINIS.

