BEING For ever with the Lord, THE Great Hope, End and Comfort of BELIEVERS:
What it is, and how to be obtained and forethought of.

Preached by MATTHEW SYLVESTER, And Published at the public Request of Mr. Ri.
Baxter, at the hearing of it.

LONDON, Printed for J. Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
M.DC.LXXXVIII.

TO Mr. M. SYLVESTER'S HEARERS.
IF you know not the Reasons of my desiring Mr. S. at the hearing of it, to
publish this Sermon, I now tell you, they were these.

1. I was affected with it, as suitable to my own Condition; who have little
Comfort to live on, but my hopes of being for ever with the Lord, and no Motive
so powerful to engage me to my great Duty, and to overcome all Temptations.

2. And that which is so suitable to me, is not unsuitable to you: I am not the
only Man that must die, and that has another Life to live.

3. Mr. Sylvester's Style is so concise, and naturally elegant, that neither I
nor you can sufficiently digest his Sermons upon a transient hearing: A full
and frequent review may make them more our own: Of-times four or five Names, or
Epithets, signify as much as so many distinct Sentences; and his Phrases are
not always vulgar: And therefore they are like strong Meat, that must have
longer time, than lighter, for digestion.

4. The Subject is such as you must daily live upon, and therefore should be
glad of a daily Help for your practical Meditations on it. Being for ever with
Christ in Glory, is that which you pray for, hope for, labor for, suffer and
wait for, deny the Flesh and the World for, and which you must fetch your
supporting comforts from, or else you must have neither Hope nor Comfort, which
sound awakened Reason can own.

5. As it is a discouragement to Preachers, when the best studied Sermons, are
forgotten at the Church-doore; so it is a great mercy to Hearers when they may
carry home, and keep, and daily use, such excellent and powerful Helps. If the
Devil knew what Printing was like to do against his Kingdom, I wonder that he
did no more to hinder the inventing of it: It was because the Father of Lights
restrained him. You Printers and Booksellers look well to your selves, for next
to Magistrates and Ministers, there are few that Devils have more malignant
designs upon than you, either to silence your Presses and Shops as to Good, or
to open them to Evil. You speak more publicly than Pulpits do. To many
Thousands you either preach wholesome saving Truth, or vend flagitious and
pernicious Evil. If you vend the best Books only for Money, you have your
Reward; yet thousands may have a greater gain; as carnal Preachers may perish
themselves while their Hearers are saved.

Lastly, I would have those Men that have thought our silencing these 28 Years
to be the Churches Interest, and have called on their Rulers to strike home, to
see what Doctrine it is that we preach, and whether it deserve Hatred and
Destruction. If many such Sermons tell them not, they may see it in the larger
Writings, of Mr. Ant. Burges, Mr. Richard and Joseph Allen, Dr. Manton, Mr.
Charnock, and many more, (to pass by the yet living).

Your Servant, RI. BAXTER.

1 Thessalonians. iv. 17. latter Part. (...). -- And so shall we ever be with the Lord.
THese words are a part of those cheering Passages which were written to this
excellent and much-commended Church, by way of Antidote against immoderate
Sorrows for such as sleep in Jesus. And indeed the provident Care and
ministerial Faithfulness of this great Apostle, clearly appears in the Matter,
Order, and Vigor of Expression that this Epistle entertains its Reader with.
He first acknowledges what effectual Grace had brought them to, 1 Thessalonians.
1.2-10. Hethen appeals to God and them, as to his Sufferings, Doctrines, and
deportment in both their genuine, designed, and succesful references to their
Good, 1 Thessalonians. ii. 1-20. Then (when he was to stay alone at Athens; for which
no doubt he saw great cause) he sends Timotheus to them for their Establishment
and Consolation in the Faith; and to obviate all Discouragements and Snares
which otherwise might make them droop or stumble. And Timothy returns with a
very good account concerning them; which sends our Apostle to his Knees again,
with Thanks and Joys, and further Supplications for them, 1 Thessalonians. iii. 1-13.
And then he presses them to walk according to his Doctrine, and abundantly to
improve that Christian Directory which they had received from him for pleasing
God: to avoid all polluting Sins (all Sins are such, but some incomparably more
so than others) as inconsistent with their Heavenly Interests and Hopes, or
prejudicial thereto, and destructive thereof, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 1-12. And then when
they are under providential Pressures, let them repair unto the Hopes and
Comforts of their returning Lord from Heaven, and of their abode with him and
his whole Family for ever, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 13-18. and let them also make their
highest practical Improvements hereof, as being under better Circumstances so
to do, than others are, 1 Thessalonians. v. 1-22. All which he closes with a solemn
Prayer and Benediction, with testified assurance of success herein, 1 Thessalonians.
5.23, 24. and hereupon he charges them by the Lord, that this Epistle be read
to all the Holy Brethren, verse. 27. as being of such consequence and
concernment to them all. And hence you may see how this great Apostle guards
his Consolations; in first securing Christianity in the Spirit and Practice of
it, and then proceeding to encourage and refresh the Hearts of Mourners. Hence
then consider the Text it self, in its, I. Sense. II. Evidence. III. Usefulness.


I. The Sense of the Text.
And here these things occurred to be considered (tho briefly) in their order.
1. The Persons determined to this Privilege. We who are found alive, and the
Dead in Christ that rise first, verse. 16, 17. and all of them Children of the
Light and Day, 1 Thessalonians. v. 5, 8, 9. The living Members and true Favorites of
Christ, distinguished from mere Pretenders, Enemies and Strangers, by their
true conformity to Christ himself, in Spirit, Purpose, and Behavior. 2. The
Privilege and State whereto they are determined, to be for ever with the Lord.
3. The Time and Manner of their entrance into the full possession of this
State. Christ comes descending with a shout from Heaven, the Voice of the
Archangel, and with the Trump of God. The Dead in Christ rise first: They with
the Living are caught up to meet Christ in the Air, and so they are for ever
with him, ver. 16, 17.

1. The Persons here intended for this blessed State, and reckoning duly
thereupon; We. How careful was this Eagle-eyed Apostle to prevent a Rape upon a
thing so chaste and sacred as this our Christian Hope! You turned to God from
Idols, to serve the living and true God, and to wait for his Son from Heaven, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9, 10. Your Work of Faith, Labor of Love, and Patience of Hope in our
Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God and our Father: knowing -- your Election
of God, verse. 3, 4. It is not every one that is to be with Christ for ever. The
Subject must be suited to this State and Privilege; and that, not by mere
Miracle, but by the fit improvements of those Means and Helps which God affords
us for our preparation-work. Means suited to their Ends are to be adhered to,
and used accordingly. Nor can it be expected that God's Institutions will
ordinarily be neglected by himself, and that our neglect thereof should be to
us as prosperous, as our fit observation^ (...) And yet, mistake me not, I do
not say, that outward Means, and moral Swasions, are all that Christian
Converts are brought home by. There is a powerful quickening Divine touch upon
the Soul, needful to make it thoroughly Christian; and without this no Man
becomes a real Christian. And none can live with Christ for ever, but he that
is wrought and kept thereto by special Grace and Providence. And excellent
Persons must such be that are thus changed and kept for such a blissful State
as this here in the Text: The Apostle calls them, the Children of the Light and
Day, 1 Thessalonians. v. 5. such as derive a new Nature from it, 2 Cor. iii. 3, 18.
walk under the Government and Conduct of it, Ephesians. v. 8. and are entitled to
great Privileges by it, Acts xx. 32. and xxvi. 18. John xii. 35, 36. Let me
then close this Head with this; 1. Consider who expressly are to be excluded,
and upon what accounts, 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10. Galat. v. 19-21. Ephesians. v. 5. Mat.
xxv. 41-46. Rev. xxi. 8, 27. Hence then this We can take in no such Persons.
They that make nothing of discovering directive, encouraging, and transforming
Gospel Light; that have not fetched their Principles therefrom, and formed
their Lives, and Practices, and Tempers thereunto, nor made the greatest
reckoning of these Privileges which are to be obtained thereby, are no ways
fitted, and therefore not determined (whilst such) unto this blessed State.
Consider, 2. whom Christ expressly has consigned and promised this Privilege
unto; John xii. 26. Luke xii. 31-37. and xiv. 26, 27. and xxii. 28-30. 2 Timothy
ii. 11, 12. Luke xxi. 36. 1 John iii. 1-3. and Jude 20, 21. 2 Pet. i. 5-11. and
iii. 14. It Is not the Form, but Power of Godliness, that can entitle and adopt
us to that State: resolute Promoters of Christ's Interests, patient Sufferers
for it, prudent Contrivers, fruitful Walkers, such as are observant of his
Conduct, obedient to his Laws, submissive to his Providence, and satisfied in
and with his Care and Grace, and that joyfully prepare and wait for his
appearance and presence, and duly represented him to themselves and others, so
as to value nothing like him; no nor themselves but as in him and for him.
These are to be with him for ever; see 2 Timothy iv. 6-8.

2. The State and Privilege whereto they are determined, to be for ever with
the Lord, John xiv. 2, 3. Hence we are exhorted to seek those things above
where Christ is, Col. iii. 1. Hence, Come, ye Blessed -- and depart from me, ye
Cursed, Mat. xxv. 34, 41. Present with the Lord, 2 Cor. v. 8. They shall walk
with me in White, for they are worthy, Rev. iii. 4. When Christ who is our Life
shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in Glory, Col. iii. 4. When he
shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired at in all them that shall
believe -- in that Day, 2 Thessalonians. i. 10. Father, I will that those whom thou
have given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold the Glory which thou
have given me, John xvii. 24. Christ with his Father are the only Temple of
that Blessed State where all the Favorites of Christ must be, Rev. xxi. 23.
Christ is our Life in Heaven, Col. iii. 3, 4. Our Hope from Heaven, Tit. ii.
13. Phil. iii. 20. Our Plea for Heaven, Heb. ix. 15. Our Way to Heaven, John
xiv. 6. Our Head and all in Heaven, Ephesians. i. 20-23. We are to be with him who
is the greatest Friend, Isa. ix. 6, 7. Heb. i. 2-14. and iv. 14-16. Rev. i. 5,
18. Col. i. 15-19. and ii. 9, 10. The dearest Friend, Gal. ii. 20. Ephesians. iii.
18, 19. Tit. ii. 14. His aim at this our Exaltation and Advancement; his sharp
and costly Agonies and Engagements to effect it, and the delight he took
therein, prove this. And the fastest and most faithful Friend, in Isa. xi. 5.
Heb. iii. 1, 2. and x. 23. and xiii. 8. But now what it is to be with Christ
none yet fully know, 1 Cor. xiii. 9-12. Christ himself tells us, We shall
behold his Glory, John xvii. 22. Now what is Glory, but the luster of
discovered Excellency and Perfection? And O the excellence of the
Lord-Redeemer, in his exalted State! his Transfiguration amazed Beholders! When
he appeared to Saul, he struck him blind, the distant sight or glance which
Stephen got, impressed no ordinary Majesty and Glory on his Countenance. But
Christ acquaints us with his threefold Glory, wherein every Eye shall see him,
Luke ix. 26. There is his personal Glory as to his humane Nature, a glorious
Body; Spiritual, Immortal, incapable of Sufferings; lively, and of the nearest
alliance and approach to Spirit, and every way fitted to subserve the Function
of his completed Soul; and (like a Crystal Mirror) to have his inward Glory
transmitted through it to all Spectators. A glorious Soul, exerting all its
vigours in and through this Body, wherein every Gesture, Look, and Motion, and
Expression, shall show the excellent Temper, Furniture, and Beauty of his Soul.
O the Wisdom, Majesty, Holiness and Vivacity of his Soul, which then will have
their fullest Explications and Appearances! And then the fullness of the Godhead
which dwells bodily in him, shall have such great and clear Discoveries and
Effects, as shall delightfully entertain his Favorites with great varieties of
discoveries for evermore. What emblemmatical Glory may attend his Person, as
the Symbol and Signal of the extraordinary presence of his Father with him, and
complacency in him, I dare not guess at, nor am I wise or good enough to know,
nor arrogant and bold enough to determine: but sure I am, the physical Changes,
and the judicial Process and Conclusions of that Day, with the evident
yieldings and submissions of the whole Frame of Nature to his Will, and the
effectual bowing of every Knee, and the confession of every Tongue to him, will
deservedly bear the Character of the Father's Glory, Phil. ii. 9-11. And all
this shall we behold to everlasting Satisfaction. And we shall see his Glory
further in all his Rectoral Excellencies. The Constitution and Administration
of his everlasting Kingdom will declare his Eminencies; How much he is above
them in Excellencies and Prerogatives. How excellently he governs them, with
such extraordinary Light and Love, suited so accurately to their Capacities,
Tempers, and Concerns, and every way preserving all his Subjects, and all their
Entertainments and Employments, in all the harmony and decencies of a Divine
Kingdom; and then how very kind he ever is and will be to them. Witness their
conformity to his glorious Self, their intimate conversation with him, and the
inundations of Delights that ever flow from him upon them; such a Prince! such
Subjects! under such Laws and circumstances, and in such order!

3. The Time and Manner of its Commencement. (...), Christ descends, and we
ascend to meet him in the Air, and then we part no more: peruse the Account
hereof as given by inspired Persons; see Mat. xxv. 31-34. 1 Cor. xv. 50-54. 1 Thessalonians. iv. 15-17. Then come those Visions, Dispensations, and Employments, and
those reciprocal Satisfactions, which cannot be but where Christ and his
Favorites are gotten and kept together.

II. The Evidence of this Truth.
1. Why else was Jesus Christ Incarnate? Heb. 2.14. He took not hold of Angels,
but of the Seed of Abraham, Verse. v. ib. (...) is there the word: and it is
used of Christ when he took hold of timorous and sinking Peter on the Waves,
Mat. xiv. 31. No doubt but Christ's assuming to himself our Nature, was a great
hold thereon. Such an alliance and approach to Man as intimated, yea
demonstrated, Christ's fitness and resolution to be both visible and
delightfully conversible to all his Saints for ever, even in their own Nature.
Became Christ visible that he might not be seen? Would he be Man to be
eternally retired from humane view? We are told, that the Word was made Flesh,
and dwelt amongst us, full of Grace and Truth; and that there were
Eyewitnesses of his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father,
John i. 14. And O how ample and emphatical is this Passage, if well considered
by us! and how pertinent and cogent as to the Case in hand! The Word; that
living quickening Word, by whom God made the World and us, Ephesians. iii. 9. John
v. 26. and whom God promised to be the Root and Prince of Life, 1 John v. 11.
by whom, and for whose pleasure all Things both are and were created, Rev. iv.
11. and upheld, Heb. i. 2, 3. Who is the Image of the Invisible God, the
firstborn of every Creature. See further, Col. i. 15-19. That Word which was
to be, and was, and is his Father's Oracle to tell us fully what we are to
know, be, do, avoid, and trust to, Heb. i. 12. Acts iii. 22. Mat. xvii. 5. 2
Pet. i. 16-18. Yea, and with whom, and what, and where we are to be for ever, 2 Timothy i. 10. Whatever then this Word shall say, may we expect, and rest upon,
John i. 17, 18. Rev. iii. 7, 12, 14. Think here then upon that insinuating
charm of Speech; In my Father's House are many Mansions -- were it not so I
would have told you -- John xiv. 2, 3. This Word made Flesh. See Heb. ii.
16-18. Romans viii. 3, 4. and in that Tabernacle dwelling amongst Men: And why?
that he might be our Kinsman, Surety, Brother, Heb. ii. 11-13. that he might
thus be conversant and sympathising with us, and strike our very Hearts even
through our very Senses; and thereby make us fervently desirous to be with him
for ever. Good to be here, said the Apostle Peter, when he had seen his
Master's Glory in but a transient glimpse, Mat. xvii. 4. And we saw his Glory
-- full of Grace and Truth. Grace poured into his Lips; and prosperous Majesty,
because of Meekness, Truth, and Righteousness, Psalm. xlv. 2-4, 6, 7. Isa. xi.
2-5. And now, can we imagine that Christ should meet us in our Nature, and
transmit such Glory to us through his very Flesh; and thus allure us and
conform us to himself, and so make us fit and long to be with him, and all to
drop and leave us here?

2. Why else was Christ incarnate, so spirited, employed, and exercised,
toward and for us, whilst in this outward Court, Acts x. 36-40. 1 Pet. ii.
21-27. Heb. xii. 2, 3. As to his personal Accomplishments and Deportments, he
was the Pattern of our Duty, and the Mirror of our Glory in his Presence, Phil.
ii. 5. 1 John ii. 6. with Phil. iii. 21. 1 John iii. 2. And as to his
Sufferings he was the purchaser of our Persons and our Glory, that his own
Grace and Name might thus be glorified in us, 2 Thessalonians. i. 12. 1 Cor. vi. 20. 1
Pet. i. 17-21. And wherefore all this waste, if Christ and we must part at
last? The Soul and Spirit is the Man; and if that be not right, the Joys and
Treasures of the Heavenly Kingdom cannot relish well, nor be esteemed of to
purpose. Hence, O the visible Beauties of Christ's Soul! Such Wisdom in
Self-conduct! such Purity, Vigor, Tenderness, Sweetness, Constancy, Sincerity,
Fervor, and Impartiality! How inwardly, evenly, readily, and cheerfully was
his Soul kept for God! and how entirely were his Thoughts taken up with God!
And all to let us see what frame we must be in, for an eternal Fellowship with
himself in God: In him we see what Spirit we must be of in Heaven. All his
Conversation in this World was but the genuine Efforts of the devotedness and
resignedness of his Soul to God, and to the good of others by his Will. And all
the Excellencies of humane Nature, that a right Spirit and Behavior toward
God and Man could reach and show, were so advanced and conspicuous in Christ,
as that they challenged all Men's Observation, and bad defiance unto all
Impeachments and Arraignments, Joh. 7.18. and 8.29, 46. 1 Pet. ii. 22. His Aim
and Business was our conformity to him in Sentiment, in Heart and Life, in this
World, that he might thus present us to his Father, as fitted for the Work and
Joys of Heaven, and for the Freedoms and Delights of his own eternal Pretense.
Never was humane Nature seen before, nor since, as it was in him. Such Knowledge
of God! such Wisdom in the conduct of Affairs for God! such Obedience and
Submission to the Will of God! such Dependence on God, Delight and Acquiescence
in him! such Expectations from him! and such Fulfillings after him! John xvii.
4. these show what Christ will bring us to, and so meet us in at last. And in
this holy Course God met him with a sweet Prelusion to his exalted State, and
ordered Peter, James, and John to be Eyewitnesses of his Glory in the Mount;
and Moses and Elias to attend him, and to be clouded whilst his Glory shone,
Mat. xvii. 1-3. 2 Pet. i. 16-18. Which Christ liked well, in that hereby it
might appear, with whom we are to be for ever, and unto whom we shall be like.
And as to his Sufferings and Death, they were the purchase of this State,
Ephesians. i. 14. Heb. v. 9. and ix. 15. and ii. 9, 10. and x. 20. The Expiation of
our Crimes, the Ransom of our Souls, and the Blood whereby we are consecrated
to this so glorious and delightful State; compare Luke xxiv. 26. with Heb. x.
19-22. and xii. 24. If Christ then taught, did, suffered so much, that we might
be both fit and sure to be together: How can we doubt thereof, or miss it? He
knew what was in Man, what most affected him, and best became him: and what was
the likeliest way to suit Men to himself, and to the Visions, Services, and
Entertainments of that most glorious State and Kingdom where he himself now is,
and will abide enthroned for ever. What Constitution and Complexion their Souls
and Persons were to be brought unto: What Means and Helps would be most
expedient hereunto. What Doctrines, Laws, and Privileges; what Ordinances and
providential Dispensations would best accommodate them in this Affair: In what
Ways and Seasons, and to what Degrees they should be furnished and tried; and
what would most effectually engage and keep them for his Father and himself.
And hence we find his Name to be Wonderful Counselor, Isa. ix. 6. That in him
are all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge hidden, Col. ii. 3. That all the
fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in him, verse. 9. And that he is made of
God Wisdom to us, 1 Cor. i. 30. Under the conduct of this Wisdom, he acquaints
them with himself, John xvii. 7, 8. He shows them his Commission and Design,
John vi. 38-40. Whither he was to go, and their way to follow him, Joh. xiv.
4-6. with all that might help or hinder them in their proficiency and advances
toward his exalted Self, with all their needful Preparations for that State
and Day wherein they should behold him, and be with him, in his Meridian Glory,
Luke ix. 23-26. and xii. 33-38. yea, and the cost and gain of Christian
Godliness, Luke xiv. 33. and xviii. 29, 30. His evidently great Love to them
(with all Expressions and Avouchments of it); this seasons all his Doctrines
and Instructions, Joh. xiii. 1-15, 34, 35. and xv. 8-17. He suffered long, was
kind, vaunted not himself, was not puffed up, envied not, never behaved himself
unseemly, sought not his own, was not easily provoked, thought no Evil,
rejoiced not in Iniquity, but in the Truth, and in the welfare and advancement
of his own unto himself. He bare all things, believed, hoped, and endured all
things: (for thus does Love, 1 Cor. xiii. 4-7.) Thus having showed them what
Spirit he was of, who was the brightness of his Father's Glory: and how this
Spirit stood and wrought toward them: and thus, how safely they might trust
him, and wherein their Tempers were to harmonize and accord with his, that so
his Presence might be their felicity and delight; then is he frequently
discoursing with them about the Jubilee which they and he must keep together in
the Heavens. Peter, thou shall follow me hereafter, John xiii. 36. Because I
live, ye shall live also: and, then you shall know that I am in my Father, and
you in me, and I in you, Joh. xiv. 19, 20, 28. And because I go to the Father,
you shall see me, Joh. xvi. 16, 22. and I will come and fetch you to my self,
Joh. xiv. 3. And having lived as bound for Heaven, practically showing His
their way thereto, he dies, a Sacrifice for Sin, a Ransomer of Souls, a
Purchaser of Heaven, a Conqueror of Death and Hell, a Martyr for the Christian
Cause and Hope, a Pattern and Exempler of Patience, Fortitude, Holiness and
Hope, and Love to his; and can Christ lose or leave us after all this?

3. Why else should he in his raised and exalted State, aim so directly at this
thing? for all that he has spoken and done, and is still doing, looks this
way, Joh. xx. 17. How pertinently and copiously might we improve that
Paragraph! Ephesians. iv. 1-16. as the enforcement of this Truth and Hope, did not
the stated Limits of a single Sermon forbid it? Was Life and Immortality
brought to Light by him, only to tantalize our Souls? 2 Timothy i. 10. Is it
illustrated by the Gospel to us as a State separate from Christ himself? Must
he, as Man, have it without us, or we without him? or must both have it in a
State of Separation each from other? Was not Christ raised by his Father, that
our Faith and Hope might be in God? 1 Pet. i. 21. And what is the Hope, that
Christ and we should see each other's Face no more! Christ rose not to continue
here, for he was not suited to this gross animal fading state and frame of
Things and Persons: And would Christ show himself on Earth alive, only to show
us what, and with whom we never are to be? as if he only came to raise our
Expectations to our shame and horror? What was the sense of that great Message
which he sent by Mary to his Brethren? Go tell my Brethren I ascend to my
Father, and your Father; to my God, and your God, John xx. 17. What! Sons of
God, and Brethren to Christ, and not live together with the same Father, and in
the same Inheritance and State! Heb. xi. 16. If Children, then Heirs: Heirs of
God, and joint-Heirs with Christ; and to be glorified together, Romans viii. 17.
What meant his entrance into Heaven as our Forerunner? Heb. vi. 20. Was it to
tell the glorious Inhabitants of that blessed World, in all their heights of
Wonderment and Expectation, that he repented of this his glorious Enterprise,
or that he was baffled in it, and that he cared not for having his Favorites
and redeemed Ones in his sight? What means his Intercession there? Heb. vii.
25. and ix. 24. whereby our Prayers, and Pains, and Hopes are so emboldned?
Heb. x. 19-25, 35. and ix. 12. Prays he against what he appeared, endeavored
and suffered for? or can he not prevail with God for us? or does he trifle with
his Father within the Veil, or sport himself before his Courtiers there, with
our deceiving and deluded Hopes? O such Blasphemy and Soloecism is there in
these Thoughts, when they are matter of suspicion and belief, as that no sober
thinking Mind can entertain them! Why is he there enthroned? Heb. viii. 1. Mat.
xxviii. 19, 20. Why made Head over all things to his Church? see Ephesians. i.
17-23. Addressed unto by a dying Martyr for this thing, and he too owned
signally, yea, miraculously in this his Martyrdom and Address? Act. vi. 15. and
vii. 55-59. And why commemorated by his own special Order at the Table of the
Lord, as one with whom we are to meet again as our Redeemer? 1 Cor. xi. 23-26.
Is not this privilege sealed and secured to us by the Covenant of Grace? How
can the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, cherish and seal to deceitful
Expectations? Heb. x. 23. 2 Timothy ii. 10-13. What does the Spirit of Jesus form
and seal us to but this? 2 Cor. v. 5. and i. 21, 22. Ephesians. i. 14. and iv. 30.
The Notions which he forms, the Faith which he works, the Tempers which he
frames, the Desires which he kindles, the Prayers and Labors which he
animates, are all for this, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 13, 14. How can it be the dreadful
doom of all his Enemies to depart from him, if it be not our determined
privilege to be with him? Mat. xxv. 41. 2 Thessalonians. i. 9. Luke xiii. 25-27. Did
not Christ know that his most glorious Presence would be a great Ingredient
into the felicity of his Servants, as Jude 24, 25. assures us, and that our
assimilation to him would be completed (and continued) by the Visions of his
State and Day, as his inspired Servant has informed us (...) Joh. iii. 2. and
that our reckoning (...) and longing after it, are the ^ory Fruits of his own
sanctifying and sealing Spirit, as we are told 2 Cor. v. 5-9. and Romans viii.
16-23. we had never been informed of such a discriminating Accent in his final
Sentence, as he has told us of. Whence was it made the Charge and Business of
his commissionated and inspired Officers, to teach and enforce this grateful
Truth upon us, were it not certainly decreed by God and Christ? 1 Cor. xv. 15.
Col. iii. 4. 1 Thessalonians. ii. 19. and iii. 13. Would he enjoin such special
Officers, so miraculously qualified and owned, to inform us of, prepare us for,
and comfort us with so great a Blessing, and to represent it to us as the
alluring and refreshing aggravation of that State to come, that we should be
with Christ for ever? Did they preach falsehood by special Order, and with such
Attestations to their Message, and such assistance in their Enterprise from the
God of Truth, and from his eminently faithful and true Witnesses? 2 Cor. xi. 2.
Why is this statedly to influence all our practical Christianity, if no such
Matter be designed for us? Joh. xii. 26. Tit. ii. 12, 14. 2 Pet. iii. 14. 2
Cor. v. 9. Our pressing Pleas and Motives that are to animate and enforce our
Duties, Sufferings, and Consolations, with all those exercised Graces which are
to spirit such Performances, Submissions, and dutiful Rejoicings by the way, do
evidently bear themselves upon this Hope, 2 Pet. i. 5-11. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 13-17.
Heb. x. 32-37. How copiously and strongly might I improve these Scriptural
Hints to prove this comfortable Truth, had I but a better Head and Heart! But
(to conclude this Demonstration) lastly; How could the Son of God himself
obtain that Glory and Delight which he so reckons on, in the success of what he
undertook, were not his purchased and redeemed Ones to be with him? John xvii.
22, 24. 2 Thessalonians. i. 10, 12. We find that Christ and his must go together in
unto the Marriage, Mat. xxv. 10. And what is this going in together, but the
joint entrance and admission of Head and Members into that State of Royal
Entertainments within the Vail? Would Christ have begged of God, both the
discovery and impartment of his Glory to his Members, had not both these been
highly valued by him? Joh. xvii. 22, 24. Will not Christ (think we) count it
his Honor, to have his own produced in open Court as Signs and Wonders? Heb.
ii. 13. to bring his Sons to Glory? verse. 10. and to have that Church for which
he gave himself, and which he loved so dearly, presented to himself a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but holy and without
blemish? Ephesians. v. 25-27. And to see us fixed in his own Presence, as the
eternal stately Monuments of his magnificent and victorious Grace and Love?
What was the Plea wherewith he accented his dying Prayer for his, that God
would charge his special Providence with them, but this, that I am glorified in
them? John xvii. 10. And will the Head be glorified by being eternally parted
from his Members? Where lies the Glory of a Teacher, but in the Wisdom of his
Scholars? and could Christ be glorified in making his expert in the Doctrine of
Lies and Forgeries? What! bring Men to discern and credit and rely upon what
only was delusive! How can we learn this as a Truth in Jesus, that we shall
live with him for ever, when no such thing shall come to pass? I have told you
-- that when it comes to pass, ye might believe, Joh. xiv. 29. The Signs which
God gave of a false Prophet under the Law, were either speaking what was
absolutely false; or Truth, to countenance Irreligion or Idolatry. And can
either of these be charged on Christ, and judged to be his Glory? Wherein
consists the Glory of a Priest, but in the acceptance and success of what he
regularly offers to the determined Ends thereof? And can Christ our great
High Priest be glorified as a Priest for ever, whose Sacerdotal Faithfulness
could never bring up those unto himself in Heaven, for whom, and to which End
he did declaredly offer up himself? Heb. ix. 12, 15, 24, 28. And wherein is
Christ glorified as a King, if his Loyal Subjects must not abide with him for
ever? John xv. 10, 11. Heb. v. 9. 2 Timothy iv. 6, 8. When he delivers up the
Kingdom to the Father, has he no Subjects to produce, fitted unto the
Felicities and Employments of his own Glorious Presence? And can he be
glorified that has no Subjects to adore him for his governing them so well?
And how can he be glorified as the Captain of the Hosts of God in the great War
with Satan, if he must sit in Heaven alone, and have no victorious Followers to
produce and show therein, as proofs of his heroic, skilful, faithful Conduct
and Achievements? 1 John iii. 8. Romans viii. 18, 35-39. And how can Christ be
glorified in and by his Saints, unless they see what God has done for him, and
in what Royal State he sits, inhabiting the Praises, and (perhaps) ordering the
Affairs, and darting forth that Glory which must diffuse it self through all
the Regions and Inhabitants of that blessed World above? He must be glorified
and admired at, and will be so when we are brought to see his Face, to bear his
Image, to share in the Visions, Services, and Fruitions of that State, all
which shall to the Life express his Interest in God's Heart, and ours in his
Heart; and what a Friend God is to him, and he to us: So that with Christ we
are sure to be.

III. The Usefulness of this Passage.
1. O what Attractives have we to a Heavenly Mind and Life! Christ and a
Kingdom with him! Who would not breath and strive to reach that blessed State?
2 Cor. 5.8, 9. O let that Passage in 1 Cor. 15.58. be well considered,
concocted, and digested by you, so as to make you every way greatly conformable
thereto: and let not Head, Inheritance and Hearts be parted. Did not Paul bear
this Truth upon his Heart, and court us all to follow him in the heavenliness
of his Mind and Life? Phil. 3.14, 15. So lovely is the Lord of Glory, and so
eminently does the great God transmit his Glory even through the Humane Nature
of our glorified Redemer, as that the Comforts of the Heavenly State will be
exceedingly abated, were not his glorious Presence there. And when he comes
from Heaven to judge the World, the Hosts and Citizens of that blessed State
will joyfully attend his motions, 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. Mat. 25.31.

2. If there be no Love to Christ, there would be no Joy in Heaven. Those that
have stumbl'd at his Holiness, will be confounded at his Glory, Mark 8.34. to
38. The Crown of Life and Glory is reserved for, and shall be only given to
those that are lovers of his Appearance. For who can think that the Glories of
the Heavenly State, and the Pleasures of beholding Christ therein, can be their
Portion, upon whom the great Sentence of Anathema Maranatha (i. e. cursed till
the Lord come) is past? 1 Cor. 16.22. Heaven cannot countenance and reward
Contempt of Christ. The Son of Righteousness, Heaven's Glory, and the Temple of
that blissful State above, must either be the Heart's Delight, or Christ and
Heaven can be no Portion.

3. No Christ! no Heaven. Heaven must needs be lost where Christ is missed of,
Act. 4.12. No Christ! no entrance into Glory: for Heaven is called the Glory of
our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. Christ must be glorified, if ever Heaven
be reached. The Lord from Heaven is Lord of Heaven, Matthew 28.18, 19. And he
must be Crowned and owned as Lord in Hearts, and as the only Holy One of God,
by those to whom he will give the Crown of Life. The Key of Heaven is in his
Hand, and he will let in none but faithful Subjects. He cannot bear the
presence of the Sons of Belial there, nor has he any Mansions for them: they
are too contrary to his Holiness, to have admission into his Presence. To let
in rotten Hearts, would be to patronize and crown Rebellion. And is it meet
that the Cross, the Crown, and Glory of the Son of God should serve the Devil?
What! shall Christ prostitute his Blood and Scepter unto the firstborn of
Apostasy and Wickedness, or to the Seed thereof?

4. Then Christ in Heaven should be addressed unto, to lift up Hearts and
Persons thither. Thus Stephen saw the Lord in Heaven, and begged his gracious
help, and that not without success, Act 7.55 to 59. It is not every Arm, no nor
any Arm but Christ's, that is fit to deal with such dark heavy Souls as ours,
so as to lift them up, and let them into Heaven, Acts 4.12. Jude 24, 25. O
then, desponding Hearts, go make your moans to Christ, look up to him with your
Hearts in your Eyes, and cry, Fain would I come to thee, but cannot; Jesus thou
Son of David help; and thou who rulest all things, if thou can do any thing,
who art the revealed Arm of God to bring great things to pass, O have
compassion on me, and raise up Heart and Soul and all to thee. Mark 9.22.
Christ cried to God, as to one able to save from Death, and he was heard, Heb.
5.7. Cry you to Jesus Christ, for he can save you to the uttermost, Heb. 7.25.
Lifts at the last and deadliest pinches, are the most satisfying and endearing
Lifts. Remember, that a dying Christ once bare a Malefactor from the Cross to
Heaven, and bravely rescued him from great destruction, and fixed him in his own
Presence; This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. O it was a Blessing won
by Prayer, and that to Christ himself, Luke 23.42, 43.

5. Then Heaven should have no Rivals if Christ be there: to be with Christ is
far better, and that abandons all Comparisons, Phil. 1.23. Christ knew the
purest Mansions where they were. Below they could not be, for Sin has changed
the Glory of all lower things to shame and blackness: And little is there in
them now, save Names and Shadows; and till these fly away, Christ, and our Life
with him, is still hid in God, Cant. 4.6. Col. 3.2 to 4. And should not our
Hearts then be gone to Heaven, and bound for those most vast and glorious
Regions, where our Dear Lord will keep his Residence for ever? What! Christ on
his Throne, concerned, and preparing for gathering up all his Favorites to
himself! and we not courted from a Dunghill! all the World without one Christ
is but a Trifle. No Christ, no worth in things; what Heart then for them! those
Joys, Relations, Gifts, Possessions and Accomplishments are but vain and small;
nothing but dangerous Charms and Pageantries, whose Soul and Savor the Lord of
Glory is not, Phil. 3.7, 8. Prize things as they speak Christ; for all the
World without him is not worth one Heart; there is neither Gain nor Glory in it.

6. Were Heaven possessed by Christless Hearts, yet would Content be wanting.
Frowns from the Master of the Feast would spoil the pleasing Relishes of the
Banquet. One, Friend, how came thou in hither? would make men sit at Table
with little Confidence, and less Joy, Mat. 22.12.

7. The Hopes of raised quickened Hearts are safe, and may be great. Christ, in
the midst of what we hope for, may and should quiet all. Heb. 6.19, 20. It Is
pity such a Passage should be passed over without a considerate pause. Has
Christ broke through the Vail, and is he got within it, to leave our Souls
without an Anchor of Hope, that may prove sure and steadfast? Can Christ enter
Heaven for us, and then forget his Work? Can the Forerunner quite desert those
lively and solicitous Members, that breath and strive so much to trace and to
tread his Steps after him? He that has lost his Blood below, what! has he
lost his Heart above? surely our Head was never crowned to shame his Members
Hopes, and Joys. Our expectations of that State may be invigorated greatly by
this, That Christ our Hope is set upon his Throne therein. Christ is our
blessed Hope, Tit. 2.13. According to our earnest expectation and our hope in
him, we cannot be ashamed, Phil. 1.20 to 23. and 3.20. It is by Christ that our
Hope is laid up in Heaven, Col. 1.5. He makes the Promise sure to all the Seed,
Romans 5.10. Christ came from Heaven to be a Ransom, and so he was, Heb. 9.15.
and he is in Heaven to plead his Wounds, and by his Intercession to animate and
succeed the regular Claims and Expectations of all his Members, Romans 8.34, 35.
Up then with Hearts and Hopes; and bid defiance unto all Discouragements.
Christ by his entrance into Heaven, and by his possessing it, as our raised and
exalted Head, has given one Lift; and surely then, his next lift will
effectually bear up all. Savoury, full, and pertinent is that both witty and
weighty Passage in Tertullian de Resurrectione Carnis, cap. 51. Quemadmodum
enim nobis Arrhabonem reliquit, ita and a nobis Arrhabonem carnis accepit and
vexit in Caelum; pignus totius summae illuc quandoque redigendae securae estote
caro and sanguis. Vsurpastis and caelum and regnum Dei in Christo. The earnest
of the Spirit left, and the earnest of Flesh carried up to Heaven; a Pledge that
all shall once be fetched up thither. The Kingdom of God, and Heaven possessed in
Christ, makes all secure. O then let Flesh and Hearts, both rest in hope; for
Christ in Heaven will fetch us all to Heaven: for there at God's right Hand
stands Christ to plead and vindicate, Act. 7.55. and there he sits to hear,
dispense and rule; Heb. 1.3, 13, 14. And if he fail in both, then may the
lively Hopes (1 Pet. 1.3.) of quickened Hearts ( Ephesians. 2.5). expire and die. And
if so, then where is our Anchor sure and steadfast reaching to that within the
Vail? Was not the Heart of our ascending Lord and Head exceeding mindful of
his Friends, and warm toward them? Joh. 20.17. and cooled it by the way? Heb.
4.15. No surely, all that are truly and firmly Christ's, always lie warm upon
his Heart. Let him be where he will, though in the heights of all his Glory, he
is yet our High Priest, Heb. 4.14. and 8.1. Our Life, Col. 3.4. Our Head, Ephesians.
1.22, 23. Our Peace, Ephesians. 2.14. Our Hope, 1 Timothy 1.1. Our Lord, 1. Cor. 1.2.
Our Savior, Tit. 1.4. The Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. and
our Advocate, 1 John 2.1. And can Christ in Heaven, statedly and avouchedly,
under such near and sure and dear Relations to us, suffer our Hopes to fall?
surely his Exaltation puts no period to his Relation to us, nor to those Bowels
that are proper to it; nor to those Expectations that are built upon it. It Is
true, his Joys are high, his Trust is great: but it is as true, that his Heart
is commensurate with and answers both: nor will his Kingdom please him without
his Bride: he will step once more from Heaven to fetch Her to Himself, John
14.3.

8. O what an Antidote is this Hope against the Snares and Fears of things
below! 2 Cor. 5.1. the Cross is heavy, and Hearts are soon unfixed; when
Heaven, and Christ therein, and our determinate abode with him, are not our
lively Hope and stated Poize. The Cross can make no breach, while Christ in
Heaven thus sets his Heart upon us: and we have sent our Hearts entirely after
him, and keep them there, Romans 8.34, 35. Heb. 10.34. And Pleasures can do but
little hurt, whilst this great Hope relishes duly with us. All the Delights of
Pharaoh's Court could never reach the Heart of Moses. When Christ and Heaven
had got his Eye and fixed it, Heb. 11.25, 26. Hearts should be under their
restraint in lawful Mirth, and at enmity with sinful Mirth, during the absence
of their Lord, Mat. 9.15. Mephibosheth grew careless of himself until his Lord
returned in peace, 2 Samuel 19.24. No joy but in his Master's presence: And shall
not Christ in Heaven correct and moderate our Joys in things below? Groans to
be stripped of Earth, and Flesh, and to be gone to Christ in Heaven should be the
deepest Groans. And truly, Sirs, if Christ in Heaven have not your Hearts, they
will be prone to Surfeits or Distractions. You either will be tunn'd with Wind,
or drunk with Vanity, or wracked with Cares and Fears. Hearts pitched on Christ
in Heaven, know where to be full and welcome, when things below have showed
their best, and done their worst. They have a Glory that will pierce the
darkest Cloud, and reach the greatest Deep, 2 Cor. 1.5. Their bitterest Herbs,
and sharpest Agonies, may possibly be their entertainment at their last
Passover: but these their shortliv'd Sorrows are but to usher in, and aggravate
their Master's Joys. Pleasures possessed and kept by Christ for them, and to be
possessed by them in his own immediate Presence, must needs be great. O
Christians, remember Heaven, and Christ therein; and what he is there preparing
for you; and fear neither Plots, nor Strokes, nor Rumors, 1 Pet. 1.4, to 7.
Mat. 5.10, to 12. Let your exalted Head, and this your elevating Hope, distill
such influences upon your exercised Hearts, as to make you valiant for your
Prize, exalted in your Aims, triumphant in your Hopes and Sufferings, and
evermore insulting over the Cheats and Dangers that attend you. He sells his
Head and Hopes for thirty Pieces, that is intangl'd with or unhinged by any
thing below this Head and Heritage, and these things above. Sure Christ in
Heaven, so evidently intent upon your being brought to live where he is, wants
neither Heart, nor Worth, nor Joys, to make you know and to acknowledge that he
is a Non-such Friend; and though rough-handed Esau may be the firstborn of
your Entertainments here, yet Jacob has him by the Heel, and shall supplant
him. Suffer and reign, these are the terms of Life, the Royal Law of Hope, 2 Timothy 2.12. Ought not we (as well as Christ) to suffer and so to enter into
Glory? Luke 24.26. with Romans 8.17. Must not he follow Christ that designs to
reach what he has got? John. 12.26. Heb. 12.2. What though the Way be foul and
rugged? What should discourage you in those Paths, where every step you take is
an advance toward Christ in Heaven? Your Faith in Christ, and Hope of Heaven,
are as the Dawnings of this Day to you: and every look at Christ in Glory, is
as a Lift toward Heaven, and as a Foretast of it. A look at Christ in Glory
bore up the Spirit of that Proto-martyr Stephen above the debasements which
carnal Fears produce in others, and would otherwise have brought him under.

9. Why should not Things above make us remember and send our Hearts to Christ
above? had not Christ bought the Prize of Heaven, Ephesians. 1.11, 14. and made our
way thereto, Heb. 10.19, 20. and peirced the Vail, Heb. 9.8. and won and worn
the Crown, through his own Blood, Heb. 1.3. our being with our Lord in Glory
had been beyond our reach and hope, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. An open Heaven for us cost
Christ a wounded Heart. He was poor to make us rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. Our springs of
Hopes and Joys came from this cloven Lehi (if I may allude to Judge. 15.19.)
where the Spring that God clave was not in the Jaw Bone, but in the place
called Lehi, because of the miraculous execution that was done by the Jawbone
of an Ass, (...) Maxilla.
(as Lehi siggnifies); and should not Heaven in hopes inthrone our Lord in
Heart? 2 Cor. 5.14. It was this made the Apostle's Heart so warm and active;
Wherefore we labor, etc. Verse. 9. Good Will indeed toward Men, when such good
things were purchased for them, Luke 2.14. O then Christians, if there be either
Worth or Love, Bowels or Bounty in that Heavenly State, so aggravated by our
there ever being with the Lord, let all your Hearts be evermore for Christ. He
walked in the Valley of the Shadow of Death, that you might fear no evil, and
felt the Pangs and Strokes of Death, with all the loads and bitterness thereof
consistent with the dignity, innocence, and designs of such a Person, as the
Son of God was, engaged in such Mediatorial Work, and all pursuant to this
great Design, That Life and Immortallity might be entailed upon us, who our
selves could not live till he himself had undergone and conquered Death. Nor
would he bring us to himself, but under such advantages, and upon such terms as
should evidently and greatly minister to universal satisfaction and renown. So
black was that thick Cloud wherein this Sun of Righteousness did set and pass
into his glorious State, thus to prepare our way to himself in Heaven, as that
the sight thereof made his awakened Soul to tremble and to solicit God for
help; Mark 14.34. Heb. 5.8, 9. Yet through this Cloud he wrought his Way, to
diffuse his Glory through the Heavenly Regions; and to make the Hosts and the
Inhabitants thereof the amazed Witnesses of his triumphant Grace and
Faithfulness: And thence to afford those Influences which should prepare us
for, and suit us to that State. Blessed is Heaven that Christ is in it, and
blessed are holy Hearts below that Christ in Heaven is theirs, and for them.
Christ there enthroned, and employed for us, should loosen all our Hearts from
all save what his Heart is upon. His Work and Presence in that holy Place, has
both its Voice and Force. He speaks not now to us in roaring Thunderclaps from
the burning Mount; nor does that Blood through which God brought him from the
Dead, and consecrated the High Priest of our Profession to his most noble Work
within the Vail, cry like the Blood of Abel for Revenges, to fill our Hearts
with Enmity or Anguish; but it is an alluring grateful Whisper from betwixt the
Cherubims of Grace and Glory; a Call to Pisgah thence to behold Emanuel's Land,
that promised and expected State of Holiness and Joy: hence therefore let us
send our Hearts to Christ as a poor Widow's Mite, only to acknowledge our
Obligations to him, and to testify how much we love our Lord and Head. And, O
thou Prince of Life and Glory, thou Oracle of Truth, the sealed Amen of all
God's Promises, and of our glorious Expectations; thou Conqueror of Graves, of
Hearts, and Hell; whom to behold is our great Hope and Joy, (for without Thee,
the Prince of Life, we cannot live, and never look to know what it is indeed to
live till we be got to Thee). Lend us a Beam of Light to view thee by; that
every Look may melt our Hearts, and make them shine and burn. That thus our
Admirations and Affections may bear some small proportion to their Object, and
more effectually secure us from losing Hearts below, and throwing them away
upon unworthy things. We lose Affections in mistaken worth; and thou get'st
little else hereby but Slights and Stabs, and all because we know not Thee the
Lord of Glory. How little is thy Love admired by us, because we feel it not!
how little are we affected with thee, because we have not seen thee! how little
do we bemoan our absence from thee, because we are so little apprehensive of
what thy glorious Presence so liberally produces and dispenses! how easily are
we courted and prevailed upon to forget thee, because we do so little think
upon, and are so little affected with thy Wounds below, and thy Worth and Joys
above? Eyes have not seen, Hearts cannot love. O lift, and help, and warm, and
fix, and conquer all. O let our Hearts be made as fast and pure as Heaven. Let
preparations be complete in Hearts, as well as in those Mansions of eternal
Glory with thy self, which thou have ordered and encouraged us to expect. O let
not Grace and Love, as large as Heaven, be under our Feet any more, but upon
our Hearts. Could ever Heaven be ours, or found and valued by us as Heaven
indeed, without thy Sufferings, Triumph, Grace and Presence? And can we think
on Heaven indeed, and yet forget the Throne of Majesty and Grace that is there,
and him that sits thereon, acting pursuantly to this delightful Hope, that we
shall see him in his Meridian Glory, and be with him for ever?

10. Let nothing have or influence your Hearts below, but that which suits the
Heart of Christ above. All must be like the Lord that are to live with him; and
he that has this Hope in him, must purify himself as Christ is pure, 1 John
3.2, 3. Whatever Christ died to start below, he lives above to propagate, to
vindicate, and complete. He has as true a Heart for Godliness now as ever: and
he was called the Holy Child after his Exaltation, Acts 4.27. Christ's Heart is
pure, so are his Joys; for they are the Joys of Holiness in its utmost luster,
vigor, and extent. You must be pure, or Christ and you must part; the
Constitution of the heavenly State admits of no disorder. His holy Soul abhors
what seems to shake his Father's Throne. He cannot bear it, that a filthy Soul
should stand before him, for God's Name is in him, Exodus 23.21. In that he
lives, he lives to God, Romans 6.10. He died with Holiness upon his Heart; and as
a Martyr for it, as well as to make an atonement for us, 1 Pet. 2.22, 23. With
a pure Heart he went to Heaven; and can you think that Purity can wast and rot,
when faced with the most immediate Visions of God, and entertained with all
things most expressive of God's complacency in it? Surely God's greatest
Favors must bear the clearest Characters and Signatures of his essential
Purity and Holiness. Has Holiness lost its Interest in Heaven, since Christ
went thither? Or has Sin gotten ground by Christ's ascent to Glory? O Sinners,
be no longer doting Fools, and stupid Sots. Lay by your Venom, and cleanse your
Hearts and Hands, Jam. 4.8. 1 Cor. 6.9, to 11. The Heart, the Blood, the
Inheritance, the Crown and Triumphs of our Lord are all engaged to revive
Holiness in the World, Psalm. 130.4. Dote not upon deceitful Riches; Christ is
the Pearl of Price, by whom you are to be enriched in every thing. Let not the
Mammon of Unrighteousness usurp the Throne of Christ, the over-valued World is
a perfect Enemy to Christ, to Heaven and Heavenliness. Be not perplexed nor
over-charg'd with Cares, be not intangl'd whilst you are allowed to be
employed. Take heed of Delilaes, lest you lose your Locks, and be bereaved of
your Christian Strength and Hopes. Fear not the Frowns, prize not the Smiles of
Mortal Dust beyond Divine Allowance. Christ hates Competitors; Christ did it
not below, he loves it not above. Be not buried alive in Sloth, Romans 12.11.
there is nothing in Heaven but Life and Joy in full conformity to all the Laws
and Purposes of that complete Theocracy. Diligence brings in rich Delights;
it is Sloth that makes Hell so full, and Heaven so empty. Be not high-minded,
neither court nor cherish Self in any dress by Pride and Rage. Haman's
preferment made him but high enough to reach a Halter. Learn of Christ, Mat.
11.29. Heaven could not bear the Pride of Angels, no more can Christ endure the
Pride of Man. Please not your selves, or others, till you have answered all
your Master's Claims, Romans 15.1, 2, 3. Gal. 1.10. Be knit to nothing but to
your Lord in Heaven; for why should he be made an Underling or Cipher here
below? Christ ours in Heaven! a better Patrimony and Inheritance than States
and Kingdoms here. Be more sollicitous about the temper, tendency, and genuine
Issues of your Hearts and Ways, than about the Events of Providence, 2 Cor.
5.9, 10. Your best Concernments are with Christ; if they succeed, you cannot
lose Treasures above, and your exalted Head in Bonds, in Power, and in
Possession to secure them, speak you too safe and rich to be undone. Be silent
Prostrates at the foot of Christ; if his presence be your Happiness, he must
needs be much above you every way: therefore observe the Words, the Looks, the
Steps of Christ, and let them rule you: And let his Dispensations here below be
all admired by you, and rested in. Christ is in Heaven about your Work; and
that he be pleased by you, does most concern you, and best become you. And when
you come to be with him for ever, how deeply and quickly will he make you
sensible of that great Wisdom, wonderful Grace, and mighty Power, which brought
you safely to himself in Glory.

11. And O what a Figure will Christ then make in Heaven, when that State is
completely filled, and when he has gathered all his Family up to Glory? 2 Pet.
1.11. If in those preparatory Scenes of Providence wherein the Redeemer addressed
himself to Action, and began his glorious Achievements, and was privileged to
open the Sealed Book, there were such Acclamations, and solemn Congratulations
of this his peculiar Privilege and Prerogative by all in Heaven and Earth; and
if there were such prostrate Venerations of him, as we find in Rev. 4.8-11. and
5.9-14. and this conjunctly with his Father: How will his Name and Glory be
aggrandized when all his Favorites shall be with him? All the Mysteries of
Godliness relate to Christ, and have their undoubted Aggravations from him, 1 Timothy 3.16. and how wondrously glorious has God represented him to us below?
Col. 1.15-19. and 2.2, 3, 9, 10. Heb. 1.2-13. Rev. 1.5, 6. John 14.6. And if
these (...), these earthly things; [these shadowings forth of Christ and of his
Kingdom to us, even by Schemes accommodated to our Capacities in this our dark
and distant State] be looked upon as scarcely to be credited by Masters in
Israel, and yet so wonderful in the Eyes of the discerning Christian: What
would the (...) be then thought to be, were they discovered to us in words more
suited to their Excellency, than to our Capacity? John 3.12. with 1 Cor. 1.23,
24. and 2.9-14. and 2.12, 2-4. We find great notices taken of him by the
Heavenly State whilst in this outward Court, ministering in the Port and posture
of a Servant: For as the Spirit of Prophecy foretold him, Types represented
him, and the Word of Promise entitled us to the hopes and benefits of his
Appearance, and propitious Mediation: So the Spirit forms his Body, Angels
declare his Birth, Miracles attest his Dignity, Doctrines, and Authority, and
Ability to form us for, and bring us to Himself. Nature obeys him, Devils fly
before him, Moses and Elias talk with him; Souls come in by Multitudes, and
value nothing like his Person, Conduct, Government, and Grace. God owns him as
his Son, as his Royal Oracle and Agent, by a Voice from Heaven, 2 Pet. 1.16-21.
1 John 5.6-12. and all the Institutions and Transactions of the Kingdom of God
amongst Men, must have the Name of Christ enstamp'd upon them. And when Christ
had finished his Course, and Work below, God raises him from the Dead, and
shows him openly; commands the Angels to worship him, and to report his
Resurrection: makes this the great Base and Pillar of his Gospel-Kingdom;
carries him up to Heaven, many hundreds of credible Witnesses beholding his
Ascension; and sets him at his own right Hand, putting the Reigns of all
Government into his Hands. And then the Father sends the Holy Spirit, in the
Son's Name, to glorify him, (as Christ had said before, John 16.13-15.) to seal
this Truth, to enable Persons to declare and prove it, and to make the Gospel
prosperous in its great Design. But as to Christ himself, he in the heavenly
Places and Affairs (for (...) imports both) sits far above all Principality,
Power, Might, Dominion, and every Name that is named in -- even the World to
come, having all things under his Feet; because he is given as Head over all
things to his Church, which is his Body, the fullness of him that fills all in
all, Ephesians. 1.20-23. Hence the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named of
him, Ephesians. 3.15. The Church in the compleatness of its Triumphant State, is
called his Everlasting Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11. And when he shall have put down
all Rule, Authority and Power, he will deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, as
a fit Present to the Majesty of Heaven, as a clear Proof and Monument of his
own Mediatorial Faithfulness, and as fit Subjects of his own Paternal
Government and Delight, or as his acquired Inheritance to possess for ever, 1
Cor. 15.24-28. For who can any way imagine, that the delivery of these Subjects
to the Father shall be the deposing of the Son from his triumphant Government,
that well considers Christ as placed by God upon the same Throne with himself?
Rev. 3.21. Is not Christ said to reign for ever and ever? Rev. 11.15. O what a
Pleonasm (or fullness of expression) is there in that passage! Ephesians. 3.21. It
is a Doxology richly phrased, and that (as in the Greek, (...)) whereto I never
yet read or heard of any Parallel in any Greek Author. See also 2 Pet. 3.18. so
vast is the reach of the inspiring Spirit, so deep the Thoughts, so full the
Heart of the inspired Penman; because so great the Dignity and Prerogatives of
our enthroned and glorified Redeemer in this his Day and Kingdom. What Eye so
sharp and strong on Earth, as to comprehend, or tolerably to reach the sense of
that great Passage, in 1 Timothy 6.14.16 (...) Timothy is charged to keep the
^^^mandment -- till the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, (mind now what
follows) which in his Times he shall show, who is the blessed and only
Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; who only has Immortality,
dwelling in Light, which no Man can approach unto, whom no Man has seen, nor
can see; to whom is (as well as be) Honor and Power everlasting? Amen. And
here, O that my heart was equal to wha^ poor purblind I discern in this great
Passage, as showing what notice must and will be taken of Jesus Christ
hereafter. For tho all these Attributions be made to God the Father, yet will
this glorious Name appear exceedingly in the Revelation of the Son from Heaven,
who is said to come in the Glory of his Father, Luke 9.26. And we cannot think
his Heavenly Glory to be less than what attends him on his Throne of Judgment.
And when all Eyes shall see him upon his Throne in Heaven; what Wonders shall
we then behold! the clearest Mirror, and most genuine Image of the Invisible
God, shedding abroad his Glory throughout that perfect World; and by the
visible Luster of his Eminencies, the boundless Dispensations of his Love, and
the most accurate Government of his entire Family and Kingdom, will he manifest
his Interest in God, and our Interest in him, to be so great and grateful to
the whole Society, as to command and gain all Hearts, Eyes, Services and
Doxologies.

12. O what a Prize have we to make improvement of? What! live with Christ for
ever! and then with such Solemnities be caught up to him to meet him in the
Air, so as to go away with him to Glory, and to part no more! Is such a Truth
and State only to exercise our speculative Searches, to entertain our wanton
Fancies, to minister to discursive Entertainments and bold Disputes; or only by
some politic Pretenses thereunto, to serve our Carnal Interests thereupon!
Think we that Christ, in his Descent from Heaven, his Return thither, his
Exaltation there, or his determined and declared Purpose to enstate us with
himself therein, only intended that we should trifle with such Matters, or make
them Engines for our ambitious and selfish Aims and Purposes? No greater
profanation and abuse of such a State, and Hope, and Friend in Heaven than
this, that Christ himself should be dishonored, and his great Aim and End
concerning us neglected and defeated, by an ill Temper and Behavior in and
from us. Hence then suffer a word of Exhortation, and that to these following
things.

1. Clear up your Notions of this State and Hope; know with whom and where you
are to be, and to what Purposes, Col. 3.1-4. You are to be with Christ in his
Eternal Kingdom, there to behold his Glory, in all the Heights and Accuracies
of full conformity to him, that even there your raised and completed Beings
may serve the Purposes, and reap the Comforts of your Stations there. God's
Household is called a Building fitly framed together, here growing up (and there
grown up) to be an holy Temple in the Lord; and all are built together for an
Habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.21, 22. And these Ephesians (as
others are) were to be filled unto all the Fullness of God; [(...)] Ephesians. 3.19.
And what does this insinuate? The use and luster of the whole Temple is not to
be confined and ascribed unto every Part. Nor are all the Parts to be in every
thing alike; it is rather Symmetry and Harmony, than Identity or Equality,
wherein the beautifulness of that Building lies. And indeed, variety of Parts,
well laid and kept together, shows greatly the Skill and Wisdom of the
Architect. God himself only knows what vast Numbers of Inhabitants that State
contains; Ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands, Rev.
5.11. and, a thousand thousands ministered to him; and ten thousand times ten
thousand stood before him. Dan. 7.10. And these vast Multitudes are all
digested into their several proper Ranks and Orders. Hence, Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, Powers, Colos. 1.16. Might, and Names named in the World to
come, Ephesians. 1.21. And the fallen Angels are said to have left their
Principality, (...), Jude 6. Thus Christ assigns Authority in his Day; to some,
over ten, to others, over five Cities, Luke 19.17-19. There is (says the
Apostle) one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, another Glory of the Stars,
which themselves also in their Glory, differ each from other. So also is the
Resurrection of the Dead, 1 Cor. 15.41, 42. And will not these be placed and
used according to their different degrees in Glory, in the Kingdom of God and
of Christ? It seems very improbable to me, (pace aliorum) that all in Heaven
are equal in their Capacities, Stations, and Circumstances; this only Obiter;
and with all submission to farther Discoveries and better Judgments, But that
which is mainly aimed at from the Apostle's hint, [unto all the fulness] is
this, that we are here to grow up to all the Fullness of God, viz. to that
degree of proficiency, and at last Perfection, which may best fill up and
answer our fixed Place and Station in the living Temple of the great God. And
then accordingly will God place and use us in the Heavenly Kingdom; whereinto,
accordingly we are minded of an abundant Entrance, 2 Pet. 1.11. But to the main
Concern. Think not that Christ will bring you to himself, to give you sensual
Entertainments, or to exempt you from all further service to his Father and
himself; or to feed and satisfy an arrogant and revengeful Temper in you, as if
the Satisfactions and Advancements of that State only were to make you
contemptuously to insult over those Enemies of yours who had vexed or wronged
you in the Flesh. Nor are you there only to sit still, and gaze at the
beautiful Objects of that State; nor only to sing your vocal Hallelujah's; nor
only to entertain the Majesty of the great Jehovah, and the visible Beauty of
that World, the Man Christ Jesus, with Commendations and Applauses, as if your
Oral Panegyricks could be your delight; for the highest flights of Speech are
low, the most masculine vigor of Expression is but flat and languid; and the
most intimate Inspections, and vastest reaches of created Intellects, are but
short and narrow as to the Objects of your Praise and Wonder in the Heavens,
Neh. 9.5. Job 11. 7-9. It Is true, Christ Jesus is the Image of the invisible
God; and the Glory of the Divine Nature (personally or bodily dwelling in him
in its Fullness, Col. 2.9.) must suit its Emanations and Transmissions through
the humane Nature, (and all its discoveries otherwise of it self) unto the
Capacities and Concerns of that most excellent Society above; which yet, as
Creatures have their Bounds, (for no Nature can be infinite that is created).
Whence we may easily infer, as I conceive, an infinite residue of Perfection,
(if I may call it so) which never can be known by any mere Creature. And it is
more than I can prove, that God neither has made, nor can make a sort of
Beings, to whom he does, or will, or may discover himself by a Name higher, and
clothed with more lofty Attributions, than either we, or those Spirits above
(called Angels, from their Ministrations to this World) can reach, or are
capacitated for. But, De Deo vel vera dicere periculosum. I dread to walk in
the impossible or forbidden searches of the incomprehensible Sourse and Abyss
of Perfection, lest I should meet with that severe and awful Reprimand, Who is
this that darkens Counsel by Words without Knowledge? Job 38.2. But this may
show how little our Words or Thoughts can reach God's own essential Perfection.
Yet is this Godhead united to the Man Christ Jesus: But how, I solemnly profess
I know not, though I believe it to be true, and think it easily demonstrable
from Sacred Writ: And I think it as copiously asserted, and plainly proved, as
almost any Article of the Christian Faith; and I take the Gospel to have very
little Mystery comparatively, if so far diluted as to lose this central
Mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. And hence it plainly follows, that to be with the Lord,
is a great aggravation of the Glory and Delightfulness of the Heavenly State,
it being not improbable to me that Christ himself will be the Mediator of
Fruition, as he has been of Acquisition. And therefore to proceed; we cannot
think, that to be with Christ infers a Peerage with him, or Partnership in his
Divine Excellencies and Prerogatives, Rev. 3.21. We are to worship him, and not
to be worshipped with him, Rev. 5.13. Phil. 2.10, 11. John 5.12, 13. What is
Worship, but, Obsequium alicui praestitum propter excellentiam? A reverent
acknowledgment of Excellence, and fit Respects and Homage paid thereto? And if
then Christ the Mediator be God-Man, has he not therein the preeminence above
all other Creatures in the Universe? and the Respects which must be paid
thereto, what Worship will you call it? Names are to be suited unto things,
they cannot otherwise duly represent them. Christ then as Mediator is more
excellent than any mere Creature, therefore as a middle Person to be more
regarded: And what then will you call this overplus of Respects? (if I may
call it so) I know we may distinguish, where we cannot divide; and whether
Divine Worship may fitly be distinguished upon or not, I leave to the more
accurate to determine. But I conceive that God expects, that the Humane Nature,
as individuated in that exalted Person Jesus Christ, shall have such Honor
paid thereto, as none besides, in Heaven or Earth, shall be allowed to have. In
a word, Christ as Mediator, is not so great as God, therefore the Worship must
not rise so high: Yet, as Mediator, he is above all Creatures, and more than
they to be respected. Consider well Heb. 1.3-6. As Man there is Humane
Excellence in its Height; as God, there is increated Excellence: As Mediator,
there is a sitting at God's right Hand: and he that sits there, must and will
be accordingly acknowledged, and had in reverence by all in Heaven. And now let
us see a little what that State imports, that we may form right Notions of it.
And here we will, 1. Premise the Excellence of the Place, as suited to all the
Grandieurs of the State, Ephesians. 4.10. the Inheritance of the Saints in Light,
Col. 1.12. the Building made by God, 2 Cor. 5.1. Heb. 11.10, 16. and 13.14.
Joh. 14.2. But where and how it is situated, divided and accommodated, no Pisgah
high enough on Earth for us to see it from, Rev. 21.9-23. and 22.1-5. And, 2.
the Perfections of the Subjects to make them receptive of that State. Defecated
Souls, and Spiritual Bodies, Heb. 12.14. Mat. 5.3. and 1 John 3.3. with 1 Cor.
15.50-54. 2 Cor. 4.14. 1 Thessalonians. 14.14-17. For none must go with Christ to
Glory, nor live with him for ever, whose Hearts and Lives are not for him
whilst here; and whose Spirits are not transformed, and so adapted or suited to
the Privileges and Ministrations of the Heavenly Kingdom, Rev. 21.27. And
therefore it is supposed and concluded, that the Constitution of the Soul be
sound and sweet, and fit for its immediate entrance into Heaven, and its abode
with Christ for ever, Romans 8.9-11. The Spirit of Christ imprinciples,
Providence exercises all these heavenly Principles; our Covenant-state obliges
us to the most lively exercise thereof: Habits are fixed and strengthened by
Acts; and the Soul's first immediate look at Christ, compleats its
Transformation; and then is it admitted into the presence of its Lord. So that
in strictness of Thoughts and Speech, the Temper of the Person must be
distinguished from his State, as that which qualifies him for his admission
thereinto. And then as to the Body, it must not be Flesh and Blood, for that
will be too weak and gross for Christ his so glorious and majestic Presence,
and for the Visions and Employments of the State above. Saul could not bear the
Glory of Christ's personal Appearance to him, without astonishment and
blindness, Acts 9.3-12. And in his Ecstasy he knew not where and what he was,
embodied or not, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3. And the appearance of an Angel made others as
dead Men, Mat. 28.2-4. And the Royal and Great Prophet, when he saw his Glory,
cried out, Woe is me, I am undone, Isa. 6.5. with John 12.41. How strangely did
Christ's Transfiguration confound Peter, James, and John? Mark 9.2-6. So that
the Body must it self be changed, in order to its meeting and being with the
Lord, 1 Cor. 15.52, 53. These things are then to be distinguished from the
State it self, as needful Preparations for it. Now therefore to the State it
self; and here I shall avoid all fond Imaginations, and Conjectures, and speak
hereof as God shall enable me, and does instruct me. This State must then
include these things: (and how much more I know not.) 1. The Visions of the
Glory of our Lord; or, beholding Christ in all his Glory: And so our being
where he is, Joh. 17.24. and that, not to astonishment and consternation, but
to delightful admiration, John 16.22. Jude 24. And here both Mind and Body have
their looks at Christ to feast them both for ever. The symmetry and delicate
Proportions of his Humane Body, the Beauty of his Face, the Majesty of his
Countenance, the Pleasingness of his Speech, the placid Aspects of his smiling
Looks at us, the Glory of his Throne, the orderly Disposals, Attendances, and
Ministrations of all his Favorites and Attendants; with all the awful and yet
delightful decencies of his Gestures and Deportments toward all with him, and
the Expressions of Divinity in all this. O what an ocular Entertainment will
this amount unto! What shall our Souls say then to all his evident
Prerogatives, his wise Conduct, his excellent Government, his bounteous
Dispensations, his intimate Converses with us, and the delight he evidently
takes in the Harmony and welfare of that State? And who knows what besides? But
this I now remember was touched upon before. 2. The glorious Benefits and
Pleasures that will result herefrom: There is Glory given, as well as Glory
seen, John 17.22. called an Inheritance of the Saints in Light, Col. 1.12. the
Crown of Life, Jam. 1.12. A Kingdom prepared to be inherited, Mat. 25.34. The
Joy of our Lord, ver. 21. Fullness of Joy and Pleasures for evermore, Psalm.
16.11. We shall be honorable and triumphing Members of the glorified Church in
Heaven, and there and such for ever; signalized with the Name of God, and of
that perfected Corporation, and of our glorified Redeemer. Whether the Deity
will (or can be) the Object of our immediate Vision, I much doubt, and am
prompted so to do, from 1 Timothy 1.17. and 6.16. I only say, I doubt it much, but
I cannot judge my self infallible; but, when with Christ in Glory, our Knowledge
of God will be more clear than now, and have more deep Impressions, and
livelier Influences upon the whole Man than now it has. We shall be like to
Angels, being the Children of God, and of the Resurrection, Luke 20.36. for
then the Privileges and Prerogatives of our adopted raised State, will be in
our actual and full Possession. We shall be ever under the smiles of infinite
Love, and under the most invigorating Influences of the God of Life; whose
constant overshadowings of us shall draw forth all the vital Energies of our
Faculties, (and perhaps of some Faculties which yet are latent in us, as being
fitter for the Felicities and Employments of the End, than of the Way; which
yet I rather offer than assert); and when exalted Faculties and Powers are
placed amongst such glorious Objects, in such vast multitudes, and with such
great variety; when we converse and dwell with Angels, so numerous, excellent,
and endearing; when we have such glorious Entertainments and Employments with
and for the Lord Redeemer; when we shall from himself receive immediately what
he here promised, and has there prepared for us; the Fruits and Harvest of all
our Sufferings, Labors, Prayers, and Hopes; when all our Dangers, Snares,
Fears, Griefs and Maladies are gone; when all Christ's Enemies and ours are
underfoot; when the Divine Life, in its meridian Strength and Luster, shows it
self; when all the Subjects of that State appear in their most accurate
conformities unto their great Exemplar, each one as Christ resembling the
Children of a King, (as those in a far lower sense, Judge. 8.18.) Princes to
look to, (as those Ezekiel. 23.15. Not after the manner of the Babylonians, but)
after the manner of the Sons of God: O what a State will this State be! To
close this Head: He that has a genuine Idea, and right Notion of this State,
must represent it to himself as that wherein Nature is perfected as to Things
and Persons, and fixed in that Perfection; and Divine Government is completed
in all its Constitutions and Administrations; and all the Privileges thereof
dispensed, its Services performed exactly by all the Subjects thereof; and the
great Ends and Purposes thereof attained and answered to universal
satisfaction, and all this in the presence of the Lord, upon his Throne,
encompassed with his Redeemed Ones, who see his Glory, bear his Image,
acknowledge his rich Grace and Love toward them, and serve and glorify his Name
for ever, to his full satisfaction. God taking great delight in them, and they
in him; and owning his Son before them all, as one that pleased his heart in
bringing all these Sons to Glory, whilst all these Morning Stars together sing
their Hallelujahs with great harmony and cheerfulness, and shout for joy, that
God is all in all by Jesus Christ with them; and that they can with so much
order, cheerfulness, and vigor, serve and please him most entirely and
delightfully with his own in that August Assembly; for the presence of the Lord
Redeemer there, resembled, loved, and served by all the Inheritors, Citizens,
and Subjects of that State, with so much Wisdom, Holiness, and Vigor, speaks
Heaven indeed. But let me not run too far.

2. Comfort your selves, and one another, with these words, 1 Thessalonians. 4.18.
Think seriously upon 1 Pet. 1.3-9. Put on the Breast Plate of Faith and Love;
and for an Helmet the Hope of Salvation. For God has not appointed us to
Wrath, but to obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us, that
whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him. Wherefore comfort
your selves together, and edify one another, even as also ye do, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
8-11. The word here rendered Comfort, is (...), which is indeed, to play the
Advocate, as the Matter shall require. To plead the Cause, the Ground and
Usefulness of this our glorious Expectation, against discouraging and
afflictive Providence, as they are otherwise apt to dispirit or disturb us.
When we are prone to swoon or tire, through the difficult Duties, heavy
Burdens, smart Temptations, strong Corruptions, and intricating postures of
Affairs below: when we have little else in humane view, but great Work, and
little Stength; huge Perplexities and strange Intricacies in every Article of
Concern, manifold Enemies and Hindrances assaulting us continually, and
pressing most severely on us; and very little help or hope in view: O let us
then our selves (and quicken one another to) repair unto this Hope as our best
Refuge, and our most sure and steadfast Anchor within the Vail, whither our
Prodromus or Forerunner is for us entered, Heb. 6.18. Romans 8.18. 2 Cor. 4.
16-18. using it as our richest Cordial, and urging it rationally and closely
upon the Heart, until we are brought to our delightful and absolute repose
therein.

1. Comfort your selves with those words, and so begin at Home, Romans 5. 2.
Phil. 3.3. For unless such grateful words come from the Speaker's Heart unto
the Hearers, from Principle to Principle, they are not likely to have such
invigorating Influences upon Souls, nor to have such kindly Operations and
Effects in Christian Conversation, as the Case requires. Vain talk about so
great an Article of Hope, is dreadful: and it is no better as to him that
speaks about it, until his own Heart duly be affected with it. Great Notions,
and high flights of Speech, are but as swelling Words of Vanity, to him whose
Tongue is not attended and actuated with a transformed, and thereupon,
concerned Soul. Nor can indeed the Speaker's End be right, whilst his Heart is
naught, 2 Pet. 2.18. What God may do for the sake of Truth, and with regard to
his own Interest and Institution, is one thing; and what such an heartless
Talker may expect, is another thing. And he that makes no reckoning of this
blessed State and Hope himself, will not be very much concerned how such things
take with others, unless as it may serve those lower Interests or popular
Applauses which are so much eyed and idolized by himself. But it is profaneness
to the height, to prostitute such a Sacred Ordinance as Christian Communion,
and such a glorious State and Hope, as being ever with the Lord, unto so mean
and vile an End as ultimate selfishness. O then make through work within, and be
what all must be, that are to be for ever with the Lord. Your Directory in this
Case, you have in Tit. 2.11-14. 2 Pet. 1.5-11. and 3.11-14. and when that is
done, then make this State your stated and occasional Consolation and
Refreshment, that so you may comfort one another with the Comforts wherewith ye
your selves are comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1.3-5. And what now is it, think you,
to comfort your selves herewith? I will tell you, (as desiring, laboring, and
hoping, through your entreated Prayer for me, and the supply of the Spirit to
me, thus to do) It is, 1. by close and solemn contemplation, to represent this
State unto your selves, (according to the Gospel-Scheme or Figure) as great,
sure, near, and suited every way to make those happy who obtain it; as yours,
by promise and in hope, (having been purchased, and being now possessed by Christ
for you; whose Spirit has also sealed you thereunto, and is your Pledge and
Earnest of it); and as of far greater consequence and concernment to you, than
all which you can meet with here can countervail. And, 2. it is pertinently and
prudently to accommodate this your Encouragement and Support to every Exigence,
so as to make you calm and easy in your selves, and sensibly and evidently
pleased herewith, whatever this your Hope may cost you here. You must consider
and apply it, and regularly enforce it upon your exercised Souls, and live upon
it as your Food and Treasure, and rest herein, when little else but Toil and
Sorrow here becomes your daily Entertainment. But I have more largely handled
this, in my printed Sermon on Psalm. 42.11. in Dr. Anneslie's Morning Exercise,
and thither I refer you, (though ill printed).

2. Comfort one another with these words, Mal. 3.16. it is needful, useful, and
delightful thus to do; for God has set this State, thus characterised before
us, as our Directory, to show us what we are to be and do, 1 John 3.2, 3. as
our Encouragement hereunto, 1 Cor. 15.58. and as the Reward hereof, Heb.
10.35-37. We are to give our Sentiments and Notions of this State, and to
represent it in its greatness each to other. We are to confer about its
certainty, and so to show and settle the reasons of our belief hereof, to
discourse the nearness of it, lest otherwise the Midnight-Cry surprise us; to
talk about the Means and Evidence of our being entitled thereunto, and of its
suitableness to all our holy Principles and Instincts, and to the Capacities
and true Welfare of our Souls, and of those great and glorious Purposes which
it may subserve; and to converse about the Snares which may be broken, and of
the Mischiefs which may be prevented by our lively Thoughts, Belief, and Hopes,
and Relishes of this blissful State; and by our warm Discourse about it. And we
are to quicken one another to comparative Thoughts about it; that is, to
consider it in its Transcendencies above all that rivals or opposes it.
Sometimes our Mouths or Palats have lost their taste and relish; and then
Discourse hereon must cure us; and the great Excellencies of our Lord, and of
our abode with him for ever, must be displayed afresh. Sometimes our Hearts are
out of hope, and then Christ as our Advocate and Head in Heaven, preparing all
Things for our solemn meeting with him, and as the Patron of this Hope, may be
the proper and fit Theme for Christian Conference about. Sometimes our Minds
and Thoughts are vagrant, and like loose Garments, rather hinder us than help
us; and then some warm discourse about this State may reduce our distracted
Spirits to some advantageous composures. Sometimes our Hearts are cold and
careless, and then some applicatory Conference about this heavenly State and
Privilege, may make them burn again within us. Sometimes the frame of Spirit,
and course of Life, which is most congenial with this Lord and State, is much
neglected; and we are degenerating into unchristian Principles, Dispositions
and Practices; and then to speak of Christ in all those Glories where he and we
must dwell together, may recover us from our Decays and Lapses. Sometimes our
Devotions have not their proper Life and Spirit in them, as Prayer, Praise,
Thanks, Sabbath-Solemnities, and Sacramental Commemorations and Transactions,
etc. and then right Words warmly delivered and enforced, may make our Altars
flame afresh. And sometimes we are in the House of Mourning; some sick, some
weak, some dead, and some twice dead, all more or less lamenting the mournful
State of Things, Souls, Persons, etc. and then for ever with the Lord closely
discoursed, may afford very great relief. For Christ, and all his Saints with
him in Glory, allays the bitterness of all such Cups, makes all Conditions
easy, clears up the Brow, and warms the Heart, and adds new Life and Vigor to
all our Winter and Summer-Graces, Romans 5.2, 3. Jam. 1. 2-12. and fully
reconciles us to all those Scenes of Sorrows, and to Death it self, through
which we are to come to Christ. Converse then more about this thing, for no
Salt like this to season Conversation with, Col. 4.5. and nothing fitter to
refresh the drooping Soul. And therefore, Ye Beloved, building up your selves
(and one another) on your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your
selves in the Love of God, looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
Eternal Life, Jude 20, 21. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our
Father, who has loved us, and given us everlasting Consolation, and good Hope
through Grace, comfort your Hearts, and establish you in every good Word and
Work, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16, 17. And to him that is able to keep you from falling, and
to present you faultless before the presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy:
To the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power,
both now and ever. Amen. Jude 24, 25.

FINIS.

