Men are Gods, OR THE DIGNITY of MAGISTRACY, and the DUTY of the MAGISTRATE: As
it was presented in a Sermon At the Assize holden at Hertford for that County,
on August 2. 1653.

By George Swinnocke M. A. and Preacher of the Gospel at Rickmersworth in
Hertfordshire.

Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people.

Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers: for there is no
power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Nevil Simmons, Bookseller in Kederminster, 1660.

Ornatissimis nec non pientissimis Viris, EDVARDO IRONSIDE ET JOHANNI HUMPHRYS
ARMIGERIS: Hanc suam qualem qualem concionem, Apud judices olim habitam, and
jam (paulo correctiorem, multo auctiorem) in lucem editam, In perpetuum grati
animi monumentum,

D. D. D. Georgius Swinnocke.

To his Reverend Friend Mr. Thomas Hall, B. D. Pastor of Kings-Norton in
Worcestershire.
Esteemed Sir,
I Have now at last, in answer to your desires, and in pursuance of my promise,
sent you my Meditations on the 6th verse of the 82. Psalm. Indeed soon after
the Sermon was preached, I was sought to, that it might be printed; But I was
then scarce flegd (not having in years equald the days of the shortest month)
and so unwilling to venture a flight into the world, lest I should fall. And
truly my Apology still must be with the good Father (when the fruits of his
youth were stolen to the Press) Infans eram, Hiero. in proae. ad Obad.
nec dum scribere noveram; Nunc, ut nihil aliud profecerim, saltem Socraticum
illud habeo, Scio quod nescio. Such as it is, I commend it to you; and the more
cheerfully, because its younger brother, which two or three years since,
supplanted it, and got away the birthright, did meet with a blessing. The good
Lord make it instrumental (in these unhappy and unholy days, wherein Moses and
Aaron, Magistracy and Ministry are trampled under foot) for the glory of his
Name, and the good of his people. So prays he who never saw you, yet loves
and honors you, and desires to be frequently and fervently remembered by you
at the throne of grace,

George Swinnocke.

TO THE READER.
IN my Exposition of the 82. Psalm, when I came the 7th Verse, I perused a
Sermon of my Brother Swinnocks (which he preached before the Judges) on that
Verse. I found it so full and satisfactory, that I must freely confess I
received more Light from that single Sermon, then from all the Commentators
which I had by me. Whereupon (perceiving by his Epistle Dedicatory that he had
preached an Assise Sermon on Verse the sixth, which lay by him Unprinted) I
requested him to publish it with my Commentary on this Psalm; and thou have it
here annexed to it. The Author and his Labors are above my praise; If thou
please to accept of these our fraternal first fruits (if the Lord bless us with
life and health together) thou may expect ere long from us a Commentary on
Psalm 73. a Psalm very seasonable for us in these times, who are exercised with
such variety of Providence. It were to be wished that the Ministers of the
Gospel would join their strength in the promoting the truth: Jesuits can do so
to destroy it, why should not we in defending it? That it may be so, is the
desire, and shall be the endeavor of

Thine in the Lord, Thomas Hall.

Errata.
PAge 232. line 19. for to render evil for good is God-like. read, to render
good for evil is God-like. p. 238. l. 9. for are the sons of God by nature and
office. r. are the sons of God by name and office.

This sheet must be placed by the Book-binder after page 188.

THE Dignity of MAGISTRACY, AND THE Duty of the MAGISTRATE.
PSALM. 82.6, 7. I have said ye are Gods, and all of you are Children of the
Most High.

But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes.


THE Book of Psalms may not unfitly be called The Analogy of Faith, the
Directory for Practice, the Epitome of Scripture, the Platform for Prayer: It
is abbreviated in two words, Hosanna signifies Save I pray thee, or preserve I
beseech thee.
Hosanna, Allelujah, Praise ye the Lord.
Allelujah. Prayer and Praise being the sum and Substance of the whole Book.

It is a throng of holy affections (says one) each passion acting a part,
wound up to the highest strain by the Spirit of God, breathing Poetical
eloquence into the heavenly Prophet.

This 82. Psalm contains a reprehension of Princes, for their oppression of
the people, and it is propounded partly by way of Objurgation, partly by way of
Affirmation.

The Text presents us with a Concession of the Magistrates Allegation for
their illegal proceedings. They argued that because they were Gods, they might
tyrannize over men; That the stamp of a Deity on them would make them current
coin, though they were never so light. The Holy Ghost grants them to be Gods,
but denies the consequence, that therefore they may live as they list, and
rule according to their lusts, or do the work of the Devil: For though they are
Gods in respect of their Places, and Power, yet they are Men in respect of
their frailty, and nature. They must die like men, and fall like one of the
Princes.

The 6. verse cloatheth men with Majesty; I have said ye are Gods, etc.

The 7. verse cloatheth Gods with Mortality: But ye shall die like men; They
are Gods, (...), that is, in their Politic capacity in regard of their power
and rule; but they are not so (...), in their Physical capacity, and in regard
of their nature and essence.

Ego Dixi Concessio est, qua tamen oftendit Propheta, nihil perversis Judicibus
praesidii fore in facta persona quam illis Deus imposuit. Calv. in loc.
Though ye are now above others, yet shortly ye shall be laid as low as others;
and then ye shall both answer, and suffer for wronging of others: The height of
your places will not excuse the wickedness of your practices: for though ye are
high, yet there is one higher then the highest of you, to whom you must give an
account of all your injustice and oppression.

We see then that the sixth verse contains a Concession of the Magistrates
power, how it is by divine appointment and institution.

In it we may take notice; First, of the Magistrates Honor; Ye are Gods, and
children of the most High.

Secondly, The Author of it. I have said it.

Or the Text presents us, 1* With the Magistrates Commission; Ye are Gods,
and children of the most High. 2. Its Seal or Confirmation; I have said. The
Commission for Magistracy is here confirmed under the broad Seal of Heaven.

I, i. e. I that am the Lord of Lords, The Meaning of the words.
and King of Kings, the mighty possessor of Heaven and Earth; I that am
Commander in Chief of the whole world, and have power to appoint whom I please
to be my Vicegerents, do call and constitute you to be my Deputy Lieutenants on
earth. I whose word is sufficient warrant for any Office, or Ordinance; I have
said ye are Gods.

Have said. How God speaks, is a point almost unspeakable. God speaks or
says as well as man, but not after the same manner; he does not form a voice
by such organs or instruments of speech. But when God speaks, He does either
create a voice in the air, as Matthew. 3.17. or declare and make known his mind,
sometimes secretly and immediately to the spirits of the Prophets; so that
phrase The word of the Lord came unto me, so frequently used in Scripture, is
to be understood; sometimes publicly and mediately by the Prophets to the
people.

So then, I have said, that is, I have in my Word manifested this to be my
will; That ye should be Gods amongst men, Exodus 21.28. I that speak, and none
may (or who dares) disannul it: I who said Let there be light, and there was
light; I who appointed the Sun to rule the day, the Moon and the Stars to rule
the night; I have said, Be ye Gods, and ye shall be Gods. I have appointed you
in power and dignity to excel others, and to rule over them on earth, as the
greater Luminaries do the lesser in the Heavens.

Ye are Gods. That is, in my place and stead amongst men. To receive honor
from them both of reverence and obedience; To distribute justice amongst them
both zealously and impartially. To be terrors to evil doers, and
encouragements to them that do well; To govern from love to my Name, according
to the rule of my Law, for my honor and praise, as likewise the good and
profit of the people.

The word God is taken diversely in Scripture,

1. Properly, and so it is given only to him who is Essentially and by Nature
God. Who is an Infinite being of himself, and from whom all others have their
being. And in this sense it is mentioned sometimes Generally without any
Limitation, to a certain person, as Heb. 12. ult. John 4.24. sometimes
Singularly with a Determination to one person, as to the Father, John 3.16 to
the Son, Romans 9.5. 1 Timothy 3.16. to the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.

2. Improperly, and so it is given to them, who by nature are not Gods. As,

1. To the Devil in regard of his unjust usurpation, and wicked men's
corruption, 2 Cor. 4.4. He is called, The God of this world: He usurpeth the
honor and Sovereignty of God, Matthew. 4.9. and the wicked world obeys him, as
if he were a God, John 8.44. The God he is, not of the world simply, but of
this world, of this sinful world that lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19.

2. To Idols in regard of the false persuasion of degenerate man, Caelestes,
Aerii, Terrestres, Marini dii. As many Gods as creatures almost amongst the
Heathen.
1 Cor. 8.4, 5. There are Gods many, and Lords many; that is, in their
conceits, who were Heathen (They worshipped stocks and stones, any thing, yea
almost all things) though an Idol be nothing in the judgment of a Christian;
It is nothing says the Apostle, i. e. formally, the thing signified is
nothing, yet materially it is something, as made of wood, or brass, or the like.

3. To Magistrates, Exodus 4.16. who have their Commission from God, Romans 13.
who do the work of God, 2 Cor. 13. Romans 3.4. who ought to do all for God, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.

And all of you are children of the most High. It was no wonder that they were
called Gods: for here they are the children of the most High: Now children are
called after their Fathers Name.

This term Son of God, And ye all sons of the most High Ain w. leg.
or child of the most High is attributed

1. To Christ, because of his Eternal Generation, Psalm. 2.7. He is the only
begotten of the Father, John 3.16.

2. To Angels, both Because of their practice; they serve God, not as slaves a
Master; but as children a Father, cheerfully, heartily, with filial alacrity
and delight. And because of their privilege; God uses them not as slaves, but
sons. They are near him always, beholding the face of their Father, Matthew.
18.10.

3. To men, and that in regard of the purity and holiness in them, they
resemble God as a child his Father; or in regard of the grace and favor God
bestows on them; in these respects all believers are the children of God: Or
in regard of their power and greatness, they are privileged to be higher then
others in place, as sons are before and above servants. And they are like him
in their Dignity and Authority; so Magistrates. The Chaldee paraphraseth,
Ainsw. in loc.
As the Angels of the high God; because Magistrates should be like Angels for
wisdom, 2 Samuel 14.24.

The words being thus opened, will yield us this Doctrine.

Doctrine.

That the God of Heaven has appointed Magistrates to be Gods on earth.

He is God by Nature, and he has given them to be Gods by Name. The Deity was
by Incarnation clothed with the Humane Nature; and Humanity is here by Gods
designation clothed with the divine name, I will praise thee before the Gods,
says David; Psalm. 83.1. that is, The tune of my heart shall be high in singing
thy praise, even before them that are by thy command highest in place.

The Sun in the higher world shines most gloriously, yet he communicates some
of his light to the Moon, whereby she surpasses (and is as Queen among) the
glittering Stars: So God the true Sun is infinitely above all; he shines
eminently with his own native light and luster; yet he bestows of his beauty
and brightness on some men, whereby they excel and are above others in this
lower world.

For the Explication of this truth, I shall only show in what respects
Magistrates are called Gods, and then proceed to Application.

Magistrates are in a twofold respect called Gods.

1. In respect of their honorable dignity.

2. In respect of their answerable Duty.

It speaks that their privilege is high, and that their practices should be
holy.

Ceterum hic nomen sicuti paulo post, and aliis locis pro judicibus sumitur,
quibus specialem gloriae notam insculpsit Deus, Calv. in Psalm. 82.1.
1. In respect of their Dignity, God speaks the nature of Magistracy to be
honorable by the names which he gives to the Magistrate. Government is not a
mean employment, but a great preferment. Magistracy is here by God himself
invested with Majesty.

It is observable that God ascribes to Magistrates the most honorable names
among men. Great men, 2 Samuel 3.38. Nobles, 2 Chronicles. 23. and 30. Princes, Psalm.
83.11. Kings, his Kings, Psalm. 18. ult. Fathers, Magnifica existimatio, Honor,
Gloria. Eras.
1 Samuel 29.11. Chief of the people, Judge. 20.2, Heads over the people, Exodus
18.25. Dignities, Glories, Jude v. 8. The Ancients of the people, Isai. 3.12.
not only because aged persons were ordinarily elected; for with the ancient is
wisdom, and in length of days understanding, Maxima debetur capiti, etc.
Job 12.12. but also because aged persons are honorable persons. Men are
commanded to bow down before the hoary head, and reverence the Ancient, Levit.
19.32.

Nay, God gives Magistrates not only those names which are in most esteem
amongst men; but the names of Angels.

Angels are the perfection, as it were, of the Creation, the top-stone of this
glorious building. When the Spirit of God would speak a thing, or person to be
excellent, it does resemble them to Angels. My Lord is wise as an Angel of God,
2 Samuel 14.20. And Acts 6.15. They beheld his face as if it had been the face of
an Angel. Farther the great happiness of holy ones in heaven is set forth by
their likeness to Angels; They shall be as Angels, Matthew. 22. and 30. Now what
glorious persons then are Magistrates, that have the names of Angels given
them; Angels are called Dominions, Principalities, Powers, Col. 1.16. Ephesians.
1.21. So are Magistrates, Jude v. 8. Titus 3.1. Be subject to Principalities
and Powers; But the Text speaks more of their dignity. Magistrates have not
only the highest names of the most honorable visible creatures, Men; and of
the most honorable invisible creatures, Angels; but of the Creator, of God
himself, the Fountain and Standard of all Dignity and Honor; I have said ye
are Gods. When Jacob would manifest to Joseph's children the extraordinary
respect he had for their father, he does it thus; My Name be named on them, and
the Names of my Father Abraham and Isaac, Genesis 48.16. It is a great honor to
be called the servant of God. Paul gloried in this, Titus 1.1. So did David,
more in being a subject to God, then a King over men, Psalm. 36. Title. It is a
greater honor and favor to be called Gods son, Joh. 1.12. 1 John 3.1. Is it a
mean thing, says David, to be the Kings Son in law? 1 Samuel 18.23. Magistrates
are children of the most High, they are sons to the King of Kings. But the
greatest honor of all is to be called Gods; for God to say My name be named on
them, This is the highest name that can be given; Here is a ne plus ultra. This
is the highest Name which is above all names, and as the Diamond to the Ring,
adds both virtue and value to whatsoever it is affixed.

As because Gold is the most precious excellent metal, therefore we lay gold
over other things; we guild peuter brass, yea silver it self. So because God is
the most excellent name, it is laid to other things, that thereby their worth
may be set forth: As the Sons of God, Job 1.6. The City of God, Psalm. 46.4. The
River of God, Psalm. 65.9. The Kingdom of God It is ordinary in the Hebrew to
add the name of God to a thing to heighten the excellency of it. A man of God
is as much as an extraordinary man, an excellent man. It is said of the Church
compared to a Vine, She sent forth her branches as goodly Cedars, Psalm. 80.10.
so we read it; But in Hebr. As the Cedars of God, that is, tall, and excellent
Cedars; and so in many other places, because all the creature excellencies are
derived from him, and are but a drop, a beam, a print of that Glory and Majesty
which is in him.
.

Dii per analogiam tanquam Deum imitantes. Theodor.
Now in their dignity Magistrates resemble God in these two or three
particulars, and therefore are fitly called Gods.

This is a godlike prerogative. God is clothed with Majesty and honor, Psalm.
104.1. The blessed and only Potentate, to whom all people must pay this
tribute. In this the Gods on earth resemble him.
First in receiving honor from others. Honor accompanyeth power as the shadow
the body. There is naturally in man an aw and respect toward those that are
Magistrates: They are the Fathers of their Country, and their subjects like
children owe them both obedience and reverence. Divine worship is to be given
only to God in heaven, but civil worship may be given to Gods on earth. David
speaks of himself being a King, His glory is great in thy salvation, Honor,
and Majesty have thou put upon him, Psalm. 21.5.

Joseph when advanced to be a Ruler in Egypt, rides in the second Chariot, and
has one crying before him, Gen 41.42, 43.
Bow the knee. The most high God that gives them Kingdoms, does also give them
Glory and Majesty, and honor, Dan. 5.28, 29. God indeed has the greatest
honor as the Supreme Governor and Lawgiver, but Magistrates receive it upon
his account, as they are his Representatives and Vicegerents. When I went out
to the gate, Job 29.7, 8. Job fuit Rex.
says Job, (that is, to the place of administering justice, for that work was
done in the gates, as Ruth 4.1. Job 5.4. Psalm. 127.5.) the young men saw me,
and hid themselves, and the aged arose and stood up, the Princes refrained
talking, and they laid their hands on their mouths, Job 29.8, 9.

My son, says Solomon, fear thou the Lord and the King, Prove. 24.21. God is
the proper object of fear; hence the Greeks call him fear; (...).
but the Gods because invested with his authority, and entrusted with the
administration of his Kingdom upon earth, are also to be feared as Superior to
us, though inferior to God.

Secondly, their dignity appears (and in this they resemble God also) in
giving Laws to others. Magistrates have power to enact laws for the encouraging
of virtue, and discouraging of vice, This is a Godlike privilege, Isa 33.21.
to make laws for men, to prescribe what creatures shall do; and what they shall
forbear. Zanch. de Magistrate.
for the preservation of peace among their people. Zanchy says There are three
offices of the Magistrate, whereof one is to ordain laws for the worship of
God, and the welfare of men.

There is indeed one Supreme and absolute Lawgiver, James 4.12. whose will and
word must be the rule of others laws. Besides in spirituals, none can give laws
to bind the conscience but God, Isa. 33.21. In that sense, The Lord is our
Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver; but in external policy the Laws of men are to
be observed. And they have power to make such laws as are suitable unto, and
convenient for the wealth and safety of their Dominions.

The end of Magistracy shows their legislative authority; for neither will
piety be promoted, nor the public good procured, or peace preserved without
it. And questionless God would never have enjoined Subjects to obey, if
Magistrates had not power to command.

That Commonwealth only can be safe where the people obey the Magistrate, and
the Magistrate the Law. Solon.
Laws are the walls and Bulwarks of a Nation, which in a great part may secure
it against invasions from abroad, and insurrections at home. The standing
Militia which protecteth the lives of the people. The hedge which keeps men in
from oppressing their neighbors. The deeds and evidences which give us a right
and title to our estates. They are the nerves and sinews of the Body Politic,
or as Physic to the natural body, to prevent diseases and purge out ill
humors.

Man is by nature an untamed Heifer, loathing the yoke of subjection, prone to
rage and rebel; so that he needs all means imaginable to rule and restrain
him. The wise Governor of all things has therefore thought fit not only to
give Christians a natural law and moral law from himself, but also positive
laws from men, that this threefold cord which is not easily broken may bind him
fast. And this surely speaks Magistrates to be like God; for even the Heathen
themselves would ascribe their laws to some one of their Gods. Zoroastres who
gave laws to the Persians, ascribed them to Oromazen. Trismegistus among the
Egyptians ascribed his Laws to Mercurius; Lycurgus, who gave laws to the
Lacedaemonians, would make Apollo the Author of them. Solon and Draco among the
Aehenians, said that Minerva was their Lawgiver. So almost in every Nation
they who had the Legislative Power, ascribed the invention of their laws to
their false gods. But the Word of God which is a perfect rule for all men, does
empower Magistrates to make laws (not according to their lusts, but) agreeable
to his revealed will.

Thirdly, Three uses of the civil sword. 1. Ad vindictam. 2. Ad protectionem
b^ner^m. 3. Ad executionem justitiae. Willet. in Romans 13.
The dignity of Magistracy (wherein they likewise are like to God) consists
in their executing the Law. In punishing the nocent and acquitting the
innocent. Execution is the life of the Law; the luster and glory of the Prince,
the security of the good people. A Law unexecuted is like a sword without an
edge for no use or service. And a Magistrate that neglects his duty herein,
is like a Winters Sun, glorious for Majesty, but yielding no warming or
refreshing influences to them that are under him; or like the Kings head on a
signpost only for show.

The God of heaven does not cast away the perfect man, nor help the evil doer,
Job 8.20. He beholds the righteous with favor, he wounds the heads of
sinners, Psalm. 68.21. He cutteth off the workers of iniquity: He kills and
makes alive, with him is the fountain of life, Psalm. 39.9. as waters flow from
Fountain, so does life from God. And he can easily slay men, Job 4.9. By the
blast of God they perish. To save and kill is a God-like privilege: The power
of life and death is in the hands of these earthly Gods: they enliven with
their smiles; their favor or the light of a Kings countenance is life; they
kill with their frowns; The wrath of a King is the messenger of death, Prove.
16.14, 15. Herein their dignity and civil God-ship appears that they can give
(by reprieve or pardon) or take away a life which is forfeited to the Law.
Plut. in vit. Caes.
Caesar's speech was high (when he was opposed by Metellus in his taking away
the money out of the Roman Treasury) Let me alone, or I will kill thee
presently; and then to qualify his threat, and magnify his strength, he told
him, Young man, thou know it is harder for me to speak it, then to do it.
But this is certain, Rulers are not for nothing called Powers, Tit. 3.1. It is
in their power (though not to Tyrannize at their pleasure, yet) to execute the
Laws even to the death of the offender.

^^gistratus dii vocantur quia sunt vicarii dei in administrando jure,
exequenda justitia, tuendo benos, puniendo malos, Pelan. Syntag lib. 7. cap. 19
2. Magistrates are called Gods not only in regard of there dignity, but also in
regard of their duty. They ought to resemble God in their execution of Justice
amongst men: God administreth Justice impartially, and so should the Gods.

The Judge of all the earth does right, and the Judges that are on the earth
should do right. God does judge the world in righteousness, and ministers
judgment to the poor in uprightness, Psalm. 9.8. And they who rule over men,
must be just, ruling in the fear of God, 2 Samuel 23.3.

Propheta ad regum insignia vel pompas alludeas, dicit judicium and justitiam
esse sulturam solii ejus, acsi diceret loco sceptri, vel purpurae vel
diadematis, his insignibus ernari deum quo justus, and aequus mundi judex.
Justice and Judgment are the habitation of Gods Throne, Psalm. 89.14. The holy
Ghost alludeth to the Thrones of earthly Princes, which were under-propped with
Pillars (as Solomon's Throne with Lions, 1 Kings 19, 20.) that were both a
support and an ornament to it. Now says the Psalmist, Justice and Judgment
are the Pillars upon which Gods Throne stands, or (as Calvin expounds it)
the Robe and Diadem, the Purple and Scepter, the Regalia with which Gods Throne
is adorned. Thus Magistrates ought to make good their pattern, and to take heed
what they do, because they judge not for man, but for the Lord who is with them
in the Judgment, Calvin in loc.
2 Chronicles. 19.6. Magistrates are therefore called Gods, because they should (as
God does) do impartial justice without respect of persons, Large Annot. in
Exodus 22.28.
protecting the godly, as being the Ministers of God for their good, Romans 13.4.
and punishing the wicked which are malignant enemies to God and them.

Now the impartiality of the Gods (as of God) in executing justice appears in
these three particulars.

First in not favoring any for their neerness: Magistrates must imitate God in
this, who is no respecter of persons, but judges every man according to his
works, 1 Pet. 1.17. Though Coniah be to me, says God as the Signet on my right
hand, yet I will pluck him thence, Jer. 22.24. That is, Etiamsi fuisset
Jeconiah mihi charissimus, quem semper in oculis ferrem, Jun. in loc.
though he were as near and dear to me as a Kings sealing-ring which is most
carefully kept and tenderly preserved, worn commonly, yea continually on some
finger, yet I would do justice in plucking him off and casting him from me. Nay
when Gods own Son (who was the Son of his infinite love and choicest delight)
became liable to the lash of the Law, as being a sinner by imputation, God
would not spare him in the least, but made him bear the curse of the Law, Romans
8.32. Zaleucus the Lawgiver having enacted that every person guilty of
adultery should lose both his eyes, did yet when his own Son was found guilty
of that fault, put out one of his own eyes and one of his Sons. But the great
God was more just when his Son was a Surety for sinners; he caused him to pay
the utmost farthing, he suffered the law to have its full stroke at him. O how
just was God that rather then violate the least Tittle of his Law, would sign a
warrant with his own hand and confirm the Commission with his own Seal for his
dearest Sons execution!

Thus should Magistrates hear and determine without any respect to friends or
relations, Prosopolepsis dicitur, si quis paribus imparia, vel imparibus paria
tribuat. Coc.
Prove. 24.23. To have respect of persons is not good, yea it is very evil.
Magistrates must hear the cause, not the person; and mind, not the man, but the
matter which is brought before them.

David was faulty (and he smarted sharply for it) in sparing Amnon guilty of
Incest, and Absalom guilty of Murder, because they were his Sons. But Levi did
nobly who said to his Father and to his Mother, I have not seen him, neither
did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children, Deuteronomy. 33.9.

Pompey aspiring to the Roman Empire, Plutarch. in Vit. Cat. U^ic.
and perceiving that Cato was against him, sent his friend Minucius to Cato to
demand his two Nieces; One for himself, the other for his Son. But when the
Messenger had delivered his errand, Cato gave him this Answer; Go tell Pompey,
Cato is not to be won by women; as long as Pompey shall deal uprightly, I shall
be his friend, and in a greater degree then any marriage can ever make me.
Surely this Moralist will condemn many Christian Rulers, of whom it is said,
that the Sun might as soon be hindered from running his race as he from doing
what was just and upright.

God will not upon any pretense whatsoever have his own person accepted, Job
13.8. much less the persons of men.

Secondly, In not sparing or fearing any for their greatness. Rulers ought to
be men of courage, Exodus 18.21. The fear of man brings a snare, Prove. 29.25.
and is often the cause why justice is perverted: Pilate feared Caesar, John
19.12, 13. and therefore against his conscience condemned Christ. The great God
of heaven fears none, spares none for their glory or greatness. He puts
the mighty out of their Seats, Luke 1.52. He binds Kings in chains, and
Princes in Fetters of Iron, Psalm. 149.8. The day of the Lord shall be upon all
the Cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up, and upon all the Oaks of
Bashan, and upon all the high Mountains, and upon every high Tower, and upon
every fenced Wall, Isa. 2.12, 13, 14. He is the Almighty, Al-powerfull God, and
therefore cares not for any might or power of man.

Thus the Gods on earth should do justice on all, great as well as small,
fearing none but the God of heaven, Deuteronomy. 1.17. you shall not be afraid of, the
face of man, for the judgment is Gods. Papiniaenus is worthy of eternal
memory, who chose rather to die then to justify or excuse the fratricide of
B^ssianus the Emperor. Holy Job as he was eminent for fearing God, so likewise
for not fearing men, Job 29.17. I brake the jaw of the wicked and pulled the
spoil out of his teeth. Great men oftentimes are like Lions, or ravenous
Beasts, that prey on others without fear or pity. Now the care of this pious
Magistrate was to secure his people against such oppressors.

When David kept his Fathers sheep, and there came a Lion and a Bear, and took
a Lamb out of the flock, David rose after the Lion and smote him, and took the
Lamb out of his mouth, 1 Samuel 17.34. Every Magistrate is or should be a
Shepherd. God says of Cyrus, He is my Shepherd, Isa. 44. ult. The man after
Gods own heart was called to feed his people Israel, Psalm. 78.70, 71. Homer
calls Agamemnon (...), the shepherd or the feeder of the people. And when
Lions or Bears (men that are great and strong) come to devour their flock, they
ought to protect or defend them. He is a base hireling that hides his head when
the Wolf comes in the night, though he endeavor to preserve his sheep from
injury by the flies in the day. For one Wolf will do more mischief in a night
then a thousand flies in a year. As the day of judgment will make no
difference between great and small, rich and poor, noble and ignoble; for then
the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
Captains and the mighty men will hide themselves in the dens, and in the rocks
of the Mountains, and will say to the Mountains and rocks, Fall on us and hide
us from the wrath of the Lamb Rev. 6.15, 16. so should not the day of executing
justice in this world Of Trajan the Emperor it is said that he neither feared
nor hated any man, but that he heard the causes of his subjects without
prejudicare impiety, examined them without sinister obliquity, and judged them
without unjust partiality.
.

The impartiality of God, and also of the Gods, consists in not taking gifts.
God is no taker of gifts, 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Riches prevail not in the day of
wrath, Prove. 11.4. Neither silver nor gold can deliver them from his
indignation, Zeph. 1.18.

Thus should Magistrates resemble his Majesty, not perverting justice either
for having, or for hope of a reward. A bribe received or expected clogs or
obscures the course of Justice. A golden pen must not write the discharge: when
the hand of a Judge is greased with gold, it cannot hold the sword of justice,
but will let it slip, at least strike very partially.

Thou shall not wrest judgment, thou shall not respect persons, neither take a
gift; for a gift does blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the
righteous, Deuteronomy. 16.19. The Roman story tells us of two persons that were
Competitors for some place of preferment, and that a Senator being asked, for
which of the two he would give his voice; answered, For neither; because says
he, One has nothing, and the other has never enough. He knew that poverty and
covetousness are both unmeet qualifications for a Ruler. The former makes
Magistracy obnoxious to contempt and derision, and the latter prompteth the
Magistrate on to injustice and oppression.

Privati fures in compedibus aetatem agu^, publici vero in auro and purpura
visuntur. Cat.
A Ruler that is a bribe-taker is a Thief in Robes, and is only differenced from
those that are in rags, by this, that the height of his place does increase his
sin and aggravate his condemnation.

I come now from the Explication to the Application of the doctrine.

This truth will be useful, First by way of Information. If the God of heaven
has appointed Magistrates to be Gods on earth: it informs us that Magistracy
is of divine Authority: Government is not an invention of some men, who desire
to Lord it over others; but it it the Institution of God. I have said ye are
Gods. Omnis potestes a summa potestate.
The Scholars of Pythagoras counted his Ipse dixit to be sufficient. Surely
then Gods saying it must be an establishing it to us. If where the word of a
King is, there be power, Eccl. 8.4. then questionless where the word of a God
is, there is warrant enough for any Office. Non de quolibet verbo Dei, sed de
speciali dominandi mandato. Calv.
Now this is the Word of God which comes to the Magistrate, as Christ says,
John 10.35. authorizing him and appointing him to that Ordinance. The
Magistrate is therefore called the Minister of God, Romans 13.4. As Justices are
called the Kings Justices, because they act by Commission from him: so
Magistrates are called the Lords Ministers, because they rule by authority
derived from the Lord. Coin is carried to the Mint, and there stamped with the
Superscription and Image of the chief Magistrate, and then called his Coin,
because current by his authority.

Governors are not of the Devil, as Satanical spirits have affirmed, nor of
men, as others have asserted; but of God, Romans 13.1.

As in the waters there be some greater, some smaller fish; and in the earth
there be Mountains and Hills as well as Plains and Valleys; and in the Heavens
there are Stars differing from each other in glory; so amongst men there are
some greater then others in power, higher in place, and excelling them in
authority and glory.

As the natural body is distinguished by God himself into comely and uncomely
parts, 1 Cor. 12.23, 24. so is the Political body into members Noble and
Ignoble:

The Bees in their Commonwealth (as is reported) have a Commander in chief, a
Master Be. The Lion claims a command and superiority among the Beasts of the
field. The Angels in heaven have a chief, Michael the Archangel, Jude 9. 1
These. 4.16. The Schoolmen indeed being more bold then they ought, do divide
the Angels into three Hierarchies, and each Hierarchy into three several
orders. The first Hierarchy they say comprehends Cherubims, Seraphims, and
Thrones: The second, Dominions, Principalities, and Powers. The third, Mights,
Archangels, and Angels: As also they assert the reason of these several names.
But the more modest and learned Expositors who join not in the aforesaid
presumptuous division, do yet generally conclude an order, distinction, and
pre-eminence amongst Angels, from Ephesians. 1.21. Col. 1.16. Dan. 10.13. Nay,
there is a government amongst the very Devils; there is not only a Prince of
Angels, Dan. 10. but Beelzebub a Prince amongst Devils, Matthew. 12.24. They that
cause so much disorder amongst others, yet have some order among themselves. We
read of the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25.41. There is a kind of government
in Hell, though some would turn all out of the earth.

The Apostle Peter indeed calls Magistracy an ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2.13.
though Paul assures us it is of God; The Powers that be are ordained of God,
Romans 13.1. And the Magistrate is the Minister of God, verse. 4.

Magistracy is an ordinance of man in a fourfold respect.

1. Subjective. As man is the subject thereof, by them it is executed. Our
Princes as well as our Prophets are men of like passions with us.

2. Objective. As man is the object thereof, about them it is exercised. It is
for the punishment of bad men, and encouragement of good men, for the deciding
differences between man and man.

3. (...), Finaliter. As man is the end thereof. He is the Minister of God for
man's good.

But these things will not prove Magistracy to be a mere humane Ordinance; for
in these three respects the Ministry as well as the Magistracy may be said to
be an humane Ordinance; Man being both the subject, object, and end thereof;
yet what sober man ever denied the ministry to be an Ordinance of God?

4. It is Ordinance of man in regard of the kind of it: Each Nation having a
liberty to choose what form of Government they apprehend most commodious for
them. Magistracy is Ordained by God, though this particular Magistrate, or this
form of Government be appointed by man. The Genus of Magistracy is from God;
yet the Species, whether Monarchy, Democracy, or Aristocracy may be at the
choice of men.

Further, though the Magistrate should be of the Devil, a wicked ungodly
person; yet the Magistracy is of God.

There is a difference between the Office or Power it self, and the manner of
exercising it, and the means of attaining it. The first is always of God, but
not always the second and third. The power of Nero was of God, (as the Holy
Ghost speaks! fully, Romans 13.) though he exercised it in a Devilish manner,
oppressing and killing the good, encourageing and acquitting such as were evil.
The power of our Richard the third was of God, though he attained it by ungodly
and devilish means, the murdering his own Sovereign and Nephew.

There are four particulars which will clearly demonstrate the truth of this
assertion, namely, That Magistracy is of Divine Authority.

First, Their Commission is from God. (...). Hes.
By me Kings Rule, says God, Prove. 8.15. Subordinate Magistrates may have
their Commission from men; but Supreme Magistrates have their Commissions from
God only.

The Powers that be, are ordained of God, Romans 13.1. not simply ordained of God
as other things, Willet in locum.
says a learned Interpreter; but specially by precept and command from God.
Cujus jussu homines, ejus jussu reges. Ireneus lib. 5. cap. 24.
There are other things of God (says he) as Famine, War, Sickness, Poverty;
but they are not ordained by Precept.

Daniel tells Nebuchadnezzar, that God had commissionated him to rule over
men, Dan. 2.37, 38. Thou O King art a King of Kings; for the God of Heaven has
given thee a Kingdom, power, and strength, and glory. And wheresoever the
children of men dwell, the beasts of the field, and the fowls of heaven has he
given into thy hand, and has made thee Ruler over them all, thou art this head
of Gold. These higher Powers are so clearly from the highest Power, that their
Throne is called Gods Throne, 1 Chronicles. 29.23. Then Solomon sat on the Throne
of the Lord as King instead of David; their Scepter is called Gods Scepter, and
their judgment Gods judgment; Deuteronomy. 1.17. Ye shall not respect persons; for
the judgment is Gods.

Besides, we find that several persons received their Regal Investiture from
God himself; as Saul, David, Jehu, Cyrus, which last was by God named and
ordained to the government of the Persian Monarchy above sixty years before he
was born, Isai. 44.28. Isai. 45.1.

2. Their command to govern is from God; the several Precepts from God to men
in high places, does fully speak their power to be of God. Why should God
command them to rule according to his laws, who have no authority to rule at
all? Jer. 22.2, 3. Hear the word of the Lord O King of Judah, execute judgment
and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the oppressed,
etc. If the matter or substance of their rule were unlawful, surely God would
not own it so far as to prescribe rules for the manner of executing it. Now God
through the whole Scriptures scatters many precepts for directions to Princes
how they should govern, and what they should practice, Deuteronomy. 17.

3. Their protection is from God. As a King defends his inferior officers in
the execution of their offices; so the King of Kings defends Magistrates in
the discharge of their trusts; God stands in the Congregation among the Gods,
Psalm. 82.1. not only to observe whether they offer injuries to others, but also
to take care, that they receive no injuries from others. God is a stronger
guard to the Judge then any Sheriff. And were not he a wall of fire about some
worthy zealous Justices, many beastly persons (who have been curbed by them,
and hindered from leaping over the hedges of divine commands) would have
trampled them under feet, if not torn them in pieces.

It is worthy our observation how exceedingly God manifests his power and
zeal for the help of Magistrates against all opposition. Korah and his company
conspire against Moses and Aaron; Magistracy and Ministry, Numb. 16. and would
have brought in Anarchy. (Indeed both those Ordinances have the same
adversaries. Those that would level the Ministry, making Preachers
Jeroboam-like, of the lowest of the people, and filling the Pulpit as Noah's
Ark, with creatures clean and unclean, will at last level the Magistracy too,
and make the Throne as low and as common as the Pulpit.) But observe what God
says of these opposers of Magistracy and Ministry, and what God does to them:
for his saying; That they are gathered together against the Lord, verse. 11.
They wounded God through the sides of Moses and Aaron. They that murmur and
conspire against Gods Delegated servants, murmur and conspire against God
himself. And surely God will first or last be too hard for those that thus
harden themselves against him: For see what he does to them; The Earth opened
her mouth and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that
appertained unto Korah, and all their goods; they and all that belonged to them
went down alive into the pit, and the earth closed, upon them, verse. 32.33. God
has strange punishments for such strange principles and practices; He will
work miraculously, but that he will make such as are against Magistrate and
Minister exemplary.

Psa. 18. ult. Great deliverance gives God to the King. The Supreme Magistrate
is in great dangers; therefore God gives him great deliverances; as he is
liable to more harm then others, by reason of his place, so he may expect (if
he be godly especially) more help then others, by reason of the divine promise;
Be strong, and of a good courage, be not afraid; for the the Lord thy God is
with thee whither soever thou go, De bello Judaic. lib. 62.
Josh. 9. Josephus from the extraordinary escape of Titus, at the view of the
walls of Jerusalem, observes, Imperatorum pericula Deum curare, That God is
the Magistrates guard.

Every one has in him the mind of a King. Calv. on 1 Pet 5.5.
4. The subjection of their people to them is from God. Every man is by nature a
Quaker, a Leveller, like a Colt unwilling to be bridled; like an untamed
Heifer, which cannot endure the yoke of subjection. It is therefore through the
wonderful working of God, that a few persons, or sometimes one man as head
should rule such a monstrous body as the multitude. If he that rules the
boisterous waves of the Sea, and shuteth them up with bars and doors, Psalm.
65.7. did not put forth the same Almighty power in quieting the spirits, and
stilling the tumults of the people it could never be done. Well might David
say, (...), subjecting them to me. Septuagint. leg.
It is God that subdueth my people under me, Psalm. 144.12.

The multitude is an unruly monster. It was a true saying of that brutish
Emperor Tiberius, to one that applauded his felicity in attaining the power of
so large an Empire; Sueton.
O said he, you know not what a Beast the Empire is, how unruly and untoward,
how headstrong and hard to be tamed. The multitude is a Beast with many heads
says another: cut off one, nay many, yet there will millions remain still. Now
that one should keep millions in awe, how could it be, if there were not a
divine constitution in an humane person. The Devil is such an enemy to man's
peace and welfare; and every man's nature so opposite to rule and restraint,
that if there were not somewhat more then humane in Magistracy, one man would
be a Beast, nay a Devil to another, and be no whit kept under by the higher
Powers. But we see clearly God has put such a Majesty on Princes, that their
people are afraid of their fury; reverence their persons, and submit to their
authority. He that reads the wonderful strength of the Horse, how his neck is
clothed with thunder; how the glory of his nosthrils is terrible; how he
paweth in the Valley, and goes out to meet the armed men; how he mocketh at
fear, and is not affrighted, nor turns back from the sword, Job 39.19. to 26.
He that considers the power of the Elephant, how he moves his tail like a
Cedar; how his bones are like strong pieces of brass, and like bars of Iron.
etc. Job 40.15. to 24. when he observes how these strong fierce creatures are
ridden and ruled by weak man, and turned about at his pleasure, will presently
conclude the reason to be this, because God has put the fear and dread of man
upon every beast of the field, Genesis 6.2. So truly he that beholds many
millions of men subject to the word, to the command of one, when they have
strength enough to overthrow thousands, must needs acknowledge that it is the
Lords doing, and it ought to be mavelous in their eyes.

Secondly, If Magistrates be Gods, The second use by way of Information.
and that by the appointment of the living God; (I have said ye Gods) It
informs us, That they are guilty of great impiety that contemn and diisesteem
Magistracy; they vilify those whom God does dignifie, and fight against God,
in endeavoring to pull down that order and that ordinance which he himself
has set up. Such men by denying rule and authority, seem to be beasts, and to
put off all humanity. For places without some in power would be rather
wildernesses then Cities, and the Inhabitants rather herds of Beasts then
Societies of men.

There are two sorts of men guilty of this sin.

First, those that in their Principles deny Magistracy to be from God. There
have in several ages been some, that because they themselves were subjects and
inferiors, would therefore deny all Sovereignty and Superiority. The Donatists
whom Augustine undertaketh, were of that opinion. And so were the Anabaptists
and Libertines in Germany, who (armed the rude multitude against their
Magistrates, and) were opposed by Luther. And truly in our days there are some
who against the light both of Nature and Scripture, affirm Government to be a
work of darkness. Though it be written in the fleshly tables of their hearts,
and in the tables of stone by the finger of God; That Fathers and Mothers civil
as well as natural must be honored, yet they are so wicked and blind, that
they will not see or read it. In the Apostles days there were ungodly men that
turned the grace of God into lasciviousness, despisers of Dominions, Jude verse.
8. such as aimed at Anarchy (according to Calvin's Comment) and the overthrow
of all Authority; being proud they scorned rule; and being licentious, they
were impatient of restraint.

First, Order is needful to them that are in a state of innocence. Angels who
continue in their estate of integrity differ in point of Superiority; Michael
the Archangel, Jude v. 4. Michael speaks the name of his person, and
Archangel the nature of his office. There are Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, Powers, different degrees among those Angelical spirits. Surely
if such order be conducible to the happiness of perfect Angels, it is the more
desirable for the happiness of imperfect man. And if there be such order in
heaven, it is no part of our bondage to have some order on earth; and therefore
the Grecians do upon good ground use the word (...) to signify Superiority, or
Government: which in its proper and native acception, signifies principium, to
set forth the antiquity of government, which had a being as soon as the world
had a beginning Politic Government was probably then instituted, when man was
first created under the Old Covenant of works; for it is a natural blessing,
and grounded upon the fifth Command of the Moral Law, which commenced upon man's
first Creation before Adams fall, and the rather may we thus judge, because it
is a law of Nature, which was binding in man's estate of innocence; besides,
Christ himself who knew no sin, yet minded this duty of subjection, Luke 2 51.
1 Col. 16.22. Matthew. 22.23.
.

2. Order and Superiority are needful to them that are in a state of Apostasy;
the more wild man is, the more need he has of a yoke; the more heady our
Horses are, the more we curb them: Unruly persons for their own good as well as
for others, require restraint.

The hearts of wicked men are like the Sea which cannot rest, but is ever
casting up mire and dirt; Augustine thinks that all civil subjection of one
man to another came in by sin, though not all natural subjection of children to
parents. De civit. Dei, lib. 19.
Now what a deluge would the boisterous waves of their unsanctified wills and
affections cause, if there were no banks of Magistracy to bound them and keep
them in. If some men were not Gods to others, most men would be Devils to
others.

Sin must be discouraged; evil doers must be punished; humane Society must be
preserved; the good must be protected; our liberties and properties must be
defended; justice must be executed; the poor must be relieved; wholesome laws
must be maintained; and how can either of these be done without Magistrates:
Many fear not sin, nor the God of Heaven, and if it were not for suffering from
the Gods on earth, their lusts should be their law, and they would deprive the
innocent of their liberties, estates, and lives, and turn the places where they
live into Acheldema's fields of blood; nay make the earth worse in some
respects then hell; for in hell there is no oppression, as no injustice; no
guilty person freed, and no guiltless person punished; but had these men their
wills, it should be so upon earth.

3. Again, Order or Magistracy is not only necessary to those that are in a
state of nature, but to those also that are in a state of grace, Titus 3.1, 2.
Romans 13.1, 2. When they begin to be servants to God, they do not cease to be
subjects to the Gods. Christianity does not consume but confirm Magistracy: As
a man I obey and honor the Magistrate for fear; as a Christian, for conscience
sake: so that Religion adds a stronger tie and obligation. The Scepter in
Christ's hand does not strike the Crown of the Mastrates head: No, it makes it
sit the faster, especially where their person is crowned with grace, and the
power improved for the glory of Christ. One Ordinance of God does not weaken
but strengthen another.

I shall inquire a little, and very briefly, into the reasons which some urge
against Magistracy and Order.

1. Say some, We are the Lords Freemen, and and therefore should not be
servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a price, be not the servants
of men.

Answer.

That place indeed forbids sinful subjection to men, but not civil
subjection to men. I may serve a Prince, but I may not sin at his precept and
command; If men command what God forbids, I must disobey men to obey God. Or
that Text may import, that I must give no man liberty to give my conscience
laws; No, my absolute dependence for soul-direction must be only on Christ and
his Word.

Those whom Christ makes free are free indeed, but it is from bondage to their
own and others lusts, not from obedience to others righteous laws.

Objection 2.

Some tell us, They are just and need no law; for they are a law to themselves:
Now laws say they, are for them that are wicked. 1 Timothy 1.9. The law is not
made for the righteous, but for the wicked.

Answer.

They that are so good that they need no laws for their correction, live among
the wicked, and therefore need laws for their protection.

That forecited place in Timothy is meant of the Moral Law, of which the
Apostle testifies, that believers are free from its curse or malediction; but
surely not from it as a rule for their conversations.

The hearts of the best are bad enough, and apt to wander, therefore they need
all means; the hedge of man's laws as well as of Gods laws to keep them in. Laws
are hedges both to fence them in from others violence, and to prevent their
their wandering out.

Objection 3.

Paul forbids going to law, 1 Cor. 6.1, 2. therefore no use of a Magistrate.

Answer.

The Apostle does not absolutely forbid going to law; But 1. before Heathen
Judges, when godly Christians might have decided their differences and ended
their controversies. They that deny to refer their lighter causes to honest
understanding persons, give occasion to others to suspect both their causes and
Christianity, v. 1, 3, 4, 5.2. Among brethren, the very name of brethren should
allay heats and charm discords, v. 8. The nearer their relation (though
spiritual) was, the dearer their affection should have been, and therefore the
sinfuller their division. 3. About trivial and small matters. If Mahometans go
to law for mean toys, they are punished. 4. With vindictive spirits: whereas a
Christian should go to law with a meek, mild, Gospel spirit, without either
hate or heat, as Tilters break their spears on each others breast, yet without
wrath or intention of hurt. So then it is not simply unlawful to go to law
before Heathen, if right cannot be had elsewhere, and the matter be weighty,
and we do it not out of spleen or malice, but with meekness and quietness of
spirit.

Objection 4.

They tell us, God is their Keeper; therefore they need neither Law nor
Magistrate for their defense.

Answer.

God is the good man's Keeper; but how? not immediately (in an ordinary way) but
mediately. As trust in God does not consist with trust in means, neither
without use of means where God does afford them: for then Christ might have
taken the Devils Counsel, and have thrown himself down from the Pinnacle of the
Temple when God had afforded him stairs for his safe going down. Saints are
under the shadow of Gods wings principally. He is their chief Sun and Shield,
Genesis 17.1. but they are under the shadow of the Gods wings subordinately, they
are the isntrumental shields of the earth, Psalm. 47.9.

God can in regard of his absolute power protect his people without the shields
of the earth, against all the opposition from men: as he can defend immediately
from all the fiery darts of the Devil without the shield of faith, or the sword
of the spirit. He needs not the agency either of Magistrates in civil things,
nor Ministers in spiritual things but he has ordained both. It is his pleasure
that both should in subordination to him be used, and therefore neither can
without sinning against him be neglected.

Objection 5.

Say they, we may not avenge our selves; we must not render evil for evil, but
overcome evil with good, Romans 13.

Answer.

Though a Christian must rather suffer then offer injuries; yet he may, nay
must mind his own safety. He may not unjustly offend his Brother, but he may
justly defend himself.

All private revenge is forbidden, R. Willet in Romans 13.
but the Magistrate is Gods Minister; therefore as vengeance belongs unto
God, so the Magistrate may in Gods place take revenge, and one may implore his
help, as he may commit his cause to God, so it be not done with a revengefull
mind.

The meaning of the holy Scriptures is far different from the sense which the
Apostate Julian put on them. When he had taken away their estates, he put them
off with a mock, Your Master said, Blessed are the poor: and when he had sorely
beaten them with his hands, he would wound them with his tongue saying, Your
Master said If one beat you on one cheek turn to him the other. The Gospel
certainly was never intended for a cross, but a comfort to a Christian, and
though its principal aim be to further him spiritually, yet it never designed
to hinder him corporally by any of those commands. Magistratus necessarius
ecclesiae, quia a Dio ordinuus est ad defensionem Ecclesiae. Polan. Syntag lib.
7. c. 19.
Christ is more tender of his people, then to thrust them into the world like
sheep among ravenous Wolves, and to deny them leave of calling to those civil
shepherds to take care of them. God has for that end appointed Magistrates to
be nursing-Fathers, and nursing-Mothers to the children of God, to be as tender
of them, as provident for them, as helpful to them as Parents to their
children, as Nurses to their Babes. They are set up by God himself to be a wall
upon which the weak Ivy of the Church may lean, and by which it may be
supported.

H^rding accused (though falsely) Luther to have animated Muncer the
rebel-preacher in Thuringia.
Thus we see that piety is not opposite to authority; though that false surmise
that Christians were enemies to the policy and government of Kingdoms, was the
cause of several of the Persecutions in the Primitive times. And indeed the
Devil and his agents suggest to Princes so much to alienate their affections
from religious persons. But though some monstrous bodies have brought forth
such an hideous birth, That Religion denies all Rule; yet you see how far the
Gospel is from being the Father of such a Child, when it commands lawful
obedience to Infidel Magistrates. It establishes the first Table, and surely
does not abolish the second. Calvin in Romans
And Calvin thinks that least believers should think themselves free from that
yoke, Paul wrote the Epistle to the Romans, to inform them of the contrary. For
it is very strange to conjecture that that God which is the God of order in the
Churches, should be a God of confusion in the Commonwealth. No, but the
Original of this error is man's corrupt nature, which hates enclosures and
banks, and would have all common and level, that he might run to excess of riot
without any rubs or hindrances. And thence it is that like waters stopped at a
Bridge, he roareth and makes such a noise. As the mad dog is enraged because
of the chain that tieth him; and the unruly Horse foameth and fretteth, because
of the Bridle that curbeth him: So these men mad upon lust, cannot endure to be
chained by laws; these furious Horses would have the reins on their own necks.

Secondly, Those that in their practices contemn Magistracy, sin against this
ttruth discovered in the Text; for they despise an Ordinance of God, Romans 13.2.

Some sin in their words by uncivil disrespectfull language; The corruption of
their hearts breaks out of their lips; These filthy dreamers defile the flesh,
despise dominions, ((...), they opposed not so much the Officers as the Office,
(...), idem valet quod (...), alterius faman laedere maledicti.
not so much the Magistrate as Magistracy,) speak evil of dignities, Jude ver.
8. they blaspheme glories. It is blasphemy against the second Table. Our wicked
times are a woeful Comment on that Text. Those persons and places which are
honored by the Spirit of God with glorious Titles, are bespattered by them
with dirty, disgraceful language. Because they could not by the power of their
hands displace the Magistrate, therefore with the poison of their tongues they
did disgrace Magistracy.

These men begin to speak evil of the Gods, and ordinarily end in speaking evil
of God himself. As Aretine by libellous and contumelious speaking against
Princes, came at length to disesteem God himself.

Observe how express the command of God is, Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor
speak evil of the Rulers of thy people, Exodus 22.28. This text is quoted by
Paul, Acts 23.2, 3.5 where he called the High Priest whited wall, and
afterward said, he wist not that he was the High Priest: which words are very
much controverted by Expositors. So Deodat. in loc. Calvin.
Some think he spoke Ironically, because he saw nothing in him worthy of that
office, and because the Priesthood was now determined in Christ, Vide Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 20. cop. 3.5.
he did usurp that Office which did not belong to him; and probably he was
some Surrogate brought in (through the disorder of the times) by some sinister
practices. Others (and that to me more likely) expound it thus, I wist not, I
considered not, I heeded not, in my haste, in heat I took not sufficient
notice, but termed him whited wall, which words I acknowledge might well have
been spared. Jun. in Parall.
The opinion of Junius is that Paul did not know him to be the High Priest;
Seneca says of Egypt that in was loquax and ingeniosa in contumeliam
praefectorum provincia: in qua qui vitaverit culpam, non effufugit infamiam.
and therefore pleads his ignorance as (at least) an extenuation of his
offense. But whatever the sense of the words is, this is clear that such as
revile Princes, disobey Gods precept. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor speak
evil of the Rulers of thy people, that is thou shall not speak evil of them by
reproach or calumny, nor wish any evil to them by imprecation or curses.

Nay, the Holy Ghost speaks the persons guilty of this sin to be impudent
audacious sinners, 2 Pet. 2.10. They are not afraid to speak evil of dignities;
as if he had said, If they had feared either God or man, Luther cried Henry the
eighth mercy for his uncivil language, such as that Audi Domine Rex, edocebo te.
they would not have dared to commit this sin. They were bold sinners indeed
that durst spit their venom in the faces of the Gods, and with the sword of
their mouths adventure upon the mouth of the sword. O to what an height of
unholiness are they arrived that bring railing accusations against the Gods,
The mother of Artexerxes in Plutarch was wont to say, that they who addressed
themselves to Princes, should use silken words.
when the Archangel durst not bring one against the Devil! Jude ver. 9. But
their tongues are set fire on hell, James 3.6. therefore no wonder if they are
set against heaven, Psalm. 73.9. Is it fit to say to a King Thou art wicked, and
to Princes Ye are ungodly! Job 34.18. The interrogation is a strong negation.
Kings must be courted with soft and silken language. If Elias and Isaiah do
otherwise, they being moved extraordinarily, are no copies for us to write
after.

As some sin in their words by uncivil language, so others in their works, by
their unseemly carriage toward the Magistrate. Surely the world is near its
end, that there are so many dregs appearing, such brutish persons in it that
have not only banished piety but humanity. They neither reverence the rulers
nor honor the ancient. How many are in their principles antiministerial, and
in their practices antimagistratical. As Nazianzen observes of the Arrians,
they began in blasphemous language against the Deity of Christ, but ended in
tumultuous carriage against the peace and tranquillity of the Commonwealth.
They plead for a Christian liberty with their mouths, but the vote of their
hearts carries it for an Antichristian licentiousness.

The time was when a Magistrate came by, the young men that saw him hid
themselves (either for reverence of Jobs person, or least they should fail in
their respectfull behavior toward him, or least he should spy somewhat amiss
in them) and the aged arose and stood up (in token of honor and to show
respect to him,) Job 29.8. but now the tide is turned. We are fellow creatures
say some, and therefore we must be fellow-beasts, taking no notice of, nor
showing any respect to one more then another. But now says Job, they that are
younger then I, have me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to
have set with the dogs of my flocks, and now I am their Song, yea their
byword: they abhor me, they flee from me, they spit in my face, Job 30.1, 9,
10. So low indeed are they whom God has set on high, through the pride and
profaneness of men's hearts. One observes of the Persians, Xenoph. Hellen.
lib. 11.
that when they came into the presence of their Prince they drew their hands
into their sleeves in token of reverence and loyalty. But how many Christians
come short of heathen, and that which is saddest of all, under the pretense of
religion? But such must know that by contemning such men they contemn God. They
have not rejected thee, says God to Samuel, but they have rejected me, 1 Samuel
8.7. not so much thee who art but my Minister as my self, who being their
Supreme Lord do rule by thee as my Deputy. As Magistracy is Gods Ordinance, by
despising this order which is by divine appointment, they despise its author;
as Magistrates are the resemblance of his glory, Gods, Glories, by contemning
the picture they contemn the person; and they that thus dishonor God, shall
belightly esteemed by him. They thae resist the Magistrate, shall receive to
themselves damnation, Romans 13.2.

My second use will be by way of Exhortation; First to Inferiors; If the God
of Heaven has appointed Magistrates to be as Gods on earth, it exhorts us to
honor them. Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. says the Holy Ghost. Magistrates
are patres patriae.
Honor to whom honor belongs, Romans 13.7. There is honor due to our civil
as well as to our natural Parents; so much is expressed in that standing Law of
God the fifth Commandment, Prohibiti sunt maledici, non jussi sunt sacrifici^s
honorari. Aug. in Exodus
Exodus 20. Though they are to be honored as Gods, yet not as the true God;
civil respect is due to them, not divine. Yet some Roman Emperors out of
intolerable pride, have affected to be called Gods, and commanded others to
sacrifice to them. This civil honor is to be visible,

1. In giving reverence to their persons.

2. In yielding obedience to their righteous precepts.

First in reverencing their persons. Magistrates are honored by God, and
therefore may well be honored by us.

Those who are dignified by God, must not be debased by men.

Honor est agnitio dignitatis vel excellentiae illius quea est in alio cum
ejusdem debita testificatione. Agnilio sinul dicitur and testificatio, quia
neque in externa observantia sola neque in interna consistit, sed in utroque
Amens. Med.
We ought to honor them in our hearts, by standing in aw of them, by esteeming
them as they resemble God, Prove. 24.21. and are in his place to be higher and
worthier then others; Thou are worth ten thousand of us, say they to David, 2 Samuel 18.3. The godly people counted King Josiah The breath of their nostrils,
Lament. 4.20. And the Holy Ghost brandeth them for sons of Belial that despised
Saul in their hearts, though he were a wicked King, 1 Samuel 10.27. In our
carriage we must honor them by rising up to them, Job 28.9. by bowing the body
to them, 2 Samuel 14.20. by silence when they speak, Job 29.9, 10.

Honor is an outward signification of that inward reverend opinion which we
have of them for their dignity and greatness.

They are honored in our speeches. The Patriarchs call Joseph their Lord, Genesis
42.10. and themselves his servants, verse. 19. Paul calls, Act. 26.25. Most
Noble Festus. Hester 5.8. If I have found favor in the fight of the King, and
if it please the King to grant my Petition, and to perform my request, says
holy Hester to the Heathen King.

It is reported of the great Grandfather of Fabius Maximus, Plutarch. in vit
Fab. Max.
that though he had bean five times Consul, and had obtained many triumphs for
diverse honorable victories, yet when his own son was Consul, be willingly
submitted himself to him, served under him as his Lieutenant, and followed on
Horseback his son in his triumphing Chariot. But such Heathen will rise up in
judgment against many christians.

Secondly, your honoring them must appear by your yielding obedience to their
lawful precepts. Mallem obedire quam miracula sacere. Luth.
In the Kingdom of Christ this is wonderful, says Zanchy, Zanch. Miscel. epi.
ded.
That he wills and commands all Princes and Potentates to be subject to his
Kingdom, and yet he wills and commands that his Kingdom be subject to
Princes and Potentates, Tit. 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates. Subjection note their
acknowledgement of obedience to be due, and obedience notes the act it self of
obeying, or the practice answerable to the forementioned principle. By
Principalities are meant those that have the Supreme power, as Kings or chief
Magistrates. Powers signify such as exercise delegated authority, and hold
from those higher Powers as Presidents of Provinces, Lieutenants of Counties,
Judges, Justices, Majors, etc. Now put them in remembrance. Men are apt to be
forgetful both of obedience to God and the Gods; Naturally we are so proud and
high, that we are unwilling to stoop to those that are higher; and therefore we
had need to be put in mind of our duties, to submit our selves to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether to the King as Supreme, or unto
Governors as unto them that sent by him, 1 Pet. 2.14. Good Rulers we must obey,
says one, as God; bad, for God.

Magis obtemperandum est diis apud quos deutius manendum est qu^m hominibus
quibusum admodum brevi tempore vivendem est. Antigon in Sophoc.
But take notice, I say, Magistrates must be obeyed in their lawful commands. If
a King (says our Civil Law) gives laws out of his Territories, he is not to
be obeyed. And it Magistrates command what God for bids, they give laws out
of their own Dominions, and therefore says the Divine law, they are not to be
obeyed. God indeed is to be obeyed universally and unlimitedly, intuitu
voluntat is, upon, the bare sight of his will; but I must examine the laws of
men by the laws of God, and if they dissonant and disagreeing to Gods laws, I
must be disobedient to their laws. No mere man's Ipse dixit is sufficient, Acts
6.29. We ought to obey God rather then men. The men of Calicot say some, will
do whatsoever their Emperors command, though it be to worship the Devil, as
some write they do; but we must observe the order of commands, Fear God, is
before Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17. And again, My son, fear the Lord and the
King, Prove. 24.21. And Eccles. 8.2. My son keep the Kings command, and that
because of the Outh of God; V^de Large Annotat. in loc.
which latter words, And that because of the oath of God; are not only a
reason, but as is excellently observed, a limitation to the precedent
Exhortation; They are a reason or enforcement: It is necessary to give
obedience to Magistrates, not only out of fear toward them, because of their
sword; but out of conscience toward God, because of his vows that are upon us,
Romans 13.5. and so it seems to relate to some Covenant and Oath of fidelity,
which was taken by the people toward their Princes, 1 Chronicles. 11.3. Isai.
19.18. And surely Oaths to Magistrates are to be kept, though some slip Oaths
as easily as the Monkies do their collars; and like the man possessed with the
Devil, break all those bonds asunder. God will have a time to make inquisition
for perjury, when his roll of curses ten yards long, and five yards broad,
shall rest in the house of him that for swears himself, and destroy it Zach.
5.2.

But the words may be considered as a limitation; Keep the Kings command; but
so, that thou do not violate thine Oath and obedience due to God. Thy fealty to
the Gods must be such as will consist with thy fidelity to God; for we are
bound to God and his service by Oath and Covenant, 1 Pet. 3.21. Psalm. 119.106.
And no subordinate obedience must make us forget our obedience to him who is
Supreme. We must obey Rulers usque ad aras, as far as Religion will suffer us,
and no farther. My obedience to man must be regulated by a good conscience
toward God, Dan 3.6, 17, 18. 1 Samuel 22.17. Act. 5.29. As a subordinate Officer
is not to be obeyed when he uses his power against his Prince, which he
received from his Prince, and should have improved for his Prince: So neither
is a Prince to be obeyed when he uses his power against God, which he received
from God, and should have improved for God. As we must give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, so we must give unto God the things that are Gods,
Matthew. 22.21, 22. (...).
One observes that the Greek Article is twice repeated when be speaks of
God, more then when he speaks of Caesar, to show that our special care should
be to give God his due. To pay to the King that tribute which is due to God
only, is not tributum Caesaris, sed servitium Diaboli. Chrysostom.
It was noble speech of those Worthies (mentioned, Dan. 3.16, 17.18. who were
commanded by the King to worship the Image which he had set up) O Nebuchadnezar
we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. Our God whom we serve is able
to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of
thine hand, O King. But if not, be it known unto thee O King, that we will not
worship thy God, nor fall down to the golden Image which thou have set up.
Hist. Gall.
And it was a gallant answer of the Prince of Condee, who being taken Prisoner
by Charles the ninth of France, and put to his choice, Whether he would go to
Mass, or be put to death, or suffer perpetual imprisonment? The former (said
he) by Gods grace I will never do; and for the two latter let the King do with
me what he pleases; God I hope, will turn all to the best.

We are also to honor Magistrates both by praying for them, and paying tribute
to them; the former is our duty, and the latter is their due; I will, says the
Apostle, that prayers and supplications be made for all men, for Kings, and all
in authority; 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. The burden which lies on them is weighty, we had
need therefore to beg of God to strengthen their backs, otherwise they can
never bear it. Moses was a pious patient man, yet he tells us notwithstanding
all his strength of grace, Non possum portare, I am not able to bear all this
people. Numb. 11.14.
There is a truth in that saying, Did men but know the weight of a Crown, they
would not stoop to take it up. Pride indeed is so prevalent with many persons,
that they will venture their lives to satisfy their ambition; these men's great
care is to get the Sword, the Scepter, not how to use them for God and his
people; but certainly they who mind a faithful discharge of their trusts, find
the Magistrates Throne to be a place of little ease. They are shepherds, Isai.
44.28. and we know the life of a shepherd is a laborious life, they endure the
scorching heat of Summer, and the nipping cold of the Winter to keep their
flocks safe. Cares and Fears about public concernments molest them night and
day, as weights hang on a clock, and will not suffer them to sleep. If they
watch to protect us, should not we watch unto prayer for them? B. Halls
contemplation.
The emblem of King Henry the seventh in all the windows of his house was
still a Crown in a bush of thorns; surely to tell us that great places are not
free from great cares; that no man knows the weight of a Scepter, but he that
swayeth it.

We are bound likewise to pay tribute to them as well as pray for them; Render
to all their dues, (...) capitatio, Poll money which men pay by the poll, or
according to their estates; (...), vectigal, due for merchandise. Beza.
tribute to whom tribute belongs, custom to whom custom, Romans 13.7.

It is observable, The Holy Ghost calls it their due. To pay tribute or
custom is not an act of courtesy, but a duty which must be done out of
conscience; Pompey first converted the capitation or head silver to the City of
Rome. Par. in Romans
God commands it from us in lieu of the Magistrates care of us; as v. 6. For
this cause pay ye tribute (praestatis, non datis, you pay; not, you give) for
they are Gods Ministers, etc. Your paying tribute and custom, is a sign of your
subjection to them, and a thankful acknowledgement of your protection from
them, and v. 5. For this cause ought you to be subject, not only for wrath, but
for conscience sake. God takes care for the maintenance of the Magistrate as
well as of the Minister, and does strictly enjoin us, that both they who watch
for our souls, and they which watch for our bodies should have an honorable
subsistence. Did such as are private, but seriously consider this word
conscience (for conscience sake) they durst not as they do, cozen the public.
The same mighty Possessor of Heaven and Earth, who gives me a right to the
whole, gives them a right to a part of my estate, and therefore to cozen them
of their dues in tribute or custom, is to cozen and defile my conscience by the
violation of Gods righteous command Tiberius did not approve that shepherd that
flayed his sheep instead of clipping; Nor Tully him who cut the wings, so that
they could never grow after. Magistrates are set for the good of the people;
and therefore should be moderate in demanding their goods.
.

I shall in the next place lay down two or three thoughts to enforce the duty
of honoring Magistrates.

First, Consider the necessity of Magistracy; without Magistracy one man would
be but bread for another; and the world which is like the Sea for storms and
tempests, would also resemble it in this, that the Inhabitants of it would be
as the fishes of the Sea, the great would devour the small. Men are like the
fishes of the Sea (says the Prophet) that have no ruler over them, Hab. 1.14.
No man could call any thing his own, were it not for these Gods. Did not they
defend us by their power, every one would rob and wrong us at his pleasure. Our
liberties, estates and lives would quickly be a prey to the covetousness and
cruelty of vicious persons. Liberty and property are quite banished where
authority is not established. Who can express the malice, and murders, the
rapine and robberies, the mischiefs and miseries that reign where the
Magistrate does not reign. In those days there was no King in Israel, every man
did that which was right (not in Gods, but) in his own eyes, Judge. 17.6. Judge.
19.1. And what evil is not good in his eye who has the Devil for his guide
and leader, and corrupt nature for his law and rules? When the gate of
Magistracy is shut, the floodgates for all manner of enormities are open. When
these that bear up the pillars of the house are removed, how soon will the
building be ruined? When God intended the destruction of the Jewish
Commonwealth, he took away their Sanedrim. And in the glass of our times it is
too too visible what a sad deformed face things have, when Magistrates are
overturned. Constantinople will witness to this truth, where upon the grand
Signiors death, till his Successor be on his Throne, all things are in a
confusion, and the Janissaries have the rule and Dominion. Some write that the
Persian law commands, that upon the decease of their Kings, there should be a
susspension of the Laws for certain (five) days that Subjects might know the
necessity of Government, and learn to value it more by being berest of the
benefit of it for a time. Nay when God is exceedingly provoked by sin, how
sharply does he make men suffer by taking away their stay and their staff! The
mighty man, the Judge, the Prophet and the Prudent, Isa. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. The
taking away the civil stay and staff, the Prince; and the spiritual stay and
staff, the Prophet, will quickly cause the fall, yea the utter downfall of the
people. Men often murmur at the Magistrate and tell us (many times falsely) He
is a Tyrant, if he were gone all would be well; but when he is out of the way,
do they not find many Tyrants for one? Every man would be an oppressor, were
there no man to be a restrainer.

What would a Nation without government be but a desert of savage beasts? what
would Towns be but dens of Thieves, and what would families be but stages of
unclean birds? yea what would most men be, but like dogs trying all right and
title by their teeth and strength?

Men naturally are more afraid of the noise of the Musket then of the Bullet; I
mean of the frowns of the Rulers, then of the fire of Hell: and therefore were
they once free from them, they would do that which would soon undo both
themselves and others.

Now the necessity of Magistrates calls for reverence and obedience to their
authority. The more needful things are, the more grateful they should be.
Things that are superfluous may be slighted, things that are only convenient
may be the less valued: but things that are absolutely necessary must be highly
esteemed. I tell thee, the Ministry is not more necessary to the well-being of
the Church, then the Magistracy to the well-being of the State. You may as soon
see a Tree thrive without a root, as a Commonwealth flourish without a Ruler.
Magistrates are in Scripture called the heads of the people, Exodus 18.25.
because they are as necessary to the body Politic, to direct and govern it, as
the head is to the body natural; therefore as the members yield respect and are
subject unto the head (if the head do but ache, all the humors of the arm (as
some observe) run to the head, and therefore the arms are thin and slender,
because they want their proper nurture; yea if the head be in danger how do the
other parts hazard themselves for its shelter? many an hand and arm has been
wounded, that the head might be saved) thus should subjects show their respect
to, and tenderness of their superiors, for if a member or some of the
inferior parts be cut off, the body may live; but if the head be taken off, if
Governors be set aside, Actum est de republica, that Kingdom, that
Commonwealth cannot stand long.

Secondly, Consider the severity of God against the contemners of Magistrates.
There are several in the word of God that stand up like the Mast of a Ship cast
away by Sands, to warn us that we steer not their course, least we be sunk
also. Those who opposed the preservers of our civil lives, have not seldom been
punished with violent deaths: Corah and his company, Abimelech, Athaliah,
Adonijah, Absalom, Zimri, Joab, Sheba, with several others will confirm this
truth. And humane as well as divine writings speak to the same purpose.

Speed Chron.
James the first King of Scots was murdered in Perth by Walter Earl of Athol,
in hope to attain the Crown: for so had his Sorcerers prophesied, and crowned
he was with a Grown of red hot Iron clapped upon his head, being one of the
tortures wherewith he ended at once his wicked days and desires. Becket,
Mortimer, Tyler, Warbeck, Sanders, Story, Campian, the Piercies, the
Powder-Plotters, Rhodulphus Duke of Suevia, Richard the third of England, and
many others have been marked with divine vengeance for contemning this divine
Ordinance.

My Son, says Solomon, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change. For their calamity shall arise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both? Prove. 21.22. i.e. of them that fear not God,
and of them that fear not the King. And Eccles. 10.8, 9. He that diggeth a pit,
shall fall into it; and whosoever breaks an hedge, a Serpent shall bite him.
Whosoever removes stones, shall be hurt therewith; and he that cleaves wood,
shall be endangered thereby. These four proverbial expressions speak the danger
of them that go about to supplant their Rulers. Whilst they are digging pits
to catch others, the earth falls on them, and murdereth themselves. When they
are breaking up the old hedge of Government, Serpents and Adders which use to
harbor in old walls and hedges will sting them. God will make men know that it
is a dangerous thing to confound rule and subjection, and to break down the
partition wall which he has set up between Magistrates and people. When these
sharp instruments which they run against, wound them deep, they will believe
that it is bad meddling with edged tools, and that there is a truth in those
words of the Apostle, They that resist procure to themselves damnation, Romans
13.2. that is, both corporal punishment and eternal torment, says Peter Martyr.

If thou would not therefore suffer with others, take heed of sinning with
other. Depart I pray you from the Tents of these wicked persons, (says Moses
to the Congregation upon the conspiracy of Corah, Dathan, etc. against their
rulers) and touch nothing of theirs, least ye be consumed in all their sins,
Numb. 16.26. They that join in common rebellions, must expect to be joined
common destructions. Be not impatient of rule, as thou desire to avoid that
ruin, which Gods mouth does threaten, and his hand will execute on such
rebellious ones. Let those many examples (which are in Scripture and other
Authors mentioned) of them that are hung on Gibbets as monuments of Gods fury,
fright thee from their acts least thou partake of their ends. Believe it, no
King can possibly be so tender of his own honor, as God is of his own
Officers. Do not therefore shoot off thy guns of opposition against the Gods,
least they recoil and kill thy self. Reviling of natural parents was banishment
by Plato's Law, death by Gods Law, Exodus 21.17. Those then that revile civil
parents, shall not always go unpunished.

Martial Policy, true Religion, and civil Justice, are the three Pillars which
uphold all, says Sr. Walter Rawleigh.
Thirdly, Consider, thy felicity and welfare does under God depend much on the
Gods. The Apostle enforces this use by this very Argument. For he is the
Minister of God for thy good, Romans 13. If he labor to do thee good why
should thou imagine evil against him? To render evil for good is God-like,
Mat. 5 ult. but to render evil for good, is devilish.

Magistrates are shields, Psalm. 47.9. they defend their subjects from the darts
and bullets with which the sons of violence would wound them.

Shepherds, Numb. 27.17. to defend them from the devouring mouths of ravenous
creatures. They are called the foundations of the earth because they support
the building from ruin, and sinking, Prove. 10.25. (...).
Coverings, Ezekiel. 28.16. which imports that Engine, under which Soldiers
used to be protected in assaulting the walls of an enemy against the stones and
darts which were thrown down upon them. Guides, Prove. 6.7. because they lead
and direct the people. Angels, 2 Samuel 14.15. in that they defend and protect
the people. The Fathers and Mothers of the Country. (...) medela.
Gen, 41.43. Judges 5.7. because they take care of, and provide for their
people. Healers, Job 34.17. because they cure their wounds, and make up their
breaches. They deliver the poor that cries, and the fatherless, and him that
has none to help. They are eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, Fathers to
the poor, Non sibi sed multorum utilititati se esse natum.
and helpers to the needy, Job 29.11, 15. They are born not for themselves, but
for the good of many; as Bucers Physician told him. And they govern not seeking
their own wealth, Non mihi sed populo, signifying that which he was often heard
to say, Ita se rempublicam gesturum, ut sciret rem populi esse, non suam.
but the Commonwealth, as Aelius Adrianus Emperor of Rome would say. They are
as Trees whose leaves are fair, whose fruit much, and in them is meat for all;
in their shadow the beasts of the field dwell, and in them the fowls of the
heaven have their habitation, Dan. 4.12.21.

They are the keepers of our liberties, the preservers of our lives, the safety
of our persons, the security of our possessions, the terrors of sinners, the
defense of Saints, the Nerves and Sinews, yea the Vital spirits of the body
Politic, without whom all things would run to ruin, and quickly fall to
confusion. How much then do they for us, and how much then should we be subject
to them! Surely as little as many value them, they will find much cause to
celebrate the funerals of these civil Fathers with many tears. Our comforts as
well as our consciences call upon us to be subject. To wish them harm that
watch to be our helps, is horrid ingratitude. Cicero says, he that kills his
Father commits many sins in one, because he sins against many
obligations. His Father begat him, nourished him, brought him up. Magistrates
are the Fathers of their Country; he that resists them, or does violence to
them, commits several sins in one, because he sins against so many
engagements to subjection. We owe all the comforts we enjoy for this world, nay
somewhat of them that relate to a better world under God to the Magistrate. We
could not sleep quietly in our beds one night; we could not eat one meal
peaceably in the day without them, we could not call either children, or
estates, or lives our own without them: we could not enjoy such liberties for
our souls, such frequent communion of Saints without them. How great then is
our obligation, and how great should our subjection be to them! These many
cords of kindness should bind us to them. He was possessed with a Devil whom no
cords would hold, Mark 5.3. and surely they are little better that against the
Law of God and this protecting love of the Gods will not learn to be loyal.

Trees receive moisture from the earth, and within a while pay it back in those
leaves that fall to the earth again: the Rivers receive their waters from the
Ocean, and they acknowledge it in emptying themselves into it: Sheep that are
fed by us acknowledge it in serving us with their flesh and fleeces. And shall
man be more brutish then the beast? I shall end this exhortation with the words
of the Holy Ghost a little varied; Obey them that have the rule over you, and
submit your selves; for they watch for your bodies (as Ministers for your soul)
as they that must give an account, Heb. 13.17.

My second Exhortation will be to the Gods. If the God of heaven have appointed
you to be Gods on earth, then it may exhort you to walk as Gods, and to work as
Gods amongst men.

First, Walk as Gods among men; your calling is high, and therefore your
carriage should be holy. Every calling has a peculiar comeliness belonging to
it. A Courtier has another manner of behavior then a Country man, a Scholar
then a Scullion, a Prince then a Peasant. The greater your privileges are, the
more gracious your practices should be. Remember whose livery your wear, whose
image you hear, whose person you represent, whose place you stand in, and walk
worthy of that calling whereunto you are called, Ephesians. 4.1. Some would have us
give no names to children, but such as should mind them of their duty. The
spirit of God has given you a divine name which should mind you of the divine
nature. Since your compellations are according to God, surely your
conversations should be according to the Gospel.

The several Titles given to you, call for sanctity and strictness from you.

The spirit of God calls you Kings, 1 Samuel 8.9. and Princes, Josh. 8.33. Now
is it seemly or suitable, to see Kings or Princes padling in the mire, or
playing in the dirt with every beggars brat? Does not every one expect that
their Linen should be in print, their clothes clean without the least spot of
dirt? And is it comely or consonant to see Magistrates (honored with a
commission from heaven) wallowing in the mire of sin and pollution with every
heir of hell? Do not all expect that as your places are god-like and
honorable, so your practice should be godly and answerable, that your linen
should be white, your garments undefiled, and your persons higher then others
not only in place but piety?

When King Porus was taken prisoner, and demanded by the Conqueror how he
would be used? he answered, Like a King: and being three times asked the same
question, he as often returned the same answer. And if you ask me how you
should demean your selves, I would answer Like Kings, Every one resembling the
behavior of a King. Prove. 31, 3, 4. It is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not
for Kings to drink wine, nor Princes strong drink, least they drink and forget
the Law. Give not thy strength unto women, Of Bonosus the Emperor it was said,
He was born non ut vivat, sed ut bihat. And when being overcome by Probus, he
hanged himself, it was commonly jested, That a tankard hung there, not a man.
nor thy ways to that which destroys Kings. Drunkenness and Uncleanness are
sinful and unwarrantable in subjects, but they are most sordid and abominable
in a Sovereign. They are so much worse then others, by how much they ought to
be better then others. A disease that surprizeth the head or heart, is more
dangerous then those that infect the exterior members: A spot in silk is far
worse then one in sackcloth. A Fly in a barrel of pitch does not the harm
which it does in a box of Ointments.

When Scipio was offered an Harlot, he said, Vellem si non essem Imperator, I
would if I were not a General, an Emperor. Should such a man as I fly! said
Nehemiah. So should a Ruler consider, Should such a man as I be unclean! I that
punish such sin in others, should I commit it my self! Should such a man as I
swear, be lascivious in my language, or unsavory in my speeches! A divine
sentence is in the mouth of a King, Prove. 16, 10. I whose words are Laws and
Oracles, should speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. Should such a man as
I profane the Sabbath, associate with sinners, be prayerless in my family, or
venture upon any iniquity! It is an abomination for Kings to commit wickedness,
Ideo deteriores sumus quia meliores esse debemus. Salv.
Prove. 16.12. Peter Martyr told Queen Elizabeth, that Princes were doubly bound
to God, as Men, and as Princes or chief men. Their sins are sins against more
obligations, and therefore are sins of more aggravations then others. A great
man cannot commit a small sin; yet a great man is seldom a good man. Godliness
in a Ruler is like a Diamond in a golden Ring, which shines radiantly; but
there are few Jewels so set. Among all the Kings of Israel, not one godly man:
Among the Kings of Judah very few. Pope Urban wrote to a Prelate in his time
scoffingly, Monacho fervido, Abbati calido, Episcopo tepido and Archiepiscopo
frigido; still the higher in means, the worse in manners.
Men in high places are apt to have their heads giddy, and thereby are in great
danger of falling. Of one only Roman Emperor (Titus) it is said that he was
the better for his honor; most are worse.

The Spirit of God calls you the children of God, And all of you are children
of the most High. Now how exactly, how circumspectly should the children of God
walk! Much obedience may be expected from servants, but more from sons; their
pre-eminence is more, and therefore their obedience should be more. The fathers
of the flesh look for much dutifulness from their children; but surely the
Father of Spirits may look for more from his children. Phil. 2.15. That ye may
be blameless and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke in the midst of a
crooked and perverse generation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world. Ye
that are Gods sons, are appointed to blame others that do evil, and therefore
it behooves you to be blameless your selves; Qui alterum accusat probri etc.
but blameless and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke. The sons of great
men should be without riotousness or rebellion; but the sons of God should be
without suspicion or rebuke; that is, walk so strictly, as that they should do
nothing blameworthy. If God be your Father, where is his honor? Mal. 1.6. Do
you honor him in your hearts by giving him your superlative love, and fear,
and trust, and esteem? Do you honor him in your houses, by causing all within
your charges to worship him according to his Word? Are your houses houses of
holiness? praying, reading, singing, catechizing houses? are they examples of
Religion to your neighbors? Is holiness to the Lord written upon your selves,
your children, your servants, your estates, and upon all the belong to you? Do
you honor God in your lives by walking as he walked? Are ye followers of him
as dear children? Ephesians. 5.1. Do you resemble him as children their Father? Are
you holy as he was holy in all manner of conversation? Was your everlasting
Father (when he walked in your flesh upon earth) ever guilty of cursing, or
swearing, or lying? Did any rotten communication ever drivel out of his lips?
Was he ever guilty of oppressing the poor, or despising the needy? of seeking
himself, or of doing his own will? Did he ever neglect praying, and instructing
his Family of the Apostles, or supplication by himself? Was not he at prayer
early in the morning a great while before day, and was not he up at it all
night? Was it not his meat and drink to do the will of his Father, and to
finish his work? Did not he go about doing good, glorifying God upon Earth, and
doing what was well pleasing in his sight? Surely ye that are the sons of God
by nature and office, should resemble the Son of God by nature.

O Sirs, Think of it; ye that are the sons of God by deputation, should
resemble this Son of God by generation. Be not as Eli's, and Samuel's, and
David's children, Eusebius.
a disgrace to your Father: But as Constantines sons resembled their Father in
his good parts and practices, so be ye perfect as your Father in heaven is
perfect, Mat. 5. ult. David's daughters were known to be his children by their
garments, 2 Samuel 13.18. Do you make it known to others that you are the
children of God, by not defiling your garments; by keeping your selves
unspotted from the world; by looking to your clothes that they be not defiled,
though ye walk in dirty streets; be as the children of God, without rebuke in
the midst of a crooked and perverse generation.

Consider, the Devil is ever watching for your halting, and like some unkind
servant, he blabs presently to the Fathet what a dirty pickle his children are
in. Suppose he sees the dirt of drunkenness, of uncleanness, of squeezing
tenants, of profaning the Sabbath, of scoffing at godliness, of irreligion and
atheism in your houses, and immediately carries your clothes to God, as the
Patriarchs did Joseths coat (For he accuses men before God day and night,
Revel. 12.10.) Saying, Lord, is this thy sons coat? Know now whether it be thy
sons coat or no. Genesis 37.32. Do thy children use to carry themselves as my
children! Surely these are of their father the Devil. Can you imagine that God
should own you? No certainly, (as the Pope disowned the Bishop, when the
Emperor had sent the Buffe-coat in which he was taken prisoner, and delivered
him up to justice) he will not dishonor himself by owning you. Nay, how can
you expect but that Jesus Christ, who sits by, and hears the indictment
against you (who uses to appear as an Advocate for others, when the Accuser of
the Brethren pleads against them) should even second the Bill against you,
and say to God, as Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.5. They have corrupted themselves, their
spot is not the spot of Gods children, they are perverse and crooked persons!
Father, these are sins not of weakness but wickedness; they are not
infirmities, but enormities; they are not the spots of thy children. Those that
cast thee out of their hearts, and let the flesh have the Supremacy there; that
cast thee out of their houses, and let the world have the Superiority there;
Those that make no conscience of thy day and their duties; whose whole care is
to be honored and enriched; whose heat and fervor is for credit and profit,
and put thee off with a few fragments of time, and a few scraps of their
estate, which they can spare from the world and flesh; those sin like wretches,
like rebels, not like Saints, like sons; Their spots are not the spots of thy
children.

There are spots which may be, and spots which cannot be the spots of Gods
children. All sins are unsuitable to, but some sins are inconsistent with
sonship; yea the pre-eminence of Adoption does absolutely deny the predominancy
of any corruption.

When Antigonus was to go to a place that might probably prove a temptation to
sin, he asked counsel of Menedemus what he should do; He bade him only remember
he was a Kings son: So say I to you, that walk every day in the midst of many
snares of temptations (and therefore should have the greater care and
circumspection) Remember that ye are the sons of the King of Kings, and do
nothing unworthy of the name by which he calls you, or the place to which he
has called you.

It might have been a cutting word to the heart of Brutus, (whose hand was then
stabbing Caesar) What thou my son Brutus! I could not have expected better from
a slave; but little looked for this from a son. How think you, can the Lord
take it, that you who are his children, should wound the Body of his Son with
oaths and curses, his sacred laws by wickedness and wilful disobedience! I
beseech you, be exceeding holy that ye may show your selves to be children of
the most High. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of
the Devil; He that does not righteousness, is not of God, 1 John 3.10. If ye
therefore call on the Father, who without respect of persons will judge every
man according to his works, pass the time of your sojurning here in fear, 1
Pet. 1.17. forasmuch as ye know ye were not redeemed with corruptible things,
as silver or gold, from your vain-conversations received by tradition from your
fathers; but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without spot and
blemish, verse. 18, 19. It is written of Boleslaus, one of the Kings of Poland,
that he still carried about with him the picture of his Father, and when he was
to do any great work, he would look on the picture, and pray that he might do
nothing unworthy of such a Fathers name: So when you set about any business,
desire and labor that you may do nothing (while on earth) unworthy your Father
who is in heaven.

Nay further, the Holy Ghost calls you Gods. How godly then should you be!
how unsuitable are the works of the Devil to them that have the name of God! God
is light, and in him is no darkness at all; and should not the Gods shine
brightly with the light of holiness, and abhor all deeds of darkness? The Gods
of the Heathen were taxed with several crimes; Jupiter with uncleanness, Juno
with passion, etc. Hence says Austin, the Heathen took liberty to sin, because
their Gods were represented to them as patterns or approvers of such actions:
As Charaea in Terence, Non ego facerem quae Jupiter fecit? Should I be backward
to what the God himself was forward? But the God of Heaven is far from such
things; He is the holy One of Israel, holy in all his ways, and righteous in
all his works; His Nature is the pattern of holiness; his Law is the rule of
holiness: Holiness is his Essence, his glory, himself, Psalm. 89.13. A God of
truth without iniquity, just and right is he, Deuteronomy. 32.4. There are many spots
in our Moons; but not the least spot in this Sun of Righteousness. Now
therefore you that have his Name, should get his Nature, and be pure as he is
pure: The Name of God is an honor to you, O be not you a dishonor to it,
James 2.8. Do not, O do not blaspheme that worthy name by which ye are called.
How holy should you be in your hearts; how watchful over your words; how wary
in your works; how faithful in your families; how conscientious in all
companies? for the most High has said, Ye are Gods Lactantus tells us that
the very Heathen thought that their only way to honor their Gods was to be
like them, to do as they did.
.

Alexander having a soldier of his name that was a coward, bid him either
learn to be valiant, or be no more called Alexander: So say I to you that have
the Livery and Name of God, and do the drudgery of Satan; either learn to be
holy, to be good, or be no more called Gods.

Sir, observe it, is it comely for a God to swear; for a God to wrong his
neighbors; for a God to profane Gods day; for a God to despise godliness, and
godly men; for a God to keep company with those that are of their father the
Devil; for a God to live without God in his affections, house, and
conversation! Blush O guilty Justice, or Ruler, and be ashamed, and either
amend thy life and nature, or disown this name of God.

I have sometime read of Luther, that he used to repel the darts of temptations
with this shield, I am a Christian, I cannot do it: O would you but think when
your hearts, or lives are swerving from God, I am called a God, and cannot, may
not do the work of the Devil. I may not do any thing unworthy the name of God;
it might be helpful to you against the assaults of Hell.

Nemo errat sivi ipsi, sed dementiam spargit in proximos. Sen. Ep. 94.
Besides, you had the more need to walk in the way of Gods Commandments, because
you have many following your steps: They that have many at their heels, had
need to be holy, least they cause the souls of others as well as their own to
miscarry for ever. Sin (especially in great men) is like leven which soureth
the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5.6.

The bodies of men do not sooner take infection then their souls. If the great
trees fall, they usually brush and beat down smaller ones with them. When two
or three men of renown, famous in the Congregation, begin a mutiny against God
they shall not want company to join with them, Numb. 16. If the Princes of the
people be guilty of Rebellion, how soon is the whole Congregation in the same
transgression? Numb. 13.28, 29. Numb. 14. init. When a disease has once taken
the head, how often does it thence diffuse it self into other parts of the
body? When Charles the fifth went into Italy to be Crowned Emperor, The whole
Army of soldiers will follow their Leader.
being troubled with the Headache, he cut his hair short, the great Courtiers
followed his example; so as long hair so much in fashion before, grew quite out
of fashion in his time. Hisy Exem.
Strabo. Alexander used to carry his head on one side, whereupon his Courtiers
to imitate him did the like. Before Vespasians time the Romans were grown to
great excess in clothes and furniture for their houses; and though many laws
were made against it, they could not be restrained: but when he came to the
Crown, being a temperate and moderate Prince, all their former vanity grew out
of use. So true is that saying of King Alphonsus, That as certain flowers move
after the Sun, so the people follow the manners of their Princes: And certain
it is, that the common sort, like a flock of sheep, which way the first goes,
all the rest follows. The actions of Rulers are often the rulers of the peoples
actions. The vulgar are like soft wax, taking any and easy impression from the
seals of great men. When men of quality swear, roar, deride Religion, dwell
without God in their houses, etc. how quickly do their neighbors take after
them, and justify their practices by such patterns, thinking they sin cum
privilegio, if they sin cum Principe! But now, if a great man walk with God,
condemn and reprove sin by his works as well as by words, (being as the chief
Magistrate of Israel was, mighty in word and deed, Act. 7.22) if he pray with
his family, keep the Lords day strictly, work out his salvation diligently, how
prevalent will such an example be to the inferior people! surely as when the
Mountains overflow with water, the valleys are much the better; so when these
Mountains (as Rulers are called, Micah 6.7) overflow with the water of grace,
the plains will abound the more in fruit.

Think therefore how comfortale it will be for thee by thy holy life to direct
others the way to heaven; and how lamentable will it one day be to thee,
should thou lead others in the road to Hell? How deep will thou sink into
hell, that shall be pressed down under the weight of thy own and thine other
men's sins? Hain. in vit. Lutheri.
I remember Luther mentions this to be one of the Papists tenants, That if
the Pope be so neglectful of his own and his Brethren salvation, and so
unprofitable and remiss in his place, that he carries a long with himself
innumerable people to be eternally tormented, no mortal man ought to reprove
him for this sin. But sure I am, the Immortal God will reprove both him and you
for such crimes, when ye shall meet in the other world, where the weight of sin
will be sufficiently felt, and the worth of the soul (which is destroyed by it)
shall be fully known.

Further, It behooves you the rather to walk as, Gods, because others do not
only sin with you, but suffer for you. When King David numbered the people out
of pride, how did God number the people to the Pestilence! 2 Samuel What bitter
fruits does God make Israel to feed on, Jer. 15.2. Such as are for death to
death, such as are for famine to famine, such as are for the sword to the
sword! But if you would know the root from which those swore fruits spring,
Because of Manasseh the King of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem, v. 4.

Whether, says one, a Gangreen begin at the head or the heel, it will kill,
but a Gangreen in the head will kill sooner then one in the heel; Even so will
the sins of great ones overthrow a state sooner then the sins of small ones;
therefore the advice of Sigismund the Emperor, when a motion was made for
Reformation, was, Let us begin at the Minorities, says one; No, rather says
he, Let us begin at the Majorities; for if the great ones be good, the meaner
cannot easily be evil.

Secondly, It exhorts you to work as Gods.

I shall branch this Use into three Particulars.

1. Executive Justice impartially. 2. Excel in showing Mercy. 3. Promote Piety
to the utmost of your power.
First, Execute justice impartially. God is a God of Justice and judgment,
Isa. 30.18. The most just, Job 34.17. Others may do justly, he cannot but do
justly: Justice which is an accident in others (and therefore may be separated
from them) is his very Essence, his Being. Be ye therefore like God. Let
Justice run down like water, and Righteousness like a mighty stream. Wear the
same garments which he does, Isa. 59.17. He puts on Righteousness for a
Breastplate, and the Helmet of Salvation upon his head. Such garments did holy
Job wear, I put on Righteousness, and it clothed me, my Judgment was as a
Robe and a Diadem, Job 29.14. Kings and Princes wear Crowns and Diadems, Judges
and other Officers wear Robes and other Ornaments. Now says Job, others place
much of their glory and state in their Robes, in their Purple vestments which
strike a reverence in the Subject toward his Superior, adding in the estimation
of men Majesty to the person, and solemnity to the action of the wearer: but I
place my honor in Justice and Judgment; I think my self better clothed with
these real virtues, then others with their empty marks and ensigns of dignity.

I say, Execute Justice impartially, that is, It was a strange yet true saying,
There was more justice in hell then in France; there the guilty are punished,
be they never so great, they do not escape; but in France it is otherwise; may
it not be said so of England?
without fear or favor; Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment; thou
shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty,
Lev. 19.15. as if he had said, ye cannot deal righteously, if ye spare any,
because he is poor, or because he is rich. It is a principle in Moral Policy,
That an ill executor of the laws is worse in a State then a great breaker of
them. And the Egyptian Kings presented the Oath to their Judges, not to swerve
from their consciences, though they received a command from themselves to the
contrary. Neither fear of greatness (It is a mercy to have Judges, says
Cicero, modo audeant quae sentiunt) nor favor of nearness should make
Magistrates deviate from the Rule. When Caricles the son in law of Phocion was
accused for taking bribes, he desired his Father to defend his cause; but he
answered him, I took thee for my son in law in all honest matters only. A
Magistrate should be an heart without affection; an eye without lust; a mind
without passion; or otherwise his hand will do unrighteous actions. He that
goes to the Seat of Judicature, must leave his affections (as Abram his
servants when he went to the Mount) behind him. A Justice must like the earth,
cherish and nourish the low Violet as well as the tall Cedar. The Graecians
placed Justice betwixt Leo and Libra, thereby signifying, that there ought to
be both magnanimity in executing, and indifferency in determining. But the
impartiality of a Ruler is notably set out by the Throne of the house of David,
Psalm. 122.5.
which was placed in the gate of the City, toward the Sun rising, as some
observe. In the gate, to tell us that all who went in and came out at the gate,
might indifferently be heard, and have free access to the Judgment Seat; but
toward the rising of the Sun, to show that their judgment should be as clear
from corruption, as the Sun is clear in his chiefest brightness.

It would be an ornament unto, and tend to the settlement of Magistracy (for
the Throne is established by righteousness, Prove. 16.12) if those two Verses
which some say are written in letters of gold over the Tribunal in Zant, were
practiced by every Court of Justice.

Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, jura, bonos.
In the executing of Justice there are two things mainly to be minded.

1. That you be terrors to evil doers; this is expressed as one of your chief
duties, Romans 13.3. If men be fearless in sinning, surely you should not be
fearful in sentencing them for their sins. God hates iniquity; He is of purer
eyes then to behold it, the evil of sin never got a good look from God, Dan.
Hist.
and why should it from the Gods? Edward the Confessor was held a bad Prince,
not by doing but enduring evil. God was angry with Eli, and tells him that he
would judge his house for ever for the iniquity which he knew, because his Sons
made themselves vile, and he restrained them not, 1 Samuel 3.13. Eli was a
Magistrate, and should have put forth his authority and punished those ungodly
children, but because he did not, God punished both him and them. O it is
dangerous to do the work of the Lord negligently. Sir, Do not you (or might you
not upon inquiry) know of them that profane Gods day, blaspheme his name,
frequent Alehouses and the like? do you restrain them? Do you fright such
offenders with your frowns, and show your love to their souls by executing
Justice on them for their sins? If you do not, look to your self; for God has
Iron hands for Justices that have leaden heels, and will one day strike them
home, for forswearing themselves to spare others. He will be a terror to thee,
and make thee a terror to thy self who wilt not at his command be a terror to
evil doers. Thou sinnest in others, Our old word Koning and by contraction
King, comes of Con, says Becanus, and comprehends 3. things, Possum, Scio,
Audeo.
whilst thou suffer them to sin, and thou shall one day suffer with them,
Rev. 18.4. Thou art afraid to offend thy Neighbors, I tell thee, God will make
thee know twere better offending all the world, then one God. I beseech you,
make it appear that you are Magistrates by being men of courage; be as bold in
executing as others are in transgressing the law. Shall iniquity be
brazen-faced, and authority hide it self? If the offender be in robes, be not
afraid of him, but make him afraid of you. I have read that the Athenian
Judges sat in Mars-street, to show that Rulers should be men of valor; Cowards
are more fit to be slaves then rulers. A Magistrate should be like Moses, in
his own cause as meek as a Lamb, in Gods cause as stiff as an Oak, as bold as a
Lion. All dare disparage him who dares discourage none. How punctually does
Scripture tell you, that this ought to be your practice! Magistrates, says
Peter, are sent for the punishment of evil doers, 1 Pet. 2.14. And Paul says,
If thou do evil, be afraid; for he bears not the sword in vain. For he is
the Minister of God, an avenger to execute wrath on them that do evil, Romans
13.4. The sword which is carried before him, as an Ensign of his power, is not
for show or for fashion, but for the wounding disorderly persons. A wise King
says Solomon, Prove. 20.26. scatters the wicked and brings the wheel over
them, a kind of punishment then in use, and now in many places. Especially be
severe to them that profane the Sabbath, that Queen of days, that golden
season of grace. Nehemiah would not spare the chief men that profaned this
chiefest of days, Nehem. 13.17. This is one of the chief precepts which the
Lord of Sabbath commands you, Exodus 20. Exodus 23.12. Englands disturbing Gods
rest, has raised God to disturb Englands rest.

He that spares the bad, hurts the good. The Surgeon must cut off
incurable members, and the Physician of the State must purge out the peccant
humors of the body Politic, least they infect and injure the whole. The
execution of Justice is like a clap of thunder which strikes few, but
frighteth many. Poena ad unum, timor ad omnes.
Smite a scorner, and the simple will beware, Prove. 19.25. Thus by not
punishing the evil, both the good and bad are (though unjustly) punished; yet
the greatest injury is to the Ruler, by the offenders impunity; for besides the
guilt which he contracts on his soul, and thereby Gods eternal wrath, he is
oftentimes punished in his body, and made an example of Gods Justice to others.
When the French King was persuaded by the Duke of Sully, to banish that
generation of Vipers, the Jesuits, Henry the fourth.
he would not, saying, Give me security then for my life. But he was shortly
after stabbed to death by their instigation. God does not seldom make them
examples of his judgments, that will not make others examples of justice.

Secondly, That you be Protectors of them that do well. The Holy Ghost tells
you that you should be for the praise of them that do well. Courts of Justice
should be Cities of refuge to them that are unjustly and causlesly pursued;
like Noah's Ark, to take in and give rest to those weary Doves; like the horns
of the Altar, to which innocence should fly for protection. Mine eyes says
David, shall be upon the faithful in the Land, Psalm. 101.6. Hide the godly
especially under the shadow of your wings. Piety has too much been bespattered
with obloquy, and holiness suffered under the name of baseness. Maliesse
coguntur ne viles habeanthur; Salvian.
Men have been necessitated to be vicious, lest they should be accounted vile.
Be you not only patterns, but Patrons of purity. Let the world know that
greatness can own and countenance goodness. The Kings of Gerar were called
Abimelech, which signifies My Father, Genesis 30.2. noting that a King should be
as careful and mindful, as tender and chary of his Subjects (especially good
ones) as Fathers of their children. Alas, if the Magistrates will not own them,
what what shall the godly do! The Devil raises all the the Train-bands of hell
against them that march to heaven. The world loves its own, but because they
are not of the world, therefore the world hates them; their neighbors malign
them, and rage because they dare not run to the same excess of riot, The whole
Parish if occasion be, will be gathered together against those that are pious,
especially if they be zealous (for Gods glory) against others impieties. Now
since God has set you up for their shelter, surely you are concerned to secure
them in times of danger. Sure I am that it is a privilege and honor to you,
that you may be serviceable to the people of God. God carries them upon Eagles
wings, Exodus 19.4. as tenderly as the Eagle her young ones, of which some
observe, she carries her prey between her Talons, but her young under her
Wings; and if a Flowler shoot at her, she will first have her own body shot
through, before they shall be hurt. God is therefore called their shield, Genesis
17.1. Now a shield is between the body and the weapon. Look therefore that you
imitate God in this. Remember that men were not made for you, but you were made
for them; God took David from the sheepfold to feed Jacob his people and Israel
his inheritance, Psalm. 78.70, 71.

It was said by Nazianzen of Athanasius, that he was Magnes and Adamas: an
Adamant in his stout resolute carriage against vice, and a Lodestone to
encourage and draw virtue to him. And the wise man tells us, The Kings favor
is toward a wise servant, but his wrath is toward him that causes shame,
Prove. 14. ult. As the wind hurts not the reeds and corn which yield to it,
but rooteth up the sturdy stubborn Oak which will not bow; so the Ruler should
deal sharply with the obstinate, but gently with the mild and flexible.

Suetoil.
Augustus Caesar in whose time Christ was born, was so tender of his people,
that when he died they wept saying, Would he had never been born, or never died!

Secondly, As you should work like Gods amongst men in executing Justice
impartially, so likewise in showing mercy: God is the Father of mercies, 1 Cor
1.3 Rich in Mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. He has multitudes of tender mercies, Psalm.
51.1. He is abundant in mercy, 1 Pet. 1.3 His mercy is free, Romans 9.15 Great,
Psalm. 57.10 Matchless, Jer 3.1. Sure, Isa. 55.1. Mercy as one observes, Mr.
Calamy, on Ezekiel. 36.32. p. 30. before the Parliament.
is the chief of all Gods attributes, though in themselves they are all equal;
but in regard of our necessities, as Oil swims above all other liquors, as the
Eagle is the chief of Birds, the Lion of Beast, Gold of Metals; so mercy is the
chief of all Gods attributes. He has a Mercy-seat, to note that he sits at
ease when he is showing mercy. Whereas judgment is his strange work, Isa.
28.21. we read likewise that mercy pleases him, Mica. 7.18. Thus the God
should be merciful men, your hearts should be full of mercy, and pity to the
sinner, when your hands are executing justice against the sin.

The Be does not sting till provoked: God does not afflict willingly, nor
grieve the children of men, Lam. 3.33. There should be bowels of compassion in
him than pronounces sentence of condemnacion. Ille dolet quoties cogitur esse
ferooe. Augustus never pronounced a deadly sentence without deep sorrow.

Our Laws forbid Butchers to be Jurors, because it is supposed they will be
hard-hearted. Godwin. Antiq.
Among several qualifications which the Jews required in their Judges, these
were two; 1. That they should be Fathers of children, hoping that their
paternal affection would incline them to commiseration. 2. That they should not
be Eunuchs, for they concieved such very cruel. It is a bestial cruelty to
delight in blood.

The laws of Draco are generally condemned, Ferina rabies est sanguine and
vulneribus gandere. Senec. de cle. lib. 1. cap. 24.
for they were written in blood, and the offender was sure to die of what
nature soever his offense was. A. Gell.

Our English Deborah, Queen Elizabeth did not without cause exceedingly prize
Seneca's first book of Clemency, Nero in the beginning of his Empire being
requested to set his hand to a warrant for the execution of an offender, would
say, utinam nescirem lite^as.
because it treated of that which is so needful to a Prince.

It is the Devils work to be Abaddon, a destroyer. It is Christ's work to be
Goel a Redeemer. Mercy and truth preserve the King, his Throne is established
by mercy, Prove. 20.28. Mercy sometime to them that sin through weakness, may be
as profitable, as severity to them that sin through wilfulness.

Siles.
It was certainly a cursed speech of that man or rather Monster, (whom the
Italian Orator mentions) that being a Judge said, To hang many is my Jubilee,
and a great execution is my great recreation. Plut. in vit. Jul. Caes.
The expression of the Roman Emperor is worthy of imitation, That he had
rather save the life of one of his Subjects, then take away the lives of a
thousand of his enemies. Life is a precious jewel, more worth then all this
world. Skin for skin and all that a man has will he give for his life, Job 1.
It is not therefore to be taken away for every trifle. I do not now dispute the
question, Whether any Theft may lawfully be punished with death, but I am sure,
every Theft ought not. The Romans had their Axes and Rods carried before their
Consuls, to show that if the lesser punishments, as of the rods, would serve,
the greater of the Axe should not be used. And they did justly lament the
cruelty of those tribunals where the cheap prescription of lives made the
Judgment Seat differ little from a Shambles.

3. Work as Gods among men in promoting piety to your power. The great design
and work of God is to promote holiness in the world. This was his aim in his
internal work or his decree, Ephesians. 1.4. This is the great end he drives at, in
his external works. As in the work of redemption, Tit. 2.14. Luke 1.92. In
bestowing his word. (The precepts in it are the perfect rule of godliness, Gal.
6.16. the promises are precious encouragements to godliness, 2 Cor. 7.1. the
threatenings are like the Angel with a drawn sword in his hand to deter men from
the way of ungodliness, Romans 1.18.) And his works of providence are to the same
purpose. Afflictions are like the fire to consume the dross, and purify the
gold, Heb. 12.6. Mercies are like the warm influences of the vernal Sun to draw
forth the Sap of grace, and hasten men's growth in holiness.

Thus should the Gods promote godliness as the chief business which the most
high God has given them to do. Prima Magistratus cura debet esse, religionem
veram promovere, and impietatem prohibere. Ames. de consc. lib. 5. cap. 25.

In hoc reges Deo serviunt in quantum reges. Aug.


Other things of what nature soever which come within the reach of their care,
are questionless much inferior to this. And this they should do, Partly by
their patterns in being examples of godliness to their people; Their lives
should be so exact that they should be able to say as Gigeon, Judges 7.17. Look
on us and do likewise, or as Paul, Walk as ye have us for an example.

Partly by your precepts; your edicts and commands should be like those of Asa,
2 Chorn. 14.2.4. Asa did that which was right in the sight of the Lord. He
commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, and to do the Law and
the Commandment. Mark, upright Asa did not leave men to choose their religions,
nor to live as they listed, but he commanded them to obey Gods Law. He did not
strictly enjoin the payment of Taxes or Customs, and such civil things, and
leave it as a matter of indifferency whether men would mind religion or no, but
his Laws did enforce and confirm the Laws of God, as far as he was able.

Partly by countenancing, maintaining and providing able Ministers, 2 Chronicles.
19.8. 1 Cor. 9.13. for the Church; as also by taking care that they discharge
their trusts faithfully, 2 Chronicles. 29.3, 4, 5.1 Chron. 16. It is observed of
Julian the Apostate, that to root up Christianity he disgraced the Orthodox
Ministry, took away Church maintenance and forbad. Christian Schools and places
of learning; so Sozomen lib. 5. cap. 5. This very course is now cried up, the
Lord prevent it. The Prince indeed is not called to be a public Preacher, but
he has a call to see that none abuse that calling to the hurt or poison of his
people.

Plato would not permit in his Commonwealth any such person as asserted God
the Author of sin.
Partly by suppressing and discountenancing them whose doctrines or lives hinder
godliness. Suppressing evil is necessary for the promoting good. Holy Asa
removed his Mother from being Queen upon this very account, 1 Kings 15.12, 13.
The toleration of any in such sins is an intolerable sin. And the jealous God
will one day make Magistrates know, that they shall bear his anger for bearing
such evil doers as blasphemers and Heretics are. I speak not against a true
Christian liberty in things that are indifferent, Christianus nulla re magis
dignosci potest quam si D^o factas contumelias and blasphemias severissime
ulc^scatur, suas obliviscatur Guevara in ep. ad Car. 5.
or in things that are not fundamental; but I cannot but speak against this
Antichristian licentiosness, which is (though under other terms) so much
pleaded for; It may well make a dumb child speak when his Father is so deeply
wounded in his Word, Honor, People, and Ordinances, as he is in our days. If
State-reason compel men to suffer it, they must know that it will prove
State-ruine. Shall it be treason and death to speak thus and thus against men
that are mortal, weak Gods? and shall it not at all be penal to blaspheme the
Almighty and Everliving God, in denying his Truths, which are more worth then
the whole world? Surely Blasphemies, Idolatry and Heresies, sins against the
first Table, are greater (as being more directly and immediately against God)
then sins against the second Table, and therefore deserve punishments; vide 1
Kings 18.18. Exodus 21.17. Levit. 24.10. to the 17. v. Job 31.25, 26, 27. Deuteronomy.
13. per totum; though care should be first had, and means used for the
informing and reforming such offenders.

Suffer me (as Elihu said, Job 30.2, 3.) a little, and I will show you what I
have to speak on Gods behalf; I will fetch my knowledge from Scripture, and
will ascribe righteousness to my Maker. Because in our unholy, and therefore
unhappy days, the very duty which I am urging the Magistrate to, is questioned
as many other truths are; I shall speak a little to it. Princeps nihil statuat
de religione, says Mariana the Jesuit. Marian. cap. 10.
This Popish doctrine is now almost generally entertained, That Magistrates
have nothing to do in matters of Religion (as some others Jesuitical tenants
are now on foot.) Parsons the English Jesuit in his memorial for Reformation,
advises that all the Colleges in the Universities with their Revenues, should
(not he employed as now they are, for the encouragement of godliness and
learning but) be settled on six men, and also what ever Manor or Parsonage
belonged to the Church; that no man's conscience be pressed for matters in
Religion: That there should be no fixed Ministers, only some Itinerary
Preachers: This is the way says he, for Popery to flourish in England, though
he names more ways. But that Magistrates ought to meddle in matters of
Religion, and promote it to their power, may appear clearly to them that are
not wilfully blind.

First, from the practices of godly Rulers; What Asa did, has been already
mentioned. Hezekiah was a Prince that did also promote Piety, 2 Chronicles. 29.2, 3,
4, 5.25.30. and in 2 Chronicles. 30. and 5. which places are large (therefore not
here recited) but full to our purpose, wherein Hezekiah commanded the Levites
to sanctify themselves, to praise the Lord with the words of David, and both
Priests and People to keep the Passover.

So Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.3. ult. And the King stood in his place, and made a
Covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his
Commandments. And (mark) he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and
Benjamin to stand to it. And the Inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the
Covenant of God. And Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the
Countries that pertained to the children of Israel. (Observe) And made all that
were present in Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God. And all his
days they departed not from following the Lord. He made them to serve the Lord
both by his precepts, and by the punishments he inflicted on them that would
not. This text can never be answered. All the subtle evasions which Jesuitical
heads have used to make it invalid, could never do it. For if as some affirm,
it is not binding to us under the New, because it is delivered in the Old
Testament, then Faith in Christ and Repentance, which are the sum and substance
of the Old Testament are void also; and so they may rob us, if we will believe
them, both of our Savior and Salvation It is observable that in the Kings and
Chronicles, when Henry the sixth mentions the lives of the Kings of Israel, he
does in the first place take notice how they dealt in matters of Religion,
whether they brake down the graven Images, or cut down the groves, or took
away the high places, or the like.
.

Nay an Heathen King enacted a law, that whosoever would not obey the Law of
God, as well as the Law of the King, that judgment should be executed speedily
upon him, whether it be unto death, or to banishment or confiscation of goods,
or imprisoment, Ezra 7.26. And for this Law holy Ezra blesses God, v. 27. so
Ezra 6.11. Dan. 3.29.

Eusebius. lib. 2. de vit. Constantini, cap. 44.

Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 20.


Besides these patterns in Scripture, we have the like in Ecclesiastical
Writers. Constantine a godly Emperor, purged the Church of Idolatry, and
established the worship of God by his own Imperial commands. Jovinian also and
Theodosius, by their Royal Edicts set up and restored the true Religion, which
Julian and Valens had put down and discountenanced.

Secondly, The precepts given by God to Rulers, speak this to be their duty.
God commands him to write him a copy of the Law, Deuteronomy. 17.18. For what end,
but that he might keep it himself, as he is a man, and take care that others
should not break it, as he is a Magistrate. It was an ancient Ceremony in
Israel at the Kings Coronation, that when the Crown was set on his head, the
Book of God should be given into his hand, 2 Kings 11.12. to show that God
committed the care of Religion principally to him, that by his power and
authority it might be established in his Dominions.

God commands Magistrates to be for the good of their subjects, Par. on Romans
Romans 13.4. For good, that is, for thy natural good in preserving thy life in
safety; for thy civil good in securing thine estate; for thy spiritual good in
establishing the true worship of God, as a keeper of the first Table; Nay, the
way to promote the civil good of a people, is, by promoting their spiritual
good. That Commonwealth will certainly stand longest, which has not
State Policy, but State-Piety for its foundation. How many Nations have
confirmed this truth, Vbi non est sanctitas, pietas, fides, instabile regnum
est! A Nation without Religion, is like a City without walls, naked and open to
all enemies; like a building without a foundation, which will quickly be
overthrown. Religion to a people is as the Palladium to the Trojans, as the
Ancile to the Romans which kept them safe. The want of this overthrew the great
Monarchies of the world. What besides this, has turned so Kingdoms into ruined
heaps, and Cities into solitary Deserts? If a fruitful land be turned into
barrenness, is it not for the iniquity of them that dwell therein! Psalm.
107.34. Tully observed, Cicero de legib.
that the glory of Greece quickly decayed when the people were given to evil
opinions, and evil manners. Those Rulers that tolerate heretical persons, do
but nourish a Snake in their bosoms, and cherish a worm that in time will eat
out their own bowels.

Besides, God promises that Magistrates shall in the days of the Gospel be
nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers to his Church, Isai. 49.23. which surely
was never meant of procuring only their corporal, but chiefly of promoting
their spiritual good.

Vide Zanch. de Magistrate Gerh. loc. com. Wallaeum de codem sub. Willet. in
Romans 13. controver. 4.
O consider, is it not reasonable as well as religious, that you who rule by
God, should rule for God? that that power which you have received from him,
should be improved mostly for him? Remember your time is short, your
opportunities are many, your work is great, and your account will be heavy,
therefore work the work of him that sent you into the world. It was a saying of
Becket, sometime Archbishop of Canterbury, when he was persuaded to deal
moderately with the King, Clavum teneo and ad somnum me vocas, Do I sit at the
stern, and would you have me sleep? Sirs, you steer the rudder of the State,
you sit at the Helm of the Commonwealth; should you be sleepy or slothful? I
beseech you to be doing for the furthering Piety, and the Lord will be with you.

Now that Magistrates may be enabled and incited to walk, and to work, as Gods
among men; I shall deliver a few directions, and two or three motives, and then
conclude.

First, If you would walk and work, as Gods, then get divine principles.
According to your principles, such will your practices be; water rises no
higher then its Fountain: If therefore you would walk as God, and work for God,
you must both walk and work from God. If ever the hand of the dial point, and
go right without, the wheels and poises must be right within. It is noted of
true and sincere Saints, that acted for God in the Regal Office, That their
hearts were perfect with the Lord, 1 King. 15.14. Isai. 38.3. This spiritual
life in their souls made them warm and zealous for their Savior. Caleb that
followed the Lord fully, had another spirit, a different principle from the ten
carnal Princes, Numb. 14.24. Men's actions will then be sacred, when their
affections are sanctified. He that follows God he knows not why, will
forsake God he knows not how. A Magistrate that is zealous for God only
because the times favor such, may soon be brought to be as zealous against
God. He that is not knit to his service with the heart strings of love, spun
out of a renewed nature, will easily be parted from his service. Such slavish
spirits will serve God no longer then they can serve themselves of God. When
Jehu's interest and Gods are conjoined, as in rooting out the idolatry of Baal,
how fiery is Jehu? how furiously does he drive? He slays all the false
Prophets, he breaks down the Images of Baal, and the house Baal, and makes
it a draught-house, 2 King. 10.25, 26, 27. But when Gods Interest and Jehus are
divided, as in the Calves at Dan and Bethel, there Jehu must be excused, he
will uphold them (as some do by that Monster of Toleration) out of State
policy, expecting that they should uphold him, 2 King. 10.27, 28. But what was
the reason of this? Surely the want of this divine principle; the fire of
Jehu's zeal was (not lighted at the Altar, for then it would have continued
burning, but) kitchen fire kindled at a common hearth, and therefore would burn
no longer then it had such gross matter as his own credit or profit to feed it,
when this fuel was taken away, his fire went out, look in verse. 31. Jehu walked
not in the law of the Lord with all his heart; his heart was not perfect, it
was not cast into the fire of the Word, and new-moulded by the Spirit of God.
The want of this foundation over-turned all that beautiful building which Jehu
had set up.

It is a question in Politics, Whether a wicked man may be a good Magistrate?
It is I suppose possible for a wicked man when he is in authority to do some
good; but I conceive he will hardly do the good he ought; or like Caleb, stand
for God when the times are against God, when the people talked of stoning him;
but like the king of Navarre, he will launch no further into the Ocean then he
can be sure to get back safe. Such a man is like an Horse with a thorn in his
foot, which may go fairly on in good ways, but if he come to hard ways, he
will halt, and discover himself. He that has not gone through the pangs of the
new birth, and heartily taken God in Christ for his All, and thereby secured
his eternal estate, will scarce hazard his name or estate, much less his limbs
or life for God, as he must do that will be faithful unto the death: For with
what heart can he look that danger in the face, which for ought he knows may
kill both body and soul?

Or if he be very bold and venturous for God, yet being an evil man, he can
never do good (by all his activeness as a Ruler) to his own soul. God may give
him parts, and gifts, and courage, (as a Noble man gives dainty fare to his
Nurse) not out of love to him, but for his childrens sake. He may like a ship,
be instrumental to land others at some happy Port whereon it never enters it
self; He may be very helpful to others temporal, nay and eternal salvation, and
yet miss himself: Jehu by acting for God, got a lease of an earthly Kingdom for
three or four lives, but he lost the heavenly one for ever. The most that I
know, that a civil yet unsanctified Magistrate gets by his forwardness and heat
for God, is only a cooler hell; though your names are divine, yet if ye be not
partakers of the divine nature, ye are lost for ever. Now what advantage will
it be to you, like Noah's Carpenters, to build an Ark for the saving of others,
and to perish your selves!

Believe it Sirs, If ye would have good fruits in your lives, there must be
this root of holiness in your hearts; A good man out of the good treasure of
his heart brings forth good things. What water is in the Well, such will be
in the bucket; and what ware is in the shop, such will be on the stall;
therefore when God promises that men shall walk in his ways, and keep his
judgments, and do them; he promises also to put his Spirit, or a new spirit
into them, which should enable them thereunto. Ezekiel. 11.19. Ezekiel 36.26, 27. The
flesh will serve to enable a man to walk after the flesh; but the Spirit of God
alone can enable man to walk after the spirit. Natural light is not sufficient
to mortify natural lusts: It may cover for some time, but can never kill sin.
Some men may be like the Lions in Daniels den, chained up, or restrained, and
yet have their ravenous dispositions, their old carnal hearts still. Civility
though commendable, yet without inward sanctity, is not sufficient to prove one
interested in a Savior, or in a state of salvation. There is as much
difference between a Moral man and a real Christian, as between a liveless
picture and a living person. A Lion and a Lamb, a Raven and a Dove, darkness
and light, death and life do not differ more then a sinner and a Saint, then a
man only civilized and a sanctified Christian.

O Sirs, think of it seriously, The smoke of a great man's sacrifice smells never
the sweeter before God, because he is perfumed with Musk, or clothed in Silk.
the terms upon which salvation may be had, are the same to you and the meanest
beggar, John 3.3. If heaven be not in you by the indwelling of Gods Spirit
renewing you in the Spirit of your mind, it is impossible that ever you should
be in heaven. The tide of your natures, and the wind of your affections must be
turned the clean contrary way to what they are by your birth, if ever you sail
to the Haven of Heaven. Labor therefore as for life, for this principle of
spiritual life, without which you cannot escape the second death.

Secondly, If ye would walk and work as Gods among men, then your rule must be
divine as well as your principle. Every calling has some rule to go by, in
conformity to which, their excellency consists. The Lawyer has his Littleton
and Coke; the Physician has his Galen and Hippocrates; the Philosopher has
his Aristotle; the Christian has the Word of God, a sure and a perfect rule to
walk by, Gal. 6.16. And this Word of God is in a special manner commanded and
committed to the Magistrate as his Directory, Josh. 1.8. This Book of the Law
shall not depart out of thy mouth, (says God to the chief Governor of Israel)
but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou shall make thy way
prosperous, and then thou shall have good success. And Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. The
King that sits upon the Throne, shall write him a copy of the Law: And it
shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he
may learn to fear the Lord, and to keep all the words of this Law.

It is a Maxim of the Law of England, that the Law it self ought to be the rule
by which all Judges must be regulated, all controversies tried, and all cases
decided. It is good to keep close to the laws of men (that are warrantable by
Scriture) but it is best to keep close to the Word of God; There are the best
precepts for justice, the best patterns of just men; nay, and of the Infinitely
righteous God. You have the example of God himself, how just, how holy he is in
all his doings, how he walks, how he works. Caesar's ambition was to imitate
Alexander; Themistocles endeavored to resemble Miltiades. Do you labor to be
like God, to hate sin, to love holiness, to discourage the profane, to
countenance the pious, to be active and zealous both by your patterns and
precepts for the glory, of God.

In all your difficulties make the Word of God your Counselor; in all your
doubts let Scripture resolve you: You may look too much to the light within
you, which is imperfect and (1 Tit.) defiled (as Quakers make a Christ of it)
but you can never look too much to this light without you, which is perfect and
pure, without the least blemish or defect.

The Jews say, that if Printing had been found out in the time of Moses, yet
was the King bound to write out two copies of the Law with his own hand; one to
keep in the Treasury, and the other to carry about with him as his Vade Mecum.
Theodosius the second, wrote the New Testament out with his own hand.
Alphonsus King of Arragon (as some say) read over the Bible fourteen times
with Lyra's Notes upon it. And that renowned Maiden Queen Elizabeth, when she
passed in triumphal state through the City of London, after her Coronation,
Speed Chronic.
when the Bible was presented to her at the little Conduit in Cheapside, she
received it with both her hands, and kissing it, laid it to her breasts,
saying, that it had ever been her chiefest delight, and should be the rule
whereby she would frame her Government. This was the delight, the joy, the
counselor of that Magistrate that was after Gods own heart, Psalm. 119.70.111,
24. And this made him wiser then his Teachers, then his Elders, Psalm. 119.97.
to 100. And indeed this Book of Books only can make a wise and good Christian,
Captain, Counselor, and Ruler. Let therefore the balance of the Sanctuary
weigh all, the Oracles of God decide all, the rule of the Word square all, and
then nothing will be amiss. Let the Bible be to you as the pillar of fire by
night, and the cloud by day to the Israelites, directing you through the
Wilderness of this world, till ye come to the true Canaan.

It was a memorable saying of King Edward the sixth, when he was crowned,
Baldae. de Script. Brit. cent. 2.
and had three Swords put into his hands, (signifying his power over three
Nations, England, France, and Ireland) Deest adhuc unus gladius, viz. Sacrorum
Bibliorum volumen; Ille liber gladius spiritus est, and gladiis his omnibus
long anteferendus; There is one Sword wanting, namely the Sword of the Spirit,
the Word of God, which excels them all.

Thirdly, let your end be divine as well as your rule, if ye would walk and
work as Gods among men. Actiones specificantur ab objecto, fine, and
circumstantiis. Eustath.
The Moralists tell us that actions are much specified from their ends. If your
actions are materially good, yet if finally evil, they are denominated wicked.
If they are according to Gods Word for the matter, yet if ye make not Gods
glory your end, they are evil. Therefore if ye would have the arrows of your
actions to fly right, let your eyes take right aim at this mark. Do all for
God. Omnibus operationibus nostris, coelestis intentio adjungi debet.
Quicquid agas, propter Deum agas, says Luther. As ye are men, ye were created
to serve him; as Magistrates, doubly bound to honor your great Master. Gods
free grace is the fountain of your power, and therefore Gods glory must be the
end. It is reported of Tamerlane, that warlike Scythian, that having overcome
Bajazet the great Turk, he asked him, Whether he had ever given God thanks for
making him so great an Emperor? The great Turk confessed ingenuously that he
never thought of it; to whom Tamerlane replied, That it was no wonder so
ungrateful a wretch was made a spectacle of misery; For you says he, being
blind of one eye, and I lame of one leg, was there any worth in us, why God
should set us over two great Empires of Turks and Tartars? So truly may you
think, It was mere mercy which advanced you more then others, and therefore it
is your duty to advance God more then others. If ye love your souls, take heed
of self. O how many millions by seeking themselves have lost themselves! by
seeking their own glory, pleasure, and profit for a time, have brought
themselves to shame, pain, and loss to all eternity! O Beware of this root of
bitterness, Self. Do not like Demetrius, pretend to be zealous for the Goddess,
when in truth it was for his gain. Or like watermen, row one way toward God
and Christ, and Heaven, and look another way, toward the world, and the flesh;
but give up thy self wholly to him; Lay out thy talents altogether for him;
esteem it thy felicity and privilege that thou have more advantages then
others, whereby thou may exceed others in serviceableness to thy Maker,
Preserver, and Redeemer.

Let that Peerless Prince be thy pattern, even the Lord Jesus Christ; I seek
not my own glory, John 8.50. And when he came to die; Father, says he, I have
glorified thee on earth. I have finished the work which thou gave me to do,
John 17.

This was the Fathers end in your creation, Prove. 16.4. Revel. 4. ult. The Sons
end in your Redemption, Luke 1.71. 1 Cor. 6.20. The Spirits end in your
Sanctification, Ephesians. 2.10. John 17.10. Therefore let this be your end; Pray,
and read, and hear, and watch over your own souls; walk inoffensively before
God; work industriously for God, and do all that God may be glorified, 1 Cor.
10.31.

We call not those Kings happy, says Austin, Aug. de civit. Bei lib. 3. cap.
24.
who reigned long, but those who have reigned most for God; Qui potestatem suam
divinae Majestati famulam faciunt; That have made their authority serviceable
to the divine Majesty. God can easily throw those Crowns from men's heads, which
are not laid at his feet. And he will assuredly lay them low that do not set
him high; for those that honor him, he will honor; but those that despise
him, shall be lightly esteemed.

I come now to the Motives, to stir you up both to walk and work as Gods among
men.

1. Consider, God beholds you this day; He takes notice, and observes how
ye walk, and how ye work. All the ways of man (Prove. 5.21.) are before the
Lord, and he pondereth all his paths. Be your works what they will be, God
sees them, and he weighs them in the balance of the Sanctuary, and that beam
will discover it, if they be never so little too light.

He beholds not only your practices, but your principles; he knows what is
the wind which causes the Mill to go; he knows by what rule, and for what
end, and from what principle ye act; all things are, (...), naked and open in
the eyes of him with whom we have to do; Heb. 4.13. The words are very
Emphatical, and signify thus much, That as the Lineaments and outside of the
Body is very visible when it is naked and uncloathed; and as the bowels and
inside are discovered when the body is dissected and anatomized; So are both
your outward and inwards, your actions and affections manifest, naked and open
to God.

Nay, he beholds what ye do in the dark; you may work so cunningly as to hide
your designs and works from men, but not from God; there is no darkness, nor
shadow of death where the workers of iniquity can hide themselves, Job 34.22.
This Sun knows no night, no darkness; where ever he is (and he is infinite
and omnipresent) it is light, and day; therefore the eyes of Christ, Rev 1.14.
are said to be as a flame of fire, implying his omniscience, and that he is
able to disperse all darkness. For Philosophy and experience teach us, that
those Creatures which have fiery eyes can see in the dark; and the reason is
clear, because they do not see as we do (Recipendo species ab objecto, sed
extra-mittendo species) by receiving species from the Object, but by sending
out species or rays, which do both inlighten the medium, the air, and apprehend
the Object. Thus Christ sees in the dark ye see: yea the darkness hides not
from him, but the night shines as the day; to him the darkness and the light
are both alike, Psalm. 139.12.

Ponder then this omnipresence and omniscience of God, and walk before him, and
be upright, Genesis 17.1. The Moralist would have his Scholars to live always as
in the eye of Cato: O do you live ever as in the eye of God. Beware what thou
do; for God sees thee: God stands in the Congregation, he judges among
the Gods, Psalm. 82.1. He judges among you, he is present with you; not always
in regard of approbation; for your deeds may be evil; but always in regard of
observation.

This was Iehosaphats Argument to incite his Judges to care and caution, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. Take heed what ye do; for ye judge not for man, but for the
Lord, who is with you in the Judgment. He is with you in the judgment; With
you to commend and praise you if ye do well; to condemn and punish you if you
do ill; to observe and take notice whether ye do well or ill. As if Jehosaphat
had said, I cannot ride circuit with you, nor be present with you in all your
Councils, but the Lord a greater then I, can and does; he is with you in the
Judgment: Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed, and
do it; for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons,
nor taking of Gifts, ver. 7.

When the Ethiopian Judges were set in their seats of Judicature, Quintus Pius
in 2 Chro. 19.
certain empty Chairs were placed about them (some say twelve) into which they
imagined the holy Angels came. And this they hoped would work in their
Magistrates circumspection and fear of doing any thing unworthy the Angels
eye-observation: I must tell you a greater then Angels is here, even the God of
Angels; therefore be wary and watchful, take heed what ye do.

Among the Egyptians it is reported, Diodor. Sicul. lib. 1.
When their Rulers were set, they caused the Image of a Divine Numen to be hung
about his neck who sat next to the Judges. The Deity is ever near you, with
you, among you: Let the consideration thereof quicken you to zeal and
faithfulness in all your transactions.

This made David, the King of Israel, so upright and holy in his Conversation:
I have kept thy precepts; for all my ways are before thee, Psalm. 119.68.
Observe his holy carriage, I have kept thy precepts; and its heavenly cause,
for all my ways are before thee; or as in another place, I have set the Lord
always before me, Psalm. 16.8. As if he had spoken, I have not done what seemed
good in my own eyes, I have not walked according to my own will, but my race
has been according to the Rule which thou have prescribed me: I have kept thy
precepts; for I considered thou wast an ear-witness to my words; therefore I
did set a watch before my lips, that I might not offend with my tongue: that
thou wast an eyewitness to my works; therefore I endeavored that my feet
might not decline thy paths: That thou wast an heart-witness to my thoughts;
therefore I durst not let vain thoughts lodge within me; I have kept thy
precepts, for all my ways are before, etc.

Surely, if Alexanders empty Chair, which his Captains when they met in
Council, sat before them, did cause them to be kept in such good order: what
behavior should the presence of God cause among the Gods!

The Jews covered Christ's face, and then they buffetted him: Men hide God from
their eyes, and think to hide themselves from Gods eyes, and then make bold to
provoke him.

Believe it Reader, God sees thee what ever thou do; he is present with thee
wherever thou art; when thou art in thy Closet, in thy Family, among thy
Neighbors, when thou art punishing Drunkards, or Swearers in the Parish where
thou live; when thou art sitting on the bench at the Sessions or Assize, he
observes in what manner thou actest, whether coldly and carelessly, as one
indifferent about the discouraging of sin, though sin deal not so mildly with
men when it turns them into intolerable and eternal flames; or whether
diligently and fervently as one fired with love to his Majesty, and zeal for
his glory, and hatred of iniquity. He observes from what principle thou
actest, whether from nature or grace; and for what end thou actest, whether thy
own or his glory; whether it be to please such a man, or the blessed God;
whether to get thy self a name, or to make his name great.

Job has a notable expression, I wish it were written on every Magistrates
heart; He withdraws not his eyes from the righteous, but with Kings are they
on the throne, Job 36.7. He is totus oculus, all eye, he sees you through and
through; his eyes are with Kings on the throne, to observe what the King does
there, to see whether Justice and Judgment are the habitation of his throne;
whether the Scepter of his Kingdom be a righteous Scepter; whether he be
clothed with grace as with a garment, and arrayed with purity as well as
purple; to see whether the zeal of Gods house do eat him up, Psalm. 69.9. and he
prefer the Spiritual before the Temporal good of his people; to see whether he
will suffer them to be lawless in Religion, and allow out of hellish policy,
that which is destructive to Piety, even a cursed Toleration.

Gods eye, Sirs, may well make you look well to your walking, to your hands and
hearts: Are uncleanness, injustice, oppression, lukewarmness, atheism, bribery
fit objects for Gods eye? It was ordered in the Law of Moses, that when any
went forth of the Camp to ease Nature, they should dig an hole with a Paddle,
and cover it; and the reason is given; For the Lord thy God walks in the
midst of thy Camp; therefore shall it be holy, that he see no unclean thing in
thee, and turn away from thee, Deuteronomy. 23.13, 14. This Law notes how the
presence of God should keep us from polluting our selves; Sin is the souls
execrement; Gods walking among us should work in us an hatred of such
defilements.

Gods eye may make you work as gods among men. Cesars Soldiers were prodigal
of their blood, when he beheld them: How bold should ye be in the discouraging
the sturdiest, stateliest Offenders? How forward in the countenancing the
poorest, pious Christian, considering that God beholds you!

Epaminondas rejoiced much that he had done noble exploits, his Parents being
alive to take notice of them. What noble acts soever are done for the promoting
Godliness, for the stopping the mouth of wickedness by the children of the most
High, are all known to the everliving Father, who records them faithfully,
and will reward them bountifully; be therefore exact in your walkings, and
zealous in your working, since your labor shall not be in vain for the Lord, 1
Cor. 15. ult.

Secondly, Consider the day of your dissolutions is hastening. While ye are
creeping only in Gods way, or doing negligently Gods Work, death is posting
with speed toward you. Consider the verse following the Text; though he has
said, Ye ars Gods, and called you children of the most High, yet ye must die
like men: Your honors, and your worships, your Majesty's, and your Highness,
must shortly lie in the dust, and be as low as the meanest. Diseases spare none
for their fine Clothes, high Places, or great Estates. And the Cannon of death
does as soon hit the great Commanders as the Common Soldier, it makes no
difference. Charles the great, Pompey the great, and Alexander the great, were
all little in Deaths hands: Men in places of greatest power, are not persons
privileged from the Arrest of this surly Sergeant.

Ye that are Divine in name, have human mortal natures; and as ye are Shields
of the earth, so ye are earthen Shields. What is said of the Duke of Parma's
Sword, is true of Death; it makes no difference between Robes and Rags,
between Prince and Peasant: It is the way of all the Earth, Josh. 25.14. The
great Road in which all Travel, and the end of all the living, Job 30.23. The
great Inn to which all travel. There is no man, says Solomon, that has power
of his Spirit, to retain it, neither has he power in the day of death; there
is no discharge in that war, Eccles. 8.8.

It is storied of Alexander, Quint. Curt.
that having heard of Paradise, he was very eager of seeking it out, and for
that end came into the East part of the Earth; where an old man meeting some of
his Soldiers, bad them tell Alexander that he sought Paradise in vain; For the
way to Paradise was the way of Humility which he did not take: but says he,
Take this stone and carry it to Alexander, and tell him that from this stone he
shall know what he is. Now the stone was a precious stone, and of such a
quality, that whatsoever thing was weighed with it, that was still the heavier;
only if it were covered with dust, then it was as light as straw; thereby
signifying that though Alexander, and men in Authority outweigh others in
life, yet when they are covered with dust, when death comes, they are as light
as others; all their greatness comes to nothing. O how little Earth contains
Great Men when they die, who will not be contented with much while they live!

If then ye must die shortly, does it not behove you to live strictly? If your
time be little, should not your work be great for God and your souls? Whether
thou will think of it or no, death is approaching thee; the Sun does not move
faster in the Heavens, then thou art moving to the earth. The glass of thy Life
for ought thou know is nigh its last sand. Sure I am thou art now nearer
thine unchangeable estate, then ever thou were: and does it not concern thee to
walk exactly among men, and to work industriously for God! O how much will thou
wish at an hour of death, that thou had walked humbly with God, and wrought
hard for the Lord all the time of thy life!

It Is observed among the Papists, that the Cardinals, who think their Cowle and
other Religious Habits ill becoming them in their health, yet are very
ambitious to die and be buried in them. And I have taken notice in several
Churches, where are the Monuments of great persons, that their Effigies must be
erected kneeling, with a Bible in their hands, holding their hands up to
heaven, and looking very devoutly with their eyes up to the same place; when I
have heard of some of them, how Profane and Atheistical they were in their
Lives; that they used the name of God often in swearing, but seldom in praying,
and prized a Romance or a Play Book above, and read them oftener then the Bible.
Truly thus it is, Piety that is trampled under feet by you now in your health
and life (believe it) will be a pearl of great price with you in your sickness
and death; then you will think the holiest man the happiest man; the Precisest
Christian in the most blessed condition; then you would willingly change states
with them which are now Objects of your scorn; then you will wish that you had
denied your selves, crucified the flesh, glorified God, and walked after the
Spirit; that you had spent that time in Praying and Reading, which you have
spent in Carding or Dicing, or vain Recreations; that you had improved that
wealth and strength in the Service of your Savior, for the honor of God, and
welfare of your soul, which have been laid about the World and your lusts. O
Sirs, when this time comes, you will have other thoughts of sin and holiness,
then now ye have; Sin will not be so pleasant and lovely, nor holiness so mean
and unworthy as now it is in your eyes.

Probably you can hear of death by the reports of others, and be little
troubled; As birds build in steeples, and are never troubled at the noise of
Bells, being used to it; nor ye at the sight of graves or coffins.
ye can stand it out stiffly against such false fire, with We must all die, and
Nothing so sure; God knows who shall go next, and the like: all this while,
the heart not with seriousness considering of it, so as to be preparing for it:
The soul as much neglected, God as little regarded, and the affections as much
inslaved to fleshly lusts as before. But when Death That King of terrors and
terror of Kings.
climbs up to your own windows, and enters into your Chamber and comely with
its pale save to your bed side, and boldly arresteth you with a warrant from
Heaven, assuring you by its symptoms on your body, that you must in good
earnest into the other world, and there have all your walkings and workings
interpreted and examined by the infinitely pure and righteous God, and your
souls (according to your deeds) sentenced impartially, and sent immediately to
Heaven or Hell, then surely your apprehensions of a new Nature, and strict
Conversation, will change, and you will wish with all your souls for a little
of others oil; for your Lamps will go out. The stoutest unregenerate heart
alive will droop at last, when God comes to take away his soul; then his crest
falls, and his plumes flag.

Now possibly thy Cup overfloweth, thou have a large portion of the good things
of this world, and they have so much of thy heart, that thou art little
troubled about the things of the other world; the Table of thy life now is
richly spread with honors, pleasures, relations, possessions, and these have
the largest share in thy heart; in these thou solacest thy self, desiring no
other Heaven. But what will thou do when Death shall come with a Voider, and
take all away, even all thy treasure on earth? then thou will wish thou could
find a treasure in Heaven, that thou might die the death of the Righteous,
and have thy latter end like his: But oh Friend, thou should then have lived
their lives, and have had thy conversation like theirs: as the Crab in the
Fable told the Serpent (who when she had received her deaths wound for her
crooked conditions, stretched out her self straight) At oportuit sic Vixisse;
that she should have been straight in her life time. The way to make thy death
comfortable, is to make thy life serviceable to God, and thy soul. He that
would enjoy true rest when he dies, must labor faithfully and diligently
whilst he lives. It will be like a dagger at the heart in an hour of death to
reflect upon the talents misimployed, and opportunities misimproved, which free
grace afforded you for the honoring of God, and furthering of your own
salvations. Sins of omission will wound deeper at a dying hour then most are
aware of. God has committed a great trust to you, and the day of your lives is
the only time of discharging it; besides, ye know not how few hours ye may have
to your day, whether it shall be a Winter or a Summer day; the shadows of the
evening may suddenly stretch themselves upon you, and then it will be no longer
day; therefore work the work of him that sent you into the world, while it is
day, for the night comes wherein no man can work, John 9.4. Is it not sad,
that our common observation should he so much verified in the practices of
great men, That Bells strike thick while they are rising, but stand still and
give no sound at all when they are at full pitch! That Magistrates should like
the Sun, the higher in the Zodiac, move the slower!

The more noble creatures are, the more active they are, Men more active then
Beasts, Angels then men. One I remember observes, that God would not accept
the firstborn of an Ass, because it was a a dull slothful creature. The Spirit
of God (which is in all that are sanctified) is compared to fire, Acts 2.
therefore they that would not grieve it, must not be slothful in business, but
fiery, fervent (seething hot, as the word signifies) in spirit, serving the
Lord, Romans 12.11. Hence it was that the Church of Ephesus got letters
testimonial from Heaven, Revel. 2.2. I know thy works and thy labor, how thou
can not bear them that are evil. And indeed the more good a Justice has in
himself, the less he will bear with evil in others.

Augustine has a true saying, Qui non zelat, non amat, He that is not zealous
for God, has no true love to God. For though love be a passion, yet it
delights to show it self in acting for the party beloved.

When Calvin grew sickly, some friends dissuaded him from hard studying, but he
gave them this answer, Vultisne Christum me invenire otiosum, would you have
Christ when he comes (to me by death) to find me idle? So do ye think, that
when sinners Jehu-like drive furiously, ye should not like Egyptians, go
heavily, least death find you idle? Observe what became of the idle servant,
that hid his talent in a napkin, Matthew. 25.30. He was punished with an eternal
long night, who would not work in his short day.

3. Consider the day of Judgment, God will then search and sentence you,
discover and reward you according to your works. Ye that examine and try
others, shall then be examined and tried your selves, and ye that acquit or
condemn others, shall then be acquitted or condemned your selves.

How should this thought move you to walk exactly, since your hearts shall be
anatomized, and your lives manifested before God, Angels and men! Could ye but
as Jerome, hear the sound of the last trump always in your ears, Arise ye dead,
and come to judgment, surely ye would he holy Judges and Justices indeed.
Peter makes this argument a strong enforcement to holiness, 2 Pet. 3.10, 11.
The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in which the Heavens
shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent
heat; the earth also and the works therein shall be burnt up; seeing then that
all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought we to be in
all holy conversation and godliness? Observe, the certainty of it, The day of
the Lord will come; If it were doubtful, it would not be so dreadful; but it
will come surely, though it come slowly, therefore men had need to be holy.
Tertullian observed of all those that professed Christianity in his time, none
lived so loosely as those that did not believe the certainty of the day of
judgment; But observe 2. the suddenness of it, The day of the Lord will come
as a theif in the night; when men at midnight are securely sleeping, they dream
not of, nor prepare for a theif. It is sometimes called a day, Matthew. 25.13.
propter revelationem secretorum; things that are now dark and secret, shall be
then as clear and apparent as at noon day; the fire of that day will make
things legible which are written with the juice of Lemons. In that Spring time
both wholesome roots and poisonous will be discovered, which all the winter of
this life were hid. The books of Gods Omniscience and man's Conscience, says
one, shall be then opened, and secret sins shall be then as legible as if it
were written with the brightest star, or the most glittering Sunbeams upon a
wall of Crystal, Eccles. 12. ult. And it is said to be at night, propter
improvisionem, etc. because of most men's unpreparedness for it. The destruction
of this new world by fire will find men generally in the same careless, carnal,
secure, sensual condition, as did the destruction of the old world by water,
Luke 21.35. as the snare on a sudden catches the bird, so will that day of the
Lord seize on such beasts. Observe 3. the dreadfulness of it, The Heavens shall
pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with fervent hear,
and the earth and the works thereof shall be burnt up. Well may it be called
the great and terrible day of the Lord, when the Judge will be a consuming
fire, Heb. 12.29. and shall come in flaming fire, 1 These. 1.6, 7. try them by a
fiery law, Deuteronomy. 33.2. before a tribunal of fire, Ezekiel. 1.27. plead with them
in flames of fire, Isa. 60.15. and condemn ungodly ones to eternal fire. O how
dreadful is the voice and noise of Fire! Fire in the night! how fearful and
frightful then will such fires at the day of Judgment be! As often as I think
of that day, Quoties diem illum considero, toto corpore contremisco Hierom.
my whole body trembles, says Hierom. Observe 4. the Apostles inference from
it, What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and
godliness! as if he had said, We had need to have grace in truth, that must
undergo such a trial. We that must meet with so strict and dreadful an
examination had need to be holy to admiration; What manner of persons ought we
to be in all holy conversation and godliness?

Surely if any argument imaginable can persuade to purity, this terrible day
can do it. The sound of the last Trump may well cause a retreat, and call us
off from an eager persuit of the flesh and world, Eccles. 11.9. and it may also
stir you up to purity, if ye would meet Christ at that day in peace. The Throne
of Christ is a white Throne, Rev. 20.11. and O with what trembling heart will thou O black sinner stand before this white Throne, 1 Pet. 4.18. If the
righteous be scarcely saved (not in regard of the uncertainty, but difficulty)
where shall the sinner and ungodly appear? Surely the drunkards cup then will
be Wormwood, not Wine; The sentence on the swearer then will be of cursing, not
blessing; as he loved cursing now, so then will it come to him; the Adulterers
pleasure now will then prove poison; and the prayerless man now, will then pray
hard, work in prayer for some ease; some end, if not a pardon, yet a reprieve,
for one hour, at least one drop of water to cool his tongue; but he shall work
at the Labor in vain, and be eternally denied.

O look therefore, and make sure of true holiness, of the power of godliness;
for the fire of that day will discover whether you are dross or gold: look that
the rule by which you walk be right, even the Word of God, for by that you
shall be judged for your eternal life or death, John. 12.36.

Ah how exactly should thou live, that must be tried for thine endless estate
by so strict a law!

How diligently should thou keep thy heart, knowing that God will judge the
secrets of thy heart! Romans 2.16. How carefully should thou keep the door of
thy lips, considering that of every (not only swearing or cursing, but) idle
word which thou shall speak, thou shall give an account at the day of Christ!
Matthew. 12.35. How wary should thou be in all thy deeds, believing that thou
shall appear at the Judgment Seat of Christ to give an account of every thing
done in the body of flesh, whether it be good, or whether it be evil! 2 Cor.
5.10. So think, so speak, so act, as one that must be judged for all at the
great day of Christ.

This may likewise incite you to work as Gods amongst men, because at that day
Christ will come, and his reward will be with him to give to every one
according to his works, Rev. 22.12. Your actions now are seed; if ye would reap
liberally on that great harvest day, ye must sow liberally in this seed-time.
Christ will then demand, how ye improved the many advantages, and opportunities
which he put into your hands for the magnifying his Name, countenancing his
people, propagating his Gospel, punishing his enemies, and discouraging the
workers of iniquity. He will ask you why at such a time, when you knew his
Name was blasphemed, his Day was profaned, his Ministers and Ordinances were
trampled upon; you never stirred, or were zealous for their vindication; you
thought it was good sleeping in a whole skin; you were loath to offend your
neighbors, or you were unwilling to get the ill will of great ones, that under
pretense of love to all the people of God, would have his blasphemous
adversaries spared, nay encouraged. See whether that Jesuitical tenent, That
Magistrates must only be second-table men, that they have nothing do in matters
of Religion, will hold water at that day. O how exceedingly will such be
ashamed of it then, who now own it in their principles and practices! possibly
thou art one of that Heathen Gallio's Disciples, that would meddle in matters
of wrong, but sit still in matters of Religion, Acts 18.14, 17. Gallio cared
for none of those things. I must tell thee, thou art like then to find Hell
hot, for thy being so cold in the cause of the blessed and glorious God.

O think of that day, and let it move thee to a faithful zealous discharge of
thy duty. Zaleucus Locrensis in his proeme to his laws has these words, Hoc
inculcatum sit esse Deos, and venturum esse summum and fatalem illum diem.
Let this be often pressed upon men, that there are Gods, and that an account
must be given to them of men's actions. Consider the day of the Lord is coming,
and who may abide it! In a word, Hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear
God, and keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty of man: For God
shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good, or whether it be evil, Eccles. 12.13, 14.

FINIS.

