SIGNA COELI. The Signs of Heaven: OR A SERMON On a TEXT in the Tenth Chapter
of the Prophecy of the Prophet JEREMIAH, at the Second Verse.

Preached on the day before that great Eclipse of the Sun, which was on the
Nine and twentieth day of March, in this Year of our LORD GOD, 1652. And Year
of the World, 5656.

By John Swan, Minister of Gods Word.

Pauci intelligunt, multi reprehendunt. Non ait Jeremias, Nihil esse Signa
Coeli, imo cum nominat Signa, portendi aliquid adfirmat.

Melancth. Praefat. in Joh. Schoneri Libros. London, Printed for John Williams,
dwelling at the Sign of the Crown in Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

JEREMIAH 10.2. Thus says the Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be
not dismayed at the Signs of Heaven; for the Heathen are dismayed at them.


THat which has caused me to make choice of this Text at this time, is the
great noise which I have heard among the common people concerning that Eclipse
of the Sun, which to morrow in the Forenoon will present it self unto us. It is
indeed an Eclipse that will be very great, and may therefore have some sad
effects, which will in time show themselves among us: Yet should not this so
trouble, perplex, or cast down the minds of Christians, as if they had no God
to stay upon. For what is it, but the way of the Heathen to be afraid of the
Signs of Heaven; which way we must not learn: For thus says the Lord, Learn
not the way of the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the Signs of Heaven; for the
Heathen are dismayed at them.

I have read the words according as I find them rendered in our last
Translation, agreeing therein to the Original, and to others who have repeated
it in another Tongue. Melancthon says, Nolite timere a signis Coeli, quae
timent Gentes. Be not afraid of the Signs of Heaven, which the Gentiles (or the
Heathen) fear. And Junius or Tremelius, thus; A Signis Coelorum ne
consternemini, quia consternantur Gentes ab illis: That is, Be not astonished
or sore troubled in mind at the Signs of Heaven, for the Heathen are amazed at
them: As if he should say, The thought of what the Signs may signify, has
taken away their heart, has cast them down, astonished them, made them afraid,
amazed, and sore troubled in mind. But be not so, You that have the Lord for
your God; For thus says the Lord, Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not
dismayed at the Signs of Heaven; for the Heathen are dismayed at them.

In which Text I find a Prohibition, wherein the people of God are prohibited
from learning the way of the Heathen: One particular whereof is this, namely,
That they feared or were dismayed at the Signs of Heaven; beside which, they
had other ways wherein they offended, as I shall afterward show you.

Some I know by the word fear in this place, understand a Religious reverence
or fear, such as is pertinent to Divine Worship; and thereupon they do not read
the Text, Be not afraid of the Signs of Heaven; but, Fear not the Signs of
Heaven: In which reading, the sense or meaning is very different. For by
saying, Fear not the Signs of Heaven, they conclude that the Prohibition in the
simple meaning thereof, is no more then worship not; it being here the intent
of the Prophet to keep back the Jews from worshipping the Heavenly Bodies;
called in the Text by the name of the Signs of Heaven: For that the word fear
is often taken so in Scripture cannot be denied. As for example, in the Nine
and twentieth Chapter of Isaiah, at the thirteenth Verse, we have these words,
And their fear toward me was taught by the precept of men: Which words when our
Savior Christ expounded, in Matthew. 15.9. he took the word fear for worship;
saying, In vain they worship me, teaching for Doctrines men's Traditions. So
also in another place when the Children of Israel had sinned, it is said, They
feared other gods; as is written in the Second Book of the Kings, the
Seventeenth Chapter at the seventh Verse: They feared other gods; that is, They
worshipped other gods. And in more particular, that it must be taken so here in
this place, the words following at the Fifth Verse do make more evident; for
there the Prophet speaking of the Images of the Heathen, which they made,
erected, and worshipped, says thus; Fear them not, for they stand up as the
Palm Tree, but they speak not, etc. By all which, a man would think that such
indeed were the signification of the word fear in this very place, and that it
were needless to seek any other interpretation thereof. But I shall show the
contrary, and evidently declare that it is not so.

For first in justification of that reading which renders the Text, Be not
afraid of the Signs of Heaven; or Be not dismayed at them; It is a reading
which is exactly suitable to the Hebrew word here used, which does certainly
signify a passive surprisal or possession with fear, and not an active, as
does that aforesaid in Isai. 29.13. And can therefore in it self import nothing
that is pertinent to such a fear as simply has relation to Adoration: For
though both the Heathen and Jews also were guilty of worshipping the Host of
Heaven, for which they are elsewhere reproved, as I shall show you by and by;
yet the word here used, imployes no such thing, nor is ever so to be taken,
except (as some think) the object of fear, when it is named, be either put for
the true God, or for some Idol to be worshipped in the stead of God.

Then Secondly, For that also at the Fifth Verse of this Chapter before
mentioned, where idolatrous fear of worship of Images is forbidden; the phrase
is not the same, for the phrase is altered; and is there no passive surprisal
or possession with fear of astonishment, as in the former word at the second
Verse; but is there an active fear, such as is pertinent to adoration, as the
word there used has declared. The word therefore not being the same in both
places, causes the sense and meaning not to be the same in one place, that it
is in the other; but that the one differs from the other, even as far as
doing is from suffering.

Howbeit, I neither can nor will deny, but that passive fear drives
superstitious men many times to that active fear of adoration: For though it be
certainly true, That God Almighty made the Sun, Moon, and other Stars, yet such
is the folly of some among men, to make them gods; which they do by their vain
wicked practices of worshipping of them: And so the greatest Lights are by them
abused to the greatest darkness; and by deifying of them, they damnifie
themselves by being as blind, and as superstitiously addicted as were the
Heathen Gentiles. This the Jews (even in this Prophets time, as also in some
times before) were guilty of, which they defended with such obstinacy, That
when they were reproved of him, and taught to do otherwise, they answered; That
they would not do according to his Teaching, but follow rather the desperate
bent of their own Bows, as I may say, In worshipping the Moon as Queen of
Heaven. This you may see in the Four and fortieth of Jeremy, at the Sixteenth
and seventeenth Verses, where the words be these; As for the word that thou
have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not (say they) hearken unto
thee. But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our mouth,
to burn incense to the The Moon, as in Job, Chap. 31.26.
Queen of Heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we
and our Fathers, our Kings and our Princes, in the Cities of Judah, and in the
streets of Jerusalem. Of which they give this Reason; For then (say they) we
had plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil. By which last words
[plenty of victuals, were well, and saw no evil] it well appears, That it was
fear, as much as any thing else, which made them thus advance this practice.
And truly fear is an effect proceeding from the nature of Superstition, and so
far prevailing, That it will there make gods, where it doubts most of danger;
As the Egyptians did, in making Fortune a godess; for they kept an annual feast
in honor of her diety, giving her thanks for the year which was past, and
earnestly imploring her favor for the year to come. It was Plutarchs
observation, That the Superstitious always think the gods ready to do hurt: By
means whereof, he accounts them in worse case then Malefactors or Fugitives;
who if they once recover the Altar, are there secured from fear, where
nevertheless the Superstitious are in greatest thraldom: And from hence arose
that ancient saying, Primos in orb deos fecit timor: Fear first brought gods
into the world. And hence it also was, That the Heathen in institution of their
Sacrifices, did offer as well to all their gods, that they should not hurt
them, as for any help they expected from them. And so in some sort it is even
among us, though called Christians; for we have some that are troubled, if the
Salt do but fall toward them; others that be afraid if a Raven do but crook
over them; or an Hare but cross the way before them; or a Pin but lie with the
point toward them, for then forsooth they think the gods are angry with them,
they dare not therefore so much as stoop to take it up; forgetting in the mean
while what David says in the 31 Psalm, at the sixth or seventh Verse; namely
this, I hate all those (says he) who hold of superstitious (or lying)
vanities; but my trust has been in the Lord. O, what a misery it is to dote,
as some men do, through the godless fear of foolish fancies: But above all we
have an example of the poor silly Indians, who sacrifice their children unto
the Devil at this very day, because they be mainly afraid of him. And of old
(as it is storied) we have the example of Alexander Magnus, who sacrificed to
the Sun, Moon, and Earth, that thereby he might divert the evil which (as he
feared) was portended by an Eclipse but a little before. And the Jews
forementioned, did not only burn incense to the Moon, whom they called the
Queen of Heaven, but did offer up cakes unto her also, as in Jere. 7.18. From
which kind of Idolatry Job did thus acquit himself, saying, If I have beheld
the Sun when it shined, or the Moon when it walked in brightness; or if my
heart has secretly enticed my mouth to kiss my hand unto it, or by way of
worshipping it; then this were iniquity that ought to be punished, Job 31.26. A
smatch of which is still remaining, even among us in some old doting Women, who
at the first sight of the New Moon do use to say, Yonder Is the Moon, God save
her grace. For from whence should that Speech arise, but from the relics of
that Heathenish kind of Idolatry which made gods of the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars: But when Job spoke against it, he said, It was iniquity that ought to be
punished; as you have already heard. And well might Job say so, because God
Almighty had forbidden it; as in Deuteronomy. 4.19. Beware lest thou lift up thine
eyes to Heaven; and when thou see the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, even
all the host of Heaven, should be driven to worship and serve them, which the
Lord thy God has divided unto all Nations under the whole Heaven.

By all, or most of which (hitherto mentioned) we see, that God Almighty would
not have his people learn the way of the Heathen, either in a servile slavish
fear actively considered, whereby they worship the Sun, Moon, and Stars; or in
a passive fear (as in the Text) whereby they are made afraid, amazed, or sore
troubled in mind with thought of what may happen from the significations of
the signs of Heaven; For though they be signs, and thereupon may and do
signify, else they were no signs; yet thus says the Lord, Be not afraid of
them, for the Heathen are dismayed at them. All which, in a word, tends to
this, namely, That the Prophet here teaches Gods people to have their trust so
firmly fixed on him, that what disaster soever the Heavens in the course of
Nature should at any time threaten unto them, they ought not to fear it. For as
one truly speaks, Astra regunt homines, sed Deus astra regit: The Stars have
a power over men, such as it is; but God rules the Stars: Or as another says,
Just age -- Sapiens dominabitur astris;
Et manibus summi stant Elementa Dei.
That is, Do godly deeds, so shall thou rule the Stars;
For then God holds the Elements from Wars.
Whereto agrees that of Melancthon, a great and famous Divine, who speaking of
this of Jeremy, Be not afraid of the signs of Heaven; says, Oh sweet
consolation proposed to the Church of God, and to all that call upon him. For
though the Prophet does not say, They signify nothing; nay, rather in naming
them signs, does declare they sometimes signify or threaten great and sad
things; yet he would have the godly comforted, and not be dismayed at them. Not
(says he) because they signify nothing, but that the pious may trust that
they shall be covered and kept of God even in those dangers. For as Christ when
he bids us not to fear death, does it, not because death is not bitter, but
because he would have us know, that even in death he is present to preserve us:
So here the Lord God, in saying, Fear not the signs of Heaven, does it, not
because they are not sometimes of an evil signification, and may therefore
produce effects of a sad event, but because he would have our whole trust and
confidence be placed in him, who has made the Heavens and the Earth with all
that therein is. The Heathens indeed were afraid, because they looked only
upon the secondary causes, but you that be Gods children may look upon God the
first cause; and therefore though they were, yet you need not be afraid of the
signs of Heaven; no, though they promise no good: For God is above them, and
can either mitigate the most direful influence that is, as he stayed the course
of the Sun in the days of Joshua; or else can make even that which is the worst
of all to work for the good of them that love and fear him, as you may see in
Romans 8.28. in which place the Apostle speaks without limitation of any thing,
saying, All things: And if all things, then even the worst of such things also
as may be intended by the signification of these signs. He that dwells (says
David) in the secret place of the most high, Psalm. 91.1.
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. Thus he in one Psalm, and in
another, Be merciful unto me, O God, Psalm. 57.1.
be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in thee; yea, in the shadow of thy
wings will I make my refuge, until these calamities be overpast. In which words
David (a man after Gods own heart) teaches us by his own example, where to
shelter our selves in troublesome times, even under the shadow of Gods wings.
And then, come life, come death, or come what will or can come, it shall be no
terror to him that makes God his refuge. For though in this infirmity of nature
man's mind is subject to fear as well as to any other passion, and may
therefore at the first be troubled when the Signs of Heaven, do threaten the
Earth with some direful influence, yet when he hears the sacred voice of the
Eternal say, Be not dismayed at them; he gives ear thereunto, betakes him to
God, prays for Faith, endeavors for patience, and all other Graces which may
confirm him: And so having put himself under Gods protection, he rests settled
and quiet in mind, waiting and expecting to see what it is that the Lord will
do: For though in it self it be a sad thing to see how the Pestilence sometimes
rages and sweeps away the people, to see how Famine and the Sword devours, to
see the firing and subversions of Cities, to behold the death of Friends and
Kinsfolks, the banishment of our selves, our Wives and Children; yet ought the
godly to be so confirmed, That through the fear of these things they may not be
broken, but be firmly settled, and willing to walk with God in all his ways, as
well of judgment as of mercy; which again was David's course in the Three and
twentieth Psalm at the fourth Verse. For though I walk (says he) through the
valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear no evil; For thou art with me,
thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me. And in the Six and fortieth Psalm at
the first and second Verses, God is our refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble; Therefore will we not fear, though the Earth be removed, and
though the Mountains be carried into the Heart (or midst) of the Sea. Erigenda
igitur men's est, etc. The mind therefore of a godly man ought to be elevated
above all this corporal nature, though the World should be broken and fall; nor
is it to be endured that the Word of God, nor that our trust toward him should
be shaken off: By which trust as the minds of the godly are guarded against
present dangers, so should they also be strengthened against the hurtful
significations of the Stars, as says Melancthon.

In a word, It is certainly true that the time will one day come, when the
whole World it self shall go to ruin; before which time there shall be signs
in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars; and Men's Hearts shall fail them
for fear, as our Savior has told us, in Luke the One and twentieth, Yet for
all this (says Christ there) when these things shall begin to come to pass,
then lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. By which phrase of
lifting up the head, is still declared, That the right reading and meaning of
the Text is so as at the first I showed; namely, Be not afraid, cast down, fore
troubled in mind, or as those who hang the head at the Signs of Heaven, what
sad thing soever seems to be threatened by them; for it is God that guides A
Star so called in Job 38.32.
Arcturus and his sons, and can (if he please) as well restrain the bad
influences of any of the wandering Planets, as bind up the sweet influences of
the fixed Pleiades, or loose the Bands of Orion; how else had the Lord
convinced Job of weakness and imbecility concerning these very things, in Job
38.31. Moreover, there is a Text in Job 9.7. where God is said to seal up the
Stars in his anger: This he does for a punishment, when he keeps back the Rain
from watering the Earth, as in the days of Ahab, when there was no Rain for the
space of three years together. From whence again I argue, That as he can seal
them up from doing good, for a punishment to offenders; so in like manner he can
seal or bind them up in his mercy from being hurtful, though they may threaten
great and sad things to this wicked world, in which we live: Or thirdly, be it
granted, That as the case may stand between him and the World, he will not
absolutely hinder (or perhaps, not at all hinder) the full and complete
operation of the Signs of Heaven, but let them go on unbound, as the Stars in
their courses, to fight against Sisera; that is, to use them as his Instruments
for punishing an incorrigable sinful people; Ephesians. 1.11.
Yet for all that, working all things not barely according to his will, but
according to the counsel of his will, there is no doubt but he will dispose of
all things as well in a merciful way to those that fear him, as in a just way
to those who obstinately sin against him; and cause even the worst of things to
cooperate or work together for the good of his children: Romans 8.28.
To whom by these sad Signs of Heaven (which beget a fainting fear in others)
he gives warning of his judgments, and thereupon prepares and stirs them
up to call upon him. For (as one truly says) Loquitur cum hominibus Deus, non
modo lingua humana, per Prophetas, Apostolos, and Pastores; sed non-nunquam
etiam ipsiis Elementis in formas and imagines diversas compositis: That is, God
(says he) speaks with men, not only with the Tongues of men, by Prophets,
Apostles, and Teachers; but sometimes also by the very Elements, composed or
wrought into diverse forms and shapes. And if by the Elements, then by the Stars
and Lights of Heaven, which work not only upon the Elements, but upon all
things else that are made thereof: For that they work upon the inferior World,
is an Axiom so firmly grounded upon experience, that all the World will never
be able to confute it. Aristotle therefore (in the opinion of Melancthon) spoke
the truth when he said, That this inferior World is governed of the superior,
and that the superior Bodies are the cause of motion in the inferior. These
virtues or powers by which they work, were at the first divinely stamped in
them, and are called in Job 38.31. by the name of influences; the Greek word is
(...) from (...) and (...), Super and fluo; that is, To flow into, or upon.
Which derivation employes thus much; namely, That they must have some Object to
flow into, or work upon, it would else be nonsense to use that name of
influence. Thus then they work. And as they work, so by their working they
speak even to all those who will but lend an ear to hear them. When therefore
David, in the Nineteenth Psalm, had said, The Heavens declare the glory of God,
and the Firmament shows his handy work; Then this he also added, namely, That
there is neither Speech nor Language, but their voice is heard among them.
Whose voice does he mean there, but the voice of the Heavens, which at the
first verse he had said declared the glory of God.

And indeed, in a right consideration of all this, there is a double speaking
to be observed; the one for God at the first verse, the Heavens declaring his
glory in such a glorious piece of work as they are; the other to men at the
third verse, in regard there is neither Speech nor Language, but their voice is
heard among them. All which is true; For though both these voices strictly
taken, are spoken unto men, as well the one as the other, yet the last, upon
occasion, may be said to be spoken to them in more particular. And thereupon it
is, that Moses in the first of Genesis, at the fourteenth Verse, speaking of
the Creation of the Heavenly Bodies, says, God made the Stars for Signs as
well as for Seasons, Days, and Years; which could not be if they signified,
foreshewed, or spoke nothing by being Signs to us who are here below: For to
whom should they be Signs, if not to us who inhabit here in this dull dark
Globe of Mortality, over whose Heads they hang; that casting our eyes upon
them, we may not only behold them, but according to that wisdom which God has
given us, look into their significations by considering their Motions,
Configurations, Risings, Settings, Aspects, Occultations, Eclipses,
Conjunctions, and the like. This we may do, nay rather should do, according to
those abilities that God has given us; Why else has he hanged up those Signs
in open view to those that dwell in the face of the Earth? Os homini sublime
dedit, coelumque tueri jussit. Man looks not downwards, as do the Beasts that
perish; but God has given to man a lofty countenance, and by that does as it
were command (though not to be afraid, yet) to look up to the Signs of Heaven.

Nor is this offensive unto Piety, or prejudicial to true Religion, more then
those other parts of natural knowledge which Christians study as not repugnant
to Divinity: For as the other parts of natural knowledge bring no harm at all
to Christian Religion; so neither does this, Nam hanc quoque partem Physices
esse sentimus, as says Melancthon: For this we also take to be a part of the
Physics, as he affirms, not in one, but many places.

I know indeed that the Devil has been always busy to sow his Tares among the
Wheat, and into the So Sir Walter Rawleigh calls it in his History of the World.
profitable knowledge of the Celestial Influences; has had an envious endeavor
to shuffle in his damned superstitions, poisoning some with his doctrine of
Characterical devices, making of Images under such or such a Constellation, and
to the knowledge of the secret Virtues of Nature, has fastened his doctrine of
Numbers, Charms, Enchantments, Incantations, and the like: Teaching men to
believe in the strength of words and letters, thereby either to equal his own
with the All-powerful Word of God, or to diminish the glory of Gods creating
Word, by whom are all things; yet should not this scare or terrify the
discerning Christian from searching with sobriety into the works of God: For as
David says in the 111 Psalm, at the second Verse, The works of the Lord are
great, sought out of all those who have pleasure therein. And as this was
David's Doctrine, so was it King Solomon's practice; For (as the Scripture
tells us, in the First Book of the Kings, the Fourth Chapter, at the 31.
Verse, and so on.) He was wiser then all men: Then Ethan the Ezrahite, and
Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the Sons of Mahol; and his fame was in all
Nations round about. He spoke of Trees, from the Sedar Tree that is in Lebanon,
even to the Hyssop that springs out of the Wall: he spoke also of Beasts, and
of Fowl, and of creeping things, and of Fishes. And there came of all people to
hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all Kings of the Earth, which had heard of his
wisdom. Thus there in that Scripture, and in the Book of Wisdom (whose title
is, The Wisdom of Solomon) at the 17. Verse of the Seventh Chapter, and so on.
I know (says he) how the World was made, and the operation of the Elements;
the beginning and the end, and the midst of times; The alterations of the
turning of the Sun, and the change of the Seasons; The circuits of years, and
the possessions of Stars; The natures of living things, and the furiousness of
Beasts; The power of the Winds, and the imaginations of men; The diversities of
Plants, and the virtues of Roots: And all such things as are either secret or
manifest, them I know; for Wisdom the Worker of all things has taught me.

All this Solomon knew, God gave him this Wisdom; which had it been Diabolical
and vain, he should never have had: But because it was not, he prayed for it
and had it, in a measure more then ordinary. To which full measure though every
own cannot attain; yet so far as by all good means he can, he may lawfully seek
it for the making up of what was lost in Adams fall. For before Adam fell, he
knew the nature of every thing, insomuch that he gave names to all the living
Creatures; Genesis 2.19 7/8
and whatsoever Adam called every living Creature, that was the name thereof.
But now, what is Man; or what depth of knowledge is it that he can have, but by
great pains and industry? His natural knowledge is not great, nor at any time
so much, but that it may be bettered by acquired skill. Seeing then this breach
came into the World through Adams fall, we may by all good means lawfully seek
to make it up again; nothing doubting but that by a sober and diligent search,
we may in some Multum est de rebus coelestibus aliquid cognoscere.
measure learn what God has written in the Works of his hands, yea even in
those things which the Text calls here The Signs of Heaven.

Diogenes Laertius says, that Thales Milesius was the first among the Grecians
that was called (...), a Wise man, because he was the first among them that
found out the Secrets and Mysteriesof the Heavenly Bodies. And Pliny in his
Natural History reports, that Solon (who was called the wise Lawmakers among
the Athenians) did by the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon, foretell the defects
and subversions of certain States and Kingdoms in Asia. To whom Melancthon
(that great Divine, so often mentioned) has fully accorded: For having said
that many things may be judged by the Stars, he reckons among them, even the
Mutations of Common-weals; calling that also, a part of the Physics.

But how can any thing of this be learned from the Signs of Heaven? Does not
God dispose of Kingdoms and Common-weals? I answer, yes, he does: and it is one
thing so to dispose of Kingdoms, as to translate them to another Nation;
another thing so to dispose of them, as they who live in them be punished for
their sins: both which God does; But how? They who in this send us to God and
to his Decree, say that which is primarily true; but they do not show us how it
is secondarily effected. For although concerning some things extraordinary, the
cause be hid and does not appear so much as in a remote way; yet such as be
either ordinary, or not altogether extraordinary, are not wrought by the first
cause without an administration of the second. But you will say, the changes of
Common-weals are altogether and at all times extraordinary; No, not altogether
nor at all times: For a previous disposition thereunto may be discerned, and
seen many times by the Signs of Heaven; but how far, or to what height their
operation herein shall extend, is seldom or never fully known in every
particular to any, but by the spirit of Prophecy; and the reason is, because
certainly to foretell of contingent events, belongs to none but God himself,
Esa. 41.23. And yet for all that, the Signs of Heaven have here also their
working, and are serviceable to God, even for such purposes as these, else
never would it be written in the Scriptures, That the Stars in their courses
fought against Sisera, Judge. 5.20. Nor would David say, in Psalm Fifty, at the
fourth Verse, He shall call to the Heavens from above, and to the Earth, that
he may judge his people. Nor last of all, would it stand upon record in humane
story, nor be granted by the consent of all Ages, That great Eclipses and
Conjunctions have always had sad events: So that the Scripture speaks not in
vain, when it says concerning the Sun, Moon, and Stars; Let them be for Signs,
as well as for seasons, days, and years.

But to give a further touch upon this: There is (I confess) no Chaldean fate
to be feared, nor any necessity to be imposed upon the That the Stars and other
Celestial bodies incline the will by mediation of the sensitive appetite, which
is stirred by the constitution and complexion, cannot be doubted; as says Sir
Walter Ralegh in his History of the World, l. 1. c. 1, 9, 11. Corpora coelestia
(says Damascep) constituunt in nobis habitus, complexiones, and dispositiones.
I Would. ex Damas.
wills of men, but only an inclination; and this inclination is not caused by
an immediate working of the Stars, on the intellectual part or mind of man,
but occasioned rather mediately, or so far forth as the soul depends on the
temperaments and material organs of the body; to which it is to indulgent, and
yields to often to the motion thereof; which is no strange thing neither: For
if we consider the operation of the soul, so long as it is in the body, it
depends indeed upon material and corporal organs; whose Elementary matter,
whereof they consist, is as subject to the operation of the Heavens, as any
other Elementary matter whatsoever: In which regard, it cannot be denied, but
that the Heavens in some sort do work upon men's minds and dispositions. And
hereupon it comes to pass, that in places where the present state of things is
apt to kindle into a combustion, That there, I say, Mars being powerful in
operation, does sometimes sow the seeds of War by his working upon adust
choler, and the like; Or the Air being greatly out of tune by the bad
influences of the Planets, causes not only many sicknesses, but strange
disorders of the mind; and they breaking out into act, do many times disturb
States, translate Kingdoms, or work some unlucky disaster or other. For when
the Air is distemperatly heated, then it is for certain, very apt so to
disorder and dry up the blood in humane bodies, that thereby great store of red
and adust choler may be purchased; and this stirs up unto anger, with the
thought of many furious and violent actions; and so by consequent to War, and
from War comes victory, from victory proceeds change of Common-weals, and
translations many times of Kingdoms, with change of Laws and Religion,
according to that common saying, Novus Rex, nova Lex; New Lords, new Laws.

All which is very plain; and yet there be some so full of scruples, that they
do altogether oppose this manifest Doctrine; others so full of self conceit,
and epicureous security, that they do wickedly deride it; whom whilst we
suffer to play the fools with their fond sancies, frivilous frumps, and
affected derisions, we may truly believe that they rather want a little
Hellebore to cure their Brains, then force of reason by arguments and
demonstration to inform their Judgments. Such a one I think (in this) was
Pericles, that great and famous Athenian, who in the beginning of the
Peloponesian War, being ready with a great Fleet of an hundred and fifty ships
to hoyse up sail, See this Story in Plutarchs life's.
was presented (even as he went up into his Gally) with a great and terrible
Eclipse of the Sun, which made the sky so dark, that some of the bigger Stars
appeared. At which the Governor of the ship was sore affrighted, and thereupon
together with the rest of the company, refused to sail; which when Pericles
perceived (either truly contemning the threatenings of the Stars, or fearing
that the hearts of his Soldiers should fail) he put his Cloak for a while
before the Governors eyes, and then by and by taking it away again, asked him,
If that which he had done with his Cloak portended any thing: To whom the
Governor answered, No: No more, says he, may thou think is signified by this
Eclipse, though the Moon be now between the Sun and our sight. Which being
said, he commanded that they should hoyse up sail and be gone about their
intended expedition. But this of Pericles was surely an overbold presumption,
as by the event appeared: For the effects of this Eclipse brought not only
misery upon his own Country, and dishonor upon himself, but did put even all
Greece under the sad calamities of a long lasting War. Which story I have
mentioned to show, that they are in as great an error who contemn the Signs of
Heaven, as they who are dismayed at them; or, as they who think it an unlawful
and forbidden thing to search into the significations of them. To whom, I say,
especially to the last; Purge away the dross, and keep the Gold; wash away the
filth, and keep the Cloth; fan out the chaff, and keep the Corn: for it
proceeds either from ignorance, or from an over-nice scrupulosity, and no way
sorteth with wise and learned men, promiscuously and without difference and
distinction, to confound lawful and praiseworthy knowledge, with that which is
impious and Diabolical; as Sir Walter Ralegh
one in his History of the World, has gallantly observed. For though (as I
said before) the Devil shuffels in many corruptions and superstitions into
lawful Arts, whereby wicked knaves have done abomination; yet are not the Arts
therefore to be condemned in the right use of them: For (as the said Author
speaks) if we confound Arts with the abuse of them, we shall not only
condemn all honest Trades and enterchange among men (for there are that deceive
in all professions) but shall in a short time obscure and bury all kind of
good learning whatsoever; and that is just as the Devil would have it; For if he
could but drown the World in ignorance, he might then work his will, and lead
about men which way he pleases.

Furthermore, it is a thing well worth the noting, that by understanding the
uttermost activity of Natural agents, we are assisted to know the Divinity of
Christ; and may thereupon the better confute those Heretics that deny it, for
the terms or limits of natural power and virtue not understood; we may stand in
doubt whether those very works which Christ did, may not be done by natural
means. But knowing how far nature can go, and finding Christ's miracles to be
above that, we conclude, that what he wrought was by the Finger of God.

And as for Divination which the Scriptures cry against, Is it that by which a
wise man may with probability conjecture of some things to come, before they
are; grounding his prediction upon the influences of the Stars, and natural
operation of the Heavens, which work upon things below? Surely no, it is not
that. For what the Scripture forbids, is certainly of another kind, by
which the Devil taught the Heathen vainly to put confidence in the flying,
feeding, chattering, and chirping of Birds; as also in what they saw at their
Sacrifices, in the opening and viewing the bowels and livers of Beasts. For it
is without question, that the Devil was never ignorant, how that both the wise
and simple observe, when the Seabirds forsake the Shores and fly unto the Land,
that then some great storm commonly follows; that the high flying of the Kite
and Swallow, betoken fair weather; that the crying of Crows and bathing of
Ducks foreshew Rain; for they feel the Air moistened in their Quils. Now
hereupon the enemy of Mankind, working upon these as upon the rest of Gods
creatures, long time abused the Heathen by teaching them to observe the flying
of Fowls, and thereby to judge of good or evil success in the Wars; and
(withal) to look into the entrails of Beasts for the same; as if God had
written the secrets of his Providence in the livers and bowels of those
creatures. The prohibition therefore in Scripture, to mark the flying of Fowls
(as signs of good or evil success) has no reference at all to the crying of
Crows against Rain, or to any observation not superstitious, and whereof a
reason or cause may be given. By which it may be concluded, that there is a
kind of Divination, to which a wise man may attain and seek after, without any
offense to God, or harm to Piety and true Religion: For though superstitious
and Diabolical Divination be abominable, and not to be tolerated among
Christians, yet that which is natural, is granted lawful, so long as it keeps
within it is own bounds. Divinum [scilicet genus Divinationis] non est impium,
nec prohibitum: Diabolicum and superstitiosum impium est, and vetium: Natural
vero, si suas metas servet, concessum est; as says Goclenius in the end of the
fifteenth Chapter of his Physical Disputations; that whole Chapter treating of
Divination and the kinds thereof.

The like may be said concerning the observing of times; for which some men, in
the height of their zeal, do also much blame Astrology, but cannot truly do it
as it is pure and unabused; For pure Astrology and undefiled, will observe no
such times as may bring any dishonor unto God, Eccles. 3.1.2.
and yet it may observe times too. For (as Solomon speaks in Ecclesiastes)
there is a time for every thing, and a season for every purpose under Heaven;
which prudentially observed, and not superstitiously sought after and doted on,
may conduce much to the benefit of Mankind. This I grant: But is it therefore
probable that every day in the week has a several Planet to govern it, or is
there any reason for it, seeing the Stars were all made upon one and the same
day? no more I think then to assign a several Planet to every hour (called by
the name of Planetary hours) which in my judgment is no better then folly and
superstition: and therefore in this respect to make choice of good or bad days,
or of lucky and unlucky hours, deserves to be exploded, and not to be harbored
under the harmless shelter of Astrology. There be times indeed when the Planets
according to their aspects, motions, or places in the Heavens, are either more
or less powerful in their operations: To observe therefore such times, and
apply them only to such things as are agreeable to their natural working, is
no superstition, but a well grounded observation; grounded upon a natural
cause, to bottom and uphold it. If the Heathen (whose ways we are not to learn)
had observed times no otherwise, I believe (for that) they never had been cast
out, nor the Jews forbidden to observe times as they did. For even afterward,
the Children of Issachar are spoken of as men of eminency, in regard that they
had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do: As it is in
the first Book of the Chronicles, the 12. Chapter, at the 32. Verse. If
therefore the Hebrew word Menonen (or Megnonen) in Deuteronomy. 18.10. be to be
rendered, An observer of times, it is to be understood of such an observer of
times, as makes his Elections by Witchcraft and Southsaying, or by some such
like Devilish practice, and not by that which truly and indeed is called
Astrology. For that which truly and indeed is called so, is nothing else but
(...), the language of the Stars, or the speech of the Heavens: whose voice (as
I showed you before, out of the 19. Psalm, at the 3. Verse) is heard over all
the Earth: For there is neither speech nor language, but their voice is heard
among them. The Apostle Paul, in Romans 10.18. does only allude hereunto, and
not literally understand it of the Preaching of the Gospel, as some would have
it; For as the voice of the Heavens is heard in all Lands, so the sound of the
Word which was Preached by the Apostles went into all the Earth, and their
words unto the ends of the World. Thus then I see, as Dogs bark at them they
know not, so some among men condemn and hate the things they thoroughly
understand not.

Moreover, another way of the Heathen was, to inchant the Signs of Heaven; as
both their Poets, and others report. Carmina vel coelo possunt deducere Lunam,
says one: Charms can bring down the very Moon out of Heaven. And so also does
Diodorus Siculus testify, Lib. 2. c. 8. Upon which power the Heathen people
did so much rely, that as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses in Pharaoh's time,
so did the Chaldeans withstand Gods Prophets in Esay's time, and afterward;
insomuch, that they reposed their safety, and the safety also of their Empire,
in the power of this wicked Enchanting brood of Astrologers; who were either
such themselves as had through Satan's subtilty corrupted the art with damned
Diabolocal inventions, and not such as meddled with no more then pure Astrology;
or else were mixed as one in counsel and purpose, with those who wickedly
believed, that they could cross God, and hinder the operation of the Heavens by
their devilish enchantments. Now these the Lord God Almighty derided, in Esa.
47.12, 13, and 14. Verses: saying, Stand now with thy enchantments, and with
the multitude of thy Sorceries, wherein thou have labored from thy youth; if so
be thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou may prevail. Thou art wearied
in the multitude of thy counsels: Let now the veiwers of the Heavens, the
lookers on the Stars, who give knowledge concerning the months, stand up and
save thee from these things that shall come upon thee. Behold they shall be as
stubble; the fire shall burn them, they shall not deliver themselves. By which
words [of, If so be thou may prevail -- let them stand up and save thee --
they shall not deliver themselves] is clearly showed that Chaldea relied solely
upon the power of these wicked men, who opposed God, and gave no heed at all to
the predictions of his Prophets. Of which opinion was Balak, the King of Moab,
when he sent for Balaam, desiring that by his enchantments he would curse Gods
people: saying unto him with great confidence, I wot well that he whom thou
blessest is blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed, Numb. 22.6. But all
this would not serve the turn; for there is no enchantment against Jacob,
neither is there any divination against Israel. And therefore when Balaam saw
that it pleased the Lord to bless Israel, he went not as at other times to seek
for enchantments, but set his face toward the Wilderness, Numb. 24.1.

And thus I believe we have the right meaning of that Text even now alleged
out of the Prophecy of the Prophet Esaias. Or suppose this be not the full
meaning, but that rather we are to understand it of Gods deriding the Chaldean
Astrologers, for not foreseeing by the Heavens what his Prophets foretold; yet
what can be thence concluded, but that the highest God does sometimes, when he
pleases, produce that which could not be foretold by the observation of the
Stars. This I grant is not altogether improbable, howbeit, I rather think the
other to be the truest interpretation, as best agreeing to the scope of the
Prophecy.

What shall I say more? the Text says here, Be not afraid of the Signs of
Heaven: and so say I, Be neither too fearful of them, nor yet to careless to
regard them, nor the significations intended by them. For though they be Signs,
and do therefore signify; yet let not this trouble you; be not overcome with
fear; be not dismayed at them. For if thou belongest to the Israel of God, and
wilt but search and try the ways, repent of sin, watch and pray, seek to God,
and redeem the time now the days are evil; then know, that there is a God, who
is the God of Israel, who will be for thee; and will either remove a threatened
evil, and leave a blessing behind him, or will else dispose of the worst, that
either may or can be, for thy assured good. For as David says in the 121.
Psalm, He that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord himself
is thy keeper; the Lord is thy defense upon thy right hand. So that the Sun
shall not smite thee by day (for so the word signifies) nor the Moon by night.
The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: yea, it is even he that shall keep
thy soul. The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in, from this
time forth for evermore.

All glory therefore be to God, both Father, Son, and holy Spirit: As was in
the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen Amen.

FINIS.

