Loyal Subjects. OR THE BLESSED Man's Encouragement, Upon the KINGS retyrement
from Hampton Court, November. 11. Delivered in a Sermon, November the 14th.
1647.

By T.S. D.D.

unknown printer's device

Printed in the Year, 1647.

TO MY HONORED FRIENDS, SIR GEORGE GRAHAM, AND HIS VIRTUOUS LADY, THE LADY
ALICIA GRAHAM.
Sir, Madam,
THe Kings retyrement has given me a resurrection, and I appear fearlesse,
maugre all the threats of his and his Loyal Subjects enemies, in the
dedication of these lines to your Patronage; assuring my self they will meet
with the same welcome and reception in your Arms, which at first Your ears
gave them; and Your munificent selves have ever given, to

Sir, Madam, Your devoted Servant, Thomas Swadlin.

Psalm. 112.7. He shall not be afraid of any evil tidings; his heart
stands fast believing in the Lord.


AND yet King David was no Stoic; for this Psalm is an Exegesis, or
Exposition of the former Psalm, and the last verse of that Psalm speaks
thus; Psa. 111.10.
Timor Domini initium sapientiae, the fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom; and this Psalm in answer to that begins thus; Psalm. 112.1
Beatus qui timet Dominum, blessed is the man that fears the Lord: Wisdom
seeks blessedness, and by fear finds it, and finds it to the fourth
degree, or in four degrees.

1. In the blessedness of his Posterity; Psalm. 112.2
his seed shall be mighty upon Earth, the generation of the upright shall be
blessed. 2. In the blessedness of his plenty, Psalm. 112.3
wealth and riches shall be in his house, and his righteousness endures for
ever. 3. In the blessedness of his stability: Psalm. 112.6
Surely he shall not be removed for ever, his righteousness shall be in
everlasting remembrance. 4. In the blessedness of his security, he shall not
be afraid of any evil tidings; his heart stands fast, believing in the Lord.
And this, though the last, is not the least degree of his blessedness; his
good fear banishes his evil fear; he fears God, and therefore he fears not
any evil tidings; and that he fears God, he is assured of it too; for his
heart stands fast, and believes in the Lord: In which words you have
observable these three parts.

Division.
1. Quis non timet? Who fears not? Timens Dominum; He that fears the Lord,
fears not. 2. Quid non timet timens Dominum? What he fears not that fears
the Lord? Ab auditione mala non timet, he fears not any evil tidings. 3.
Quare non timet? Why he fears not any evil tidings? Paratum est cor ejus,
stabilitum est cor ejus, confirmatum est cor ejus, confidens in Jehova; his
heart is fixed, is established, stands fast, believing in the Lord:
Pars. 1.
I begin with the first; Non timet, non timebit, read it either way, for it is
read both ways; in the present, or in the future Indicative; if in the
present, he fears not, it is K. David's character of a blessed man, and his
commendatio^: if in the future, he shall not be afraid, it is King Diavids
prohibition to the blessed man, and his duty: but either way at first sight it
seems a strange commendation, or a strange prohibition.

Timor enim est Janitor Cordis, and Virtutis Custos, says St. Jerome; fear is
the Guard-royall of the Heart, and keeps out forbidden lusts like unbidden
Ghests, that no strange face may enter the chamber of presence without a
wedding garment: Fear is the Treasurer of virtue, and keeps it in a close
Cabinet, as some precious Jewel, lest it should take wing, like riches, and
fly away.

Timor est Fundamentum Salutis, says, Tertullian, fear is the Foundation of
Hope, and keeps it like that house which is built upon a Rock; let the Sea
roar, and the Rain fall, and the winds blow, It stands sast, and is
unshaken.

Tuta Armatura est Timor, says St. Chrysostom; fear is a safe Armor;
whosoever has put it on, has such a Coat of Male as is Sword, Pike, Pistol,
Cannon, and Ordnance proof.

Initium sapientiae timor est, says Solomon, fear is the beginning of
wisdom; not a Student in the Academy of fear, but is sure to commence Doctor
of Wisdom.

Vita omnium operum, says Melancton; fear is the vivacity of all our actions;
whatsoever we do without fear is dead in the very doing; and the reason of
it is given by Solomon; Eccles. 12.13
Officium enim est totius hominis; for this is the whole duty of man, to fear
God, and keep his Commandments.

And therefore says Lactantius, Religio, Majestas, Honor metu constant; where
Religion is neglected, consusion enters, nor can Religion subsist without
fear, for what is not feared, is contemned; what is contemned, is not
worshipped; Religion, Majesty, and Honor; the Religion of God, the Majesty of
the King, the Honor of the Nobility are all preserved by fear; take away
fear, and take away all.

This age, this miserable age, this worst of ages gives us too sad and feeling
an example of it; The Kingdom of England has lost Religion, the King of
England has lost his Majesty, (but for a while, I hope in God it will be found
again) The Nobility of England have lost their Honor, and all this because
the Reformers and Levellers of England have lost their fear, the fear of God.

St. Bernard, advises most divinely, Cum adest gratia, time, ne non digne
operreis ex ea; substracta gratia, magis time, quia te relinquit custoldia tua;
siredierit gratia, multo amplius time, ne forte contingat pacis excidium; If
grace be present with thee, fear lest thou answer not the expectation of that
grace; if grace be absent from thee, fear more, because thou art left unto thy
self; if grace returns to thee again, fear much more, lest thy security
ruins thy peace.

And if Fear be so necessary a virtue by the verdict of so many learned
Fathers, and holy Authors, what means King David here to give the blessed man
this Character, to lay upon him this prohibition, He fears not, he shall not
be afraid?

Do you but distinguish of the subject, Fear, and look upon the object, what
the blessed man fears, and fears not; and you will presently confess,
there is neither Adaxie, nor Paradox in this Character, He fears not, in
this Prohibition, he shall not be afraid.

Some have distinguished Fear into six sorts: First, Natural, which respects
Being, and is in all Creatures; Hoc naturae est refugere corruptionem propter
natural desiderium essendi; Every thing naturally desires to be, and by
instinct of nature shuns destruction: Secondly, Humane, which respects Life,
and is in all men, Humanum est vivendi desiderium, dissolvendi Christianum: As
a man, Saint Paul desired to live; as a Christian, Saint Paul desired to be
dissolved: Thirdly, Mundane, which respects Riches, Liberty, and the like, and
is in covetous and cowardly wretches: Fourthly, Servile, which respects
Punishment, and is in Slaves, Reprobates, Rebels, and Devils: Fithly, Initiall,
which respects sin, and is in all good Christians and loyal subjects:
Sixthly, Filial, which respects God, and is in all noble Martyrs and glorious
Saints.

You may contract these six into two, Viz. Filial, and Servile; because under
Servile may be comprised Humane and Worldly; and under Filial, Initiall, and
Natural.

Filial fear looks upon God as a Father, and honors him, and is resolved to
honor him, though there were neither Heaven nor Hell; no Heaven to reward him,
no Hell to torment him.

Servile fear looks upon God as a Judge, and shuns him; if now and then in a
fit he yields him any obedience, it is Formidine paenae, only to avoid the
punishment due to the disobedience.

Filial fear is an ornament and virtue of the Soul; servile fear is a
passion and distress of the Soul; filial is a chaste fear; servile, an
adulterate: servile fear is in the reprobate both here and in Hell, Filial
fear is in the Regenerate, both in the Church militant and tryumphant; but not
here as there, but in several confiderations; here by two actions, Fugiendo
malum, Faciendo bonum, by eschewing evil, and doing good; there only by doing
good:

Perficietur in patria, non abolebitur reverentia timoris; non minuitur, sed
augetur, says Saint Austin, Reverentiall fear shall not be diminished in
Heaven, but increased: It shall not be abolished, but perfected: Servile fear
is not in them, not in them at all so far as they are Regenerate; as men they
may fear their lives, as covetous they may fear their estates, as carnal
they may fear their liberties; but he that fears the loss of either
Liberty, Estate, or Life, can never be good Soldier, or loyal subject, can
never be good Christian, or Gods servant; he may fear God, as God is just, and
so fear is a passion and distress of the soul; he does not fear God as God
is good, for so fear is a grace and ornament of the soul,

As fear is a passion of the soul, you may understand that speech of Saint
John; Joh. 12.42.
Many of the Rulers believed in Christ, but for fear of the Jews they did not
confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue; for they loved the
praise of men more then the praise of God: I may add, They feared the injustice
and punishment of men more then the justice and chastisement of God; and
therefore says Christ, Matthew. 10.28.
fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the soul, but
rather fear him, who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell:

The words in the Original are worth your observation; Fear not them (...),
that do kill the body; It is not said, Them that can, but, them that do; they
may do such a thing by a permissive power, they cannot do it by any inherent,
any native or natural power; (...), but the soul they may not, they cannot;
they neither may nor can kill the soul: (...); but rather fear him who has
power to destroy both soul and body in Hell.

I wish the Renegado's of this age seriously to consider these Texts; those men
I mean, who served the King, and tarryed with him so long as the sun shined,
and the weather was calm; but so soon as ever the rain began to fall, and
the winds to blow, they presently run away to compound and save something, a
little wealth, and some few days, but they forget God can and will destroy
both soul and body in Hell.

Yes, He both can and will, without a great deal of repentance: for their
sin is far more desperate then the first Rebels; they ran into the sin
out of rashness and inconsiderately; but these men have put God into one
scale, and the World into another; and therefore to them belongs that miserable
Doom, Apoc. 21.
The fearful shall be cast out, i. e. Such men as fear the loss of their
Estates more then the loss of Gods favor, and the loss of their momentany
life, more then the loss of their eternal life; they have forsaken Gods
Anointed, and God will forsake them.

Whatsoever other men think of this policy, and commend it; this is my Piety;
God give me grace to live a Christian, and dye a Roman; to continue Loyal,
and not fear man, who can but kill my body, and dye courageously in the fear
of God; so I shall not fear any evil tidings.

Pars. 2.
It is my second Consideration, Quid non timet timens Dominum? what he that
fears God, fears not? He fears not ab auditione mala, or ab auditu malo,
non timet; He is not afraid, or, he shall not be afraid of any evil tidings.

At first sight again, This object increases my wonder; He fears not any
evil tidings? Prove.
why, the Kings wrath is evil tidings; for it is the messenger of death, and
shall I not fear him?

Solomon says, Prove.
Fear God and the King, Saint Peter is at the same, 1. Pet. 2.
Fear God and honor the King; Saint Paul is at it for conscience sake, Romans
13.5.
Be subject to the higher powers, not only for wrath, but conscience sake;
And is the son of David against it there? Fear not them that kill the body:
and is the Father of Christ against it here? Fear not any evil tidings, not
the wrath of Kings?

No, at no hand; This is no absolute, no general prohibition, but only a
limited and comparative; God is to be feared, and the King is to be feared;
where their commands are not in opposition, Fear belongs to them both, both
natural fear and filial fear; But when they stand in competition, where my
obeying the King will dishonor my God, where my fearing the King will
displease my God; where sin is the subject of a Tyrants command, and Gods Law
must thereby be transgressed, I am then at the Apostles resolution, Act.
Whether it be fit to obey God or man, judge you: I am then at King David's
blessed man, I fear God, I fear not any evil tidings.

This will be more evident, and appear more lucidly, if we look into the
diverse acceptions of Auditus malus, and see what is the true meaning and right
construction of evil tidings.

1. It signifies sometimes Calumnies, contumelies, checks, taunts, and
reproaches, wherewith they that fear the Lord are slaundered: Thus gluttony,
blasphemy, and sedition were objected to Christ; and now his servants, and the
Kings liege people are called, I should have said, Miscalled, Malignants,
Delinquents, Evil Counselors, Papists, Enemies of the Church, and troublers
of the State; Haec autem perferre difficile; and this is a very heavy burden
to bear, Generosis enim animis Cruciatus corporis, quam jacturam famae
facilius est perferre; A noble mind had rather have his body bruised then his
Credit blasted; yet he that is truly noble, Et sola virtus vera Nobilitas, the
noble Christian that fears God is so far from being afraid of those evil
tidings, that he neither forsakes the Truth, nor declines his Loyalty: He is
not afraid of those evil tidings.

2. Sometimes evil tidings signify, Famam sinistram quam improbi culpa sua
sibi contrahunt, That evil report which base people deservedly bring upon
themselves; Thus Shemei is called a Raylor for speaking evil of the King, thus
Doeg is called an Accuser, for belying the Lords anointed, and his Priests:
Thus Absolon and Achitophell are called Conspirators, the one for taking Arms,
the other for giving counsel against their Sovereign: Thus Corah, Dathan, and
Abiron, and all their followers, such as rise against their King, upon pretense
that he stretches his Prerogative too high, are called Rebels.

But they that fear God, and all Loyal Subjects do fear God, fear no such
aspersions: If they are cast upon them by evil tongues, they readily answer
them as Saint Austen did Petilian upon a like scandal, I know no such thing by
my self, and I think I know my self better then he knows me, but believe
you whom you please, him or my self, I am not afraid of these evil tidings.

3. Sometimes Evil tidings signify Dangers and Calamities, Jobs messengers;
one tells us our Cattle are Plundered, another, our Houses are fired, a third,
our Children are murdered, a fourth, our Soldiers are mutinied, our Garrisons
are betrayed, our Armies are disbanded, and fair quarter is denied, or if
promised, it is not performed.

Why yet, Non succumbit justus, non deficit justus, He that fears God faints
not, fails not, looses not his courage; yea, though he knows death to be the
Guerdon of his not yielding to a Conquerors pleasure, he looks upon his
Savior, and fears not him that kills the body, he looks upon King David's
blessed man, and fears not any evil tidings.

These times offer as fit a case as this Text requires: King David pronounces
the man blessed that fears God; my fearing God is best evidenced to me by my
obedience to my parents, for that is Gods command: Exodus 20.
Honor thy Father, and thy Mother; my great Parent is the King, he is Pater
patriae, the Father of the Kingdom, and the higher power, Romans 13.1.
so Saint Paul calls him, The supreme power, 1. Pet. 2.
so Saint Peter calls him, Therefore I to be subject to him, and not to resist
him, is Saint Paul's inference: Therefore I to honor him, and to fear him, is
Saint Peter's: And to take away all reply, Saint John's rule holds in this of
Fear, as well as in that of Love: 1 John 4.20.
He that says he loves God whom he has not seen, and loves not his brother
whom he has seen, is a liar; so he that says he fears Gods whom he has
not seen, and fears not Gods Anointed, whom he has seen, speaks not true
English.

But now there is a Pack of men met together, who call themselves a Power above
the King, a Supremacy above the Supremacy, a Sun above the Sun; who command us
to take part with them against the King, who, if we do not, threaten us with
Sequestration of our Estates, that is Beggary, with registring our Names in
their black Book, that is Infamy, with bringing us to the Bar of Justice,
of their justice, that is, Death.

We know, if we forsake the King, and side with them against the King, we
sin because we resist the higher power: If weresist, we incur damnation:
The word is (...), let Master Marshall qualify it as he pleases, the
destruction of our souls and bodies here, and for ever.

Now here is the trial: 2 Samuel 15.21.
If we stand to the King, and do our duty, if we are resolved as Ittai was,
wheresoever my Lord the King is, whether in life or death, there will thy
servant also be, then we fear God.

But if we go back to them that oppose the King, let it be upon what
considerations it may, I shall leave my Wife and Children Beggars else, I shall
be a slave and prisoner all the days of my life else; else I shall be hanged
my self; and these petty thoughts fright me out of my duty, I have then ruined
my Blessedness, I am not blessed, I have lost my evidence, I fear not God,
and am a witness against my self, that I am afraid of evil tidings.

Well fare that Heathen, who was resolved for all fortunes, and will rise in
judgment against the cowardly Christians of England; his resolution was thus
expressed. -- Non fulminantis magna Jovis manus
Terrebit justum:
And again, Etiamsi fractus illibatur orbis,
Impavidum ferient ruinae:


Let the World totter, turn rnund, and fall, I will not be afraid.

But a Heathen is not fit to be our Scholemaster: look we upon the Primitive
Christians, and amongst them, well fare old Hilarion, who being in the hands
and power of his Persecutors, and by them demanded, An non timeret, If he were
not afraid of those evil tidings they brought him, for they came to strippe
and plunder him; returned them an answer as full of gallantry as mirth, Nudus
latrones non timet, an empty Ship fears not a Pyrate, a poor man fears not
Thieves: They then threaten him with Terribilium terribilissima, and the very
Hyperbole of evil tidings, Sed occidemus te, we will put thee to most
exquisite torments, and in the end kill thee; Non times mortem, art thou not
afraid of death? and he returns as great an Hyperbole of Gallantry, Non timeo
mortem, quia paratum est cor meum confidens in Jehova, and paratus sum mori;
No, I fear not death, because my heart is established, believing in the Lord,
and I am prepared to dye.

Well fare Saint Chrysostom, who being threatened with Banishment by that
Empress of a good name, but a badd nature, Eudoxia, Et vult me Exulem Regina?
and will she banish me, said he? Agat, let her do it, she cannot banish me
from the presence of God; Domini enim est terra, for the whole earth is the
Lords, and the fullness thereof.

Another bids him hide himself, and save his life, for the Empress would saw
him to death, Et me secabit? secet; And will she saw me to death? content
says he, I am not afraid to follow the prophet Isaiah in his way to the
Kingdom of Heaven.

A third bids him shift away, for else the Empress would cast him into the
Sea; Immerget? Immergat; will she cast me into the Sea, says he, content
still; I doubt not but to find as good a planke, as Jonas did, to save me from
drowning.

A fourth advises him to secure himself, for the Empress would cast him into
the Furnace of fire; Iniciat, says he, as she pleases; I am not afraid of a
fity Chariot, the three Children will bear me company, and the son of God
will drive the Coach so fast, that the flames shall neither scorch my flesh,
nor singe my clothes.

A fifth bids him take Sanctuary, for the Empress would have him thrown into a
Den of Lions; Jaciat, says he, content still, I make no question but the
Angels will musle them for hurting me.

Yet a sixth persuades him to convey himself aside for a little while, that the
Church of Christ might receive some further benefit by him, else the Emprelse
would have him stoned to death; Fiat voluntas Dei, says he, I have always
prayed that the will of God might be fulfilled, and if this be his will, let
it be fulfilled, and Hers too* I will use all lawful means for my
preservation, being persecuted in this City, I will fly into another, but
still with this resolution, I am not afraid to follow Saint Stephen through a
whole shower or Quarry of stones into the Kingdom of Heaven.

If these Examples be procul, and too far, at too great a distance for us to
follow; look we then upon some of our own Countrymen, and amongst them upon
a noble Glenham, who was more conquered by an empty dish, then by an insulting
and increasing Foe, and yet was afraid of neither, but left his Garrison of
Carlisle with more honor, then his Enemy gained it.

Look we upon a valiant Fawcet, who was more conquered by the mutiny of his
unfaithful slaves, for they are not worthy the name of Soldiers, that will
mutiny, then his thundering enamies, and yet was afraid of neither, but came
off with more honor then he left behind him.

Look we upon a Loyal Compton, who notwithstanding the improbability of
relief, and the continuation of an hard Seige, and the multiplication of a
cruel Enemy, was yet resolved to fear nothing, but to come off with so much
honor, as to leave none behind him for his enemy.

Look we upon an undaunted Arundell, who being summoned to deliver up the
remainder in the West, and allured thereunto, because the Kings party was
utterly defeated; returned an answer as full of Resolution, as Religion, as
full of courage as Christianity, and such as became both a Soldier and a
Christian, I have lived untainted these threescore and seven years, and I
have not now any mind to go a Rebel to my grave.

Remember if you revolt, you turn Rebels, and if you dye in that Apostasy,
you dye Rebels, and leave an Odium upon your Name, and a Curse upon your
Estates.

Look we upon those Gentlemen, but look we upon them with the eyes of
charity and imitation, who at the last of all went from Portsmouth and Exeter
to Oxford; what carried them so many a weary step, when they might have lived
quietly there, or have gone safely to their own habitation, but the example of
a Loyal Wagstaf, and the fear of being tempted into a Rebellion, and a desire
to live and dye in his Majesty's service?

I could tell you of many more, who have chose rather to live in Exile, in
Prison, in Poverty, then any way to comply or compound with the enemy; having
yet a hope above reason, but not without faith, that God will at last arise,
and acknowledge his own cause, and maintain it, and remember how the foolish
man has blasphemed him.

And that God may own his cause, look we upon his Majesty; who not
withstanding so many waves of the sea, and so much madness of the people in
the loss of all, and above all, in the unreasonablenesse of Propositions, is
yet so far from being afraid of any evil tidings, that he yet doubts not to
recover all, at least to requite all our miseries with the blessing of peace,
and honorable conditions.

And that God may bless him in these undertakings with success; look we
upon him with admiration for his constancy and perseverance; look we upon him
with imitation for his patience, and pursuing Peace; look we upon him with
sighs and tears, that He so good a King, should have so bad Subjects; look
we upon him with Loyalty and contribution, and make it a case of conscience,
whether when he undertakes so many hazards for us as his former journey to the
Scots did, and his present retirement, God knows whither, presents him with,
it be not a rising sin for us to murmr, or for any of our Party to fear;
whether it be not a sin in every one of us to spend a penny upon our
superfluities, now he wants so many for his own, and our urgent necessities;
but especially look we upon him with prayers and supplications, that God
would bless his pious Oratory with a gracious peace, or by an unexpected
supply with a glorious victory.

And doubt not, but that God, who in a like expedition returned him safe from a
Spanish Treachery, and delivered him from the pawe of the Bear, and Beasts of
ravine, will also preserve him from an English Conspiracy, and deliver him from
the Talon of the Eagle, and Birds of Prey.

If he miscarry in one or both, blame not the goodness of his Cause or Person,
but the badnesse of our selves, the falsenesse of our hearts, and the
faintness of our Prayers.

Never was a better Cause since the World began: No not in the Primitive
Persecutions; for then Heathen Emperors persecuted Christian Subjects: But now
Heathen Subjects under Christian names persecute the best of Christian Kings;
and if such a Cause perish, we must conclude our selves the worst of People
since Adam begat Caine: Never was a better King, no not in Israel, setting
aside the spirit of Prophecy, King David himself cannot outvye him for
goodness, and if he and we perish, it is not because he, but we have done
wickedly.

King David was a man after Gods own heart; and is not King Charles so too?
The reason I am sure is alike for both; Confirmatum enim est cor ejus; for his
heart stands fast, believing in the Lord,

Pars. 3.
It is my third consideration: Quare non timet ab auditu malo? Why he that
fears God fears not any evil tidings? Paratum est cor ejus, confirmatum
est cor ejus, stabilicamest cor ejus, read it which way you please, his heart
stand eth fast, and believes in the Lord, his heart is prepared to believe in
the Lord.

And here the very object, Lord, is enough to make our heart to stand fast,
and believe.

Were it but El, there were a Magazine of strength in that, and we shall have
relief enough, if we believe in Him as He is a strong God.

Were it but Shaddai, there is a Pana cea of sufficiency in that, and we shall
have succor enough, if we believe in Him as He is God All-sufficient.

Were it but Elion, there is a Mountain of Hope in that, and we shall have
supply enough, if our heart stands fast in Him as He is the Most high God.

Were it but Tsebaoth., there is an Army of Protection in that, and we shall
have victory enough, if our heart stands fast and believes in Him as He is
the Lord of Hosts.

Were it but Adonai, there is a Rock of Preservation in that, and we shall be
upheld enough, if we believe in Him as he is the strong Foundation.

But it is more then all this; for it is Jehovah, the most essential and
excellent name of God; If El, implies his Omnipotency; If Elion implies his
Soveraignety; If Shaddai implies his Immutability; If Tsebaoth implies his
Irresistability; If Adonai implies his Fidellity; sure I am Jehovah implies
them all, whether you take it in the construction of our own Divines, or in
the Derivation of others.

In the Construction of our own Divines it signifies three things: First,
Habere esse a se ipso, that he has his Being of himself: Secondly, Dare esse
omnibus, that he gives a being to all things that be: Thirdly, Dare esse
verbo, that he gives a being to his word, and we therefore need not fear, if
we believe the truth of his word, but he will give Rebels their due, and
settle the Crown to flourish upon the Kings head.

Or if you take the meaning of Jehovah, in the derivation of other, either with
Oleaster, as it is derived from Hovah, which signifies Destruction, then we
have reason to believe, He will be mighty in the destruction of his Enemies:
Or whether you take it with Galatinus, as it is derived from Hajah, which
signifies to be, and we have reason to believe, He will be mighty amongst us
in our Preservation.

Let your hearts stand fast in Jehovah then, And ere long, He will either
divert our Enemies from pursuing us, as he did Saul from hunting David; or, He
will divide our Enemies in their Consultations, as he did destroy the counsel
of Achitophell by the counter-counsell of Hushai; or, He will give our Enemies
to selfe-destruction, as he did Abimelech, and the house of Millo: or He will
call back our enemies by strange rumors, as he did the Assiryans.

All these ways, and many more, God can do it, so that we need not be
afraid of any evil tidings, and He will be persuaded to do it, if we fear
him, for when we fear him, then, as it was when the Dictator ruled in Rome,
all other offices ceased: so when the fear of God is in us, then all other
fears vanish.

This was acknowledged by that once magnanimous Earl of Essex, but afterward
the Rebel Father of a Rebel Son; sometimes said he. When I have been in
the Field, and encountered the Enemy, the weight of my sins have lain so
heavy upon my conscience, because I was not reconciled to my God, that my
Spirits were quelled, and I have been the most timorous man upon the earth.

I wish our Gentlemen of the Sword, if ever the King has occasion to use them
again, that they would not batter our Walls more within by sin, then the
Enemy can do without by Guns; that they would not storm themselves more by
oaths, and ruin themselves more by mutining, and undo themselves more by
Treachery, then an Enemy can by strength; and you that hear me this day, Let
your hearts stand fast, and believe in the Lod: And that our hearts may, and
that the heart of the King may, Pray we for him and for our selves.

Help the King O God, and help us O God; for vain is the help of man:
Though thou have cast him a great way off, yet be not displeased too long, but
turn thee unto him again, and return him unto us again; but return him
either with an Olive of Peace, or with a Laurel of Conquest; or if neither,
yet let neither tribulation, nor anguish, nor sword, nor any other thing
separate us from fearing thee, that we may not be afraid of any evil tidings,
because of thy love in Jesus Christ: Amen.

FINIS.

