KING CHARLES HIS FUNERAL.

Who was Beheaded by Base and Barbarous hands January 30, 1648.

AND Interred at WINDSOR, February 9, 1648.

WITH His ANNIVERSARIES Continued until 1659.

By THOMAS SWADLIN, D.D.

Qui orat and exorat, Vivat, veniat, Vincat Carolus Secundus. Et sit Carolo
Magno Major, Amen. LONDON, Printed by John Clowes for the Author, 16^^.

TO THE KINGS Most Exceent MAJESTY CHARLES II.
GREAT SIR,
THat Your Majesty may vouchsafe to give these Anniversaries a gracious
Reception, is the Petition to, That Your Majesty may be Blessed with a Long
Life, with a quiet Reign, with a Faithful Council, with a Pious Clergy, with
a Valiant Soldiery, with a Loyal People, and be preserved from a new Rivalry
of Presbytery and Independency, is the Petition for, Your Majesty, By

Your Majesty's Loyal Subject THOMAS SWADLIN D.D.

Anno Dom. 1648.
2 SAMUEL 1.14. How wast thou not afraid, to put forth thine hand to destroy the
Anointed of the Lord?
IN qualia tempora reservasti nos Domine? O Lord God, In what sad times do we
live? Times, wherein sins of the highest size are committed, Sacrilege and
Rebellion, and not controuled; Nay, They are countenanced, and not checked; Yea,
to check them, and control them, is accounted a greater sin, and can expect
no greater Reward, then an heavy punishment.

So sad are the Times we live in, Sacrilege and Rebellion committed,
countenanced, commanded; To discountenance them, to discommand them, to rebuke
them, is accounted a greater sin, and must expect as great if not a greater
punishment.

But what then? Shall we dry our Eyes and not weep for them? Shall we harden our
Hearts, and not sigh for them? Shall we muzzle our Mouths, and not declaime
against them? This indeed would involve us in the Guilt, and ^^y us liable to a
greater punishment; Not only to an Hatchet, to an Halter, to a Rack, to a
shame, to a Torment here; but to Fire and Brimstone, to storms and Tempests,
to Tortures and Devils hereafter. A hard choice I confess; But for all that,
They that have more care of their Bodies, then of their Souls; They that have
more respect to their Posterity then to their Eternity, may consent by silence;
For my part, Liberabo animam meam, whatsoever becomes of my Body of my Wife, of
my Children, I will, if possibly I can, deliver mine own Soul; not only by not
consenting to, but also by dissenting from, and increpating of those Royal
Blood-suckers, those Sons of Belial, those Regicides and King-Killers; not only
in the Distillation of mine Eyes to bedew a Royal Coffin, not only in the
Compunction of my Soul, to bewail the loss of a Royal Person; but also in the
Objurgation of my Tongue, by chiding those who were so Disloyal, as not to be
afraid to put forth their hands to destroy the Anointed of the Lord.

And that you may deliver your Souls too, I beseech you, Join your Tears with
mine; Join your Prayers with mine; Join your Sorrows with mine, until God shall
be pleased to establish King David's seed in King David's Throne, to increpate
those bloody Actors in this Expostulation and Disquisition of so bloody an Act;
How wast thou not afraid? etc.

These words at first view seem to be nothing but an Interogation, the asking
of a Question, and no more; But upon a second and better Inspection, they will
appear an heavy Indignation, and resolve themselves into this strong Negative,

No man may, None but a fearlesse; i. e. a graceless man dare, put forth his
hand against, much less, destroy the Lords Anointed; and offer to our
consideration these particulars.

Division -- 1. Whether all Kings, bad and all, be the Lords anointed? I
resolve it, Yes, They are. 2. Whether such a Person, though had, may be
resisted, deposed or murdered? I resolve it, No, He may not. 3. How fearful a
sin is it to do such an Act? Besides what I shall resolve upon this anon, I
must add, Time will discover.


I begin with the first; Whether all Kings, bad and all, Par. (...)
be the Lords Anointed? Yes, I say, They are.

For it was in a Phrensy mood, when Ajax took Kings for Upstarts, rising and
standing of themselves; Cowards get victory by God, says he, but I will win,
whether God will or no.

And it was in as desperate a sit, when Antiochus said, The Persons of Kings
are of Force or Fortune; (...) Let him take the Kingdom, to whom Fortune or the
sword shall give it.

And a foolish Dream of wise Homer it was, when he said, That Kings are the
spawn of Jupiter, nursed and fostered by Jupiter.

And t^eir Speech is as full of Folly and Madness, whether Papist or Puritan,
or him that has out-stripped them both, the Independent, who say, That the
King is the Peoples Creature, The People the Kings Creator; The King whosoever
he be, qua King, is King but Precario, by the Peoples Courtesy.

And those Texts they allege for the proof of their Opinions, are foolishly
if not foully mistaken by them. viz.

All the People went up to Gilgal, and made Saul King there; and therefore the
King is the Peoples Creature: so again, 1 Samuel 11.15. 2 Reg. 14.21.
All the People of Judah took Azariah, and made him King for his Father
Amaziah: and therefore the People are the Kings Creator.

For in Propriety of Speech, The People did then, and do now only declare him
to be King, who was so appointed by God; and therefore the Context runs thus;
Samuel said to the people, Come, let us go to Gilgal, and renew the King^om
there: i*e. Let us acknowledge, and make known him to be King, 1 Samuel 11.14.
whom the Lord has chosen, as it is in the 24 verse of that chapter.

Outward Solemnity and Coronation the King has from the People; but Power,
Right, and Authority he has from God; from God immediately, and Dependent upon
God only; and Independent from the People, whether Diffusive or Collective,
whether Representative or Essenciall.

Look ye else upon the first Rulers Gods first Church had, the Church of the
Jews; Who made Moses to be Ruler over Israel? God: Act. 7.35. Number. 27.16 Judge.
2.16.
The People had no hand in it: who appointed Joshua over the Congregation of
Israel! who but God? Who raised up the Judges! who but the Lord? Who appointed,
yes, to come to the word of my Text, who anointed Saul to be Captain over
Israel! who but the Lord? 1 Samuel 10.1
Samuel poured on the Oil, but God anointed him.

That for the first King of Israel, SAUL; He was appointed to be King, and
anointed by God: And so again for the second, King of Israel, DAVID; Who found
him, and who anointed him? Not the People, I assure you; not the better sort
of them, The Elders of the City Bethleem, 1 Samuel 16.4.
They were astonished when Samuel went upon that errand from God; Nor the best
sort of the People neither; Not the Saints; They dreamed of no such matter,
until God told them on it by a Dream and Vision, as you may read in the Psalms;
God spoke in a Vision to his holy Ones, and said, Ps. 89.19.
I have exalted One chosen out of the people; chosen a exalted out of the
People by God; Not chosen and exalted out of the People by themselves; No, nor
yet by Samuel the Prophet neither; For if he had been left alone, we had not
had King David for the second King of Israel, but King Eliab; for so he said,
when he looked upon Eliab, 1 Samuel 16.6. 1 Reg. 1.7.
Surely the Lords anointed is before me: No, nor yet Abiather, the
High Priest; For if he might have had his will, we had not had King Solomon for
the third King of Israel, but King Adonijah.

No, no, neither People nor Prophets, nor Saints nor High Priest, are
King-founders, but only God himself; and therefore certainly neither
King-founders, nor King-confounders are of God, who lay the Foundation of Kings
upon any other then God alone; and so God-self tells us, saying, I have found
David my Servant, with my holy Oil have I anointed him. Ps. 89.20.


The words there are Emphatical, and worth your marking; It is not Reperi, I
have found him by adventure, or I have stumbled upon him by chance; but it is
Inveni, I have taken pains by seeking to find him out; and so it is elsewhere
expressed; Quaesivit Deus hominem; The Lord has sought him a man; and in the
Psalm it is, Inveni Davidem servum meum, 1 Samuel 13.14.
I have found out David my servant.

But mistake not; I repeat not these words, nor do I comment upon these words,
to give you leave to think, God needed either to seek him, or find him, but to
let you know, How God stood affected to the having of Kings; He was so set upon
them, that rather then not have them, He would do as we do, Take the pains to
seek them, and find them out; and yet not do as we do too often; so soon as we
have sought a thing and found it, by and by to loose it again: No, but God so
sought and found out Kings, as to have them continued; and therefore it follows
in that place, Oleo meo sancto, with my holy Oil have I anointed him.

Were it no more but Oil; why yet that alone were enough to show both the
Sovereignty and perpetuity of Kings; For mingle what you will with Oil, it
will be uppermost; and though those Colors which are laid in water, fade by
and by; yet the Colors of the Crown being laid in Oil, it is to let us know,
They should, yea, and notwithstanding the craft of Royal Horseleeches, they
shall last and hold out all weathers: Yea, and to let them know too, Kings
themselves, what they should be, smooth, gentle and supple as Oil; no
Acrimonie in them at all.

If it were no more but Oil, We should learn so much, and They should learn so
much; We, That Kings should continue: and live out their days, because they
are anointed with Oil, not with water; They, that they should be gentle to
their Subjects, because they are anointed with Oil, and not with Wine.

But it is more then Oil, It is holy Oil, and Gods holy Oil; and this is to
tell them, Kings, That they should be holy, and as they bear an Image of Gods
power in the sublimity of their places: so they should also of Gods purity in
the sanctity of their persons: And this again is to tell us, That their
Function is like their Unction, Holy; and therefore not to be touched with the
hand of violence by any: They that offer violence to Kings, offer violence to
God himself: because God finds them, and makes them Kings: because God annoints
them, and sacres their persons.

This happily may be granted for David, and such good Kings as he was, who
with the Sanctity of their Functions, received also Sanctity, into their
Persons: But is it so with bad Kings too? Are they found out by God, and
anointed by God? Yea, that they are; and this I shall show you first in
General; and secondly in some particulars.

First in General, Per me Reges regnant, By me Kings Reign; Per me, Ia. Iae.
Prove. 8.15.
By me; not per lumina, by the Position of the Stars; By Jupiter or Venus, or
some other good Planet in their Ascendent; Nor is it per se* By their own Bow
or Sword; Adonijahs regnabo sailed him: But it is, Per me, By me, and that is,
By God himself; In 13. al Romans
and therefore says St. Chrysostom, Reges quod sunt, per Deum sunt, Kings are
Kings by God; and it was once the usual style of Popes themselves, in writing
to Kings, to wish them health, In co per quem Reges regnant, In him by whom
Kings do Reign; and that was neither Saint, nor Angel, nor Pope, nor People,
but only God; A Deo, says St. Paul, The Powers that be are ordained of God:
Romans 13.
Per me, says Solomon, By God Kings Reign.

And this per here is not only Permissive^, by way of Toleration only, though
the Latin will bear such a construction, as Per me licet, you may if you will
for all me, I hinder you not: And so some Priests of the Latin Church, and
some Presbyters in the English Church: The Priest there, and the Presbyter here
is a solo Deo, et Jure Divine, by Divine Right, and of Gods constitution; But
the King is ex importunitate Populi; That there be Kings, and that Kings Reign,
it is upon the Peoples importunity, and God only bears them, or rather bears
with them: and so They make Per me Reges regnant permissive only, and at no
hand Positive; and yet the Apostle says expressly, Romans 13.2.
It was (...) the Ordinance of God himself: and so of Gods Institution.

Indeed however per in the Latin may bear it, yet (...) in the Greek cannot;
the Idiome of that Tongue rejects permission, and says clearly, Kings are of
Gods Ordination and Institution; By the Institution of his Power: so is the
Context, I have strength, By me Kings Reign, By the institution of his Will.
Prove. 8.14. 1 Pet. 2.13.15.
Haec est voluntas Dei, says St. Peter, This is the Will of God, that ye submit
your selves to the King, By the Institution of Gods good Will and Love; Because
God loved his People, 1 Chro. 2.11
says Hyram King of Tire, he has made thee King.

And this per me, is as well for Saul a bad King, as for David a good King; as
well for Cyrus an Heathen King, as for Solomon a Jewish King; as well for
Constantine a Christian King, as for any of the rest: and so for all other
Kings whether Jewish, Heathen, or Christian, Good or Bad. That in General.

Secondly in particular, Saul was as bad a King, as well could be, a Monster
rather then a Man; There were not many sins against God or Nature, wherein he
transgressed not, and yet his excess was not punished either by Sacerdotal
Synod, or by the secular Senate; either by an Assembly of Levites, or by an
Army of Soldiers; David for bad it twice in his life time, and revenged it
after his death, and for no other reason but this; Quia unctus Domini, quia
Christus Domini, Because he was the Lords anointed, Saul's unction was the
cause of his immunity, Quaero si Saulus non habebat Sacramenti sanctitatem,
Contr. Patil. l. 2. c. 48.
quid in eo David venerebatur says St. Augustine. If Saul had not the holiness
of unction, I wonder what it was, that David reverenced in him, David
reverenced Saul for his holy unction.

Saul a bad King was Gods anointed, though bad; and it is to let you know,
That anointing does not signify any spiritual grace or virtue; For then Saul
had not been King, and yet, when he was at the worst, he was still Gods
anointed.

Nor secondly does Unction signify Religion; For then Cyrus a mere Heathen had
not been King; yet King he was, and Gods anointed too. Isa. 45.1.


Unction or anointing then, signifying neither confirming in Religion, nor
conferring of any spiritual grace, it must and will s^grisie that Dominion and
Sovereignty, which God gives that man, whom He chooses out of the rest to be
King, whether he be good or bad, either in the beginning of a Royal Race, or in
the Succession of a a Royal Birth; And the Primogeniture of Sovereignty, (I
must tell you) is enough to prove one Gods anointed.

At first, God made Kings and his anointed immediately by himself: so Moses;
Then Mediatly by Men: so Joshua by Moses: so Saul and David by Samuel: and so
Solomon by David, and these were extraordinary ways: The ordinary ways are by
Succession or by the Sword, (For Elective Kings are rather Reguli then Reges,
Jud. 2 Reg. 24.1. Isa. 45.1.
and titular then real) Abimelech got it by the Sword: so did Nebucadnezzar:
and so did Cyrus, and still they were Gods anointed. But this we durst not say
to you, if Gods word did not say so to us. The surest was by Succession, or
Birthright, which belongs to the eldest Son; and thus Rehoboam succeeded
Solomon, etc. and they that so come to the Crown are Gods anointed: and
therefore may not be resisted, deposed, or murdered; which is my second part,
and thus proposed:

Whether such a Person as the King, and Gods anointed, Part: 2.
though bad, may be resisted, deposed, or murdered? I answer it, No; and thus
I undertake it.

And that you may clearly, and to the full, understand the truth of this; I
shall leave it to your choice, whether you will believe Papists and Puritans,
without the word of God, or the Primitive Fathers and Doctors, with the word of
God.

The Jesuits of Rome tell us, That Kings may be deposed by Popes; The Puritans
of Geneva tell us, That Kings may be deposed by the People; Both, in some
cases: and the spawn of both, the Independents, have done it de facto in
England, without any Case or Cause at all; will you hear them speak?

1. Say they of Rome, If the King be a Tyrant, i. e. If instead of protecting
the People, he destroy them: If instead of feeding the People, he fleece them:
If instead of enriching his Subjects, Bellar. de
he impoverish them: If instead of doing them Justice he be unjust unto them:
Let him be, as lawfully he may be, deposed.

Potest: Papae.
2. If the King usurp power in spiritual things, i. e. If he call himself
Defender of the Faith, or under Christ the Head of the Church; If he call a
Council without leave of his Holiness, the Bishop of Rome; If he shed the
blood of Priests by the Secular Power, and Civil Sword; If he alienate
Monasteries, Nunneries, and other Demeasus of the Church; Let him be, as
lawfully he may be, deposed.

3. If he be an Heretic, i.e. If he be not of the Romish Faith and Religion;
If he favor it not, If he promote it not, Lib. 5.
If he practice it not, If he persecute the Professors of it, If he enact and
execute Penal Laws against them; Let him be, as lawfully he may be, deposed.

4. If he be a Fool, (had I been the Cardinal, instead of Fatuity, I would have
said, If he be a Demoniack) i. e. If he be possessed with the Devil, or an evil
Spirit: if he have compacted with the Devil: If he be so sierce that no man may
speak unto him: If upon every, or any light occasion, he throw his Javeline to
nail men to the wall, Cap. 1.
and draw his Sword to cut their Throats; Let him be, as lawfully he may be,
deposed.

These are ruled cases in Rome, to legitimate, that spurious Doctrine of
King-deposing and King-killing, and all these made good by those hell-hatcht
Distinctions of Proprie, and Improprie, of Direct, of Simplciter and secundam
quid, of Absolute and in ordine ad spirituali^, by the Popes Absolute and
Relative Authority.

And the same Doctrine of Sedition, of Deposing, of Regicide and King-killing,
Loc. Com. Theol. Loc. 77. p. 845.
is as stiffly, but not so subtly maintained by the Puritans, else hear them
speak:

1. Subditis, si sit publica et manifesta savitia, licet fieri supplices
implorare anxilia ab alijs, et suscipere eorum defensionem aliis Regibus licet
says Bucanus: when Subjects suffer Public and manifest wrong, they may
lawfully become Suppliants unto Foreign Magistrates, and implore their aid
against their own Princes; and other Kings ought to take upon them their
Defense and Protection.

2. Si legibus Dei Magistratus transgrediantur etc. says Christopher Goodman;
If Magistrates transgress Gods Laws themselves, Tract. de obed. p. 119.
and commend others to do the like, they loose that honor and obedience, which
is otherwise due unto them, and ought no more to be taken for Magistrates, but
to be examined and punished as private transgressors.

3. Licuit, says Eusebius Philadelphus from Edengburgh, Dial 2. p. 57
It was as lawful for his Brethren of France, to defend themselves from the
Tyranny of Charles 9. King of France, as for wayfaringmen to resist and repel
Thieves, and Wolves; Nay, says he I am of opinion with the old people of Rome,
That of all good action, the Murder of a Tyrant is most commendable.

4. Oritur nobilis quaestie, says Danaeus, in his Christian Policy; Lib. 3. c.
6.
Here arises a noble question, Whether it be lawful for Subjects to change and
alter their Government? Yea, whether it may be done by godly men with a good
Conscience? Yes, says he, It may; and his Reason is this, Reges summique
Magistratus, Kings and chief Magistrates are the Vassails of the Kingdom and
Commonwealths where they Rule; and therefore may be dispossessed and dejected,
when they attempt any thing against the Fundamental Laws thereof; and as it is
truly said, A General Council is above the the Pope; so the Kingdom or Peers of
the Land are above the King.

5. Hunc tollent, vel Pacifice, vel cum bello, qui ea potestate dotati sunt, ut
Regni Ephori, vel omnium ordinum publicus conventus, commended by Cartwright,
the Presbiterian-founder in England; The Peers of the Kingdom, or the public
Convention of the States ought to destroy a Tyrant, Lib. 5. c. 13. page 1 85.
either by peaceable practices, or by open War, says Fennerus, in his Sacra
Theolog.

6. Jus humanum, Natural, Nationale, Positivum, Prt. 1. cap. 4. page 72.
says Doleman, All Laws, Humane, Natural, National, Positive, do teach, That
Common-weals, which gave Kings there Authority for the Common-good, may take the
same from them, if they abuse it to the common ill.

Thus you see the Kings of Christendom crucified, as Christ was between two
Thieves, the Papist, and the Puritan; All the difference is, The Papists give
this Power to the Pope; The Puritans give it to the People; and yet, in that,
rather then fail, they do sometimes agree; But,

I pray take notice, when this seditious Learning came in, It is but of
yesterdays standing; but 220 years old at most, by any Public Record: Then,
and not till then, did Joannis de Parissis bring it in for the Pope, and a
great while after did John Calvin bring it in for the people; and therefore
with your favor, we will look a little higher.

School-man of Rome Aquinas, by whom I dare encounter with either Papist or
Puritan, to justify almost every point of that Religion, wherein I have been
born and bred, and in which, God willing, I intend to dye; For the present,
This we have now in hand:

Kings, though bad, may not be resisted, deposed, or murdered; Esset enim
multitudini periculosum, et ejus rectoribus; For it would be as dangerous to
Subjects, as to Sovereigns, if any man should attempt to take away the life of
Princes, though Tyrants; For commonly not the well-disposed, De Regin. Princip.
l. 1. c. 6.
but the ill-affected men thrust themselves into that danger; the Government of
good Kings being as odious to bad men, as the Rule of Tyrants is to good
People; and the Kingdom by this presumption will be rather in danger to forgo a
good Prince then a wicked Tyrant; and his Answer to that Objection which was
even now delivered by the Scottish Eusebius Philadelphus, 2 a. 2 ae. 4.41. a.
2. ad. 3.
viz. That it is praise worthy to murder a Tyrant, is, Sedition is a mortal
sin.

Pope Paschalis had persuaded Robert the Son: Ep. Laodiensium apud simonem
scard. p. 116.
to Rebel against his Father Henry the Emperor, and had excommunicated the
Bishop of Liege or Lions for his Loyalty, All the Churchmen of Liege; All,
Nemine contradicente, none excepted, writ an Apolegy for themselves, the sum
whereof is this, We are excommunicated because we obey our Bishop; Our Bishop
is excommunicated, because he takes part with his Lord the Emperor; yet who
can justly blame him for taking his Lords part, to whom he has sworn
Allegiance? Perjury is a great sin, whereof they cannot be ignorant, who by new
Schism, and novel Tradition, do promise to absolve Subjects from the guilt of
Perjury, that forswear themselves to their Lord and King. And at last they
conclude thus, Nihil modo pro Imperatore nostro dicimus; At present we say
nothing in defense of our Emperor; but this we say though, Were he as bad as
you report him to be, we would endure his Government, because our sins have
deserved such a Governor; Be it we must needs grant against our will, That the
Emperor is an Arch-heretick, an Invader of the Kingdom, a worshipper of the
Symonaical Idol, and accursed by the Apostles and Apostolical men, as you say
of him, why yet, even such a Prince ought not to be resisted by violence, but
to be endured by patience.

Aquinas is against Rebellion for Tyranny, and a whole Church is against
Rebellion for Heresy.

John Damascene, Though wicked Kings, and their wicked Underofficers be
Thieves, Parallel. l. 1. cap. 21.
though they be unjust, or otherways tainted with any other crime; yet they
must be regarded, we may not contemn them for their impiety, but we must
reverence them for their Authority.

Rebellion, Deposing, Murdering of Kings, is not allowable in the case of
Tyranny, by the judgment of Aquinas, nor in the case of Heresy, by the
judgment of the Churchmen of Liege, nor in the case of Impiety, by the
judgment of Damascene.

Augustine is as positive against Rebellion in the case of Apostasy; Julianus
extitit Imperator infidelis; Julian was an unbelieving Emperor; for he was an
Apostate, for he was an Oppressor, for he was an Idolater; and yet Christian
Soldiers served this Emperor; Indeed when they came to the cause of Christ,
they would acknowledge no Lord, but him that was in Heaven; when they were
commanded to adore Idols, and to offer Sacrifice, In Ps. 124.
they preferred God before their Prince; But when he called upon them to War,
and bad them invade any Nation, they presently, as they ought, obeyed: They
distinguished their eternal Lord from their temporal King; yet they submitted
themselves to their temporal Lord for his sake who was their eternal King.

Apostle, says St. Chrysostom, to command us to pray for all men, and for
Kings by name; seeing Kings serve not the living God, In ep. 1 Timothy cap. 2.
ver. 1.
(as they did not in his time) but live in infidelity? Why surely, it is to
teach us, That Kings, though they be never so wicked, yet they may not be
resisted, less may they be deposed, least of all may they be Murdered.

Tyranny cannot justify Rebellion if Aquinas may be believed; Heresy cannot
justify Rebellion, if the Church of Liege may be credited; Impiety cannot, if
Damascene gains upon your Faith; Apostasy cannot, if St Austin speaks truth;
Obstinacy in all these cannot, if St. Chrysostom be a true man.

If Nazianzen have repute with you who for his admirable Learning and Piety,
was called, The Divine, and lived under five Emperors; four of them bad
enough, and the fifth no better then he should be, viz. Constantius, Julianus,
Valens, Valentinianus, and Theodosius. There is no remedy against the Tyranny,
Heresy, and Apostasy of Princes, but Prayers and Tears.

King be a Persecutor of the Church, yet may he not be resisted, deposed or
killed, either by Pope, by Peers, or People; if Hosius, who for his Age,
Experience excellent Learning, and holy conversation was admired and esteemed
by all men, may be believed; For thus he stoutly answered the wicked demand of
Constantius the Arian Emperor; Hosius apud Athan. ad solitary viventes.
Ego confessionis munus implevi, cum persecutio moveretur ab avo tuo
Maximiniano; I was then a Confessor, when your Grandfather Maximinian
persecuted the Church; and if you now raise a Persecution, I am ready to endure
any thing, rather then to betray the Truth; I know that whosoever with an
envious eye maligneth your Imperial Majesty, ctntemneth the Ordinance of God;
yet I may and do beseech you, Take heed of the Arian Heresy.

No, neither these, nor any thing else, if Justin Martyr, Appol. ad Anton. page
113. Tert. ad Scap. Cypr. contr. Demetr.
Tertullian and Cyprian may have credit given them, can justify Rebellion; For
they all jumpt in this; That the Majesty of Kings and Emperors is ordained of
God: and therefore their Government not to be reviled; much less by force and
violence may they be resisted, deposed, or murdered.

And now, Beloved, choose you whom you will believe, these Grandees and Fathers
of the Church, these Martyrs and Saints of God; or those Punies, the Jesuit of
Rome, with the Presbyterian and Independent of England: Or if you will have the
word of God carry it from all parties, why then in a word take it thus?

1. Saul was a Tyrant in David's judgment, if those two Psalms were penned in
respect of Saul, as most Commentators are of opinion; In the one it is said,
Ps. 54.3.
Tyrants that have not God before: heir eyes seek after my Soul. In the other,
Under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge, Ps. 57.1.
until this Tyranny be overpast.

2. Saul was an Usurper, and that upon the Priests Office, and in the highest
part of his Office too, in the judgment of Samuel; 1 Samuel 13.19.
For he offered burnt-offerings upon the Altar.

3. Saul was a Persecutor, and shedder of blood; 1 Samuel 22.18.
For he slew the High Priest, and 84 inferior Priests upon one day.

4. Saul was a Demoniack, 1 Samuel 28.8
, and possessed with a Devil.

5. Saul was a Necromancer and consulted with Witches; and yet for all that
says David to Abisai, 1 Samuel 26.9
Ne perdas, Destroy him not; and to the Amalekite in my Text, who thought he
had done God some service, and David a great courtesy, in belying himself to
be a Regicide, and a spiller of Saul's blood, Quommodo non timuisti, How wast
thou not afraid to put forth thy hand to destroy the Anointed of the Lord?

But this is Old Testament, and not worthy credit with an Army of Saints; Take
it therefore from the New too, from true Saints. Nero was a Tyrant, a
Persecutor, a Murderer, and as bad as you can imagine him; and yet for all
that says St. Paul once, Let Prayers be made for him; and again, Let every soul
be subject to him; 1 Timothy 2.1. Romans 13.1.
For he was the Power St. Paul then spoke of.

Domitian was a Tyrant, a persecutor: a Murderer, a Blasphemer, and almost as
bad as Nero; and yet says St. Peter, Be ye subject unto him; 1 Pet. 2.15.
For he was the Supreme St. Peter there intended.

And if for a Nero St. Paul had his prayers and subjection, If for a Domitian
St. Peter had his Obedience, If for a Saul David had his Ne perdas, while he
lived, and his Quomodo non temuisti, when he was dead; O God! what would that
Prophet and these Apostles, and all the Primitive Fathers have said, if they
had lived now? Now, wherein a King, and such a King as was Anointed, and
Anointed by God, with Oil, with his Oil, with his holy Oil, as well in his
Person, as in his Function, and ^^at above his Fellows too, (for what Age can
parrallel him for his Virtues, for his Graces?) was first resisted, then
imprisoned, then deposed, then condemned, then murdered; And yet who knows for
what?

For with what Vices has the world branded his repute? Did ever his high Diet,
his strength of Body, his Sovereign power, warpe him to any luxurious vanity?
Had he ever any Attorney to his Royal lust? No, he remains a President, and so
will till Domes-day of unblemisht chastity; and therein out-vied those two
great Favorites of God, David and Solomon.

Had he ever any Cateror or Bottleman to pomper up his wanton Palate, with
choice Wine, and curious Viands? No, he remains a Pattern, and so will till
Doomes-day, of Temperance and sobriety; and therein equalled Samuel.

Had he ever any Zany to magnify his Mercy, or to sell his Justice, to reward
a Service or to pardon an offense? No, he remains the example, and so will till
Doomes-day, of Inexorable Justice, and of Admirable Mercy; and therein he
exceeded Ely.

But something there was, and for ought I can yet find, This it was; King
Charles was like to Jesus Christ: so like to him, that I can find but this
difference betwixt them; Jesus was Christus Dominus, the Lord Christ; and
Charles was Christus Domini, the Lords Christ.; both in his Graces, and in his
Crosses.

1. For his Graces, look upon him in his Patience; therein he exceed Job; For
he never cursed the day of his Birth, or desired the day of his Death;
Notwithstanding the Winnow he under went by Satan, and his Instruments;
notwithstanding all the Indignities and Affronts were offered him by his
vassalls; In all which he comes only short of Christ; and yet as Christ the
King was led like a Lamb to the slaughter and opened not his mouth, but only in
the behalf of his Disciples, saying, If ye seek me, let these go their way:
Joh. 18.8.
so King Charles offended not in his Lips by any impatient expression; and
when the Blood-thirsters urged him to deliver up his Friends into their hands;
No, says he, here am I, pray let my friends live in peace and safety.

2. Look upon him in his Content, and therein he vies with St. Paul; Philip.
In omne condition, In every condition; and only comes short of Christ; Mat.
8.20.
and yet as Christ said, The Foxes have holes and the Birds of the Air have
nests, but I have not where to lay mine head: so said King Charles to his loyal
followers, Gentlemen, go you and take your rest; for you have houses and homes
to go to, and Beds of your own to lodge in; but I am deprived of these
comforts, I must intend my present affairs, and return this night from whence I
came; And this he said at Wrexam, in Denbighshire, when he had traveled
thither from Shrewsbury: And to assure you, this was no complement, look upon
the Text, as you have it in the 14. chapter of King St. Charles, (...)
at the first verse, O God, make me content to be overcome, when thou will have
it so.

3. Look upon his wisdom, and therein he comes near Solomon, yet as it is said
of one greater then Solomon; The Wisdom of God dwelt in him bodily; so when the
Treaters were last with King Charles, it was confessed by some Lords and many
Divines, That such illustrious wisdom, as King Charles was Owner of, could
claim little or no Birth from Flesh and Blood; yes, before that, Mr. Hynderson
himself declared him to be, A most pious and learned Prince; yes, and Mr.
Caryll confessed, That he found King Charles another Selomon.

4. Look upon him in his Mercy, and therein he out-strips that King that
forgave his servant 10000 talents; Mat. 18.27. Luke 23.34.
and only comes short of Christ; and yet as Christ said, Father forgive them:
so said King Charles, I do freely pardon for Christ's sake those that have
offended me in any kind, nor shall my hand ever be against any man, to revenge
what is past, in regard of any particular done to me. And this in his Solitudes
he said at Holmeby as you may read in the 41 verse, of his Penitentialls.

I could go on, but expede Herculem, and by these Four; His Patience, His
Content, His Wisdom, and His Mercy, you may see King Charles was Christus
Domini, and very near a Kin to Christus Dominus, in the Unction of his Graces,
and so you may again in the Unction of his Crosses.

1. Look upon him in the Cross of Conspiracy, Men of several minds and
manners, of diverse Sects and Factions, Sadduces and Pharisees, at deadly Feud
between themselves, yet bandy together against Christ; so was King Charles
assaulted by men of several Opinions, Anabaptists and Antinomians,
Presbyterians and Independents, at Daggers drawing between themselves, do yet
combine in their oppositions against him; and all the difference was this, The
one brought him to the Block, and the other chopped off his head.

2. Look upon him in the Cross of his ignomity; The Devil is in him, Why hear
ye him? said the Sanhedrin of Christ, Joh, 10.20.7.48.
I dare not repeat what our Pharisees have said of King Charles; and yet I dare
not but repeat on speech of theirs, Do any of the Worthies of Parliament
believe him, or give any respect to any things that proceeds from him?

3. Look upon him in the Cross of Cruelty and Malice, As Christ was belyed and
betrayed, bought and buffeted by his own, scorned and derided in his very
Devotions, and numbered amongst the greatest Transgressors; and for fear he
should make an escape, had an Ordinance, put out by the Great Council,
requiring, If any man knew where he was, he should discover him: John. 11.57.
So was King Charles betrayed by his servants, bought and sold by his Subjects,
belyed by his Enemies, denied by his Friends, and least he should make an
escape, Look upon the Order of Monday, May 4. 1646 where it is said, Ordered be
it, and it is hereby declared, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, That what Person soever shall harbor or conceal, or know of
harboring or concealing the Kings Person, and shall not reveal it immediately
to the Speaker of both Houses, shall be proceeded against as a Traitor to the
Commonwealth, and forfeit his whole Estate, and dye without Mercy.

4. Look upon him in the Cross of his Accusers, accusation and Judge.

1. His Accusers, many false Witnesses; many false Witnesses sought against
Christ: Mat. 27.
and many false Witnesses sought against King Charles.

2. His Judge a Heathen Deputy President, for the true and sworn Judges of that
Kingdom durst not condemn him: so because the sworn Judges of this Kingdom
durst not, and by Law could not, therefore Legi-serviens is made his Judge, and
made to condemn him.

3. Because the Evidence of witnesses gave no ground to Pilate to condemn
Christ; the Soldiers cry out, He makes himself a King, Joh. 19.12.
and therefore is not Caesar's friend; and his very Accusatition over his Head
upon the Cross is no more but this, J. N.R.J. and just so is King Charles
served, because he was a King, and would maintain Monarchy, he is no friend to
the Parliament, and His Accusation can bear no Title but this, C. A. R. O. was
put to death January 30. 1648. for no other cause but because he was the best
King England ever had; and so like to Jesus Christ, in the Unction both of his
Graces and also of his Crosses.

And to make them yet more parallel as God would have it, the very pretense of
their enemies is the very same; In salutem populi, Joh. 11.47.
The fafety of the people, Better one man die, thou all the people perish, said
Caiphas of Christ; so, that the Commonwealth of England might be preserved,
let Charles the King of England be condemned, said Mr. John Bradshaw; and it is
a fine way I confess, to preserve the Body by cutting off the Head.

So like to Christ was King Charles, and now very near to Christ is King
Charles, even at his right hand; where that we may also be, God of his infinite
mercy pardon all our sins past, and keep us from all sin to come, and
especially from this sin, which is so fearful a sin, Rebelling against,
Deposing and Murdering of Gods Anointed, thorough Jesus Christ, Amen.

And how fearful a sin that is, Part. 3.
my third and last part will tell you in a word. 1. It is Murder, and that is
a fearful sin; For it is not only Peccatum quia prohibitum, which is bad
enough, but it is Prohibitum quia peccatum, which is a great deal worse; It is
not sin only because it is forbidden; but is therefore forbidden because it is
sin. And yet 2. It is far worse in this case, because it is in conjunction with
Sacrilege and Rebellion; and so in direct opposition against Almighty God
himself.

David's nolit^ tangere Christos men's, Touch not mine annoinetd, Touch not my
Christ's, proves it Sacrilege; St. Paul's Qui obsistit, whosoever resists the
King, Romans 13.2.
resists the Ordinance of God* proves it Rebellion: And whether of these two,
Sacrilege or Rebellion be the sin against the Holy Ghost, has been
controverted by some Divines; but that both concurring are, if not the sin
against the Holy Ghost, an unpardonable sin, has been determined by many
Divines; and this Demonstration I offer for it.

The Antecedent to the sin unpardonable is Knowledge: Ignorant men cannot
commit it; The subsequent to that sin is Irrepentance; The Penitent men have
not committed it: And both these Knowledge and Irrepentance, are in Sacrilege
and Robellion; Knowledge goes before to teach, Irrepentance follows after to
sinpify; Knowledge shows the sweet of Rule in Rebellion, and the sweet of
Profit in Sacrilege: The sweet of profit begot^ Delight. and nurses it to
Presumption; The sweet of Rule conceives Fear, and nurses it to Despair; each
of which finds Irrepentance upon the bed of Death.

For the truth of this, view all Records, Sacred and Profane, read all
Histories, Canonical, Apocriphal, and Ecclesiastical; and see if you can find
one, but one either Sacrilegis or Rebel, that ever died in an outward
possibility of Salvation.

What sign, what Symptom of Repentance in Cain the first, in Saul a Second, in
Jeroboam a third, in Ananias a fourth sacrilegious person? In Corah the first,
in Absolon a second, in Sheba a third, in Bigthan a fourth Rebellious person?
It is much feared they all went from the sweet of Sin to the smart of Pain,
from the Darkness of Sin to the Darkness of Hell.

I speak of Principals, 2 Samuel
not of Accessaries, many of them go in the simplicity of their Hearts; and for
them I pray with my Savior, Father forgive them: Luke 23.34.
but for the rest, They that commit these sins wittingly, wilfully,
maliciously, to them, I sear, belongs the Epilogue of Rebels, Damnation
because their Prologue was Resisting the higher powers, which is a wilful
Perjury in the breach of their Allegiance; if St Paul speak Scripture when he
said, Romans 13.2.
(...), They that resist the higger powers, shall receive to themselves
damnation: They may fear it, and let them pray, Acts 8.22.
whom it concerns, and Repent, if perhaps God may forgive them: And for our
selves, though we are not maliciously concerned in this sin, yet because we are
cowardly concerned in this sin, I pray,

God Almighty deliver us from the punishment of it, Pestilence, Famine and
Sword, in this world, and from damnation in the world to come, and assure us
thereof, by an holy conformity of our lives to his Law, all our days, and by
an holy perseverance in our obedience to himself, and to his Anointed, King
Charles the Second, whom God restore unto, and establish in his Fathers Throne,
brough Jesus Christ; Amen, Amen, Amen.

January 30. 1649.
ACTS 3.15. The Prince of Life whom ye killed,
BUt that I know, and am sensible of the occasion, I would read the following
words; whom God raised from the dead: and then I should tell you; This Text
were Janus like, and looks two ways, Uisione reflexa, backwards upon
Good-Fryday last; Visione recta, forwards upon Easter Day, next.

As it looks backward, it speaks nothing but Passion; Ye have killed the Prince
of Life, and makes the Sermon Funeral.

As it looks forward, it speaks nothing but Resurrection, Whom God has raised
from the dead, and makes the Sermon Nuptial.

But alas, I am only for the Passive part of this verse, and look upon these
words positively and personally, as they intend April 4. 1649, years since, and
Jesus Christ the Prince of Life whom ye then killed: and I look upon these
words again Relatively and yet personally again, as they relate to January 30.
1648: and King Charles, a Prince of life whom ye killed.

Well, Look upon the words either ways, either Literally and possitively, or
Relatively and personally, They will require Tears, Tears being commonly the
Followers, if not the Friends of Funerals; and whatsoever the Followers do,
the Friends will weep; And indeed, whether to speak or weep my time out, upon
this Text, I could willingly question, since we in it commemorate the Exequie^
both of Jesus Christ, and one very like him, as ye heard the last year, King
Charles of Great Britain and Ireland the first; And can we follow these to the
Grave without a Tear.

It was done upon Good-Fryday personally, on Christ, 1649. years since; the
first Good-Fryday that ever was, and that day the streets below were hung with
Blacks, and the Heavens above with blackness: For no Sun was seen in Jury, for
three hours; but only the Sun of Righteousness, whom the Darkness comprehended
not.

That day, both the Heaven above, and the Earth beneath were astonished, if not
ashamed, at the Apprehension, condemnation and execution of Jesus Christ; And
shall not we follow the Son of Man, Nay, the Son of God to the grave with a
Tear.

The Poet pointed out the Spectacle of sorrow, when he said, Hinc ille
Lachrymae, and wept, when it may be he aimed at the Tomb, certainly at the
Tormentor.

But now that Spectacle of sorrow may question, Unde haec lachrymarum
indigentia, whence proceeds this want of Sorrow, whence this Dryness?

Is it from Obedience to that command, Weep not for me; but then why do we not
weep for our selves? Is it not rather from the hardness of our hearts, which
dams up the moisture of our eyes?

Can you see a King killed, and not Weep? Why behold, Princeps trucidatus, The
King is killed.

Can you see a Good King killed, and not weep? Why behold Princeps vitae
trucidatus, The Prince, the King of life is killed, That King, that Prince of
life, of whom we said, Under his shade we should live in peace, he is killed.

Can you see that Good King, that Prince of Life whom your selves have killed,
and not weep? Why behold, Interemistis trucidastis vos, Ye have killed the
Prince of Life.

And upon these three parts I shall spin my Discourse.

Division, 1. Quid, What was done; Killing. 2. Quis, Who was Killed? Princeps
vitae, the Prince of life. 3. Qui, Who killed him? Vos, ye, you and myself.


I begin with the first, Quid, What was done upon April 4. Good Friday, An.
primo salutis nostrae, In the first year of our redemption? Killing; upon Jan.
30. Anno 1648. salutis nostrae, In the thousand, six hundred, forty and eight
year of our Redemption? Killing.

1. Had it been only Passus est, He suffered; It had been an hard word; For it
is an hard thing to suffer; especially for great Persons such as Christ was,
and all Kings are; If great Persons do great things, it is no wonder; Their
very Genius does naturally incline them to it; But to suffer, yes any small
thing, for them is more, then to do many great things: Doing is good, if it be
well doing; but suffering is hard, though we suffer well for well doing; yea,
though doing be sometimes hard labor; yet suffering is harder of the twain,
yet Christ suffered: so in the Creed he suffered under Pontius Pilate: So in
St. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.21.
Christ suffered for us.

2. Had it been Mortuus est, He Died, It had been harder; Add shame to Death,
and then it is harder yet; For as I take it, shame and Death are the hardest
things that can be suffered; nothing so precious to us as our Life, unless it
be our Reputation: and nothing therefore so hard to suffer as the loss of both
these, Life and Reputation.

But Christ suffered both, Death and shame both; The Cross cost him his Life;
and the shame of the Cross bereft him of his Honor, viz. with the Jews: He
put his Shoulders to the Cross, and endured it to the loss of his life; Hebr.
12.2
He set his Feet upon the shame, and despised it to the loss of his Honor.

Of the Philosophers (...), five terribles, Death is the most terrible; and
what Christian, be he as strong as a man, or weak as a women; what will not He
or she suffer, in Physic or Surgery, in Purging, Vomiting, Cutting or
Cauterizing, so that they may not suffer Death.

But Death, many a man may suffer, and desire it too; Simeon did; Luke 2.29.
Domine nunc dimittis, Lord now let thou thy servant depart; Philip. 1.
so did St. Paul, Cupio dissolvi, I desire to be dissolved.

But yet did ever any man desire to be hanged? I do not think Judas senior did,
who betrayed his Master, nor Judas junior neither, who condemned his Sovereign:
True, They both hanged themselves; but for all that, I do not believe, that
either of them desired to be hanged.

If I must die, let me die any Death, rather then a shameful, then an accursed
Death? and yet the Apostle doubles that word upon Christ, Philip. 2.8
Christ suffered death, mortem autem crucis, yea, the death of the cross, i.
e. He suffered the most shameful and accursed of all deaths.

For as all Life's are not equally comfortable; so all Deaths are not equally
miserable: the Cottage is not like the Palace for life; nor is the Water like
the Halter for Death.

The Jews had four kinds of Death, for Malefactors, Sword, Fire, Stone, and
Towel; the Towel was the easiest; yet there was Dolor, Pain in that: the Sword
was next, yet there was sanguis Blood in that; Fire was worse then the Sword;
for there was scandalum, shame in that; Stoning was worse then all three, yet
there was not maledictum a curse in that; but crucifying was worse then all
Four: Colos. 1.14. Act. 2.24. Gal. 5.11. Gal. 3.13.
for it was Bloody, and therefore called the Blood of the Cross; For it was
painful, and therefore called the Pain of the Cross: For it was shameful, and
therefore called the shame of the Cross; For it was cursed, and therefore
called the curse of the Cross.

To dye by Age, no man is against; It is a Natural Death; a Debt we owe to
Nature; to die by War, no Soldier is against; It is an honorable Death; so
that they die pro Rege, et Lege, for their King and Country; but if against
their King, it is Rebellion and damnable; to die for Religion, no good
Christian is against; It is a glorioas Death, the Death of Martyrs; But to dye
the Death of the Cross, violently, untimely, penally, cursedly; Oh, this goes
against the hair, It strikes to the heart, This,

Cursed it was, That is without all question: Cursed is every one that hangs
on a Tree, Deuteronomy. 21.23 Galat.
says St. Paul by way of Transcript from Moses's Original.

Untimely it was: For he was now in the prime of his Age, about thirty three
years old, not more by any ones account that I remember: His Body most Active
now, and now his Soul most contemplative, both most vigorous.

Violent it was; For they nailed him, and stabbed him, spikt His Hands and Feet,
that he might neither show a nimble pair of heels, nor a valiant pair of Hands;
and last of all they pierced him through the Heart, the very Fountain of Life,
least peradventure he might have recovered after three hours crucifixion.

Painful it was: For it is a pain to prick a Vein, a greater pain to boar the
Hand and pierce the Heart; yes, a cruel pain it was, the cruellest of pains;
and thence as I take it, are Dolores acermi called cruciatus.

A pain it was, when He bled in Gabbatha, where they scourged him with Rods,
and Crowned him with Thorns: more painful it was in Golgotha, where they
printed his Hands and Feet with Nails and Spikes, and peirced his Heart through
with a Spear; and the more long, the more painful; It is some ease if Gravis be
Brevis: but if it be Acuta too, Oh, then it is painful indeed!

Add but to this, the Blood he lost in Gethsemane, the Blood of his Soul; and
without all question, you will confess, that if this Text had run but in
mortuus est, He dyed, It had been hard enough.

But Death may still be suffered, a painful and shameful Death may; but when
cruelty and malice are joined to the shame and Pain; Oh, then it is hard
indeed; Indeed hard it is to say, whether cruelty or shame have the upper hand.
Saul chose rather to fall upon his own Sword, 1 Samuel 31.4
then to die shamefully by the han's of the Philistines.

Well, but what shame did Christ suffer? or rather, what shame did he not
suffer?

He suffered first the shame of the whip, which was a punishment only for
Slaves and Bondmen then, amongst the Romans, and for Vagrants, and Wanderers
now amongst the English: so it was once answered by a Freeman, when he was
threatened with a whip; Loris, says he, Liber sum, Whip me? Do if you dare; I
am a Freeman; Acts 16.37.
and St. Paul himself intimates so much saying, After they have beaten us
openly, uncondemned, being Romans, they have cast us into prison, and now would
they put us out privily; and more expressly afterward, Acts 22.25.
Is it lawful for you to scourge one that is a Roman and not condemned?

He suffered secondly the shame of contempt, and disgraceful usage; Herod's
white Sheet, ct Pilates blew Livery, were put upon him: so St. Luke and St.
John describe his Apparel. Herod with his men of war despised Jesus, and
mocked him, and arrayed him in white, Luke 23.11.
says St. Luke; And the Soldiers, (Pilats Soldiers) platted a Crown of
Thorns, and put it on his Head, and they put on him a purple garment, says St.
John: And then they hood-winkt him, John 19.2.
played at blind-man-buff with him, pulled him by the hair, and spet in his Face.

He suffered thirdly the shame of despite and malice; In the depth of his
distress, they would not afford him a dragm of compassion; but railed,
reviled, scoft, scorned and derided him in his very prayers; and in his extreme
thirst, denied him that which was never denied to any but the damned in Hell;
John 19.36.
A drop of Water, and instead thereof offered him a Sponge dipped in Vinegar.

He suffered fourthly the shame of shames; For to make the world believe, His
Death was an Act of Justice, they add the Solemn formality of a new erected,
and never before heard of Court of pretended High Justice; For they knew too
well, That no Legal Court of true Justice could take away his Life.

In a word, Had it been Occidistis, You have killed him, though by
Assasination, It had not been so much; because that Act would have workt all
honest men to pity his condition; but it (...), Trucidastis, you have
impetuously, without any judicial proceeding, but that of pretense and
formality, and cruelly, without any Relenting and Compassion, saving that of
Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, killed him, i. e. in plain English murdered him:
and if you will believe Mr. Beza, and in this you may believe him, though he
was Dr. of the Chair at Geneva; Trucidare is more then Occidere; For Occidere
is but to Kill: It implies neither shame nor cruelty; but trucidare is guilty
of both. And therefore the Poet expressing the shame, and cruelty, and
subtlety, and malice, and Revenge to boot, which the Greeks used toward the
Trojans, gave it by this very word, saying.

Fit via vi rumpunt aditus, Aeneid.
primosque trucidant. By this time I believe your Intellectuals are weary of so
sad a Theme, and rueful Discourse; I shall now speak a word to your Affections,
If it prove sad there too, you may not think much of it, since it was upon the
Prince of Life, which is my second Consideration, In

Quis, Who was killed? (...), The Prince, Pars. 2.
the Author of Life.

1. The Author of Life, who gave life to us. 2. The Prince of Life, who
preserves life in us; Corporis anime, et utrinsque, tam conjunctim, quam
seperatim; The Prince and Author of all our Animal Life: For by him were all
things made, and without him was not any thing made that was made, John 1.1.
Acts 17.
says St. John; For in him we live, we move, and have our being says, St. Paul.

The Author and Prince of our spiritual life; I live now, says, St. Paul, Gal.
2.20.
yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and that I now live in the flesh, I live
by Faith in the Son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me; and so
he speaks of us as well as of himself, Ephesians. 2.1.
saying, You who were dead in sins, has he quickened together, in Christ, by
whose grace ye are saved.

The Prince and Author of our eternal life, and that three ways:

1. By Preordination, Ephesians. 1.5.2.6.
He has decreed it to us from all eternity, He has predestined us to be
adopted through Jesus Christ to sit together in heavenly places. 2. By Purchase,
He has bought it for us, and us to it, by the price of his blood; 1 Cor. 6.20.
Ye are bought with a price, says St. Paul, and so bought, and with such a
price, as neither Man, nor Angel did administer any help in the Satisfaction;
Torcular calcavi solus, says the Prophet Isaiah in the Person of Christ; Isa.
63.2.
I have trodden the Wine Press of my Fathers wrath alone, and of all the
people there was not one with me; and so bought, and with such a price, that
neither man nor Devil, can hinder us from the fruition of it; Nec sublimitas,
nec profunditas, says St. Paul, Neither height, nor depth, nor life, nor death,
nor sword, nor peril, nor any other thing, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God in Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 8.39.
For, 3. He is the Author and Prince of our Eternal life by Donation, were it
put upon our Desert and Merit, we might not only doubt of it, but utterly
despair of it; For all our works, whether of Obedience, or Patience come
infinitely short of it; and therefore said one Father, Etiamsi millies
servirem, Though I could and should serve God unreproveably a thousand years,
yet should I not thereby deserve to be one half hour in Heaven; and therefore
said another Father, Etiamsi millies paterer, Though I could and should
patiently suffer all the pains of Hell for ten thousand years, yet should I not
thereby deserve to be one minute in Heaven; But being that Heaven and eternal
Life is Gods gift, we may rest assured that no thing, Man nor Devil, is able to
take it out of his hands, and therefore we shall have it.
But oh! for Tantus, so great an Essence, so good an Essence, as the Prince of
Life, of our corporal Life, of our spiritual Life, of our Eternal Life, should
be made Tantillus, so little a thing as never was less; Agnus, a Lamb, Jer.
11.19. Psalm.
as the Prophet Jeremy calls him, pitifully slaughtered; Vermis, a Worm, as
King David calls him, spitefully trod upon; me thinks is able to melt Stones
into Tears, and Hearts of Rock into Hearts of Flesh.

To see a Lamb lie pitifully bleeding, it is a pitiful spectacle; To see a
Worm scornfully trod upon, is a sorrowful sight: But Lambs were made to be
slaughtered, and Worms to be trampled on.

Be it so; But yet for a Man to be made a Worm, and no man; for a Lion to be
made a Lamb, and no Lion; and that without any demerit of his own: To see an
Innocent and a Noble person suffer; to see a great and a gracious King to be
trucidated; to see God, the Prince and Author of our Life to be killed;
certainly it is a heavy, a very heavy spectacle, and enough to make our Bowels
yearn.

The Sun was ashamed of it, and therefore withdrew his light; the Temple was
afeard of it, and therefore rent it self in twain; the Farth trembled at it,
and therefore fell into an Ague; And shall not we be moved at it? to them it
appertained not; For he came not to Redeem Sun, Temple or Earth, but to Us it
does; For he was killed for us, Justus pro injustis, He for us; The Righteous
for the Unrighteous; and he by Us, Justus ab Injustis, The Righteous was killed
by the Unrighteous; which is my third consideration.

Qui, Pars. 3.
Who killed him? Vos, Ye. If you charge his death upon Judas, the Traitor, who
sold him for thirty pence, or upon Caiphas, the High Priest, who accused him of
Envy; or upon Pilate the Lord president, who condemned him of cowardice, and
against his conscience, you take your aim amiss; We wretched sinners, that we
are, were the principal; They but the Accessory and Instrumental Killers of
Christ; The Executioner does not Kill the Man, He does but execute the
Sentence; The Judge does not Kill the Man, He does but pronounce the Sentence;
No, Solum peccatum est homicida, only sin is the Murderer: so then, the true
Construction of this Text, is this; You have killed the Prince of Life, i.e.
Our sins, or we by our sins have killed the Prince of Life.

And upon the thought of this, Can we do less then weep? Can we see the Sun
ashamed, and cover his Face, and our selves not blush? Can we see the Temple
rent in two, and we not rend our Hearts? Can we see the Earth quake, and our
selves not tremble? Can we see Christ pati, suffer for us, and we not compati,
suffer with him, and if need be for him too?

Can we see his soul heavy to the death, and hear him complain of it too, Mark
14.
My soul is exceeding heavy, even to the death, and our souls be light with,
and delight in sin?

Can we see Christ Trucidatus, killed at, and transfixus, peirced through the
Heart, and we not be compunctus, pricked at the Heart?

Can we see the Jews spet upon his Face, that did when he pleased outshine
the Sun, and we not wash our Face With Tears.

Can we see them buffet him on his Face, and we not smite our Breasts, and cry
out, God be merciful unto us miserable sinners?

Can we see his Head Crowned with Thorns? Crowned to deride him! Crowned with
Thorns to torment him, and we not cover our Heads with Ashes?

Can we think upon Revenge to them, that offer us Indignities, and yet will we
not be Revenged upon our sins, which offered Christ so many Indignities?

If this Text works less with us, we gain no more benefit by this Text, then
they did by the brazen Serpent, who never looked upon it; but I hope, it has
workt no less; and if so much, why then, Behold, Sampsons Riddle is again
unfolded: And as out of his strong came sweet, and ont of his Eater came Meat:
Judic.
so out of Christ's Cross, upon which he was killed, comes this comfort to us,
that we shall live; For if you ask, Why God gave his Son? St. John tells you,
It was, That whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life; If you ask, John 3.16.
Why Christ came into the world? He tells you himself, It was to seek and save
us that were lost; If you ask, Why Christ was killed upon the Cross? I can
tell you, and I tell you truth in it, It was that his Hands might be stretched,
to embra^e and receive us into Heaven.

For the Cross by virtue of Christ upon it, Rev.
is become Clavis Caeli, The Key of David, which shuts, and no man opens, which
opens, and no man shuts, Ps.
which opens the everlasting door of Heaven that we may go in to the Prince of
Life, to the King of Glory.

For the Cross by virtue of Christ upon it, is become Baculus Jacobi, Jacob's
Staff; and by the help of it, we may safely pass over the Jordan of this
world into the Land of Canaan. Genesis 32.10.


For the Cross by virtue of Christ upon it, is Virga Moysi, the Rod of Moses;
and with it we shall pass through the Red Sea of this world into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Exodus 14.16.


For the Cross by virtue of Christ upon it, is become Lignum or Arbor Moysi,
Exodus 15.16.
he Tree of Moses, and with it we shall make all the bitter waters of this
world sweet to our tastes, pleasant to our smells, and comfortable to our souls;
Nullus cibus tam amarus, qui, si recordatione aceti et fellis Christi
temperetur, non statim fit dulcior, says St. Barnard; No water so bitter, which
his Cross cannot sweeten: No meat so unsavory, which his Gall and Vinegar
upon the Cross will not make rellishable. Nihil tam durum, says St. Gregory,
Nothing so hard, so heavy, which his Cross will not make easy; especially if
we apply to our selves the Apostles inference, Tim.
If we suffer with him (yes or for him) we shall also Reign with him.

For the Cross by virtue of Christ upon it, is become Citharae Dabidis, David's
Harp, and by touching the strings of it, we shall lay all those evil Spirits,
1 Samuel 16.23.
which molest and trouble our Hearts.

For the Cross by virtue of Christ upon it, is become Gladius Dabidis, David's
Sword, and by the use of it, we shall slay the Goliath of Hell, 1 Samuel 17.51.
and vanquish all the Philistines of Tentations.

For the Cross by virtue of Christ upon it, is become Clypeus Jehosuae,
Josuahs Shield, with which if we guard our selves, we shall batter the walls of
Jericho, and put to flight all the Armies of the Flesh, Jos.
the World, and the Devil.

For tell me, tell me, O my Soul! whether if thou think upon that Vinegar
and Gall, which Christ tasted at his death, it will not allay and quench the
fire of thy hottest Lusts.

Tell me, tell me, O my Soul! whether if thou think upon Christ's Pater
remitte on the Cross, Father forgive them, it will not fright thee from
Revenge, and work thee into Charity? Did Christ forgive them who killed him,
and will thou be revenged upon them who do but displease thee? God forbid.

Tell me, tell me, O my Soul! whether if thou think upon that Spear, with
which Longinus (so we have received his name) stabbed Christ to death, thou will
not fear to swear another Oath? For thy Oaths stab him deeper then that Spear
could.

Tell me, tell me O my Soul! whether if thou think upon Christ's great and
incomparable meekness, all the while he was killing, that when he was reviled,
he reviled not again, when he was slaughtered, he threatened not: thou dare
for those petite Injuries, which thou supposest are unjustly offered thee, and
maliciously laid upon thee, swerve to Impatience?

No, I am confident, thou will not sin again, if thou but remembrest Christ was
killed for thy sins: or if thou do, I shall be sorry.

Neither will thou despair of Gods mercy, if thou remembrest, That as he was
killed to expiate thy sins, so he was raised again to justify thy Person.

But I read not that for any part of my Text, nor shall I now make it any part
of my Sermon; my Sermon ends with the 30 day of January, the day wherein King
Charles was killed and murdered by you, by you and us, and all of us; For if
all of you had not an hand in the Actual murdering of him, yet you are all
guilty of his murder, if all the Fathers and Schoolmen are right in their
Expositions of Guilt, and how we may stand guilty of sin; They number nine
ways, and every one is very naught. I shall name them, and when we confess
our selves guilty of any one way of the nine, God have mercy upon us.

The first is not to hinder it, when thou can; means thou make thy self
second in the sin, and give it the helP of thy hand, because thou did not
hinder it with thy hand: And was it not in our power to hinder the Kings
murder? Had we not six hands to two? Were we not three to one thorowout all
the Kingdom? Well, God have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to redeem
this Law, by bringing home King Charles II. and settle him in his Fathers
Throne, King Charles I. that was murdered.

Not to reprove it. when we should; For by this means we make our tongues
Advocates for it, and give it License by our Silence, And where was one of us,
or if one, by name Dr. Gauden, who did reprove it, in tempore opportuno? Well,
God have mercy upon us, and open our mouths to pray for restoring King Charles
II. and may God and the King forgive us all for not reproving them who
murdered K. Charles I.

to Council sin; For by this means, we become a Mother to it, and give it Womb
by conceiving it in another; And for this let them look to it, who framed
Petitions, and caught the giddy multitude to cry for Justice, until King
Charles I. was most unjustly murdered: and if there were such a one who told
Oliver Crumwel, That he stooped to low in creeping too, and supplicating the
King, then his prisoner, and afterward told the King, It was admired, that his
Majesty should so Court such a Rebel, and told the Rebel then again the Kings
answer, which was supposed to be the hastening cause of that murder; Let him
repent, and pray if God may possibly forgive him.

to command sin, For by this means, they beget it, they give it Seed, and
become the Fathers of it: And for this: Let the Long Lifed Parliament,
Lieutenant General Cromwell, and others whom it concerns, water their Bedds,
and wash their Couches every night with tears for fear they exchange their
Evil Days into an Everlasting Night of Evil.

The fifth is, to consent to it; For by that means they own it, maintain it,
and become Adopted Fathers to it. And for this, Let the High Court of Justice,
President Bradshaw, Whaley, Pride, and others that sat there, and gave Vote, to
the most unjust sentence that was ever pronounced, Pilates only excepted,
abhor themselves in dust and ashes, least their memories be abhorred by all
good men on Earth, and their Souls in Fire and Brimstone.

The sixth is, to commend it; suck and Dugg, and become a Nurse to it: And for
this, Let them who have presented Books to John Bradshaw, and given him
Eulogies for the greatest Vaelogy was ever spoke in England, severing the Head
of King Charles I. from his Body.

The seventh is, To entertain and maintain the Actors of it; For by this means,
they give it Shoulders, they support it, Protectors of it: And for this, Let
him who has made himself Protector with his Stately Counsel, consult how they
may avoid the curses of so many thousand innocent Widows and Orphans, whom
they have made so, that they might kill as the Jews did, the King of Life, the
King of England, Charles the I.

The Eighth is, To keep Silence, and to be mute at it, when it is done; For by
that means, Friends to it, and give it Heart and Hand; And for this, Let him or
them, or both, who have out-stript Dioclesian, and Julian, by mnzzleing the
Mouths of all the Orthodox Clergy of England, least they should declaim against
it, look to it and weep, and groan, if perhaps they may outcry that cry which
the Blood of CHARLES the I. makes to Heaven for vengeance.

The ninth and last is, to partake of it; For by that means they give it Arm
and Face, and become Benefactors to it: And for this, Let the present Soldiers,
whether Volunteers or other, whether before or since, consider with themselves,
whether they be not guilty of the violent, painful, shameful murder of King
Charles I. and presently forsake their Usurper, and join to bring in the true
Heir of these Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, King Charles II.
whom as God has hitherto miraculously preserved, so may he make a Miracle of
his mercy in restoring him to a Glorious Crown here, and receiving him to a
Crown of Glory hereafter, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

Anno Dom. 1650.
PSALM 112.7. He is not afeard of any evil tidings; For his heart stands
fast, and believes in the Lord.
ANd yet King David was no Stoic, For this Psalm is an Exegesis or Exposition
of the last verse of the former Psalm. And that Psalm ends thus; Timor Domini
initium sapientiae; The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; Ps. 111.10.
and this Psalm in answer to that begins thus: Beatus qui timet Dominum:
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord. Ps. 112.1.
Wisdom seeks Blessedness, and by the Fear of God finds it, and finds it in
four degrees.

1. In the Happiness of his Posterity; His seed shall be mighty upon Earth. 2.
In the Happiness of his Prosperity; Wealth and Riches shall be in his house.
Happiness of his Stability; He shall never be moved. 4. In the Happiness of his
Security, He shall not, he will not be afraid, or, He is not afraid of any evil
tidings.
And this, though the last, is not the least degree of his Happiness: his good
Fear banished his evil Fear; He fears God, and therefore he fears not any evil
tidings. And that he fears God, he is assured of it too; for his heart stands
fast, and believes in the Lord. In which words you have observable these three
Parts.

1. Quis non timet? Who fears not? Times Dominum, He that fears the Lord,
fears not. 2. Quid non timet? What is it he fears not? Ab auditione mala,
He fears not any evil tidings. 3. Quare non timet? Why does he not fear any
evil tidings? quia paratum est, stabilitum est, confirmatum est cor ejus,
confidens in Jehova because his heart is prepared, because his heart is est
ablished, because it is confirmed, and stands fast, believing in the Lord.
I begin with the first, He fearet not, he shall not be afraid: Pars 1.
And this at first sight seems a strange commendation, or a strange
Prohibition; Construe it as you please, by the Present, or Future tense: Timor
enim Domini est Janitor cordis, et virtutis custos* says St. Hierome: Fear (of
the Lord) is the Guard Royal of the heart, and keeps out forbidden lusts, like
unbidden Guests; Fear is the Treasurer of Virtue, and keeps it in a close
Cabinet, like a precious Jewel, least it should take Wings like Riches and fly
away.

Fundamentum salutis, says Tertullian, Fear is the Foundation of Hope: and like
that house which is built upon a Rock, let the Sea roar, and the Rain fall, and
the winds blow, It stands fast, it is unshaken.

Tuta Armatura says St. Chrysostom, Fear is a safe Armor, whosoever puts it
on, has such a Coat of Male, as is Sword, Pike, Pistol, and Canon proof.

Initium sapientiae, Pro.
says Solomon; Fear is the beginning of Wisdom; not a Student in the Accademy
of Fear, but is sure to commence Doctor of Wisdom.

Vita omnium operum, says Melancton, Fear is the vivacity of all our Actions;
whatsoever we do without Fear is dead in the very doing: and Solomon gives the
reason of it; Officium enim est totius hominis, Eccles. 12.
For this is the whole duty of man, To fear God and keep his Commandments.

Religio, Majestas, Honor metu constant, says Lactantius, where Religion is
neglected, confusion enters: nor can Religion subsist without Fear; For what is
not feared, is contemned: and what is contemned, is not worshipped; Religion,
Majesty, Honor; The Religion of God, the Majesty of the King, and the Honor
of the Nobility, are all preserved by Fear; Take away Fear, and take away all.

This Age, this unhappy miserable Age, gives us too sad and feeling an example
of it; The Kingdom of England has lost Religion, The King of England has lost
his Majesty: the Majesty of England has lost his Head: the Nobility of England
have lost their Honor; And all this, because the Commons of England have lost
their Fear, the Fear of God.

St. Barnard advises most divinely, Cum adest Gratia, time, ^e^ non digne,
operis ex ea, substracta Gratia, magis time, quia te reliquit custodia tua; si
redirit gratia, multo amplius time, ne forte contingat, pacis excidium. If
Grace be present, Fear lest thou answer not the expectation of that Grace: If
Grace be absent, Fear more, because thou art left unto thy self: If Grace
return again, Fear much more, least thy Security ruin thy Peace.

And if Fear be so necessary a Virtue by the Verdict of so many Fathers and
grave Authors, what means King David here to give the blessed man this
Character, He fears not.

Do but you distinguish of the Subject, Fear; and look upon the Object, what
the blessed man fears; and you will presently confess, There is neither Adaxie
nor Paradox, neither Absurdity nor Ambiguity in this Character, He fears not.

Some have made six sorts of Fear; 1. Natural, which respects Being; and this
is in all Living creatures. 2. Humane which respects Life, and this is in all
men. 3. Mundane, which respects Riches, Liberty, Beauty, Honor, and the like;
and this is in all covetous and cowardly wretches. 4. Servile, which respects
pain and punishment, and this is in Slaves, Reprobates, Rebels, and Devils. 5.
Initiall, which respects sin; and this is in all good Christians, and Loyal
Subjects, who choose rather to suffer in Gods cause, then to participate with
the sins of a more successful party. 6. Filial, which respects God; and this
is in all Noble Martyrs, and Glorious Saints, who therefore fear to sin,
because they will not offend God.

You may contract these six into these two, Filial and Servile; because under
Servile may be comprised Humane and Worldly; and under Filial, Initial and
Natural fear.

Filial fear looks upon God as a Father, and honors him, and is resolved to
honor him, though there were neither Heaven to reward him, nor Hell to torment
him.

Servile fear looks upon God as a Judge, and shuns him; and if now and then in
a Fit he yields God any obedience, it is, Formidine paenae, only for fear of
punishment.

Filial fear is an Ornament and Virtue of the Soul; Servile fear is a Passion
and Distress of the Soul.

Filial fear is in the Regenerate, both in the Church Militant and Triumphant;
but in several considerations. Here by two Actions, Evitando malum, et faciendo
bonum, by eschewing evil, and doing good; There only by doing good.

Perficitur in Patria, non abolebitur reverentia Timoris, says St. Augustine,
Reverential fear shall not be diminished in Heaven, but increased; It shall not
be abolished but perfected.

Servile fear is not in them, not in them at all, so far as they are
Regenerated; As men, they may fear their Life's, as covetous they may fear their
Estates; as Carnal, they may fear their Liberties; But he that fears either, or
the loss of either, Liberty, Estate, or Life, can never be good Soldier, or
Loyal Subject, can never be good Christian, or Gods servant; He may fear God,
as God is just: and so Fear is a Passion and Distress of the Soul; He does not
fear God, as God is good; for so Fear is a Grace and Ornament of the Soul.

As Fear is a Passion of the Soul, you may understand that speech of St. John,
Many of the Rulers believed in Christ, but for fear of the Jews they did not
confess him, least they should be put out of the Synagogue; for they loved the
praise of men more then the praise of God. I may add, They feared the Injustice
and punishment of men, more then the Justice and Judgment of God: and therefore
says Christ, Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the
Soul; but rather fear him, who is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell.
Mat. 10.28.


The words in the Original, are worth the marking, Fear not,(...), them that
kill the Body; it is not them that can kill the body: they do it by a
permissive power; They cannot do it by any Inherent power of their own, (...);
but the Soul they neither may nor can,(...), but rather fear him, who has
power to destroy Soul and Body in Hell.

I wish the late Renegado's had seriously considered these Texts; Those men I
mean, who served the late King, and tarried with him so long as the Sun shined,
and the weather was calm; but so soon as ever the Rain began to fall, and the
Winds to blow, they presently ran away to compound and save something, a little
wealth and some few days, but they did forget that God could, Luke 12.
(and it may be will) cast both Soul and body into Hell. And then as Christ
says, Fools, whose shall these things (your Riches and your Days) be?

Yes, He both can and will, without a great deal of Repentance; For their Sin
was far more desperate then the first Rebels; They ran into the Sin out of
Rashness and Inconsiderately; But these men put God into one Scale, and the
World into another: and therefore to them especially belongs that fearful
doom. The fearful shall be cast out, Apoc. 21.
i. e. Such men as fear the loss of their Estates, more then the loss of Gods
favor, and the loss of their momentary Life's, more then the loss of their
Eternal Life's; They forsook their King, and God will forsake them.

And God have mercy upon us all, and forgive us our following the Apostles in
their worst Act, and forsaking our Sovereign upon the Scaffold, as they did
their Savior upon the Cross; and give us grace to redeem that fault, by
living, for the time to come, Loyal Christians, and dying stout Romans, to
continue obedientially, and not fear man, who can kill but our Bodies, and dye
courageously in the fear of God, that we may not fear any evil tidings.

It is my second consideration; Pars. 2.
Quid non timet timens Dominum, what he fears not that fears God? Ab auditione
mala non timet, Ab auditu malo, non timebit; He is not afraid, He shall not be
afraid of any evil tidings.

At first sight again, this Object increases my wonder, Fear not any evil
tidings! Why, the Kings wrath is evil tidings, for it is the messenger of
death; And shall I not fear him?

Solomon says, Fear God and the King; St. Peter it at the same, Prove. 1 Pet. 2.
Fear God, and Honor the King; St. Paul is at it for conscience sake; Be
subject to the higher powers, not only for wrath, but for conscience. Romans 13.5.
And is the Son of David against either? Fear not them that kill the Body? Or
is the Father of Christ against either? Fear not any evil tidings? not the
wrath of Kings?

No at no hand; This is no Absolute, no General Prohibition; but only a
Relative, and Comparative; God is to be feared, and the King is to be feared,
where their commands are not in opposition, Fear belongs to them both; both
Natural fear, and Filial fear; But when they stand in competition, and my
obeying the King will dishonor God, and my fearing the King will displease
God; where sin is the subject of a Tyrants command, and Gods Law must thereby
be transgressed. Act.
Then I am at the Apostles resolution, Whether it be fit to obey God or man,
judge ye; I am then at King David's blessed man, I fear God, and therefore I
fear not any evil tidings.

This will appear more evident, if we look into the diverse acceptions of
Auditus malus, Evil tidings; and what is the true construction of evil tidings?

1. It signifies sometimes Calumnies, Contumelies, Checks, Taunts, and
Reproaches, wherewith they that fear the Lord are slaundered; Thus gluttony,
blasphemy, and sedition were objected to Christ; And now his Servants, and the
late and present Kings liege people are called, I should have said miscalled,
Malignants. Delinquents, Papists, evil Counselors, enemies of the Church and
troublers of the State* Haec autem perferre difficile; and this is a very heavy
burden to bear: Generosis enim animis cruciatus corporis, Plutarch.
quam jacturam famae facilius est perferre. A noble mind had rather have his
Body to be bruised, then his credit blasted; yet he that is truly noble (et
sola virtus vera Nobilitas) the Noble Christian that fears God, is so far
from being afraid at these evil tidings, that he neither forsakes the Truth,
nor declines his Loyalty: He is not afeard of the evil tidings.

2. Sometimes evil tidings signify Famam sinistram quam improbi culpa sua
contrahunt; that evil report which base people deservedly bring upon
themselves; Thus Shemei is called a Rayler: thus Doeg is called an Accuser:
thus Absolon is called a Traitor: thus Achitophel is called a Conspirator: thus
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and all such as rise against the Lords Anointed,
their lawful King, are called Rebels.

But they that fear God, and such as are Loyal Subjects, fear not such
aspersions; If they are cast upon them by evil Tongues, they readily answer as
St. Augustine did Petilian, upon a like scandal, I know no such thing by my
self, and I think I know my self better then he knows me; but believe you which
you please, and judge as you please, whether he that writes, and fights against
the King, or he that writes and fights for the King be a Rebel, a Delinquent, a
Malignant; I am not afeard of these evil tidings.

3. Sometimes evil tidings signify dangers and Calamities, Jobs messengers;
One tells us, Our Cattle are plundered: A second tells us, Our houses are
fired: A third tells us, Our Children are murdered: A fourth tells us, Our
Soldiers are mutined, Our Garrisons are betrayed, Our Armies are disbanded, and
Free-quarier is denied.

Why yet, Non succumbit justus, non deficit; He that fears God, faints not,
fails not, looses not his courage, yea, though he knows Death to be the Guerdon
of his not yielding to a Conquerors pleasure, he looks upon his Savior, and
fears not him that kills the Body: he looks upon King David, and fears not ^ay
evil tidings.

These times offer as fit a case as this Text requires, King David pronounces
the man blessed that fears the Lord; My fear of God is best evidenced unto me
by my Obedience to my Parents, for that is Gods Commandment; my great Parent
is the King, He is, Pater patriae, and the higher power: so St. Paul calls him,
The Supreme power, so St. Peter calls him: Therefore I to be subject to him;
and not to resist him is St. Paul's inference: Therefore I to honor him, and to
fear him is St. Peter's inference.

But of late there were a pack of men met together, against Charles I. the long
lived Parliament, and so there are now against Charles II. the too long being
Protector, with his too long fitting Council of State, who did and do call
themselves a Power above the King; who did command us, who do command us to
take their part against Charles I. then, against Charles II. now: who did and
do threaten us with Sequestration of our Estates, That Is Beggary, with
Registring our names in the black Book; That Is Infamy, with bringing us to the
Bar of Justice, of their Justice, or more truly, To the Bar of their Court of
their high Injustice, That Is Death.

We know, If we did forsake Charles I. If we do forsake Charles II. and take
part with them against the King, we sin, we resist; If we resist, we incur
damnation: The word is (...), Mr. Marshall did qualify and linify it by the
construction of Judgment) and that signifies the destruction of Soul and Body
here and for ever.

Now here is the trial, If we did stand to the late, and do to the present
King, and do our Duties: If we were and are resolved, as Ittai was, 2 Samuel
Wheresoever my Lord the King is, whether in Life or Death, there will thy
servant also be. Then we fear God, and therefore fear no evil tidings.

But if we did go back to them that opposed, and deposed, and murdered, the
Father, or if we do go back to them, who resist, and keep out, and calumniate,
and hunt after the blood of the Son, let it be upon what consideration it may,
I shall leave my Wife and Children beggars else, I shall be a Slave and
Prisoner all the days of my life else, I shall be han'gd else; And these
pettire thoughts fright me out of my Duty: I have then ruined, my blessedness,
I am not blessed, I have lost my Evidence, I am witness against my self, I am
afeard of evil tidings, basely and slavishly afeard, and therefore I fear not
God.

Well fare that Heathen, who was resolved for all Fortunes, and will rise in
Judgment against many, very many cowardly Christians in England.

Non fulminantis magna Jovis manus
Terrebit justum: And again,
Etiamsi fractus illibatur Orbis
Impavidum ferient ruinae.
Let the world totter, turn round, and fall, I will not be afraid, I will fear
God.

But a Heathen is not fit to be our Schoolmaster, look we upon the Primitive
Christians; and amongst them well fare old Hilarion, who being in the hands and
power of his Persecutors, and by them demanded, Antimeret, If he were not
afeard of those evil tidings they brought him? For they came to strip and
plunder him. To which he returned an Answer as full of gallantry as mirth,
Nudus latrones non timet, An empty Ship fears not a Pyrate: A naked man fears
not a Theif.

They then th^eaten him with Terribilium terribilissim^, the Hyperbole of evil
tidings, sed occidemus te, we will put thee to most exquisite torments, and in
the end will kill thee. Non times mortem? Art thou not afeard of death? and he
returns as great a Hyperbole of gallantry, Non timeo mortem, quia paratus sum
mori; No, I fear not death, because I fear God, and am therefore prepared to die.

Well fare St. Chrysostom, who being threatened with banishment from the
Empress of a good name, but bad condition, Eudoxia, Et vult me exulem Regina?
And will the Empress banish me? said he, Agat, Let her do it; Domini est
terra, the Earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof.

Another bids him hide himself and save his life, For the Empress would saw
him; secet, Content says he, let her saw me, I am not afeard to follow the
Prophet Isaiah in his way to Heaven.

A third bids him shift aside, For the Empress would cast him into the Sea;
Immergat, said he, Content still, let her drown me, I doubt not to find as good
a plank, as Jonas did, to preserve me from perishing in the waters.

A fourth advises him to secure himself, For the Emperesse would cast him into
a Furnace of fire: Injiciat, said he, As she pleases, I am not afeard of a
fiery Chariot; The three children will bear me company: and the Son of God will
drive the Coach so fast, that the Flames shall neither scortch my Flesh, not
singe my clothes.

A fifth bids him take Sanctuary, For the Emperesse would throw him to the
wild Beasts; Jaciat, said he, let her do it: I make no question, but the
Angels will muzzle them for hurting me.

Yet a sixth persuaded him to convey himself away for a while, that the Church
of Christ might receive some further benefit by him, else the Emperesse would
have him stoned to death; Fiat voluutas Dei, said he, Let Gods will be
fullfilled, and hers too; I will use all lawful means for my preservation,
being persecuted in this City, I will fly into another: but with this
resolution still; I am not afeard to follow St. Stephen, through a whole shower
or Quary of stones into the Kingdom of Heaven.

If these Examples be procul, at too far a distance for us to follow; Look we
then upon a late Noble Glenham, who was more conquered by an empty dish, then
by an insulting and increasing Foe; and yet was afeard of neither, but left his
Garrison with more honor, then his Enemies possessed it.

Look upon a valiant Fawcet, who was more conquered by the mutiny of his
unfaithful Slaves, (for they are not worthy the name of Soldiers that will
mutiny) then by his thundering Enemies; and yet was afeard of neither, but came
off with more honor, then he left behind him.

Look upon a Loyal Compton, who notwithstanding the improbability of relief,
and the continuation of an hard Siege, and the multiplication of a cruel Enemy,
yet resolved not to be afeard of any evil tidings.

Look upon an undaunted Arundel, who being Summoned to deliver up the Remainder
in the West, and whether threatened or allured thereunto, I know not, because
the Kings party was utterly defeated, returned an Answer as full of Resolution
as Religion, as full of Courage as Christianity, and such as became both a
Soldier and a Christian; I have lived untainted threescore and seven years,
and I have not any mind to go a Rebel to my Grave.

Remember if you revolt, you turn Rebels: and if you dye in that Apostasy, you
dye Rebels, and leave an Odium upon your Name, and a curse upon your Estates.

Look we upon those Gentlemen, but look we upon them with the Eyes of
imitation, who in the year 1646, when all Royal hopes were low enough, and
Rebellious Ambitions high enough, came from Plymouth and Excester; what brought
them so many weary steps, when they might have lived quietly there, or gone
safely to ^heit own habitations; but the Example of a Loyal Wagstaffe, and the
fear of being tempted unto a Rebellion, and desire to live and dye in his late
Majesty's service?

Look we upon his late Majesty, who notwithstanding so many Waves of the Sea,
and so much madness of the People, in the loss of Shrewsbury and Hereford, in
the loss of Bristol and Bridgewater, in the loss of Excester and a brave
Cavalry, was yet so far from being afeard of those evil tidings, that he
doubted not to recover all, or at least to requite all his and his loyaly
Subjects miserys, with the blessing of Peace and honorable Conditions.

And when all this failed by a Scotch treachery, which surpassed that of
Judases by two hundred thousand pounds, bating but thirty pieces of Silver, and
by a breach of Faith and Trust, in his Parliament, and their Army; why yet his
admirable constancy and perseverance, his yet unimitable piety and patience,
bid us look upon him again with Sighs and Tears, that so good a King should
have so bad Subjects, to present him with so evil tidings, as the dark hurrying
of him from Holmby to Hampton from Hampton to the Isle of Wight, from the Isle
of Wight to Windsor, from Windsor to St. Jameses, from St. Jameses to
White Hall, and there to a Decollation, to a Beheading, to the loss of his
Life, was not yet afeard; He was not afeard of any evil tidings.

And now look we upon his present Majesty, whom the late Majesty, his Father,
desired might be rather Charles le boon, then Charles le Grand, and I doubt
not, nor need you, but that he will be Charles le Grand, because he is Charles
le Boon, in his Enterprise of this year, advancing from Scotland as far as
Worce, ster, into England, where when he was betrayed by the Cowardice or
Treachery of the Scots, I know not which, I am sure by the obstinacy and
obduracy, was yet preserved by a Miracle from the Bloody hands and hearts of
those, who pursued him as a Partridge, and still perseveres in his Fathers
steps, without fearing any evil tidings, expecting faithfuller hands, fairer
opportunities, and better successes.

And better success he will have, by Gods providence, sooner then by Humane
reason, I can hope within these six years; For as Tych^ Brachy said, The year
1640, would be Totius Mundi insania erga Reges, An universal madness of the
World against Kings: so will that year 1656, prove Totius Mundi benevolentia
erga Reges, An universal goodness of the world toward Kings.

Sooner by Gods providence, he may be established in his Birth, and Undoubted
Rights, without any worldly assistance, but then by Gods providence, and the
worlds subservance, He will be restored, and my Divine reason for it is, As his
Father appeared the best of men, in being his Subjects Martyr: So will he
appear the best of Kings, in being his Subjects Master, because his heart
stands fast and believes in the Lord.

It is my third and last Consideration; Quare non timet ab auditu malo? Why he
that fears God, fears not any evil tidings? Pars. 3.
Paratum est cor ejus, or, Confirmatum est cor ejus; Read it which way you
please, His heart stands fast and believes in the Lord: or, His heart is
prepared to believe in the Lord.

Sure I am the very Object, Lord, is enough to make our Heart stand fast and
believe.

Were it but El, There is a Magazine of strength in that, and we shall have
relief enough, El
if we believe in him as He is a strong God.

Were it but Shaddai, there is a Panacea of sufficiency in that, and we shall
have Succor enough, if we believe in him as He is God All-sufficient.

Were it but Elion, there is a Mountain of Hope in that; and we shall have
supply enough, if our Heart stands fast in him, as He is the most High God.

Were it but Tsebaoth, there is an Army of Protection in that; and we shall
have Victory enough, if our Heart stands fast, and believes in Him, as He is
the Lord of Hosts.

Were it but Adonai, there is a Rock of Preservation in that, and we shall be
upheld enough, If we believe in Him, as He is the strong Foundation.

But it is more then all this; for it is Jehovah, the most Essential and
Excellent Name of God; If El implies His Omnipotency; If Elion implies his
Sovereignty; If Shaddai implies his Immutability; If Tsebaoth implies his
Irresistability; If Adonai implies his Fidelity; sure I am, Jehovah implies
all, whether you take it in the construstion of our own Divines, or in the
Derivation of others.

1. In the Construction of our own Divines, it signifies three things.

First, Habere esse a seipso, that he has his Being of himself.

Secondly, Dare esse omnibus, that He gives a Being to all things that be.

Thirdly, Dare esse Verbo, that He gives a Being to his word, and we therefore
need not fear, if we believe the truth of his word, but He will give the
Rebels their due, and settle the Crown to flourish upon the Kings Head.

2. Or if you take the meaning of Jehovah in the derivation of others, either
with Oleaster, as it is derived from Hovah, which signifies Destruction; then
we have reason to believe, He will be mighty in the Destruction of His Enemies;
or whether you take it with Galatinus, as it is derived from Hajah, which
signifies to Be, then we have reason to believe, He will be mighty amongst us
in our preservation.

Let your Hearts then stand fast in Jehovah; And e're long, He will either
divert our Enemies from thirsting after any more of our Blood, as He did Saul
from hunting after David: or, He will divide our Enemies in their
Consultations, as He did destroy the Counsel of Achitopel by the
Counter-Counsel of Hushai; or, He will give our Enemies to Self-Destruction, as
He did Abimelech, and the House of Millo, and as He has one of the late
King-Tryers, to Hoyle himself; or, He will call back our Enemies by strange
rumors, next time the present KING comes to claim his own as He did the
Assyrians.

All these ways, and many more: God can do it, so we may have no need to be
afeard of any evil Tidings; and He will be persuaded to do it, if we fear him;
For when we fear him, then, as it was when the Dictator Ruled in Rome, all
other Offices ceased; so when the Fear of God is in us, then all other Fears
vanish.

This was acknowledged by that once magnanimous Earl of Essex, but afterward
the Rebel-Father of a Rebel-Sonne; Sometimes, said he, when I have been in the
Field, and encountered the Enemy, the Weight of my sins have layn so heavy upon
my Conscience, because I was not reconciled to my GOD, that my Spirits were
quelled, and I have been the most timorous man upon the Earth.

I wish our Gentlemen of the Sword, when King Charles II. shall have occasion
to use them, that they would not batter our walls more within by sins, then the
Rebel enemy can do without by Guns; that they would not storm themselves more
by Oaths, and ruin themselves more by Mutining, and undo themselves more by
Treachery, then a Rebel enemy can do by strength, And you that hear me this
day, January 30. 1650.
Let your hearts stand fast, and believe in the Lord; And that all our hearts
may, and that the Heart of King Charles II. may; Pray we for Him and for our
selves.

Help the King, O God, and help us, O God, for vain is the help of man; Though
thou have cast him a great way off, and seasoned the morning of His days with
bitterness; yet be not displeased too long, but turn thee unto Him again, and
return Him unto us again; but return Him either with an Olive of Peace, or with
a Laurel of Conquest; And as thou have strangely and wonderfully delivered Him
from those who eagerly hunted after his Life: so let it appear to them, that
thou have not done this, to make him more miserable, or to continue him in the
condition of an Exile, but rather that thou have reserved him for faithfuller
hands, then the Scots, for fairer opportunities, and more prosperous successes,
then in the year 1650. for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

Anno Dom. 1651.
1 SAMUEL 10.27. But the Children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? and
they despised him, and brought him no presents.
THis latter, and therefore this wicked Age has broached three Seditious
Questions; the false resolving of which, was a chief cause of the Decollation
and Martyrdom of our late and blessed King, Charles I. and the true resolving
whereof will, I trust, be a leading cause for the Restoration of our present
and glorious King, Charles II.

The Questions were brewed heretofore by Bellarmine and his fellow-Jesuites, by
Bucanan and his fellow-Puritans: and this Age, this Jesuitical, Puritanical
Age, has Practically broached what they speculatively brewed, viz.

1. Whether God or the People be the Author and Efficient of Regality, of
Monarchy, of Kingship?

2. Whether the King be only singulis Major, and Universis Minor, greater then
every particular man, but less then the Assembly of men?

3. Whether it be lawful to contribute for the maintenance of a War against the
King? And this Age, this wicked Age, resolves these Questions just to the
Peoples humors.

1. The People are the Author and Efficient of Monarchy. 2. The whole People or
the People in a Body Representative, are above and greater then the King. 3. It
is lawful to contribute to a War against the King.
But to make good that old Adagy, Quod vulgo placet sapienti displicet, That
which pleases the People displeases the wise, the Prophet Samuel in this
Chapter, in this Text resolves clean contrary.

Samuel's Rosolve.
1. That God, not the People, is the Efficient of Monarchy; so he says, See ye
him, quem elegit Deus, not quem populus, whom the People have chosen? No, but,
See ye him whom the Lord has chosen? The King has his power, not precario, by
the courtesy of the People, but Dei gracia, by the Grace of God.

2 That the King is greater then the Body, not only in peicemeale, and
particulars, but also in gross and in the whole; so he says, He the King,
stood amongst the people, and was higher then all the People by the Shoulders
and upwards; Ver. 23.24.
not only in Stature but also in power, and therefore the People shouted, and
said, God save the King.

3. That Contributions to maintain a War against the King are unlawful; because
He is to be assisted in his War; and therefore they are marked cum carbone, for
children of Belial, who brought hius no presents; Certainly then they are ten
times more the Children of Hell, who bring presents against the King.

Indeed this Text within it is own Verge, resolves these three Queries.

1. In the Description of Rebels, They are Children of Belial. 2. In the
Expostulation of Rebels, Division.
How shall this man save us? 3. In the Condition of Rebels; the Condition
Positive, and the Condition Privative; Positively they despise the King;
Privatively they bring him no presents.
The Result of the whole falls into these Particulars, thus.

1. They accounted the King as one of themselves, and as one chosen by
themselves; and therefore they said, How shall this man save us? and therefore
they are called the Children of Belial. Had they looked a little higher, and
observed how God chose him out of them, they would then have believed, That God
by him would save them; because God chose him to be King over them, and
Protector of them.

2. They looked upon themselves, Aggregatim, and in Conjunction, and thought
themselves in that Bulk and Aggregation, or Collection or Representation,
greater then Him; and therefore they despised him: and therefore they are
called Children of Belial. Had they looked upon him, as Head of that Body,
whereof they were Members, they would have confessed, That neither some of the
Principal Members Representatively, nor all the Members Collectively, had been
worthy of Comparison with him, and that He, the King, had been greater, not
only then any one a sunder, but then altogether.

3. They looked upon their Enemies, how strong they were, and upon themselves,
how numerous, how copious, how many, how rich, and therefore how well able to
defend themselves, and therefore brought him no presents; and therefore they
are called the children of Belial; and therefore not only by Symbolical, but
also by Rational and Logical Divinity, It is unlawful to contribute to a war
against the King.

I begin with the first, And the Children of Belial said, How shall this man
save us? and of the first Question, Pars. 1.
resolved thereupon, The King is Gods, not the Peoples Creature; God, and not
the people is the Efficient of Monarchy.

The Children of Belial; What is meant by Belial? Why, as Christ tacitly tells
you, That there are diverse kinds of Devils, when he says expressly, Mat. 17.21.
This kind goes not out but by Fasting and Prayer: so I tell you That there are
diverse names of Devils, or, The Devil has diverse Names, and this of Belial is
not the best. As sometimes, he is called Demon for his Knowledge, sometimes
Satan for his Malice: sometimes Baalzebub for his Filth: Belial, what?
sometimes Diabolus, either for his Defluxion, and falling down from Heaven, or
for his Traduction, and seducing of men, sometimes, as here, Belial, for his
Rebellion and casting of the yoke of Obedience; for contending against him, as
much as in him lies, by whom he should, and shall at last be controuled; For
Belial signifies Absque jugo, or Absque domino, a mere Masterlesse Sir.

Children of Belial, who and how?
But what then? Did the Devil beget these men in my Text? or else, how are they
called the Children of Belial? No, the Devil cannot beget any children; neither
as 1. the Common Cause; For so Sol et homo generant hominnem, the Common Cause,
is the Heaven. Nor 2. as the proper Cause; For every thing begotten of the
Proper Cause, is begotten either a simili genere, as the Mule that is begotten
by the Horse and Ass: or else a simili specie, as a Child begotten by a Man;
but Satan is a Spirit, and has at most and best, when he has any, but an
assumed Body; but the Child has a Body begotten of the Father; and therefore
are our Fathers called, Hebr. 12.9.
the Fathers of our Flesh; and this is proper only to a Natural Father; and in
this sense Satan cannot be called Father; Besides every Child so begotten is
bound to honor his Father; but no Creature is bound to honor the Devil; Nay,
every Creature is bound to the contrary; Nor 3. can the Devil beget Children as
the Material cause; For all Generation is, (...), as speaks the Apostle, Heb.
11.11.
Through faith Sarah her self received strength to conceive seed, or as the
Prophet speaks, Ex commixione seminum, I will sow the house of Israel and the
house of Judah with the seed of men: Jer. 31.27.
They are then here called, the Children of Belial, not by Natural or virtuous
Generation, but by vicious and sinful Immitation; Joh. 8.44.
As therefore Christ told the Jews, They were of their Father the Devil,
because they sought to kill him, and be-lye him; and gives this reason of it,
because the Devil is a murderer from the beginning, and the Father of lies: so
Samuel here calls these men the children of Belial, i. e. of the Devil, because
they by his example and tentation sought to shake and cast off the yoke of
obedience; and therefore barely apprehended the King as a Creature of their
own, and chosen by themselves, saying, How shall this man save us? and this
brings me to the examination and resolution of the first Question, viz.

Whether God or the People be the Author and Efficient of Monarchy? To this it
is answered by the children of Belial, 1 a. 1 ae.
for the People, saying, How shall this man, This man, and no more save us? but
by the Prophet of God, it is answered for God, saying, See ye him whom the Lord
has chosen? and now Beloved, judge your selves, whether it be fit to obey God
or man, as the Apostle speaks in another case, Act. 4.19.
whether it be fit to obey the children of Belial, who from their Father have
learnt to speak nothing but a lie, or the Prophet of God, who from the
Holy Ghost can speak nothing but Truth.

But that the falsity of this populous opinion, and the verity of this
Prophetical Assertion, may more fully appear, either to call you by Repentance
to acknowledge the Truth, and to do your Duty, or that you may wander with more
security, and with less excuse to Hell, I shall endeavor as much brevity and
perspicuity as I can, to examine this Question to the full.

When God first made the world, He made many Angels; but one man; and yet God
could, if he had pleased, as well, and as easily have made and created a
Company, a Colony, a Country, a Kingdom, a whole world of men upon Earth with
his own one Faciamus, Let us make, as he did create so many Legions of Angels
in Heaven; and so might, if he had pleased, Genesis 1.26.
have given these several Countries, or that whole world of men leave to make
choice of their own Commander. He could have done this by his power; For his
power; had no bounds; but he did not so: So his Wisdom did manage his power;
he made many Angels, by his Power; but in his wisdom he made but one Man.

And would you see a Reason of that? I dare not pry into this Cabinet; yet I
shall show you the outside of it; God found not Heaven it self free from Mutiny
amongst a multitude of Inhabitants; and therefore to take off all color to
contention, to with hold all pretext of disobedience, to Sovereignty, He made
but one man, one and no more; thereby teaching us, That the power of a King,
over his Subjects is as Natural, as the power of a Father over his Child: That
as Naturally there can be but one Father of one Child: so Polittically there
should be but one King over one people; and all this to tell us, That not only
the King should have as great and pious a care over his Subjects, as a Father
has of his children; but also, that the Power of Monarchy is from God, and not
from the People, and so to be acknowledged by the People: That Is the Duty of a
King, the Duty of a people; He to use his power paternally, and they to render
their subjection Filially: sic fuit ab initio, Thus it was from the beginning.

And this is acknowledged by Aristotle himself, Lib. 1. cap. 8. Polit.
who was led only by Nature, and saw as far into the Laws of Nature, as ever
man did; At first, says he, Regal power belonged to the Father of the Family;
and he gives this Reason for it, Because in the Infancy of the world the
Fathers were so Grandevous, and lived so long, that each Father begat such a
Numerous posterity, as might People a whole Country: Genesis 4.17.
so we read, That Cain built a City: Certainly it was for his own Colony, and
that Colony certainly was his Natural generation: and so he was at once as well
their King, as their Father; and his Regal power over them, as his Subjects,
was no less from God, then his Paternall power over them as his Children.

And Justine, though he did not see so well, nor so far into Nature as
Aristotle did; yet he saw so far as to acknowledge so much, saying, Principio
rerum, gentium, Nationumque imperium penes Reges erat; The Rule of Nations (of
all Nations) was in the hands of Kings from the beginning; and the People, had
no more right to choose their Kings, then to choose their Fathers: because the
Kingly Right pertained to the Father of the Family; Therefore in the beginning,
if we believe these two lights of Nature, Kings are of God not of the People;
sic fuit ab initio, Thus it was from the beginning.

But has not Moses since given a Bill of Divorce, Has it been so ever since,
and in all places? It is a spacious and large demand; and I shall, as I am
able, for the present resolve, it, though briefly, yet plainly.

Nor here will I tire your Ears, with the four steps or Ascents to Royalty,
viz. 1. Of Inheritance. 2. Of Donation. 3. Of Election. (In which only the
People can claim some color for choosing the person, but not for bestowing the
Power, or at most for Administration of the power, but not for Foundation of
the power it self) 4. Of Conquest. Nor yet with the three Originals of
Kingdoms. 1. Natural, which may also be called Civil. 2. Violent, which you may
rather call Martial. 3. Mixed of both, In which last, though the People had
somewhat to do, yet not any Absolute power, and in the two former nothing at
all; God only therein is the Author and Institutour.

Nor here will I tell you, How Melchesedech, Abraham, and the Patriarchs, were
Kings, and saluted Patres Patriae, Arist. loco prae dicto.
the Fathers of their Country, where they inhabited, without any Efficiency,
so much as of Curtesy from the People, because Regal Power belonged to the
Pater-familias, so descended by Right of Primogeniture to the Eldest Son,
according to that Natural, Moral, Positive, Divine Law, That the younger should
be subject to the Elder. Genesis 4.7.


I look first upon Moses, who first efected Municipal and Natural Laws amongst
the Jews, and was the first Catholic visible King of and over the Jews, (for
the Sanhedrim was but Moses his Privy Council, or as Deligated Judges, because
of the numerous multiplicity of businesses) and he as good a man as he was, and
enabled and endued with extraordinary abilities, and fully persuaded that he
was the Instrument appointed by God, to be Isreal's deliverer; Exodus 2.12.14.
yet because he sought his Commission from the People, Acts 7.25.
before he had received his Commission from God, he was fain to expiate the
error of his self-led Zeal, with Forty years exile in the Wilderness; Exodus
3.10.
and then, and not till then, God called him, not the People, for their
approbation, but to Pharaoh.

And all this was, as for some other ends, so also for this in particular, To
tell the People, That they have nothing to do, that yet they had nothing to do
in the appointment of a King; but that God himself, and he only is the Author
and efficient of Monarchy: And that by him, he, Moses ruled Israel Forty years:
after him, God appointed Joshua, and he ruled Israel Sixty years; and after
these two Worthies died, then God appointed Judah, then Othniel, then Ehud,
then Shamgar, then Deborah, then Gedeon, then Tolah, then Jeptha, then Sampson;
still God appointed, called and authorized them, not the People.

These, I confess, were not Kings so properly and absolutely as the former
were; They were yet Loco Regum, instead of Kings, and chosen and called by God.

When after God left them to themselves, and gave them no Kings, and that
Monster the Multitude took the Power into their own hands: Oh, what hideous
births did they produce? The Danites instead of Liberty, the Subjects Liberty,
betook themselves to Licenciousnesse; the Benjamites instead of Property, the
Subjects property, Judge. 19
gave themselves to Rapes and Rapines; and in a word, The whole Jury of the
Tribes gave themselves to Revenge, and have given up no Bill to their
Posterity, Judge. 20.
but Astonishment; and enough of that to affright any people, unless they have
lost their sense with their Conscience and their Reason, with their Religion
from affecting Anarchy, or almost any kind of Government, whereof God is not
the Efficient and Immediate Author,

Well, After this, when God in mercy looked upon their misery, and gave them a
little refreshment in the succession of two Judges, Heli and Samuel, and they
were a weary of this Government, and would needs have a King to govern them, as
the Nations had; why even then, God did not give them leave to choose one
themselves, but he himself appointed one over them, even Saul of whom Samuel
here says, See ye not him, the King, 1 Samuel 10.
whom the Lord has chosen? It is still to tell us, That God is the efficient
of Monarchy, and not the People.

And was it not God that afterward appointed David, and after him Solomon? and
so of all the Kings both of the Jews and of the Nations, was God the
efficient, 2 Samuel 5. Prove. 8.15.
if you will believe Solomon's Per me for the Kings of the Jews, By me Kings
Reign; and Isaiahs Unctus Cyrus for the Nations, Isa. 43.1.
where the Lord calls Cyrus his Anointed; or that of Daniel, for both; Dan. 4,
25.
The most high rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will; Mark it, The Lord gives it, not the people: and the Lord gives it to
whomsoever he will, not to whomsoever the people will.

But soft, I have here committed a great Error, and given an open way to a
very fair Objection; For some Monarchomachoi, Anti-Royalists, and Fighters
against the King say, People are the Author and efficient of Monarchy: and they
give Scripture for it, 1 Reg. 12.20.
The people sent and called Jeroboam unto the Congregation, and they (the
People) made him King over all Israel.

Yet now I think upon it again, Resp.
this Error of mine was not so great, nor the Objection so strong, but that I
can fairly salve the one, and easily solve the other; and in Answer, I
confess, That the People did make Jeroboam King, and that by God too; But How
by God? and, How by them? Not by God Efficiente, approving of it, but only
Permittente, permitting of it; and, By them, not Authoritate, by any Authority
they had acquired, but Rebellione, by Rebellion they had incurred.

Jeroboam was King indeed, and indeed of the Peoples making, but in Fact, not
in Right, because not of Gods appointing, further then by way of Permission;
God blessed him not Immediately by himself, No Prophet of God annoinaed him, nor
was there any Ceremony used for and at his Inauguration, more then a Rent;
Ahijah the Prophet rent a new garment in twelve pieces, and bid Jeroboam take
ten; 1 Reg. 11.31.
In all which God only punished Solomon's sin, but did not make Jeroboam King.

And what a heavy Judgment God intends, that people whom he permits to choose
and make a King unto themselves, the sad progress of this Story will
demonstrate; and that was this in a word.

When they had made a King of their own, why then they and their King would
have a Religion of their own; and to effect this, They banish, or silence, or
imprison all their old Priests, and Orthodo^al Clergy, as absolute impediments
to their new intended government; and by and by they take as much Anthority
over God, as before they took Liberty over their King; and Jeroboam confesses
himself to be but an Usurper, though a King of the Peoples making, 1 Reg. 12.27.
saying, This People will return unto their Lord if they do sacrifice in
Jerusalem; And indeed, when they had made an Usurper their King, their King and
they made a Calf^ their God; and this sin of Idolatry stuck so close to their
King, and that sin of Rebellion stuck so close unto themselves, that He is made
an example to Sovereignty, they to Subjects, least if Kings do as he did, and
become Idolaters, and worship another God, or Subjects do as they did, and set
up another King, then whom God has placed over them, the Kings become
Castaways, and the Subjects first Rebels, and ever after Slaves.

You see, This Objection has done the Objector little good, All that it says
is, God may give way to people to make an Usurper King, but punishes them
soundly for it; and is still himself the Author of lawful Kings, and the
Efficient of true Monarchy.

And as it was in the days of Moses, so it was in the days of Christ: He
would rather be without his own Right, then receive it in a wrong way, or from
a wrong hand; and therefore to let the People know, That they had no power to
conferr Crowns, Joh.
he would by no means accept of that Dignity when they, the People, would by no
means accept of that Dignity when they, the People, would have made him King.
He likewise acknowledged Pilate, though he were but a Deputy-King, to have
received his power De super, from above: Joh. 18.
and St. Paul maintained the same Doctrine, saying, The Powers that be are
ordained of God. Romans 13.1.


Not does the Reply any way foil this truth, where, St. Peter says, Replic.
1. Pet. 2.
That that is the Ordinance of man, which St. Paul calls the Ordinance of God.

For the same Act is often times ascribed, both as well to the one as the
other, sometimes to the Mediate, Immediate Agent: so it is said, 1 Samuel 11.15.
1 Samuel 10.1.
All the people went to Gilgal, and there they made Saul King; and yet in the
Chapter before it is said, The Lord has anointed thee to be Captain over his
inheritance; and the like is said of David, They the people, anointed David
King over Israel; and yet it is said again, 2 Samuel 5.3.
The Lord anointed David King over Israel* 2 Samuel 12.7
i. e. God as the Master of the Substance makes Kings, and gives them their
Regal power, the Prophets as Masters of the Ceremonies, powered on the Oil,
and declared them Kings, and the People as Underofficers received them into
the Possession of that Right, and admitted them to the Exercise of that
Authority, which God had given them.

Or you may take the Answer thus, whereas St. Peter calls the Supreme Power, or
Monarchy the Ordinance of Man, there he speaks of the Final cause of Power* q.
d. Power, the Supreme power, Kingship and Monarchy it self, is ordained for the
good, peace, and welfare of man; not but that God is the Efficient Cause of
this power as St. Paul speaks.

And Paraeus himself, who was no great Royalist, indeed no friend at all to
Monarchy, In Romans 13. page 1327.
tells us, That the Authority of Kings is primarily the Ordinance of God, and
he answers this very Objection thus; [St. Peter, says he calls the Magistrate,
(...), An humane Creation or Ordination; not causally, as if it were invented
by man, or brought and begotten by the Will of man, or as if man were the
Author of it; but this he speaks, 1. Subjectively, because it is executed by
man. And 2. Objectively, because it is used about the Government of humane
Society. And 3. (...) or Finally because God ordained it for the good and help
of markinde. And in the close he adds; The wordused by the Apostle (...),
Creation ad Deum primum autorem nos rev ocat, shows plainly, That God is the
first Author of it.

Hitherto then it holds right and true, That God, not the People is the Author
and Efficient of Monarchy. I descend, and shall endeavor to make it good
downwards; Libr. ad Scupul.
and I begin with the testimony of Tertullian; A Christian is enemy unto no
man, much less to the Emperor; for he knows, that the Imperial Majesty is
ordained of God: He is next to God, Sovereign ever all, and Subject to God
alone.

Hosius who lived in the time of Constantine the Great, Apud Ath. ad s^litariam
vitam agentes.
gives in the same evidence, saying to the succeeding Emperor, Constantius;
God has entrusted your Majesty with the Empire, and he that with an envious
eye maligneth your Majesty and Imperial Sovereignty, contradicts the
Ordinance of God.

Liberius to the same purpose, thus bespake the same Emperor, Apud Ath.
an Arian; Fight not against, God, we beseech you, who has bestowed the Empire
upon you.

And Athinasius himself confesses as much, saying, That the Power of Kings is
of God, God is the King over all the world, Ad Antioch. 9.55.
and the King (by God) is over all Earthly men.

Beda tells us, That David spared Saul for two Causes, Lib. 4. Ex. posit. in
Sam. 1.21.6.
one whereof was, because Saul was his Lord, and the Lords Anointed.

Walthramus, in the succeeding age, Ep. Wald. quae habetur in appendice Marian
scot.
when this truth first began to be called in question, and a contrary damnable
Doctrine to be broached, tells us, Either that is false which some men prate
amongst silly women, and the vulger sort, viz. That we ought not to be subject
to the Kingly power, or else that is false which the Apostle teaches, viz. Let
every soul be subject to the higher Power, because the higher power is the
Ordinance of God.

Aquinas the great Schoolman tells us the same, saying, De Regi^^ Princ. l. 1.
c. 6.
They who are the Kings by succession are above the reach of all men, subject
to none but God, in whose only power it is to mollify the heart of a King if
he turn Tyrant, All Kings are Gods Ordinance; wicked Kings are exalted by Gods
permission to punish the Pe^ples sins.

Aeneas Silvias exhorts all men to acknowledge themselves ^e ortu et author.
Imperij* c. 2 (...)
subject, to their Prince, and give reverence to him whom God has made his
Vice-gerant on Earth.

Luther speaks the same Language, saying, Ye ought not to reject your Prince,
whom God has set over you.

Hitherto from Adam to Abraham, from Abraham to Moses, from Moses to Christ,
from Christ to Luther, it has gone current, That Kings are beholding to God
only, not to the people, for their Crown and Royal Authority.

It only remains now to enquire, Whether the Kings of England receive their
Power from God, or the People? and this I shall dispatch suddenly.

And here I say first, That the people could not give this Power, because the
People never had this power; Nihil dat quod non habet; and that the people
never had it, it is plain; because it is against the Nature of Regality to be
in more then one; Rex unicus esto; The Sun in the Firmament cannot be
multiplied, the Firmament admits but of one Sun, nor England of more then one
King: It is not with England as it was with Rome; Leges a Magistratu,
proponuntur, a populo, jubentur; The Magistrate proposes the Law, and the
People ratify it; but the clean contrary, Leges a populo proponuntur, a Rege
jubentur; The People propose Laws, but the King makes the Laws, and the Reason
is plain* The People of Rome elected the Magistrates of Rome, but the God of
Heaven has appointed the King of England.

And this appears, 1. By his Right to the Crown, to which he is not elected,
but Born; He has it not by the Peoples Votes, but by Gods blessing, and
Heriditary Succession; King Charles II was King of England so soon as ever King
Charles I. was beheaded, by the Law of Birthright; and so is, though he never
receive the Ceremony of Coronation.

This is plain in the Case of Henry 6. who was not Crowned until the 9. year of
his Reign. Speed l. 2. c. 16. Cook 7. Re. p. 256.


2. By his Power, his Power Military, the People cannot, the King may Proclaim
War, and establish Peace: His Power Curial; No Court, not the Court of
Parliament can meet, Polyd. Virg. Lib. 11.
but by the Kings Authority; yea, the Court of Parliament it self was at first
devised, framed, and instituted by the King; and they have fairly rewarded it
in the Decollation of one King, and Banishment of another: His power Official;
Smiths Com. wealth l. 2. cap. 4. et 5.
He chooses and establishes all Officers, the Superior by himself Immediately,
the Inferionr by others in Authority under him; His power universal in and over
all Causes and Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; and lastly, by his
Power Titular, and that runs thus; Carolus Dei gratia, and not Carolus
electione populi; It is not, Charles by the election of the people, but, Fol.
34. a.b.
Charles by the grace of God King of England. The King, says Bracton, has
under him Freemen and Slaves, but he is under none but God; and it is said of
our King, as it was said of Solomon, in his Chair-Royal, That he then sits not
in Solium populi, upon the Peoples Throne, as though they made him King, but In
Solium Domini, upon the Throne of the Lord, because He is what he is, King of
England, Scotland, and Ireland by the grace of God.

And may Almighty God, with that grace, by which he designed him King by his
Birth, restore him to the possession of his Kingdoms, that he may punish all
those men of Belial who said, They made his Father King, and he should no
longer Reign over them, and therefore murdered him: Yea, O God, let all such
men of Belial, taste of thy mercy and the Kings Justice, who dare say, How shall
this man save us? and so deny his Authority to come from thee, and despise him,
because they esteem him less then the whole Body, though greater then the
particular members, Amen.

It is my second part, and to be examined next year; Till when, and ever, Pars.
2.
God bless King Charles II. thorough Jesus Christ Amen.

Anno Dom. 1652.
1 SAMUEL 10.27. How shall this man save us? And they despised him.
THis day Twelve-moneth, you heard from the beginning of this verse, The
Children of Belial said; That God, not the People is the Author and efficient
of Monarchy, you shall, God willing, from the second part and middle words of
this Verse, hear, That the King is greater then the People, not only in
piecemeale, and particulars, but also in gross, and in the whole;
notwithstanding they say, How shall this man save us? and they despised him;
whence they raise this Question, Whether the King be less then the
Representative Body of the Kingdom? and first here I shall examine what is
meant by these words, They despised him.

The meaning of this consists in three branches; and they are these;

1. They did Male-cogitare, think evil of him in their hearts; and so came
within the compass of Solomon's prohibition, Curse not the King in thy thought;
Eccle. 10.20.
A thought of despising the King is Treason as well as a Word, and a Word as
well as an Action: so says the Scripture of the Intention of Bigthan and
Teresh, Traitors they were; and yet they never came to an Insurrexerunt, or any
Act of Treason; Ester 2.21.23.
but only to a Voluerunt, an Intention, they sought, or they thought to lay
hands upon King Ahasuerus; and for this very thought of Treason, they were
hanged; And as the Law of God, so the Law of this Kingdom does construe a bare
purpose against the King, a despising thought of the King, to be Treason, and
makes it deadly, My prayer therefore is,

Convert them O God; if they will not be Converted. confound them, O God, and
let them perish, as many as have evil will against the King, and do
Male-cogitare, despise him in their thoughts.

2. They did Male-dicere, despise the King with their tongues, and speak evil
of him, saying, How shall this man save us? and this is the second Branch,
whereby the meaning of this word is explained, They despised him, i.e. they
speak evil of the King, and so came within the compass of Moses's prohibition,
Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people; Deuteronomy. 27.16
A Word against the King is Treason, as well as a thought or Action; Greater
Treason then a thought, and lesser Treason then an Action; And they that Word
it against the King, if they be of the Clergy, they are of Balaams Ordination,
Numb. 23.
because they Curse whom God has blessed, and he was killed with the Sword: If
they be of the Layety, they are of Shimei's condition, 2 Samuel 16.5.
because they revile whom God has anointed; and he was put to death. And of
late by the Law of this Nation, there stood one Pym condemned for saying, He
would if he could embrue his hands in the blood of King Charles the first; and
many more in good time may be condemned and executed for saying, They will, if
they can, embrue their hands in the blood of King Charles the Second; My Prayer
again therefore is,

Convert them, O Lord; if they will not be converted, confound them O God, and
let them perish, as many as speak evil of my Lord the King, and do
Male-dicere, Despise Him with their Tongues.

3 They did Male facere, Despise the King with their Hands; for they brought
him no presents; and so came within the compass of King David's prohibition, 1 Samuel 26.9.
Thou shall not stretch forth thy hand against the Lords anointed; I know King
David there speaks by way of Interrogation, Who can stretch forth his hand
against the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless? but I know withal, that
Interrogative, Quis, Who can? is a most triumphant Negative, and says, Nullus,
No man can, and be guiltless; or, No man ought unless he will bring Guilt upon
his own Soul; Absolon did, and was hanged, 2 Samuel 10.9.
Robert, late Earl of Essex, did against Elizabeth, our late Queen of England,
and was beheaded; and how many, that were in the same Conspiracy, were hanged,
you may read in that Chronicle: My prayer therefore is gain,

Convert them O Lord, Convert them, and return them to their Duty of Loyalty to
thine Anointed: If they will not be converted, confound them O Lord, confound
them, and as many as lift up their hands against, or withdraw their hands from
my Lord the King, Amen.

You see what is meant by these words, 1 a. 2 a.
They despised him, will you now see, Why they despised him? why it was,
Because they looked upon him as a single man; How shall this man save us?
Happily they thought him greater then any of themselves in particular; but they
thought themselves in a collective or Representative Body greater then him, the
King: and this brings me to the unfolding of the second Question, which is,

Whether the King be singulis major, greater then single persons, but Universis
minor, less then collected Persons, or the Body Representative?

I shall not need to speak of the first Branch of this Question, viz. Whether
the King be Singulis major, Greater then any single Person? For it is not
denied by any, or if by any, yet only by such, who are more Beasts then Men,
and live more by Sense then by Reason, or Religion; or rather have lost both
their Sense, their Reason, and their Religion; The enquiry therefore here must
be, upon the other branch of this Question, viz. Whether the King be Universis
minor, less then the Body Representative? For this was the thing in agitation
in this late wicked Age, and affirmed by these wicked men, the Children of
Belial, who did de facto, murder King Charles I. of blessed memory, and would
have done as much upon King Charles II. if they could have fastened upon him at
Worcester; but God, I trust, has preserved him for better times.

I must at first take leave to tell them, That the Ground on which they build
is false, and mere Sophistry; That the assumption and Inference which they
build is weak, and mere Fallacy For thus they argue:

The Fountain or Cause of a King is greater then the King; but the People
Representative, is the Fountain and Casue of the King; Therefore the People
Representative is greater then the King.

And here I say, The Ground is false, the Assumption is untrue, and the
Inference therefore is so too.

1. The Ground is taken from an old Axiom, Quickquid efficit tale, est ma gis
tale; whatsoever effects a thing, is greater then the thing effected; This
though true, Ante effectum productum, before the effect produced; yet it is
often false, Post effectus productionem, after the production of the effect, v.
g.

The Fountain was once bigger then the River; but now the River is bigger then
the Fountain: A spark of fire was once more Fire then all the Wood in the
Chimney; but when the Wood becomes one Flame, the Wood is more Fire then the
Spark: You see the Ground is not ever true; and sure I am, the Assumption laid
upon this Groundwork is never true, viz.

The People is the Fountain or Cause Efficient of the King; For God (as I have
showed you before, and whether I referr you) is the only Efficient of Monarchy:
Only I add thus much;

Were it so that the People did make the King, yet it would not follow, That
therefore the People is greater then the King; For this Axiom is true only in
those Agents, in whom the Quality by which they work is Inherent, and from whom
it cannot be separated; But the People (if they had Power to make the King)
have divested themselves of that Power, and the King is not under them, and
Over them, not only Over them, Sigillatim, one by one, but also Conjunctim,
over altogether: Else the Body Representative need not petition him, for they
might command him; They need not else call him their Sovereign, but their
Fellow-Subject; They need not else write, To the Kings most Excellent Majesty;
but, To my very Loving Friend: But you remember the usual style of the Body
Representative:

To the Kings most excellent Majesty, We your Majestys most humble Subjects in
this present Parliament Assembled.

And this I hope, is not a Complement, or Pro forma tantum, only for show, or
fashion sake; No, They meant what they said; for they called God to witness
it: and so by their own Confession and Practice, they acknowledged, The King,
not only Singulis, but Universis major, to be over as well the whole Body, as
Particular Persons.

But alas, how suddenly they forgot and forfeited their acknowledgements and
Duties, this day sadly remembers us, which was the Day wherein King Charles I.
was murdered by Sonns of Belial, who despised him, and taught the world
another Lesson, That the King is Universis minor, The Parliament, the House of
Commons is above the King, the Army above all.

But the contrary will appear, and I shall make my Proposition good; 1. By
Scripture. 2. By Fathers. 3. By Reason. And 4. By that which is grounded on all
these, The Law of England.

And that I may not too far transgress the time, 1. By Scripture.
instead of many Texts, I shall referr you only to two or three, and first
weigh seriously I beseech you, and ponder well those words of the Army Royal,
when they were to join in Battle, and to pitch the field against Absolon, the
General of the Rebels, and his Rebellious Army; When David had appionted three
Chiefs over all his Cavelry and Infantry, viz. Joab, Abishai, and Ittai, and
said withal, He would go forth himself; No, said they, 2 Samuel 18.3.
No, said they, The People, and the People represented, the Representative Body
of the People, the Great Council, the Council of War, and the Council of State,
the three Lords Generals, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, and the
Speakers of both Houses, and give him their Reason for their Negative Vote, and
the best Reason in the world too, Salus Populi, Salus Regni; The safety of the
People, and the safety of the Kingdom, both depending upon the safety of the
King, saying, If we fly away: they will not care for us, neither if half of us
dye will they care for us; but now, thou art better then ten thousand of us,
i.e. Thou art worth us all, thou art over and above us all, thou art greater
then us all.

In the next place, I beseech you to weigh seriously the words of St. Peter, 1
Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as Supreme; Mark the word, it is, (...), Submit your selves; It is
not, Submit your self, every single man of you, one by one, but it is, Submit
your selves, all of you together; and that not only to the Inferior
Magistrate, but to the King, as the Supreme over them, and you all.

Certainly St. Peter never intended an Absurdity, or an Impossibility, when he
called the King, (...) Supreme; yet he had committed both, an Impossibility,
and an Absurdity, if the People were above the Supreme, or (...) a Supreme
above the Supreme; For so there should be two Supreams, which is an Absurdity,
as absurd to suppose one Kingdom to have two Supreams, as one Firmament to have
two Suns, as one Heaven to have two Gods: and an Impossibility is it too; For
the two Supreams might be contrary Masters, and command contrary things, and
command to be obeyed by one and the same Subjest; But no man can serve two
Masters, says the Master of us all.

But St. Peter is clear from and against all such Absurdities and
Impossibilities; and that you may clearly see, if you please to read the
Context, which does subordinate the Body Collective and Representative to the
King.

The Body Collective is the People, and St. Peter expressly subordinates them,
saying Submit your selves to the King.

The Body Representative is the Inferior Magistrates, the Peers, Nobles, and
Counselors, call them what you will, The House of Lords, and the House of
Commons, And St. Peter does expressly subordinate them too, saying, They are
Governors sent by him, i.e. by the King; For (...) cannot Grammatically relate
to any word but (...); The King is the Antecedent to Him the Relative, else
questionless there is false Greek, and little less then Nonsense.

Who makes the Inferior Governors but the Chief Governor? Who is the Chief
Governor but the King? God only as the Principal Efficient made the King; and
the King only as the Instrumental Efficient from God made the Inferior
Magistrates; God only can De Jure unmake the King: and the King only can De Jure
unmake the Inferior Magistrates; For they are sent, or made, only by him, and
the refore they are not Coordinate with him, but subordinate to him.

And so if you will believe either the Prophet Samuel, or the Apostle St Peter,
The King is as well Universis as singulis major, greater both then every
particular Person, and the Body Representative; i.e. In plain English, then
People and Parliament, viz. where King and Parliament are distinguished,
because the Parliament is sent, or called, or made a Parliament by the King.

Shall I commend to you one place more? I will do it in a word; and it is in
the Psalms, where God says of the King, I have exalted one chosen out of the
People; Psalm. 89.20.
and these words are worth your observation; Unum electum e populo, not a
populo, One chosen out of the people by God, not by the people; and that one so
chosen by God, God h^^^ exalted; and over whom has God exalted him? over the
People, or over no body; and not only over this or that part of the People, but
over the People, Indefinitely, i. e. over all the People Generally.

Secondly, I make this good by the Fathers; 2. By the Fathers.
and I begin with Tertullian; We honor, says he, the Emperor in such sort, as
is lawful for us, and expedient for him; we reverence him as a mortal man, next
to God, of whom he holds all his Authority, subject to God; and so we make
him Sovereign over all, in that we make him subject but to God alone.

Sicut in toto mundo Deus Rex est, Ad Antioch. 9.53.
et potestatem exercet in omnibus, says Athanasius; As God is King over all the
World, and exercises his power in and over all Creatures, so the King is over
all earthly men: (Over All.)

Cum super Imperatorem nemo sit nisi solus Deus, De Schism. Donat. lib. 3.
says Optatus Milevita^us; Since there is no man, (no Representations of men)
above the Emperor, but only God alone, which made the Emperor, Donatus by
advancing himself above the Emperor, does exceed the bounds of Humanity, and
makes himself a God rather then a Man, in that he fears and reverenceth him
not, whom all men should honor next after God; (All men should honor him, and
therefore All men are below him.

Siquis de nobis, Hist. lib. 5. c. 1.
Rex, justitiae limits transcendere voluerit, etc. says Gregorius Turonensis
to Childerick that wicked King of France; If any one of us, O King, do
transgress the bounds of Justice, you have power to correct; but if you exceed
your limits, who shall chastise you? (Who shall chastise you? None, No man, no
Assembly of men whatsoever,) who but God? And if none but God may chastise the
King, surely the King is above all men because he may chastise any men.

I might be infinite this way; Ep. 170. ad Lud. Regem
a word from St. Barnard, Si totus Orbis adversum me conjuraret, ut quippiam
molirer adversus Regiam Majestatem, ego tamen Deum, etc. If the whole World
should conspire against me, to the end that I should do something against the
Kings Majesty, yet I would fear God, and not dare to offend the King who is
ordained by God, and by him appointed over me: (over me, and over all men) and
so he says elsewhere, Quis vos excepit? who has excepted any man?

And Aquinas himself tell us, That by the Faith of Christ, and Order of
Justice, 2 a. 2 ae. q. 104 Art. 6.
all (All) Inferiors are bound to obey their Superiors; neither the Godly nor
Faithful are either exempted, or excused, but even they are tied by the Law of
Christ to obey the secular Prince: Nay, he goes a little farther, saying; If a
Successive King, or King by Inheritance turn Tyrant, Recurrendum est ad omnium
Regum Deum; We must fly to God, the King of all Kings, who only has power over
Kings. And certainly, If God only be above the King, the King is above the
People.

Will you see the same confirmed thirdly by Reasons? 3. By reasons.
I assume the Proposition again then, and say, The King is above the People,
not only Seorsim asunder, but also Conjunctim together; Because,

1. The King is, Sponsus Regni, the Husband of the Kingdom, and at his
Coronation is wedded with a Ring unto his Kingdom; not to the Kingdom in the
Natural capacity of the People, to this and that particular man and woman; (for
so the King should have many Wives) but in the Politic capacity of the people,
as All the people make but one politic Bridegroom, (and so the King has but
one wife) And therefore as the Wife is to obey her Husband, and therefore the
Husband to Rule his wife: Ephesians. 5.22.
and therefore the Husband is over his wife: so the People, All the people are
to submit themselves unto the King; and the King is over and above them, not
only Divisim, one by one, but Conjunctim also, altogether.

2. The King is above the People, because the King is the Head of the People;
The Head not of these or those particular Members, but of all the People; For
all the People make but one Body; and one Body has evermore a Head, and but
one Head; Otherwise, if it have no Head at all, or more Heads then one, It is a
Monster; And therefore as a Body Natural consists of many Members, and the Head
is above, not this or that Member asunder, but all the Members together, as one
Body: so the Body Politic consists of many Members, and the King is the Head
of, and above, not this or that Member alone, but all the Members together; The
Body Natural is ruled by one Head, and the Body Politic ought to be ruled by
one King.

3. The King is above the people, because the King is Oeconomus, or Pater, the
Master (...) Father, and the whole Kingdom is Familia, the Family (...)
Children or Servants, He is Dominus, the Lord; and They are Domus, the House;
Now as Dominus domui praest, The Lord bears Rule in his House, The Father is
above his Children, The Master above his Servants; not this, or that Child, or
each Child a apart; not this or that Servant, or each Servant apart; but all
the Children, and all the Servants together: so the King is above all the
People together.

Agesilaus foresaw the danger of this Distinction, and the danrous consequence
of it, if it were allowed, and therefore to a Citizen of Sparta, who desired an
alteration of Government, he returned this Answer; That kind of Rule which a
man disdains in his own house is very unfit to govern a Kingdom by.

Beloved, make up you the Application your selves; It may be your Children and
your Servants, which are the Representative Body of your little Kingdom, your
Family, hold together; Is it fit therefore that they should command you, or
turn you out of doors? Will any but Unruly Servants, or Graceless Children say,
They are therefore above, over, and greater then their Master, then their
Father? Nor is it fit, though all the Subjects of a Kingdom conspire and
combine together, that they should command the King; Nor will any but unruly,
undutiful, unthankful, Graceless and Rebellious Subjects say, They are, or
esteem themselves to be above the King; They that say so speak against Reason;
For the King is the Husband, The People the Wife: The King is the Head, The
People are the Members: The King is the Father, the People are the Children:
The King is the Master, the People are the Servants of the Kingdom.

They that say so, speak against Learning; For it has been the Universal
Opinion of the Fathers, That the King is inferior to none but God; and They
speak against the Letter and Sense of the Scripture; For the Scripture calls
such Despisers of the King, Children of Belial.

And lastly, they speak against the Common Law of England, which is my fourth
and last way, 4. By the law of England.
I promised to make this good by, viz. That the King is above the People: and
for the Common Law of England, I shall refer you to Bracton, Fortescue, Sr.
Thomas Smith, Thomas de Walsingham, Cambden and others.

Bracton thus, Omnis sub Rege, Ipse sub nullo nisi tantum sub Deo; Parem non
habet in Regno suo, Lib. 1. cap. 8.
De Chartis Regijs et factis Regum, nec privatae personae, nec Justitiarij
debent disputare. Every one is under the King, and the King is under none but
God; He has no Equal, no Peer, (much less Superior in his Kingdom; Of his
Royal Graunts and Actions, none, neither private Persons, nor Judges may
dispute.

Certainly, If the King be only under God; then neither the People, nor their
Representatives are above the King; Indeed in Bulk the Body is greater then the
Head, the People then the King; but in Virtue, in Power and Authority, the Head
excels the Body; the King is above the Parliament; For the Parliament by
virtue of Representation is but the Body of the Kingdom, whereas the King is
the Head of that Body, and the Representative of God himself; and certainly He
that represents God, is above them that represents the People.

Thomas de Walsingham mentions a Letter written to the Bishop of Rome, from the
Parliament held at Lincoln, in which Letter are these words, Scimus Pater
sanctissime, et notorium est, Anno 1301.
a prima institutione Regni Angliae, quod certum etc. We know most holy Father,
and it is manifest from the very beginning of the Kingdom of England, as well
in the times of the Britains, as of the Angles, that the certain and direct
Dominion has belonged unto the King; neither have the Kings of England (by
reason of the unbounded pre-eminence of the Royal Dignity and Custom observed
in all Ages) answered, or ought to answer before any Judge Ecclesiastical or
Civil.

Certainly the Pa^liament is either an Ecclsiastical, or Civil Judge or both;
Be it which it will, or both, if it will, The King is above both, because
neither of them may call him to account; He is of an unbounded pre-eminence,
and therefore by no means under the Peoples gir^le.

Nec populus Acephalus (says Fortescue) corpus vocari meretur, quia ut in
Naturalibus Capite detru^cato, Cap. 13.
residuum, non corpus sed Truncum appellamus, sic in Politicis sine Capite
communitas nullatenus corporatur. A headless People, or a People without a
Head, may not be called a Body, because as in a Natural Body, the Head being
cut off, the residue or remaining part is not called a Body, but a Trunck or
stump: so in a Politic Body, the Community or Representee, if without a Head,
is not a Body Certainly then, If the King makes the Community a Body, and the
Community without the King is not a Body, the King is above the Community,
because the Head is above the Body.

He says, Ad ^tutelam legis, subditorum, ac eorum corporum et bonorum, Rex
erectus est, et ad hanc potestatem a populo effluxam ipse habet; A King is
ordained for the defense of the Law of his Subjects, for the defense of their
Bodies and their Goods; and hereunto he receives Power of his People: and
therefore, says the Objector, The King is accountable to his People, and
therefore the People is above the King.

But withal, the Objector may know, That in the same place, the Author answers
the Objection, King, saying, Rex hujusmods, such a King; i. e. A King merely
Politic; or a King whose Government is merely Policicall; but the Government
of England is as well Royal as Political; Regnum Angliae in Dominium Politicum
et Regale prorupit; The Kingdom of England consists of a Regal and Politic
Dominion; Et in utroque, tam Regali, quam Politico, Cap. 9.
populo suo dominatur, so are his words; And the King of England is the
Governor of his People, as well by a Regal, as by a Politic Dominion.

I add, In reference to his Power, he is a Regal King, and Rex Naturalis, a
King by Birth; In reference to his Duty, he is a Politic King, or Rex
Nationalis, a King by Law; but in both a King; and therefore above the People
in both respects.

Nor is that any bar to the Kings Supremacy, Fol. 56.
which is alleged either out of Brrcton; Rex sub lege est, quia lex facit
Regem; The King is under the Law, because the Law makes the King.

For though the King be under the Directing power of the Law, as the Law is the
Rule of Justice; yet He is above the Corrective power of the Law, as the Law is
the Instrument of Justice.

Or out of Fleta; Rex habet in popule regendo superiores, De Justice. subst. l.
1. c. 17.
legem per quam factus est, et curiam suam, videlicet, Comites et Barons; The
King has Superiors in the governing of his People; The Law by which he is
made, and his Council* to wit, his Earls and Barons.

For the Law does not make the King, Right, to what was his own before; nor is
the Counsel any other way above him, then to direct and advise him.

In a word, The Law declares and publishes the Kings right to the Crown; The
People admit the King to the Possession of his Right; The Council advise him,
and direct him in the safest way of Governing his People, and they are all but
as Instruments and Servants to him, and so He is above them all.

The King the Life, the Head and Authority of all things that be done in the
Realm of England, Lib. 2. cap. 4
says Sr. Thomas Smith in his Commonwealth of England.

The King of England, Summam et Supremam potestatem in omnes Regni ordines
habet, Cambd. Elis. page 39.
says Cambden, has the chief and Supreme Power ove^ all Orders and sorts of
People in the Kingdom, Supremam potestatem et merum Imperium apud nos habet,
nec in Imperij clientela est, Brit. p. 132.
nec investituram ab alio accepit, nec praeter Deum Superiorem agnoscit, says
the same Cambden; He has Sovereign Power over us, He is not under the
Protection of the Roman Empire, not does he take investiture from any other,
nor does he acknowledge any above him, but God alone.

Certainly then the Distinction of Universis minor, and Singulis major, was not
yet coined; For he that is under none but God, is above all the People, unless
they be God.

And this is yet made as plain, if not plainer, by and in a Preface to a
Statute in the Reign of Henry VIII. 24. Hen. 8. cap. 12.
where it is said, By diverse sundry old Authenitque Histories and Chronicles,
it is manifestly declared and expressed, that this Realm of England is an
Empire, and so has been accepted in the world, governed by one Supreme Head
and King, having the Dignity and Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the
same, unto whom a Body Politic compact of all sorts and degrees of People,
divided in terms, and by names of Spiritualty and Temporalty, have been
boundened and owen to bear, next to God, a Natural and humble obedience: and
thus afterward, This your Graces Realm recognizeth no Superior under God, 25.
Hen. 8.
but only your Grace.

The words are worth your marking, We, the Realm of England; i. e. Surely the
Subjects Conjunctim, or Vniversalitas Angliae, All the People, whether
Represented in Parliament or otherwise; Owe the King a Natural Obedience; i. e.
by the Law of Nature, or the Divine Law, not by Popular Pactions, or Politic
and National Agreements, we are bound to obey the King; and the Reason is,
Because the King is the Supreme Head: i. e: properly Universorum, of all the
People; and all this is not obscurely employed; but, manifestly expressed, and
that not by single and yesterday Pamphlets, but, by sundry old Authentic
Histories and Chronicles.

Would you have it yet plainer? Look ye then upon the Oaths ye have taken in
the presence of Almighty God; The Oath of Allegiance, The Oath of Supremacy,
and your own Parliamentary Protestation. In each of these you have sworn to
maintain the Kings Sovereignty, in all Causes and over all Persons
Ecclesiastical and Civil.

A Sovereignty he has, not only over singular persons, but over all persons;
and you have sworn to maintain it; and as you endeavor it so God will help you.

But you may fear, you may justly fear, If you have un-Sworne that, or Sworn
against that, which you have so Solemnly Sworn to maintain, That GOD will not
only not help you, but wound you, wound you while you live with the Infamy of
Rebels, and a tormenting Conscience, (Witness Alderman Hoyle, Sr. Henry Phane
Senior, and some more) and wound you when you are dead with the Eternity of
Fire, and all the Torments of Hell.

From both which Almighty God deliver you for his Son, Jesus Christ his sake;
and from which that you may be delivered, I pray God give you grace to
acknowledge and esteem King Charles II. to be Universis as well as Singulis
Major, Greater then, and over all; because, They that think less of him, do
despise him, and are therefore the Chil^ren of Belial, as they are, and shall
be in future Chronicles, who thought less of King Charles I. and therefore
murdered him.

And so are they that bring him no presents, which is my third Consideration,
and to be handled the next year. In the mean time, God in mercy, etc.

Anno Dom. 1653.
1 SAMUEL 10.27. They brought him no Presents.
WE are by the Grace of God, Pars. 3.
met here again to remember a sad and mournful day, That day, on which the best
King, that ever England had, was murdered; I chan^ (...) my Text yet, because
I am yet to show you the Privative cond tion of Rebels, or Children of Belial,
from these words, They ^^ought him no Presents.

And I shall not spend much time in the Explication of these words; The^ are
obvious enough to the thinnest understanding, and th^yi^ end thus much; These
men, these Children of Belial di^no^ contribute to the maintenance of the King,
They did not ^yd im, they did not assist him; They aided him not with A^ms,
they assisted him not with money; They withheld his Vecti^li from him; They
brought him not his Customs, his Crown-Re^enues,, his Subsidies, and
Poll-monies.

I shall therefore spend my ensuing Discourse, in resolving that Question,
which does (almost Naturally) arise from these last words, viz.

Whether it be lawful to bear Arms, or contribute for the maintenance of a War
against the King?

This Text resolves it Negatively, and says, It is not lawful: For they who
brought the King no presents, were therefore Sons of Belial; and, therefore
much more are they the Sons of Belial, who fight against, or contribute to
maintain a War against the King.

And this I shall endeavor to make good, 1. Removendo, by removing all
Objections that I meet withal, which color this Opinion.

2. Moven^o, by commending to you some choice and pregnant places of Scripture,
which give the checkmate to this Opinion.

3. Propendendo, by explaining those places of Scripture by the practices of
the Fathers.

4. Proponendo, by laying before your face some of those fearful Judgments,
which have befallen some men who have born Arms against their Kings, as fearful
Examples for them; who contribute to the maintenance of such Wars.

And first for the Objections, and the first of any validity I meet with, is
that of David's taking up Arms against King Saul; 1 Samuel 22.1, 2. 1 Samuel 24.18.
David the Subject took up Arms against Saul the King, and was not rebuked for
it, either by any Divines, or Lawyers, or Statesmen. Many of his Fellow
Subjects, to the number of 600. took up Arms with him; and very likely many
more contributed to the maintenance of that Army: nor yet were they reprehended
either by any Rules of Divinity, Law, or Policy; and, Therefore Subjects may
take up Arms, and contribute to the maintenance of a War against a King, if
he be an Oppressor of their Properties, Liberties, or Religion.

And to this first colorable Objection, Allegation is false; For how can it
possibly be imagined, That David took up Arms against Saul, when we find him
continually flying from, and never fighting with Saul? Yea, 1 Samuel 24.6.
so far was he from fighting with him, or taking up Arms against him, that when
God had delivered Saul into his hands two several times, 1 Samuel 26.9
once in the Wilderness of Engedi, and once in the Hill of Hachilah, David
durst not himself, nor would he suffer any man else, to stretch forth his hand
against King Saul, and for this reason, 1 Samuel 24.2
Because he was the Lords Anointed.

Certainly David neither raised, nor entertained these 600 men, to fight or
encounter with or against Saul; For what are 600 to so many thousand as Saul
had at Command? 1 Samuel 26.2
He never went without 3000 men after him, David used these 600, only for Spies
or Scouts, that they might give him Intelligence where Saul's ambushments lay,
that so he might (as is said) the better avoid his fury. ver. 4,
Certainly therefore David with his 600 men's is very unlearnedly urged as an
Example of Disloyalty.

Nor will that Addition help it, viz. That David was 40000 strong in the days
of Saul; and likely he would not lie still with that great Army; 1 Chr. 1.12.
No, no, They had no such foolish Oath in those Loyal days, as Never stir law,
It is fit let the King know himself; It is high time King Saul were removed
from his evil Counselors, Doeg and his fellows.

For first, you cannot but know, at least you cannot deny, That these 40000
come not to David until Saul's death; if you observe the story; Ver. 22.
For it is said expressly, They came to David to help him, until it was a great
Host, like the Host of God; And these are the numbers of the Bands, Ver. 23.
that were ready Armed to the War, and come to David to Hebron, to turn the
Kingdom of Saul unto him, according to the Word of the Lord; And what made
these men come to David at this time? It was Saul's death; and they knew, David
was appointed by God to succeed him.

But secondly, admit it for truth, That David was 40000 strong in the da^es of
Saul; yet this is so far from being an Argument to justisie Rebellion, or
taking up Arms against the King, as that it does altogether condemn it; For
notwithstanding so great strength, yet David never pursued Saul, never sought
after Saul, never discharged one Canon, one Murderer, one Gun against Saul,
but still fled from him; and to put him out of all such Fears and jealousies,
got himself and his Forces out of Saul's Kingdom, and begged a place for his
habitation of Achish the King of Gath. Let all Rebels follow David in the
whole Example, and we shall both allow this Quotation, and also commend their
Imitation; yes, and pray they may have so many Followers, that there may be no
Rebel left to lift up an hand against the Lords Anointed.

The second Objection, I meet with, of any colorable strength; Jonathan from
Saul; Their whole Act. being nothing but a mediation in the behalf of Jonathan,
and nothing less then a Rebellion against Saul, as any man may evidently
percieve, if he reads the whole Story: and so Junius, Borrhaus, Osiander, and
Willet himself say and determine of it; and Peter Martyr adds, That if the
People did more then pray, if they pressed violently upon Saul in making a
mutiny, they sinned; Liberaverunt says St. Jerome, Redimerunt says Tremelius,
In Reg. c. 14
and so says Gregory Magnus, i. e. They delivered, they redeemed, they freed
Jonathan that he dyed not; And how did they this? Certainly not Fustibus, but
precibus, by Prayers, not by Pole-axes; For if the did more then pray, says
Peter Martyr, they sinned.

I forbear likewise, 2. The Example of Elisha's shutting the door, 2 Reg. 6.32.
and holding fast the Messenger that came from King Joram to take away his
Head: For Elisha had Revelation from God, as well of Jorams repentance, as of
his former and furious Message. And 3. Of Jehu who killed this King Joram; For
this was by special and particular command from God, 2 Reg. 9.14.24.
and not by any Law of God or Man; and extraordinary Oracles may not be our
Examples; And 4. Of Ahikam, For he defended not the Prophet from the Tyranny of
King Jehojakim, but from the fury of the people; Jer. 26.4.
Had he had any hand in that tumultuous insurrection with the People, he had
been a Rebel like the People; but being he did what he did, by that credit and
authority which he had with and under the King, he showed himself both a
faithful Magistrate, and a Loyal Subject. And 5. the withstanding of Uzziah the
King, by Azariah the Priest; For this was by words, 2 Chronicles. 26.17.
not by Swords, and besides, God struck him with Leprosy; and so by the Law he
was to be removed from the concourse of the people, for fear of of Infection.
And 6. That of Deposing Athelia; For She was but an Usurper of the Crown.)

The second Objection, I say, of any seeming validity is that of Jeroboam; 1
Reg. 12.
from whence it is argued thus; Rehoboam the Son of Solomon refused to ease the
People of their burdens; and therefore they rebelled against him, and set up
Jeroboam to be a King over them; and this was so far (says the Objector) from
being a sin, that the Text says, It was from the Lord; and Therefore Subjects
may (in some cases) bear Arms lawfully against the King, and without sin.

And this Objection I answer thus, The Scripture here sets down Rei gestae
veritatem, non Facti aequitatem, the Truth of a thing done, not the Right of a
Thing to be done; Quia factum legimus non ideo faoi ^ndum credimus, says St.
Austin, sectando enim exemplum, violemus praeceptum. If we follow the Example
of men, we may break the Commandment of God; Nor can we any more be free from
the breach of the 5. Commandment, and Disobedience, if we rebel against our
King upon this Example, then we can from the breach of the 8. Commandment, and
Theft, if we plunder and rob our Neighbors, upon Example, of the Israelites
spoiling the Egyptians. In a word, God made Jeroboam King, and in that Act
punished Solomon's Idolatry, and Rehoboams folly; but notwithstanding, This Act
of the People, in revolting from Rehoboam, was Rebellion, and so called by God
himself, in two several places: 1 Reg. 12.19. 2 Chronicles. 10.19.
And Israel rebelled against the House of David unto this day. And Israel
rebelled against the House of David unto this day.

And God punished this Rebellion of theirs so fearfully, that he first gave
them up to Idolatry, and afterward drove them out into Captivity. And I do
assure you, That there are ten Examples for one to show, Rebels have been first
Idolaters, and so hated by God, and afterward Slaves, and so hated by Man.
That we may never fall into the one, or the other, either Idolatry or
Captivity, Almighty God keep us from Rebellion.

And whatsoever some People say, and make show of, I will make it good, That
there is not one more Example in Scripture of any color, or worth a straw to
dispute, much less to justify the taking up of Arms against the King.

There is one Objection made from the example of our own Progenitors, Richard
the Second was deposed and deposed by Parliament, and therefore says the
Objector, A King of England may be resisted. With shame and sorrow, I canfess
the Factum, but without blushing, and in truth, Ius^um; The honest Bishop of
Carlisle opposed it, and howsoever the Rebels of those days ended that good
man's days in prison, for his honesty; yet by this very Act of deposing King
Richard, they brought such miseries and mischiefs, such Battails and
Bloudsheds, such Rapines and Murders upon this Kingdom, that until two Kings,
viz.

One Prince, ten Dukes, two Marquesses, one and twenty Earls, seven and twenty
Lords two Viscounts, one Lord Prior, One Judge, one hundred, thirty and nine
Knights, four hundred one and twenty Esquires, Gentlemen of a vast number, and
Common Soldiers to the number of an hundred thousand, were slain in Civil
Wars, England never saw happy days. And setting Kings and Princes aside, I
believe there has been more lost in a latter Rebellion against King Charles I.
That we may yet see and enjoy Peace and Happiness in our days, God keep us
all from bearing Arms against King Charles II. when he shall be enabled by Gods
raising him Friends abroad, and converting or consternating the Hearts of His
Enemies at home, to require his own, Amen.

For it is altogether unlawful, as appears Secondly by Scripture; 2. Scripture.
and the first Scripture I offer to your Consideration is that of Moses; Exodus
22.28.
Speak not evil of the Ruler of thy people. And this very place touched St.
Paul so far that it brought him to a Peccavi, when he had suffered his Tongue
to run a little over, and be to lavish but with the High Priest; (and certainly
the King is higher then the High Priest:) St. Paul would never have said, The
Lord smite thee thou whited wall, if he had known the man, to whom he speak,
Act. 22.3, 5.
had been the High Priest.

But this place, because is may be extended to Rulers in General, and therefore
may meet with some colorable evasion, I shall give you some other Texts
concerning Governors in particular, and especially and namely Kings, Eccl.
8.2, 3.
viz. I Counsel thee says Solomon, to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in
regard of the Oath of God; Be not hasty to go out of his sight; stand not in an
evil thing, for he does whatsoever pleases him; where the word of a King is,
there is power; and who may say to him, What do thou?

Mark the words, Beloved, and deal truly with your own Souls, as you will
answer it at the dreadful, great and fearful day of Judgment, I Counsel thee, I
that have more Wisdom then ever any man had before me, or shall have after me,
I that am Directed by the Holy Ghost, I Counsel thee; i.e. I Command thee from
God, To keep the Kings Commandment, i.e. Whatsoever he Commands thee, so it be
not against the Word of God; And what did the late King Command thee? He
Commanded thee to assist him with men, money, and Ammunitions He Commanded thee,
not to furnish an Army that was raised against him, by what Power soever, under
whose Conduct or Command soever, with either men, money, or Ammunition.

And Could any of you doubt, whether you were bound to observe and obey that
Command? Solomon told you then, you were, and tells you now, you are, and tells
you the reason why you were and are, Even in regard of the Oath of God; And
what is that Oath of God? Why it is that Covenant thou did make with, it is
that Oath thou did enter into, to thy late Sovereign Lord King Charles. viz.
The Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy.

But it may be thou will say, This was the Oath of man; It was so, but withal,
It was the Oath of God too; For thou did make and take these Oaths to the
King, by and with Gods approbation; Thou did call God to be the Witness of
thy true Intention, Endeavor and Resolution to perform those Oaths; and assure
thy self, If thou dare so far to sin against thine own Soul for any by-respect
whatsoever, either for fear of plundering and undoing, by Death or Torment, or
for hope of keeping thy Estate and getting more by Life and preferment, thou
shall find God to be a severe punisher of thee: Exodus 20.7.
God will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain. He that uses
Gods Name to vanity, is damnable, and in a possibility of Damnation; and
therefore, He that uses Gods name to Perjury, is damned, and in a certninty of
Damnation.

Be not hasty to go out of his sight, i. e. says Tremelius, Ne ab obsequio
illius te subducito animo, perturbato. Do not draw thy neck out of this yoke,
withdraw not thy self from his, the Kings, Allegiance, in an angry mood or
discontentednesse of Spirit.

Stand not in an evil thing; i.e. Imperturbation et Rebellione quae tibi malum
allatura erit, In thy fullinesse, in thy peevishness, in thy discontentedness,
in thy Rebellion; If thou do stand out and refusest, or neglectest the Kings
offer of Grace and Pardon, This thy standing out will at last bring mischief
and evil upon thee.

For He, the King, does whatsoever pleases him, i.e, He has a long hand, and
though for a while thou be sheltred from him, yet at last, He will reach thee,
and condemn the to the Gallows, if thou bear Arms against him; if thou
contributest to maintain a War against him.

Where the word of a King is, there is Power, Power to break a Loyal Subjects
heart into Duty, and Power to break a Rebels heart into Death and Confusion;
For a while, The word of a King, like the word of God, may be slighted and
resisted, but in the end it will appear to be a word of power, and shall be
suffered with Death, where it was not obeyed with Duty.

And who may say to him, the King, What do thou? i. e. Questiones
affirmativas resolvendo negative, by the old Rule, None, may say unto the King
what do thou? ot call him to account; None may not the Judges of his Bench,
not the Captains of his Host, not the Grooms of his Stool, not the Masters of
his Horse, not the Nobles and Gentlemen of his Chamber, nor yet his Great
Council; None whatsoever may say it.

It is not fit, says Job, not fit for any man whosoeoer, Job 34.18.
nor fit for any sort of men whatsoever, to say to a King, Thou art wicked, or
to Princes, you are ungodly; and Solomon gives you the reason of it, saying,
Against the King there is no rising up, Pro. 30.31.
Nemo qui insurgit, says Junius, No man that rises up against him now; Nemo qui
insurgat, says Clarius, No man that may rise up against him hereafter; No man,
either Clergy or Layety, No man, either private Persons or Representative Body;
None, either Lords or Commons, Amen, say I, I would to God, there had been none
of late, against King Charles I. If there may be none hereafter against King
Charles II. If there be, they will find Power in his word, to punish those who
resisted the word of his Father; and that when come to pass, they will find
Answer enough against all Objections they can raise agafnst this last Passage.

Thirdly and Lastly, for I will not burden you with many, though I could with
a whole Volumn; I present you with that of St. Paul, even that which some
Anti-Royallists, because they cannot evade it: countercolour it and excuse it,
do scoffingly and contemptuously call our great and Goliath Text; viz. Let every
Soul be subject to the higher Powers; Romans 13.1.2.
for there is no power but of God. The Powers that be are ordained of God;
whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and
they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.

Here again let me advise you to deal ingenuously, sincerly, and truly with
your own Souls; and here give me leave to ask you, or rather, do you seriously
ask of, and enquire, and Catechize your own Souls; who, or what do thou
think is meant by the Higher Powers? Do thou, can thou think, That nothing
is meant hereby but a Naked Authority? as Mr. Burrowes would have thee believe;
2 Thessalonians. 2.11.
Take heed thou be not given over or give thy self over, to believe a lie:
Take heed, I say, take heed of such a construction, of such an Exposition; for
admit that (...) did signisie Power in the Abstract, or the Power of the Law,
without relation to the Person that made the Law; yet (...) must of necessity
note the Person, and the Superiority of the Person that has that Power
conferred upon and given to him; and such Power no Person in England has, but
only the King of England: His great Council may Jus dicere, propose Laws, but
He only can jus dare, make Laws; They the Lords and Commons may give weight
and Testimony to the Law; but He only, The King, can give Force and Authority
to the Law: And therefore by Higher Power, we English men must needs understand
the King of England; To whom, the King every Soul, i.e. All People in the
Kingdom of England, must be subject, subject Actively, If He commands not what
is against Gods word, Subject Passively, if He do; whether He do or do not, we
must be so far Subject, as that we may not Resist: For if we do, we shall
receive to our selves Damnation; Not the Plundering of our Goods at Home, not
the hanging of our Bodies in the street or field; but the Damnation, the
everlasting Damnation of our Souls and Bodies in Hell for ever.

Now search and examine your selves; Art thou any where in the whole word of
God commanded to bear Arms, or to contribute to maintain a War against thy
Lawful and Rightful King? Art thou any where forbidden by the word of God to
Assist thy King in his just Wars? Nay, Does not the word of God forbid thee
That, and command the This? It does, thou know it does; and so I conclude
this Proposition from the Scripture, and say, Therefore it is not lawful for
any man to bear Arms, or to contribute to the maintenance of a War against the
King: For no man may curse the King in his thoughts, for no man may revile the
King by his words, For no man may resist the King with his Hands; yea,
Therefore every man must assist the King with Arms, and contribute to the
maintetenance of a War for him with his Purse: because they that do not, are
the Children of Belial; The Children of Belial said, How shall this man save
us? and they despised him, and brought him no presents.

And this I shall endeavor to make good, Thirdly, 3. Fathers.
By the contemplation and conversation of the Fathers, by their Practice and by
their Opinion; and that I may not tire you, or my self; I shall give you but a
Taste instead of a Feast, and name you but Few instead of Many.

I begin with Justine Martyr, Ad inquisitionem, vestram, Secund. Apolog. ad
Anto. Imp. p. 113.
Christianos nos esse profitemur, etc. says he to Antoninus, an Emperor bad
enough; At your Inquisition, we Profess our selves to be Christians, though we
know Death to be the Guerdon and reward of our Profession. Did we expect an
Earthly Kingdom, we would deny our Religion, that escaping Death we might
obtain our desires; For the preservation of public peace, we Christians, O
Emperor, yield you our help and assistance.

We Christians, says Tertullian to Scapula the Viceroy, are defamed for
Seditious Persons against the Imperial Majesty; Lib. ad Scap.
but we were never yet found to be either Albinians, Nigrians, Cassians, or any
other sort of Traitors; No, we know the Emperor is ordained of God; and
therefore we love him, we honor him, we reverence him, we pray for him, and
for the welfare of his whole Empire.

Una nox pauculis faculis, etc. says he, In Apolog.
in his Apologetical Defense of the Christians, One short night with a few
Firebrarnds, or Torches would work our deliverance, and revenge our wrongs, if
it were lawful to requite evil with evil; Vetat autem Deus ut aut ab igne
humano vindicatur Divina secta, aut doleat pati in quo probatur; But God forbid
that the Christian Religion should be revenged with humane fire, or that
Christians should grieve for suffering, because in suffering they are refined,
and for suffering they are rewarded.

Apol. Atha. ad Constant.
Holy Athanasius in the clearing of himself against the Accusation of the
Arians, to Constantius the Emperor thus expresses his own Duty, and the Duty
of all good Subjects; I am not so mad, neither have I forgotten the voice of
God, which says, Curse not the King, no, not in thy heart, and backbite not the
Mighty in the secreets of thy Chamber; for the Birds of the Air shall tell it,
and the winged Foul shall bewray thee: It is not for any man to say otherwise
then well of his Majesty, in the opinion of this holy man; and therefore
certainly it is not for any man to do otherwise then well, To bear Arms, or to
contribute to maintain War against the King.

Orat. 1. in Julian.
Nazianzene the Divine, so termed for his Excellent Knowledge and profound
Learning, speaks to this purpose, Repressus est Julianus Christianorum
lachrymis, quas multas multi profuderunt, hoc unum adversus persecutorem
medicamentum habentes; Julian that great Apostata, and persecutor of
Christians, was restrained by the Tears of Christians, which many of them shed,
and powered forth abundantly unto God; nor had they any other remedy against
the Persecutor, because they knew it to be unlawful, to use any other means
then Sufferance, or else they might (having so much strength as they had) have
repelled their wrong with violence.

St. Ambrose being commanded to deliver up his Church in Millane to an Arian
Bishop, Contr. Aux. Ep. 31, 32, 33.
and his people being very sorry for his departure, he thus resolves and
comforts both himself and them; Quid turbamini? Volens nunquam vos deesram; Why
are you troubled? I will never willingly leave you; Repugnare non novi, dolere
potero, potero slere, potero gemere, adversus Arma, Milites, Gothos, Lach rymae
meae mea sunt Arma; aliter nec debeo, nec possum resistere. If I be compelled,
I have no way to resist, I can grieve and sorrow, I can weep and sigh, my Tears
are my Weapons against Soldiers, Armors, Goths; such is the Artillery and
Ammunition of a Priest; otherwise then with Tears, I neither may, nor must, nor
ought resist.

St. Chysostome in one Epistle tells us, Ep. ad Tim. 2.
That though Kings continue obstinate in Infidelity, yet they must be prayed
for, (they must not, they may not be resisted,) The Apostle commands prayers,
supplications and intercessions to be made for all men, especially for the
King: What he has said in another, you have heard before; and thither I refer
you.

St. Augustine is of the same opinion, Julianus extitit Imperator Infidel is,
Julian was an unbelieving Emperor, In Ps. 124.
he was an Apostata, an Oppressor, a Tyrant, and Idolater; yet the Christian
Soldiers served this anbelieving Emperor; They obeyed him in all things for
Christ, and when he commanded them any thing against Christ, yet they resisted
him not, though they did not obey. him.

Gregory the Great might, if he would, Ep. l. 7. Ep. 1.
but would not though he could, destroy the Lombards; The Lombards, who were
Pagans, Plunderers of goods, Robbers of Churches, Ransakers of Cities,
Persecutors of Saints, Oppressors of the Poor; These men he could have
destroyed, but he would not, because he feared God.

Fulgentius tells us, Ad Thrasim Reg.
That no kind of Sedition can stand with Religion, we may boldly maintain our
Religion, but we may not by any Act come under the suspicion of Disobedience;
it is the Apostles Doctrine, and we must obey it, Fear God and Honor the King.

Quincunque, Coun. Toled. 5. Can. 2.
whosoever of us, says the Council of Toledo, shall violate that Oath which he
has taken for the preservation of the Kings Majesty, whosoever shall attempt
to destroy or depose the King; whosoever shall aspire to the Regal Throne, let
him be accursed, cast out of the Church, and together with his Accomplices be
condemned with the Devil and his Angels eternally; let them be all tied in the
bond of Damnation, who were joined in the society of Sedition: I forbear the
Citation of more Fathers, only I shall give you a remembrance or two from
those Fathers already cited:

1. It may be, you will say, All those Kings whom those Fathers did obey, or
command us to obey, were good Kings: No, they were not; some of them were as
bad as Saul, whom David obeyed; some of them were as bad as Claudius and Nero,
whom St. Paul and Peter commanded to obey; some of them were Heathens; some of
them were Heretics; some of them were Apostata's; some of them were Idolaters;
some of them were Tyrants; most of them were bad enough.

2. If you say, The Christians did not resist, because they could not, because
they had not strength and power enough.

Yes, that they had; Tertullian tells you so; Cyprian tells you so; Gregory the
Great tells you so; The number of Christians was a Principio from a few years
after the Apostles, Nimius and Copiosus, Great and Numerous.

3. If you say, Christian Religion, and their Privileges were not yet
established.

Yes, that they were, Constantine the Great, and his Successors both gave and
established them, and daily added to their Immunities.

And hence I advise you, I entreat you, I beseech you, I conjure you, as you
hope for Heaven, as you fear Hell, that you seriously think with your selves,
who are like to speak truet' These ancient Fathers, I have now named unto you,
or the young' trenchor, flattering Ministers, come over from New England, or
that never durst appear in Old England until now; And if you are not wilfully
blind, you will in the end conclude, It is not lawful to bear Arms, or
contribute to maintain a War against the King; They were children of Belial
that brought King Saul no Presents; and the children of Belial much more are
and were, all they that did bear Arms, and maintain a War against King Charles
the first.

And this I shall endeavor fourthly to make good by those fearful Examples, 4.
Punishments.
Punishments and Judgments which God and Man have from time to time inflicted
upon Rebels and Traitors, even such as have born Arms, and maintained War
against their Kings.

And look ye first upon those Intentional Rebels, Rebels but merely in
Intention; They had but resolved upon a Mutiny; and Corah the Clergy Rebel, N
umb. 16.
Dathan and Abiram the Nobility and Layety Rebels; Fire from Heaven devoured
Corah, and his 250 that usurped upon the Priests Office; The Earth opened and
swallowed up Dathan, and covered the Congregation of Abiram.

And it is thought by some, That that Fire from Heaven sent those Clergy Rebels
into the Fire of Hell; Bafll. Hom. 9.
and that the Laic Rebels fell through the Earth into the very Pit of the Damned.

So likewise Bigthan and Teresh, for but seeking to lay hands upon King
Ahashuerus, were both hanged on a Tree. Ester 2.21.23.


Look ye next upon that Verbal Rebel Shemei; He did but move his Tongue, 2 Samuel
16.
and rayl'd at King David, saying, Come out thou bloody man, and man of Belial;
And for this he was put to an untimely and shameful death; though not by David,
for some reasons best known to himself: yet by Solomon for some reasons best
known to himself.

And if Intentional and verbal Rebels were so heavily plagued for the seed of
Rebellion; Oh what punishment belongs to them that bring forth the Fruits of
Rebellion and are Actually Rebels.

Achitopel, 2 Samuel 17.23.
a subtle man, a great polition, yet because he gave mischievous Counsel in the
matter, and for the effecting of Absolons Rebellion, for the lack of an
Hangman, the fittest Servitor and Officer for a Rebel, went and hanged himself.

Absolon who hatched that Rebellion against David his Father, and actually
levied and bear Arms against him, though he were a goodly man for Beauty and
proportion, though he were a great man for Beauty and proportion, though he
were a great man for Nobility and Extraction, 2 Samuel 18.7
though he was the Favorite of his Fathers love and affection, though he was a
Popular man in the Peoples eyes and estimation; yet a Tree, a senseless Tree
caught him by the hair of his head, and hanged him in the Air; and thence he
could not stir until Joab the General of King David's Army, had thrust him
through the heart with three darts.

See see my Beloved, and seeing it tremble at Rebellion; It is not Goodlinesse
of Person, it is not Nobility of Birth, it is not Favor of People, no, nor the
Favor of the King himself, that shall or can save a Rebel from due punishment:
God the King of Kings, is so offended with Rebellion, that rather then the
Rebel shall go unpunished, Every tree shall be a Gallows, and his own Hair a
Halter to hang him.

Sheba likewise but for blowing a Trumpet and striking up the Drum, 2 Samuel
20.1.22.
to raise another Rebellion, had his head cut off by the advice and means of a
weak woman.

Look through the whole Bible, yea, and look both upon Foreign, and our own
Domestic Chronicles, and see if ye can find but one, even but one Rebel, or
Traitor, or Abettor and maintainer of Rebellion and Treason, that ever escaped
unpunished, either by the Hand of God, in a troubled and perplexed Conscience,
or by the hand of man, in an untimely and shameful death.

Look upon Brutus, with the same Dagger he killed his King Caesar, he killed
himself.

That Seditious Ringleader and Captain of the Jews, who the more to fascinate
them, Eusebius. lib. 4. Cap. 3.
and make them sure to his Rebellion against Adrian the Emperor, named himself
Ben-chobab, i. e. Filius Stellae, or the Son of the Star, was suddenly killed,
and after was scornfully remembered by the name of Ben-Cozba, the Son of a Lie.

Barnardino de Corte, rebelled against his Lord and Master the Duke of Millane,
Dal. Aphor. lib. 4.39. page 176.
and sold the strong Castle of that Town and Duchy to the French; The
Frenchmen ever after in their ordinary sport, when they were at Cards, and
pulled for a Traitor, (a sort in their Packs as Knaves are in ours) would call
for a Barnardino de Corte, to his perpetual reproach and Infamy; with the shame
whereof, and the sting of a guilty Conscience, the Rebel was so tormented, that
he languished continually, until he dyed desperately.

I have heard of a certain Commander, who would often wish he might rot, if
ever he lift his Hand or drew his Sword against the King; Notwithstanding he
did both, and God answered him in his wish; For he rotted within and dyed, this
was at Worcester.

A certain Lord likewise I have heard of, a Great Ringleader in a Rebellion;
yet a great Pretender to Religion, and in his Exercises of Devotion would often
desire God, If the course he took were not right, if the cause he managed were
not just, that God, would take him away suddenly; God heard him and answered
him; For by the Shot of a Musket he was killed so suddenly that he had not so
much time as to say, God be merciful unto me, and without any sign or symptom
of Repentance dyed; This was at Liechfield.

I need not remember you of Pausanias, Ariobarzanes Rodolph Duke of Suevia,
Catcline of Rome: Spencers, Dudlys, and many more of England.

Not one of them all, nor any other Rebel that I have read of, but if he lived,
he lived the sco^n of honest men; and if he dyed, he dyed the shame of his
Friends, the mirth of his enemies, and the example of all* God in the shameful
and fearful punishments of them, telling us, That it is not lawful to bear
Arms, or contribute to maintain a War against the King.

They that did so against King Charles I. God Almighty look upon them in so
much mercy that they may look up to him with so much Repentance, that they may
be forgiven, and their Souls saved, whatsoever becomes of their Bodies; and
that no man, none of us especially, may do the like against King Charles II.
with the Church I pray.

From all Sedition and privy conspiracy, from all false Doctrine and Heresy,
from hardness of Heart, and contempt of thy word and Commandment, Good Lord
deliver us for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen, Amen, Amen.

Anno Dom. 1655.
1 REG. 21.19. Have thou killed and also gotten Possession?
THat a Rich man, that a Good man should be made first a Delinquent, and then a
Malignant, is no news; For the Fact can prescribe time out of mind, even beyond
the memory of Christianity.

Yet such a Fact may be suspected, and called in question, whether it be Legal
or Illegal, since it has so bad a Founder as Achab, and so great a Confounder
as God: For it was God that sent Elijah the Tishbite, to meet Achab King of
Israel, V. 17.18.
with this expostulation, Have thou killed, and also gotten Possession.

But soft, Is not this Text corrupted or mistaken? for Achab killed not Naboth;
rather the False Witnesses that testified against him, or the false Judges that
condemned him, or Jesabel that commanded both to be done, and him to be stoned.

Truly they had their Guilt and Punishment* yet as if they had been but
Accessories, Achab is picked out for the Murderer, because without his Seal to
the Letter, and his Covetousness after the Vineyard, Naboth had not been marked
out for a Delinquent, nor put to death for a Malignant; Nor had Achab received
this Increpation from God by the hand of Elijah, Have thou killed, and also
gotten Possession? In handling of which words, I shall observe;

1. Two Persons. 2. Two things belonging to each Person.
The two Persons are, 1. The true Malignant, Achab. 2. The pretended Malignant,
Naboth.


1. In the pretended Malignant, I look upon the two Causes Why he was so
pretended: 1. He was a Rich man, and would not part with his Inheritance. 2. He
was a Good man, and would not yield to an Arbitrary Government.


2. In the True Malignant, I look upon the two Causes that so Branded him: 1.
His Murder, Anoccideris? Have thou killed? 2. His theft, (you may call it
Plunder or sequestration) Ac etiam jure haeriditario possidias? and have thou
gotten Possession?


Of these, God willing, orderly, and first of the first; The pretended
Malignant, Naboth.

Naboth has three Significations.

1. It signifies Conspicuus, visible; and so he was a Delinquent and a
malignant, de Front, for his honesty. 2. It signifies Sessio, stable, and so
he was a Delinquent, and a Malignant, de pede, for his Constancy. 3. It
signifies Exclusio, expelled, and so he was a Delinquent, and a Malignant, de
Facto, and sequestered both from his livelihood and Life*
But for a man visibly honest, whose Heart and thoughts you may read in his
Face and Front, without fraud or guile; For a man unmoveably constant, whose
Persevera^ce in honesty keeps company with his Life, without halt or Apostasy;
For a man who will not part with the sincerity of his Intentions, nor the
Integrety of his Actions, for the Frowns of Kings or fear of death; For such a
man to be made a Delinquent, and under sequestration to be made a Malignant,
and put to Death, me thinks is somewhat strange and Illegal.

It is strange indeed, but indeed it is true too, de Facto, that he was served
so, though not true, de merito, that he deserved so.

It was Illegal too, against Law, and without president, yes, against old Laws
and former Presidents; But a new Law may come forth by an Ordinance, upon a day
of Humiliation, under a Privy Signet, by the subtilty of Jesabel, which
signifies Covetousness; as you may read in this Chapter.

Jesabel wrote Letters in Achabs name, and Sealed them with his Seal, and sent
the Letters to the Elders, and to the Nobles, Ver. 8.
that were in his City dwelling with Naboth.

And she wrote in the Letters, saying, Proclaim a Fast, and set Naboth among
the Chief of the People. Ver. 9.


And two wicked men before him, Ver. 10.
and let them witness against him, saying, Thou did blasphem God and the
King; then carry him out, and stone him that he may die.

And the reason of all this is double; 1. Because Naboth was a Rich man, and
would not part with his Inheritance; which is my second Consideration, and
prima, primae.

So you have it in the 2. and 3 verses, Naboth had a Vineyard by the Kings
Palace; Achab desires it for a Garden of Herbs; 1 a. 1 ae.
but he would not part with it because it was the Inheritance of his Fathers.

In Riches there is a Felicity, and an Infelicity; Happiness and misery both in
Riches.

Happiness because Wealth gets a man esteem in the World: Misery because it
gets a man Envy in the World; Happiness because it enables a man to do good in
the W^^ld* Misery because it tempts a man to do mischief in the World;
Happiness because a Man may make Friends by the Mammon of Iniquity; Misery
because commonly Mammon is the Friend of iniquity; Happiness because many times
it frees a man from the stroke of Justice; Misery because many times it lays a
man obnoxious to stroke of Injustice.

For what made Naboth a Delinquent, and put him under a Sequestration, but
only because he had a Vineyard too near the Kings House, and he was a Rich man?

Benedixit Deo et Regi, He blasphemed God and the King was but a Forgery, and a
mere pretense of Jezabels, as you may perceive in the Context.

Set two wicked men before him, and let them Witness against Him, Ver. 10.
saying, Thou did Blaspheme GOD and the KING; where you see Wicked men
subborn'd to bear false Witness; and therefore yon know it was a mere Forgery.

The true Cause you may read in the other Context; Then Jesabel said unto Him,
Ver. 7.
(to her Husband Achab) Do thou now Govern in Israel? Up, eat Bread, and be
of good cheer; I will give thee the Vineyard of Naboth the Izreelite.

Naboths Vineyard lay fit for Achabs Pleasure; and fit therefore upon refusal
to make him a Delinquent.

And indeed, had Naboth abused his Vineyard unto Drunkenness, he had merited
the name of a Delinquent; For Drunkenness is one of those Seven deadly
sins, which brings a Deliquium upon a Man, and ranges him under a
Delinquency; because by the Commission of that sin, he does Delinquer^ Hominem,
cease to be a Man, and becomes a Beast.

For this sin, this very sin of Drunkenness, Noah became a Delinquent, and so
did Let; and one of Noah's Children, Cham by name, and Lots two incestuous
Children, Moab and Ammon, lay under a Sequestration for many hundred years.

But alas! Naboth had no such fault laid to his charge; All the guilt I find
him stained with, is; 1. He was a Rich man, and would not part with his
Inheritance: 2. He was a Good man, and would not yield to an Arbitrary
Government.

Secunda Primae.
Which is my Secunda Primae, and my Third Consideration, and thus begins: That a
Rich man should be made a Delinquent, is no great wonder; no, not in a well
governed Kingdom, for it is possible, there may be ill Governors in a well
governed Kingdom, Justices and such subordinate Magistrates, who from some Puny
Divines may suck in false Doctrine, and believe, That Gods temporal Blessings,
and the Goods of this world belong only to themselves, because Dominium
fundatur in Gratia, non Natura, none but the Babes of Grace have right to the
blessings of the Earth.

But for a Good man to be made a Delinquent, qua talis, because he is a Good
man; This certainly argues the Kingdom to be very bad, the Government to be
ill, and the Governors to be worst of all; which seldom happens in any but an
Apostate Kingdom, where the Subjects have resisted their true Governors, and
parted with their Allegiance under the Pretense of Religion, but in truth, for
Rebellion and Licentiousness; And such was the state of Israel at this time, 1
Reg. 12.20.
Jereboam the son of Nebat rebelled against Rehoboam the Son of Solomon; and by
that Rebellion got ten parts of the twelve, 1 Reg. 15.29.
and his Race was finished and expired in his son, and next Successor Nadab;
For Baasha smote them all, and left none alive to Jeroboam.

Elah his son Reigned in his stead; and Zimri served him with the same sauce,
and slew all the house of Baasha, 1 Reg. 16.6.
not leaving one to piss against the Wall.

Omri succeeded him by a like Legerdemain, only he had the compact of the
major part of the people, 1 Reg. 9.11. V. 16.
and Achab his son succeeded him.

By the way I beseech you mark, The Kingdom thus got by Rebellion, first
changed their Religion and their Clergy; 1 Reg. 12.27.
For whereas before the People exercised their Religion in the House of God at
Jerusalem, now they exercised it to two Golden Calfes in the house of the High
Places, and the the lowest of the People took upon them the Priests Office, and
became, as a man might say, V. 31.
Tub-preachers.

Next, This Kingdom thus gotten by Rebellion, changed the Peoples Prosperity
into Poverty, their Liberty into Slavery, and dashed out the Magna Charta of
Meum and Tuum, so that no man could say, Any thing was his own; For Naboth was
therefore made a Delinquent, because he laid claim to his Vineyard, which came
to him by the Inheritance of his Fathers, and would not part with it at the
will of his King: i.e. Because he was a Rich man, and would not part with his
Estate; because he was a Good man, and would not yield to an Arbitrary
Government.

And good reason for it; For in an Arbitrary Government, as was singularly well
observed in the late long Regnant never to be forgotten Parliament, by that man
of Noted M^mory, Mr. John Pym; Lust becomes a Law; Covetousness becomes a Law;
Revenge hecomes a Law; and every sin becomes a Law.

What his Intention was in that Speech, I list not to enquire here; but sure I
am, herein he spoke truth; For when it once comes to this pass, stat pro
ratione voluntas, when one man's will becomes every man's Law, why then the
Chaste Wife, and Pure Virgin are ravished before the face of the miserable
Husband, and more miserable Parent; Neutroque contradicente, neither the
Husband able to relieve the Wife, nor the Father to rescue his Daughter, from
that Villainy.

This was the case of pitiful Uriah, who durst not relieve Bathsheba, and of
the more pitiful Absolon, who could not rescue his Sister Thamar against the
wilful lust of David and Ammon.

When one man's will is every man's Law; why then the goodliest Cities are set on
flaming fire, and turned to Dust and Ashes, Nemine abstante, the Citizens not
daring, or altogether unable to resist the ambitious Conqueror.

This was the case of the most pious City Jerusalem, and of the most famous
City Troy, the one rased to the ground by the Romans, the other levelled to the
earth by the Greecians; and the deplorable Motto to this day stands, Jam seges
est ubi Troja fuit^ The Corn grows where Troy stood.

When one man's Will is every man's Law, Why then there is no Charter nor Freedom
of the People, no distinction of the Magistrate and the Plebeian.

This was Englands case once, when Cade, Straw, and Tyler durst beard the King,
and give Laws from their wills; It was Englands case again, when John Hambden,
John Pym, Oliver Crumwel, and such other Patriots, had a greater Influence upon
the People then King Charles I. I pray God it be not Englands case again in
King Charles the seconds time, least the Nobles and Peers of this Land, be
perpetually made the scorn of Coblers' Tinkers and Tailors.

When one man's will becomes every man's Law, Why then, All Privileges, All
Immunities cease, and cease to every man, save to him, whose Power is equal to
his Will; The Crown is trampled upon, the Mytre is thrown to the Dunghill, The
Garter is laid in the Dirt; No Law but Power and Lust* No Justice but spoil
and Rapine; No Religion but Schism and Heresy.

T^i, was Englands case once, when Henry III in the Barons Wars at the Battle
of Lewis in Sussex was overthrown by them. I pray God the Issue of that may be
Englands case again; when not long after at the battle of Eversham in
Worstershire, the King defeated the Barons, became the Conqueror, and rid his
Neck from the yo^k of the Twelve Peers, that had been put upon him, and had
long time been grievous to Him, and to the whole Kingdom.

For whosoever parted not with his inheritance to their side; and yielded not
to their Arbitrary Government, was presently made a pretended Delinquent, and
brought under a Sequestration for his Estate; and a pretended Malignant, and
brought under an Execution for his Life; whereas in truth They themselve* were
all the while the true Delinquents, and the true Malignants; which is my second
general part, in the Person of Achab.

And what signifies Achab? Pars 2.
I find but one signification of his Name; and that is Frater Patris, The
Fathers Brother; Nor can I in this signification, fasten upon him the Truth of
malignancy, unless it be in the Poets transposition and observation; Fratrum
quoque gratia rara est, The Love, the Friendship, the courtesy of Brethren, is
a very rare thing in this World, and seldom to be seen.

And in this sense, I find the first and eldest Brother in this world a true
Malignant, Cain, who pretended Malignity to his Brother Abel, because he se^ved
God better then himself, and slew him for it; and so were Ten Sons of Jacob,
who pretended Malignancy to their Brother Joseph, because Jacob loved him best;
because Jacob their Father loved him best, and prescribed Ruben.

But this is not an Universal Truth, and therefore I shall not fasten the Title
of Malignant upon Achab from the signification of his Name, the rather because
the Interposition of Non makes the verse false, though the English true,

non Rebus conveniu^t nomina saepe suis. And therefore I shall seek for another
Appellation is given him, whereby we may call him the true Malignant, and that
is in t^^^ first Book of Kings, where it is said, Achab malum in con^p^^^^^
Domini super omnes qui fuerunt ante ^um fecit; Achab (...) worse in the sight
of the Lord, C. 16. v. 30.
then all that were before him.

How! worse then all that were before him! why so I beseech you? An quia
Idololatra fuit? Was it because he was an Idolater? Not so, For Solomon fell
into Idolatry. 1 Reg. 11 4


An quia vineam alienam? Or, was it because he took away another man's Vineyard,
and did more then Decimate the Royal Party? This indeed was one cause which
made him a true malignant, but this was not the cause which made him the worst
in Gods account; for Jeroboam did Decimate over and over, 1 Reg. 12.20.
when he took away the whole Kingdom of Israel from the right heir.

An quia unum Naboth injustissime occidit? Or was it because he put Naboth to
death most unjustly? This indeed was another cause which made him a true
Malignant; but yet this was not the cause which made him the worst in Gods
account; For Saul killed fourscore and five Priests which wore a linen Ephod
in one day. 1 Samuel 28.18.


Why then was Achab accounted the worst of the Kings of Israel? Quia plurimis
non solum suppliciis, sed etiam beneficiis excitatus fuerat ad impietatem
deserendam, et ad sanctitatem observandam, because God sought to reclaim him by
many Punishments, and by many Benefits, In li. 1. Reg. cap. 12.11, 12.
and yet he still remained obstinate^ as Mendoza notes, with whom Paulus
Burgensis agrees, saying, Magis fuit rebellis, et contumax, co quod tempore suo
sloruit Helias, qui quam plurimis signis et prodigiis ipsum exhortaretur, et
tamen semper remansit in abstinatione sua* He was therefore the most wicked,
because God by the ministry of Elias would have reclaimed him, but he still
remained stubborn.

And with both these agrees St. Ambrose, saying, Debuit intelligere quod Helias
vero Deo serviebat, In Ps. 35.
cum videbat in verbo Heliae clausum coelum tribus a^nis, et trilus mensibus;
et ad preces ejus pluvias esse demissas, ut arida omnia rigarentur* se^ ^oluit
intelligere; Achab saw Heaven shut up, three years and three Months at the
word of Helias; and upon his prayers, he saw the Heaven opened; by both which
he might have understood, that Helias served the true God, and therefore he
should have repented, but he would not understand: And hereupon my Author
concludes him to be the worst of men, because he would not be frighted by
Punishments, nor wooed by Favors.

Now lay all these together, He robbed Naboth of his Vineyard, He robbed Naboth
of his life, He despised the Prophets, and would have silenced the Clergy, He
was the worst of men; And then tell me, or rather tell your selves, Whether
Achab were not the true malignant?

If you ask why? my prima secundae tells you in Quia occideri^? Have thou
killed? An occideris? An tu occideris? An tute occideris? Have thou killed?
Have thou thy self with thine own hands killed? for so the Prophet intends to
bring Achab to the Bar, and to implead him guilty of the murder.

And yet it is not (...), He killed him with his own hands, though
Covetousness, like wrath be (...), a self Executioner.

But this of Elijah to Achab, is somewhat like that of Nathan to David; There
was the hand of the Ammonite that killed Uriah, there was the hand of Joab that
set him in the Forefront of the Battle, and there was the hand of David that
invented and commanded all this; and yet Nathan past by them, and said to
David, Thou have killed Uriah the Hittite with the Sword.

So here were the false witnesses, who testified against Naboth, and stoned
him; here were false and new erected Judges that condemned him, here was
Jezabel the Queen who commanded this, and here was Achab the King whose Seal
gave Authority to all this; and yet Elijah past by all the rest, and said to
Acha^ only, Have thou killed? i. e. Thou have killed.

Thou who should have been (...), the Shepherd and feeder of my People, art
(...), the Pest and Butcher of my People: Thou who should have been Pater
patriae, thy Peoples Father, art Lanio thy Peoples Killer: Thou who might
have in some cases, Tondere, fleece and clip thy Subjects wool, did what in
no case thou should do, Deglubere, flawe and shed thy good Subjects blood.

But is it not lawful to kill! why? 2 a. 2 a.
that my secundae secundae shall tell you; and it tells you, It is lawful for
some men to kill in some Cases; but it is not lawful for any man to murder in
any Case.

Clamitat in Goelum vox sanguinis; Murder is the first and loudest crying sin
of the four; and who dare say, It is lawful to have a Scritch-owle in ones
Conscience.

Diabolum habet Patrem, The Devil is the Father of it, as appears by that
Increpation of Christ upon the Jews, when he told them, They were of their
Father the Devil, who was a murderer from the beginning. Et quis occidit? John
8.44.
And who dares say, It is lawful to be the Devils Son?

The Discoveries of it are many and wonderful, commonly the Wound, it self
bleeds a fresh in the Presence of the Murderer, and in a manner cries out for
vengeance; Apoc.
How long Lord, how long do thou cease to be avenged?

Jacob would not part with God without a blessing, I will not let thee go
except thou bless me. Genesis 32.16.
Murder will not part with God without a curse; The voice of thy Brothers
Blo^d cries out unto me from the ground, Genesis 4.10.
and now thou art cursed from the Earth. Et quis occidet? and who dares say, It
is lawful to deserve a ^urse?

Murder is most severely punished of all other sins; Adams sin was not so
severely punished as was Cains, For the Earth yielded her strength to Adam upon
his good h^sbandry, but to Cain, though he did till the Earth, it did not; Adam
for all his sin had leave to eat his bread in the sweat of his face; Genesis 3.18.
but Cain was a vagabond, Genesis 4.12.
and had neither leave nor leisure to eat his bread.

In a word, Murder is a sin against Nature; For Omnia appetunt esse, Nature
seeks her own preservation; Murder deprives her of it.

It is a Beastly sin, Ferina Rabies est sanguine et vulnere delectari, None but
Beasts delight in Blood.

It seeks to annihilate God, and to destroy his very Essence; In the Image of
God, God made man: and therefore he that kills man unlawfully, does the best he
can to kill God.

As Phydias painted the Image of Minerva, and his own so cunningly together,
that be said, whosoever should mar the Image of Minerva, should mar the Image
of Phydias: and whosoever should mar the Image of Phydias, should mar the
Image of Minerva: so has God so place his Image in man, that whatsoever
defaceth his Image defaceth man, and whosoever kills man, kills his Image.

The Image of God, I confess, is in the Soul, tanquam in proprio objecto, and
that cannot be killed; yet it is in the Body too, you will not deny, tanquam in
Orga^o, and in the Blood, tanquam in copula, et per concomitantiam, both which
are destroyed by Murder: And because the Soul depends upon the Senses, and the
Senses upon the Vital Spirits, and the Vital Spirits are carried by the Blood,
Therefore he that takes away the Blood, causes the Vital Spirits to fail; He
that takes away the Vital Spirits, causes the Senses to fail He that takes away
the Senses, causes the Reasonable Faculty to fail, and he that causes that to
fail, destroys the Image of God, and so does every Murderer, and so did
Achab.

Achab the Magistrate, the King, did better acquaint himself with th to take
away life against his Duty, then with z to preserve life, which was his Duty;
And that which adds ^o his sin, he did not do it by (...) interficiendo, which
a King may in some cases do; but by (...), Trucidando* which a King may not do
in any case.

No may ^ might not Achab a King, shed blood? yea, he might, so he did it as he
might; and there are 4 grounds that make it lawful.

Si ex just^ causa, If the occasion be just, Crime so requires; I instance in
this particular, whosoever shedeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed;
Genesis 9.6.
not that every man may be his own Judge; but in necessitate instanti, as Moses
tells us, If a thief be breaking up a house, in the dark, and he be smitten
that he dye, In this case God requires not the shedding of blood for him. Exodus
22.2.


The same Rule holds in the defense of our life's, when it once comes to this
push, either kill or be killed; else if there be not a Necessity, an Absolute
Necessity, It is unlawful; Nay, though there be a Necessity, an Absolute
Necessity, yet in some Cases, it is not lawful; I propose the Case of Duels,
Rebels, Tyrants.

1. Duels, that for private Revenge shed the Blood of Peace in War. 2. Rebels,
that for Public Revenge shed the Blood of War in Peace. 3. Tyra^ts that for
public or private Revenge shed the Blood of Innocence, by turning Peace into
War; no pretense whatsoever can make shedding of Blood lawful in these cases.
To affect Magnanimity is Heroical and lawful; but to forget Christianity is
Diabolical and unlawful, let Duellists remember Cain, Genesis 4.
Kill and Despair.

To affect Liberty is Generous and Lawful but to purchase it by disloyalty is
odious and unlawful; Let Rebels remember Corah, Absolon, Number. 16.2 Sam. Romans
13.1.
Sheba, Resist the Powers of God, and receive damnation.

To settle Crowns becomes Kings, and argues spirit; but to do it by Cruelty and
Injustice, becomes not Kings, and argues an evil spirit; Let Tyrants remember
Pharaoh, Achab, He^od, secure their Crowns by Blood, and loose their Souls for
ever.

The King himself sins, if he kills sine justa causa It was King Achabs fault;
For what cause in Naboth that he should be killed? Capiat qui capere potest.

And secondly, Si sine ordinaria potestate, If his Power be not Good and Right,
and such Power is only in the Magistrate in the Supreme Magistrate, and such as
are delegated from him; None but the Supreme has the Sword borne before him;
No may he for all that Sword take away every man's life. Romans 13.
The life of the Innocent he may not; the life of Malefactors he may and must.

Solomon was not Reus homicidi^, guilty of murder for shedding Adonijahs,
though his Brothers Blood, because he was a Malefactor, the worst of
Malefactors a Rebel; But Achab was guilty of Murder for shedding Naboths
blood, though his Subject, because Naboth was Innocent, and guilty of nothing
that we read of, but his Inheritance, which made him a Delinquent, and merited
a sequestration; and his goodness, in not yielding to an Arbitrary Government,
which made him a Malignant, and merited a Trucidation.

And thirdly, Is he guilty of murder who kills sine justo ordine, Achab guilty
again; Due proceedings, I confess, he observed by way of Formality; For the
Court was erected, and Naboth was Arraigned; but Due proceeding there was not
for want of Reality; For it was a new Court, not a true Court of Justice that
was erected: Had the Execution issued without any Conviction, it had been
Judicium temerarium, a Rash Judgment; but because the Execution issued upon a
Formal Conviction only, it was Judicium hypocriticum, a false Judgment; and
therefore does this man of God, Elijah from the God of man, question him for
it, and charge him with it, saying, An occideris? Have thou killed? i. e. Thou
have murthered^.

And fourthly, He was guilty of murder in killing Naboth, Quia non ex recto
animo for want of Regular intention; For a King inflicting Death upon true
proceeding and a just Cause, may yet be guilty of murder, when he does it
rather, Ex libidine irae, Timoris, Vindictae, Avaritiae then ex amor^
Justitiae, more for Revenge, for Anger, for Fear, for Convetousnesse, then for
Justice, And three of these Vices were very eminently in Achab.

1. He desired Naboths Vineyard; There was his Covetousness. 2. He was
displeased with Naboth for denying his Vineyard; there was his A^ger. 3. And
then He engrossed his Covetousness, and reak'd his Anger, by murdering of
Naboth; There was his Revegene.
And now, Beloved, Judge your selves, who was the true Malignant, Naboth that
was murdered, or Achab who murdered him.

But withal, Judge again; If the murdering of Naboth but a Subject, made Achab
a Malignant, though a King; whether then Naboth, the Subject, had not been a
Malignant, if he had murdered Achab the King, though a bad King? Certainly the
Position holds more strongly A majore adminus, then a minore admajus.

And if you add to the murder of Naboth, the Plundring, the sequestring and
robbing of Naboth, It is too evident, That Achab was a very great Malignant.

Which is my tertia secundae, 3 a. 2 ae.
and last Consideration in these words; An etiam jure haeredita^io possedisti?
Have thou killed, and also taken possession? i. e. Thou have killed, and that
was enough to make thee a Malignant; but thou have yet done more, Thou have
also taken possession, i. e. Thou have robbed, robbed not only the Father and
the Husband, but also the Wife and Children, and this makes thee the greater
Malignant.

The words are worth your marking; For it is Jure haereditario possedisti, It
is not, Impetivisti, Thou have made an Invasion, like a Thief; but, Thou have
taken Possession, like an Heir; and yet thou have no right to it, no
Inheritable right.

A man may have a Title to what he does not as yet Possess, and a man may
wrongfully Possess what he has no Title to.

Naboth had a Title to his Vineyard; It was, says he, the Inheritance of my
Fathers; At length, Achab possessed it, without any Title, for ought I know, I am
sure without any lawful or just Title, unless perhaps, It were some new Law in
that Apostate Kingdom, That the Husband should succeed him, whom the wife had
murdered; or, the Son should succeed him, whom the Father has murdered; or,
the Lieutenant should succeed him whom the General had murdered; The General
should succeed him whom the President had murdered.

And therefore does the Prophet here increpate, and chide him for it, saying,
Have thou killed, and also taken possession? Have thou broken two Commandments
at once? the sixth by murder, and the eighth by theft? For theft or stealing
is the taking away another man's Goods against his will; whether it be by
unlawful getting, or by unjust detaining; or as the Schoolmen speak, In ablato,
or In deposito.

And Achab was guilty of every branch in this Definition of theft; because he
took away Naboths Vineyard against his will, by an unlawful Ablation, and kept
away Naboths Vineyard, by an unlawful Detention; Nor was there any way to
excuse his will or to ease his Conscience, whatsoever.

Not the consent of the Absolute and Supreme Lord; for the Egyptians could not
complain of the Israelites for theft, Jewels and Earrings, without their
consent, and against their will, because God himself, who was the Absoute and
Supreme Lord, both consented to it, and commanded it; and there it is very
Emphatical, in the Original, where it is said Vaniat Zelu Eth Mizrajim, They
spoiled the Egyptians, Exodus 12.36.
q.d. They had as good right to those Jewels, as Soldiers in a lawful War, have
to the spoil of their enemies.

But here Naboth the Inferior Lord, consented not; Nay, he denied it; and God
the Superior Lord disallowed it; yes* and condemned it; and therefore sent his
great Prophet Elijah, with this Increpation, Have thou killed, and also taken
Possession? Was it not enough for the to play the Murthe^er, but thou must also
play the Thief.

Nor Secondly, had he any Necessity to excuse him in the supply of his wants;
For in Necessity, Absolute necessity, it is not Theft, though a man take his
Neighbors goods away against his consent: because Division of goods was
brought in after the Fall; whereas before the Fall all things were common, and
the Second must give place to the First, Institution, in the Case of a Man's
extreme Necessity to save his life; and therefore as before the Fall every man
might take as much as would suffice him, without wrong to another: so in
extreme necessity, a man may take as much of another man's goods, as will supply
his wants, without the Owners consent, and not be guilty of Theft.

This is employed in the Law given by Moses, which though it be in it self
Judicial and Judaical, yet the Morality of it belongs to and lies upon us.

A man might go into his Neighbors Vineyard, and eat as many Grapes as he
pleased* and this he might do Jure charitatis by the Right of Charity; but he
might not carry any away with him, because he had not Jus proprietatis, any
Right of propriety.

This is also exemplified in David, 1 Samuel 21.
who in his Necessity are, the Shewbread to satisfy his Hunger; Mat. 12.
and this is alleged by Christ to justify his Disciples for pulling the Ears
of Corn.

By all which it appears, That Christians may do the same; But Achab had no
excuse of Necessity, and therefore no Jus charitatis to Naboths Vineyard, and
Dominium unius rei penes plures in s^lidum jura non patiuntur, say the Jurists;
The Law suffers not many to have the Absolute Dominion of one thing.

Much less had he Jus proprietatis in it, because Naboths Plea of Inheritance
to it, was no way dissolved; and therefore was Achab guilty of theft, as well
as of Murder, which made this great Prophet thus increpate him; Have thou
killed, and also taken possession?

Nor thirdly, had he any Prescription to excuse him in this Case; For
Praescriptio est adjectio Dominii per continuationem Possessionis a lege
definiti; Prescription is a long continuation of Possession, which the Law
presumes equivalent to the tacit consent of the former Possessor, says
Modestenus, and truly.

Therefore did Jepthe plead a right Title to that Land for the Israelites, by
Prescription, because they had possessed it for 300 years, or as we speak here in
England, Judge. 11.12.13.
Time out of mind.

Now then to draw this Argument to a conclusion, we join issue, thus; because
Achab had neither Gods commandment for his Warrant, nor the Law of Nature for
his Necessity; nor the tacit consent of Naboth for his Prescription; He was
therefore guilty of theft for taking away Naboths Vineyard: and because guilty
of theft, a Milignant.

And now Beloved, as in the former, so I say again, Judge your selves, If
Robbing of Naboth, but a Subject, male Achab a Malignant, though a King;
Whether then, Naboth the Subject had not been a Malignant, if he had robbed
Achab the King, though a bad King.

And this day, the 30th of January will yearly remember them to be the true
Delinquents and Malignants, who robbed King Charles, and murdered King Charles;
whether their Names were Fairfax, or Ireton, or Whaley, or Pride, or Baxter or
Bra^shaw, or whosoever else; especially Cromwell, because after he had killed,
he took possession; For you, for my self, and all Loyal Subjects I pray.

From robbing and murdering, either our Superiors or Inferiors, God deliver
us, and incline our hearts to keep these two Laws, Thou shall not kill, Thou
shall not steal, that neither our Neighbors goods, nor blood may cry for
vengeance, or bring Judgments upon us here, or hereafter, for Jesus Christ his
sake* Amen, Amen, Amen.

Anno Dom. 1655.
1 Cor. 9.16. Necessity is laid upon me, and woe be to me, if I preach not the
Gospel.
GOD did once open the mouth of an Ass to teach a Prophet his duty; Number.
so merciful is God, that rather then a Prophet should miscarry in his Duty, an
Ass shall teach it him; But now the Prophets mouths are shut, that they may
not teach men their Dutys; so merciless is man, that rather then men shall
learn their Duties, the Prophets mouths shall be muzzelled.

I pray God, this be not a sad Omen of more misery then we have already felt,
two ways; 1. That the shutting of our Mouths, whereby we might be kept from
starving, be not the wounding of your Souls, Romans
whereby you may be kept from Believing; For how shall you believe without
hearing? and how shall you hear without preaching? and how shall we preach, if
we be not sent? if we be shent when we go, being sent about our Masters errant,
to preach.

But 2. I pray God, this silencing the Clergy do not prove a worse Omen then
the starving of your Souls, even the darkening of your Souls here, and the
sending of them into darkness hereafter, at the least, the Souls of your
innocent Posterity.

For how shall they, when the Orthodox and lawful Clergy are silenced from
preaching, ever learn to acknowledge the Articles of their Faith, and
particularly that one most necessary Article of the Trinity, 1 John 5.7.
since there is but one Logical Text in the whole Bible that proves it? Many
Symbolical Texts there are that show it, but only one Logical Text, I say, that
proves it; And when we are silenced, both from preaching and reading the Common
Prayers, in which Book the Creed of Athanasius is the only Piece that expounds
that Logical text of the Bible, (the Heterodox Clergy never or seldom troubling
themselves with that Masterpiece of Faith) How shall your Posterity learn to
believe in a Trinity in unity, and in an Unity in Trinity! God divert it.

But if you observe Gods works, you will find them all, and amongst them all,
his Judgments to be done in Number, Weight, and Measure; when he resolves to
punish a People for their crying sins, He commonly begins at their Bodies, and
either divides their Civil Governors, as in the case of Rehoboam the lawful
King, and Jeroborm the usurping King of the Jews; and with such a Civil
Division commonly arises a Spiritual Division, and the lowest of the People are
made, or make themselves Priests, and wrest the word of God, to successful
Principles; yet there was then an Orthodox Priesthood remaining, to maintain
the Purity of Gods Word and Worship, and happy are the People that are
converted then.

But if they go on still, and side one with another, and having made an Head,
justle out the Truth, and the Prophets may no more preach at Bethel, because it
was the Kings Court, nor in Jerusalem, because it was the Metropolis, the Chief
City, end the Kings Chamber.

Though the Judgment of taking away Kings e^eavy, (and we have felt it) yet the
next is heavier, when the Judgment rises so high, as to take away the Priests
too; And therefore as the Church was wont to pray; From Famine, Plague,
Pestilence, Battle, Murder and sudden death, Good Lord deliver us: so
answerably I pray now, From sudden death, Murder Battle, Pestilence, Plague
and Famine, but especially, From the Famine of the Word, Good Lord deliver us:
Amos the Prophet makes that the greater Judgment; and God deliver you from it.

For it any of you do think, there lies no Necessity upon you so hear us
preach; yet I think there lies a Necessity upon us, and woe be to us if we
preach not the Gospel, That Is the Text, and in it I observe;

1. The Duty, To preach the Gospel. 2. The Duty performer, Me, to me; every
lawfully ordained Minister, St. Paul was ordained thereunto; and therefore did
it; and we that are called thereunto, must do it too. 3. Why must we do it?
Necessitatis Causa, for Neecssity sake? 4. What is that necessity? Why besides
other Necessities, which I shall look upon, There is a woeful Necessity, if I do
it not; Vae mihi.
When I have dispatched these, I shall by way of Antithesis ^ook upon the Text
another way, not as it is in the Bible, but as ^t is in the Alchoran; Necessity
is laid upon me, and woe be to me if I do not preach the Gospel.

I begin with the first, The Duty, (...); and what is the Gospel? Pars 1.
Why this word Gospel signifies two things;

1. That Sacrifice, which the Heathens, used to offer to their Gods, when they
received any good news or tidings; In this sense Cicero takes it, O suaves
Epistolas, Quibus Evangelium deberi frater, Ad^ Attic.
O sweet Epistles! O excellent Letters, which I account worthy of an Evangel;
i.e. Of such a Sacrifice. 2. It signifies the bringing of good news; and here
Appropriatly, it signifies the glad tidings of our Redemption by Christ: so
says the Angel, Luke 2.
Fear not, (...), For behold I bring you glad tidings, i.e. Good news, then
which, there is, there can be no better; For it is of a Pardon to a Condenmed
Malefactor, and it is not only to o^e, but to All, to all you, To you in the
City of David, the Royal City of the Anointed King, is born a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord.
The English Etymology speaks as much; For it is therefore Gospel, quasi
Good-spel, or the Charm of the Soul; A Spell, a Charm, like David's Harp, or
rather far better then it, That drove the evil Spirit out of Saul only; but
This, the Gospel drives the evil spirits of all our sins out of all our Souls.

A rare thing then it is, and the rarer yet, if you but consider whose Gospel
it is; It is sometimes called the Gospel of God, as in the Epistle to the
Romans, because He is the Author of it; Romans 1.1.
and sometimes it is called the Gospel of Christ, as in the same Epistle, Romans
1.16.
because he is the subject of it sometimes It is called the Gospel both of God
and Christ, not only to distinguish it from Pharisaical Traditions, which are
but Doctrins devised by Men, but also to tell us, It is the only means whereby
we may be saved; For if Jesus be the only Name under Heaven, in whom we may be
saved, then the Gospel of Christ is the only means under Heaven by which we may
be saved. Acts 4


For it is the Grace of God, the only free Grace of God, so free that we
deserved it not, that we sought it not, that we desired it not; No, He was
found of us when we sought him not, Isa.
says the Prophet, I indeed, He found us when we were so far from seeking him,
that we ran away from him. If he had not pursued us, with an Adam ubi es, we
had never answered with a Deus ubi es tu. Genesis 3.


For it is the Truth of God, the only promised Truth of God, which He promised
before by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since the world began;
Luke
as you heard not long since in this place, from a Reverend and Learned
Gentleman, for which if there were, no more worth in him, Dr. H.
as there is much every manner of way, he deserves Honor and Respect.

For it is the Counsel, the chief Counsel of God, whereby He predestined us
to be saved, Ephesians. Luke
To be saved from our enemies, and from the hands of all that hate us.

For it is the Power of God, the only emphatically revealed Power of God, for
salvation unto every one that believes, to the Jew first, Rem. 1.17.
and also to the Gentile.

And the grace of God, the Free grace of God, the Truth of God, the promised
Truth of God, the Counsel of God, the Eternal Counsel of God, the Power of
God, the only revealed Power of God unto salvation, who will not that lawfully
may preach it? who will, who dares deny them to preach it? but of that by and
by.

In the mean time, What is to preach? It is not only Docere, to Teach, That may
intend to make something known, that was not known before, by a new way of
Illumination, which might have proved happy to this Nation, if it had not been
Enthusiasted and made known now by a pretended Infusion, but indeed, a Devilish
Illusion; but it is Praedicare, to Preach, i.e. To inculcate matters pertaining
to our salvation, by an intended acquisition after the old way, in which they
that walk are safe, if you will give credit to the Prophet.

A new way it was and dangerous, which Dioclesian took, when Sustulit
Episcopos, he took away Bishops, the Persons of Bishops, whether by the
Hatchet, or by the Halter, by Fire and Faggot, by Men or Beasts, or by Beasts
in the shape of Men.

A newer way it was, and more dangerous, which Julian took when Sustulit
Episcopatum, when he took away Episcopacy, and the very Office of Bishops, as a
needless thing, whether by Sacrilege or for Avarice, whether by prophanness
or for wantonness having cloyed themselves with that Heavenly Manna, or willing
to glut themselves and fill their Purses with that Aurum Tholosanum, and
Heavenly Treasure.

Sure I am as Wise and Conscientious a Lord, as this latter Age brought forth,
forbad his Posterity to reap the First Fruits, E. Strafford
Tithes or Holy ground, for fear of an after-clap; and sure I* am, as Wise and
Pious a King as the Christian world ever had, (...) page 103.
who said, He had rather live on the Churches Alms, than violently take the
bread out of the Bishops and Ministers mouths.

And therefore it is the Newest and most dangerous way, which some men since,
at this very time have cook, O. C. with his Counsel, when sustulerunt
Clericatum, They took away the Execution of their Function from the Clergy, and
musselled the mouths of all the Orthodox and Lawful Clergy of the Land.

Would you see what belongs to this New and Dangerous way of Dioclesians; to
this Newer and more Dangerous way of Julians; to this Newest and most Dangerous
way of Cromwell. Take it in Three Curses, Gods Curse, a Kings Curse, and an
Ecclesiastical Curse.

1. Gods Curse is set down by Moses thus, Smite through the loins of them that
rise against Levi, Deuteronomy. 33.11.
and of them that hate him, that they may rise no more; It is Gods Curse, this;
and it is a fearful Curse, a Curse for this life, they dye suddenly or
violently; So did Dioclesian; so did Julian; and it is a Curse for the next
life, they dye Eternally, without a great deal of Repentance, which God
Almighty send them whom it concerns. 2. The Kings Curse is King Jua's, Anno 725.
Quisquis hujus meae munificentiae testamentum quovis deinceps tempore, etc.
and it is as sad Curse, for the sense of it is, Sr. Henry Spel.
-- Whosoever, upon what cause or occasion soever, shall rob the Church or
Churchmen, of what was collated upon them by his Royal munificence, let him be
condemned with Judas, to the Flame of Hell: But my Zeal is not so hot, and
therefore I pray for them that are in this way guilty of Juda's sin, God
Almighty give them both Juda's Repentance, to make Restitution, and St. Peter's
Repentance to keep them from Confusion. 3. The Ecclesiastical Curse is this, as
it is recorded by Rascal; Tit. Excom.
By the Authority of Almighty God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, we
excommunicate, accurse, and from the benefits of our Holy Mother the Church, we
sequester all those, that willingly and maliciously deprive or spoil the Church
of her Rights; and all those that by any craft, or wiliness, do violate, break,
diminish, or change the Church-liberties, and free Customs, contained in the
Charter of the Common Liberties; we also excommunicate, etc.
This is the Ecclesiastical Curse, and it is both a sad and fearful Curse: But
I am not for Cursing, I am for Preaching the Gospel; and therefore I pray and
say, God forgive them who have prohibited the Clergy, the Lawful Clergy to
Preach, and dissolve that prohibition; and till then, whether it be fit to obey
God or man, judge ye, since woe be to me if I Preach not the Gospel, I.

It is my second Consideration; Pars 2.
The Duty performer, me, I, woe be to me, if I, St. Paul personally, and every
lawfully ordained Minister successively.

St. Paul was chosen to it; St. Paul was separated to it; separate me Barnabas
and Saul, Act. 9.15. Act. 13.2. Romans 1.1. 1 Cor. 1.
called them; St. Paul was called and appointed to it, and in this Epistle is
the very same, St. Paul called to be an Apostle of Jesus Christ through the
Will of God: St. Paul himself, nor none other of the Apostles durst Preach,
until they were called; and being called, they durst not but Preach.

They, the Apostles, in their Calling, had something conferred upon them
personally, and peculiar to themselves; and some other things which generally
concern all their Successors, viz. Bishops primarily, and other Inferior
Priests, and Pastors secondarily.

They, the Apostles, had an immediate Calling from Christ, in Person; Our
Calling is, though not of men, yet by men; Theirs neither of men, nor by men;
They had an Universal Mission, an unlimitted jurisdiction, and an Infallible
Assistance of the Spirit the gift of Tongues, to speak several Languages, and
the gift of Miracles, to do many supernatural works.

And all these were Extraordinary Privileges, and did not outlive their
Persons, were not entailed to their Successors; But the Warrant of their
Commission, and the Work of their Commission, generally and equally belongs to
us with them; None may usurp the charge of a Bishop, or Inferior Minister,
until a Necessity be laid upon them, and when Necessity is laid upon them, then
woe be to him that lays it by, and Preaches not, or takes it off, and will not
suffer him to Preach; But of that anon: In the mean time, I beseech you give
me leave, to commend unto you two Lessons, of some, if not great Importance,
and worthy of your Consideration, and mine own.

First, The Author of all lawful Vocation to the Ministry, Nota.
is the Lord Christ; Only Christ, I say, Exclusively to all men, not to the
two other Persons in the glorious Trinity, which all equally concur to this
External Work; God the Father placed in the Church, Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers, etc. 1 Cor. 12.28. Act. 13.2.
Ghost commanded, saying, Separate me Paul and Barnabas for the Work whereunto
I have called them: and God the Holy Ghost it was that ordained the Bishop of
Ephesus: Act. 20.28.
Indeed, To whom else can it belong? The Harvests Gods; Mat. 9.38. Mat. 14 48
The Clergy are but Laborers; and they may not go before they are called. The
Church is Gods House; The Clergy are but Stewards in that House, and no man may
dare to take that Office before it be given him.

Secondly, Nota 2.
Ministers of the Gospel must have their Power and Placing from Heaven; Nor is
he now a Lawful Minister or Messenger from Heaven, who is not sent and called
by God and the Church; St. Paul in my Text did not intrude himself into this
Commission, he did not assume this Holy Office, until Christ laid upon him the
necessity to Preach; and little less than Antichristian is he, that forbids
such to Preach.

The Calling necessary to every Lawful Pastor at this day is twofold: 1. One
Inward from God: 2. Another outward from the Church.

The Inward Calling is that, whereby God ^eacheth the Heart of a man with an
holy desire, to consecrate himself to the Service of his House, and enables him
by his Grace to edify his Church by Word and Work.

The Principal Evidences of this Calling are two: 1. The Testimony of a man's
own Conscience, that he enters not into holy Orders for any Carnal or
by-respects, but only, or chiefly to honor God, by his Labors: And secondly,
a Competent measure of Learning and Piety, of Zeal and Discretion, of Wisdom
and Elocution, and such other gifts as are requisite to the discharge of so
high an Office.

The Reason is plain; Gods Sending and Gifting go still together; He sends not
to his People either Headless or Heartless Messengers, but men of Science and
Conscience; and when He calls us, he either finds us, or makes us fit for his
Service.

A Minister grossly ignorant, or Scandalously profane, goes upon his own
Errand; God never sent him, Christ never laid a Necessity upon him to Preach
the Gospel: How can they Preach except they be sent, says the Apostle? They
must have Skill and Power, Romans 10.15.
else they may not Preach; without Skill cannot; without Power they may not: If
they want these they are of them whom God complains of by his Prophet, Jer.
23.21.
I have not sent these Prophets, and yet they run: But God enters not, nor
entertains any Volunteers into his Clerical Army; and He is so far from
accepting or appointing that Voluntary Service, which they force upon him, that
He seldom punishes any sin more Severely or Exemplarily then this saucy, if not
Sacrilegious Intrusion; Uzziah, though a King, 2 Chronicles. 26.18. 2 Samuel 6.6.
for putting hand to the Incense, and usurping upon the Priests Office, was
suddenly smitten with Leprosy; Uzzah was struck suddenly dead but for touching
the Ark, yes, but for peeping into it, 50000. Bethshemites died of the same
disease.

It is an holy Function, The Ministry is, and therefore must have a holy
Vocation; Christ himself submitted to this Rule; nor did he Preach until he was
very solemnly ordained thereto by a voice, from Heaven; He took not this Office
upon him, until his Father called him; Mat. 3.
nor did the Apostles until Chris called them.

And this Inward Extraordinary Calling was enough for the Apostles; but besides
this Inward Calling from God, which may settle ones Conscience, we must have an
External Calling from the Church, and be installed or ordained by Public
Solemnity, before we may adventure upon the Exercise of this holy Service; Our
Life and Learning must be gravely and duly examined: The Church of God must
approve us, and the Hands of the Bishop must ordain us, and a^mit us; else we
may not enter upon this holy charge: If we do, we can unlawfully, we go
unsafely; and woe be to them that Preach so.

No man may take this honor unto himself, Hebr. 5.4.
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron, says the Apostle; whosoever he be
that thrusts himself into the Ministry, and runs into this Office, when the
Lord has not sent him, as the Prophet speaks, his own Conscience will one day
accuse him, and God at the last day will condemn him, when he shall say to him,
Friend, how came thou in hither? Who called thee into the Ministry?

He that enters in like a Fox, by the Window of Craft and Subtilty, as Absalon
sought the Kingdom of h^s Father under the pretense of Justice and Humility,
may w^ll fear, he shall dye like a Dog, because he that c^mes no^ (...) the
door of lawful Admission, is but a Thief and R^^^^^*

If thou would have thy Calling (...) th^e, as it is Honorable in it self,
be sure to have a (...) ^^^^^ion by the Impositio^ of Episcopal Hand (...) ^^^l
Calling, and an Infallible Confirma^^^^ (...) ^^^ing, by the Illumination and
Sanctification^ (...) ^^ost; and when thou have both these, then look to it
(...) thee, if thou do not Preach; which brings me to (...) ^hird
Consideration, the Reason, why we (...) Preach the G^^^el.

Necessitas mihi incumbit; Necessity is laid upon me; The word here used, Pars
3.
is (...); and this word has diverse signification, especially two.

1. Affliction, Tribulation, Misery or Trouble; so by Saint Paul in this
Epistle, I suppose then this to be good for the present Necessity: 1 Cor. 7.26.
i.e. Because the Saints are daily subject to many Crosses, and continually
tosted up and down by Punishments and Banishments; For this Necessity sake it
is good, that they marry not in these days; And so it is used by my blessed
Savior, (...), There shall be great distress in this Land: Luke 21.23.
Distress, rendered, Necessity; and therefore Woe be to them that be with child,
and give suck in these days: And the Reason is, because (...), and (...), in
the Greek Idiom, are of the same signification: And St. Augustine in his
Annotations gives us a very fair Gloss for it, saying, Afflictiones ideo
vocantur Necessitates, In Ps. 25.19.
quod necesse sit eas usque ad finem tolerare, ut salvemur; Afflictions are
therefore called Necissities, because there is a Necessity upon us to bear them
to our lif^s end, that we may be saved: But I do confess, This is not the
signification of it in this place: For it is not a Misery; no, It is a Glory to
Preach the Gospel.

2. (...) is taken by Antithesis and opposition to (...); So St. Peter, Pascite
Dei gregem qui penes vos est, 1 Pet. 5.2.
illius inspectioni vacantes, non coacte, sed Libenter: Feed the Flock of God
which depends upon you, caring for it, not by Constraint (or Necessity) but
Willingly (or Freely:) and so St. Paul to Philemon, Without thy mind I would
do nothing, Philem. 14.
that thy benefit should not be as it were, (...), of Necessity, but
Willingly: and so again here in my Text, Necessity is laid upon me; i.e. I am
trusted, I am commanded: And so I Preach not (...), as a Voluntier, and a man
gifted, but (...), as a Pressed and Commanded man; That which I do (...),
Freely and Voluntarily, is that I make not use of that Power which I have, to
receive and demand maintenance from you for Preaching the Gospel to you; and so
St. Augustine expounds it, saying, Potuit beatus Paulus ex Evangelio sibi
victinam quaerere; Blessed Paul might get his Food by Preaching; Quod maluit
operari, amplius erogabat: In that he chose to labor with his hands, he
erogated the more, or did more in Gods service, than by any particular precept
was required of him: But that which I do (...), of Duty, is that I Preach the
Gospel, because the Necessity of a Command from God lies upon me.

I would to God an Act of Parliament did not lie upon us in these times, now
another Act of State lies upon us; The Act of State forbids us to Preach the
Gospel; The Act of Parliament (yet unrepealed) forbids us to enterfeer, or
meddle with other Trales then Preaching, You, And the last long Parliament
thought, Preaching the Gospel was work enough for any man to employ himself in;
and therefore accounted it a great prudence to take all Acts of Magistracy out
of the Preachers hands, and to divest them of being so much as a Justice of
Peace.

Now lay these together, An Act of Parliament forbids us to work with our
hands, An Act of State forbids us to preach with our Tongues: What shall we
then do? shall we starve? No, Divine Providence running through the Channels of
your Charity denies that; and blessed be that Divine Providence by our
Acknowledgments; and may the same Devine Providence bless you for your Charity,
by our Devotions thorough Jesus Christ; and may the same Divine Providence too
bless us with this remembrance, That the Act which forbids us to preach, is but
a humane necessity, and, The Act which commands us to preach is, a Divine
necessity: and therefore to put on the Apostles courage and resolution, Whether
it be fit to obey God or man, let God and man judge: the rather, because,

Woe unto us if we preach not the Gospel, Pars. 4.
which is my fourth and last consideration.

The woe here intended is the wrath of God here and hereafter; for this sin of
Omission in the Clergy, if they preach not the Gospel.

But what if this woe be encountered with another woe, woe to us if we preach, says
a man of power; Woe to us if we preach not says the God of power, Now which of
these Powers shall fear', which shall we obey? Why the Choice will be soon made
if we look upon the Differences, 1. Of the Powers. 2. Of the Woes.

1. And first, what Power is that, which says, Woe to us if we preach? Why, It
is but a humane Power at most; and if lawful, it is the worst and last of
Humane Powers too; For Successive is the first and best, because by way of
Inheritance; Donature is the second, and the second best, because by Deed of
gift; Elective is the third, and better than the fourth, which is Martial and
the last, and worst: because in the former three God shows a hand of Mercy; but
in that of the Sword, God shows nothing but Judgment, or at best, Justice; Now
so far as Mercy exceeds Justice: so far does the Title of Succession, of
Donation, of Election exceed that of the Sword; and So far as the Comparative
exceeds the Possitive, and the Superlative the Comparative: so far does
Donation exceed Election: so far does Election exceed Conquest: and so far does
Succession exceed them all; and the Reason of all is plain; God keeps the Key
of Succession in his own hand, Clavis Uteri, They Key of the Womb no hand can
turn, but the hand of God. The other Keys, Clavis Donationis, the Key of
Donation, God sometimes rents out, to punish the peevish affections of some
Princes; and Clavis Electionis, the Key of Election God sometimes lets out, to
punish the wantonness of some Subjects; and Clavis Gladii, the Key of
Conquest, God sometimes farms out, to punish the Madness of the People.

Would ye see this exemplified? Look then upon the Jews in Rehoboams time, and
look upon the English in King Charles his time; The Jews then thought King
Rehoboam loins too heavy; and therefore they made an Election of Jeroboam,
never dreaming that his little Finger would be heavier, in the Levies of Taxes
for the payment of Soldiers, to maintain his usurped Power, and raising up the
basest and lowest of the People to be Priests, and become their Teachers.

The English thought Ship-mony in King Charles his time, to be a Tax
unsufferable, and therefore first set up Essex, and found out an easy way of
Excise, and the First and Twentieth parts, and a Bankrupt Public Faith, to
maintain a Rebellious Army; and when that would not do, they then set up a New
Modelled Army under the command of Fairfax, with a lighter burden of 60000 li.
and 120000 li. the Month, to reduce the King to obedience; and then did
Cromwell finely juggle him out, and gave himself by deed of Gift the
Protaectordom of England, which he has fairly safe-guarded, by running it into
a vast Debt, and silencing the Orthodoxal Clergy, for fear by their Preaching
the people might be recovered of their madness, and cherishes in their room an
Anabaptistical Sect to keep them still in Bedlam; But in the mean time they
forget a Power which is in Heaven, that will e're long laugh all these powers
of Earth to scorn, and establish Him whom by Succession he has assigned, to
the Crowns of England, Scotland and Ireland, King Charles II.

But till then, Woe be to us, if we preach, says the Humane power; Woe be to us
if we preach not, says the Divine power: and So you see which power, both by
Reason and Religion, we should rather obey: And now

2. You may see, which woe, either Man's woe, or Gods woe, we should rather Fear.

1. The woe, which Man threatens us, if we preach, is the woe of imprisonment,
and the woe of banishment; The woe of imprisonment for three Months, the first
time we preach; The woe of imprisonment for six Months, the second time we
preach, and he woe of banishment the third time we preach.

Now, may not these woes be borne by us? Certainly they may, if we think upon
Joseph in his Prison, or the Jews in their Banishment; for Gods hand is not
shorter now, than it was then, but He can preserve us as well in, and deliver
us as well out of prison, as he did Joseph. Nor is his ear heavier now than it
was then, but He can as well provide for us in, and restore us from Exile, as
He did the Jews, and bring us back as well as them, to re-build our Church and
worship him with our former Reveverence, Unity and Order.

2. But the woe which God threatens us, if we preach not, is the Woe of the worst
Goal, Hell; the Woe of the Banishment from Heaven, and both these Eternal, from
which their is no Redemption; and to bear which there is no Ability; For who is
able to dwell in those everlasting burnings? Isa.


But then, why do we not preach the Gospel? Why Beloved, It may be we do; For
the Pulpet does not make a Sermon, or if we do not, It proceeds not from fear
of either, the Humane power or woe; but because we believe, God will be pleased
more with our Obedience, than Sacrifice. Mistake me not, I mean not Obedience
to the Power which forbids us to preach, but Obedience to the Providence which
has made our silence our punishment; and also because we hope and pray that
power, which has all things at his dispose to Restore King Charles the Second,
into the Throne of King Charles the First, to Reign as he did Justly and
Mercifully, not to be Murdered as he was Barberously and Cruelly: And then Woe
be to us if we preach not the Gospel; And as we believe and pray, so be it unto
us for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

Anno Dom. 1656.
APOCALYPSE. 14.13. Blessed are the Dead that dye in the Lord, from henceforth,
even so faith the Spirit, They rest from their labors, and their works follow
them.
THis Book is not Apocrypsis, a Covering, but Apocalipsis, a Discovery; and
therefore may be looked into: Were it Apocrypsis, a Concealment, It were only
for God; For secret things belong only to God; Deuteronomy.
But being as it is, Apocalypsis, A Revealement, or a Revelation, It is for us,
and ours: For things revealed belong to us, and to our Children.

In this Book, I confess, are Multa Mysteria, Many Mysteryes, and so not fit
for vulgar eyes; But in it too are Multae Hystoriae, Many Historys, and so fit
for all Eyes; The Mysterys indeed are for the Schools; but the Histories may be
for the Pulpit.

My Text has not one jot of Mystery in it, It is all an History, a plain
History for the understanding; For who understands not, That they which dye in
the Lord are blessed? It is a sweet History for the Affections; For what more
desired then Blessedness? And it is a short History for the Memory; For it
consists but of three parts, and who remembers not three? Those three parts are
these;

1. An Affirmation, or a Proposition, Beati abhoc tempore, posthac, amodo, qui
in Domino, Domini causa moriuntur; Blessed henceforth are they which dye in the
Lord, or for the Lords Cause.

2. A Witness, or a Deposition, to justify the Truth of the Proposition,
Etiam, dicit Spiritus, Even so says the Spirit.

3. A Comment or Exposition; Quoniam requiescunt a laboribus, et opera eorum
sequntur eos; They rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

The Proposition comforts us, The Deposition assures us, The Exposition
enlightens it and us; For if any man should say of the Proposition, Blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord, Durus hic Sermo, This is an hard sentence, who
can understand it? why here is a Gloss to expound it and explain it; and the
Gloss tells you, They are doubly blessed.

1. In Deliverance and Relaxation, They rest from their labor. Pars. 1.


2. In Reward and Retribution, Their works follow them.

If the time confines me not, I shall D. V. speak of each; And 1. of the first,
Blessed are the dead which dye, etc.

Blessedness is a large word, and comprises all those Mercies and Favors
which appertain to this Life or the next: so we read in the Psalms, Blessed is
the man that fears the Lord; and that Blessedness is as well Earthly as
Heavenly; His Seed shall be mighty upon Earth, Wealth and Riches shall be in
his house; There it is earthly, His Righteousness endures for ever; Here it is
Heavenly.

But the Blessedness in any Text is not of this extent, It is not extended to
the Living, and therefore is not earthly; It is restrained to the dead, and
therefore only Heavenly; Blessed are the Dead, says my Text.

And here again, least any one should quarrel with the Text and say flatly: It
is false because of all Terribles Death is the most Terribles, and therefore
said Mecaenas, Facito debilem Pede, facito debilem manu vita dum superest, been
est, Lay what Pain you will upon me, Sursingle me, with the Colic; shackle me
with the Gout, Torment with the Stone; Lay all Diseases upon me Physicians can
name, let me but live and I care not.

Or least any one should wrong the Text, and make Cleombortus his have, dye
before he should dye, Preposterously, and make away himself out of a Co^ceipt
of being Blessed.

Or lastly, least any one should make this Text an enemy to other Texts, and
say, If the Dead are Blessed, then none are Cursed: Not Cain the
Brother-Killer, nor Judas the Saviour-killer, nor Ravilliac the King-killer,
but all are saved; The Period is not at Mortui, Blessed are the dead, but at In
Domino, Blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord.

To keep the Text from splitting upon any of these Rocks, I shall show you in
this part of it,

1. The Subject, Mortui, Who, the Dead. 2. The Object, what, Beati, They are
Blessed. And 3. The Subject quallified, and restrained, which of the Dead are
Blessed? In Domino; They that dye in the Lord; they are blessed.
And yet because of the Order of these words, I shall crave leave to speak, 1.
Of the Object, Blessed, and of it, as it is here restrained, to the next life,
to the Dead, Blessed are the Dead.

And what is this Blessedness? 1 a. 1 ae.
Blessedness Comp the Fruition of the Sovereign Good; no Complete
Blessedness until then; And what this Sovereign Good is these two Charecters
tell us; Optimum et Maximum, The greatest thing, and the Best thing.

1. Optimum it must be, The Best; Else it will not sistere appetitum, Give us
content; For enjoy a man what he can or will, either Bona, the gifts of
Fortune, Riches, and such External Blessings; or Meliora, the gifts of the
Mind, Wisdom and such Internal Blessings; yet the Mind is never content, until
it have Optimum, the Best, which is the Eternal Blessing.

2. And as it must be Optimum, the Best, to give us content; so it must be the
Maximum, the Greatest, else it will not Implere appetitum, and satisfy our
Desire; For enjoy a man what he will or can, either Magna, the great Chair of
Priesthood; or Majora, the greater Throne of Majesty; yet is the Desire never
satisfied, ( Unus Pellaeo juveni non sufficit Orbis, Alexander wonted
Elbow-room in a whole world) until it have Maximum, the Fruition of what is
greatest.

The Positive is too low, whether it be Bonum or Magnum, Good or Great; For the
Good men would be Better, and the Great men would be Greater; The Yeoman a
Gentleman to be Greater, and the Priest a Bishop to be Better. And yet then,
The Comparative is not high enough; For be he Better then the Good or Greater
than the Great, yet we are not so Good or Great as we would be, until we enjoy
both Maximum and Optimum, the Best and the Greatest; The Best to content us,
and the Greatest to satisfy us.

And the Reason hereof is very plain, plain in that plain and old Resemblance
of the Mind or Heart of Man; The Heart of Man is the Greatest Figure, and the
Heart of Man is the Best Figure; For it is Triangular: Now, the Bona and the
Magna, The Good and the Great, the Majora and the Meliora, The Better and the
Greater, Gifts and Places are all but Globular; and therefore Impossible that
any of them, being all Globular and Round, should content and satisfy the
Heart of Man, which is altogether Triangular and three square; Nothing can
content that, but what is hoth for Eminence and Circumference Triangular; And
so Nothing is, but only that which is Optimum and Maximum; The Best and the
Greatest.

And now of whom may those two Attributes and Characters be predicated? Who do
enjoy Him in whom these two Characters meet? Surely none below, For there is
none that does good upon the Earth, says the Psalmist, no not one: Some below
are Comparatively good, Saints in respect of Sinners, Believers in respect of
Infidels are good; Good they, but none Absolutely good; None so good as to be
Optimus, but God; nor none but Him is Maximus neither; only God is Almighty,
and All good: He only is Omnipotentia and Omnibmentia, Omnipotence and
Omnibonence; He only is Almighty in Himself, and over All; He only is All good
in Himself and to All; 1 Timothy 6.15.
and therefore only Blessed, as the Apostle only Blessedness, which
Blessedness till we enjoy, we can never be, or be truly said to be, Blessed.

But against this, there lie two Objections, One on Gods part, propter
Essentiam, for his Essence, and one on our part, propter Absentiam, for our
Absence.

On Gods part, Octjection is framed thus, God is Essentia simplex, A simple
Essence; we are of a Compound Nature, and therefore God, because simple as He
is, cannot satisfy us, because Compound as we are: This is the Objection.

And thus I answer it, God is simply good, but so that He is also Manifoldly
good; Innos eminenter, He is a Manifold Good to us; In se simpliciter, He is a
simple Good in Himself; That way He does satisfy us, though This way He does
not satisfy us; and we are thereby Blessed.

On our part, the Objection is framed thus, God is in Heaven, we, upon Earth,
and therefore we cannot, see Him, and therefore we cannot enjoy Him, and
therefore we are not Blessed.

And I answer this Objection thus, Text, for my Text speaks of the Dead, and
says, The are Blessed; and the Dead are not upon Earth, where they cannot see
God, and live; but in Heaven, where they live, because they see God; and
therefore they are Blessed, because they see Him, and enjoy Him, who is both
Optimus and Maximus, All-mightiness, and All-goodness.

But least any man living should think himself unblest, because my Text
ascribes Blessedness only to the Dead, I enlarge my Answer thus.

There is a Twofold presence of God: 1. In his Scepter, Ester.
and that is gracious, like Ahashuerus's: 2. In his Throne, and that is
glorious, like King Solomon's: Gods Scepter is his Word; Here we see Him darkly,
and but Darkly, because we apprehend this Presence only by Faith; Gods Throne
is his glory, or his Kingdom, or his Heaven of Heavens; and There when we are
(and God Almighty once bring us thither) we shall see Him clearly, even Face to
Face.

The Presence of Him in his Word, though is be a Dark, yet it is a True Sight
of Him, and the Pledge of a Clearer in Heaven.

For when we believe in God, In God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, we are
then Blessed in the Church Militant, because we have Peace of Conscience, and
are thereby assured, That therefore we shall be Blessed in the Church
Triumphant, because we shall then and there have the Peace of God.

When we believe in God, and consider in Him, as our Maker, of Nothing, as our
Redeemer from Sin, as our Sanctifier against as our Preserver from Sin and
Danger, from the Sin of Rebellion, which was this Day acted to purpose, and
from the Danger of Rebels, which for this Days Rebellion, will ere long be
executed on them to the purpose; as our Judge, according to the Clearness of
our Hearts, and Cleanness of our Hands, we are then Blessed, Spe in Regno
Gratiae, by Hope in the Kingdom of Grace, because we have the Forgiveness of
our sins, and are thereby assured, that therefore we shall be Blessed, Re in
Regno Gloriae, by way of Possession in the Kingdom of Glory, because then we
hall have Everlasting Life.

And this is the upshot of all Blessedness; And this Blessedness will not be
had until we be Dead; nor can it be had, unless we Dye in the Lord.

It is my next Consideration, 2 a. 1 ae.
my Secunda Primae, proposed thus, Who are Blessed? And disposed thus, The
Dead; They are the Subject of this Object, The Dead are Bessed; and their
Qualification is, If they Dye in the Lord.

By Dead here is not meant St. Paul's Dead, which he speaks of to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.16
The wanton Widow who is Dead whiles she lives, she is not Blessed, because
Dead, but therefore Cursed, because she is Dead whiles she lives; For howsoever
she draws in the Life of Nature, yet she never breaths out the Breath of Grace.

And this I prove by those three parts which are the best Indications of a Dead
or Living Body: The Pultse, the Heart, the Mouth; If a man's Pultse beat, If his
Heart pants,, If his Mouth speaks or breaths, we are sure he lives; but if all
these are silent, and stir not, we conclude He is Dead.

1. Now for the Pultse of a wanton Widow, the Pultse of her Soul, her
Conscience, If it beat at all, yet it beats unevenly, and out of tune, either
too high by Desperation and Presumption, or else too low by Security and
Supiness; And by this we know she is sick; For the most part, It beats not at
all; It gives no warning before, It starts not at the temptation to sin, It
gives no Remembrance after, It checks not at the Commission of sin; and by this
we conclude she is Dead.

And so her Heart too; If that pants at all, It is after sensual Pleasures, and
things forbidden; like the Harlots in the Proverbs, Come and let us take our
fill of love; Prove.
Broken Cisterus that can hold no water; It is not after the Fountain of living
waters, like David's, Come and let us go into the house of the Lord. Psalm.


3. And so her Mouth too; That speaks not the Language of Canaan, and such as
becomes Saints; but the Language of Ashdod, and such as becomes Devils: By
which it appears, she is Dead, but not Blessed.

Nor by Dead here is meant those Dead which Christ speaks of, Let the Dead bury
the Dead, i.e. The Deal in sin bury them that are Dead for sin; As elsewhere He
speaks to the Jews, Ye shall dye in your sins.

And they that are so Dead, Dead in their sins, while they live, or so Dye, Dye
in their sins, when they leave this life; They that give sin leave to reign in
them, while they are here, and over them when they depart hence; They that obey
the commanding power of it now, and sink under the Condemning Guilt of it then;
They are not Blessed, though Dead, but Cursed; Cursed in their finishing of
sin, because that sin brings forth Death; as St. James speaks: i.e. Eternal
Death. Jam. 1.


But by Dead here is meant, not Universally, All, but Indefinitely, Many; Those
that Dye in the Lord: It is my next Consideration, my Tertia Primae; And here I
shall show you first, What it is to dye in the Lord; by way of Doctrine and
Explication: And secondly, How we may dye in the Lord, by way of Use and
Application.

And first, 3 a. 1 ae.
What it is to dye in the Lord? Why, To dye in the Lord, or, To dye in Christ,
or, To dye in Faith; (for all these are Synonima) is, either, To suffer Death
for Christ, like a Martyr; or, To end our life in firm Faith in Christ, as a
Confessor.

The Romanists contend earnestly for the Former, and will have the Text to be
understood of Martyrs only; and so they take In for Propter, To dye In the
Lord, is, To dye For the Lord.

Now be it, That the Martyrs are here Specially meant; yet sure I am, That they
arc not here only meant; For I do not read, Luke 16.
That Abraham was a Martyr; yet I read, That he was Blessed in Heaven with
Glory; nor do I read, That the Thief upon the Cross died for Christ; Luke 23.
yet I read, That he was Blessed in Paradise with Christ.

He, whosoever he be, that doubts of the Martyrs Blessedness, His that dies for
Christ, is scarce worthy himself to have any part in Christ; It is a thing so
little doubted, That Saint Augustine says, Injuria est, He does the Martyr
wrong that prays for him: For by praying for him, he doubts of his Salvation;
and Christ himself says, He that loses his life for my sake shall find it.

And certainly, Mat.
If he wrongs the Martyr that prays for him, then he that grieves for him,
wrongs him much more; For he either doubts of his welfare, or repines at his
happiness.

To see Clouds in the Clergies face for the departing of our late most reverend
Father in God, William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury; To see Furrows in the
faces of the remaining Greenvills, Smiths, or Boules; To see water in the eyes
of the surviving Cavendishes, Lyndseies* or Gardiners, To hear Plaints from the
Tongues of the being Bourcheris, and Yeomans, Tompkins and Challoners, for the
not being of their Fathers, Sons, Brothers, Kindreds, and Friends, is equally
to doubt of their being Martyrs, and therefore Blessed, as of our Enemies being
Rebels, and therefore Murderers; which for mine own part, I no more doubt of
either, then of success in the End, or mine own Salvation.

It has been questioned, I know, by the Churchmen of Rome, Whether Soldiers
may be Martyrs; and their Reason is, Quia bonum Reip. licet maximum inter bona
humana, non potest esse Causa Martyris, sed solummodo Divinum: Yet I know
withal, It is resolved by them again, Quod bonum humanum officitur Divinum, si
referatur ad Deum, est Causa Martyris: Aq. 2.2. q. 124. Ar. 5. ad. 3.
a Subjects fighting and dying for their King, or King fighting and dying for
his Subjects, did Fight and Dye for God, they did it of late; For of late,
Gods, and the Churches, and the Kings Cause consentred in one; The King
endeavored to maintain that Religion, and that publicly Service of God, which
Gods own right hand planted, and his blessed Martyrs watered, watered with
their Blood; and therefore blessed, because they have so done; Etiam dicit
Spiritus, so says the Spirit, blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord.

Had it been only to maintain the public Service of God, established by Law,
even that alone would have made them Martyrs; For not a Tittle of it, but it
was by the Dictate of the Holy Ghost; and I should think my self accursed, if I
were not able to maintain it; and would now, if it were not beside my Text and
Purpose; yet blame not my holy Zeal, if I do vindicate that saving-Book against
the Schismatics greatest Exceptions: And that is in the Office of Marriage:
That Office consists of Substance and Ceremony; The Substance, Prayer, The
Ceremony, a Ring.

Look you upon both, and first the first Prayer in that Office, It beseeches
Almighty God to bless the Couple to be married, As Isaac and Rebecca; whence I
a^gue thus:

This Prayer was dictated by the Holy Ghost to the Composers of the Common
Prayers, or made by those Composers without the Dictate of the Holy Ghost; But
not by them, without his Dictate; Therefore by his Dictate to them.

If by them without him, then they would have made it according to Humane
Reason, and so have said, bless them O Lord, as thou did bless Ab^aham and
Sarah, or as thou did bless Jacob and Rachel; and they had humane Reason for
it: for Abraham was Gods first Friend, Jacob was Gods great Favorite: But
says the Holy Ghost, Not so, nor so; but let it be, bless them as Isaac and
Rebecca; and there is no Humane Reason for this, but a Divine Reason there is,
and that is this, Abraham had his Hagar in Sarahs time, and this Keturah
afterward: Jacob had his Leah, his Zilhah and his Bilhah; but Isaac had none
but his Rebecca; and therefore says the Holy Ghost, let it not be, Bless them
as Abraham and Sarah, Bless them as Jacob and Rachel; for then people may be
apt to think they may have many Wifes at once, if not some Concubines; but, let
it be, Bless them as thou did bless Isaac and Rebecca; let them know, One man
should have but one Wife, especially at one time.

Then secondly look upon the Ring, The Ring must be round without end, and the
Ring must be of Gold without mixture; so must the Husbands love be to his Wife
perpetual, and to be terminated only by Death; and withal his Love must be
pure, and not given or imparted to any other, but to his Wife only.

Certainly therefore, Blessed they which dye in maintaining that Service Book,
which can without contradiction father the very Ceremonies of it upon the Holy
Ghost.

But add to this, Obedience to the King, Unity to the Church, Liberty to the
Subject, and many more commanded by God; and deny He that can or dare, Blessed
is William Laud Archbishop, for dying for the Churches Unity; Blessed are
Cavendish Greenvile, etc. for dying for Obedience, and to keep the Kings Crown
upon his Head; Blessed is King Charles the first for dying for both, and to
preserve the Subjects Liberties.

And if they are Blessed, why then do any mourn, as if they were lost? But
alas! Nature will have her course, and on Gods Name let it; but let Nature give
you bounds to Natures course stillate volo, non currere; let your Eyes drop
Tears like precious water out of a Still; not run like common water out of a
spout: So said Seneca from Nature.

Yes, Nature has taught it not only by Speech, but also by Example; what else
meant that Heathen Priest, who so soon as be heard of his Sons Death, presently
put off his Crown, and vented his Sorrow by his Tears; but hearing withal, That
his Son died Valiantly, he assumed his Crown again, and finished his Sacrifice:
So you B. hearing your Friends death, lay aside your Crowns and melt your
selves into Tears; but knowing, They died for God, for the Church, for the
King, for the Country, for the glory of God, for the Unity of the Church, for
the Honor of the King, for the Laws of the Country, and that the King
himself was Murdered and Martyred for all these: Put on your Crowns again, and
finish your own Christian course with Joy; Give not back, though you are bur
few: Fall not back, though Gods, the Churches, the Kings, and your Enemies have
got the Trophies; you know not whether God has chosen for his Gedeon a
Reserve, that his own Glory may be the greater and your own blessedness as sure
by Dying In the Lord, as your Friends that have dyed For the Lord.

Their blessedness is not doubted, They that dye For the Lord They that seal
the Truth of Gods Word and Religion with their blood: Nor Catholic, nor
Papist call their blessedness into question. They that were slain in the late
quarrel: And certainly their blessedness too, your own, needs as little doubt,
who are resolved to dye In the Lord; you who lead a holy life, and believe in
the Lord Jesus, and will continue therein to the end, They are, you are,
blessed.

For questionless St. John is blessed, though he died in his bed, and was but
banished, as you are, as well as St. Peter, though he died upon the Cross, and
was put to Torment, as our glorious King, and many of our Friends were: And it
is to you as well as to them, to you that are but Confessors, as well as to
them that were Martyrs, that Christ speaks, Come ye blessed of my Father,
possess the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning. Mat. 25.34.


But this, for my part, shall make no quarrel between Rome and England, or
Amsterdam; If they will yield to us in some Substances, we will easily yield to
them in this Circumstance, Let them decline to the killing of Kings, and we
will soon yield, That Martyrs only are blessed, and so by consequence, They
only dye in the Lord: But with this Proviso, That they take not, nor
understand this word Martyr, in the common use of speech, and secundum vulgus:
For so it is one that seals his witness to the Gospel with his blood, and
suffers death for Christ; but in the Grammar sense, and secundum Cleres: For so
it means but a Witness, One that lives and dies in Faith; as the Apostle
speaks, All these, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and many more, died in the Faith: i.
e. They were all Martyrs, Heb. 11.13.
or, they were all Witnesses, to the truth of Christ's Religion, both in their
Life and Death, They died in the Lord.

And thus you see, what it is to dye in the Lord; or who may be said to dye in
the Lord? Now for Application of this Point; How may we dye in the Lord? Appl.
And that I shall tell you plainly and quickly.

If you would Dye in the Lord, you must Live in the Lord; Live in him you must
by a Faith that purifies your hearts, and then Dye in him you may by a Faith
that justifies your Souls; Live in him you must by the Faith of water to
Sanctification; Act. 15.9.
and then, Dye in him you may by the Faith of Blood to Justification.

We may not with Balaam desire to dye the death of the Kighteous, and live
Covetously; N^^b.
but we must with David lead the life of the Righteous, and dye Comfortably.

If we would dye in the Lord, and receive the end of our Faith, which is the
Salvation of our Souls, we must first Live in the Lord, by laying the
Foundation of Faith, by doing the Act of Faith, and by bringing forth the Fruit
of Faith.

1. Fundamentum autem Fidei quid? But what is the Foundation of Faith? Why it
is Cognitio Dei and nostri, the Knowledge of God, and of our selves; The
Knowledge of God the Father, and our Fall; He made us upright, and we found out
many inventions; He made us in his Image, and we defaced it: The Knowledge of
God the Son, and our Redemption; we were lost, and He sought us; we were sold,
and He bought us; 1 Cor.
were slaves, and He enfranchised us.

The Knowledge of God the Holy Ghost, and our Sanctification by Him; Such we
were, Dru^kards, Revilers, Fornicators, etc. But we are sanctified by the
Spirit of our God: 1 Cor.
This is the Foundation of Faith, and it must be laid by Knowledge.

2. The Act of Faith; and it must be effected by Applying, Actus autem Fidel
quid? And what is the Act of Faith? Why it is Fiducia, A persuasion that God
the Father so loved me, Joh. 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son for me: A persuasion that God the Son so
loved me, That he came in the similitude of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3.
and for sin condemned sin in the flesh: A persuasion that God the Holy God so
loved me, that he has baptized me into the death of Christ, and has thereby
made me the Temple of Himself, a Member of Christ, and the Child of God. In a
word, 1 Timothy 1.15.
when I believe, Though I am the greatest of all sinners, yet Jesus Christ came
into the world to save me.

3. Fructus autem fidei quid? And what is the Fruit of Faith? Why it is
Charitas, Charity; Charity to God by Prayer; Charity to my self by Fasting, and
keeping my Body under; Charity to the Poor by Alms: These, These are the
precious Fruits that grow upon the precious Tree of Faith; Faith believing in
God, through Jesus Christ, by the Holy Ghost, to be saved, does therefore pray
to God against sin, and keeps the Body under from sin, and gives Alms to the
Poor.

And when we do this, why then as Christ says, you shall know the Tree by his
fruit; we live in the Lord, and therefore we shall dye in the Lord.

The word of my Text is not, Qui vivunt, They which live, but Qui exeunt, They
that dye in the Lord; Nor did I say this to deviate from my Text, but to tell
you, How you may fulfill the Text, and dye in the Lord; and no way for this, but
by living in the Lord, for otherwise the Lord may be said to Dye in us; we
cannot be said to Dye in the Lord.

Nor yet did I say this, That the man that lives not in the Lord, cannot dye in
the Lord: For God can fetch water out of the flinty Rock; but to tell you, That
ordinarily, Few dye in the Lord, that do not first live in the Lord: They that
live in sin, may dye in the Lord, and such A course may speed: But it is a
dangerous and indiscreet pare to venture a Soul upon such an hazard: This
course is sure to speed', They that live in the Lord, do always dye in the
Lord.

It is storied that the French ad judged certain ground to the Irish, against
the Scotch, because Spyders, Toads, and such poisonous Creatures did presently
dye, if they were put there: So you may be our own Judges, and know to what
Master you belong; If si^ful lusts, words and works dye, when they come upon
the Ground of your Souls, you belong to the Lord; He lives in you, and you
shall dye in him.

Once more, Would you dye in the Lord? Why then as St. Paul sa^es, Dye daily:
i. e. Master your Lusts, Subdue your Wrath, Humble your Pride, Resist all
Temptations; v.g. more plainly.

Suppose Covetousness were now breeding in my heart, and Money persuaded me to
become another Judas, to betray my Soul, my Savior, my King, my Country: Yet
remember I it is but a sad bargain I am about, No profit to gain the whole
world, and loose mine own Soul; And what I say of this sin, I say of all sin,
Take them while they are but little ones, Mat.
even but Temptations, and dash them against the stones; Against the stones of
Mortification and Repentance; Obey the Precepts of God, and resist sin; Believe
the Promises of God, and rely on Christ, and so you shall live in the Lord;
Continue in this Obedience to the Law; Persevere in this Belief of the Gospel;
and though you do sometimes fall, (and God forgive us all, for who falls not
often?) yet Rise again by Repentance, and at the Hour of your Death: Then six
your Faith upon the Mercies of God in the Merits of Jesus Christ; and you shall
Dye in the Lord; And Dying so, you shall be blessed; Etiam sic dicit Spirius,
For so says the Spirit.

It is my second General; Pars 2.
I called it the Witness to assure the Deposition, to confirm the truth of the
Proposition; and I must tell you, It is beyond all exception; Etiam sic dicit
Spiritus; For so says the Spirit.

But of this I shall not need to speak much; For I hope in Christ, There is no
Athist here to deny the Truth of God, or of his Word; No Schismatic, or
Heretic here, I hope, to deny this Book of Revelation, though penned by St.
John, to have proceeded from the Spirit; Not any Carnal, or Private Spirit, not
any Giddy or worldly spirit, but the Holy and Blessed Spirit; and therefore I
forbear to prosecute this Point, and thank your Piety for saving me the pains.

Nor shall I dare to trespass upon your Patience, Pars 3.
in speaking much of my Third General; This Depositaries Exposition of the
Proposition; And yet least I should injure your Expectation, I shall venture
upon a word or two.

If any one asks, wherein are the Dead Blessed, They that dye in the Lord,
wherein are they blessed? Lo, The Spirit makes answer, and says, They are
blessed two ways: 1. In Relaxation, They rest from their Labors: 2. In
Retribution, Their Works follow them.

They are two Blessednesses, and two such Blessednesses, as this world cannot
afford, Ease and Glory both; In this world, If sometimes we have Rest in our
Studies, by Divine Contemplation, yet there we have no Glory; we are but poor
Scholars still: And if sometimes you have Glory in the Court, by Royal
admission, yet there you have no Rest, you are but Observing Courtiers still*
But in Heaven, Both you and we shall have Rest and Glory both.

1. Rest: 1 a. 3 ae. Job. 14.
When we are born, we are born to Labor, says Holy Job; when we dye, we dye
to Rest, says holy John, If we dye in the Lord; Every man while he lives, Psalm.
has many Troubles, says holy David; even the Righteous; Every one, when he
dies, has not many, has not any Comforts; For some are tormented in Hell,
says holy Abraham; But the Righteous have many Comforts, says holy Isaiah;
Isa. 31.17.
The work of Righteousness shall be Peace; The End of Righteousness shall be
Quietness and Assurance for ever.

The Righteous, while he lives, is troubled in his Body by Diseases; In his
Soul by Temptations; In his Goods by Plunder; In his Name by Ignominy: But when
he is Dead he has a Quietus est from them all; His Body feels no Sickness;
His Soul fears no Temptation; His Goods fear no Miscarriage; His Name feels no
Reproaches; For he rests from his Labors.

No^ is this Rest like man's in the Night, Natural, by sleep from the Sorrows
of the Day; nor like Servants, every Sunday, Ceremonial, from the Labors of
the Body; not yet merely like Christians, upon those Sacred Festivals,
spiritual from sin; but it is Eternal, like that of Angels, from sin and sorrow
both.

And here you are to mark, That this Rest follows Labor: q. d. No Labor here,
No Rest the^e; If you labor not while you live, but sit down to Eat and Drink,
and Rise up to Play, no Rest when you Dye: And therefore labor here, labor
after a sanctified Rest while you live, that you may enjoy a Glorified Rest
when you Dye.

And here again you may mark, That the Allegory of this Word compares Death to
sleep For as they that sleep, Rest; so they that Dye, If they Dye in the Lord,
Rest: The difference in only this, All that sleep, Rest; All that Dye, sleep,
but All do not Rest; some Rest not at all: To make it hold in all to you, I
beseech you to mark one thing in our Common Rest; we never sleep so well at
Night, as when we work hard in the Day: No Rest to the Laborers: It is an old
Proverb, and true: So, That you may sleep, when you Dye, Rest ^n ^ha^ sleep, I
beseech you again, and again, To labor, and to labor out the Salvation of
your soul, though it be with Fear and Trembling, as the Apostle speaks, Phil.
2.12.
That when you have slept the night of Death, you may Rise in the Morning of
your Resurrection, to Rest ^om your Labors, and have your Works follow you.

That Is one Blessedness of the Dead man's; 2 a. 3 ae.
; his Relaxation, He rests from his labou^s: And this is another, His works
follow him: For by this Phraise is meant Reward, because God rewards us
according to our works.

But here you must take heed of Popery: It is not for the merit of our works
that we are rewarded, but by the Mercy of our Rewarder that our works follow us.

We press Good works as hard as they; They are necessary, and so necessary to
salvation, that without them we cannot be saved: For how shall They follow us,
if we have none of them?

But they do it to make their Proselytes proud: We, to make you and our selves
Fruitful: We are Trees, and the Husbandman is not beholding to the Tree, if it
bears him Fruit, when he has bestowed much cost upon it: It is the Duty of a
Tree to bring forth Fruits, and it is the Duty of Christians to bring forth
Good works: For that the Tree is spared from Burning, and suffered to continue
in the Orchard, because their Fruits follow them from Year to Year: And for
this, we are spared from Hell, and suffered to enter into the Joys of Heaven,
that our works may follow us from Generation to Generation, for Ever and for
Ever: The Tree by his Root is entitled to the Orchard, but by his Fruit, it
has Possession of the Orchard: And we by our Faith have Dominion, a title to
Heaven; but by our Good works, we have Possessionem, i. e. Pedis Positionem,
the Possession of Heaven.

Labor therefore for Faith, that as Abraham by the Promise of God had a Title
to Canaan, so you by Faith in the Mercies of God may have a Title to Heaven:
But let this Faith Travel with, and bring forth Good works, that as Abraham by
his Travel took Possession of Canaan, so you by your Good works may take
Possession of Heaven.

One thing more for the Necessity of Good works, It is here said, They follow
you: It is to let you know, They are your Servants; and therefore you must
cloth them with Good Liveries, such as may do you service and credit both: For
if they be of a Course Wool, or a False Dye, They will do you neither: Let your
works then be sincere, i. e. sine Cera, without any Wax or Gum: Let your Works
of Piety, Prayer and Fasting, be without Hypocrisy: Let your Works of
Charity, Alms and Benevolence, be without Vainglory: Let your Works of
Loyalty, your Arms, in bringing home King Charles the second, And punishing
the Murder of that Blessed Martyr, King Charles the first, be without
self ends: Do none of these to be seen of men, but in secret, Man.
That your Father which sees in Heaven, may reward you openly.

And an open Rewarding you shall have: For Angels and Devils, Heaven and Hell,
Saints and Reprobates shall see you follow the Lamb, to the Glory of God; and
they shall see your works follow you, to the Glory of your selves.

This, This is the Blessedness of them that Dye in the Lord, and of the late
King, and all his Soldiers who have Dyed for the Lord: And now what greater
Blessedness can there be than this? For here is Rest, and here is Glory; Rest
from your Labors, and Glory in your Followers.

Nor do you tarry long for this after your Dissolution, though the Papist would
have it so to maintain their Fire of Purgatory: Nor can you blame them for it;
for if it be once quenched, it will presently sta^ve the Sea of Rome, and make
the Kitching in St. Angelos Castle very cold: But St. John says, It is Amodo,
Immediately, Henceforth, so soon as ever the Soul is gone out of the Body, By
and by, the Body rests from sickness, and all External Labor, The Soul rests
from sin, and all Internal Labor; and both their works follow them, till at
Doomes-day, They shall both be reunited, and Crowned with ternal Glory, to
follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes, Even so says the Spirit: And so may He
say to us now, by the Assurance of Faith, that then we may have it by the
Assurance of Fruition, through Jesus Christ: Amen, Amen, Amen.

Anno Dom. 1657.
PSALM 106.29. Thus they provoked him to Anger with their own Inventions, and
the Plague brake in upon them.
NOW I have read the words, you may happily think, It is such a Plague, as
sometimes reigns in this City; The Plague of Pestilence: But I think not so.

For though every Pestilence be a Plague, yet every Plague is not a Pestilence:
All the Plagues of Egypt were not Pestilences: And the Plague spoken of in my
Text, was, Occidat unusquisque proximos suos, qui initiati sunt Baal Peor, Slay
ye every one his Brother, that were joined to Baal Peor: Number. 25.5
as you may read in the History.

And is not there such a sin, or such sins amorgst us? Have not we found out
suc^ Inventions, which have provoked God to inflict such a Plague upon us?

For from Moses in the North, and from the Seventy in the South, ther^ came out
many such Edicts, as said, Occidat uansquisque, Kill and Slay.

And this was, you know it was, I and God knows it was a Plague, a very great
Plague; God have mercy upon us and at last divert it.

Divert it O God altogether, or at least, O God, from Occidat unusquisque
Proximes suos, into Occidat qui jure potest Ad inventores: Let it not, O Lord
let it not longer be, Slay every one his Neighbor: But let it be, Let that
Magistrate, King Charles the second, to whom thou have by Birth designed the
Sword of Justice, punish them, who unjustly took the Sword of Justice from King
Charles the first, and more unjustly with the Sword of Injustice chopped off his
head and provoked thee with their own Inventions, whereby a Plague is broken in
upon us.

That's the Text for this Anniversary 1657. wherein you have observable, two
parts.

1. A provocation in the first' words; Irritaverunt eum adinventionibus suis,
They provoked God to anger by their own Inventions. 2. An Execution upon that
Provocation in the last words; Et irruit in eos Plaga, And the Plague brake in
upon them.
In the first, The Provocation, I enquire, 1. Qui, the Persons provoking, They:
2. Quis, the Party provoked, God: 3. Quo, The means whereby they provoked God
to Anger, Their own Inventions; They provoaked, God to Anger by their own
inventions. In the second, The Execution, I enquire, 1. Quid, What this Plague
is? 2. Quid fecit? What this Plague did? Irruit, It brake in upon them.

Or, to fit my parts to the meanest Capacity, and that the Greenest Cloak-man
may as well carry away the Sermon as the gravest Gown-man: I propose my parts
by Question, thus: 1. Who provoked? They. 2. Whom did they provoke? God. 3. By
what did they provoke God? By their own Inventions. 4. What was the fruit of
this Provocation? Or, What did they get by all this? The Plague brake in upon
them.


Of these, and each of these, may I by Gods blessing so speak, and you so hear,
and you and I, and all of us so repent of our own Inventions, whereby God has
been provoked, that the Plague which has a long time brake in upon us, may be
cast out from us through Jesus Christ, Amen.

I begin with the first, Pars 1.
Qui, who provoked; They. And who were They; Why? They were not only Fax
populi, The Dreggs and Skum of the People, though they began it by Tumults;
but, They were also Flos Populi, The Cream and Flower of the people, who did
not suppress those Tumults; One amongst the rest was Zimri, Number. 25.14
the Son of Salu, a Prince of a chief house amongst the Simeonites: Not only
the common people therefore, but also the Princes of the people: Not only the
Moabites, who knew not God; but also the Israelites, who entered into Covenant
with God; and amongst them, They the Chiefest, so well as They, the Meanest;
and therefore it is said, Toll omnes Principes, sive Primarios, Take all the
Heads or Chief of the People, Number. 25.4.
and hang them up before the Lord, against the Sun.

Such weakness in them, The best of the People, that They may fall into sin,
and provoke God, as well as such wickedness in them, the worst of the people,
who do nothing else but sin, and provoke God: Ever since Adam brake the
Covenant with God, there is none righteous, no not one: None so Spiritual, but
that he is in some part also Carnal, None so much bent to please God, but that
he may, if sometimes he does not, provoke God; Homo enim est, and habet
mutabilem naturam, says Theodoret, though he be Regenerate, yet he is a man,
and therefore has a changeable and mutable condition: To day Clean, and in the
State of Grace, to morrow Foul, and in the State of Wrath; Sensu saltem suo, In
his own Sense and Apprehension at least.

Let it go for Truth, A justified man shall never fall from the Grace of God;
Fall Finally, Totally and for ever: Yet as true it is, such a man may fall,
fall for a time, and Partially, and thereby provoke God.

It is not long since, That there was no perverseness in Israel, nor Iniquity
in Jacob for God to see; Number. 22.21
It is but in the 22. Chapter of the Book called Numbers; and yet in the 25.
Chapter* There is so much Iniquity and Perverseness, Number. 25.
that thereby they provoked God.

I could tell you the like of this Age, It is not long since, but Anno 1641.
that that Nigrum Parliamentum, promised by their old Oath of Allegiance, to
make King Charles the first, the most glorious King, that ever England enjoyed,
Feared abroad, and Loved at home: A while after, in Anno 1642. they sung
another Song, and by a New Covenant, and all that is cursed, made him
inglorious both at home and abroad, and left not, until they had made him
shorter by the Head; and whereby they provoked God.

Posse peccare. A Possibility to sin is the Portion of every mortal man: In
Galat. 6.1.
He that stands, may fall; For we all walk in the midst of snares, says St.
Jerome, and therewith censured some Heretics of old; and they were like some
Schismatics, if not some Heretics, that live now: They say, A righteous man
is such a Tree, as can bear no bad fruit; but can they show a Tree, that did
never bear an untimely fruit, that did never bear an unkindly fruit? Was there
ever Tree, that was never blasted? Never blasted either in the Blossom by Wind,
or in the Bud by Hail? Then may they show a man who is so often compared to a
Tree, that did never si^, that did never provoke God.

But all men have sinned, The Faithfullest Abraham, The Meckest Moses, The
Strongest Sampson, The Holiest David, The Wisest Solomon, The Confident'st
Peter, The Zealousest Paul; And which of you that overcome a Temptation to day,
and thereby please God, may not fall under a Temptation to morrow, and thereby
provoke God; They did; The very best of the People; They.

Docet hic locus, says Estius; upon another place, homines etiam spirituales
non esse de sua stabilitate securos: In Call. 6.1.
The Apostle teaches, That even spiritual men may sin; and therefore no man
ought to be secure: But he is a Jesuit, and happily you will not believe his
Resolves.

But Prosper may happily be believed; and says he, Ex regeneratis quosdam
relicta fide, Resp. 7. ad Cap. Fir.
etc. We see by many lamentable Examples, that some Regenerate men have
forsaken Faith and good manners.

And says St. Austen, Licet sancti de suae perseverantiae praemio certi sunt,
de ipsa tamen perseverantia reperiuntur incerti; They, the Heads of the people,
the Holiest of the people, are sure of a Reward if they persevere, but they are
not sure to persevere: They that repented yester day, and cried God mercy,
provoked God to day by new Inventions.

And so the Catholic Doctrine is as it was, Nec beatum dixeris quenquam ante
mortem; quamdiu enim vivimus, in certamine sumus; and quamdiu sumus in
certamine nulla certa est victoria; Call no man blessed before his death, for
so long as we are here, we are in a warfare, and so long as we are fighting in
a war, we are not sure of the Victory.

In a word; this Psalm was penned, partly to tell Gods people of their labile
condition, that they may provoke God; and partly to tell them again, How to
appease God, being provoked.

They did, They, Principes populi, The best of them; and therefore we may, the
best of us; For the best of us do but walk in the same world they did; and this
world is no better to us, than it was to them: A world of Provocations to us,
as it was to them, whereby we provoke God, as they did.

If here be a Covetous Achan, the Devil provokes him with a Wedge of Gold; He
sees it, He takes it, He steals it; Josh.
and by that Invention of theft he provokes God.

If there be an Ambitious Absalon, the Devil provokes him with a Crown of Gold,
and to atchieve it, 2 Samuel
he insinuates into the Subjects hearts, promises them Privileges, Immunities,
a clear and free passage of Justice; So He aspires, Rebels, and provoke God by
that Invention, until some 20000. of his Confederates be slain with the Sword,
and himself hanged on a Tree.

If there be a Voluptuous Sichem, the Devil provokes him by a wandering Dinah;
He lusts after her, He lies with her, Genesis
and provokes God by that Invention.

If there be a Potent David, the Devil provokes him by a Multitude of Subjects;
He Numbers them, He boasts in them, 2. Sam. 24.
and provokes God by that Invention, until 70000 be slain by the Pestilence.

If there be a Wise Solomon, the Devil provokes him by a Multitude of Wives; He
loves them, They turn him to Idolatry; and he provokes God by that Invention,
until Ten parts of his Kingdom be lost.

And as these did, so which of us, the best of us all may not provoke God,
either by Avarice, or Ambition, or Idolatry, or Luxury, or Self-confidence, or
All?

We may, That's out of doubt; For they did; And do not we too often? Appl. 1.
God knows we do: The just men fall seven times a day; and seven to one, if in
one of those seven, he provokes not God: But we miserable Wretches, God have
mercy upon us, fall 70 times 7 times; and 70 to 7, if in 7 of those 70 we
provoke not God: Now, because we may, we must be fearful, and fearful that we
may not provoke him; Because we do, we must be Humble, and Humble under the
mighty hand of God, that He may deliver us from the Executions of our own
Provocations; and Careful we must be too, least we be overtaken with another
Provocation.

He that thinks he stands, videat ne cadat, let him take heed lest he falls.
Cor.
It is the advice of the Apostle, and better advice we cannot follow; and did
we follow this advice as we should, we should not provoke God so often as we
do, nor continue in our provocation so long as we do.

When therefore thou have robbed thy Neighbor by Theft, or deceived thy
Customer by Trade: when thou have resisted thy Superior by sauciness, or
oppressed thy Inferior by Imperiousness: when thou have fooled thy Neighbor
by Drunkenness, or beasted thy Neighbors Wife by uncleanness; Thou have
provoked God, highly provoked God; Continue not in these provocations, least
God provoke the Devil to carry thee into Hell; but humble thy self, Fast and
Pray; Punish thy Flesh, Afflict thy Soul, and beseech thy God to be appeased
and forgive thee; and Ten to One if God forgive thee not in the Name of Jesus
Christ.

But if thou have not yet provoked God, and so need not to humble thy self;
Why yet remember, They did, they as good as thy self: and therefore, Thou
may, and be fearful that thou may not. Do not say with Peter, Luke 22.
Though all men forsake Christ, yet thou will not forsake him; For thou read
how shamefully, and how soarly he did forsake him.

If thou hear a man of God say, as Elisha did, Thou may commit these and
these sins, set on fire strong holds, slay young men with the sword, dash
children in pieces, rip up Women with child; Do not thou say as Hazael did,
Thou will not; 2 Reg. 8.
For he did, and thou art a man as he was; and it is Gods mercy, if thou
provokest not as he did.

Whosoever thou art, whatsoever thou art doing, be not self-confident, but
Fear; If thou art praying, Fear; least thou be distracted, and send up one
ejaculation to Heaven, that God would fasten thy intention, and quicken thy
Devotion, that thou may not sin whilst thou prayest against sin, that thou
may not provoke by sinful prayers.

If thou art Trading, Traffic to Heaven, that thou may not deceive thy
Neighbor by buying or selling. If thou art Drinking, Fear, the next Cup after
the Cup of Recreation: It commonly provoks to a Cup of Madness; If thou art in
the Company of Women; Fear the next Kiss after the Kiss of Salutation; It
proves too often an undeniable Tentation.

Do not run into the Pesthouse upon the presumption of an Antidote: and
because thou have prayed this Morning, and do please God now, this Noon, yet
do not at Night take poison, because thou have formerly taken a Preservative;
Do not say, Thou will not provoke God all day, For they whom God had blessed in
the former Chapter, provoked God in this; They provoked God.

It is my second part, wherein I must resolve this Question, Whom did they
provoke? Pars. 2.
and it is resolved, God: Provocaverunt Deum: or Irritaverunt Deum; It is an
hard word, This, and it is a strange word, This; To provoke God, A hard word;
To provoke God to wrath, a strange word.

Had it been vocaverunt, They called to God, or had it been Invocaverunt, They
called upon God, It had been a Devout word, and a work of Devotion: or had it
been Revocaverunt, They recalled themselves They revaoked their own deeds and
renounced their own ways, It had been as good as good could be; but being as
it is, Provocaverunt, They provoked God, It is as bad as bad may be.

For it is as much as to challenge God to fight, and to desy him in the
Battle, and to insult in that dishonor they did him; and whoever did so, but
he was a looser by the bargain? For so God himself comments upon the word, and
gives it such a construction, saying, Do they provoke me to wrath, and not
rather themselves to the confusion of their own faces? Jer. 7.19.
Such a hard word it is, To provoke God.

And it is a strange word too, To provoke God to wrath, is, strange that God
should be provoked at all, and stranger that God should be provoked to wrath;
strange that God should be provoked at all; For Ego Domirus et non mutor, I am
the Lord, and I change not. And if He be not changed, Mal. 3.6.
how can he be provoked? For he that is provoked commonly takes Weapons in his
Hands, Fur^ows into his Brows, Fire into his Eyes, and Revenge into his Heart.

True it is so with Man, He is changed when he is provoked, and puts on those
Addresses; but it is not so with God, He is not changed, when He is provoked;
Our sins do provoke him, but our sins do not change him; No, He is provoked,
and we are changed. v. g.

A man stares upon the Sun, and would outface it: In the end his Eyes are
scortched, and he cannot see himself; Here is a change, not in the Sun, but in
the Man: The Sun would have helped his Eyes to see, if he had been modest; but
provoking the Sun with too much sawciness, the Sun consumes his Eyes, Just so
it is, God is the Sun, Psa. 84.21.
so long as we look upon him with Modesty and Devotion, we are enlightened with
the Beams of his Grace; but when we grow bold, and pry into him by presumption,
we are struck blind, and our sight is taken from us; For to them that provoke
him, He is a consuming fire; but the change is not in God, it is in our selves.

Again, a man desires the Physician to make him whole, the Physician prepares
him Physic and brings it him, He instead of taking it, throws it into the
Physicians face; yet still entreats the Doctor to do him good; bnt now the
Doctor will not. At last, the Patient is bound with Coards, and then the Doctor
gives him what is fitting, and he is cured. What then? Is the change in the
Physician? No, but in the Patient, His Body is now fitted for such Physic, It
was not before: Just so it is, God is the Physician, we are the Madmen when we
sin; In a Fit or so, we desire God to bless us: God sends us Mercies, we will
none of them, but we grow worse and worse; In the end, God hampers us, and
binds us with the coards of a Plague, of a Famine, of a War; and if we call
upon Him in that trouble, He hears us, and He helps us. What then? Is there any
change in God? No; but in us there is, out former sins provoked God, and made
us unfit for these blessings.

Once more; A man in a Boat, puts his Staff upon a Rock, and there thrusts; It
seems to a Fool, the Rock farther from the Boat; whereas a Wise man knows, the
Boat is thrust farther from the Rock; Just so it is; God is the Rock, we are
the boat, this world is the Sea, Sin is the Staff; we thrust, but not God
farther from us; but us farther from God; God is the Rock, still unmovable,
and unchangeable; Provoked He may be to dash us in pieces; Changed He cannot
be, though He be Provoked.

Strange though it be, Isa. 27.4.47.6.
that God should be Provoked; and as strange it is, if not stranger, that God
should be Provoked to Wrath; For says God Himself, Anger is not in me; and yet
he says again, I was wrath with my people, and is it not strange, that He
that has no Anger should be in Wrath! That he should be in Wrath that has no
Anger in him! A strange Riddle it is; and thus it is unfolded;

He cannot be Provoked to Wrath Materially, i. e. His Blood cannot be inslamed;
you cannot move him to Choler; But he may be Provoked to Wrath Formally; i. e.
You may by your sins set him upon a Revenge; and the Formal part of Anger is a
desire to be revenged;

Or, then God may be said to be Provoked to Anger, when he does carry himself
Ad modum hominis erritatie, after the manner of a man provoked to Anger; and so
does the Learned Aquinas, and the Devout'st Barnard, both fasten Anger upon
God: Aquinas thus; Ira est in Deo, non ut Passio, sed secundum, similitudinem
effectus; ut punitio; Anger is in God, not as a Passion, but as an Effect of
that Passion; and so St. Barnard; Omnia haec habet Deus non secundum Naturam
sed ^ffectum; All these things God has, Eyes, Ears, Arms, Legs, and all
other Members of the Body; Anger, Grief, Love Joy, and all other Passions of
the Soul; All these he has Effectually, but he has none of these Naturally.

And what is the Effect of Anger? why it is Punishment; so we usually say; the
Father is angry with his Child if he does but whip him; and yet the Father is
but moved, he does but make a show of Anger, he is not Angry indeed, not Angry
with his Child, though happily with his Fault; and so we have God set out,
sometimes in the Nature of Love, sometimes in the Nature of Anger, throwing
himself froward to the froward, and pure to the pure; as we give him occasion;
Psalm. 18.26.
None but a Stoic is senceless of an injury; Our sins can Provoke God to
Wrath, and make him Angry.

I put a Period to this in this plain similitude; God Provoked, and man
Provoking, are like the Sun and Moon; They both work upon the earth; but the
Moon is first altered her self, e're she alters any thing; she waxes and wanes,
e're she produce Flux or Reflux in humors, whereas the Sun, though it turns
all things in this lower world, yet continue still the same, and when it
scorches most, is never a whit the warmer, not a jot warmer in Summer, when we
feel it most, then in VVinter, when we feel it least; so we, like the Moon,
anger not God, but are first angered our selves, whereas though God changes from
one Estate to another, yet in himself continues still unchangeable: More
plainly thus: God at first gave us his law, and required our obedience; we
failed in our obedience, and thereupon followed Gods displeasure, and our
disquietness; Gods holiness offended, and Gods Justice Executed, are the
effects of our sins; That as Wrath in God Formally, this as Wrath from God
Materially, and Effectually.

Thus you see, God can be Provoked to Wrath; will you now see, what it is that
Provokes him! Part. 3.
It is my third Consideration in revealing that Question, wherewith, or, by
what did they Provoke God to Anger? Operibus suis: so Calvine and Molleras; by
their works, wicked works they were: facti suis; so Amesius, by their Deeds,
Evil Deeds they were, Adinventionibus suis, so St. Hierome, which our
Translation follows, by their own Inventions.

What those Inventions were, the former verce tells you, they joined themselves
to Baal Peer, and ate the offerings of the Dead: But in that verse, verse 28.
they are but succinctly set down; you may read their Inventions more at large
in the book of Numbers: They committed Whoredom, verse 2.3. with the
Daughters of Moab; Cap. 25.
They ate the Sacrafice of their Gods, i. e. the Dead and they joined
themselves to Baal Peer, of which I shall give a Compendious, and short
Paraphrase, that you may understand what their sins were; and would to God we
had not found out worse Inventions our selves?

1. Fornicatus est populus; They committed VVhordome; and an Invention this
was, and an Invention of their own too; For it was against Gods Proscription,
He proscribed it in his 7th Commandment; Non Maechaberis, Thou shall not
violate that good order which should be between Person and Person, by unruly
Lusts, by unclean Deeds.

The Consequences of this sin are commonly a Diseased Body, an empty Purse, a
shameful name, and without Gods great mercy, a Damned Soul; For Harlots are
the high way to the Devil; when you look upon them with Delight, you begin
your Voyage; when you chat with them, you make haste; when you lie with them,
you are at your journies end: In this age it is called a trick of youth; But I
pray God have mercy upon us, and forgive us the sins of our youth, and incline
our hearts to keep this Law; Thou shall not commit VVhordome, least we Provoke
God to more Wrath by our Invention.

2. The second was, Commederunt sacrificia, they at the sacrifices of the Dead;
and they were called the Sacrifice of the dead, either because the Gods of the
Moabites were dead Gods, to whom the Sacrifices were offered: so Musculus, or
else, because they were offered for dead men, so St. Austen, or else, They were
Oblations devoted to Gods service, to God-self, by men that were Dead whilst
they lived.

And they ate them, i. e. They devoured them by sacrilege, and robbed God of
them.

Either of these Expositions is an Agravation of their sin; For whereas the
Israelites were fed with those Sacrifices which were offered to the True God,
and thereby put in mind, that the Covenant betwixt God and them, was as firm
and familier, as betwixt Man and Wife, who eat at the same Table: They did
hereby divorce themselves from the True God, and marry themselves to a false,
and confirm it by eating the Sacrifices of the Dead: A mere Invention, This:

The third was, Copulati sunt Baal Peer, they joined themselves to Baal Peer,
and what was Baal Peer?

Baal Peer was a false God, an Idol, not such a God, quem Deus fecit, nor so
good neither, which God made, of whom He says himself, Dixi Dij estis, I have
said yea are God; but a God, Psalm. 82.
quem fecit homo, which man made, of whom the man of God says, they are no
Gods, but the works of man's hands.

They called him Baal for his honor, for Baal signifies a Lord; Psalm.
and Peer they called him for his Residence, for his Abode was upon the Hill or
Mountain Peer, so Lyranus; Others, and amongst them Justinianus says, that
Baal Peer is Idolum Ignominy, by way of contempt, the blind God; he had eyes,
but he saw not; he saw not his Priests launcing themselves; he had ears, but he
heard not; he heard not Elias mocking him, nor his own false Prophets crying
unto him: Others says, Baael Peer signifies Deum hortorum, the Garden God:
Whatsoever it signifies, sure I am, it was a mere Invention, this; For Gods
injunction was, Thou shall have no other Gods but me.

You see, what their Inventions were, I wish they were not a Map of ours: yes,
I wish, we did not outvy them in Inventions: So many are our Inventions, that I
cannot give you the Tithe of them; and in that word, Tithe there lies one of
our Inventions.

1. Come, let us make the Lease of this House for 6. l. per annum Rent; but let
the Income by another Indenture be 16. l. per annum more: A mere Invention,
this; for says God, Bring ye all the Tithes into the Storehouse; Malac. 3.10.
that is one Invention.

2. Come, and let us go and play the Good Fellows, and drink an Health or
two: A mere Invention, this; for says God, VVoe be to him that is strong to
power in strong drink, and again in the New Testament, Isa.
Be not overcome with Wine, wherein is excess: That Is a second Invention.

3. Come, let us go and play a Trick of Youth, and lie with yonder VVench,
Exodus 20.
a mere Invention, this: For says God, Thou shall not commit Fornication; Mat.
5. 1 Cor.
and again, Thou shall not look upon a Woman to Lust after her; and again,
Thou shall not touch a Woman, that is a third Invention.

4. Look, yonder goes a Reprobate, a mere Invention, this; for God made no man
on purpose to Damn him, because God self says, 1 Timothy 2.
He hates nothing that he has made, and St. Paul from God says; God would
have all men to be saved: that is a fourth Invention.

5. A Child of God cannot sin, a mere invention, this: Jac. 1 John 1.
For says St. James, In many things we sin all: For says St. John, If we say
we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: That is a
fifth Invention.

6. Come, says the Merchant, let us ingross this Commodity, and raise the
Rate, a mere Invention, this: For says God, The people shall curse him that
withholds the Corn: that is a sixth Invention.

7. Sirrah says the Shopkeeper to his Apprentice, pare that Yard, a mere
Invention, this: For says God, Thou shall not have a short measure: Deuteronomy.
that is a seventh Invention.

8. Christ did not descend into Hell, a mere Invention, this: For says David
of Christ to God, Thou shall not leave my soul in Hell; and says Athanasius,
Whosoever beleives not this, Psalm. 16.
that Christ went down into Hell, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly:
that is an eighth Invention.

9. No Necessity of Baptizing Infants: a Mere Invention, this: For says
Christ, Suffer little Children to come to me, Man. 10.
and says St. Peter, Be Baptized every one of you, for the promise is made to
you, and to our Children; Act. 2.
and says the Counsel of Milevitary Placuit, ut quicunque parvulos recentes
ab ut reteris matrum baptisandos negat, Anathemasit whosoever denies Baptism
to Children, let him be accursed, and says Origin, propter hoc, Ecclesia ab
Apostolis Traditionem accepit, etiam parvulis dare Baptissimum; Romans 6.
Because we are all conceived and born in sin the Church has received a
Tradtion from the Apostles to Baptize Children; and says St. Austin,
Consuetudo matris Ecclesia, etc. The Custom of our Mother the Chu ch in
Baptizing Infants is not to be slighted, because it is an Apostolical
Tradition; De Genesis ad li. c. 23.
That Is a ninth Invention.

10. If we believe and have Faith, It is no matter for good Works, or how we
live, a mere Invention, this: For says St. James, faith without work is dead;
and says St. Paul, Jac. 2.
neither Circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing but Faith which
works by Love; That Is a tenth Invention.

He is gone to Hell, For he dyed of the Plague; A mere Intention, This; For
many of Gods dear Servants do dye of the Plague. 2 Samuel 24.
David was desirous to dye of it when he prayed, Let thy hand I pray thee be
against me and my Fathers house, but sure he would not have been so desirous to
die of the Plague, if he must have gone to Hell for it; That is a 11th Invention.

Subjects may take up Arms against their King; For the King is Universis minor,
though he ^e singulis major; Less then the Collective Body, though greater
then any particular Person; If he be a Tyrant, If he be Sacrilegious, If he be
an Idolater, He may be Resisted, He may be Deposed: A mere Invention's this;
For Saul was greater then all the People, because he was their King; and Saul
was a Tyrant, a sacrilegious person, an Idolatar, a Consulter with Witches; and
yet David durst not resist him, durst not depose him, and only for this cause,
Because he was the Lords Anointed: and therefore the Lords Anointed, because
the King; And this has been the Judgment of all Divines, until of late; and
therefore, This is another twelfth Invention.

Bishops and Presbyters are of equal Authority; They are all one, For Bishops
are called Presbyters in the word of God; A mere Invention, This, and a false
Conclusion; For Presbyters are never called Bishops, either in the Book of God,
or in any other book unless in the Books of Heretics, or Schismatics: And
that is a Thirteenth Invention.

King may be Deposed by an High Court of Justice, and unjustly sentenced to
death, as a Tyrant, Traitor and Murderer, and Public enemy, by severing his
Head from his Body: A mere Invention, This, though pronounced by

John Bradshaw, Lord President, so called. Oliver Crumwel, L. General. Henry
Ireton Commis. General. Col. Hardresse Waller. Col. Harrison. Col. Whaley. Col.
Pride. Col. Ewer. Lord Gray of Grooby.
Sir John D'Anvers, with many more who are not worth the remembering, unless
Dr. Dorislaus and Justice Ask, Councillors for the Commonwealth.

Cook Solicitor General, Broughton, and Phelps, Clarks to the Court; Danby,
Mace-Bearer.

Humphrey, Sword Bearer, and King Crier; And this was an Invention beyond all
the Jews Inventions.

And a great many more Inventions yet, have we found out; but I have tired you
and my self already, with these, and by these, though there were no more, I am
sure, we have provoked God to wrath, for the Plague is broken in upon us.

It is my fourth and last consideration, in resolving that Question, What is
the fruit and effect of these Inventions, Pars. 4.
of these Provocations? The Plague brake in upon them, Irruit, It brake in.
Magno impetu invasit, It came with a mighty violence and could not be resisted;
Tanquam aqua exundas, like a sudden Flood of water, Maltiplicata est in eis
ruina, A multiplied destruction came upon them; Factis est in eis gravis ultio,
God took an heavy and grievious revenge upon them: twenty four thousand of the
common people and Princes were slain; and this tells you, what Plague it was is
here meant.

It was not the Plague of Pustules, or the Plague of the Pestilence, or as the
common people call it, the Plague of Gods Tokens, or as we of late have had,
the Plague of the Guts, which was never heard of in any Kings Reign, but only
in the first Reign of a President, and in the second Reign of a Protector; but
it was the Plague of a Civil commotion, raised by the Madness of the people,
for a former madness of their provocation, and the small number of the slain
then, but 24000, shows and proves their provocations to be less then ours:
because the Plague of an Uncivil civil war amongst us, has slain many score of
Thousands, some Hundreds of thousands, and proves our provocations to be
greater then theirs.

However I wish not the rest of the Rebels may either Hoyle or Phane
themselves; I wish them not confusion here, or Damnation hereafter; The worse
that I wish is, That God would be pleased to take them as the Rods of his
Justice into the Hands of Mercy, and bring in King Charles II. with power to
recover his own Dominions, and to sit upon the Throne of his Father, King
Charles Is the Royal Martyr of blessed memory, who upon this day January 30.
Anno Dom. 1648, was murdered by barbarous hands, for seeking to preserve the
Churches Rights, and the Peoples Liberties, and Reign over us, and our
childrens children in peace and prosperity, thorough Jesus Christ, Amen.

GOD Save King CHARLES II.
Anno Dom. 1658.
ACTS 13.28. And though they found no cause of death in him, yet desired Pilate
to kill him.
THere are not many steps betwixt Princes, Prisons and Graves; Mat. 2.
Christ was the King of the Jews, so confessed by the Magi; and the People would
have proclaimed him so; But Pilate the Lord President, and Cajaphas the High
Priest having Him delivered into their hands by the Treason of Judas, for a far
less price then 200000 l. even 30. pieces of Silver, and though they found no
cause of death in him, unless it were Negatively, because he had not Ahab-like
took away Naboths Vineyard, or plundered any of his Subjects Illegally; nor
Jesabel-like took away Naboths life, or put to death any of his Subjects
Extrajudicially, or Affirmatively, had healed their sick, cured their lame and
their blind, eared their deaf, raised their dead, delivered them all from the
Kings Evil, and made them happy to their Enemies Envy, and their Friends
Admiration, yet they desired Pilate to kill him.

That Is my Text, and in it I observe two parts, and they are these.

1. A VVonder; they found no cause of death in him; for a VVonder it is, that a
King, who has so many Prerogatives and Advantages to Blaspheme, to Rob, to
Rabe, to Murder, to Idolatry, (and more causes I find not to kill any man)
should have no cause of death found in him. 2. A Murder, and a monstrous
Murder: Yet they desired Pilate to kill him, for a monstrous Murder it is,
that Subjects, who have so many ties of Obedience upon them, toward their
Kings, should first desire Pilate a Judge, and having obtained leave upon their
desire, should add to their desire, endeavor, and to that endeavor, the act,
and actual Execution to kill him, it is a monstrous Murder: This
If it be a monstrous Murder for Servants to kill their Master; If it be a
monstrous Murder for Sons to kill their Father; If it be a monstrous Murder
for a Wife to kill her Husband; why look ye, here are all, Subjects which are
but serci Domini Regis, Servants to their Lord the King, Subjects, which if
more then Servants, are but Filij Patri Patriae, Sons to the Father of the
Country, the Kings Subjects, which if more then Sons, are but sponsa Marito
Gentis, the Spouse to the Husband of the Country, the King, yet these Servants,
these Sons, this Wife, desire to kill, and kill their Master, their Father,
their Husband; and that which makes this monstrous Murder, more then, and
above measure monstrous, they can find no cause of death in their Master, in
their Father, in their Husband, in their King, which is all.

In the first of these, the wondea, I enquire: 1. Why there was no cause of
death in him! 2. If there had been cause of death in him; whether they might
desire to have him killed!

In the second, The monstrous Murder, I enquire: 1. Why they desired Pilate
to kill him? 2. What end they had in killing him?

I begin with the first; the wonder, they* found no cause of death in him:
Pars. 1.


The Jews had four sorts of death in use amongst themselves: 1. Lapidatio,
Stoning: 2. Combustio, Burning: 3. Decollatio, Beheading: 4. Suffocatio,
Strangling.

Other sorts of death, in number six, they borrowed from other Nations: 1.
Crux, the death on the Cross: 2. Damnatio ad bestias, to dye by wild Beasts:
3. Serra dissectio, cutting one in sunder with the Saw: These three they
borrowed from the Romans: 4. (...), the Wheel: 5. (...) udgelling one to
death: 6. (...) Drowning one in the Sea: They borrowed from the Greek.
and this they borrowed from the Greeks and Romans.

These several sorts of death, had their several causes of inflicting them: I
shall but name them.

1. There were eighteen Causes for Stoning one to death: 1. He that lies with
his own Mother: 2. He that lies with his Fathers Wife: 3. He that lies with
his Daughter in Law: 4. He that lies with a betrothed Maid: 5. He that
Coupleth with a Male: 6. He that Coupleth with a Beast: 7. The Woman that
lies down to a Beast: 8. The Blasphemer: 9. He that worshippeth an Idol: 10.
He that offers his Seed to Molech: 11. He that has a familiar spirit: 12.
The Wisord: 13. The private intiser to Idolatry: 14. The public drawer to
Idolatry: 15. The VVitch: 16. The prophaner of the Sabbath: 17. He that Curses
his Father or his Mother: 18. The Rebellious Son.

Now of none of these 18. did they accuse him, but only of Profaning the
Sabbath, and Blaspheming in calling himself the Son of God; in neither of which
they found no cause of Death in him.

For he disproved his profanation of the Sabbath by works of Charity, and
proved himself guiltless of Blaspheamy by his own constancy, and by his Fathers
Testimony; His Father witnessed twice that he was his Son; once at his
Baptism, Mat. 3.15. Mat. 17.3.
and again at his Transfiguration; at both which times a Voice was heard from
Heaven, saying, this is my beloved Son; His own Constancy also quitted him,
since his first words, and his last words, when he died, Luke 23.34. Luke 23.46.
were Father forgive them; and, Father into thy hand I commend my Soul.

No cause therefore to stone him to death, and as little cause could they find
to burn him to death; for none but 10. sorts were adjudged to burning. 1. The
Priests Daughter which committed Whordome. 2. He that lies with his own
Daughter. 3. He that lies with his Daughters Daughter. 4. He that lies with
his Sons Daughter. 5. He that lies with his Wives Daughter. 6. He that lies
with his Wives Sons Daughter. 7. He that lies with his Wives Daughters
Daughter. 8. He that lies with his Daughter in Law. 9. He that lies with the
Mother of his Mother in Law. 10. He that lies with the Mother of his Father in
Law.

None of these ten, did they accuse him of at all; and less cause did they find
of death in him, to be burnt to death.

And less cause they had to behead him; for they beheaded only two sorts of
Malefactors. 1. The Murderer. 2. He that stole a Soul of Israel: But of
Murder they accused him not, nor indeed could they, since he rather chose a
Crown of Thorns, then to exchange that of Gold, for one of Lead, whose embased
Flexibleness, might be forced to comply and bend to the various, Ps. 33.20.
and oft-contrary dictates of any Factions: nor did they accuse him of stealing
any Soul of Israel, Ps. 36.10.
since he complained, the difference in Religion was the only thing that
troubled him.

Neither of these two did they accuse him of; and less cause of death did they
find in him to be beheaded.

And less cause yet had they to strangle him: For they strangled but six sorts
of Malefactors. 1. He that smote his Father or his Mother. 2. He that stole a
Soul of Israel. 3. An Elder which contradicted the Consistory. 4. A false
Prophet, and he that prophesied in the name of an Idol. 5. He that lay with
another man's Wife. 6. He that abused the Body of a Priests Daughter.

Now none of these six was he accused of; and therefore no cause did they, or
could they find in him of death, to be strangled to death: And for the other
six punishments they borrowed from other Nations, the Cross. 1 The Saw. 2. The
Beasts. 3. The Wheel. 4. The Sea. 5. The Cudgel. 6. They found as little cause
of death in him.

And if you ask, why they could find no cause of death in him, my prima
second will tell you, and it tells you thus.

1. Becauses the Hearts of Kings are in the Hands of God; and Christ was a
King, yet, and He was God too; and so had his Heart in his own hands; and
therefore Impeccable, because God cannot sin; for if he could, he were not God:
And for the King that my discourse in this Anniversary and Text aims at,
though he were not Impeccable, because a Man; yet such a man he was, that his
most malicious Enemies could find no cause of death in him, and therefore
framed, or caused Petitions to be made in the Names of the Soldery and
common people, to cry out for Justice; that he might be killed, though they
could find no cause of death in him; Christ, the King in my Text, was free from
all cause of death; for no cause of death, but Originally Corruptions or
Actual Transgressions; But Originally Corruption He was free from; because He
was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary: and Actual
Transgressions he was cleared of, not only by the Verdict of St. Peter, who
tell us from the Holy Ghost, He did not sin, neither was any guile found in his
lips; 1 Peter.
but also by the sentence of Pilate himself, who told the Jews, who importuned
to have him Crucified, I have examined him, but can find no faults in him: And
Charles the first, King of England, John.
Scotland, France and Ireland, for whose Commemoration, and his 8 Anniversary,
I chose this Text, though he was conceived in sin, and questionless guilty of
Actual transgressions, yet not such Transgressions as made him worthy to be
Killed, and murdered, by the ancient Laws of this Kingdom.

And that is a wonder, A wonder that King Charles I. should rather with
Constantine cover other men's Errors, and discover His own.

A wonder it is, P. 146.4.
that Charles I. would continue an Angel of Reformation, when the Devil of
Rebellion was up in Arms against him.

A wonder it is, p. 207.1.
that Charles I. would rather suffer himself, and his to be destroyed, then
give way to alter a settled Orthodox Religion.

A wonder it is, p. 186.3.
that Charles I. would rather choose the woe of Vae soli, and Solitude, then of
Vae vobis Hypocritae, and Hypocrisy.

A wonder it is, p. 127.28.
that Charles I. should choose rather to be reckoned among the Misfortunate,
then in the black List of irre ligious and Sacrilegious Princes.

A Wonder it is, p. 165.20:
that Charles I. should seek to set up Christ's spiritual Kingdom, by pulling
down his own Temporal Kingdom.

A Wonder it is, p. 135.4.
That Charles I. should rather ascribe the settling of Bishops to the wisdom and
piety of the Apostle, then to the favor of Princes, or Ambition of Presbyters.

A Wonder it is, that Charles I. should be so judicious to determine some men's
Zeal for Bishops, p. 141.8.
Lands, Houses, Revenues, set them on work to eat up Episcopacy, Root and
Branch.

A Wonder it is, p. 103.10.
that Charles I. should esteem it his greatest Title, and chiefest Glory to be
the Defender of the Church, both in the true Faith, and its just Fruitions, and
equally abhor both Sacrilege and Apostasy.

A wonder it is, p. 103.21.
that Charles I. should rather choose to live on the Churches Alms then
violently to take the Bread out of Bishops and Ministers mouths.

A wonder it is, p. 104.17.
that Charles I. wounld not repair the Breaches of the State, by the Ruins of
the Church.

A wonder it is, p. 103.6.
that Charles I. should rather choose Pharaohs Divinity, and Joseph's true
piety, then to sell the Priests Lands.

A wonder it is, that Charles I. should esteem the Church above the State, and
Gods Glory above his own, p. 92.13.
and the Salvation of his soul above the preservation of his Body, Estate, and
Posterity.

And yet a greater wonder it is, That in none of all these, nor any thing else,
neither Judge, nor Jury, nor Rabble could sind any cause in him, King Charles I.

But now suppose, They had found cause of death in him, 2a. 1ae.
yet might they desire to have him killed?

That my 2a. 1ae. is to tell you, and it tells you, No; It is not awsul for
Subjects to desire to have their King killed, though ^hey could find cause of
Death in him.

No, God forbid, we should desire to have Christ the King killed, since he came
to he killed for us, that we might not be killed. A most unthankful part this
would be, and therefore most abominable, to requite so much Mercy with so great
Injury.

Yet so unthankful and so abominable were the Jews, They desired to have
Christ killed; and I would to God, some Christians, yes, and all Christians,
were not so abominably unthankful*

But I must tell you, so abominable and unthankful are we all, that we daily
wound him, if we do not kill him; yes, that we daily wound him and kill him;
Wound him by our Miseries, or kill him with our sins; we renew his Agony by our
consticts, or his Passion by our Guilts; We never suffer as Christians, but He
suffers with us; we never sin as Beasts or Epicures, but we kill him by those
sins.

We have more need to say, Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who gave his Son to be killed on Earth for a time, that we might not be killed
in Hell for ever, and, Blessed be God the Holy Ghost, who did anoint Jesus to
be our Christ, and gave him Inauguration to his Crown of Thorns, and Blessed
though most bloody Function; and blessed be our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave
himself up to death, that death might not swallow us up: yes, rather say we,
Blessed be the Holy Trinity, then to desire that Christ should be killed.

And God forbid again, That we should desire to have that King killed, whom I
in this Text aim at; For it is against the Law, against the Law of God, against
the Gospel of Christ, and against the Law of men too.

1. Against the Law of God, Exodus 27.22.
Thou shall not speak evel of the Ruler of thy people, says Moses; much less
may thou do evil to him; Prove.
for says Solomon Against the. King there is no rising up; but to desire his
death, to desire that he may be killed, is both to speak evil of him, and do
evil to him.

2. It is against the Gospel of Christ; For Christ himself says, Give to Caesar
the thing, that are Caesar; and what things are Caesar's, St. Paul tells you,
when he says, Be subject to him; Give him Honor, Romans 13.
Tribute, Obedience; Take not any thing from him; and all this for Conscience
sake; which argues their little or no Conscience which desire to have him
killed; for in so doing they take all things from him; and St. Peter puts it
further home, when he says next to Fear God, Honor the King, which shows, and
it it as if the Apostle had said, They have little or no Fear of God, that have
so little Honor for their King, as to dishonor him by desiring to have him
killed: or as the Royal Expositor has it, They cannot appear good Christians
p. 165.20.
that approve not themselves good Subjects; Nor can it be safe for a King to
tarry amongst those men, who shake hands with their Allegiance, p. 37.15.
under pretense of laying faster hold on their Religion and certainly that is
no Religion, or a very bad one, which allows it lawful for Subjects, to desire
to have their King Killed.

But I have spoken at full heretofore, That no cause whatsoever in the King,
though Murder, Wit^ h^raft, Idolatry, etc. can authorize Subjects, to
Rebellion, from the Law of God, from the Gospel of Christ, from the Judgment
of all the Primitive and later Orthodox Divines, as To kill their King.

3. And therefore I hasten to show in the next place, That such a desire to
have the King killed, is against the Law of Man, and particularly against the
Law of the men of this Nation, even of those men who did Kill King Charles I.

And that I may do it truly, and according to the Law of this Nation, I shall
only repeat the words of Judge Jenkins, who tells us, His Oath as a Judge, runs
thus; p. 174.


1. Well and truly to serve our Sovereign Lord the King, and his People in that
Office. 2. To do right to all manner of People, Poor and Rich, after the Laws
and Usages of this Realm. 3. Truly to Counsel the King, and his Counsel to
conceal and keep. p. 174.
4. Not to suffer the hurt, or disheriting of the King, or that the Rights of
the Crown be decreased by any means as far as he may let it. 5. If he may not
let it, he shall make it clearly, and expressly to be known to the King with his
advice and Council. 6. And that he shall do and purchase the Kings profit in
all that he reasonably may, as God him help, and the Contents of Gods Book.
And after he tells us, p. 175.
That the House of Commons this Parliament, (some called it the Long
Parliament, gave in charge to Mr. Solicitor ( St. John's I think) upon the
Prosecution of the Bill of Attainder against the Earl of Strafford, to declare
the Law to be, That Machination of War against the Laws or Kingdom, is against
the King; They cannot be severed.

He tells us again, p. 1676.
That Mr, Pym had in charge likewise upon the same Prosecution to Declare, That
the KING and his People are obliged one to another in the nearest relations; He
is a Father, and the Child in Law is called Pars Patres; He is the Husband of
the Commonwealth, They have the same Interests, they are inseparable in their
condition, be it good or evil; He is the Head, they are the Body; there is such
an Incorporation as cannot be dissolved without the destruction of both.

Once more, p. 198.
after this, he tells,

1. To Imprison the King is High Treason. 2. To remove Counselors from the
KING by force is High Treason. 3. To alter the Laws established in any part by
force is High Treason. 4. To usurp the Royal Power is High Treason. 5. To alter
the Religion established is High Treason. 6. To raise rumors and give out words
to alienate the Peoples affections from the King, is High Treason. 7. To sesse
Soldiers upon the People of the Kingdom, without their consent, is High
Treason. 8. The execution of Paper Orders by Soldiers in a Military way is
High Treason. 9. To counterfeit the Great Seal, is High Treason. 10. The
Commissions of Array is in force and no other. 11. None can make Judges,
Justices, Sheriffs, etc. but the King ^he King makes every Court. 12. The Great
Seal belongs to the Kings Custody, or to whom he shall appoint, and none other.
13. Ordinances of one or both Houses, are no Laws to bind the people. 14. No
Privilege of Parliament holds for Treason, Felony, or breach of the Peace. 15.
To Levy war against the Person of the King, is High Treason. 16. To impose
unlawful Taxes, to impose new Oaths, is High Treason. 17. It is a pernicious
Doctrine to teach Subjects, They may be discharged from the Oath of Allegiance.
Good God, of what a complicated Treason then was that party of that PARLIAMENT
Guilty, who after they had taken up Arms against KING CHARLES I. did did then
slander him, did then Imprison him, did then desire to have Him Killed, and
did then Actually Kill Him.

And so Committed a Murder, a monstrous murder, which is my second General
Part; Pars. 2.
And thus I discourse it.

Had they but desired to kill him, they had committed a monstrous Murder. For
as to Lust after a Woman is Adultery in Christ's Exposition of they
Commandment; Mat. 5.
so to be Angry with a man, to call him Fool, or Raca is Murder in his
Exposition of the sixth Commandment; but they, the Jews, called Christ a
Wine-bibber, a Samaritan, a Devil, and at last desired to have him killed, and
thereby committed a monst^ous Murder.

King David tells us, that the Lord a^horreth the blood-thirsty and deceitful
man; Psalm. 5.6.
and the deceitful man, as the best Expositors tell us, is such a one as
longs after, or desires the blood of his Neighbor.

But they went further, they did not only desire to have him killed, but they
actua^y killed him: Pilate indeed gave the sentence upon their importunity; and
they executed that sentence by their own Cruelty, and so Murdered him in their
heart by desire, in their tongue by detraction, and in their hand by Execution,
and so committed a monstrous Murder,

1. Monstrous. 1. as being against Nature; Omnia appetunt esse, Naturally all
things love their being. 2. Monstrous 2. as being against Reason, Quod tibi non
vis fieri, alteri ne feceris; Reasonably no man should do that to another,
which he would not another man should do to him. 3. Monstrous, as being
Devilish: He is a Mu^therer from the beginning, and the Author and Father of a
Murder; and who would be called a Malignant, Joh. 44.8.
or the Son of the Devil. 4. Monstrous. 4. as being Beastly, Ferina rabies
vulnere et sanguine laetari, says Seneca, it is a savage Cruelty to delight in
blood.
And yet if these Jews had thought, that for this sin of Blood, this monstrous
Murder of Christ, they should have been cursed upon earth, and have been
Vagabonds all the days of their life, certa^nly they would never have
committed so unnatural, so unreasonable, so devilish, so beastly a sin in
defiring Christ to be killed by the Cross; nor would the English have done the
like, by desiring Charles to be killed by the Hatchet.

But why did they desire Pilate to kill Christ? and why did some others desire
John Bradshaw to kill King Charles? why that my prima secundae is to tell you,
and it tells you thus in one suppositive, and in one Positive Quare.

1. It may be, the speak truth, when they said to Pilate, Joh. 18.31.
It is not lawful for us to put any man to death, and some latter Jews tells
us; by name, Moses Kots, in Sanhedrin, that all power of Capital punishments
was taken from them, forty years before the destruction of their second Temple.

But this I dare not conceive: For though power in Criminalls, in the General,
was taken from them, yet in this particular, Pilate gave them power, when he
said, Joh. 18.31.
Take yea him, and judge him according to your Law. Nor could they object
against this, their Law could not condemn him, if he had transgressed their
Law; because they confessed, they had a Law, and by their Law he ought to dye:
All that can excuse him in this, is, Joh. 19.7.
the Holiness of that time, made them say* It was unlawful; because they held
it unlawful upon their days of preparation to sit on life and death; and
Friday on which our Savior was condemned, was the preparation of their
Sabbath: But, 2. My positive Quare is this, They desired Pilate to put him to
death, because if they had let Christ alone, all men would believe him, et
venient Romani, the Romans will come, and take away both their Place and Nation.

This was the causeless cry they made against Christ, and the causeless end
they pretended in desiring Pilate to kill him, and here you may see how just
the Judgment of God was: We desire you Pilate to kill him; for fear the Romans
come upon us, and destroy us; and the killing of Christ was the cause that
brought in the Romans upon them, so justly did God punish them with that which
they pretended most to fear.

I would the Application were not too visible; 1. That gallant and wise Earl of
Strafford must be beheaded, because he plotted the Alteration of the
Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and raising of the standing Army: 2. The
constant and learned Archbishop of Canterbury must be beheaded, because he
plotted the Alteration of Religion, and bringing Popery into this Church: 3.
King Charles the first, that most Wise, most pious, most Learned Religious
Defender of the Faith, must be beheaded too, because He listened to such (evil)
Counselors, which God has punished with an evil Counsel, with the raising
and continuing of an Army, against the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and
with an Harvest of the Popes, besides with the Gleanings of a Medley of many
Sects, and Schisms, Anabaptists, Independants, Quakers, Shakers, Brownists,
and the Mother and Father of these and many more, the Presbyterians, to the
utter undoing almost of the most glorious Church Christ ever had upon the
Earth, since the Apostolical and Primitive time? God Almighty in his good
time, send a Charles the second to restore Vigor to the Fundamental Laws,
Peace to the people, and true Religion to the Church, through Jesus Christ Amen.

But what end had the Jews in killing Christ? why that my seconda secondae,
and last disquisition must inform you, and thus it does it.

1. It may be they had Jeroboams end, to make Priests of the lowest of the
people; and it is observable that after they had killed Christ, they never had,
nor to this day have a worthy man for their High Priest.

2. It may be they had Jehu's end, to make away all the Seed and Blood-Royall
and it is observeable again, that after they had killed Christ, Herod the Son
killed James also, the Cozen-German of Christ, and therefore of the Blood Royal
from David, that so none of that Family might ever after inherit the Crown of
Judea.

3. Or it may be they had Omries end, to erect new Statutes, contrary to the
old, Statutes of a new Invention, contrary to, or diverse from th^se of Gods
first Institution.

4. Or it may be they had Je abels end, that when Christ the King was killed,
they might without control make honest, loyal, constant, Conscientious men
Delinquents and Malignants, and plunder them of their ^states, and take away
their life.

5. Or if they had none of these ends, (and I cannot positively say they had)
yet questionless, their end was that in the Parable, This is the Heir, come
let us kill him, and the Inheritance shall be ours; He being killed, our
Glosses and humane Traditions, and Inventions shall go for Current, and all the
world will be of our Religion; and thereout shall we suck no small advantage.

And this end had some Judaized Scots and English in killing King Charles the
first: They desired the Deputy, or Governor, or President Bradshaw to kill
him, that the Possession of Crown and Sovereignty being of out his hands, or
podibility to recover them, and his Heir and Issue banished, he the President
by name, John Bradshaw might quietly and Conscientiously enjoy the Lord
Cottingtons Estate, and part of the Earl of St. Albons; worth 4000. l. per ann.
Sr. Thomas Fairfax part of the Duke of Buckinghams; Oliver Cromwell part of the
said Dukes, part of the Marquess of Worcesters, with a great deal more, who of
late upon the third of September this year, forfeited his usurped
Protectorship, with all his ill-gotten wealth, and Honors, and surrendered his
Soul into the hands of God, with this Manifesto of his Repentance? O Lord, how
will thou deal with me? O Lord, what Judgments and Torments have thou prepared
for me: I dare not say, so let them and the Kings enemies perish, O Lord, and
yet I do say, How long O Lord, how long will it be ere thou returnest King
Charles II. with power to recover his Dominions, and with Wisdom to settle
Peace and Religion in these Kingdoms; which we yet wait for patiently, and do
beg earnestly for his sake whom the Jews killed; Jesus Christ, Amen.

Anno Dom. 1659.
ROMANS 1.32. Who knowing the Judgment of God, that they which commit such
things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have pleasure in them
that do them.
MAny Inditements has the Apostle brought in against the Gentiles in this
Chapter, from the 29. verse to this 32. Two and twenty as some have tallied
them; Others add this to the former, and read them Three and twenty.

(...), Fornication the first; (...), Wickedness was the second, (...),
Covetousness was the third (...), Maliciousness was the fourth, (...), Envy
was the Fifth, (...), Murder was the sixth, (...), Debate was the seventh:
(...), Deceit; was the eighth: (...), Malignity the ninth: (...), Wnispering
was the tenth: (...), Backbiting was the eleaventh: (...), Hating of God was
the twelfth: (...) Despitefulness was the thirteenth: (...), Pride was the 14th
(...), Boasting was the fifteenth: (...), Invention of evil things was the
sixteenth: (...) Disobedience to Parents was the seventeenth: (...) without
Understanding was the eighteenth: (...) Covenant Breaking was the nineteenth
(...) Without Natural affection was the twentieth: (...) Implacability was the
one and twentieth: (...) Unmercifulness was the two and twentieth: and this I
take to be the last of his Indictment.

And this I have now read unto you, howsoever some men account to be a three
and twentyeth Indictment; yet I take it to be an aggravation of, and not an
addition to the former Inditements; and withal a preoccupation of all excuse;
For they might say, That we have done, as you have charged us, we cannot deny;
but that we are therefore Reprobates, we hope not; For what we have done
hitherto, we have done ignorantly; we knew not our sins to be so Capital; and
we trust God will wink at our sins of ignorance.

Nay, says St. Paul, you cannot plead ignorance; For you know the Law of God,
and that they which do such things are worthy of death; and yet you did them:
Yes truly, they reply, we have committed those sins against our knowledge; but
what then must we needs be damned for that? will not God pardon the frailties
of our youth? though we have not done these ignorantly, yet we have done them
of infirmity; Nay says St. Paul, by your leave, that you have not neither; For
if you had committed these sins by way of infirmity in your selves; you would
then con, demn them in others; but you not only do them your selves, but you
also take pleasure in them that do them.

Before I proceed, give me leave to wish that those Inditements were not as
justly chargeable upon a great part of English Christians, as they were upon
the Roman Gentiles; not upon all; no, there are many Chaste, Plous, Religious,
Meek, Patient and Loyal Souls amongst them; who are not liable to any of St.
Paul's enditement in this Chapter; nor yet upon the Parliament neither, that
long Parliament: no, God forbid I should have or ha^bour such a thought of
Parliament, of a true Parliament, which represents the blessed Trinity in
Power, Wisdom, and Sanctity, where the King, as Head, directs the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, as heart enlivens, and the Commons as the inferior
Members, put all things into execution.

I speak only of a Faction in that Parliament, who by their Serpentive sedulity
and subtlety, engros'd the power of all, cut off the Head of the Head, the
Kings Head, and voted down, or rather out, the Heart of the Hearts, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal: and did not only do these things themselves,
Malignity, Murder, Deceit, Debate, but also took pleasure in them that did
them; and vent one degree further, commanded others to do them too: In which
words the Apostle,

1. Accuses them for doing things worthy of death. 2. Aggravates that fault;
And were blessed St. Paul now living, he would further aggravate it. 1. From
their knowledge of Gods Law. 2. By delighting in others for doing the same. 3.
By Commanding all others, and compelling many to do the same; witness the 1.
Engagement. 2. Oath of Abjuration. 3. Subscription against the common Enemy,
King Charles the second.


I begin with the first Agravation, (so the Accusation is too plain, indeed too
plain, that who so runs, Psalm. 1.
may read it) and the Observation thence is this: Knowledge Aggravates Sin: Joh.
9.41.
For says Christ, If yea were blind, yea should have no sin: i. e. Nullum non
simpliciter, sed nullum Comparative; None not simply, but no sin Comparatively;
and when Christ extenuates their sin that crucified him, he prays thus for
them; Father, Luke. 25.
forgive them, for they know not what they do: and if I, if you, am that
Servant, which knew my Masters will, and prepare not my self to do according to
his will, I yes and you, yes and they, whosoever they are, shall be beaten with
many stripes. Luke 12.


If Christ had not come, and spoke to you, and them, and me, Joh. 15.22.
we had not had sin; but now, because Christ has spoke to us all, we have no
Cloak for our sin: If you, and they, Joh. 4.17.
and I know how to be good, and do it not: (know how to abstain from sin, and
abstain not) to us it is sin.

If I sin of Ignorance only, I want both knowledge and good will; having a will
only to the deed, not to the sin; but if I sin willingly, I want both good will
and inclination to leave my sin; having a will at once both to the deed and
sin; and therefore the more sinful, because when I knew the deed to be sin,
yet I would do it.

More sinful therefore I am then other men, because my knowledge makes my sin
a wilful neglect of Gods Authority; He is the immediate Lawgiver, and has
revealed it to me* as well as to Adam and Eve, as well as to Moses and Aaron,
as well as to the Prophets and Apostles; More sinful therefore I am then
ignorant people, because my knowledge makes my sin a Profane Contempt of the
Lawgivers Authority; and He has revealed it more to me, and you, and them,
then to the Gentiles.

Yet may no man hence more profanely in far, welcome Ignorance; for though
ignorance lessors both Sin and Damnation, yet it makes not my sin to be no sin;
and it is but a miserable comfort for a So^omite to think that a Capernaise is
worse then himself, when he is in the burning Lake; for he too is damned
everlastingly, Luke 12.46.
though less tormented: Science, in the knowing sinner, shall have the more
stripes, yet no more stripes then his sciene is capable off; Ignorance in the
unknowing sinner, shall have fewer stripes, yet no fewer then his Ignorance is
capable off. As the tender and soft flesh is more sensible of the sharpness, by
incision or stripes, then the tough and hardened flesh; yet they both have
enough, though not equally the same.

Nessire to be invincibly Ignorant, is damnable simplicity: Nolle scire, to be
wilfully Ignorant, is heinous Impiety: Scire et nolle facere, to know good, and
not to do it, is intolerable Obstenacy; or, scire et contra facere, to know
good, and yet to do the contrary against the light of that knowledge, is a very
near* borderer upon that unpardonable sin, the sin against the Holy Ghost,
which shall never be forgiven: This is the Aggravations of the Gentiles sins;
they knew those several acts to be sins; yet they did the sins.

Now before we go on, let us examine whether some of our English Christians did
not know, the Dethroning the deposing, the killing, the Murdering of King
Charles the first were not a sin, and a great, a very great sin.

Certainly they did know it; they knew it: 1. By the Law of God; they knew it:
2. By the Example of Christ; they knew it: 3. By the Native, Positive, and
Statute Laws of this Kingdom, all which they were bound and sworn to observe
to follow, and yet against their knowledge and Oath both. They (quod horrendum
est dicere, quod infandum est renovare) They dethroned him, deposed him, killed
and Murdered him.

1. They knew it by the Law of God; It is expressly said, Thou shall do no
murder; but this it may be is too general, what think you then of that
particular prohibition, Nolite tangere Christis meos; Touch not mine Anointed:
Does not this concern Kings in particular! For they were Anointed: or
rather, does it not concern you in particular, that howsoever you touch other
men, yet you would forbear to touch Kings; i. e. to touch them with any hand of
violence; He, whosoever he be that does it, commits no less sin then Crimen
laesae Majestatis; High Treason; Touch not mine Anointed is all one with,
Prove. Job.
lay no violent hands on Kings: no, nor tongues neither, speak not irreverently
of them, no nor hearts neither, think not unworthy of them.

But it may be, some have got, and others follow the new gloss of these words;
Touch not mine Anointed; i. e. touch not my Prophet, touch not my Saints,
touch not my holy ones; Prove.
This concerns not Kings.

Well, be this admitted, though it be not granted: yet what say you to that of
Solomon? Fear God and the King, and that in respect of the Oath: Is not this
home to this particular? The King next to God, and the King joined with God in
the duty of Fear? q. d. If you fear not the King when you have seen, you fear
not God, whom you have not seen; and is not that Aggravation of the sin, in not
fating God for want of fearing the King, and an Aggravation of another sin, in
not fearing the King, for want of fearing God.

But the Aggravation is yet further and higher; and that in respect of the
Oath; Take the Oath which way you please, eitheir the Oath of Universal
obedience to God, wherein the King is not left out; or the Oath of particular
Allegience and Supremacy to the King, wherein the King is especially put in,
and yet God not left out; for the Oath is to the King before God; and that God,
before whom you took this Oath, will be a most severe revenger upon you that
have broke this Oath of Allegiance to the King before God, and the Oath of
Obedience to God before the Church.

2. They knew that Murdering of King Charles the first was a sin, and a very
great sin by the Example of Christ, when he was upon the Earth Clothed with
the Garment of our Humanity: Having at his Command and beck twelve legions of
Angels for his assistance and rescue, Joh. 19.
and Pilate told him, he had power to loose him, and power to Crucify him,
Christ was so far from Commanding his Angels, or to resist Pilates power, that
he commanded St. Peter to sheeth that sword which he drew in his defense; and
said no more to Pilate, but, thou should have no power over me unless it
were given thee from above; therein acknowledging all Royal Power on earth to
be a Dorrative and Derivative from Gods power in Heaven; therefore to be
feared, obeyed, and submitted unto, at no hand to be resisted. But whether the
Murdering of a King be the resisting of Regal Power, and a sin, yes and an
Aggravation of that sin, because they knew it, Judge your selves.

Again from Christ's Example, Mat.
when these Crafty and Fox-like Pharisees come to Christ, that they might
entangle him; and therefore demanded, whether it were he asks whose lawful
to give Tribute unto Caeser or no; superscription was upon their money; and
when he heard it confessed from themselves, that it was Caesers; why then quoth
he, give unto Caser the things that are Casaers and to God, the things that are
Gods; thereby denying God and the King to be (...) or Incompatible, and
commanding us as well to give the King our Goods and Bodies to him service, as
to do give God our Souls and Bodies in his service. And does not this Aggravate
their sin, who against their knowledge, are so far from paying or giving the
King his Tribute, that they plunder him of his life.

3. They knew, that Murdering of the King was sin, a great sin, a very great
sin, by the Native, Positive, and Statute Laws of this Kingdom; All which
Laws do say, It is High Treason to Imprison the King; certainly then, much
Higher Treason to Murder the King: And this last Aggravation of their sin,
concerning their knowledge, that Murdered King Charles the first at his own
Royal Pallace-Gate, Jan. 30. 1648. and I conclude it with this prayer for you
and my self.

Give us grace, O God, to labor for knowledge; Joh. 13.17.
and give us more grace to add practice to our knowledge, that we may be
blessed in knowing good, and doing well, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

Cursed am I, if I know, and will not do, not because I know, but because
knowing, I will not do what I know, and so sin against my knowledge; as these
Gentiles did?

They knew the Law of God, This was the object of their knowledge; some
Translations read the Righteousness of God; some, the Judgment; some the
Justice of God.

They all come to one, so I here understand by the Law, not the Law written;
either Moral or Judicial; for this was the Jews Prerogative; but the Law
unwritten, whereby every man knows in general, what is good, what is evil,
what is to be done what is to be forborne; and this was a privilege which God
vouchsafed the Gentiles, and that three ways.

1. By the light of Nature; which Philosophers called the Law of Nature; Lex
and Lux not differing much either in Signification or pronuntiation; E. and U.
In pronuntion, light, i.e. the light of the mind, which direct, and Law, the
Law of the mind, which persuades.

2. By Conscience, which is the lights light, or the Laws Law, and is
therefore quiet, and commends the mind for well doing, but is restless, and
condemns the mind for ill doing; and so the next Chapter tells us, their
Conscience (or thoughts) accusing, or excusing; accusing when any thing is done
co^tra scientiam against knowledge; excusing, when the mind thinks, or the mouth
^peaks, or the hand does cum scientia, according to knowledge; ever writing
like that Lex Acilia among the Romans, one of these letters to be read, either
A. or C. if A. it was Absolution; if C. it was Condemnation.

3. By examples of Vengeance upon evil doers, which may be called the judiciary
Law of God; and so is the word here, (...) (Righteousness, Law, or Judgment)
injusti facti Correctio, the punishment of an unjust act; especially of that
which is the unjustest of unjust Sects, whether it be Homicidium, Parricidium:
or Regi-cidium, ^urthering of a man which is bad, or the murdering of a
Father, which is worse, or the murdering of a King which is worst of all.

Had we been before Christ, or were we now without Christ; yet we should have
the Law, at least, the knowledge of the Law of God; and this the Apostle proves
to every one of us two ways. 1. A Facto, by Fact 2. A Testimonio by Witness.

1. By Fact thus: Though they have not the law, yet by Nature, they do the
things contained in the Law; Romans 2.14.
by Nature, by the light of Nature; For by the light of Nature.

Plutarch thus justifies the first precept of the Decalogue, saying, Omnes hoc
uno ore dicunt, esse Deos; In amator in Tim. 3. page 416.
Notwithstanding all the tentations of the Devil to persuade men like Diagoras,
Theodoras, and others, who made a profession of Atheism, to say there is no
God, yet upon better consideration they were compelled to confess, with one
mouth, as it were; De not. Deer lib. 2. page 203. De leg. lib. 1. page 313.
That there is a God, and Cicero, that Eloquen^'st of Orators to the same
purpose; Omnibus innatum est, and quasi insculptum, esse Deos, De leg. lib. 1.
page 313.
It is naturally engraven in the minds of all men to believe, there is God;
and elsewhere, Nulla gens neque tam immansneta, nequetam fera and barbara est,
quae etiamsi ignoret qualem habere Deum deceat, tamen habendum sciat; There is
no people so feirce, so uncivil, so barbarous, though they be ignorant what God
to have, yet they are persuaded, they ought to have a God; and with the
Athenians, rather then they will have none, they will sacrifice Ignoto Deo, to
an unknown God? and Cato tells us, Act. 17.25.
that God is a Spirit, and therefore pura mente colendus, to be worshipped with
a pure mind.

De bello persio, contra Gravos.
By the light of Nature Strabo justifies the second precept, which is an
Inhibition of Idolatry, when he tells us: The Persians in detestation of such
impiety, pulled down and burnt the Images of the Grecians in their Temples: and
Cornelius Tacitas reports, that the ancient Germans held it very absurd to
immure the incomprehensible Majesty of an Immeasurable God within private
Walls, and to paint the Invisible Godhead by any Humane shape: And Plutarch
tells us, that Numa Pompilius, the second King, and first institutor of
Religions Rites amongst the Romans held it heinous to worship God in or by any
Image.

3. By the light of Nature, Theophras^us justifies the third precept, which is
a prohibition against Blasphemy, when he tells us, that Paricles was an
irreligious fellow, because he used Charms, thereby to invocate and abuse the
name of God; and Tullush Hostilius, as we are told, was struck dead, because he
Blasphemed the name of Jupiter.

4. By the light of nature, both Thomas Aquinas, and Dr. Bird, from the very
Heathen justify the fourth Commandment, which Commands the Sanctifying of the
Sabbath, when they both tell us, that the Heathen had many Laws to sever
certain days from their worldly affairs, as to dedicate them to the service
of God; and deputed a certain time to refresh and feed their soul by their
service to God, and they did every day nourish and feed their bodies by food
and sleep; and howsoever they could not, or did not hit upon the right day, yet
by the direction of mere natural reason, they acknowledged, a day ought to be
sequestered from common business, and consecrated to God worship.

5. By the light of Nature Menander justifies the fifth Commandment, which is,
to honor our Parents, when he tells us (...) Have thy Parents in all honor.

6. Romulus by the light of Nature justifies the sixth Commandment, which
forbids Murder, when he accounted it of that execrable Nature with Parracide,
and devised such exquisite punnishments to be inflicted upon Homicides, and all
man-slayers, that if Halicarnassus his report be true, there was not a man
slain within the Walls of Rome for above 600 years.

7. By the light of Nature the very Peot justifies the seventh Commandment;
when he says,

Nupta virum timeat, rata sit custodia nupta,
Hoc decet, hoc leges, jusque pudorque jubent.
The Laws, Common Right and Honesty teach all men and women to live Chastely,
and to keep their Faith, each one to another, and so another by name Tibullus
ah, pereat, didicit foller^ siqua virum: Let that Wife perish which deceives
her Husband, yes, and that Husband which deceives his Wife: and so the great
Philosopher, Non debet homo sanae mentis ad quamcunque mulierem mittere semen
suum; No man of a sound mind may defile his body with a strange Woman: and
Geraldus tells us, that among the Spartans they were so chaste, that it was
almost incredible that any Adulterer should be found amongst them.

8. Cicero by the light of Nature justifies the eight Commandment, which
forbids theft or stealing; when he says, Detrahere aliquid alteri, etc; To
steal or take away from our Neighbor, to increase our own wealth, and decrease
his, Magis est contra Naturam quammors, quam dolor, quam caeter a quae possunt,
aut corpori accidore, aut rebus externis; it is worse then death, and more
against Nature then Grief, or any other external thing; and Draco the
Athenian Lawgiver punished Theft with Death.

9. The Poet again by the sight of Nature justifies the ninth Commandment,
which forbids false-witness-bearing, when he says Non been conducti vendunt
perjuria testes; they very much offend that sell or hire themselves to testify
any falsehood: and therefore such Laws were made to hinder all false testimony,
that none should be a Witness in his own cause; that none should be admitted to
testify against his Enemy; that if any man should thrice bear false Witness,
and presume again to testify any thing before a Judge, he should be condemned
to dye.

10. By the sight of nature, Sophocles justifies the tenth Commandment, which
forbids us to Covet another man's good, when he says; This very affection is a
most furious Commander: and when Xerxes would have persuaded Leonides to this
sin, he answered, if thou knew what were honest, thou would forbear to
Cover what is another man's: for my part, I had rather dye then do it.

All these things the Gentiles know by the light of Nature only; and yet for
that the Apostle aggravates their sins, because they know it, and yet did it:
first by Fact.

Secondly by Witness: Kom. 2.15.
for so in the next Chapter again he says; Their Conscience bearing Witness,
and their thoughts accusing or excusing one another: and elsewhere he says,
God left not himself without Witness, in that He did good, and gave us rain
from Heaven, Act. 14.17.
and fruitful seasons, and filling our hearts with food and gladness; and this
the very Heathens called Haeriditaria fama omnium mortalium, the Inheretance of
all men.

Take you and my self therefore heed of that Religion, which grants
dispensations for Murders, and marrages within degrees prohibited, and makes
them not only commendable, but in some cases also meritorious, yes, worthy of
Canonization too For it is a Transgression of the Law of God, because of the
Law of Nature, both which the Apostle here makes all one.

And again, take you and my self heed, how you or I lay the guilt of our sin,
or the pain of our Condemnation upon God; let us not charge him with Cruelty,
but our selves with folly and impiety: The Law of God teaches you and my self,
when we are idle in the Pismire, to provide in Summer against Winter, to be
sober in the Horse, and drink no more then will do us good: being Unchaste or
Lacivious in the Dove, and know no woman but out own Wifes: being Cruel or
Unnatural in the Storke, and to maintain our Parents, Children, Friends; that
if we do such things, we are worthy of death.

Worthy of death, of death temporal; so Draco by the light of nature appointed
Death for all great Transgressions: but that is not all our Apostle here means;
but worthy of death eternal too; and this the very Gentiles knew, by assigning
their Elisyan fields to some sinners, and Hell, or their Stygian Lake to other
sorts of sinners:

Take you and I therefore heed of all sorts of sins, and do with every sin, as
David did with his water, which his Worthies brought him with hazard of their
lives, power it and them on the ground, and say, God forbid we should commit
these sins, because if we do we are worthy of Death, of Death Temporal, and
Death Eternal.

Especially take we heed, that we delight not, that we take not pleasure in,
that we applaud not them that do them: For this is desperate impiety, the hight
of and the great aggravation of the Gentiles sin, here used by this great
Apostle; which is my second consideretion, They do not only do them, Psalm. 2.
Put also take pleasure in others for doing the same.

Some read it Consent, so Lyranus, Tolet, and others; and make the Aggravation
less.

But Theophylact Paraeus, Piscator and others read it, Patrocinantur, favor,
delight, take pleasure in; yes, Applaudunt, Applaud and defend them that do
such things; and so make the Aggravation greater: either way, It is bad enough.

Alexanders murdering of Clytus, was not the less, though Anaxarchus the
Epicurian Philosopher told him, All was lawful that Princes did; though
Aristander the Stoical Philosopher told him, it was Fate and Destiny: David's
murdering Uriah was not the less, though the Ammonite slew him, 2 Samuel 12.9.
because he commanded it.

Achitopels killing of Absalom was not the less, because his Counsel brought
him to his death. 2 Samuel 16.21.


Saul was not less guilty of St. Stephens death, Act. 7.59.
though the Jews stoned him, Act. 22.20.
because he consented to it.

Achab was not less guilty of Naboths death, though some Sons of Belial bare
false witness against him, and others condemned him, Reg. 21.13.
and others stoned him; because he authorized and countenanced it with his Seal.

Esau was not the less guilty of Jacobs destruction, though Foreigners, Obed.
11.12.
carried him away captive, because he did not rescue him.

All the Tribe of Benjamin was not guilty of the Concubines Death and Rape in
the Act of it, Jud. 19.22. Jud. 20.13.14.
yet they were guilty of the sin, because they sheltered the Actors and Doers
of it.

The Modern or latter Jews were not the less guilty of the old Prophets death,
Mat. 23.34.
though their Fathers and Grandfathers slew them, because they were Heir, as
well of the Murders, as of their Fathers.

Nor were they less guilty of King Charles, blessed King Charles the first his
death, who brought him to the Block, though others chopped off his head; because
they then withstood it not, nor ever since called any of them to account for
doing of it.

Nor are you, or my self the loss guilty of that sin, which another man
commits, if, lying in our power, we do not hinder it, if we do not reprove it,
if we counseled it, if we consented to it, if we commanded it, if we concealed
it, if we entertained the Actors of it, and gave them applause, or took
pleasure in them for doting of it.

I end this second part with Prayer. O God, we have much guilt of our own, too
much, if thy mercy be not the greater; suffer us not we beseech thee to partake
of other men's sins, or communicate in other men's guilt; but give us Courage to
hinder it, Zeal to reprove it, Power to forbid it, Wisdom to dispraise it,
Anger to discountenance it, Strength to resist it, Hearts and Tongues to
declaime against it: The burdens of others miseries give us Charity to bear;
but the burdens of other men's sins give us piety to forbear; and the burden
of our own sins do thou ease, and the guilt of our own sins do thou forgive,
for his sake, who has borne that burden, and washed away that guilt by his
precious and invaluable blood, Jesus Christ; Amen.

And now I come to the last part I proposed; That if the Apostle were now
living, Pars. 3.
he would certainly further aggravate this sin upon the English Christians,
then he did upon the Roman Gentiles, who have out-stript and exceeded their
doing these sins themselves, and their delighting in those that do them, by
commanding all others, and compelling many to do the same, by 1. An Engagement.
2. An Oath of Abjuration. 3. A subscription of Opposition against the Common
Enemy, whom they at least some of them, I am sure one of them, with the
Approbation, if silence gives consent, declared to be Charles Stewart, whom we
acknowledge to be Charles the second, King of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and for whose return we do and will pray, with Power from above to recover his
own Rights, with mercy from above to forgive his Rebellions Subjects, and with
Wisdom from above to lettle this Church of God, and his three Kingdoms in
Peace and Truth, until the second coming of our Blessed Lord and Savior,
Jesus Christ, Amen.

That Engagement (with the Covenant) was the first; 1. Engagement.
and either of these bad enough, since there is not one Engagement in the whole
Book of God, save those of the Rebels, Corah and his Accomplices, Absalom and his
Conspirators, Shaba and his Peufellowes, nor is there one Covenant in that
whole book, but they were all given and taken by the Kings Authority, not a
Covenant amongst them all, (and they are but six in number) imposed without,
much less against the Kings Authority; and besides, they were all merely
Religious Covenants, not one Politic or state Covenant amongst the whole six:
Joshua 24.25.
The first, of which six was made by Joshua with the people: The second, was
made by Jehojada the High Priest, in behalf of the young King Joash with the
people, 2 Reg. 11.4.
the sum of which Covenant was that the people should be true to God, 2 Cron.
15.12.
the King, and the Church: The third was made by King Asa with the people to
seek the Lord God of their Fathers with all their heart, and with all their
soul: The fourth was made by King Hazechiah with the people, when they were in
great distress for want of Religion: and therefore said the King, I have
purposed to make a Covenant with the Lord God of Israel, that he may turn his
feirce wrath from us; This was the Kings Covenant and Engagement with God for
the people, 2 Cron. 29.10.
not theirs against him: The fifth was made by Josia, King of Israel with God,
that he, (and his People) would walk after the Lord, and keep his
Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes, with all his heart, and
his soul, and that he would accomplish the words of the Covenant, and he caused
all the people to stand to it: 2 Cron. 34.30.
The sixth and last was requested by the people of the Captivity from Ezra, who
was then Instar and loc^ R^gis, in these words; now therefore let us make a
Covenant with our God to put away all our strange Wifes: These are all the
Covenants I have read of, or can remember in the whole Bible; and all these
were made by and with the several Kings, Ezra. 10.3.
none without or against them: But the English Engagement and Covenant was made
without and against the King of England: and howsoever those were commendable,
and extenuated the Israelites sins; yet this must needs aggravate the English
sins, and condemn them who contrived it, and took without much Repentance in
themselves, and more mercy in God and the King to which mercy God incline the
heart of the King for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

And (...) ^orse then the former; for the former (...) only engage against the
Kings person, 2. ^^tion.
and the other part of it promised and pretended to fight for him in order to
the preservation of Religion, which might and did easily beguile many simple,
and well minded people; but this same Oath of Abjuration was against the Kings
Posterity; not one of his Race or Name to reign over us any more; nay, against
Lords of both sorts, Ecclesiastical and Temporal; yes against the office of
Episcopa^y; so that we should not have had so much as a Skeleton of Monarchy,
nor a shape of any one of the Royal Tribes, none of Benjamin or Nepthali; none
of Asher or Ephraim, not a Duke, Marquess, Earl, Lord, or Barron; nor any one
of an Apostolical Church, not a successor of Aaron, not a successor of St.
Peter^ St. Paul or any other of the Apostles; some of the Tribe of Levi we
might have had in a settell'd Presbytery, to the loss of the English, and gain
of the Romish Church; And had not this been a greater Aggravation of our
Countrymens sins, in compelling some to be their Prosolites, and ten times more
the Children of Satan then themselves, then a bare knowing and doing those
sins, with delighting in others that do the same, comes short of compelling
others to do those things which we know to be sin: Delectation comes short of
Compulsion, and therefore once more I pray.

O thou Eternal and Merciful God, suffer not again such Commanders to rule
over us; or if thou had not yet sufficiently punished us for our former
Malignity and Murder, yet give us not over to obey such evil Commands, that
when thou make Inquisition for blood, for common blood, for sacred blood, or
Noble blood, for Royal blood, our souls may be sprinkled with the saving and
all sufficient blood of Jesus Christ.

(...) ^^^scription, which these Master Murderers required, and would have
compelled us to do, under the specious pretense of, against the Common Enemy,
but in truth, with the horrid guilt of shutting out, if possible, for ever, of
King Charles the second, whom, God Almighty preserve to these three Kingdoms,
England, Scotland, and Ireland, till in a good old age he be received into the
Kingdom of Heaven, for Jesus, for Jesus, for Jesus Christ his sake: Amen,
Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

