TARUGO'S WILES: OR, THE Coffee-House.

A COMEDY.

As it was Acted at his Highness's, the Duke of York's Theater.

WRITTEN By THO. St SERFE, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Sign of the Anchor, on the
Lower-walk of the New-Exchange. 1668.

To the Right Honorable, and most Noble Lord, GEORGE MARQUESS of HUNTLEY,
EARL of EIGNEY, AND LORD STRATHBOGY.
My Lord,
AS Cities receive great Princes with Shows and Pageants, so I welcome your
Honor into the world with this Dramatick divertisement. Perchance a more
serious present had not been so becoming your age, as having but newly shaken
off the infant blossoms of a hopeful fruit, which in all reason is to be
expected, if your Honor contemplate the actions of your Illustrious Ancestors,
whose greatness and glory were first rooted by the munificence of Majesty,
especially for stifling and confounding the Rebellions in the Reign of King
James the Third. Never was bounty better bestowed; for Loyal gratitude in the
highest degree has been by it constantly intailed on the house of Huntley:
there needs no further demonstration then the actions and sufferings of your
Noble Grandfather, Father, and Uncles in our late Fanatic Commotions: For,
upon all occasions they and their Relations were still in the greatest
readiness to assert the Royal Interest: And that which rendered them most
considerable (next their Loyalty) was their number, who of themselves, without
regard to Dignity, composed entire Squadrons of Horse and Foot. And for their
sufficiency, let any reflect upon the Battles of the great Montrose, they will
find them so conspicuous, that it lies not in the power of the cunningest and
blackest Malice to raze their glorious Memories out of the lasting Monuments
and Histories of our time. This is so great a Truth, that I am delighted to
think there is none can justly contradict me: So, whosoever sees all their
Virtues summed up and inherited by you, shall never doubt that in any active
capacity for the service of your Prince, your whole Name and Family under such
a Head will still continue in the first rank of the best Subjects.

My Lord, this same Comical Trifle, which I dedicate to your recreation, like
most other Plays, has its useful moralities. If the way I have used in
ordering them be satisfactory, I esteem my self happy, humbly begging your
Honor would be pleased to accept it as a small part of the great Thankfulness
I owe for the many Reliefs, Shelters and Protections, I received from your
Family during the time of His Majesty's Service in the North of Scotland, which
I shall die acknowledging, to be the duty of,

My Lord, Your Honors most Devoted, and most humble Servant, THO. St SERFE.

The PROLOGUE.
Enter a Gentleman, a Player, and the Poets Man. Gent. WHo is the Author of
this new Play?


Po. Serve. He Is a Stranger, and my Master.


Gent. He must be a bold Stranger indeed that will venture his reputation to
the Censures of our Critics.


P. Serve. Heaven forbid that any honest man's reputation should depend upon the
making of a Play; But, I must tell you Sir, he had never ventured, if he had
not seen the Wit of the times so easily acquired.


Gent. But why is modern wit so easily acquired.


P. Serve. Because a Trivolino, or a Skaramuchio that is dextrous at making of
mouths will sooner raise a Clap then a high flown Fancy.


Play. All the better for us if that be true, for we shall have new Plays come
on like fresh Herring and Mackarell, all the year about, so that our Wits shall
never be out of Season.

aside.
Gent. But Friend, you are in a monstrous error; for if your Masters Play be
not provided with requisite Materials, both he and it will be condemned to the
Nursery.


P. Serve. I pray what do you reckon them Sir?


Gent. The Plot must be new, the Language easy, the Fancies intelligible, and
the Comical part so delicately interwoven, that both laughter and delight may
each of them enjoy their proportions.


P. Serve. I have heard my Master say, that since the restoration of the Stage,
he has seen all you have said represented to perfection, and yet blown upon
with disdain.


Gent. That Is only by the young sucking fry of Wits; But tell me, has your
Masters Play the qualifications I told you of.


P. Serve. Not one of them, for the Plot is like all others of the time; viz. A
new Toot out of an old Horn; and in regard he saw small things so acceptable, he
has dubbed his Trifle with the rest, in hopes that it will prove less
considerable then any that is gone before, and consequently expects a better
approbation.


Gent. By that Character I perceive he is not ambitious to bear up with the
Flag-wits.


P. Serve. Right, only a small Privatier to skulk among Creeks and Clifts.


Gent. My advise is then, that he quit the English Shore if he intend to thrive
at Wit Capring, for the Natives of that Trade has left so little now to pilfer,
that the purchase will not defray the rigging of Ink and Paper, and let him try
when he pleases, he will find the Wit almost as scarce a commodity as the Money.


P. Serve. My Master was lucky then at his first setting out to cruise the Coast
of Spain.


Gent. If he has done so, he could not miss of a good Prize.


P. Serve. A small Caravel from Sevill which he freely bestows upon this good
company, and that his present might be entire, he has given the PrizeOffice the
go-by.


Gent. He might have saved that labor; for not being matter of money they
would never a looked after him. But tell me friend, without any more
circumlocutions, what way is the Play dressed?


P. Serve. What do you mean by that?


Gent. That Is whether it be set off with Blank verse, Rhyme, or Prose.


P. Serve. My Master is no Arithmetician, and so defies all numerical
composition.


Gent. This is the first Poet that ever I heard of, could not make Verse; But
how shall the Expectations of the Audience and the Music be prepared at the
ending of Acts.


P. Serve. I am appointed with an Engine to do that.


Gent. Which way?


P. Serve. This way.

[The Poets man takes out a Rattle and whirles it about his Head.
Play. 'Slife, I think this Prose Poets fancy will take; for if I be not
mistaken, a Rattle will be better understood by a great many here then the best
kind of Rhyme.

aside.
[The Gentleman takes the Rattle, and whirles it about. Gent. I see no reason
but this same Engine ought to alarm the Minstrills to tune their Fiddles, and
advertise the Audience to refresh their hams as well as a couplet of Rhyme.


Play. But Sir, it may scare the Ladies from eating their fruit.


P. Serve. Pox take you for a Coxcomb, do you take them for Magpyes and
Jackdawes.


Gent. I hope he has dressed his Prologue in Rhyme.


P. Serve. No, I am to be his Jack-Pudding in the case, and deliver it by way of
Harangue.


Enter a true Poet, and Friend to the Author. Poet. Forbear Sirrah, you are a
saucy Serving-man; your Master will not be pleased at this boldness of yours
with this Company. I say be gone with your Jack-Pudding Speech, least the
Audience take it for a Directory, and so choke their expectations of the Play.


Poet. Ladies and Gentleman,

You Are too well bred not to be kind to day,
Since it is a Stranger that presents the Play:
Stranger to our Language, Learning and Ryme;
He says, to Wit too; and it is his first time.
No boldness in our Prologue shall appear
You, but too frequently meet that elsewhere:
We only your Divertisement intend,
'Cause on your Goodness all our hopes depend.

DRAMATIS PERSONAE.
DOn Patricio, Don Horatio -- Two Knights. Liviana -- Sister to Patricio.
Locura -- Her Maid. Sophronio, in love, and beloved by Patricio. Stanlia -- Her
Maid. Roderigo a Knight, designed by Patricio to marry Liviana. Tarugo a
younger Brother, bred in England, and Kinsman to Don Horatio. Hurtante -- a
Tailor. Two Sergeants. Alberto -- Servant to Don Patricio. Domingo -- Servant
to Don Horatio.
A Coffee-House, where is presented a mixture of all kind of people.

TARUGO'S WILES: OR, THE Coffee-House.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter D. Horatio and Tarugo. Taru. IS not she, who you saluted now in passing,
the Lady you so highly praised the other day?


Hor. The same; the City has not her equal.


Taru. What think you of Liviana?


Hor. I confess her beauty's great, but for excellency of parts, Sophronia much
excels.


Taru. Are there any other parts requisite in a Woman but Beauty accompanied
with riches? all which Liviana has in abundance.


Hor. The Lady Sophronia has all you named, besides a vast knowledge in
Masculine learning.


Taru. Vast knowledge, say you? ought Women to have any other understanding
then good Huswif'ry; particularly to be skilled in composing the valiant
decoxions of Cock-broth, and restorative Jellyes.


Hor. That Is (I suppose) the only practice of the Northern-Women.


Taru. If it be, I conceive it more proper for them, and much more useful for
us; what you call Masculine learning is every way as unbecoming a Woman as to
see a Switzer a Horseback.


Hor. Well Cousen, I am now going to pay her a visit, which I can do at
pleasure; she being my Kinswoman you shall go along, where I doubt not but
after a little time spent in her company, you will soon recover the gravity of our
Spanish conversation, which I perceive you have altogether cast off for the
English way of freedom.

Exit.
SCENE II.
Enter Liviana and Locura. Live. I wonder what can be the occasion that my
Brother's Nuptials with the Lady Sophronia is retarded, the report being all
about the Town that they are already married.


Loc. Madam, all I can learn from his man Alberto is, that since you have been
so strictly confined, the Lady Sophronia has not received your Brothers Visits
with her wonted cheerfulness: For my part, I believe this sudden restraint
upon you has raised dislike in her against so jealous and peevish a
disposition.


Live. It Is like enough; if I were in her place I would do the same: but no
more, I hear him coming.


Enter Patricio. Pat. How fares it with my Sister?


Live. Well; I hope in Charity with all the world.


Pat. Are you not troubled to be deprived of the accustomed freedom in giving
and receiving Visits.


Live. Not at all, since it is your pleasure; but if I thought any of my actions
had led you to this severity, I should then be highly perplexed.


Pat. I did it not upon any such account, only the corruptions of the time
urged that I should not expose you to the temptations of the world, and since
it is for the ease of my mind, and preservation of your honor, you ought to be
less dissatisfied.


Live. Fear not the ease of your mind, if it depend upon the preservation of my
honor, for it is within my breast can do that better then all your restraints.


Pat. All the better; yet I Will scarce trust her,

aside. Exit severally.
Enter D. Horatio, Tarugo, Sophronia and Stantia. Sophr. Cousin Horatio, you
are opportunely come, for I was just now going to send for you.


Hor. I am glad then my good Angel directed me hither; But pray, Madam, be
acquainted with my Kins-man That Is lately arrived from England.


Sophr. The advantage will be mine to learn the Customs of that wise Nation.


Taru. If she be governed by the example of the English Ladies, she will lead a
merry life, and yet be esteemed a Vertuosa.

[aside.
Sophr. Cousin my business will require privacy; Therefore intrear your Friend
for a little space to step into the Gallery: Stanlia, go you along and show him
the Pictures.


Hor. Do Cousin: and try to pick out a Mistress among the Court Ladies, for
there you will find 'em represented to perfection.


Taru. Whatever be her Learning I am sure her breeding's good, that will not
suffer me to be alone staring about like a troublesome Dun:


Stan, Come Sir, 'Ile lead the way.


Taru. Do Sweetheart: I wish the Gallery be so blessedly contrived as to have
a Belcone-window in it, that I may tender my love to this Original worth a
thousand Copies.

Exeunt Tar. Stan.
Sophr. Now that we are alone, I pray use the same sreedom with me that I shall
do with you.


Hor. With all my soul I grant it.


Sophr. Then tell me, was there ever any serious Love 'twixt you and Liviana?


Hor. Such a business was once fairly begun, and I believe in regard my
addresses were generous and real, that in some measure they were favorably
received.


Sophr. Be persuaded they were, and she has signified so much to my self that
you are the only person she affects.


Hor. The discovery of this distracts me; for what hopes of enjoying such
happiness, so long as her Brothers jealousy denies her all Conversation?


Sophr. There Is the mischief; however (if your love be real) me hinks you ought
to study all means to get the difficulties removed.


Hor. Where is your concern in being so earnest to advance this love 'twixt
Liviana and me?


Sophr. To be free with you; Patricio is the only Sovereign of my Soul, and I
flatter my self to have a proportionable share in his love: It Is long since our
Faiths were plighted, but I am resolved against marriage so long as he
practices this barbarous jealousy against his Sister, who among all the Ladies
in Town is reputed the great example of Virtue; Therefore (dear Cousin) I sent
for you that we may consult either to dispossess Patricio of this new taken up
humor, or find a means to fetch Liviana out of her Prison; That your
honorably begun love may be finished, and happily by the performance of either,
Patricio may be convinced of his Error, and I in a capacity to terminate my
enjoyment.


Hor. I am ready to advance the design though I suppose it will be more easy
to rescue Liviana, then convince Patricio; for which cause I desire my Kinsman
Tarugo be in the Plot, in regard his Education abroad has wonderfully improved
him in dextrous Stratagems; If there be a way under the Sun he will find it out.


Sophr. Let Us call presently, and acquaint him with the project. Don Tarugo,
now that we have done, your conversation will be acceptable.

[She goes to the Gallery
Taru. Madam, you can dispose of me at all times: yet I could have wished their
Cabinet Council had lasted till my love to her Maid had been more advanced; for
(if I be not mistaken) her frozen Chastity was beginning to thaw.

[aside.
Stan. O Madam! your call came in good time; Certainly this man has been bred
Commander in a Scotch Privateer.


Sophr. Why so Stanlia?


Stan. Because I suppose he fancied me a Dutch bottom, who for not striking at
first, he was ready with his Grapler to have laid me aboard; and I verily think
had made me prize, if the Authority of your call had not so seasonably come to
my relief.


Sophr. What a mad way of expression this same Wench uses? but don't you know,
the English humor, with which he has been so lately accustomed, is not really
so dangerous as it seems.


Stan. I am sure it is altogether Anti-platonick: Out upon him there where he
stands, for a naughty man: But hark me Sir, the next time you catch me in the
like occasion I Will be better prepared.


Taru. With a more willing mind I hope.


Sophr. Horatio! Be pleased to unfold our design to your Cousin; you need not
boggle at my Maid, for I am fixed in her fidelity.


Hor. The Lady Liviana, whom you so lately magnified (though at that time I
concealed my passion) yet she is the only Object of my Love; I have reason to
believe her kindness to me is reciprocal; but for the present her Brothers
Tyrannous restraint interrupts the honorable Fruition that is designed by us
both. Now if we can find a way to bring her out of Patricio's house (which in
effect is her Goal) I am resolved presently to marry her.


Taru. What needs so just and fair a design be pursued with such indiscreet
means? being it is supposed Patricio's condition and quality ought not to deny
alliance with you, who in all respects are his equal.


Hor. That Is confessed: but he is drunk and mad with a fancy that none of equal
quality can have any other but dishonest intentions against his Sister, besides
another Fantastic opinion that is lately ceiz'd upon him, that a Woman's Will
is easily restrained, in contemplation of that Paradox he will needs make the
experiment upon his Sister.


Sophr. What Horatio says is true: and I must tell you Sir, this same idle
Caprice of his is the only occasion that I delay my marriage with him who will
entertain no other Love but mine; if it be your good fortune either to relieve
her, or dispossess him; Horatio and I will have cause to bless you for ever.


Taru. Is this all?


Hor. It is.


Taru. Your business shall be done, but in the first place, let me have that
same little Picture of yours in Minature which was done by the renowned English
Artist when he was last at Madrid.


Hor. Take it.


Taru. Then, Madam, tell me who is Liviana's Tailor?


Stan. It Is Signior Lorenzo; he lives in Thimble-street, at the Sign of the
Penny-loaf and Cucumber.


Hor. I do not understand what all this points at.


Taru. I pray' have patience, it is like I may take your Mistress measure, and
give you no cause of jealousy.


Enter servant of Sophronia's. Serve. Here is one Alberto that belongs to Don
Patricio, impatient to speak with Don Tarugo.


Taru. I Will go see what the matter is, and return presently.

Ex. Taru.
Hor. Heaven defend that this be no advertisement of an Arrest.


Sophr. I hope he is not under that danger.


Hor. It Is not to be expected but one whose greatest subsistence depends upon
his wit, must sometimes run that hazard.

Enter Taru.
Sophr. Here he returns, it seems the business is sudden.


Hor. What Is the matter Cousin?


Taru. A trifling scruple, yet I wish it were removed.


Sophr. Let Us know the particular.


Taru. My Tailor has been at Patricio's Lodgings for a warrant to arrest me,
but not finding him I am yet secure; however I have shifts to give this little
danger the go by.


Sophr. For the greater security I Will instantly send for Patricio, who will be
glad of any opportunity to oblige me, because of the slights I have put upon
him since he began to oppress Liviana and Horatio, you shall not go from hence
till you see the business done.


Hor. I am resolved to obey.


Taru. I Will lose no time but presently about your affairs.


Sophr. Good success go along with you.

Ex. severally.
Taru. I perceive for all this Ladies great learning, she still aims at the
Natural practice of a warm Demonstration. -- I have undertaken a business that
will stretch my invention to its height, and therefore in imitation of growing
Politicians, I Will dress my self in the posture of deepest Contemplation. --
It Is here, it is here! -- O my beloved Mercury, thou great God of Tricks, one
hit more with a couple of Gusmans Pins to stop two small holes, and then all is
well: As I live it is come. Poh, Proteus was an Ass in comparison of me; me
thinks if my back and lungs would hold out, I could transform my self in the
shape of a household Pedant when he goes to breath Revelations upon his Ladies
Bedside; and whilst the invention is warm, I Will instantly put it in execution.

[Exit.
SCENE III.
Enter Patricio, Alberto. Patr. I tell thee Alberto; nothing shall hinder my
resolution; see there be Guards at the great Gate, and Sentinels at every
window.


Alber. What needs all this Sir? your Sister is a spotless Virgin, and never
discovered the least levity in her behavior that might render her susspitious.


Patr. I must and will be obeyed: Methinks you being a Kinsman, as well as
servant, ought to have a greater regard of my Sisters -- Honor.


Alber. The Lady Liviana wants not Virtue in abundance to preserve that her
self.


Patr. No more words; but with diligence mind my orders.

[Exeunt.
ACT II. SCENE 1.
Enter Horatio, Sophronia, Patricio. Sophr. I pray pardon my boldness in
sending for you.


Patr. Madam! you have done me honor in the point.


Sophr. I shall be yet more your Debtor if I speed in my desires.


Patr. -- It will be strange with me when your pleading fails.


Sophr. The Matter is, Don Tarugo, my Cousin Horatio's friend and kinsman is in
hazard to be arrested at his Tailors suit, by a warrant from you, my request is
for a time you suspend the giving it out.


Patr. You have spoke too late, for it is out already, besides, Madam, if you
knew his indiscretion in defaming of Women, you would be loath to own him.


Sophr. As how?


Patr. He was heard say in an Assembly of persons of Quality, that it was as
equally difficult to make Women in love with Chastity, as to persuade English
Quakers to study Heraldry.


Hor. I never heard him say so, though I know its his common discourse to
affirm it a hard matter to confine a woman's humor.


Patr. That Is every way as ill as the other.


Sophr. Why Sir, is there any thing more certain then shut up a Woman against
her will, but like a fire of Coals covered with earth, which (though it burns
not clear) yet vents its heat in smoke, and in the end with violent flames
breaks through the cloddy goal that smothered its natural course.


Patr. Madam, I know you have store of Philosophy to maintain Paradoxes;
therefore I Will avoid to reason with you upon the Argument, for I am sure that
watchful authority overthrows all hazards of that kind.


Hor. I have still observed, that in all Creatures strict Restraint raises both
passion and hatred against the Guardian; but most in Women whose brains are
continually busied, to acquire their freedom, and with such secure ways, as
seldom their inventions are found out.


Pat. I do not value your opinion, for such as know the way can no more be
mistaken then a wise man commit folly.


Soph. But you know often the wisest men upon occasion distrust their own
reason.


Patr. I Will not change my mind, Liviana is my Charge, and her will I preserve.


Sophr. Alas! your virtuous and noble Sister I dare swear never entertained any
dishonorable thoughts.


Stan. 'Ere I were in love with one of so cursed an Humor, I had rather be
condemned to the sacrilegious embraces of a revolted Friar.

aside.
Sophr. Pray, noble Patricio, be advised.


Patr. I am not to be shaken from my design.


Hor. Sure you are bewitched, those we love and delight in ought to have
freedom, and though you had Hydra's head studded with Linx's eyes, yet a Woman
of less wit and spirit then is your Sister may overreach you.


Patr. By Heaven's they are deceived that think a woman's wit can overcome my
Care.


Hor. I tell you that is a saucy Contradiction.


Patr. Take it in the worst sense then if you please.


Hor. How?


Patr. I say so again.

[They offer to draw.
Soph. O Stanlia! Alberto, separate. Hold noble Knights, this argument was
never designed to be decided by fighting.


Pat. I Will justify my opinion with the hazard of my life, what ever reason or
experience say to the contrary, but I must be gone.


Albert. And I must follow

Ex.
Sophr. O most unfortnnate wretch that I am! my love is great, and yet my
sorrow is greater: Oh, oh! -- If Virtuous Liviana thus be used, his wife must
needs expect to be abused. Oh, Oh!

[She swoons.
Stan. O Sir! Did not you observe how my Poetical Mistress breathed her last
words in Madrigal Rhyme?


Hor. Leave off your fooling.


Soph. Oh! Would I could either change my love, or he his humor.


Stan. Madam, I would disdain all mankind e're I were thus enslaved with so
rigorous an Opiniator.


Soph. O Stanlia! Stanlia! thou know not what it is to be in love.


Stan. Nor never shall at this rate.


Hor. Cheer up, Madam, my life on it Tarugo finds relief for us both.

Exeunt.
SCENE II.
Enter Livia. Patr. Stanlia, Alber. Live. Methinks brother your Countenance
disovers dissatisfaction in your mind.


Pat. Whatever be the business, I Am sure the means that I use shall preserve
the honor of my Family.

Exit.
Live. Stay, Alberto! who has provoked my Brother to this Choler? How comes the
honor of our Family in question? and tell me freely what means he by this
strict guarding of his house, or has his memory and sense left him that he
talks so idly!


Alb. It seems so when he is so causelessly careful.


Live. It cannot be without cause.


Alb. Upon my life I know none.


Live. It Is impossible but you do; neither is it to be immagin'd. A passion can
be raised to that excess without some ground.


Alb. I cannot deny but he pretends one but built upon so slender a foundation.
-- I Am sure the sense you have of your own honor might have secured him from
jealousy.


Live. Prithee Alberto be free, for my Innocence protects me from all fear.


Alb. Madam, it were cruelty not to satisfy your desire; the truth is he means
by you.


Live. Upon what account?


Alb. I know not; only in a dispute the other day he maintained the best way
to secure a Woman's Honesty was close imprisonment, and that freedom furnished
'em opportunities of looseness.


Live. What was the person with whom he had the debate?


Alb, It was the brave Don Horatio, nothing short of his Ancestors who were
still reckoned among the most illustrious Hero's of Spain.


Live. Was I mentioned in the case.


Alb. He named none; but on you he is to make the experiment, and besides
additional Guards in the house, your liberty is to be diminished by fresh
restraints: In effect his family is to be converted to a Garrison of Goalers
and Spies, entrusted to my Charge, and to wheedle me into fidelity; he owns me
as a Kinsman: This I have discovered to witness my respects; however I Am
resolved to be faithful. Your pardon, Madam, for I will not stay to be diswaded

Exit.
Enter Locura. Live. O Locura! Locura.


Loc. What Is the matter, Madam?


Live. Are not all the faculties of my Brother's fair soul ceiz'd upon by the
black Devil of jealousy?


Loc. Against whom?


Live. All woman kind in General, but I Am the unfortunate Wretch that must be
the sacrifice of his folly.


Loc. I am still in a mist.


Live. Why then he has the vanity to be thought wiser then any e're went before
him.


Loc. In what?


Live. No less trifle forsooth then the bridling of a Woman's will.


Loc. This is strange: from whence does it proceed?


Live. What was the first occasion of debarring my liberty I know not, but this
other design of a more severe confinement (as Alberta tells me) took its rise
from an Argument 'twixt him and Don Horatio.


Loc. O Heavens!


Live. Well Locura! you know with what valor I have trod upon all Temptations,
though the addresses were modest and from persons of equal quality.


Loc. I know it very well.


Live. Heavens be my witness I near entertained a thought either too grate upon
my Birth or Chastity; but now that I Am innocently abused, I find a dangerous
spirit revel in my blood. -- Sulphur and Gunpowder when fired in the great
wild Fields does no harm.


She treads the Stage in a high Passion. Loc. No, none at all.


Live. But when coffined within the bowels of the earth, Cities and Mountains
cannot resist its force.


Loc. Nothing more certain.


Live. I have often observed, That the most curious Glasses have been aptost to
break when most carefully Tendered.


Loc. To my knowledge and expensive experience that is true.


Live. You know Locura that Don Horatio and I had some interviews, he is no less
worthy then the world speaks him.


Loc. Indeed a most Excellent person.


Live. Though we were never serious in the point of Love, yet I am apt to
believe there is mutual flames betwixt us which happily on my part might of
themselves been extinguished if my brother had not become so cruel a Guardian;
and since it is for him I must suffer, my brains shall never rest till I have
found a means to entertain and renew our Loves.


Loc. Nay she should never bear the title of a Woman, that should outdo me
either in Wilfulness or cunning.


Live. Neither shall she, and yet with the highest preservation of my honesty.


Loc. Alas! what simple and indiscreet Sots are those men who think their
little inventions are of greater force to correct our Frailties then the sense
of our honors?


Live. No, no, they are grossly mistaken for liberty in a virtuous soul scorns to
abuse it self; what is to be condemned in women at freedom, may be justified
when shut up; and yet without the least hazard of my reputation, I Will find a
way to convince him by experience that nothing wrongs our sex more then the
indiscretion of a groundless jealousy.


Loc. When restraints are just they are not to be endured, for this last Lent I
was enjoined to eat but once a day, and yet I could neither want Supper nor
Breakfast.


Enter Alberto. Alb. Advance Friend!


Live. Who is that you bid come in?


Alb. Madam! i'ts the Tailors man come to take your measure for a new Gown.


Live. Let him come in.


Enter Tarugo disguised like a Tailor with several Indian-Stuffs. Tar. Laus a
Dies.


Live. Your business?


Tar. My Master, your old Servant, being sick, has appointed me as the first
trial of my Skill to come and take your measure.


Live. I like not experiments at my Charges.


Tar. He that sent me hither knows I seldom mistake.


Live. Where learned you the Trade?


Tar. In the West Indies!


Live. That Is a place indeed.


Tar. I was thither carried Captive, being taking by a Muscoviter Man of War,
going to Alexandria; he sold me to a Jew, who brought me to the Southern parts
of America, where to the Queen of the Amazons Tailor I was bartered for an old
Petticoat, there I was instructed, and (though I say it my self) as approved a
Thief as ever yet wielded a Sizzor.


Live. This fellow is of a pleasant humor, but don't you know the fashions here
and there vary?


Tar. All Is one to me whether I work for Greeks or Pagans; Madam, the Queens
name of that Country is Fatima.


Loc. How, Don a Fatima? that is a Christian-name.


Tar. It is, Madam, for so was her Mother called, who being a Frenchwoman
became Renegado upon a point of curiosity to try the difference 'twixt
Circumcision and Uncircumcision, and to that effect by way of Love Errantry she
traveled till she arrived to the Kingdom of the Patagoones, where she brought
forth this Lady Fatyma, who now swayes the Amazonian Scepter.


Live. Locura, Did you ever hear such a Grotesk deduction.


Tar. But, Madam, before I take measure will your honor view some choice
Indian-Stuffs?

[Whilst he is showing 'em out be drops Horatio's Picture, which Live. takes up.
Live. Show 'em out: What Is this?


Tar. Bless me, Heavens, How brought I it hither?


Live. Hold, let me view it a little; really it is a delicate Piece: I pray
whose Picture is it?


Tar. I dare not tell.


Loc. Madam, it is Don Horatio's, and very like.


Live. I suspect there is more cunning in this fellow then we apprehend. -- But
why will not you tell?


Tar. Not for the world: for I was entrusted to give it a Lady, and Madam, take
notice for all my Trade I am sometimes employed with love Embassies.


Live. What Is the Lady's name must have the Picture.


Tar. That I have forgot: but I cannot forget her condition being she is a Lady
that is kept close-Prisoner through the Caprice of a jealouse Brother.


Live. I know you are no Tailor, there is both reward and punishment before you;
therefore I charge you to tell what you are, or if you be a servant to Don
Horatio?


Tar. Now the Fish begins to bite, if the line but hold.

[aside. In this business some what more.


Live. What? his Kinsman?


Tar. Somewhat more yet.


Live. What are you then?


Tar. His Friend who has run this hazard to let you know the sincerity of his
love, and how much he is concerned against your Brother's severity.


Live. Is it possible?


Tar. Most true, I hope you are not dissatisfied with the matter.


Live. On the contrary I infinitely rejoice.


Tar. Then, Madam, I have gained my wishes, and he desires you will keep his
Picture till he find a way for your relief, to which he will leave no fair
means unattempted.


Live. Assure him he is the only person in the world on whom I have fixed my
love, and deliver him here my Picture in return of his, which I will sacredly
preserve as a sovereign Antidote against inconstancy; I expect he will entertain
mine at the same rate.


Tar. Be confident of it: Have you any more to say?


Live. Nothing at present, but now that you can visit me unsuspected, let me see
you often.


Tar. Doubt not of that, and since I perceive you are both fixed in your
affections, leave it to me to complete your enjoyments.


Live. I dare stay no longer, Heaven accompany your undertakings

[Ex.
Tar. The world may now judge Patricio's snared by his rash jealousy

Exit Tarugo.
Enter Alberto, with the Servants of Don Patricio's Family. Alb. Now that you
are all under my Charge I conceive my self a mighty Commander, and therefore
Fellow Soldiers, when ever you have occasion to compare me with other
Generals, let none be mentioned under Julius Caesar, or Alexander the Great.


1. Serve. What think you of Scanderberg?


Alb. Well enough for sudden Stratagems, and leading of small Party's; but
nothing like me for the conduct of such a mighty business as this which Don
Patricio has entrusted me with.


2. Serve. A great design indeed to interrupt the admonitions of Nature in point
of Love.

[aside.
Alb. To give you a demonstration of my Military skill; suppose I were
Governor of a starved Garrison seituate upon this same spot, and you three the
several Brigadoes of the Enemy that beleagur'd me.


3. Serve. What then?


Alb. And we shall suppose the Cook on the top of a Hill in the shape of a
smoking Olio come for my relief.


1. Serve. Which way could you come to him, or he to you?


Alb. Why there lies the matter; In the first place I would attaque you with a
multitude of thundering Stockadoes in tertio, the same to you in quarto; and
supposing you to be a stand of Pikes I would trip up all your heels in
Flankanado's.

[He embraces the Cook, sucking his head. And thus and thus I would enjoy my
beloved Olio.


Cook. This same General of ours sucks me as if I were a Marrow-bone.


2. Serve. I wonder at that, for his Snout is more like a Carbonado'd Gizzard
upon the Trencher of a Claret Vertuoso.

[aside.
Alb. Take this instruction along with you: whilst you are upon the duty of
Centinelling, avoid all sort of Devotion, for that brings drowsiness, as it
fell out the other day with me when I was caught sleeping by my Patron with a
pair of Beads in my hand.


3. Serve. For which I remember you were soundly banged.


Alb. Therefore let us presently have a Song

[He sings a Catch. Did not you all see how strangely Pug did imitate the
Music?

[Whilest he sings, a Baboon imitates the Music.
Cook. That Is nothing; I caught him one day in the Kitchen both Playing and
Dancing with the Negro- wench.


Alb. Then I believe they have more in'em then we are aware of; and though we
look upon'em as the By-blowes of drolling Devils begot upon Drills, yet in
Italy when they are associate with Operators, they are then reckoned in the
number of the Vertuosi; and to try what you have said, bring out the Negro-
Girl, and we'll have a Dance to see if he will imitate us.


Cook. My life upon it, provided you donot beat him.

[They Dance, where Pugge at the corner of the Stage imitates with the Negro-
Girl.
Alb. Now Gentlemen let us to our several Posts least Don Patricio come to go
the round

Exeunt.
Enter Hurtante and two Sergeants. Hurt. Friends at length I have procured a
warrant to arrest Tarugo.


1. Serj. But it may be long enough e're we catch him.


Hurt. What Is your reason.


2. Serj. In the first place he has such a correspondence with the Clerks of
the persecuting Offices, that he never wants Tymous Advertisements: Next, for
the most part, he is so circled with predestinat Hectors, that the attaque will
be as dangerous as to storm a Battery charged with small shot.


1. Serj. 'Its true what my Brother says.


Hurt. But if you will be governed by the directions which I shall shape out
for you, there is not the least hazard.


2. Serj. Let Us hear them.


Hurt. You must near think of catching him after Sun set, for by that time he
and the Myrmidons of his Society will be warmed to such despair, that though
the whole Kennel of the Martials Beagles were let loose, they dare not grin
upon them.


1. Serj. We know that by woeful experience.


Hurt. Therefore my advice is, since it is his custom every morning to be at
the Coffee-house, allaying his Claret vapors, that you lay hold upon that
sober opportunity.


2. Serj. Truly Brother the advice is good, for if ever the Law have any
operation with persons of his temper, it must still be in a morning before
Dinner.


1. Serj. Nay even at Dinner, if they be half way entered in the second Course
they are impregnable.


Hurt. No more words since I have told you his haunt there is five Pistols to
do my business


2. Serj. Fear nothing, it shall be done.

Exit Hurt.
1. Serj. These same Tailours are most excellent Benefactors.


2. Serj. Nay, if Protections were not in vigor, they would so advantage our
profession, that it were to be dreaded the second rate, Lawyers would
incorporate with us.


1. Serj. There Is no doubt of that, for since the Judges takes their Fees, they
poor wretches are little better then Knights of the Post.


2. Serj. I say again, Long live the Tailours; for since our subsistence depends
upon the wrath of Heaven, Tailours must be in the first rank of stitching
Plagues, for the Egyptian Juglers could near attain the counterfeiting of Lice.

Exeunt.
Enter Patricio and D. Roderigo. Pat. I wonder Roderigo how you came to stay so
long in the Country.


Rod. I was so far from wearying, that when once I have ended the business that
brought me to Town, I Will straight thither again.


Pat. For shame lay aside that Resolution; it is your younger Brother's business
to be your Steward whilst you remain here, and enjoy the pleasures of the City.


Rod. I am rather for the English Gentry, who stay at home and mind the
preservation of their families, and let their younger Brothers come to shift in
the Court and City; besides, you know what ill luck I had when I was last here
in pursuance of a Wife.


Pat. It was your own want of patience, can you imagine any Lady in the matter
of marriage will yield at first sight?


Rod. I cannot help my humor, but now I am so much delighted with
Country-sport, that I can wait with patience till I meet with such a ready
disposed woman as my self, and when I am surpised with Natural Frailties, my
Tenants Daughters are so dutiful, that they think it Rebellion to deny me, that
humor being over, I have no temptation to arrest me from the pleasure of all
sorts of Field-Exercises.


Pat. Let Us go and divert our selves in the Park; it is like before you part
from the City I may sit you with a Wife, that in all respects will answer your
Birth and Fortune.


Rod. I Will try it for once; but if I meet the old stiffness and Formality, my
accustomed indifference is still at hand.


Pat. This same Roderigo is of a much more easy temper then the huffing
Horatio; I Will try to fix him with my Sister, then all my care is at an end.

Exeunt.
ACT III. SCENE, A Coffee-House.
Enter Tarugo, Coffee-Master, two Servants. Tar. WAs there any to enquire for
me?


1. Serve. None at all.


Coff. Mr. Pray Sir when are you to have your Troop?


Tar. Speedily now that the War goes on with France. But why do you ask?


Coff. Mr. Because my man Will. has been so often box'd by our Neighbors
Prentices; he would fain ride six Months a Trooper to learn a little of the
Bravo, and so return with fierce Looks to frighten his old Enemies.


Tar. Let him be fitted with a good Horse and other necessaries; then if he will
hazard so much time as to be beaten into the humor you speak of, for your
respect I Will make him welcome.


Coff. Mr. I thank you, Noble Sir; But do you observe Will. what the Captain
says?


Will. Well enough; but I am told if I can but once be so lucky as to bang a
reputed Killcow, that then I may live in quiet for the future.


Tar. But have a care, lest such a success lead you into so saucy an humor, as
will ensnare you into so many beatings, that it is to be feared you may be
re-cowed to the tameness of your first temper.


Enter the other Drawer in a Hurry 1. Serve. O! Sir: Over the way behind the
Pillars, yonder is Hurtante the Tailor, and two Sergeants, pointing at this
House, and by their busy whispers they seem to be upon a search.


Tar. 'Slife I am the party concerned: What shall I do Landlord?


Coff. Mr. If they come here I dare not deny 'em entrance.


Tar. If I go out I Am certainly caught: Let Will. and I shift Clothes, and
whilst he acts the part of a Gentleman-Customer, I Will perform his office in
serving up Coffee.


Coff. Mr. Not amiss if he act the part of a Gentleman handsomely; there is
hopes he may prove a good Trooper, but that you may have the more time to
shift, I Will down stairs, and entertain 'em with some discourse: Remember Sir
(when you serve Customers) you discover nothing of a Gentle-pride.


Tar. Let me alone for that: Come Will. quick, quick! your Coat and Apron; take
you my Vest, Hat, Perriwig and Sword.


2. Serve. I see that Gentlemen upon occasion will play Tricks to avoid a just
debt, as well as we poor Rogues.


Tar. Tush, That Is nothing; farewell sweet England, where, what you term Tricks
are accounted acts of Thrist.


2. Serve. This same Hat, with the other ranting Movables, inspires me already
with the heat of a Hector.


Tar. All the better; and Roar out your first Trial upon me, but good Will,
avoid blows, least I forget the humility of my disguise. Oh! I hear 'em coming.


1. Serve. It Is none of them.


Tar. No matter, be what they will I Will begin to practice.


Enter several Customers of all Trades and Professions. Tar. You Are very welcome
Gentlemen, and as I may say, come in season to taste of the best Coffee that
e're wet purslin.


1. Cust. So it had need, for the last I had here was nothing but warm water
boiled with burnt Beans.


Tar. To tell truth, it was but a remain of the last years growth. but I Will
assure you, this is of the first fruits brought home from the Gardens of Sestos
and Abidos.


2. Cust. What places are those?


Tar. They are two Houses of pleasure four miles from Constantinople; the one
belongs to the Gand-Signeur's Tallow-Chandler, the other to the Gold-finer of
the Seraglio.


3. Cust. If their Gardens be cultivate with the dung of their Trades, the
stuff wants not heat.


4. Cust. Bring me Chocolette that is prepared with water, for I hate that which
is encouraged with Eggs,


2. Cust. Landlord! pray what is the operation of Coffee?


Coff. Mr. Gentlemen, do but read this Paper, and there you will find an exact
account of its qualities.


3. Cust. reads the Paper. The Physical operations of Coffee, are dissolving of
Corns, correcting Convulsion-fits upon the Temples of the Posteriors, and
cooling those fiery Blisters upon the Liver that is procured by extraordinary
drinking of Lemonado that is warmed with the frosted Crystal of the Alps.

AS for its operations upon the faculties of the Soul, that varies according to
the several Climats; for in Spain, when the steam is applied to the eyes, it
renders the Inhabitants there most foreseeing and perspicatious in foreign
Discoveries; and when under the Ears of a Frenchman, it fills his head so full
of Pantaloons, and Sarabands, that he can no more forbear Dancing, then if he
were bit with a Tarantula. In England again it has more politic Effects in
appearance, but little to the purpose, for every Pragmatical fellow will be
cementing the Cracks and Flaws of the Government, especially when the vapor
mounts into the Noddle of a snivelling Lay Elder; for there commonly it fixes
till it has dissolved all the ligaments of Loyalty. But it is most useful to
the Hollanders; for when their brains are stupifi'd with condensed Clouds, by
eating and drinking too much Hair-grout and Brandee, then they use it by way of
Glyster to remove these knotty impediments; but instead of making these Dull
vapors transpire through the passages of the head, by way of repercussion,
they come tumbling down the body, and fly into the Breeches with as great fury
as a Cork does from English Bottle-Ale.


Tar. Pray Sir, how do you like this Chocolette?


4. Cust. Well enough.


Tar. So you may, for this is the prolifick Cawdle, that renders all our
Curtezans fruitful when they are transplanted to the West Indies.


1. Cust. Observe how the Rogue Cants.


Coff. Mr. I must tell you Sir, this same Fellow is of honest City-Parents, and
was well bred at Schools, but disdaining a Virtuous Life he betook himself to
Travel, or more properly to act the Vagabond; but now the speed of his ranging
humor being spent, he thinks himself happy with this sober condition.


2. Cust. That Is commonly the end of all such who avoid the virtue of a
laudable Trade or Profession.


Enter two Scholars. 1. Schol. Come Brother, let us to the Table of Salamanca,
and not mingle with these Illiterati.


2. Schol. What you please.


Tar. Gentlemen, are you for Coffee, Tea, or Chocolette?


1. Schol. Coffee by any means, for the last Chocolette I drank did so smite me
with drowsiness, that in a Dispute with a Junior Soph, I was still to seek for
distinctions.


Tar. Prohac ratione dabo vobis, Coffeeum Sublimatum.


2. Schol. You seem to be a Scholar.


Tar. I was a time at the University.


1. Schol. Can you unravel a Syllogism.


Tar. Provided it be not drawn up in Latin.


1 Schol. Then Vulgariter I Will try you.


Tar. Come then: methinks I can stand one Broadside of your dreeling
Philosophy.


1. Schol. He that drinks most has least Thirst.


Tar. That Is allowed.


1. Schol. Then you must grant that he who has least thirst drinks least.


Tar. It would seem so.


1. Schol. Ergo he that drinks most drinks least.


Tar. I suspect this is a Sophysma, and such a one that I cannot tell where it
lies, though I was four year in the Philosophy-Classe.


2. Schol. Ha ha, ha; Four year at Philosophy, and cannot dissect a Sophism!
Friend, friend, my advice is you near offer at learning among Scholars again.


3. Cust. Nor at sense neither, least he be not understood with such as you,
who Butchers the Truth with distinguishing subdivisions.

afide.
At another end of the Table there is a hot debate, and the Disputants standing
up. 1. Cust. Yonder Gentlemen are very eager in their dispute; Heaven forbid
they do not quarrel.


2. Cust. Come Sir, to avoid more contest here, I Will give you five Pistols if
you will oblige your Heirs to give me forty, a hundred years hence.


4. Cust. Hold him Sir, I and my Heirs will go your half.


1. Cust. What Is the debate Gentlemen?


4. Cust. He maintains by this new invention of the Vertuosi of Transfusion of
the blood, that he is able to perpetuate himself to Eternity?


1. Cust. Which way?


4. Cust. When once his own blood decays through Age, that by letting it out,
and filling its place with the blood of a young Hog, then immediately he
returns into the Age of Fifteen.


1. Cust. But why a young Hog?


4 Cust. Because of all Beasts, it resembles most a Man.


2. Cust. You may judge Sir, whether I have not reason for my opinion, for the
other day being at Vertuoso-Hall, I saw a decayed Weather, replenished with the
blood of a Bull-calf, which so soon as it was settled with a Ramish bravery, it
broke from the gripes of the Vertuosi Operators, charged through Ten thousand
Spectators, and most valiantly mounted a Barbary-Mare in view of teh multitude.


1. Cust. Then it seems it participates of the Drain'd-Creatures Faculties by
way of Transmigration.


3 Cust. Nothing more certain; for when I was last in England where such
Experiments are frequent, There was an old usurer past 80, bought a young Welsh
Thief from the Gallows, whose blood by this way of Transmission, having
restored him to youth; this same usurer, contrary to his former practice, was
taken stealing of Cheese, for which I saw him whipped at a Post.


2. Cust. Come Sir, no more dispute, will you hold my Bett.


4. Cust. -- Nay: I Am resolved near to die, so long as I am able to buy a
Young-Goat; It Is not out of wantonness I pitch upon this Creature, but to
satisfy my humor of climbing Cliffs for Jack-Daws Nests.


1. Cust. I pray Sir when you were at London, did you know e're a Coffee house
that went by the Title of the Politic Speculatists of the Roundtable.


3. Cust. Those were the ballating Projectors, when the Government was off its
hinges, but that fort of people are no more, for alas who but fools would
debate whether the Hen or the Egg was first; for so they have stated the
priority of propriety and Government, and Heaven knows how in order to that,
what Havoc they made of Bodin, Matchieval,, and Plato:


Enter Hurtante, 2 Sergeants spying from Table to Table. Landlord. this Son of
a Whore your Man, is such a thick-scull'd Rogue, that he brings me Coffee when
I cry for Chocolette.


Coff. Mr. Why don't you mind the Gentlemen, you Logger-head Booby.


Hurt. He Is not here! That Is but earnest of what shall follow if you do the
business.

[to Tarugo.
Tar. If he had not been gone this morning to E'strema Daura, in order to the
raising of his Troop, I should have set him to you sometime to morrow; it will
be at least ten days e're he return; there sits his man whom he has lest to
send some necessaries after him.


1. Serj. I believe it is true, for he wears a cast suit of his Masters.


Hurt. No more! you will remember?


Tar. Fear nothing on my part.

Ex. Hurt. and Sergeants. This danger is fairly over, now shall I have time to
finish Don Horatio's affairs: Come Will. let us shift again, and be as we were;
there is a Crown for you to spinl: I Will delay no longer, but instantly go find
Horatio and Sophronia, and comfort 'em with the success I have already found in
this their amorous intrigue.

[Ex.
At another Table they are in debate about Painting. 1. Cust. By its style of
Painting, it seems to me of the Florentine-School, and a Copy of Tintarets.


2. Cust. I rather think it of the Roman-Class, and an original of Paulo,
Verones.


3. Cust. I perceive these blades would fain be reckn'd among the Vertuosi of
the time, for all their knowledge in Painting consists in the naming of famous
Artists basely applied.


4. Cust. Like those who are still retailing the Index's of Books to be
esteemed learned.


5. Cust. Or new started Gentry that are still discoursing of Heraldry.


1. Cust. I Will be judged by any of these Gentlemen.


2. Cust. You Are a Coxcomb to tell me it is an Original of Hannibal Curachio


Coff. Mr. Gentlemen, these rude words do not become the Gravity of my house,
which I'se have you to understand, is like the School of Athens, where all
things are debated with reason.


3. Cust. Softly, Friend not too much of that neither; for the Athenian-Magi
were themselves to seek for a definition of Reason, and though it bethe
pretended standard that governs the Actions of this World, I suspect every man's
own fancy takes the largest share.


1. Cust. Remember this Sir. I Will teach you to call a Vertuoso a Coxcomb.


3. Cust. Come Gentlemen, lay aside your quarrelling, and I Will reconcile your
scruples; for if I be not mistaken, the best of you all is not arrived to a
Journy-man Vertuoso as yet.


1. Cust. I begin to suspect to my self.


3. Cust. Take notice then if you had understood the History, you had soon
found the Pencil: for it s the description of Arion the Grecian Piper, that
stroll'd up and down Italy, where in his return home, crossing the Peloponesus
in a Fish-wherry of the Dardanelli, the Boatmen cast him overboard for his pelf
which this Damned Dutch-painter has made a great ship of two tire of Guns with
the Rainbow-flag of Amsterdam, and instead of making our Min'strel bestride a
Dolphin, he has mounted him upon the Shoulders of a large Codd.

At which all the company laugh.
The two Scholars at the Table where the Globes Were, the one is instructing
the other in the Celestial-Globe. 1. Schol. This same gravelike Matron is
Cassiopeia, Jupiters Dry-Nurse, and Governess to Juno's Milk-maids.


2. Schol. Is this she who with her Troop of Country-wenches goes every May Day
a milking Cowes in Via-Lactaea.


1. Schol. The same: and there they make provisions of Cheese-cakes and Cream
for the Mathematical Feast in Copernicus-Hall; but when I come to demonstrate
with Galileus's Tube, I Will discover to you all the black-patches on her Face,
and whether her Whisk be right set off, and how many tire of Gimp-lace circles
the skirts of her Petticoat.


Coff. Mr. Take notice Gentlemen, the two Scholars are got to hold forth upon
the Globes, observe a little, and you will hear most strange Learning.


2. Schol. 'Pray what old Woman's this with a pair of Scales?


1. Schol. That Is a Geneva-Witch, weighing the French-League against the
Tripple-corded Covenant.


2. Schol. What be these old fellow's that seem to oversee the balance.


1. Schol. The one is a Gascoigne-Fryer, the other a New England Lecturer.


2. Schol. Methinks the West- India-Divines side has the odds in weight.


1. Schol. That Is no wonder, in regard he has the advantage of 39 scruples of
Nonconformity.


2. Schol. But why the Devil a witch to manage the Scales?


1. Schol. Nothing so proper, it being a case of sanctified Rebellion: But
enough of this, and take a little view of the Terestrial Globe.


2. Schol. What great Continent is this in Africa that is illustrated with Green
and Yellow?


1. Schol. That Is the Territories of Presbyter-John; and mark me, Sir there
stands his principal City, and here stands his Palace, and this same round pile
of building like a Pigeon-house is his Chapel of Ease, which serves likewise
for the Meeting Place of his Synod, when he congregates 'em to knead directory
Discipline; and observe it is the exact Antipodes of the propaganda fide at
Rome.


2. Schol. Under what parallel?


1 Schol. Let me see precisely to a hairs breadth upon the same line with two
Villages in England, known by the names of Kidderminster, and Banbury.


2. Schol. By that account it should be directly as many Degrees of latitude
from the South-pole as the Sollin Geese-Islands are from the North.


1. Schol. Most exactly right.


2. Schol. Now Sir, tell me the reason why in this great Sea, the fish you see
swim there, are of the quantity of Islands.


1 Schol. These are the Trouts of the Atlantic Ocean, which overgrows all
other Fish, by the strong nourishment of its Water.


2. Schol. As how I pray?


1. Schol. Why Sir, this great Sea has its source from the roots of the
Coker-nut-trees, that grows among the Mountains of Tartuffely in America, and
after it is strained through the straits of Magelan it disgorgeth it self, as
you see all along the large Coast of Terra Australis incognita.


2. Schol. Then it would seem the Atlantic Sea drinks like Chocolette, because
the milk of the Coker-nut is its greatest ingredient.


1. Schol. The very same.


4. Cust. If this same Ocean had been either Plum pottage, or Brumswick-Mumme,
it had been a great question whether the Aldermen in England, or Burgamasters
in Holland had proved the greatest Discoverers.


2. Cust. I Am told Sir, that Coffee inspires a man in the Mathematics.


3. Cust. So far as it keeps one from sleep, which you know is the ready way to
distract consequently the improvement of the Mathematics.


Enter a Barber and a Baker. Barb. Neighbor, do you find the Polliticks grow
upon you since your drinking of Coffee.


Bak. So far from the hopes of being a Counselor of State, that I now despair
the preferment of a Constable.


8. Cust. Friends, you are both mistaken, if you think the Spanish-Coffee
perfects any man in the Polliticks; it is only in England where the advantage
of the Air, with a particular way of preparation improves the Coffeedrinkers in
these Mysteries.


Enter Bakers Wife in a hurry to her Husband. B. Wife. O! you are a fine man
indeed! to leave the Government of the Oven now, when it is crammed with the
English Consulls pastry, to me that is the weaker vessel, besides the looking
after four small Children, and all forsooth to be thought wiser then your
neighbors by drinking the abominable liquor of Infidels! A Murrin upon all
ambition, for since my Husband came to be a Vertuoso-Hunter in these
Prating-houses, he has altogether left off the caring for his poor Family.


Bak. Hey! Whirr! I think the Woman's mad; huzzy though I allow you to find me
out in Taverns, yet this sawdness does not become you to intrude into the
society of Vertuosi.


Barb. I hope none of this learned and politic Crew will be offended that my
neighbor here Clubs his cloven Philosophess.


The Baker plucks his Wife away, and says to the Barber, Bak. Neighbor, pray
pay what I have had, for I must home, and house my Wife.

Exit.
Barb. I will not stay long behind, left my wife do the same.


1. Schol. I wish she had stayed, for they say a woman is the best Engine
either to display a Horizontal-Dial, or Horizontal-Windmill.


2. Schol. I should rather think by her Clack she would make a better
demonstration of the perpetual motion.


Barb. If any knew her as well as I, you would think all the members about her
are a perpetual motion.

Exit
Enter Coffee-Master with a Gazette. Coff. Mr. Gentlemen, here is fresh news
from all parts.


1. Cust. Pray let one read for all.


2. Cust. Give it me then. From Constantinople the Dutch Ambassador in
imitation of Algiers has presented the Grand-Signeur with a Covy of
East-Freezland Boys, fatten'd with black Beans and Butter-milk:


3. Cust. If that be true, then the prophecy of Sybilla Laplandica shall be
fulfilled.


4. Cust. Pray what is that?


3. Cust. She says, when Mahomet is glew'd to the stern of Squab-skipers, then
the whore of Babylon shall be brought to bed of a horned Hermaphrodite.


Fourth Cust. proceed. Aleppo. The long Wars 'twixt the Ribband-makers
Daughters of Athens, and the Bone-lace Weavers of Lacedemon shall be determined
by a Match at Stool-ball in the Fields of Pharsulia, the party vanquished is to
pay a Tanzy-Cake of the quantity of a Millstone: after that, with a confort of
Bag-Pipers and Jews-harps, they give a meeting to the Link-boyes of London in
the Meads of Arcadia, where the Queen of the Country treats 'em with ten Tun of
Syllybub; from thence they go a pairing among the Groves of Parnassus, to
gender inhabitants for the Commonwealth of Utopia.


1. Schol. This peace may much conduce to reconcile the jansinists and jesuits.


England. The Jews have preferred a Bill of Comprehension to the Senate of
London, that they may be admitted into the Society of the Coal-Merchants and
Wine-coopers, because Trade settled in his due latitude, is the stability and
advancement of that Kingdom.


2. Cust. I wonder what can be the reason of that?


3. Cust. My life upon it, it can be for no other reason, then that among other
pretenders to liberty, they may be allowed to starve and poison the bodies of
Christians, as others would do their minds with dangerous and pernicious
persuasions.

From Amsterdam. The States have taken the allowance from the Vertuosi that
were to find out the longitude, and bestowed it upon their Gazetteers, for
finding out dextrous lies to conceal the defeats they had from the English.

2. A singular Act of prudence, for such tricks have in some sort supported
their reputation over the world.


3. Cust. Ditto. Hans-Bublikins Burgomaster of Enchusen was stigmatized for
Adultery, because in the last Dog-dayes he was found in a Ditch cooling himself
with the embraces of a Virgin- Sturgeon.


1. Schol. O Heavens! certainly that was one of the prodigies that was foretold
to fall out in 1666.


2. Schol. But by their Hogen Mogen-ships favor, that was too severe a
punishment, for conform to one of their own Decrees of the Synod of Dort,
providing the sturgeon be not pickled, it only amounts to a simple Fornication.


3 Cust. From the Islands of Orcades in the North- Indies. The Prize-Brandee is
so plentiful, that in the last great drought they used it for watering their
Gardens, which warmed the ground to such a degree, that their Cabbiges sprung
out Musk-mellons, and their Gooseberry-bushes produced Muskadine-Grapes.


1. Schol. The occult quality of that will be one half years Task for the
newhatch'd Virtuosi.


3. Cust. Here Is an Advertisement of a Citizens Daughter of 17 handful High,
and 18 years of Age, who went without the Walls to drink Red-Cowes milk: it is
feared she has strayed among some of the neighboring Parks. If any Male or
Female Keepers of the said Chases will bring Notice of her to the Office of
Address, they shall be honestly rewarded.


1. Cust. Her Parents were indiscreet to trust her alone; it is a hundred to one
if e're she be recovered without a dangerous Crack.


3. Cust. In Don Pantalions Academy there lives a Virtuoso, who makes Spring
Saddles that will make a man's body amble though mounted on a Flanders Genet.


4. Cust. A good Posting-Saddle for such who are troubled with the Hemerods.
But is there any advertisement of new Books?


3. Cust. Here are two; the one titl'd, Bibliotheca Matrum: or, a Comentary
upon Ambrose Parey's Instructions for Generation, written by Mother Cawdel
Wright, Dry-Nurse to the Society of Philosophical Demonstrators; The other is,
let me see, Observations upon the Memories of Monsieur de Bussy, with a
translation of Aretines Moralls in Burlesque-rhyme; done by a Platonic Lady in
her Lucid Intervalls.


4. Cust. The titles proclaim them great works: O to think of the mettle and
ingeniousness of these times, in respect of the dull days of our Ancestors!


1. Schol. Really the News-book Writer has done his part well, and very
exactly; calculate his occurents to the understanding of the Age: neither has
he in the least made any invasion upon the secrets of State.


2. Schol. I am not altogether of your mind; for if our natural enemies get the
secret of the Pacing-saddle, not only we, but all our neighbors may suffer.


1. Schol. I pray which way?


2. Schol. It may encourage all their Flux'd Gallants, whose Bones cannot
endure the jolts of a Trotting-horse to become Troopers, in that case
considering their Warlike Dispositions, it may rationally be feared, they will
never give over till they have ambled themselves into the Universal Monarchy.


1. Schol. I confess, Brother, your reason is to be allowed; but if we can find
a way to start-up another holy League among them, the vanity of that Career
will be soon stopped.


4. Cust. Friends, do not flatter your selves with that, for it is seldom known
that any stratagem serves twice in one place.


3. Cust. You are in the right; for there were two late experiences of it in
Britain: The one of a Wine-Cooper, who thought to have made disturbance under
the pretext of the Good Venner in Colemanstreet, and the good man with his
Whigs in Galloway. So this Hocus is but small comfort to the Fanatics of both
kinds.
old Cause; but that kind of stummed stuff would not down with the people,
their stomachs having been so much cloyed with it formerly. The other was
renewing a rebellious Covenant in the North part of the Island, but that juggle
had the same success: so that the effects of both were no better then if a
Garrison of Bedlam had sallied out to conquer the world. But whereas you say,
our Gazettier has discovered no State secrets truly; many are of the opinion
they have none to discover.


2. Cust. I wonder what kind of man that is who is so busy with his Table Book?


3. Cust. I suspect this a Dramatick Poet of a weak memory, come to pick up
materials to help his fancy.


4. Cust. I rather think he is a spy of a Tott'ring-States-man, That Is curious
to know the opinion of the world as to his Actions.


Coff. Mr. He Is a spy, but not of that kind you speak of?


2 Cust. What then?


Coff. Mr. One of these setters belonging to the Excise-Office comes to peep
upon my gains.


Enter several Reformadoes at another Table. 1. Refor. Mark! where I place this
Tobacco, Staple was the Battalia.


2. Refor. Right.


1 Refor. Don Hurtado with his red and yellow Brigadoes, commanded the right
Wing, and Don Alonzo with his blew and white the left.


3. Refor. And do not you remember when I commanded the Forlorn, the General
sent me Orders not to be too sudden in the shedding of blood.


2. Refor. Did not you tell me once, that you commanded the Reserve of the
Right Wing?


3. Refor. So I did; but the agility of the Enemy in point of wheeling, made me
then become the forlorn of our left Wing; by all good Tokens, at my first
onset I defeated 1500 Curasseers that commanded the Redoubt which flanked
The Enemies Cannon.


Countr. Gent. What is a Redoubt?


3. Ref. It Is a large Field of plough'd ground, circl'd with a Turf Dike; but
when it is appropriated to a line of Circumvallation in a Camp, why then it
falls artificially in to be a spot of ground naturally fortified with Bastions,
Half-moons, Ravelins, Tenalies, Horn-works, Foss-braes and Parapets; for all
which strengths it carries the valiant title of Redoubted.


1. Ref. Did ever any hear a Son of a Whore talk so ignorantly?


2. Ref. Take heed who you call Son of a Whore.


1. Ref. Where Is the danger?


2. Ref. Here Is the danger.


He throws a Dish of Coffee in his face, and so they fight. 4. Ref. I cannot
but laugh at this impudent Rogue in calling the Redoubt a Field of plough'd
ground, for when this Battle he speaks of was fought, it was in the latter end
of March when the Corn was so high that we ambuscado'd our Cavall'ry.


Co. Gent. Nay, friend, if he be not righter in Military Art, then you in the
observation of your Corn, I believe all your stories alike.

They fight.
Coff. M. and Servants part. Coff. Mr. Gentlemen, I pray be gone; this rudeness
becomes a Suburb-Tavern; rather then my Customers shall be disturbed in this
fashion, I had better want your change.


Coff. Mr. and Servants thrusts' em all out of doors, after the Schoolars and
Customers pay. 1. Schol. Landlord, If you intend your house to be like the
School of Athens, you must take care these Buff-bravo's come no more here; they
are nuizances to sober company in as high a degree, as they are scandalous to
true Gallantry.


2. Schol. Did not you observe how their ignorance for want of Logic brought
them presently to blows.

Ex. all but Coff. Mr.
Coff. Mr. I suspect this Trade will not hold out, for I perceive the Vertuosi
are a company of empty fellows, and most of 'em come here only to change their
breath with the stem of my Coffee. The truth is, the Claret-Philosophers
(though they be few) are my best Customers, for when they come reelingin, no
less then half a score Dishes they require to settle their Stomachs. Well, I Will
try it yet a month longer, and if I fail then, I am resolved to take a House
near a Pump, and with a stock of rotten Raisons and Salsa-parilla, set up a
brewing of Dyet-drink, and Stipone, which I am confident will prove a good
Commodity, if I be not interferr'd by a Monopoly.

Exit.
ACT. IV.
Enter Don Horatio, Sophro. Tar. and Stanlia. Sophr. TArugo's cheerful
countenance speaks good success.


Hor. Come Cousin, Keep us no longer in suspense.


Tar. Then shortly thus: My Gold prevailed with her Taylour, notwithstanding
his timorous apprehensions of Patricio's anger; by acting the part of his
Foreman I had access to Liviana, and have managed the business so happily,
that nothing could be more acceptable to her as the perseverance of Horatio's
Love, in return of your Picture she has here sent you hers


Soph. The business is so well begun, that I don't despair of its success.


Hor. The beauty of this Copy increases my flames, I Am for ever lost if I enjoy
not the Original.


Soph. This pleases me, yet I have still a jealousy his love is in complacence
to me, which I Will yet put to a further Trial.

aside.
Don Horatio, My advice is, that you govern your affection with moderation,
least you meet with disappointments by her Brothers severity, and then you are
affected with fresh sorrows.


Hor. Madam I am resolved to perish in the Enterprise, rather then give over so
noble a design that is so well begun.


Soph. Be not too confident in so dangerous undertakings; for love is like a
frozen Snake taken up by a compassionate Pilgrim; who trusting to its weakness,
gives it the heat of his Bosom, and whilst the poor wretch is cheerfully
marching on his way, he then finds the force of the Serpents poison by a fatal
sting in his breast: how often has love been known to begin with trifling and
indifferent addresses, yet has swelled to such heights when not ending with
enjoyments, has brought on certain death: and though Loves firstlings be not
violent, yet his motions never cease till he has made a purchase of the heart;
so, when the desired object cannot be acquired, the soul of the poor Lover is
nothing but a compound of griefs and anxieties.


Tar. It seems she speaks by experience.

aside. Cheer up Cousin, since I have undertaken the conveyance, it is a
distrust of my abilities to question a fortunage success.


Soph. O how I love Tarugo, for his confidence is comfortable.


Tar. I have been told Madam, that Don Patricio glories much in being a Friend
and Kinsman of Marquess Villana's, and that sometimes he corresponds with him
from the Indies.


Soph. It Is true enough, and upon his account he has writ several times to me.


Tar. Then my project holds, Madam, the Fleet being lately arrived, cause with
all expedition to be made ready a parcel of Indian rarities.


Hor. What do you intend by that?


Tar. To be transformed like a Cavalier of Peru, for so I Will introduce my self
to Patricio's Conversation (and happ'ly be lodged in his Family) and let me
have one of the Marquess's Letters for the better counterseiting his hand in an
Epistle Recommendatory; (I had almost forgot my own little stock is spent in
the first practice according to the Lawyers learned Aphorism) Let not your
Cause starve.


Hor. Fear not want; take: here is a Purse of 200 Pistols; and fit your self
with the Conceits you have mentioned.


Soph. And there is one of the Letters you desired.


Tar. Both of you may now go to Prayer, and leave the rest to me.

Ex.
Enter Servant. Serve. Madam? Don Patricio is below, and desires to know if your
Ladyship is to be seen.


Soph. Horatio Shall he come up?


Hor. By any means, I am not afraid he will eat me.


Soph. I conjure you then not to be offended it what he speaks.


Hor. Provided his words be not accompanied with blows.


Soph, I Will answer for that; conduct him here Stanlia.


Enter Patricio, and makes a stand as in a maze. Pat. O here he is, when I view
the Picture I am confirmed; It Is none else but Don Horatio's! O Hell and
Damnation.


Soph. I perceive his looks bend at you with a froward aspect.


Hor. It seems his anger continues.

aside.
Soph. Don Patricio, I hope the last days dispute is forgot.


Pat. I am not so easily changed, especially when I met with new reasons to
confirm me.


Soph. 'Pray, Sir, be not so wilful, and if for arguments sake you have
ensnared your self in a fond opinion, it will become your discretion to lay
aside obstinacy, least you incurr the imputation of a peevish Humorist.


Pat. Madam! If I find my jealousy rightly grounded, whatever he be that
designs the dishonor of my Family, I am resolved that he and all his Interest
shall be sacrificed to my revenge.


Soph. I hope I have given you no offense.


Pat. Madam, I crave pardon, that my passion has thus flown out in your
presence, but the sense of injured honor hurried me on. -- If Horatio be the
person that pursues my disgrace, By all the glory of my Ancestors he shall
suffer.

aside, Ex.
Hor. I doubt he suspects.


Soph. His passion demonstrates no less: it will not be amiss that we acquaint
Tarugo.


Hor. Well thought on; let us go instantly and do it.

Ex.
SCENE IV.
Enter Liviana and Locura. Loc. Madam, since you have to deal with a Madman,
and that your love is honorably grounded, there is no fault to arm your self
with a brisk dissimulation.


Live. Upon that consideration, I Will once try to set a bold brow against a steep
hill.


Loc. Come, let us begin, for I hear him and his man bending toward us.


Live. Love has sufficiently perfected me in my Cue.


Enter Patricio, Alberto. Loc. Dear Madam, lay aside your passion, for it is
true what I have told you.


Live. You lie like an impudent slut; I say either deliver up the Picture, else
I Will have you whipped for a Bawd.


Pat. What Is the matter? From whence proceeds this passion?


Live. This same naughty wench here, Locura, as we were yesterday coming from
the Chapel, found a Gentleman's Picture: when she came home, showing it me, I
chid her for taking it up, and presently ordered her to burn it, and now
forsooth she tells me it is lost; which I look upon as a shift that she may keep
it.


Pat. This is strange, and seems a Riddle; Pray Heaven's it be not the
forerunner of greater Mischief.


Loc. If I did not lose it last night, let me be condemned to the strictest
Cloister in Spain.


Pat. Ha! Liviana, this is your cunning; because you see me careful in the
preservation of your honor, you think by this Artifice to abuse me; but all
will not do.


Live. O Heaven's, that I should be thus innocently abused! Did not I foresee
this? Go, Wretch that thou art, and find out the Picture.


Loc. As I hope to be saved, Madam, I have searched all I can.


Pat. Come, Sister; this trick will not pass upon me; you know that I found the
Picture when I was last in your Chamber; This confirms me of the Intrigues
'twixt you and Don Horatio.


Live. O strange! have you lost your wits?


Pat. Peace, least I chastise your loose behavior with this Dagger.


Live Brother, let me tell you, your groundless jealousy was temptation enough
for me to have gone astray; if my own honor had not governed me better: If I
have done amiss, you are to blame as well to conceal it, as not to punish it:
and take notice, your austerity has awaked desires in me that might have slept:
If I chance to miscarry, I must attribute all to your idle humor: I Am
confident this sottish distrust in men, thinking to overcome our Wills with
violence, has been, and is still the only great cause that creates vicious
Women.

Exit in anger.
Pat. I am almost convinced with the weight of her Reason: go Locura, follow
your Mistress.


Loc. O Sir! she is in such a rage, that I Am afraid she will beat me about the
loss of the Picture!


Pat. Be not afraid, I Will remove that scruple.


Loc. Here is one Danger past.

Aside, Ex.
Enter Alberto to him. Alb. This Letter was left by a Seaman ten days since,
with the Porter, who all this time had forgot to deliver it.


Pat. It Is not the first time I have been so served by that negligent Rascal.

[He reads the Letter. SIR, the enclosed will tell you what I am; that I cannot
accompany this Letter, is by reason the Wayters of the Custom House will have
the Presents I have brought you from Marquess Villana enrolled as a parcel of
Merchandise; I expect your friendship to deliver me from this trouble. This
from aboard the Pearl of Peru. D. Chrisante de Pego.


Pat. O Heavens! when will the exorbitancy of these inferior Officers be at an
end, for they and the like are the Instruments of great Odium upon the
Government.


Alb. With the insolency of small fellows of birth and parts, when they come to
places of trust.


Pat. This is Villana's Character.

He reads the Letter. THE Gentleman to whom I have delivered this Letter is one
of my intimate Friends; he has business in Sevil, which happ'ly may be advanced
by the discretion of your good Counsel; the particulars he will impart
himself: whatever kindness you witness him, shall be embraced as done to me.
That our Friendship may not be forgot by distance of place, I have sent you
such rarities as our Indies affords, which I hope will be received as coming
from Your faithful Friend, and humble Servant, Villana.


Pat. Alberto, I Will go my self, and have this abuse corrected.


Alb. If there were not a Present in the Case he would not be so ready.

aside.
Enter another Servant. Serve. An't like your Worship, there is an
Indian-Gentleman at the Gate, with Presents for you from the Marquess Villana.


Pat. What like man is he?


Serve. He seems to be a person of Quality.


Pat. Alberto, Conduct him hither.


Enter Tarugo, in the habit of a Knight, with his Servants laden with Boxes.
Tar. I am afraid the Letter I sent you has miscarri'd?


Pat. If you be the Gentleman that is come from my Cousin Villana, it has
miscarri'd so far, that I have but now received it by my Porters negligence:
however, I was just now going my self to have taken order for your redress.


Tar. I hearily thank you Sir, but the Wayters after second thoughts had a
regard to the Authority of your name, and so has dismissed me.


Pat. Noble Sir, my Cousin Villana speaks you his Friend, and consequently a
person of merit, upon which account I earnestly entreat that both my house, and
all other assistance, either as to advice or personal hazard, be at your
disposal, during your abode in this place.


Tar. I am not deceived of the Character my Friend Villana gave of you; It
shall be my study to deserve your kindness, In the mean time let these Presents
be disposed of.


Pat. Alberto, Carry these Boxes to my Closet. -- But oh -- What shall I do
with my Sister now that I have engaged him to lodge in my house?

aside.
Tar. Since your Hospitality is so great, let me acquaint you with my infirmity
before I give you the trouble of being a Guest.


Pat. It would be a strange infirmity that should cause Marquess Villana's
friend, being a Stranger, to lodge any where else but with me.


Tar. Sir, not to keep you longer ignorant of my disease; know, that if I meet
with any Women in your house, I run the hazard of my life.


Pat. That Is strange, it seems an enchantment.


Tar. You are in the right; for when I was about ten years of Age in Mexico,
where my Father lived, There lodged a Girl of the same Age at our next door;
she and I were Play-fellows: Her Grandmother who had the repute of a Witch,
seeing me once tumbling her a little rudely, to snatch a Kiss; the old Hag
immediately in point of Revenge, so enchanted me, that upon the approach of any
Woman, except Blood-relations, I am suddenly struck with the highest
extremities of Convulsion-fits; insomuch that whilst the Paroxism lasts, I run
the hazard of my life by the violence of the pains.


Pat. This is an odd kind of Charm.


Tar. Nay Sir, it varies according to the handsomeness and Qualities of the
persons: As for example, I can well enough admit of Nurses, and other necessary
Vulgar Women to pass to and fro within my view; But when once either Youth or
Beauty, especially of equal quality appears, then all the torments of Hell
seizes on me at once.


Pat. Since it is so, you shall be in no danger in my Family; for there is but
two Women, my Sister and her Maid, who shall be disposed of to remote lodgings
by themselves.


Tar. This is so great on obligation, that my first Letter to the Marquess
shall be nothing but an account of your civilities.


Pat. To his Friend I cannot be kind enough, but were you ever in Spain before?


Tar. This is the first time.


Pat. Could you receive the Order abroad?


Tar. The King sent it me.


Pat. No doubt it was upon the score of some eminent service.


Tar. I serve none, though in following my own Inclinations, the Kings affairs
had some advantage by my Countenance.


Pat. I perceive the Rodomontado's that is left in Spain begins to root in the
Indies.

aside. Your pardon, Sir, till I give order for your Lodging.


Tar. Since I have delivered my self up to you, let us avoid Ceremonies.


Pat. Your servant Sir. Come Alberto

Ex.
Tar. I have in some sort tuned this unruly Instrument.


Enter Liviana and Locura at the door. Live. Tarugo! I have heard all the
discourse that passed 'twixt you and my Brother; really the Plot is well laid.


Tar. You Will think it better if I order it so, that once this night you and
Horatio shall meet.


Live. That I cannot comprehend considering the multitude of Guards.


Tar. Has not your Garden a backdoor?


Live. Yes, but my Brother keeps the key.


Tar. No matter as I have designed, he himself shall open it for Don Horatio's
entrance.


Live. Alas! my Brother has got Horatio's Picture.


Tar. How came he by it?


Loc. He found it in my Lady's Chamber.


Tar. Does he suspect any thing?


Live. Most furiously jealous, though I told him Locura found it as we came from
Chapel, yet nothing can allay his passion.


Tar. Trouble your self no more, I Will recover the Picture, and calm his rage.
But hark me Liviana

They whisper.
Loc. They are now at counsel, but I am sure to be on the Execution.

aside.
Tar. Pray remember.


Live. How can my memory fail where such happiness is proposed?


Tar. Be gone: I hear your Bother coming.

Ex. Live. and Loc.
Enter Patricio. Pat. Don Chrisanto, your Lodgings are ready, so you may retire
to them at pleasure.


Tar. Noble Sir, I meet with such frank and real friendship, that I should do
my self an injury to retard the communication of the affair brought me to Sevil.


Pat. In that do as you think fit.


Tar. Being already inform' of my fatal Charm, you must needs conclude, its
consequence debars the satisfaction of Matrimony. I have only one Sister lest
to continue our Family: there is a Knight living in this Town, whose fair
reputation has made a conquest of her affection. It Is like, being of the same
quality, and living in the place, he must needs be within the verge of your
Acquaintance.


Pat. Speak his name, and I Will satisfy you.


Tar. l'le first try you with the sight of his Picture. By all that is sacred
it is lost: O how shall I a acquit my self to my Sister?


He searches his Pocket, misses the Picture Pat. If your Sister was so
passionately in love with him, how came she to part with the Picture?


Tar. That Is a just exception which I must tell you flowed from her self, who
(not trusting to any other) she prevailed with me to undertake this Voyage, and
try whether the opinion of the World, as to his Virtues, and his own person
compared with the Picture, be every way consistent. But now having lost it, I
may be satisfied of the one, but scarce of the other.


Pat. Sure you remember his name?


Tar. That I cannot forget, for he bears the name and Title of D. Horatio De
St. Christophel.


Pat. Now I begin to be convinced of the injury I did to Liviana, and her Maid.

aside. But do you remember where you lost it?


Tar. Scarcely: unless yesterday coming from a little Chapel, not far from
this place, where in pulling out my Handkercher, I dropped my Sneezingbox, which
was suddenly restored by the first finder, and there I suspect it sell in the
hands of some Reprobate that was not in use of Confession.


Pat. The same place that Locura found it.

aside. But Sir, the Picture is not lost.


Tar. I would ransom it with a thousand Ducats.


Pat. I believe this is it; my Sisters Maid found it in the same place you
mentioned.

Plucks out the Picture:
Tar. O happy Maid! I wish my enchanted infirmity would allow me to give her
personal thanks: however a bountiful Token of my remembrance shall not be
wanting.


Pat. That needs not; I am glad any within my house had the good fortune to
serve you.


Tar. But as to D. Horatio, how stands his reputation herein Spain?


Pat. Most deservedly great, which you will soon find by a little conversation.


Tar. And that shall be done with the first convenience.


Pat. It Is a good resolution; and the sooner you finish the matter, so much the
better; for there is still danger accompanies the keeping of young Beauties.


Tar. That Is true; for those who pretend to be in the greatest security, are
aptest to be deceived.


Pat. No! I esteem him a fool that pretends to keep a Woman, and is
over-reached.


Tar. I will not dispute the matter; but if you please now that the night
approaches, let us enjoy a little friscoe in the Garden.


Pat. A good motion; Alberto, do you run before, and set the Waterworks a
going, and light the Flamboys of Orpheus's Grot.


Alb. I shall Sir.

Exeunt.
Enter Liviana and Locura in the Garden. Loc. I admire the cunning and
dexterity of Tarugo.


Live. But if he bring D. Horatio hither, and conduct him safely out again, I
shall never doubt his other undertakings.


Loc. You need not question it, since hitherto he has been so succesfull.


Live. Conform to his Directions; we'll stay in the Garden.


Enter Patricio. Loc. But Madam, there comes your Brother and Tarugo; by
Patricio's advance he seems as if he would speak with you.


Live. I think so.


Pat. Sister! because the sight of a Woman is not acceptable to my Guest, be
pleased for a time to withdraw to your Chamber, that we may have the freedom of
the Garden.


Live. That Is a strange humor; but you know the disposition of my body requires
an after-Suppers walk.


Pat. We will not stay long, and so you may return.

Ex.
Live. Let Us go Locura; when my Brother's out of sight we'll hide our selves
among the Bushes, and listen what passes.

They hide.
Enter Patricio and Tarugo. Tar. A most incomparable piece of Nature richly
improved by Art.


Pat. It serves me, Sir.


Tar. It Is so delightful a Paradise, that I think I Will scarce be persuaded to
get out of it this night.


Pat. I suppose rest would become you better after so tedious a Sea-voyage.


Tar. Can there be greater repose then where the most virtuous part of our
senses are so largely regall'd?


Pat. O Heavens! no appearance of his going! if my Sister chance to come to the
Garden

aside.
Tar. Me thinks I hear a noise of fighting.

A noise of fighting without.
Pat. No matter, it concerns not us.


Hor. Ah Traitors five to one.

Another noise:
Tar. Bless me Heavens!


Hor. O bloody Murderers, is there no generosity? Would it were light that I
might kill the one half of you with my looks, to save the blunting of my Sword.


Pat. Don Crisanto! you seem concerned.


Tar. The tie we owe to Knighthood obliges us to relieve the oppressed.


Pat. Spoke like a Gentleman; lets go then.

Ex. As they go out into the Garden, Horatio slips in.
Enter Liviana and Locura. Loc. What can this mean?


Live. I know the trick; run you toward the Garden door, and if you meet
Horatio, conduct him to the Grove, where I Will stay his coming.

Ex.
Enter Horatio. Hor. Here Is one opportunity gained.


Loc. By your countenance, you seem D. Horatio.


Hor. I am.


Loc. Come along with me.

Exeunt.
Enter Patricio and Tarugo, sheathing their swords. Tar. They escaped us
narrowly: but I believe we were mistaken.


Pat. Like enough; for I fancy they were only Rogues upon the set, for
catching of Cloaks. Sir, if you think fit, it is time to retire, before the
night air come on severely.


Tar. With all my heart.


Pat. But I Will shut the Gate.

aside.
Tar. All falls out well as yet.


Pat. Don Crisanto, there is the Garden entry to your Lodgings; I give you good
night.

Ex.
Tar. Your humble servant Sir, but I must return

aside.
Enter Horatio and Locura. Loc. They are gone Horatio, you may come out.


Hor. Yes, Madam, to prostrate my self at your feet.


Loc. You Are mistaken, I am not Liviana.


Hor. Who then?


Loc. Her servant Locura.


Enter Tarugo. Tar. I have left the jealous Coxcomb fixed in his Chamber.


Hor. Is that Tarugo?


Tar. The same.


Hor. Where Is Liviana?


Tar. Not far off; the ordr'ing this business has perplexed me to the purpose.


Enter Liviana. Live. Here she comes that will thank you.


Hor. Madam, though the night has clouded the glory of these flowers, yet with
the presence of your Beauty they are restored to all the vanity which Nature
ever bestowed upon 'em.


Live. Don Horatio, if there be any thing makes me question the sincerity of
your expressions, is, that your love to me is upon no other account but to
convince my Brother's rigorous jealousy.


Hor. Madam, I dare not deny but the Lady Sophronia engaged me upon that
account; but here I invoke the Heaven's, and all those glorious bodies with
which they are garnished, to be my witnesses that you are the only person I
adore with a sincere and spotless love.


Live. There needs no more; you are believed, and I with the same affection
deliver up my self, and all mine to your disposing; for the present let our
care be how you may be safely conveyed out of this dangerous place.


Tar. That will be hard without over-turning the house.


Live. Why, where can he stay?


Loc. O Madam! Here Is a great noise of Feet, and they bend this way.

[A noise without.
Tar. 'Slife, it is your Brother, and all his Servants; and my Sword has
unhappily dropped, that will increase the noise.

[Noise again.
Pat. Alberto! Haste; bring hither Lights.


Alb. I come Master.


Live. Oh, oh! I am the most unfortunate of Women.


Tar. I Will secure you at this bout; and for you Don Horatio, shelter your self
among the Mirtles.


Hor. I obey.

Ex.
Tar. Madam! when your Brother comes, tell him, being in my Balcony, as you
passed by, I tumbled down.


Enter Patricio with Servants and Lights. Live. O Brother! I am afraid your
Stranger-Friend has broke his neck; for just as I passed by he tumbled out of
the Balcony.


Tarugo counterfeits his Fit. Tar. O Heaven's! will my Torments never have an
end?


Pat. What Is the matter?


Tar. Unfortunate Wretch that I am, and more unfortunate in your Friendship!
Did not you tell me I should see no Women in your house: I think the Devil
either brought me to the Belcony, or the Women to the Garden. -- Oh-oh.


Pat. Sister! You and your Maid withdraw, the sight of you makes him worse: I
am heartily sorry for this Accident, but I hope you are not ill hurt.


Tar. Worse then it appears; but I pray convey me to my Chamber.


Pat. Come, lets bear him smoothly.

They carry him away.
Alb. O! to think of the pleasurable life I should enjoy, if all the Town
Stallions were of the temper of this Gallant?


Cook. If that were true, I would farm out my Carcass in as many ninteen shares
as ever a Ship was divided among Widows and Orphans.


Butler. The Great question would be then, whether your bodily basting, or my
faculty of Gembling would turn to the best account?


Alb. When all is done, I suspect if all these Casties in the Air were true, we
should at the long run find it the most cumbersome of all domestic Drudgeries.

Exeunt.
Enter Liviana, Locura, and Horatio. Live. Oh how shall we dispose of Horatio?


Loc. In your Closet for one night.


Live. I Will venture, though it consists not with the modesty of our sex.


Hor. Madam! What shall become of me?


Live. Sir, the freedom I may chance to afford for your safety, I hope you will not
abuse it in any thing that may wrong my honor.


Hor. I Will sooner undergo the greatest of hazards.


Live. Then my Closet shall be your retreat till morning you get to Tarugo's
chamber.


Hor. Madam! this bounty becomes a Goddess.


Live. It Is love that moves me.


Hor. May I presume

He kisses her hand.
Live. If my Lady had not been thus mewed up, she would have been burned sooner
than afforded this freedom.

Exeunt.
ACT V. SCENE 1.
Enter Horatio, Tarugo. Hor. I am astonished at your great Foresight, ready
Wit, and courageous Confidence.


Tar. Cousin, It Is the indulgence of kind Nature, to provide those with shifts
who are destitute of all other help.


Hor. I have seen you contrive, and act that on a sudden, which would take a
Play-maker six days to dress in a Scene.


Tar. And yet he gains the reputation of a wit, whilst I pass for a Craftyknave.


Hor. Nothing more certain.


Tar. And when poverty and age comes to oppress me, I shall be scarce admitted
in the hospital of the decayed Vertuosi.


Hor. Like enough; unless you can instruct either the contriving of a conceity
Sneezing-box, or a set of Glass-buttons, with Squibs in their Breeches.


Tar. For that reason, whilst I am young, I Will bestir my self like a Lord that
comes to his Honor before his Fortune.


Hor. Right! or like a hungry Courtier that is been long out of play.


Enter Liviana above. Live. Hist! Hist! Tarugo -- Tarugo! -- my Brother knows
there is a man in the house.


Tar. What Is the matter?


Hor. My dearest, how came that about?


Live. A little Negro-wench who see you pass through the Garden to Tarugo's
Chamber has made discovery.


Tar. No matter: do you withdraw to your Chamber, and keep close.


Hor. What do you intend now?


Tar. To prosecute the same design, only this Alarm hastens it with some
change of Circumstances; Get upon my bed, tie up your arm, and let the bloody
slieve of your Shirt hang out, and be sure to counterfeit a sound sleep.


Hor. Fear nothing on my part; but if there be need of fighting, speak loud,
and to the purpose.

Ex.
Pat. within. Alberto, Go search the Garrets, and secure all the Windows, and
Sancho do you the same to the lower Room; it will be strange if this fellow
escape us all.


Alb. and Sanch. We obey.

Exeunt.
Enter Patricio in a hurry, with two Servants toward Tarugo's Chamber, where
Tar. in his Gown meets 'em with his sword drawn. Tar. What Is the matter
Gentlemen, that you come thus armed to my Chamber? Do you intend to murder me?


Pat. Heaven forbid such a villainy; I was told there is Thieves in the house,
which puts me upon the search.


Tar. You may forbear that; I was just coming to acquaint you with the
strangest accident that ever befell in Spain.


Pat. You amaze me; What Is the business Sir?


Tar. Do not you remember, last night in the Garden we heard two several noises
in different places about the quarrel.


Pat. Very well.


Tar. And as we returned from following the first noise which fled from us,
there was some clashing of Swords, as it had been nigh your Garden backdoor.


Pat. I do remember, and upon our speedy approach it vanished.


Tar. Well then; let me ask you a question; Is there such a Knight in or about
the Town that bears the name of Don Alonzo de Figueros.


Pat. There is such a noble Person, and of an ancient Family.


Tar. Is there a quarrel 'twixt him and any other?


Pat. A most lasting and bloody feud 'twixt them and the Lucina's.


Tar. All this agrees.


Pat. But how came you to the knowledge of Don Alonzo, and what makes you so
curious to understand his Enemies.


Tar. I, that will raise your wonder; besides, I shall bless the time I came to
be lodged with you.


Pat. That removes part of my wonder into joy.


Tar. Take notice Sir, the noise we heard last night, was not as we supposs'd,
occasioned by night Rats.


Pat. What then?


Tar. It was this same Don Alonzo, and his Kinsman, who were set upon by the
Lucina's, Alonzo was separate from his friend, which it seems was the noise we
sought after first; and that which was toward the Garden-door, was Alonzo's
Kinsman, hardly put to it by his Enemies. But upon our approach, they fancied a
relief from the Figueros, and so betook themselves to flight; the Gentleman
finding himself weak with the loss of blood by a wound in his Arm, laid hold on
the opportunity of your Garden-doors, being open, and came to the seat of the
West-corner to rest himself.


Pat. This is a strange accident; I am apt to believe it; for Don Balthazar who
is head of the Lucina's, is a person of a low spirit, and has made several
unworthy attempts of this kind to murder Don Alonzo; but pray what is become of
the Gentleman.


Tar. This morning betimes, an hour before Sunrising, finding my self
indifferent well recovered of my last Convulsion-fits, I came to recreate my
self in the Garden, where I found him in such distress, that in my time I never
saw such an object of compassion.


Pat. What became of him then?


Tar. With the best skill I had I bound up his wound, and brought him to my
Chamber.


Servant. An't like your Worship, it was about break of day, the little Moor
saw this same strange man.


Pat. I am now satisfied of the Alarm; But where consists your singular
happiness, by saying you would bless the time for lodging with me.


Tar. I that is matter indeed.


Pat. As how I pray?


Tar. Why this same Gentleman in whose relief I was so fortunate, calls himself
Don Horatio de St. Christophel.


Pat. It Is very like, for he is Cousin-Germain to D. Alonzo; and they are often
together.


Tar. However, it was never my intention to be abused by any finistrous belief;
but was resolved so soon as I got ready to have found you out, and have the
matter tried; it seems the Alarm has hastened the discovery in bringing you to
me.


Pat. That shall be speedily known.


Tar. I left him sleeping upon my bed, and I Will in, and try if he be awake.

[ Tarugo goes in, and returns instantly.
Pat. I pray do it softly, for it were barbarous at such a time to disturb him.


Tar. he is fast asleep, but so that you may have a full view of his Face; I
pray let us step in quietly and satisfy my impatience.


They both go in and peep. Pat. It Is certainly he, now he begins to stir.


Tar. Let Us withdraw a little, and give him liberty to awake of himself.


Hor. awakes, and stares about. Hor. I miss the courteous Gentleman that
brought me hither, and saved my life; I wish he were here; for being under Don
Patricio's Roof, I know not to what length his Passion may lead him to revenge
the debate of the last encounter; happy'ly his presence might allay rash
Actions: But oh! when I think on it, I injure honor to imagine Don Patricio can
be guilty of Baseness; I hope Heaven will be satisfied for my unjust jealousy
with my inward sorrow: Well, upon this generous fancy, I Will venture to take a
little more rest.

[ He puts himself to sleep again.
Tar. How Patricio? Can you be that man's enemy whom you so lately magnified to
me?


Pat. You must know Don Crisanto, there never was any material quarrel 'twixt
Horatio and me; only last day we had a little debate upon the nicety of an
Argument, that concerned neither our Honors, nor Interest.


Tar. From such a trifle nothing of malicious hate could rise.


Pat. Not on my part; I believe it is so with him; for it was only want of
skill in either that could not manage our different opinions with that smooth
dexterity that ought to be in point of Argument.


Tar. I have observed indeed, that where the want of such conveyances is not
practiced, the variation of fancy is often accompanied with tart
Contradictions; nay, sometimes the loudness of the voice betrays the innocence
of the Mind.


Pat. In a few words you have hit upon the difference.


Tar. If that be all I Will be the balsome to salve up that fore; and before you
come together, I Will so prepare him that he shall meet your Candid disposition
with a suitable generosity.


Pat. A most provident and discret resolution.

Ex.
SCENE, Tarugo's Chamber.
Enter Horatio. Hor. I wonder Tarugo stays! yet when I consider, it must be
upon some necessity; for as to me I know neither his kindness nor industry can
undo one another.


Enter Tarugo. Tar. I just now parted with Don Patricio, in so serious a belief
of my Reality, that he scruples at nothing I say; and I have so ordered the
matter, that he resolves to forget all the heat that passed 'twixt you and him
in presence of the Lady Sophrenia; so when ever you come to meet, embrace as
never any such business had been.


Hor. Any thing that will advance our Project.


Tar. Here is the picture of my Doxie, which diverted me when I was in England;
it must pass for that of my Sisters which I brought you.


Hor. Really it is pretty; But why done like a Shepherdess?


Tar. O the most obliging despos'd Ladies there, will ever be drawn in that
innocent dress.


Hor. I hope they are not so coy as the Astrea's and Vrania's in Arcadia.


Tar. So far from it, that during all my abode in and about Londen, I never
knew either a Tyterus or a Malebeius breath one sigh for his Mistress's
cruelty; but I have heard some scalded Corridons make grevous groans for the
warm enjoyments they had from the Nimphs that ply the Parks in the Upper-
Holbornia: But here comes Patricio; Mind your countenance of dissimulation,
keeping the Picture constantly in your hand, adoring it with the name of the
incomparable Durinda.


Enter Patricio. Hor. Is it possible that ever I shall attain that good fortune
to be sufficiently grateful, for the singular happiness I have met with under
your Roof, and within its precincts.


He runs and embraces Patricio. Pat. Noble Horatio, I am doubly rewarded, in
having the opportunity to serve you, and D. Crisanto, the friend of the
renowned Marquess Villana.


Tar, I think my joy ought to be greatest, in being happy in a Brother in Law,
who in all respects goes beyond the Character was given by his Uncle Antonio;
at that time my Sister became in love with the fame of his good parts.


Hor. O to think of my happiness when I come to enjoy the incomparable Durinda.

Kisses the Picture.
Tar. Brother Horatio, I am impatient till I find out your Mother, that I may
discharge her Brother Antonio's Commendations, therefore let us be gone.


Pat. I hope Don Crisanto you will return to your old Quarters.


Tar. To do otherwise were to blot my own discretion; assure your self, during
my abode here, I have designed your House to be my home.


Pat. The honor's mine.


Hor. Brother Crisanto! you tell me the sight of an old Woman brings not on
your disease.


Tar. Not at all.


Hor. Then my Mother is past 60, and for the other young Waiting-Girles, before
you enter I Will have 'em all removed out of the way

Exeunt.
Enter Liviana, Locura. Live. Tarugo's singular dexterity has removed all our
fears.


Loc I hear your Brother coming.


Live. That Is well, for I intend to entertain him with free language.


Enter Patricio. Pat. How is it with my Sister?


Live. Not so very well.


Pat. Where lies your Sickness?


Live. In my mind.


Pat. Who has discomposed it?


Live. None but you by defaming my reputation to the world.


Pat. In that you wrong me, for the preservation of it is all the business I
aim at.


Live. The means you use are barbarous and irrational.


Pat. Softly Sister.


Live. My complaint is just; for the World must needs conclude, the severity you
have practiced upon me was grounded upon my loose behavior: Brother, Brother;
There Is my loss which is scarce to be repaired; for the action being done by
you who has the repute of a Wise man, makes the deeper and blacker reflections
upon me.


Pat. Trouble your self no more, I am convinced of my error; besides, all my
cares and fears are almost at an end, you being now upon the matter even as
good as married.


Live. That Is strange! and I as yet ignorant of the person, pray! what is he?


Pat. That noble Cavalier, Don Roderigo de la Rochos.


Live. Do you know if I love him?


Pat. I have made choice, and you must be content.


Live. In this matter Brother, I am the person most concerned, and therefore
ought to be first consulted. 'Pray! assume no more power in the Election of a
Husband for me, than I shall do in a Wise for you.


Pat. This freedom does not become you.


Live. Have not I a Will?


Pat. Nothing in this but obedience: I being your Father in the case.


Live. Here Is a story indeed! A grave Father? I wish you had the Wisdom that is
requisite in an elder Brother.


Pat. Let me hear no more words; for the business is resolved, and conform to
my promise; I am now going to bring Don Roderigo. Alberto when you have ordered
the Guards, go find out the Priest, for this Night I Will have the Marriage
Consummate.

Ex. Pat. Alb.
Live. Did you hear all this Locura.


Loc. Yes, Madam, with great grief.


Live. Rather then I Will be false to Don Horatio, I Will embrace the worst of
Deaths.


Loc. Allege stoutly, That you are married already, and if you please, I Will
take the deepest Oaths that the law affords, that I saw the Priest join you and
Horatio together.


Live. There may fall out bloody Consequences 'twixt my Brother and Horatio by
such a shift! oh! oh! is there no hopes of relief?


Enter Servant. Serve. Madam! the Lady Sophronia is come to visit you.


Enter Sophronia and Stanlia. Live. She is most welcome: Go, wait upon her in
Locura; this is a most blessed opportunity to advertise Horatio and Tarugo. --
Dear Sophronia, you could never have come to visit me at so seasonable a time.


Soph. I hope, Madam, the pains I have taken to cultivate the love 'twixt you
and Horatio is acceptable.


Live. Nay, Madam, though your interest be equally complex'd, yet when our loves
are Crowned with marriage, I shall ever acknowledge you as the happy instrument.


Soph. But what think you of Tarugo's inventions?


Live. He has not his equal in the world.


Soph. I verily believe, if he had lived in the days of Lycurgus, he had been
preferred to be Recorder of Lacedemon.


Stan. Don't you observe, Locura, how my learned Lady enamels her discourse
with Historical Sippets of Antiquity.


Loc. Pish! I have often heard my Grandmother say, that learned Women were
sometimes led into dangerous curiosities, and upon that account I think it no
excellent qualification in our Sex.


Stan. You are in the right, there being strange and perilous things mentioned
in Books; for I was once in a condition that I could not rest in ten days,
only for reading six lines of a rapture.


Soph. This is strange

To Liviana.
Live. Most certain he himself is gone for Don Roderigo, and sent his man
Alberto for a Priest; I expect him every hour, though I am resolved never to
yield, yet my Brothers passion may lead him to commit extravagances upon me.


Soph. For that very reason I will stay with you, and at your Brother's Return,
it is like I may invegle him to conduct me home. In the mean time Stanlia, run
and advertise Horatio and Tarugo of the danger Liviana is in to be married this
night to D. Roderigo; and assure 'em, I will so divert Patricio, that they
shall have time either to practice force or slight.


Live. O my comfortable Sophronia!


Soph. Cheer up Madam! my life upon it Horatio and Tarugo will overcome this
difficulty. Come, let us to the Garden, and stay their coming.

Exeunt.
Enter D. Patricio and Roderigo. Rod. Though the Alliance and the person be in
all respects as fair and great as ever any of my Family would pretend to, yet
it still runs in my fancy that the Lady Liviana will not yield.


Pat. What Is your reason?


Rod. Because she being of so lofty and witty Education, it is not to be
imagined she will condescend to marry at first sight.


Pat. My Authority shall weather that difficulty.


Rod. Because it is a matter of marriage, I Will venture two hours Siege, if in
that time she yields not, I fall presently off.


Pat. If my Sister do not answer your expectation, I Will conduct you from the
Siege with all honor and safety.

Exeunt.
Enter Live. Soph. Loc. in the Garden. Soph. Whatever the matter is, I find
Whisp'rings to my Soul of some approaching happiness.


Live. Would I could entertain such thoughts.


Loc. Madam! this should be Don Patricio by his rapping!


Noise at door. Live. Like enough.


Soph. Get you to your Chamber; I Will go meet him, and practice my Trick, which
shall in the end convince him, that Mercury as well as Venus club'd his
influence at my Nativity.


Enter Patr. Roder. where Sophronia meets 'em in the Hall, and their Servants
at their Guard posture. Soph. Don Patricio, when I come to visit your Sister,
you keep out the way.


Pat. Madam! if I had known of your coming, no temptation in the world could
have withdrawn me; but I am glad that you are here at this time.


Soph. What Is the matter?


Pat. Because I am just now going to marry my Sister to this noble Gentleman
Don Roderigo; I hope you will not grudge to be Witness to the Ceremony.


Soph. With all my heart: but I must go home first, and I expect you and your
friend will conduct me.


Pat. Yes, in hopes you will return and let the same Priest put an end to all
our long loves.


Soph. We shall advise of that hereafter.


Pat. Come Roderigo, we'll satisfy this Lady.


Rod. It cannot he avoided; besides, I am not so hasty, for I still expect a
denial.


Pat. Mind your duty Alberto; Come then Lady.

Exeunt
Enter Horatio, Tarugo, in Piatza. Tar. Hitherto we have been miraculously
successful.


Hor. If I had Empire and Sovereignty, you should be my only Minister of State.


Tar. So you might, and be well served, for greatness would convert all my
Tricks and Circumventions to the delicate words of prudence, foresight and
sagacity. If I be not mistaken, here comes Stanlia.


Enter Stanlia. Stan. Horatio! Tarugo! If you take not a speedy course
presently to rescue Liviana, her Brother is resolved to marry her this night to
Roderigo, and to give you opportunity to act the more securely, my Lady by this
time has trained both Roderigo and Patricio to her own Lodgings, where she
intends to divert them till you have attempted something in order to Liviana's
relief.


Hor. 'Slife, I Will go call my friends, and force the house.


Tar. Be sober and resolute, without confusion: the business shall be done at
this time or not at all; Stanlia, return and bid your Lady gain as much time as
may be.


Stan. I obey.

Ex.
Tar. We are close by Patricio's House; run you and stand at the corner of
Toledo-street, where I will direct Liviana and her Maid to find you.


Hor. I Will do what you bid me, though I am still of the opinion, that now
during his absence, force would be the only way.


Tar. It would look so like a Riot, that we should have all the City about our
ears: but no more, let us to our business.

Ex.
Tarugo comes to Liviana's Chamber-window, and knocks. Enter Locura at the
Window. Loc. What Is the matter Tarugo?


Tar. Is Patricio gone out?


Loc. Yes, to conduct the Lady Sophronia home.


Tar. That Is well: there he will be tied till we have done our business.


Live. Which way?


Tar. No more words; but both of you be instantly dressed in your coursest and
unusual Clothes.


Live. What next?


Tar. Pass through the Garden where you will find my Chamber open, and there with
your Faces veiled stay for my coming.


Loc. That Is easy and quickly done.


Tar. When once you find your self free without the great Gate, make all the
haste you can to the corner of Toledo-street, where you will find Horatio to
conduct you to the Lady Sophronia's back-Entry; there I Will be ready to receive
you.


Loc. Come, Madam, Let Us go valiantly about the business

Exeunt.
Enter Alberto, and Servants. Alb. As I was this morning before I rose out of
bed, upon the highest Bensil of natural contemplation, I was convinced of the
unreasonableness of my present employment.


1. Serve. It Is so far from being Military, that we are rather like Goalers then
Soldiers.


Alb. Therefore with the first convenience, I Will fling it off, and sooner
undertake the weaning of Cub-Rats, rather then be at the drudgery of being a
Turkish Guardian against a Christian Lady, that minds nothing but honorable
enjoyment. But Mum! -- here comes our Indian-Stranger.


Enter Tarugo. Tar. Peace be here.


Alb. 'Bless your Worship.


Tar. I Am dry; bring some Lemanado to my Chamber.


Alb. Presently Sir.

Ex Tarugo, and returns in a great fury.
Tar. Heavens defend me, I Am villanously murdered and betrayed.


Alb. What do you mean by this, Noble Sir.


Tar. O Rascals! Traitors! Villains! have you conveyed Women to my Chamber to
destroy me with Convulsion-fits?


Sanc. You amaze us, which way came they there?


Tar. There they are you Dogs; go instantly and drag 'em out, else one after
another I Will sheath my Sword in all your bellies. Look upon 'em you careless
Coxcombes, are not these Women?


Tar. drives 'em all before him to his Chamber. 1. Serve. I believe they are
Witches.


Alb. Yet I Will venture to see their Faces.


Tar. Thou Son of an English Sequestrator; do'nt you know the sight of a Woman's
face presently choaks me to death; I say instantly, let 'em be kicked out,
least I prove your Executioner.


Sancho, and the rest drive out Liviana and Locura. Sanch. Go, and the Devil go
with you; But pray Sir discover nothing of this to our Master.


Tar. Provided you be more careful in time coming; against my return let my
Chamber be well perfumed, least their smell renew my disease.

Ex. omnes.
Enter Hor. Live. Loc. in their Disguises at the corner of Toledo-street. Hor.
This is the place.


Loc. Madam! there waits Horatio.


Hor. Are you come my Dearest?


Live. Oh the fears I apprehend.


Hor. Continue still veiled, and let us make haste to the Lady Sophronia's.


Live. Let Us on then. Oh! oh! Horatio, there comes my Brother and Roderigo; When
will my miseries be at an end?


Pat Rod are going toward 'em. Hor. Fear nothing; I have been too conversant
with Tarugo to want a shift for this danger, which if it fail, it is here shall
protect you.


Points to his Sword. Enter Pat. Rod. Pat. What are these coming toward us?


Rod. A man and two Women.


Pat. Every shadow swells my Jealousy.


Hor. Don Patricio, this a happy encounter, if you will be pleased to afford me
another Trial of your Friendship.


Pat. Of that you may rest assured; But what is the matter?


Hor. The Lady is my Kinswoman, and Daughter to Don Alonzo: we have been paying
a visit to her Father, who lies ill at a Surgeons house of the wounds he got at
the late quarrel, in the next street our Coach broak and upon such occasions
you know the multitude crowds to gaze. Whereupon I bethought my self of going
to the Lady Sophronia's, to stay the mending of our Coach: and now being alone,
to prevent any affront that might come to the Lady, either by the Lucina's or
any other accident, let me entreat your assistance in the Convoy.


Pat. Though there were not friendship in the case; Honor requires my help on
such occasions: I hope Roderigo you will not grudge your countenance?


Rod. In matters of Honor, I am never behind.


Hor I think the Heavens have sent you both to my help.


Pat. That we may do it the more methodically, I Will march at a distance in the
Van, and my Friend Roderigo shall keep the Rear, and Don Horatio with the Lady
shall be the Battalia.


Hor. With this help I care not for all my Enemies.


Loc. It seems I am of the Baggage, and must along with the Artillery; yet I
could wish Alberto with his Javelin were here to defend me.

aside, Exeunt.
Enter Sophronia, Tarugo. Tar. All that I have told you is true.


Soph. Thy invention is not to be equaled.


Tar. But, Madam, Ple go below stairs and wait their coming.


Soph. Do, and bring 'em up the back way to my Closet.

Exeunt.
Enter Pat. Rod. Hor. Live. Loc. at Sophronia's back Gate. Pat. Now Horatio
there is Sophronia's Lodgings, and since this danger is past, unless you have
any other Service, I must beg your pardon being to return home; and deliver my
Sister Liviana to this noble Gentleman, who is to be her Husband; for both she
and the Priest I know by this time expect us.


Hor. I wish you both joy, e're long I hope you shall hear that Crisanto and I
shall have likewise put a period to our affairs: it would be no small addition
to us all to hear the same 'twixt you and the Lady Sophronia.


Pat. That will soon follow after the settling my Sister.


Hor. And that will be sooner then you imagine

Aside, Exeunt.
Enter Soph. Hor. Live. Stan. Loc. Tarugo. Soph. Blessed be the Stars that has
brought you both safely hither.


Hor. The sport of all is, Patricio not knowing any thing conveyed us to your
great Gate: He is just now below, ready to go home with Roderigo, thinking to
marry him to Liviana.


Soph. That Is best of all: And to have his Error the more solemnly convinced;
Stanlia go instantly and call Patricio up; tell him he must needs come; neither
will I admit of any excuses.


Stan. I run, Madam.

Ex.
Live. What do you mean by this, I begin to have fresh fears?


Soph. No danger at all: Horatio, convey your Mistress to my Closet, and there
stay till I call.


Hor. Come Liviana, let the apprehension of further danger be a Stranger to
your thoughts; as I am all yours, so I conceive you are so much mine, that
though both your Brother and Roderigo should offer to force your return, Heaven
would lend this single arm strength to justify my right; therefore let us
follow the Lady Sophronia's directions.


Soph. Whatever become of me, in spite of all Spain, e're you two go from this
House your Marriage shall be civilly and religiously consummate; for I can
order my family to stand out the finishing half a score of such bargains.


Tar. Yes, Madam! and as many more, if you will let me command your Garrison, as
Alberto did that of Patricio's.


Soph. But I hear Patricio coming; Therefore Cousin you and your Love to the
Closet quickly.


Enter Patricio and Roderigo. Pat. Madam, though my affairs are considerable,
yet you see my readiness to obey your commands.


Soph. 'Twill be for your good in the end: but first let me ask you a question.


Pat. If I can I Will satisfy you.


Soph. Do you continue in the same opinion, of the facility in keeping a Woman
from her humor?


Pat. As yet I know nothing to convince me.


Soph. Will no less then a demonstration of the contrary satisfy you?


Pat, No, Madam.


Soph. I warrant you, you think your self Cock-sure of Liviana's being at home.


Pat. What else?


Soph. Come out; Advance my new married Couple; if you be not now fitted with a
demonstration, I Will trouble my self no more to find one.


Enter Hor. Live. from the Closet. Pat. If you be humane, speak. O Heavens! what
do I see?


Live. Nothing of Sorcery in the matter: the noble Horatio, who is now my
Husband, has rescued me from your unjust slavery: He wants not generous courage
to maintain what he has done.


Hor. That I will with the hazard of my blood, and all that belongs to my
Family.


Soph. What, Patricio, are you Planet-struck?


Tar. Lay aside your wonder; only a little cleanly conveyance of your much
esteemed Friend Don Crisanto, who is now returned to be your humble servant
Tarugo.


Soph. What say you? can a Woman's will be fettered?


Pat. I acknowledge my error.


Soph. Then our Nuptials shall be no longer delayed.


Pat. Madam, though my spirits be a little troubled, yet the consideration of
enjoying you, reconciles me to my Sister, and the brave Horat is They embrace.


Alb. My Noble Knights and Honorable Ladies, when all your Solemnities are
over, I hope you have so much natural compassion as to think there be other
mouths that cannot always chew fodder.


Pat. What do you mean?


Alb. Even that Domingo, Locura, Stanlia, and I, may clip one another in a
Matrimonial way.


Soph. Because you are so discreet in not seeking it till our Nuptials be past,
your desires shall be granted.


Alb. Content: let it be so.


Rod. When all these knots are tied, there will be old whisking, and nothing
lest for me: however I am not much disappointed, for I never expected Liviana
would love at first sight.


Hor. In this there is nothing new, only you see a fresh experience of the
impossibility of restraining a Woman's Will.

Exeunt omnes.
FINIS.
Epilogue.
THere is a Fate accompanies Play-makers, like the Curse upon the Women of
Holland; which is, besides the Authors true birth, the Audience will not be
satisfied without a Soutterkine, and that forsooth trimmed to a better
advantage with trappings of Rhyme then the Play it self. The truth is, our Poet
bids me tell you, bee'l rather run the hazard of being thought no Wit, then
garnish the corners of his sense with such canting Gingles: And if happ'ly he
should pop upon a revery of Dactylus and Spondaeus, there is none knows h m
would believe it his. Therefore in his own way, he says, that having brought
his Present from Spain, and having' escaped the boisterous Billows of the Bay of
Biscay, he hopes at this time neither to dash or split upon these Boxes, nor be
ingulfed in this Pit. And for his Friends above in the exalted Stalls, he
expects the best from them, since he has complemented them with a Monky and a
Jigge. All the Clap he expects from you is, not to be hist, and say with an
indifferent Grimasse, it is well enough for a Novice. I am sure if you knew him
so well as I, this could never be refused, for he is a person that honors your
good Men, and never boiled at the coursest of your Women.

If this prevail not, he hopes he is safe from danger,
For Wit and Malice, ought not to reach a stranger.

